'Don't answer me in that way!' thundered Mr. Kendal, and much
incensed by the nice distinction, and not appreciating the sincerity
of it, he gave the child a shake, rough enough to bring the red into
his face, but not a tear.  'You knew it was very wrong, and you were
as near as possible breaking your neck.  You have frightened your
mamma, so as to make her very ill, and I am sorry to find you most
mischievous and unruly, not to be trusted out of sight.  Now, listen
to me, I shall punish you very severely if you act in this
disobedient way again.'

Papa angry, was a novel spectacle, at which Maurice looked as
innocently and steadily as ever, so completely without fear or
contrition, that he provoked a stern, 'Do you hear me, sir?' and
another shake.  Maurice flushed, and his chest heaved, though he did
not sob, and his father, uncomfortable at such sharp dealing with so
young a child, set him aside, with the words, 'There now, recollect
what I have told you!' and walked to the window, where he stood
silent for some seconds, while the boy stood with rounded shoulders,
perplexed eye, and finger on his pouting lip, and Mr. Ferrars,
newspaper in hand, watched him under his eyelids, and speculated what
would be the best sort of mediation, or whether the young gentleman
yet deserved it.  He knew that his own Willie would have been a mere
quaking, sobbing mass of terror, under such a shake, and he would
like to have been sure whether that sturdy silence were obstinacy or
fortitude.

The sound of the door-bell made Mr. Kendal turn round, and laying his
hand on the little fellow's fair head, he said, 'There, Maurice,
we'll say no more about it if you will be a good boy.  Run away now,
but don't go into your mamma's room.'

Maurice looked up, tossed his curls out of his eyes, shook himself,
felt the place on his arm where the grip of the hand had been, and
galloped off like the young colt that he was.

Albinia awoke, refreshed, though still shaken and feeble, and
surprised to find that dinner was going on downstairs.  Her own meal
presently put such new force into her, that she felt able to speak
Maurice's name without bursting into tears, and longing to see both
her little ones beside her, she told the nurse to fetch the boy, but
received for answer, 'No, Master Maurice said he would not come,' and
the manner conveyed that it had been defiantly said.  Master Maurice
was no favourite in the nursery, and he was still less so, when his
mamma, disregarding all mandates, set out to seek him.  Already she
heard from the stairs the wrangling with Susan that accompanied all
his toilettes, and she found him the picture of firm, solid fairness,
in his little robe de nuit, growling through the combing of his
tangled locks.  Though ordinarily scornful of caresses, he sprang to
her and hugged her, as she sat down on a low chair, and he knelt in
her lap, whispering with his head on her shoulder, and his arms round
her neck, 'Mamma, were you dead?'

'No, Maurice,' she answered with something of a sob, 'or I should not
have my dear, dear little boy throttling me now!  But why would you
not come down to me?'

'Papa said I must not.'

Oh, that was quite right, my boy;' and though she unclasped the tight
arms, she drew him nestling into her bosom.  'Oh, Maurice, it has
been a terrible day!  Does my little boy know how good the great God
has been to him, and how near he was never seeing mamma nor his
little sister again.'

Her great object was to make him thankful for his preservation, but
with a child, knowing nothing of death and heedless of fear, this was
very difficult.  The rapid motion had been delightful excitement, or
if there had been any alarm, it was forgotten in the triumph.  She
had to change her note, and represent how the poor horse might have
run into the river, or against a post!  Maurice looked serious, and
then she came to the high moral tone--mounting strangers' horses
without leave--would papa, would Gilbert, think of such a thing?  The
full lip was put out, as though under conviction, and he hung his
head.  'You wont do it again?' said she.

'No.'

She told him to say his prayers, guiding the confession and
thanksgiving that she feared he did not fully follow.  As he rose up,
and saw the tears on her cheeks, he whispered, 'Mamma, did it make
you _so_?'

Cause and effect were a great puzzle to him, but that swoon was the
only thing that brought home to him that he had been guilty of
something enormous, and when she owned that his danger had been the
occasion, he stood and looked; then, standing bolt upright, with
clasped hands, and rosy feet pressed close together, he said, with a
long breath, 'I'll never get on Bamfylde again till I'm a big boy.'

As he spoke, Mr. Kendal pushed open the half-closed door, and
Albinia, looking up, said, 'Here's a boy who knows he has done wrong,
papa.'

Never was more welcome excuse for lifting the gallant child to his
breast, and lavishing caresses that would have been tender but for
the strong spirit of riot which turned them into a game at romps, cut
short by Mr. Kendal, as soon as the noise grew very outrageous.
'That's enough to-night; good night.'  And when they each had kissed
the monkey face tossing about among the clothes, Maurice might have
heard more pride than pain in the 'I never saw such a boy!' Then
sooner or later it would reach some softer formation which would
yield, and the great volume of water would rush through, tearing
down everything in its way, until it last it found itself once again
in the sunshine.

Now, with its work in the Adelsberg Grottoes done, the river Poyk
is taking a well-earned rest, and flows gently through the Grottoes,
reflecting in its waters the lofty bridges and vaulted roofs hewn
out by its former toil.

Not that the Poyk has grown lazy! It only desires fresh worlds to
conquer; after enjoying a little run in the daylight, it changes
its name to the Laybach, and again plunges into the Grottoes of
Reifnitz, where with all its old energy it is working as hard as
ever to make the Laybach Caves as celebrated as those of Adelsberg.

Various animals live in these caverns, of which the most celebrated
is the 'Proteus,' a creature which has greatly perplexed naturalists.

At first sight it looks like a lizard, but its movements are those of
a fish. The head, lower part of the body, and tail resemble an eel,
but it has no fins, and its breathing organs are quite unlike those
of fishes.
Round its neck is a ruffle, which seems to help it to breathe,
although it has perfect lungs and can breathe, as well as move,
equally comfortably on land and in water.

The front feet are like hands, and each has three fingers, whilst the
back limbs have only two. The eyes are very tiny, like those of
the rat or mole; its mouth is well set with teeth, proving it to
be a beast of prey, and its organs of smell are fully developed.

A great authority has declared its spine to be like those of the monster
animals of pre-historic ages known as Saurians. The most extraordinary
part of the Proteus' history is that it seems perfectly able to
live without food.

It has never been seen to eat in captivity, and one has been kept
alive for years by occasionally changing the water in which it lives.
These animals were originally discovered in the Grottoes of Laybach,
and later on at Adelsberg, being rare in dry seasons, but plentiful
after heavy rains.

HELENA HEATH.

INSECT WAYS AND MEANS.

XI.--CATERPILLARS AND THEIR ENEMIES.

(_Concluded from page 357._)
The caterpillar of the North American Great Peacock moth (fig. 4)
is armed with numerous tufts of prickles ending in minute black
points which pierce the hand if touched, and cause severe pain.

These spines, as shown in the illustration (fig. 2, A B, on page 357)
are hollow, and filled with liquid poison.

'A' is the portion which breaks off; 'B' the hollow base which
contains the poison.

In some few caterpillars the poison spines take the form of balls armed
with short prickles and one large spike; hence they are known as
caltrop spines (fig. 2, C), from their likeness to the cruel weapons,
known as caltrops, which used to be scattered over the ground in
time of war to repel the attacks of cavalry; the spikes forced their
way into the horses' feet when trampled on, and so disabled them.

The spines of the caterpillar of our Oak Eggar moth are very brittle,
and in handling these insects, great care must be taken, as cases
are known of blindness having been caused by the spines being
carried into the eyes by the fingers.

Let us now turn to the liquid squirts with which some caterpillars
are provided.

Our Spurge-hawk caterpillar, for example, when threatened, squirts from
the mouth a spray of poison. In our illustration (fig. 5) it is
shown repelling the attack of the dreaded ichneumon fly by means
of this spray.

Cavendish Dusautoy's condescension in giving
chase.  'It was well poor little Maurice was not abandoned to your
discretion, and his resources.'

'It seems,' continued Mr. Ferrars, 'that young O'More was taking a
walk on the towing-path, and was just so far off as to see, without
being able to prevent it, this little monkey scramble from the gate
upon the horse's neck.  How it was that he did not go down between, I
can't guess; the beast gave a violent start, as well it might, jerked
the reins loose, and set off full gallop.  Seeing the child clinging
on like a young panther, he dashed across the meadow, to cut him off
at the turn of the river; and it was a great feat of swiftness, I
assure you, to run so lightly through those marshy meadows, so as to
get the start of the runaway; then he crept up under cover of the
hedge, so as not to startle the horse, and had hold of the bridle,
just as he paused before leaping the gate!  He said he could hardly
believe his eyes when he saw the urchin safe, and looking more
excited than terrified.'

'Yes, he was exceedingly struck with Maurice's spirit,' said Mr.
Kendal, who, when the fright and anger were over, could begin to be
proud of the exploit.

'They fraternized at once,' said Mr. Ferrars.  'Maurice imparted that
his name was Maurice Ferrars Kendal, and Ulick, in all good faith and
Irish simplicity, discovered that they were cousins!'

'Oh! Edmund, he must come to the christening dinner!'

'Mind,' said Maurice, 'you, know he is not even my wife's cousin;
only nephew to her second cousin's husband.'

'For shame, Maurice, cousin is that cousinly does!'

'Very well, only don't tell the aunts that Winifred saddled all the
O'Mores upon you.'

'Not an O'More but should be welcome for his sake!'

'Nor an Irishman,' said Mr. Ferrars.

Albinia suffered so much from the shock, that she could not make her
appearance till noon on the following day.  Then, after sitting a
little while in the old study, to hear that grandmamma had not been
able to sleep all night for thinking of Maurice's danger, and being
told some terrible stories of accidents with horses, she felt one
duty done, and moved on to the drawing-room in search of her brother.

She found herself breaking upon a tete-a-tete.  A sweet, full voice,
with strong cadences, was saying something about duty and advice, and
she would have retreated, but her brother and the stranger both
sprang up, and made her understand that she was by no means to go
away.  No introduction was wanted; she grasped the hand that was
extended to her, and would have said something if she could, but she
found herself not strong enough to keep from tears, and only said, 'I
wish little Maurice were not gone out with his brother, but you will
dine with us, and see him to-morrow.'

'With the greatest pleasure, if my uncle and aunt will spare me.'

'They must,' said Albinia, 'you must come to meet your old friend and
_cousin_,' she added, mischievously glancing at Maurice, but he did
not look inclined to disavow the relationship, and the youth was not
a person whom any one would wish to keep at a distance.  He seemed
about nineteen or twenty years of age, not tall, but well made, and
with an air of great ease and agility, rather lounging and careless,
yet alert in a moment.  The cast of his features at once betrayed his
country, by the rounded temples, with the free wavy hair; the
circular form of the eyebrow; the fully opened dark blue eye, looking
almost black when shaded; the short nose, and the well-cut chin and
lips, with their outlines of sweetness and of fun, all thoroughly
Irish, but of the best style, and with a good deal of thought and
mind on the brow, and determination in the mouth.  Albinia had
scarcely a minute, however, for observation, for he seemed agitated,
and in haste to take leave, nor did her brother press him to remain,
since she was still looking very white and red, and too fragile for
anything but rest.  With another squeeze of the hand she let him go,
while he, with murmured thanks, and head bent in enthusiastic honour
to the warm kindness of one so sweet and graceful, took leave.  Mr.
Ferrars followed him into the hall, leaving the door open, so that
she heard the words, 'Good-bye, Ulick; I'll do my best for you.  All
I can say is, that I respect you.'

'Don't respect me too soon,' he answered; 'maybe you'll have to
change your mind.  The situation may like me no better than I the
situation.'

'No, what you will, you can do; I trust to your perseverance.'

'As my poor mother does!  Well, with patience the snail got to Rome,
and if it is to lighten her load, I must bear it.  Many thanks, Mr.
Ferrars.  Good morning.'

'Good morning; only, Ulick, excuse me, but let me give you a hint; if
the situation is to like you, you must mind your Irish.'

'Then you must not warm my heart with your kindness,' was the answer.
'No, no, never fear, when I'm not with any one who has seen
Ballymakilty, I can speak English so that I could not be known for a
Galway man.  Not that I'm ashamed of my country,' he added; and the
next moment the door shut behind him.

'How could you scold him for his Irish?' exclaimed Albinia, as her
brother re-entered; 'it sounds so pretty and characteristic.'

'I fear Mr. Goldsmith may think it too characteristic!'

'I am sure Edmund might well call him prepossessing.  I hope Mr.
Goldsmith is going to do something handsome for him!'

'Poor lad!  Mr. Goldsmith considers that he has purchased him for a
permanent fixture on a high stool.  It is a sad disappointment, for
he had been doing his utmost to prepare himself for college, and he
has so far distinguished himself at school, that I see that a very
little help would soon enable him to maintain himself at the
University.  I could have found it in my heart to give it to him
myself; it would please Winifred.'

'Oh, let us help; I am sure Edmund would be glad.'

'No, no, this is better for all.  Remember this is the Goldsmith's
only measure of conciliation towards their sister since her marriage,
and it ought not to be interfered with.  Poor Ulick says he knows
this is the readiest chance of being of any use to his family, and
that his mother has often said she should be happy if she could but
see one of the six launched in a way to be independent!  There are
those three eldest, little better than squireens, never doing a thing
but loafing about with their guns.  I used to long for a horse-whip
to lay about them, till they spoke to me, and then not one of the
rogues but won my heart with his fun and good-nature.'

'Then I suppose it is a great thing to have one in the way of
money-making.'

'Hem!  The Celtic blood is all in commotion!  This boy's business was
to ask my candid opinion whether there were anything ungentlemanlike
in a clerkship in a bank.  It was well it was not you!'

'Now, Maurice, don't you know how glad I should have been if Gilbert
would have been as wise!'

'Yes, you have some common sense after all, which is more than Ulick
attributes to his kith and kin.  When I had proved the respectability
of banking to his conviction, I'll not say satisfaction, he made me
promise to write to his father.  He is making up his mind to what is
not only a great vexation to himself, and very irksome employment,
but he knows he shall be looked down upon as having lost caste with
all his family!'

'It really is heroism!' cried Albinia.

'It is,' said Mr. Ferrars; 'he does not trust himself to face the
clan, and means to get into harness at once, so as to clench his
resolution, and relieve his parents from his maintenance
immediately.'

'Is he to live with that formal Miss Goldsmith?'

'No.  In solitary lodgings, after that noisy family and easy home!  I
can't think how he will stand it.  I should not wonder if the
Galwegian was too strong after all.'

'We must do all we can for him,' cried Albinia; 'Edmund likes him
already.  Can't he dine with us every Sunday?'

'I know you will be kind,' said Mr. Ferrars.  'Only see how things
turn out before you commit yourself.  Ah!  I have said the unlucky
word which always makes you fly off!'

There was little fear that Ulick O'More would not win his way with
Mr. and Mrs. Kendal, recommended as he was, and with considerable
attractions in the frankness and brightness of his manner.  He was a
very pleasant addition to the party who dined at Willow Lawn, after
the christening.  No one had time to listen to Mr. Cavendish
Dusautoy's maxims, and he retired rather sullenly, to lean against
the mantelpiece, and marvel why the Kendals should invite an Irish
banker's clerk to meet _him_.  Gilbert likewise commented on the
guest with a muttered observation on his sisters' taste; 'Last year
it was all the Polysyllable, now it would be all the Irishman!'


CHAPTER XIX.


There was a war of supremacy in the Kendal household.  Albinia and
her son were Greek to Greek, and if physical force were on her side,
her own tenderness was against her.  As to allies, Maurice had by far
the majority of the household; the much-tormented Susan was her
mistress's sole supporter;  Mr. Kendal and Sophy might own it
inexpedient to foster his outrecuidance, but they so loved to do his
bidding, so hated to thwart him, and so grieved at his being
punished, that they were little better than Gilbert, Lucy,
grandmamma, or any of the maids or men.

The moral sense was not yet stirred, and the boy seemed to be trying
the force of his will like the strength of his limbs.  Even as he
delighted to lift a weight the moment he saw that it was heavy, so a
command was to him a challenge to see how much he would undergo
rather than obey, but his resistance was so open, gay, and free, that
it could hardly be called obstinacy, and he gloried in disappointing
punishment.  The dark closet lost all terror for him; he stood there
blowing the horn through his hand, content to follow an imaginary
chase, and when untimely sent to bed, he stole Susan's scissors, and
cut a range of stables in the sheets.  The short, sharp infliction of
pain answered best, but his father, though he could give a shake when
angry, could _not_ strike when cool, and Albinia was forced to turn
executioner, though with such tears and trembling that her culprit
looked up reassuringly, saying, 'Never mind, mamma, I shan't!'  He
did, however, _mind_ her tears, they bore in upon him the sense of
guilt; and after each transgression, he could not be at peace till he
had marched up to her, holding out his hand for the blow, and making
up his face not to wince, and then would cling round her neck to feel
himself pardoned.  Justice came to him in a most fair and motherly
shape!  The brightest, the merriest of all his playmates was mamma;
he loved her passionately, and could endure no cloud between himself
and her, so that he was slowly learning that submission to her was
peace and pleasure, and rebellion mere pain to both.  She established
ten minutes of daily lessons, but even she could not reach beyond the
capture of his restless person, his mind was out of reach, and keen
as he was in everything else, towards "a + b = ab" he was an
unmitigated dunce.  Nor did he obey any one who did not use authority
and force of will, and though perfectly simple and sincere, he was
too young to restrain himself without the assistance of the
controlling power, so that in his mother's absence he was tyrannical
and violent, and she never liked to have him out of her sight, and
never was so sure that he was deep in mischief as when she had not
heard his voice for a quarter of an hour.

'Albinia,' said Mr. Kendal, one relenting autumn day, when November
strove to look like April, 'I thought of walking to pay Farmer Graves
for the corn.  Will you come with me?'

'Delightful, I want to see what Maurice will say to the turkey-cock.'

'Is it not too far for him?'

'He would run quite as many miles in the garden,' said Albinia, who
would have walked in dread of a court of justice on her return, had
not the scarlet hose been safely prancing on the road before her.

'This way, then,' said Mr. Kendal; 'I must get this draft changed at
the bank.  Come, Maurice, you will see a friend there.'

'Do you know, Edmund,' said Albinia, as they set forth, 'my
conscience smites me as to that youth; I think we have neglected
him.'

'I cannot see what more we could have done.  If his uncle does not
bring him forward in society, we cannot interfere.'

'It must be a forlorn condition,' said Albinia; 'he is above the
other clerks, and he seems to be voted below the Bayford Elite, since
the Polysyllable has made it so very refined!  One never meets him
anywhere now it is too dark to walk after the banking hours.  Cannot
we ask him to come in some evening?'

'We cannot have our evenings broken up,' said Mr. Kendal.  'I should
be glad to show him any kindness, but his uncle seems to have ruled
it that he is to be considered more as his clerk than as one of his
family, and I doubt if it would be doing him any service to
interfere.'

They were now at the respectable old freestone building, with
'Goldsmith' inscribed on the iron window-blinds, and a venerable date
carved over the door.  Inside, those blinds came high, and let in but
little light over the tall desks, at which were placed the black-horsehair
perches of the clerks, old Mr. Goldsmith himself occupying a lower
throne, more accessible to the clients.  One of the high stools stood
empty, and Albinia making inquiry, Mr. Goldsmith answered, with a dry,
dissatisfied cough, that More, as he called him, had struck work, and
gone home with a headache.

'Indeed,' said Albinia, 'I am sorry to hear it.  Mr. Hope said he
thought him not looking well.'

'He has complained of headache a good deal lately,' said Mr.
Goldsmith.  'Young men don't find it easy to settle to business.'

Albinia's heart smote her for not having thought more of her son's
rescuer, and she revolved what could or what might have been done.
It really was not easy to show him attention, considering Gilbert's
prejudice against his accent, and Mr. Kendal's dislike to an
interrupted evening, and all she could devise was a future call on
Miss Goldsmith.  But for Maurice, it would have been a silent walk,
and though her mind was a little diverted by his gallant attempt to
bestride the largest pig in the farm-yard, she was sure Mr. Kendal
was musing on the same topic, and was not surprised when, as they
returned, he exclaimed, 'I have a great mind to go and see after that
poor lad.'

'This way, then,' said Albinia, turning down a narrow muddy street
parallel with the river.

'Impossible!' said Mr. Kendal; 'he can never live at the Wharves?'

'Yes,' said Albinia; 'he told me that he lodged with an old servant
of the Goldsmiths, Pratt's wife, at the Lower Wharf.'

She pointed to the name of Pratt over a shop-window in a house that
had once seen better days, but which looked so forlorn, that Mr.
Kendal would not look the slatternly maid in the face while so absurd
a question was asked as whether Mr. O'More lived there.

The girl, without further ceremony, took them up a dark stair, and
opened the door of a twilight room, where Albinia's first glimpse
showed her the young man with his head bent down on his arms on the
table, as close as possible to the forlorn, black fire, of the grim,
dull, sulky coal of the county, which had filled the room with smoke
and blacks.  The window, opened to clear it, only admitted the sickly
scent of decaying weed from the river to compete with the perfume of
the cobbler's stock-in-trade.  Ulick started up pale and astonished,
and Mr. Kendal, struck with consternation, chiefly thought of taking
away his wife and child from the infected atmosphere, and made signs
to Albinia not to sit down; but she was eagerly compassionate.

'It was nothing,' said Ulick, 'only his head was rather worse than
usual, and he thought it time to give in when the threes put
lapwings' feathers in their caps just like the fives.'

'Are you subject to these headaches?'

'It is only home-sickness,' he said.  'I'll have got over it soon.'

'I must come and see after you, my good friend,' said Mr. Kendal,
with suppressed impatience and anxiety.  'I shall return in a moment
or two, but I am sure you are not well enough for so many visitors
taking you by surprise.  Come.'

He was so peremptory, that Albinia found herself on the staircase
before she knew what she was about.  The fever panic had seized Mr.
Kendal in full force; he believed typhus was in the air, and insisted
on her taking Maurice home at once, while he went himself to fetch
Mr. Bowles.  She did not in the least credit fever to be in the chill
touch of that lizard hand, and believed that she could have been the
best doctor; but there was no arguing while he was under this alarm,
and she knew that she might be thankful not to be ordered to observe
a quarantine.

When Mr. Kendal returned home he looked much discomposed, though his
first words were, 'Thank Heaven, it is no fever!  Albinia, we must
look after that poor lad; he is positively poisoned by that
pestiferous river and bad living!  Bowles said he was sure he was not
eating meat enough.  I dare say that greasy woman gives him nothing
fit to eat!  Albinia, you must talk to him--find out whether old
Goldsmith gives him a decent salary!'

'He ought not to be in those lodgings another day.  I suppose Miss
Goldsmith had no notion what they were.  I fancy she never saw the
Lower Wharf in her life.'

'I never did till to-day,' said Mr. Kendal.  'It was all of a piece--
the whole street--the room--the furniture--why the paper was coming
off the walls!  What could they be dreaming of!  And there he was,
trying to read a little edition of Prodentius, printed at Salamanca,
which he picked up at a bookstall at Galway.  It must have belonged
to some priest educated in Spain.  He says any Latin book was
invaluable to him.  He is infinitely too good for his situation, and
the Goldsmiths are neglecting him infamously.  Look out some rooms
fit for him, Albinia.'

'I will try.  Let me see--if I could only recollect any; but Mr. Hope
has the only really nice ones in the place.'

'Somewhere he must be, if it is in this house.'

'There is poor old Madame Belmarche's still empty, with Bridget
keeping it.  I wish he could have rooms there.'

'Well, why not?  Pettilove told me it must be let as two tenements.
If the old woman could take half, a lodger would pay her rent,' said
Mr. Kendal, promptly.  'You had better propose it.'

'And the Goldsmiths?' asked Albinia.

'I will show him the Lower Wharf.'

The next afternoon Mr. Kendal desired his wife to go to the Bank and
borrow young O'More for her walking companion.

'Really I don't know whether I have the impudence.'

'I will come and do it for you.  You will do best alone with the lad;
I want you to get into his confidence, and find out whether old
Goldsmith treats him properly.  I declare, but that I know John
Kendal so well, this would be enough to make me rejoice that Gilbert
is not thrown on the world!'

Albinia knew herself to be so tactless, that she saw little hope
other doing anything but setting him against his relations; but her
husband was in no frame to hear objections, so she made none, and
only trusted she should not be very foolish.  At least, the walk
would be a positive physical benefit to the slave of the desk.

Ulick O'More was at his post, and said his head was well, but his
hair stuck up as if his fingers had been many times run through it;
he was much thinner, and the wearied countenance, whitened
complexion, and spiritless sunken eyes, were a sad contrast to the
glowing freshness and life that had distinguished him in the summer.

Mr. Kendal told the Banker that it had been decided that his nephew
needed exercise, and that Mrs. Kendal would be glad of his company in
a long walk.  Mr. Goldsmith seemed rather surprised, but consented,
whereupon the young clerk lighted up into animation, and bounded out
of his prison house, with a springy step learnt upon mountain
heather.  Mr. Kendal only waited to hear whither they were bound.

'Oh! as far as we can go on the Woodside road,' said Albinia.  'I
think the prescription I used to inflict on poor Sophy will not be
thrown away here.  I always fancy there is a whiff of sea air upon
the hill there.'

Ulick smiled at such a fond delusion, bred up as he had been upon the
wildest sea-coast, exposed to the full sweep of the Atlantic storm!
She set him off upon his own scenery, to the destruction of his
laborious English, as he dwelt on the glories of his beloved rocks
rent by fierce sea winds and waves into fantastic, grotesque, or
lovely shapes, with fiords of exquisite blue sea between, the variety
of which had been to him as the gentle foliage of tamer countries.
Not a tree stood near the 'town' of Ballymakilty, but the wild crags,
the sparkling waters, the broad open hills, and the bogs, with their
intensely purple horizon, held fast upon his heart; and he told of
white sands, reported to be haunted by mermaids, and crevices of rock
where the tide roared, and gave rise to legends of sea monsters, and
giants turned to stone.  He was becoming confidential and intimate
when, in a lowered voice, he mentioned the Banshee's crag, where the
shrouded messenger of doom never failed to bewail each dying child of
the O'More, and where his own old nurse had actually beheld her
keening for the uncle who was killed among the Caffres.  Albinia
began to know how she ought to respect the O'Mores.

They were skirting the side of the hill, with a dip of green
meadow-land below them, rising on the other side into coppices.  The
twang of the horn, and the babbling cry of the hounds, reminded Albinia
that the hunting season had begun, and looking over a gate, she
watched the parti-coloured forms of the dogs glancing among the
brushwood opposite, and an occasional red coat gleaming out through
the hedge above.  Just then the cry ceased, the dogs became silent,
and scattered hither and thither bewildered.  Ulick looked eagerly,
then suddenly vaulted over the gate, went forward a few steps, looked
again, pointed towards some dark object which she could barely
discern, put his finger in his ear, and uttered an unearthly screech,
incomprehensible to her, but well understood by the huntsman, and
through him by the dogs, which at once simultaneously dashed in one
direction, and came pouring into the meadow over towards him, down
went their heads, up went their curved tails, the clatter and rushing
of hoofs, and the apparition of red coats, showed the hunters all
going round the copse, while at the same moment, away with winged
steps bounded her companion, flying headlong like the wind, so as to
meet the hunt.


          'Ask me not what the lady feels,
           Left in that dreadful hour alone,'


laughed Albinia to herself.  'Well done, speed!  Edmund might be
satisfied there's not much amiss!  Through the hedge--over the
meadow--a flying leap over the stream--it is more like a bird than a
man--up again.  Does he mean to follow the hunt all the rest of the
way?  Rather Irish, I must say!  And I do believe they will all come
down this lane!  I must walk on; it wont do to be overtaken here
between these high hedges.  Ah!  I thought he was too much of a
gentleman to leave me--here he comes.  How much in his way I must be!
I never saw such a runner; not a bit does he slacken for the hill--and
what bright cheeks and eyes!  What good it must have done him!'

'I beg ten thousand pardons!' cried he, as he came up, scarcely out
of breath.  'I declare I forgot you, I could not help it, when I saw
them at a check !'

'You feel for the hunter as I do for the fox,' said Albinia.  'Is
yours one of the great hunting neighbourhoods?'

'That it is!' he cried.  'My grandfather had the grand stud!  He and
his seven sons were out three times in the week, and there was a
mount for whoever wanted it!'

'And this generation is not behind the last?'

'Ah! and why would it be?' exclaimed the boy, the last remnant of
English pronunciation forsaking him.  'My Uncle Connel has the best
mare on this side the bridge of Athlone!  I mean that side.'

'And how is it with you?' asked Albinia.

'We've got no horses--that is, except my father's mare, and the colt,
and Fir Darrig--the swish-tailed pony--and the blind donkey that
brings in the turf.  So we younger ones mostly go hunting on foot;
and after all I believe that's the best sport.  Bryan always comes in
before any of the horses, and we all think it a shame if we don't!'

'I see where you learnt the swiftness of foot that was so useful last
July,' said Albinia.

'That? oh! but Bryan would have been up long before me,' said Ulick.
'He'd have made for the lock, not the gate!  You should see what
sport we have when the fox takes to the Corrig Dearg up among the
rocks--and little Rosie upon Fir Darrig, with her hair upon the wind,
and her colour like the morning cloud, glancing in and out among the
rocks like the fairy of the glen.  There are those that think her the
best part of the hunt; they say the English officers at Ochlochtimore
would never think it worth coming out but for her.  I don't believe
that, you know,' he added, laughing, 'though I like to fetch a rise
out of Ulick at the great house by telling him of it.'

'How old is she?'

'Fifteen last April, and she is like an April wind, when it comes
warm and frolicking over the sea!  So wild and free, and yet so
gentle and soft!  Ellen and Mary are grave and steady, and work hard-
-every stitch of my stockings was poor Mary's knitting, except what
poor old Peggy would send up for a compliment; but Rosie--I don't
think she does a thing but sing, and ride, and row the boat, and keep
the house alive!  My mother shakes her head, but I don't know what
she'll say when she gets my aunt's letter.  My Aunt Goldsmith purses
up her lips, and says, "I'll write to advise my sister to send her
daughters to some good school."  Ellen, maybe, might bear one, but
ah! the thought of little Rosie in a good school!'

'Like her brother Ulick in a good bank, eh?'

'Why,' he cried, 'they always called me the steady Englishman!'

Albinia laughed, but at that moment the sounds of the hunt again
occupied them, and all were interpreted by Ulick with the keenest
interest, but he would not run away again, though she exhorted him
not to regard her.  Presently it swept on out of hearing, and by-and-bye
they reached the summit of the hill, and looked forth on the dark
pine plantations on the opposite undulation, standing out in black
relief against a sky golden with a pale, pure, pearly November sunset,
a 'daffodil sky' flecked with tiny fleeces of soft bright-yellow light,
reminding Albinia of Fouque's beautiful dream of Aslauga's golden
hair showing the gates of Heaven to her devoted knight.  She looked
for her companion's sympathy in her admiration, but the woods seemed
to oppress him, and his panting sigh showed how real a thing was _he-men_.

'Oh! my poor sun!' he broke out, 'I pity you for having to go down
before your time into these black, stifling woods that rise up to
smother you like giants--and not into your own broad, cool Atlantic,
laughing up your own sparkles of light.'

'We inland people can hardly appreciate your longing for space.'

'It's a very prison,' said Ulick; 'the horizon is choked all round,
and one can't breathe in these staid stiff hedges and enclosures!'
And he threw out his arms and flapped them over his breast with a
gesture of constraint.

'You seem no friend to cultivation.'

'Why, your meadows would be pretty things if they were a little
greener,' said Ulick; 'but one gets tired of them, and of those
straight lines of ploughed field.  There's no sense of liberty; it is
like the man whose prison walls closed in upon him!'  And he gave
another weary sigh, his step lost elasticity, and he moved on
heavily.

'You are tired; I have brought you too far.'

'Tired by a bit of a step like this?' cried the boy, disdainfully, as
he straightened himself, and resumed his brisk tread.  But it did not
last.

'I had forgotten that you had not been well,' she said.

'Pshaw!' muttered Ulick; then resumed, 'Aye, Mr. Kendal brought in
the doctor upon me--very kind of him--but I do assure you 'tis
nothing but home sickness; I was nearly as bad when I went to St.
Columba, but I got over it then, and I will again!'

'It may be so in part,' said Albinia, kindly; 'but let me be
impertinent, Ulick, for my sister Winifred told me to look after you;
surely you give it every provocation.  Such a change of habits is
enough to make any one ill.  Should you not ask your uncle for a
holiday, and go home for a little while?'

'Don't name it, I beg of you,' cried the poor lad in an agitated
voice, 'it would only bring it all over again!  I've promised my
mother to do my part, and with His help I _will_!  Let the columns
run out to all eternity, and the figures crook themselves as
spitefully as they will, I've vowed to myself not to stir till I've
got the better of the villains!'

'Ah!' said Albinia, 'they have blackened your eyes like the bruises
of material antagonists!  Yes, it is a gallant battle, but indeed you
must give yourself all the help you can, for it would be doing your
mother no good to fall ill.'

'I've no fears,' said Ulick; 'I know very well what is the matter
with me, and that if I don't give way, it will go off in time.
You've given it a good shove with your kindness, Mrs. Kendal,' he
added, with deep emotion in his sensitive voice; 'only you must not
talk of my going home, or you'll undo all you have done.'

'Then I won't; we must try to make you a home here.  And in the first
place, those lodgings of yours; you can never be comfortable in
them.'

'Ah! you saw my fire smoking.  I never shall learn to make a coal
fire burn.'

'Not only that,' said Albinia, 'but you might easily find rooms much
better furnished, and fitter for you.'

'I do assure you,' exclaimed Ulick, 'you scarcely saw it!  Why, I
don't think there's a room at the big house in better order, or so
good!'

'At least,' said Albinia, repressing her deduction as to the big
house of Ballymakilty, 'you have no particular love for the
locality--the river smell--the stock of good leather, &c.'

'It's all Bayford and town smell together,' said Ulick; 'I never
thought one part worse than another, begging your pardon, Mrs.
Kendal.'

'And I am sure,' she continued, 'that woman can never make your meals
comfortable.  Yes, I see I am right, and I assure you hard head-work
needs good living, and you will never be a match for the rogues in
black and white without good beef-steaks.  Now confess whether she
gives you dinners of old shoe-leather.'

'A man can't sit down to dinner by himself,' cried Ulick,
impatiently.  'Tea with a book are all that is bearable.'

'And you never go out--never see any one.'

'I dine at my uncle's every Sunday,' said Ulick.

'Is that all the variety you have?'

'Why, my uncle told me he would not have me getting into what he
calls idle company.  I've dined once at the vicarage, and drunk tea
twice with Mr. Hope, but it is no use thinking of it--I couldn't
afford it, and that's the truth.'

'Have you any books?  What can you find to do all the evening?'

'I have a few that bear reading pretty often, and Mr. Hope as lent me
some.  I've been trying to keep up my Greek, and then I do believe
there's some way of simplifying those accounts by logarithms, if I
could but work it out.  But my mother told me to walk, and I assure
you I do take a constitutional as soon as I come out at half-past
four every day.'

'Well, I have designs, and mind you don't traverse them, or I shall
have to report you at home.  I have a lodging in my eye for you, away
from the river, and a nice clean, tidy Irishwoman to keep you in
order, make your fires, and cram you, if you wont eat, and see if she
does not make a man of you--'

'Stop, stop, Mrs. Kendal!' cried Ulick, distressed.  'You are very
kind, but it can't be.'

'Excuse me, it is economy of the wrong sort to live in a gutter, and
catch agues and fevers.  Only think, if it was my boy Gilbert, should
I not be obliged to any one that would tyrannize over him for his
good!  Besides, what I propose is not at all beyond such means as Mr.
Kendal tells me are the least Mr. Goldsmith ought to give you.  Do
you dislike going into particulars with me?  You know I am used to
think for Gilbert, and I am a sort of cousin.'

'You are kindness itself,' said Ulick; 'and there! I suppose I must
go to the bottom of it, and it is no news that pence are not plenty
among the O'Mores, though it is no fault of my uncle.  See there what
my poor dear mother says.'

He drew a letter from his pocket, and gave a page to her.


'I miss you sorely, my boy,' it said; 'I know the more what a support
and friend you have been to me now that you are so far away; but all
is made up to me in knowing you to be among my own people, and the
instrument of reconciliation with my brother, as you well know how
great has been the pain of the estrangement caused by my own pride
and wilfulness.  I cannot tell you how glad I am that he approves of
you, and that you are beginning to get used to the work that was my
own poor father's for so long.  Bred up as you have been, my mountain
lad, I scarcely dared to hope that you would be able to sit down
quietly to it, with all our hopes of making you a scholar so suddenly
frustrated; but I might have put faith in your loving heart and sense
of duty to carry you through anything.  I feel as if a load were off
my mind since you and Bryan are so happily launched.  The boy has not
once applied for money since he joined; and if you write to him, pray
beg him to be careful, for it would well-nigh drive your father mad
to be pressed any more--the poor mare has been sold at a dead loss
and the Carrick-humbug quarry company pays no dividends, so how we
are to meet the Christmas bills I cannot guess.  But, as you
remember, we have won over worse times, and now Providence has been
so good to you and Bryan, what have I to do but be thankful and hope
the best.'


Ulick watched her face, and gave her another note, saying mournfully,
'You see they all, but my mother, think, that if I am dragging our
family honour through the mire, I've got something by it.  Poor
Bryan, he knows no better--he's younger than me by two years.'

The young ensign made a piteous confession of the first debt he had
been able to contract, for twenty pounds, with a promise that if his
brother would help him out of this one scrape, he would never run
into another.

'I am very sorry for you, Ulick,' said Albinia, 'and I hate to advise
you to be selfish, but it really is quite impossible for you to be
paymaster for all your brothers' debts.'

'If it were Connel, I know it would be of no use,' said Ulick.  'But
Bryan--you see he has got a start--they gave him a commission, and he
is the finest fellow of us all, and knows what his word is, and keeps
it!  Maybe, if I get on, I may be able to save, and help him to his
next step, and then if Redmond could get to college, my mother would
be a happy woman, and all thanks to my uncle.'

'Then it is this twenty pounds that is pinching you now?  Is that
it?'

'You see my uncle said he would give me enough to keep me as a
gentleman and his nephew, but not enough to keep all the family, as
he said.  After my Christmas quarter I shall be up in the world
again, and then there will be time to think of the woman you spoke
of--a Connaught woman, did you say?'

When Albinia reported this dialogue to her husband, he was much moved
by this simple self-abnegation.

'There is nothing for it,' he said, 'but to bring him here till
Christmas, and by that time we will take care that the new lodgings
are cheap enough for him.  He must not be left to the mercy of old
Goldsmith and his sister!'

Even Albinia was astonished, but Mr. Kendal carried out his
intentions, and went in quest of his new friend; while no one thought
of objecting except grandmamma.

'I suppose, my dear,' she said, 'that you know what Mr. Goldsmith
means to do for this young man.'

'I am sure I don't,' said Albinia.

'Really!  Ah! well, I'm an old woman, and I may be wrong, but my poor
dear Mr. Meadows would never encourage a banker's clerk about the
house unless he knew what were his expectations.  Irish too!  If
there was a thing Mr. Meadows disliked more than another, it was an
Irishman!  He said they were all adventurers.'

However, Ulick's first evening at Willow Lawn was on what he called
'a headache day.'  He could not have taken a better measure for
overcoming grandmamma's objections.  Poor dear Mr. Meadows' worldly
wisdom was not sufficiently native to her to withstand the sight of
anything so pale and suffering, especially as he did not rebel
against answering her close examination, which concluded in her
pronouncing these intermitting attacks to be agueish, and prescribing
quinine.  To take medicines is an effectual way of gaining an old
lady's love.  Ulick was soon established in her mind as 'a very
pretty behaved young gentleman.'

In the evenings, when Mr. Kendal read aloud, Ulick listened, and
enjoyed it from the corner where he sheltered his eyes from the
light.  He was told that he ought to go to bed quickly, but after the
ladies were in their rooms, a long buzzing murmur was heard in the
passage, and judicious peeping revealed the two gentlemen, each,
candle in hand, the one with his back against the wall at the top of
the stairs, the other leaning upon the balusters three steps below,
and there they stayed, till the clock struck one, and Ulick's candle
burnt out.

'What could you be talking about?' asked the aggrieved Albinia.

'Prometheus Vinctus,' composedly returned Mr. Kendal.

Ulick's eagerness in collecting every crumb of scholarship was a
great bond of union; but there was still more in the bright, open,
demonstrative nature of the youth, which had a great attraction for
the reserved, serious Mr. Kendal, and scarcely a day had passed
before they were on terms of intimacy, almost like an elder and
younger brother.  Admitted into the family as a connexion, Ulick at
once viewed the girls as cousins, and treated them with the same easy
grace of good-natured familiarity as if they had been any of the
nineteen Miss O'Mores around Ballymakilty.

'How is your head now?' asked Mr. Kendal.  'You are late this
evening.'

'Yes,' said Ulick, entering the drawing-room, which was ruddy with
firelight, and fragrant with the breath of the conservatory, and
leaning over an arm-chair, as he tried to rub the aching out of his
brow; 'there were some accounts to finish up and my additions came
out different every time.'

'A sure sign that you ought to have left off.'

'I was just going to have told my uncle I was good for nothing to-day,
when I heard old Johns mumbling something to him about Mr. More
being unwell, and looking up, I saw that cold grey eye twinkling at
me, as much as to say he was proud to see how soon an Irishman could
be beaten.  So what could I do but give him look for look, and go on
with eight and seven, and five and two, as unconcerned as he was.'

'Well,' said Mr. Kendal, 'you know I think that your uncle's apparent
indifference may be his fashion of being your best friend.'

'I'd take it like sunshine in May from a stranger, and be proud to
disappoint him,' said Ulick, 'but to call himself my uncle, and use
my mother's own eyes to look at me that way, that's the stroke! and
to think that I'm only striving to harden myself by force of habit to
be exactly like him!  I'd rather enlist to-morrow, if that would not
be his greatest triumph!' he cried, pressing his hands hard on his
temple.  'It is very childish, but I could forgive him anything but
using my mother's eyes that way!'

'You will yet rejoice in the likeness,' said Mr. Kendal.  'You must
believe in more than you can trace, and when your perseverance has
conquered his esteem, the rest will follow.'

'Follow?  The rest, as you call it, would go before at home,' sighed
Ulick, wearily.  'Esteem is like fame! what I want begins without it,
and lives as well with or without it!'

'Perhaps,' said his friend, 'Mr. Goldsmith would think it weakness to
show preference to a relation before it was earned.'

'Ah then,' cried Ulick, in a quaint Irish tone, 'Heaven have mercy on
the little children!'

'Yes, the doctrine can only be consistently held by a solitary man.'

'Where would we be but for inconsistency?' exclaimed Ulick.

'I do not like to hear you talk in that manner,' said Sophy.
'Inconsistency is mere weakness.'

'Ah! then you are the dangerous character,' said Ulick, with a droll
gesture of sheltering himself behind the chair.

'I did not call myself consistent, I wish I were,' she said, gravely.

'How she must love the French!' returned Ulick, confidentially
turning to her father.

'Not at all, I detest them.'

'Then you are inconsistent, for they're the very models of
uncompromising consistency.'

'Yes, to bad principles,' said Sophy.

'Robespierre was a prime specimen of consistency to good principle!'

Sophy turned to her father, and with an odd dubious look, asked him,
'Is be teasing me?'

'He'd be proud to have the honour,' Ulick made answer, so that Mr.
Kendal's smile grew broad.  It was the funniest thing to see Ulick
sporting with Sophy's gravity, constraining her to playfulness, with
something of the compulsion exercised by a large frolicsome puppy
upon a sober old dog of less size and strength.

'I do not like to see powers wasted on paradox,' she said, even as
the grave senior might roll up his lip and snarl.

'I'm in earnest, Sophy,' pursued Ulick, changing his note to
eagerness.  'La grande nation herself finds that logic was her bane.
Consistency was never made for man!  Why where would this world be if
it did not go two ways at once?'

Sophy did laugh at this Irish version of the centripetal and
centrifugal forces, but she held out.  'The earth describes a circle;
I like straight lines.'

'Much we shall have of the right direction, unless we are content to
turn right about face,' said Ulick.  'The best path of life is but a
herring-bone pattern.'

'What does he know of herring-boning?' asked Mrs. Kendal, coming in
at the moment, with a white cashmere cloak folded picturesquely over
her delicate blue silk.  Ulick in a moment assumed a less careless
attitude, as he answered--

'I found my poetical illustration on the motion of the earth too much
for her, so I descended to the herring-bone as more suited to her
capacity.'

'There he is, mamma,' said Sophy, 'pleading that consistency is the
most ruinous thing in the world.'

'I thought as much,' said Albinia.  'Prometheus and his kin do most
abound when Ulick's head is worst, and papa is in greatest danger of
being late.'

Mr. Kendal turned round, looked at the time-piece, and marched off.

'But mamma!' continued Sophy, driving straight at her point, 'what do
you think of consistency?'

'Oh, mamma!' cried Lucy, coming into the room in a flutter of white;
'there you are in your beautiful blue!  Have you really put it on for
the Drurys?'

Sophy bit her lip, neither pleased at the interruption, nor at the
taste.

'Have you a graduated scale of dresses for all your friends, Lucy?
asked Ulick.

'Everybody has, I suppose,' said Lucy.

'Ah! then I shall know how to judge how I stand in your favour.  I
never knew so well what the garb of friendship meant.'

'You must know which way her scale goes,' said Albinia, laughing at
Sophy's evident affront at the frivolous turn the conversation had
taken.

'That needs no asking,' quoth Ulick, 'Unadorned, adorned the most for
the nearest the hearth.'

'That's all conceit,' said Lucy.  'Maybe familiarity breeds
contempt.'

'No, no, when young ladies despise, they use a precision that says,
"'Tis myself I care for, and not you."'

'What an observer!' cried Lucy.  'Now then, interpret my dress to-night!'

'How can you, Lucy!' muttered the scandalized Sophy.

'Well, Sophy, as you will have him to torment with philosophy this
whole evening, I think you might give him a little respite,' said
Lucy, good-humouredly.  'I want to know what my dress reveals to
him!' and drawing up her head, where two coral pins contrasted with
her dark braids, and spreading out her full white skirts and cerise
trimmings, she threw her figure into an attitude, and darted a merry
challenge from her lively black eyes, while Ulick availed himself of
the permission to look critically, and Sophy sank back disgusted.

'Miss Kendal can, when she is inclined, produce as much effect with
her beams of the second order as with all her splendours displayed.'

'Stuff,' said Lucy.

'Stuff indeed,' more sincerely murmured Sophy.

'Say something in earnest,' said Lucy.  'You professed to tell what I
thought of the people.'

'I hope you'll never put on such new white gloves where I'm the party
chiefly concerned.'

'What do you mean?'

'They are a great deal too unexceptionable.'

If there were something coquettish in the manner of these two, it did
not give Albinia much concern.  It was in him 'only Irish;' and Fred
Ferrars had made her believe that it was rather a sign of the absence
of love than of its presence.  She saw much more respect and interest
in his mischievous attacks on Sophy's gravity, and though Lucy both
pitied him and liked chattering with him, it was all the while under
the secret protest that he was only a banker's clerk.

Sophy was glad of the presence of a third person to obviate the
perils of her evenings with grandmamma, and she beheld the trio set
off to their dinner-party, without the usual dread of being betrayed
into wrangling.  Mr. O'More devoted himself to the old lady's
entertainment, he amused her with droll stories, and played
backgammon with her.  Then she composed herself to her knitting, and
desired them not to mind her, she liked to hear young people talk
cheerfully; whereupon Sophy, by way of light and cheerful
conversation, renewed the battle of consistency with a whole
broadside of heavy metal.

When the diners-out came home, they found the war raging as hotly as
ever; a great many historical facts and wise sayings having been
fired off on both sides, and neither having found out that each meant
the same thing.

However, the hours had gone imperceptibly past them, which could not
be said for the others.  The half-yearly dinners at Mr. Drury's were
Albinia's dread nearly as much as Mr. Kendal's aversion.  He was
certain, whatever he might intend, to fall into a fit of absence, and
she was almost equally sure to hear something unpleasant, and to
regret her own reply.  On the whole, however, Mr. Kendal came away on
this evening the least dissatisfied, for Mr. Goldsmith had asked him
with some solicitude, whether he thought 'that lad, young More,'
positively unwell; and had gone the length of expressing that he
seemed to be fairly sharp, and stuck to his work.  Mr. Kendal seized
the moment for telling his opinion, of Ulick, and though Mr.
Goldsmith coughed and looked dry and almost contemptuous, he was
perceptibly gratified, and replied with a maxim evidently intended
both as an excuse for himself and as a warning to the Kendals, that
young men were always spoilt by being made too much of--in his
younger days--&c.

Lucy, meantime, was undergoing the broad banter of her unrefined
cousins on the subject of the Irish clerk.  A very little grace in
the perpetration would have made it grateful to her vanity, but this
was far too broad raillery, and made her hold up her head with
protestations of her perfect indifference, to which her cousins
manifested incredulity, visiting on her with some petty spite their
small jealousies of her higher pretensions, and of the attention
which had been paid to her by Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy.

'Not that he will ever look at you again, Lucy, you need not flatter
yourself,' said the amiable Sarah Anne.  'Harry Wolfe writes that he
was flirting with a beautiful young lady who came to see Oxford, and
that he is spending quantities of money.'

'It is nothing to me, I am sure,' retorted Lucy.  'Besides, Gilbert
says no such thing.'

'Gilbert! oh, no!' exclaimed Miss Drury; 'why, he is just as bad
himself.  Papa said, from what Mrs. Wolfe told him, he would not take
500 pounds to pay Mr. Gilbert's bills.'

Albinia had been hearing much the same story from Mrs. Drury, though
not so much exaggerated, and administered with more condolence.  She
did not absolutely believe, and yet she could not utterly disbelieve,
so the result was a letter to Gilbert, with an anxious exhortation to
be careful, and not to be deluded into foolish expenditure in
imitation of the Polysyllable; and as no special answer was returned,
she dismissed the whole from her mind as a Drury allegation.

The horse chanced to be lame, so that Gilbert could not be met at
Hadminster on his return from Oxford, but much earlier than the
omnibus usually lumbered into Bayford, he astonished Sophy, who was
lying on the sofa in the morning-room, by marching in with a free and
easy step, and a loose coat of the most novel device.

'No one else at home?' he asked.

'Only grandmamma.  We did not think the omnibus would come in so
soon, but I suppose you took a fly, as there were three of you.'

'As if we were going to stand six miles of bus with the Wolfe cub!
No, Dusautoy brought his horse down with him, and I took a fly!' said
Gilbert.  'Well, and what's the matter with Captain; has the Irishman
been riding him?'

Sophy bit her lip to prevent an angry answer, and was glad that
Maurice rushed in, fall of uproarious joy.  'Hollo! boy, how you
grow!  What have you got there?'

'It's my new pop-gun, that Ulick made me, I'll shoot you,' cried
Maurice, retiring to a suitable distance.

'I declare the child has caught the brogue!  Is the fellow here
still?'

'What fellow?' coldly asked Sophy.

'Why, this pet of my father's.'

'Bang!' cried Maurice, and a pellet passed perilously close to
Gilbert's eyes.

'Don't, child.  Pray is this banker's clerk one of our fixtures,
Sophy?'

'I don't know why you despise him, unless it is because it is what
you ought to be yourself,' Sophy was provoked into retorting.

'Apparently my father has a monomania for the article.'  Gilbert
intended to speak with provoking coolness; but another fraternal
pellet hit him fall in the nose, and the accompanying shout of glee
was too much for an already irritated temper.  With passion most
unusual in him, he caught hold of the child, and exclaiming, 'You
little imp, what do you mean by it?' he wrenched the weapon out of
his hand, and dashed it into the fire, in the midst of an energetic
'For shame!' from his sister.  Maurice, with a furious 'Naughty
Gilbert,' struck at him with both his little fists clenched, and then
precipitated himself over the fender to snatch his treasure from the
grate, but was instantly captured and pulled back, struggling,
kicking, and fighting with all his might, till, to the equal relief
of both brothers, Sophy held up the pop-gun in the tongs, one end
still tinged with a red glow, smoky, blackened, and perfumed.
Maurice made one bound, she lowered it into his grasp as the last red
spark died out, and he clasped it as Siegfried did the magic sword!

'There, Maurice, I didn't mean it,' said Gilbert, heartily ashamed
and sorry; 'kiss and make it up, and then put on your hat, and we'll
come up to old Smith's and get such a jolly one!'

The forgiving child had already given the kiss, glad to atone for his
aggressions, but then was absorbed in rubbing the charred wood,
amazed that while so much black came off on his fingers, the effect
on the weapon was not proportionate, and then tried another shot in a
safer direction.  'Come,' said Gilbert, 'put that black affair into
the fire, and come along.'

'No!' said Maurice; 'it is my dear gun that Ulick made me, and it
shan't be burnt.'

'What, not if I give you a famous one--like a real one, with a stock
and barrel?' said Gilbert, anxious to be freed from the tokens of his
ebullition.

'No! no!' still stoutly said the constant Maurice.  'I don't want new
guns; I've got my dear old one, and I'll keep him to the end of his
days and mine!' and he crossed his arms over it.

'That's right, Maurice,' said Sophy; 'stick to old friends that have
borne wounds in your service!'

'Well, it's his concern if he likes such a trumpery old thing,' said
Gilbert.  'Come here, boy; you don't bear malice!  Come and have a
ride on my back.'

The practical lesson, 'don't shoot at your brother's nose,' would
never have been impressed, had not mamma, on coming in, found Maurice
and his pop-gun nearly equally black, and by gradual unfolding of
cause and effect, learnt his forgotten offence.  She reminded him of
ancient promises never to aim at human creatures, assured him that
Gilbert was very kind not to have burnt it outright; and to the great
displeasure, and temporary relief of all the family, sequestrated the
weapon for the rest of the evening.

Sophy told her in confidence that Gilbert had been the most to blame,
which she took as merely an instance of Sophy's blindness to
Maurice's errors; for the explosion had so completely worked off the
Oxford dash, that he was perfectly meek and amiable.  Considering the
antecedents, such a contrast to himself as young O'More could hardly
fail to be an eyesore, walking tame about the home, and specially
recommended to his friendship; but so good-natured was he, and so
attractive was the Irishman, that it took much influence from
Algernon Dusautoy to keep up a thriving aversion.  Albinia marvelled
at the power exercised over Gilbert by one whose intellect and
pretensions he openly contemned, but perceived that obstinacy and
undoubting self-satisfaction overmastered his superior intelligence
and principle, and that while perceiving all the follies of the
Polysyllable, Gilbert had a strange propensity for his company, and
therein always resumed the fast man, disdainful of the clerk.  He did
not like Ulick better for being the immediate cause of the removal of
the last traces of the Belmarche family from their old abode, which
had been renovated by pretty shamrock chintz furniture, the pride of
the two Irish hearts.  Indeed it was to be feared that Bridget would
assist in the perpetuation of those rolling R's which caused Mr.
Goldsmith's brow to contract whenever his nephew careered along upon
one.

His departure from Willow Lawn was to take place at Christmas.  The
Ferrars party were coming to keep the two consecutive birthdays of
Sophy and Maurice at Bayford, would take him back for Christmas-day
to Fairmead, and on his return he would take possession of his new
rooms.

Maurice's fete was to serve as the occasion of paying off civilities
to a miscellaneous young party; but as grandmamma's feelings would
have been hurt, had not Sophy's been equally distinguished, it was
arranged that Mrs. Nugent should then bring her eldest girl to meet
the Ferrarses at an early tea.

Just as Albinia had descended to await her guests, Gilbert came down,
and presently said, with would-be indifference, 'Oh, by-the-by,
Dusautoy said he would look in.'

'The Polysyllable!' cried Albinia, thunderstruck; 'what possessed you
to ask him, when you knew I sacrificed Mr. Dusautoy rather than have
him to spoil it all?'

'I didn't ask him exactly,' replied Gilbert; 'it was old Bowles, who
met us, and tried to nail us to eat our mutton with him, as he called
it.  I had my answer, and Dusautoy got off by saying he was engaged
to us, and desired me to tell you he would make his excuses in
person.'

'He can make no excuse for downright falsehood.'

'Hem!' quoth Gilbert.  'You wouldn't have him done into drinking old
Bowles's surgery champagne.'

'One comfort is that he wont get any dinner,' said Albinia,
vindictively.  'I hope he'll be ravenously hungry.'

'He may not come after all,' said Gilbert; and Albinia, laying hold
of that hope, had nearly forgotten the threatened disaster, as her
party appeared by instalments, and Winifred owned to her that Sophy
had grown better-looking than could have been expected.  Her eyes had
brightened, the cloudy brown of her cheeks was enlivened, she held
herself better, and the less childish dress was much to her
advantage.  But above all, the moody look of suffering was gone, and
her face had something of the grave sweetness and regular beauty of
that of her father.

'Seventeen,' said Mrs. Ferrars; 'by the time she is seventy, she may
be a remarkably handsome woman!'

The tea-drinking was in lively operation, when after a thundering
knock, Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy was ushered in, with the air of a
prince honouring the banquet of his vassals, saying, 'I told Kendal I
should presume on your hospitality, I beg you will make no difference
on my account.'

Of which gracious permission Albinia was resolved to avail herself.
She left all the insincerity to her husband, and would by no means
allow grandmamma to abdicate the warm corner.  She suspected that he
wanted an introduction to Mrs. Nugent, and was resolved to defeat
this object, unless he should condescend to make the request, so she
was well satisfied to see him wedged in between papa and Sophy, while
a prodigious quantity of Irish talk was going on between Mrs. Nugent
and Mr. O'More, with contributions of satire from Mr. Ferrars which
kept every one laughing except little Nora Nugent and Mary Ferrars,
who were deep in the preliminaries of an eternal friendship, and held
the ends of each other's crackers like a pair of doves.  Lucy,
however, was ill at ease at the obscurity which shrouded the
illustrious guest, and in her anxiety, gave so little attention to
her two neighbours, that Willie Ferrars, affronted at some neglect,
exclaimed, 'Why, Lucy, what makes you screw your eyes about so! you
can't attend to any one.'

'It is because Polly Silly is there,' shouted Master Maurice from his
throne beside his mamma.

To the infinite relief of the half-choked Albinia, little Mary
Ferrars, with whom her cousin had been carrying on a direful warfare
all day, fitted on the cap, shook her head gravely at him, and after
an appealing look of indignation, first at his mamma, then at her
own, was overheard confiding to Nora Nugent that Maurice was a very
naughty boy--she was sorry to say, a regular spoilt child.

'But how should you hinder Miss Kendal from attending?'

'I'll tell you, darling.  Poor Lucy! she is very fond of me, and I
dare say she wanted me to sit next to her, but you know she will have
me for three days, and I have you only this one evening.  I'll go and
speak to her after tea, when we go into the drawing-room, and then
she wont mind.'

Lucy, after an agony of blushes, had somewhat recovered on finding
that no one seemed to apply her brother's speech, and when the
benevolent Mary made her way to her, and thrust a hand into hers,
only a feeble pressure replied to these romantic blandishments, so
anxious was she to carry to Mrs. Kendal the information that Mr.
Cavendish Dusautoy had been so obliging as to desire his servant to
bring his guitar and key-bugle.

'We are much obliged,' said Albinia, 'but look at that face!' and she
turned Lucy towards Willie's open-mouthed, dismayed countenance.  You
must tell him the company are not sufficiently advanced in musical
science.'

'But mamma, it would gratify him!'

'Very likely'--and without listening further, Albinia turned to
Willie, who had all day been insisting that papa should introduce her
to the new game of the Showman.

Infinitely delighted to be relieved from the fear of the guitar,
Willie hunted all who would play into another room; whence they were
to be summoned, one by one, back to the drawing-room by the showman,
Mr. Ferrars, who shrugged his shoulders at the task, but undertook
it, and first called for Mrs. Kendal.

She found him stationed before the red curtains, which were closely
drawn, and her husband and the three elder ladies sitting by as
audience.

'Pray, madam, may I ask what animal you would desire to have
exhibited to you, out of the vast resources that my menagerie
contains.  Choose freely, I undertake that whatever you may select,
you shall not be disappointed.'

'What, not if I were to ask for a black spider monkey?' said Albinia,
to whom it was very charming to be playing with Maurice again.

Mr. Kendal looked up in entertained curiosity, Mrs. Nugent smiled as
if she thought the showman's task impossible, and Winifred stretched
out to gain a full view.

'A black spider monkey,' he said, slowly.  'Allow me to ask, madam,
if you are acquainted with the character of the beast?'

'It doesn't scratch, does it?' said she, quickly.

'That is for you to answer.'

'I never knew it do so.  It does chatter a great deal, but it never
scratched that I knew of.'

'Nor I,' said the showman, 'since it was young.  Do you think age
renders it graver and steadier?'

'Not a bit.  It is always frisky and troublesome, and I never knew it
get a bit better as it grew older.'

Winifred laughed outright.  Mr. Kendal's lips were parted by his
smile.  'I wonder what sort of a mother it would make?' said the
showman.

'All animals are good mothers, of course.'

'I meant, is it a good disciplinarian?'

'If you mean cuffing its young one for playing exactly the same
tricks as itself.'

'Exactly; and what would be the effect of letting it and its young
one loose in a great scholar's study?'

'There wouldn't be much study left.'

'And would it be for his good?'

'Really, Mr. Showman, you ask very odd questions.  Shall we try?'
said Albinia, with a skip backward, so as to lay her hand on the
shoulder of her own great scholar, while the showman drew back the
curtain, observing--'I wish, ma'am, I could show "it and its young
one" together, but the young specimen is unfortunately asleep.
Behold the original black spider monkey!'

There stood the monkey, with sunny brown locks round the laughing
glowing face, and one white paw still lying on the scholar's
shoulder--while his face made no assurance needful that it was very
good for him!  The mirror concealed behind the curtains was the
menagerie!  Albinia clapped her hands with delight, and pronounced it
the most perfect of games.

'And now let us have Willie,' said Mrs. Ferrars; 'it will conduce to
the harmony of the next room.'

Willie, already initiated, hoped to puzzle papa as a platypus
ornithoryncus, but was driven to allow that it was a nondescript
animal, neither fish, flesh, nor good red-herring, useless, and very
fond of grubbing in the mud; and if it were not at Botany Bay, it
ought to be!  The laughter that hailed his defence of its nose as
'well, nothing particular,' precipitated the drawing up of the
curtain and his apparition in the glass: and then Nora Nugent being
called, the inseparable Mary accompanied her, arm-in-arm, simpering
an announcement that they liked nothing so well as a pair of dear
little love-birds.

Oh, unpitying papa! to draw from the unsuspicious Nora the admission
that they were very dull little birds, of no shape at all, who always
sat hunched up in a corner without any fun, and people said their
love was all stupidity and pretence; in fact, if she had one she
should call it Silly Polly or Polly Silly!

To silence Willie's exultation in his sister's discomfiture, he was
sent to fetch Lucy, whose impersonation of an argus pheasant would
not have answered well but for a suggestion of Albinia, that she was
eyes all over for any delinquency in school.  Ulick O'More, owning
with a sigh that he should like to see no beast better than a snipe,
gave rise to much ingenuity by being led to describe it as of a class
migratory, hard to catch, food for powder, given to long bills.
There he guessed something, and stood on the defensive, but could not
deny that its element was bogs, but that it had been seen skimming
over water meadows, and finding sustenance in banks, whereupon the
curtain rose.  Ulick rushed upon the battles of his nation, and was
only reduced to quiescence by the entrance of Sophy, who expressed a
desire to see a coral worm, apparently perplexing the showman, who,
to gain time, hemmed, and said, 'A very unusual species, ma'am,'
which set all the younger ones in a double giggle, such as confused
Sophy, to find herself standing up, with every one looking at her,
and listening for her words.  'I thought you undertook for any
impossibility in earth air or water.'

'Well, ma'am, do you take me for a mere mountebank?  But when ladies
and gentlemen take such unusual fancies--and for an animal that--you
would not aver that it is often found from home?'

'Never, I should say.'

'Nor that it is accessible?'

'Certainly not.'

'And why is it so, ma'am?'

'Why,' said Sophy, bewildered into forgetting her natural history,
'it lives at the bottom of the sea; that's one thing.'

'Where Truth lives,' said a voice behind.

'I beg to differ,' observed Albinia.  'Truth is a fresh water fish at
the bottom of a well; besides, I thought coral worms were always
close to the surface.'

'But below it--not in everybody's view,' said Sophy--an answer which
seemed much to the satisfaction of the audience, but the showman
insisted on knowing why, and whether it did not conceal itself.  'It
makes stony caves for itself, out of sight,' said Sophy, almost
doubting whether she spoke correctly.  'Well, surely it does so.'

'Most surely,' said an acclamation so general that she did not like
it.  If she had been younger, she would have turned sulky upon the
spot, and Mr. Ferrars almost doubted whether to bring ont his final
query.  'Pray, ma'am, do you think this creature out of reach in its
self-made cave, at the bottom--no, below the surface of the sea,
would be popular enough to repay the cost of procuring it.'

'Ah! that's too bad,' burst out the Hibernian tones.  'Why, is not
the best of everything hidden away from the common eye?  Out of
sight--stony cave--It is the secret worker that lays the true solid
foundation, raises the new realms, and forms the precious jewels.'
The torrent of r's was irresistible!

'Police! order!' cried the showman.  'An Irish mob has got in, and
there's an end of everything.'  So up went the curtain, and the polyp
appeared, becoming rapidly red coral as she perceived what the
exhibition was, and why the politeness of the Green Isle revolted
from her proclaiming her own unpopularity.  But all she did was to
turn gruffly aside, and say, 'It is lucky there are no more ladies to
come, Mr. Showman, or the mob would turn everything to a compliment.'

Gilbert's curiosity was directed to the Laughing Jackass, and with
too much truth he admitted that it took its tone from whatever it
associated with, and caught every note, from the song of the lark to
the bray of the donkey; then laughed good-humouredly when the
character was fitted upon himself.

'That is all, is it not?' asked the showman.  'I may retire into
private life.'

'Oh no,' cried Willie; 'you have forgotten Mr. Dusautoy.'

'I was afraid you had,' said Lucy, 'or you could not have left him to
the last.'

'I am tempted to abdicate,' said Mr. Ferrars.

'No,' Albinia said.  'He must have his share, and no one but you can
do it.  Where can he be? the pause becomes awful!'

'Willie is making suggestions,' said Gilbert; 'his imagination would
never stretch farther than a lion.  It's what he thinks himself and
no mistake.'

'He is big enough to be the elephant,' said little Mary.

'The half-reasoning!' said Ulick, softly; 'and I can answer for his
trunk, I saw it come off the omnibus.'

'Ladies and gentlemen, if you persist in such disorderly conduct, the
exhibition will close,' cried the showman, waving his wand as Willie
trumpeted Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy in, and on the demand what animal he
wanted to see, twitched him as Flibbertigibbet did the giant warder,
and caused him to respond--'The Giraffe.'

'Has it not another name, sir?  A short or a long one, more or less
syllables!'

'Camelopard.  A polysyllabic word, certainly,' said Algernon, looking
with a puzzled expression at the laughers behind; and almost
imagining it possible that he could have made an error, he repeated,
'Camel-le-o-pard.  Yes, it is a polysyllable'--as, indeed, he had
added an unnecessary syllable.

'Most assuredly,' said the showman, looking daggers at his
suffocating sister.  'May I ask you to describe the creature?'

'Seventeen feet from the crown to the hoof, but falls off behind,'
said the accurate Mr. Dusautoy; 'beautiful tawny colour.'

'Nearly as good as a Lion,' added Gilbert; but Algernon, fancying the
game was by way of giving useful instruction to the children, went on
in full swing.  'Handsomely mottled with darker brown; a ruminating
animal; so gentle that in spite of its size, none of my little
friends need be alarmed at its vicinity.  Inhabits the African
deserts, but may be bred in more temperate latitudes.  I myself saw
an individual in the Jardin des Plantes, which was popularly said
never to bend its neck to the ground, but I consider this a vulgar
delusion, for on offering it food, it mildly inclined its head.'

'Let us hope the present specimen is equally condescending,' said Mr.
Ferrars.

'Eh! what! I see myself!' said Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, with a tone so
inappreciably grand in mystification, that the showman had no choice
but to share the universal convulsion of laughter, while Willie
rolling on the floor with ecstasy, shouted, 'Yes, it is you that are
the thing with such a long name that it can't bend its head to the
ground!'

'But too good-natured to be annoyed at folly,' said Mr. Ferrars,
perceiving that it was no sport to him.

'This is the way my mischievous uncle has served us all in turn,'
said Lucy, advancing; 'we have all been shown up, and there was mamma
a monkey, and I an argus pheasant--'

'Ah! I see,' said the gentleman.  'These are your rural pastimes of
the season.  Yes, I can take my share in good part, just as I have
pelted the masks at the Carnival.'

'Even a giraffe can bend his head and do at Rome as Rome does,'
murmured Ulick.  But instead of heeding the audacious Irishman,
Algernon patronized the showman by thanks for his exhibition; and
then sitting down by Lucy, asked if he had ever told her of the
tricks that he and il Principe Odorico Moretti used to play at Ems on
the old Baron Sprawlowsky, while Mr. Ferrars, leaning over his
sister's chair, said aside, 'I beg your pardon, Albinia; I should not
have yielded to Willie.  This "rural pastime" is only in season en
famille.'

'Never mind, it served him right.'

'It may have served him right, but had we the right to serve him?'

'I forgive your prudence for the sake of your folly.  Could not
Oxford have lessened his pomposity?'

'It comes too late,' said Maurice.

Before Ulick went to bed his pen and ink had depicted the entire
caravan.  The love-birds were pressed up together, with the
individual features of the two young ladies, and completely little
parrots; the snipe ran along the bars of the cage, looking exactly
like all the O'Mores.  The monkey showed nothing but the hands, but
one held Maurice, and the other was clenched as if to cuff him, and
grandest of all was, as in duty bound, Camelopardelis giraffa, thrown
somewhat backwards, with such a majestic form, such a stalking
attitude, loftily ruminating face, and legs so like the Cavendish
Dusautoy's last new pair of trousers, that Albinia could not help
reserving it for the private delectation of his Aunt Fanny.

'It and its young one,' said Mr. Kendal, as he looked at her
portrait; and the name delighted him so much, that he for some time
applied it with a smile whenever his wife gave him cause to remember
how much there was of the monkey in her composition.

It was the merriest Christmas ever known at Willow Lawn, and the
first time there had been anything of the atmosphere of family frolic
and fun.  The lighting up of Sophy was one great ingredient; hitherto
mirth had been merely endured by her, whereas now, improved health
and spirits had made her take her share, amuse others and be amused,
and cease to be hurt by the jarring of chance words.  Lucy was lively
as usual, but rather more excited than Albinia altogether liked; she
was doubly particular about her dress; more disdainful of the common
herd, and had a general air of exaltation that made Albinia rejoice
when the Polysyllable, the horses, the key-bugle, and genre painting
disappeared from the Bayford horizon.


CHAPTER XX.


If the end of the vacation were a relief on Lucy's account, Albinia
would gladly have lengthened it on Gilbert's.  Letters from his tutor
had disquieted his father; there had been an expostulation followed
by promises, and afterwards one of the usual scenes of argument,
complaint, excuse, lamentation, and wish to amend; but lastly, a
murmur that it was no use to talk to a father who had never been at
the University, and did not know what was expected of a man.

The aspect of Oxford had changed in Albinia's eyes since the days of
her brother.  Alma Mater had been a vision of pealing bells, chanting
voices, cloistered shades, bright waters--the source of her most
cherished thoughts, the abode of youth walking in the old paths of
pleasantness and peace; and she knew that to faithful hearts, old
Oxford was still the same.  But to her present anxious gaze it had
become a field of snares and temptations, whither she had been the
means of sending one, unguarded and unstable.

Once under the influence of a good sound-hearted friend, he might
have been easily led right, but his intimacy with young Dusautoy
seemed to cancel all hope of this, and to be like a rope about his
neck, drawing him into the same career, and keeping aloof all better
influences.  Algernon, with his pride, pomposity, and false
refinement, was more likely to run into ostentations expenditure,
than into coarse dissipation, and it might still be hoped that the
two youths would drag through without public disgrace; but this was
felt to be a very poor hope by those who felt each sin to be a fatal
blot, and trembled at the self-indulgent way of life that might be a
more fatal injury than even the ban of the authorities.

She saw that the anxiety pressed heavily on Mr. Kendal, and though
both shrank from giving their uneasiness force by putting it into
words, each felt that it was ever-present with the other.  Mr. Kendal
was deeply grieving over the effects, for the former state of
ignorance and apathy of the evils of which he had only recently
become fully sensible.  Living for himself alone, without cognizance
of his membership in one great universal system, he had needed the
sense of churchmanship to make him act up to his duties as father,
neighbour, citizen, and man of property; and when aroused, he found
that the time of his inaction had bound him about with fetters.  A
tone of mind had grown up in his family from which only Sophy had
been entirely freed; seeds of ineradicable evil had been sown,
mischiefs had grown by neglect, abuses been established by custom;
and his own personal disadvantages, his mauvaise honte, his reserved,
apparently proud manner, his slowness of speech, dislike to
interruption, and over-vehemence when excited, had so much increased
upon him, as, in spite of his efforts, to be serious hindrances.
Kind, liberal, painstaking, and conscientious as he had become, he
was still looked upon as hard, stern, and tyrannical.  His ten years
of inertness had strewn his path with thorns and briars, even beyond
his own household; and when he looked back to his neglect of his son,
he felt that even the worst consequences would be but just
retribution.

Once such feelings would have wrapt him in morbid gloom; now he
strove against his disposition to sit inert and hidden, he did his
work manfully, and endeavoured not to let his want of spirits sadden
the household.

Nor was he insensible to the cheerful healthy atmosphere of animation
which had diffused itself there; and the bright discussions of the
trifling interests of the day.  Ulick O'More was also a care to him,
which did him a great deal of good.

That young gentleman now lived at his lodgings, but was equally at
home at Willow Lawn, and his knock at the library door, when he
wished to change a book, usually led to some 'Prometheus' discussion,
and sometimes to a walk, if Mr. Kendal thought him looking pale; or
to dining and to spending the evening.

His scrapes were peculiar.  He had thoroughly mastered his work, and
his active mind wanted farther scope, so that he threw himself with
avidity into deeper studies, and once fell into horrible disgrace for
being detected with a little Plato on his desk.  Mr. Goldsmith nearly
gave him up in despair, and pronounced that he would never make a man
of business.  He made matters worse by replying that this was the
best chance of his not being a man of speculation.  If he were
allowed to think of nothing but money, he should speculate for the
sake of something to do!

Before Mr. Goldsmith had half recovered the shock, Mr. Dusautoy and
Mr. Hope laid violent hands upon young O'More for the evening school
twice a week, which almost equally discomposed his aunt.  She had
never got over the first blow of Mr. Dusautoy's innovations, and felt
as if her nephew had gone over to the enemy.  She was doubly
ungracious at the Sunday dinner, and venomously critical of the
choir's chanting, Mr. Hope's voice, and the Vicar's sermons.

The worst scrape came in March.  The Willow Lawn ladies were in the
lower end of the garden, which, towards the river, was separated from
the lane that continued Tibb's Alley, by a low wall surmounted by
spikes, and with a disused wicket, always locked, and nearly
concealed by a growth of laurels; when out brake a horrible
hullabaloo in that region of evil report, the shouts and yells coming
nearer, and becoming so distinct that they were about to retreat,
when suddenly a dark figure leapt over the gate, and into the garden,
amid a storm of outcries.  As he disappeared among the laurels,
Albinia caught up Maurice, Lucy screamed and prepared to fly, and
Sophy started forward, exclaiming, 'It is Ulick, mamma; his face is
bleeding!'  But as he emerged, she retreated, for she had a nervous
terror of the canine race, and in his hand, at arm's length he held
by the neck a yellow dog, a black pot dangling from its tail.

'Take care,' he shouted, as Albinia set down Maurice, and was running
up to him; 'he may be mad.'

Maurice was caught up again, Lucy shrieked, and Sophy, tottering
against an apple-tree, faintly said, 'He has bitten you!'

'No, not he; it was only a stone,' said Ulick, as best he might, with
a fast bleeding upper lip.  'They were hunting the poor beast to
death--I believe he's no more mad than I am--only with the fright--
but best make sure.'

'Fetch some milk, Lucy,' said Albinia.  'Take Maurice with you.  No,
don't take the poor thing down to the river, he'll only think you are
going to drown him.  Go, Maurice dear.'

Maurice safe, Albinia was able to find ready expedients after Sir
Fowell Buxton's celebrated example.  She brought Ulick the gardener's
thick gauntlets from the tool-house, and supplied him with her knife,
with which he set the poor creature free from the instrument of
torture, and then let him loose, with a pan of milk before him, in
the old-fashioned summer-house, through the window of which he could
observe his motions, and if he looked dangerous, shoot him.

Nothing could look less dangerous; the poor creature sank down on the
floor and moaned, licked its hind leg, and then dragged itself as if
famished to the milk, lapped a little eagerly, but lay down again
whining, as if in pain.  Ulick and Albinia called to it, and it
looked up and tried to wag its tail, whining appealingly.  'My poor
brute!' he cried, 'they've treated you worse than a heathen.  That's
all--let me see what I can do for you.'

'Yes, but yourself, Ulick,' said Albinia, as in his haste he took
down his handkerchief from his mouth; 'I do believe your lip is cut
through!  You had better attend to that first.'

'No, no, thank you,' said Ulick, eagerly, 'they've broken the poor
wretch's leg!' and he was the next moment sitting on the summer-house
floor, lifting up the animal tenderly, regardless of her
expostulation that the injured, frightened creature might not know
its friends.  But she did it injustice; it wagged its stumpy tail,
and licked his fingers.

She offered to fetch rag for his surgery, and he farther begged for
some slight bits of wood to serve as splints, he and his brothers had
been dog-doctors before.  As she hurried into the house, Sophy, who
had sunk on a sofa in the drawing-room, looking deadly pale, called
out, 'Is he bitten?'

'No, no,' cried Albinia, hurrying on, 'the dog is all safe.  It has
only got a broken leg.'

Maurice, with whom Lucy had all this time been fighting, came out
with her to see the rest of the adventure; and thought it very cruel
that he was not permitted to touch the patient, which bore the
operation with affecting fortitude and gratitude, and was then
consigned to a basket lined with hay, and left in the summer-house,
Mr. Kendal being known to have an almost eastern repugnance to dogs.

Then Ulick had leisure to be conducted to the morning-room, and be
rendered a less ghastly spectacle, by some very uncomfortable
sticking-plaster moustaches, which hardly permitted him to narrate
his battle distinctly.  He thought the boys, even of Tibb's Alley,
would hardly have ventured any violence after he had interfered, but
for some young men who aught to have known better; he fancied he had
seen young Tritton of Robbles Leigh, and he was sure of an insolent
groom whom Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, to the great vexation of his
uncle, had recently sent down with a horse to the King's Head.  They
had stimulated the boys to a shout of Paddy and a shower of stones,
and Ulick expected credit for great discretion, in having fled
instead of fought.  'Ah! if Brian and Connel had but been there,
wouldn't we have put them to the rout?'

Nothing would then serve him but going back to Tibb's Alley to trace
the dog's history, and meantime Lucy, from the end of the passage,
beckoned to Albinia, and whispered mysteriously that 'Sophy would not
have any one know it for the world--but,' said Lucy, 'I found her
absolutely fainting away on the sofa, only she would not let me call
you, and ordered that no one should know anything about it.  But,
mamma, there was a red-hot knitting-needle sticking out of the fire,
and I am quite sure that she meant if Ulick was bitten, to burn out
the place.'

Albinia believed Sophy capable of both the resolution and its
consequence; but she agreed with Lucy that no notice should be taken,
and would not seem aware that Sophy was much paler than usual.

The dog, as well as Ulick could make out, was a waif or stray,
belonging to a gipsy deported that morning by the police, and on whom
its master's sins had been visited.  So without scruple he carried
the basket home to his lodgings, and on the way, had the misfortune
to encounter his uncle, while shirtfront, coat, and waistcoat were
fresh from the muddy and bloody fray, and his visage in the height of
disfigurement.

Mr. Goldsmith looked on the whole affair as an insult to every
Goldsmith of past ages!  A mere street row!  He ordered Mr. More to
his lodgings, and said be should hear from him to-morrow.  Ulick came
down to Willow Lawn in the dark, almost considering himself as
dismissed, not knowing whether to be glad or sorry; and wanting to
consult Mr. Kendal whether it would be possible to work his way at
college as Mr. Hope had done, or even wondering whether he might
venture to beg for a recommendation to 'Kendal and Kendal.'

Mr. Kendal was so strongly affected, that he took up his hat and went
straight to Mr. Goldsmith, 'to put the matter before him in a true
light.'

True light or false, it was intolerable in the banker's eyes, and it
took a great deal of eloquence to persuade him that his nephew was
worth a second trial.  Fighting in Tibb's Alley over a gipsy's dog,
and coming back looking like a ruffian!  Mr. Goldsmith wished him no
harm, but it would be a disgrace to the concern to keep him on, and
Miss Goldsmith, whom Mr. Kendal heartily wished to gag, chimed in
with her old predictions of the consequences of her poor sister's
foolish marriage.  The final argument, was Mr. Kendal's declaration
of the testimonials with which he would at once send him out to
Calcutta, to take the situation once offered to his own son.  No
sooner did Mr. Goldsmith hear that his nephew had an alternative,
than he promised to be lenient, and finally dispatched a letter to
U. More, Esquire, with a very serious rebuke, but a promise that his
conduct should be overlooked, provided the scandal were not repeated,
and he should not present himself at the bank till his face should be
fit to be seen.

Mr. Kendal mounted him the next morning on Gilbert's horse, and sent
him to Fairmead.  The dog was left in charge of Bridget, who treated
it with abundant kindness, but failed to obtain the exclusive
affection which the poor thing lavished upon its rescuer.  By the
time Ulick came home, it had arrived at limping upon three legs, and
was bent on following him wherever he went.  Disreputable and
heinously ugly it was, of tawny currish yellow (whence it was known
as the Orange-man), with a bull-dog countenance; and the legs that
did not limp were bandy.  No. 2. Johnny Eastman is going to be
_bridegroom_, to stand up, if he doesn't do anything naughty
before. P.P."
The look of "mouldy melancholy" disappeared from Dotty's face
entirely.

"A wedding! A _crystal_ wedding! What can that be? I didn't know
my father and mother would ever be married any more. Aunt 'Ria, were
you and Uncle Henry ever married any more?"
"This is a sort of make-believe wedding," replied Mrs. Clifford; "that
is all.

And since you are to be bridesmaid, Dotty, I wonder if I cannot find
a pair of white slippers for you. I remember Grace had a pair
some years ago, which she has never worn."
[Illustration: THE WHITE SLIPPERS.--Page 167.]
The slippers were produced, and fitted perfectly. Dotty danced
about, embraced her auntie, made a great many wild speeches, and
finally found herself in her uncle's lap, kissing him and laughing
aloud.

"I suppose now," said Mr. Clifford, "we cannot keep you much longer
and I am sorry, for it is very pleasant to have our little cousin
here to talk with us."
"I don't wan't um go 'way, I don't want um go 'way," spoke up little
Katie.

"But I _must_ go to meet my papa," returned Dotty, with a business
air.
"I have to be at home to get ready for the wedding."

It was very pleasant to know people liked her to stay. She ran into
the kitchen, and said to Katinka,--
"O, Katinka, my papa and mamma are going to be married again! Do you
know I've got to start day after to-morrow?"
"So?" replied Katinka, not very much impressed. "I'm going to a party.

I must up stairs go, and make my hairs and shut my dress. Gute
Nacht."
"I'm only going to stay one more day; aren't you sorry?" said Dotty
to broken-nosed Phebe, who came in from the pantry with a long
face.

"Why, I reckoned you was going _to-morrow_," was Phebe's cool reply,
rolling the whites of her eyes to hide a twinkle of fun. She knew
Dotty expected her to say, "I am sorry;" but, though she really
was sorry, she would not confess it just then, because she was an
inveterate tease.
Dotty felt a little chilled. She could not look into the future and
see the tomato pincushion Phebe was to give her, with the assurance
that "she liked her a heap; she was a right smart child, and not a
bit stuck up."
The day ended with Dotty's dear, dear letter under her pillow. She
was going to be very happy by and by; but just now she thought she
was so homesick that she should never go to sleep. She longed to
see Prudy, and hear her say, "O, you darling sister!"The
sentence was rustication, and the tutor wrote to Mr. Dusautoy, as the
least immediately affected, to ask him to convey the intelligence to
Mr. Kendal.

The vicar was not a man to shrink from any task, however painful, but
he felt it the more deeply, as, in spite of his partiality, he was
forced to look on his own favourite Algernon as the misleader of
Gilbert; and when he overtook the sisters on his melancholy way down
the hill, he consulted them how their father would bear it.

'Oh! I don't know,' said Lucy; 'he'll be terribly angry.  I should
not wonder if he sent Gilbert straight off to India; should you,
Sophy?'

'I hope he will do nothing in haste,' exclaimed Mr. Dusautoy.  'I do
believe if those two lads were but separated, or even out of such
company, they would both do very well.'

'Yes,' exclaimed Lucy; 'and, after all, they are such absurd
regulations, treating men like schoolboys, wanting them to keep such
regular troublesome hours.  Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy told me that there
was no enduring the having everything enforced.'

'If things had been enforced on poor Algernon earlier, this might
never have been,' sighed his uncle.

'I'm sure I don't see why papa should mind it so much,' continued
Lucy.  'Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy told me his friend Lord Reginald
Raymond had been rusticated twice, and expelled at last.'

'What do you think of it, Sophy?' asked the vicar, anxiously.

'I don't feel as if any of us could ever look up again,' she answered
very low.

'Why, no; not that exactly.  It is not quite the right way to take
these things, Sophy,' said Mr. Dusautoy.  'Boys may be very foolish
and wrong-headed, without disgracing their family.'

Sophy did not answer--it was all too fresh and sore, and she did not
find much consolation in the number of youths whom Lucy reckoned up
as having incurred the like penalty.  When they entered the house,
and Mr. Dusautoy knocked at the library door, she followed Lucy into
the garden, without knowing where she was going, and threw herself
down upon the grass, miserable at the pain which was being inflicted
upon her father, and with a hardened resentful feeling, between
contempt and anger, against the brother, who, for very weakness,
could so dishonour and grieve him.  She clenched her hand in the
intensity of her passionate thoughts and impulses, and sat like a
statue, while Lucy, from time to time, between the tying up of
flowers and watering of annuals, came up with inconsistent
exhortations not to be so unhappy--for it was not expulsion--it was
sure to be unjust--nobody would think the worse of them because young
men were foolish--all men of spirit did get into scrapes--

It was lucky for Lucy that all this passed by Sophy's ear as unheeded
as the babbling of the brook.  She did not move, till roused by Ulick
O'More, coming up from the bridge, telling that he had met some Irish
haymakers in the meadows, and saying he wanted to beg a frock for one
of their children.

'I think I can find you one,' said Lucy, 'if you will wait a minute;
but don't go in, Mr. Dusautoy is there.'

'Is anything the matter?' he exclaimed.

'Every one must soon know,' said Lucy; 'it is of no use to keep it
back, Sophy.  Only my brother and Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy have got
into a scrape about a wine party, and are going to be rusticated.
But wait, I'll fetch the frock.'

Sophy had almost run away while her sister spoke, but the kind look
of consternation and pity on Ulick's face deterred her, he in
soliloquy repeated, as if confounded by the greatness of the
misfortune, 'Poor Gilbert!'

'Poor Gilbert!' burst from Sophy in irritation at misplaced sympathy;
'I thought it would be papa and mamma you cared for!'

'With reason,' returned Ulick, 'but I was thinking how it must break
his heart to have pained such as they.'

'I wish he would feel it thus,' exclaimed Sophy; 'but he never will!'

'Oh! banish that notion, Sophy,' cried Ulick, recoiling at the
indignation in her dark eyes, 'next to grieving my mother, I declare
nothing could crush me like meeting a look such as that from a sister
of mine.'

'How can I help it?' she said, reserve breaking down in her
vehemence, 'when I think how much papa has suffered--how much Gilbert
has to make up to him--how mamma took him for her own--how they have
borne with him, and set their happiness on him, and yielded to his
fancies, only for him to disappoint them so cruelly, and just because
he can't say No!  I hope he wont come home; I shall never know how to
speak to him !'

'But all that makes it so much the worse for him,' said Ulick, in a
tone of amazement.

'Yes, you can't understand,' she answered; 'if he had had one spark
of feeling like you, he would rather have died than have gone on as
he has done.'

'Surely many a man may be overtaken in a fault, and never be wrong at
heart,' said Ulick.  'There's many a worse sin than what the world
sets a blot upon, and I believe that is just why homes were made.'

Lucy came back with the frock, and Ulick, thanking her, sped away;
while Sophy slowly went upstairs and hid herself on her couch.  For a
woman to find a man thinking her over-hard and severe, is sure either
to harden or to soften her very decidedly, and it was a hard struggle
which would be the effect.  There was an inclination at first to
attribute his surprise to the lax notions and foolish fondness of his
home, where no doubt far worse disorders than Gilbert's were treated
as mere matters of course.  But such strong pity for the offender did
not seem to accord with this; and the more she thought, the more sure
she became that it was the fresh charity and sweetness of an innocent
spirit, 'believing all things,' and separating the fault from the
offender.  His words had fallen on her ear in a sense beyond what he
meant.  Pride and uncharitable resentment might be worse sins than
mere weakness and excess.  She thought of the elder son in the
parable, who, unknowing of his brother's temptation and sorrow,
closed his heart against his return; and if her tears would have
come, she would have wept that she could not bring herself to look on
Gilbert otherwise than as the troubler of her father's peace.

When her mother at last came upstairs, she only ventured to ask
gently, 'How does papa bear it?'

'It did not come without preparation,' was the answer; 'and at first
we were occupied with comforting Mr. Dusautoy, who takes to himself
all the shame his nephew will not feel, for having drawn poor Gilbert
into such a set.'

'And papa?' still asked Sophy.

'He is very quiet, and it is not easy to tell.  I believe it was a
great mistake, though not of his making, to send Gilbert to Oxford at
all, and I doubt whether he will ever go back again.

'Oh, mamma, not conquer this, and live it down!' cried Sophy; but
then changing, she sighed and said, 'If he would--'

'Yes, a great deal depends upon how he may take this, and what
becomes of Algernon Dusautoy; though I suppose there is no lack of
other tempters.  Your papa has even spoken of India again; he still
thinks he would be more guarded there, but all depends on the spirit
in which we find him.  One thing I hope, that I shall leave it all to
his father's judgment, and not say one word.'

The next post brought a penitent letter from Gilbert, submitting
completely to his father; only begging that he might not see any one
at home until he should have redeemed his character, and promising to
work very hard and deny himself all relaxation if he might only go to
a tutor at a distance.

This did not at all accord with Mr. Kendal's views.  He had an
unavowed distrust of Gilbert's letters, he did not fancy a tutor thus
selected, and believed the boy to be physically incapable of the
proposed amount of study.  So he wrote a very grave but merciful
summons to Willow Lawn.

Albinia went to meet the delinquent at Hadminster, and was struck by
the different deportment of the two youths.  Algernon Dusautoy, whose
servant had met him, sauntered up to her as if nothing had happened,
carelessly hoped all were well at Bayford, and, in spite of her
exceeding coldness, talked on with perfect ease upon the chances of a
war with Russia, and had given her three or four maxims, before
Gilbert came up with the luggage van, with a bag in his hand, and a
hurried bewildered manner, unable to meet her eye.  He handed her
into the carriage, seated himself beside her, and drove off without
one unnecessary word, while Algernon, mounting his horse, waved them
a disengaged farewell, and cantered on.  Albinia heard a heavy sigh,
and saw her companion very wan and sorrowful, dejection in every
feature, in the whole stoop of his figure, and in the nervous twitch
of his hands.  The contrast gave an additional impulse to her love
and pity, and the first words she said were, 'Your father is quite
ready to forgive.'

'I knew he would be so,' he answered, hardly able to command his
voice; 'I knew you would all be a great deal too kind to me, and that
is the worst of all.'

'No, Gilbert, not if it gives you resolution to resist the next
time.'

He groaned; and it was not long before she drew from him a sincere
avowal of his follies and repentance.  He had been led on by
assurances that 'every one' did the like, by fear of betraying his
own timidity, by absurd dread of being disdained as slow; all this
working on his natural indolence and love of excitement, had combined
to involve him in habits which had brought on him this disgrace.  It
was a hopeful sign that he admitted its justice, and accused no one
of partiality; the reprimand had told upon him, and he was too
completely struck down even to attempt to justify himself;
exceedingly afraid of his father, and only longing to hide himself.
Such was his utter despair, that Albinia had no scruples in
encouraging him, and assuring him with all her heart, that if taken
rightly, the shock that brought him to his senses, might be the
blessing of his life.  He did not take comfort readily, though
soothed by her kindness; he could not get over his excessive dread of
his father, and each attempt at reassurance fell short.  At last it
came out that the very core of his misery was this, that he had found
himself for part of the journey, in the same train with Miss Durant
and two or three children.  He could not tell her where he was going
nor why, and he had leant back in the carriage, and watched her on
the platform by stealth, as she moved about, 'lovelier and more
graceful than ever!' but how could he present himself to her in his
disgrace and misery?  'Oh, Mrs. Kendal, I forgive my father, but my
life was blighted when I was cut off from her!'

'No, Gilbert, you are wrong.  There is no blighting in a worthy,
disinterested attachment.  To be able to love and respect such a
woman is a good substantial quality in you, and ought to make you a
higher and better man.'

Gilbert turned round a face of extreme amazement.  'I thought,' he
said, 'I thought you--' and went no farther.

'I respect your feeling for her more than when it was two years
younger,' she said; 'I should respect it doubly if instead of making
you ashamed, it had saved you from the need of shame.'

'Do you give me any hope?' cried Gilbert, his face gleaming into
sudden eager brightness.

'Things have not become more suitable,' said Albinia; and his look
lapsed again into despondency; but she added, 'Each step towards real
manhood, force of character, and steadiness, would give you weight
which might make your choice worth your father's consideration, and
you worth that of Genevieve.'

'Oh! would you but have told me so before!'

'It was evident to your own senses,' said Albinia; and she thought of
the suggestion that Sophy had made.

'Too late! too late!' sighed Gilbert.

'No, never too late!  You have had a warning; you are very young, and
it cannot be too late for winning a character, and redeeming the
time!'

'And you tell me I may love her!' repeated Gilbert, so intoxicated
with the words, that she became afraid of them.

'I do not tell you that you may importune her, or disobey your
father.  I only tell you that to look up and work and deny yourself,
in honour of one so truly noble, is one of the best and most saving
of secondary motives.  I shall honour you, Gilbert, if you do so use
it as to raise and support you, though of course I cannot promise
that she can be earned by it, and even that motive will not do alone,
however powerful you may think it.'

Neither of them said more, but Gilbert sighed heavily several times,
and would willingly have checked their homeward speed.  He grew pale
as they entered the town, and groaned as the gates swung back, and
they rattled over the wooden bridge.  It was about four o'clock, and
he said, hurriedly, as with a sort of hope, 'I suppose they are all
out.'

He was answered by a whoop of ecstasy, and before he was well out of
the carriage, he was seized by the joyous Maurice, shouting that he
had been for a ride with papa, without a leading rein.  Happy age for
both, too young to know more than that the beloved playfellow was at
home again!

Little Albinia studied her brother till the small memory came back,
and she made her pretty signs for the well-remembered dancing in his
arms.  From such greetings, Gilbert's wounded spirit could not
shrink, much as he dreaded all others; and, carrying the baby and
preceded by Maurice, while he again muttered that of course no one
was at home, he went upstairs.

Albinia meantime tapped at the library door.  She knew Mr. Kendal to
be there, yearning to forgive, but thinking it right to have his
pardon sought; and she went in to tell him of his son's keen remorse,
and deadly fear.  Displeased and mournful, Mr. Kendal sighed.  'He
has little to fear from me, would he but believe so!  He ought to
have come to me, but--'

That 'but' meant repentance for over-sternness in times past.

'Let me send him to you.'

'I will come,' said Mr. Kendal, willing to spare his son the terror
of presenting himself.

There was a pretty sight in the morning-room.  Gilbert was on the
floor with the two children, Maurice intent on showing how nearly
little Albinia could run alone, and between ordering and coaxing,
drawing her gently on; her beautiful brown eyes opened very seriously
to the great undertaking, and her round soft hands, with a mixture of
confidence and timidity, trusted within the sturdy ones of her small
elder, while Gilbert knelt on one knee, and stretched out a
protecting arm, really to grasp the little one, if the more childish
brother should fail her, and his countenance, lighted up with
interest and affection, was far more prepossessing than when so
lately it had been, full of cowering, almost abject apprehension.

Was it a sort of instinctive feeling that the little sister would be
his best shelter, that made him gather the child into his arms, and
hold her before his deeply blushing face as he rose from the floor?
She merrily called out, 'Papa!'  Maurice loudly began to recount her
exploits, and thus passed the salutation, at the end of which Gilbert
found that his father was taking the little one from him, and giving
her to her mother, who carried her away, calling Maurice with her.

'Have you nothing to say to me?' said Mr. Kendal, after waiting for
some moments; but as Gilbert only looked up to him with a piteous,
scared, uncertain glance, be added; 'You need not fear me; I believe
you have erred more from weakness than from evil inclinations, and I
trust in the sincerity of your repentance.'

These kind words softened Gilbert; he assured his father of his
thanks for his kindness, no one could grieve more deeply, or be more
anxious to atone in any possible manner for what he had unwittingly
done.

'I believe you, Gilbert,' said his father; 'but you well know that
the only way of atoning for the past, as well as of avoiding such
wretchedness and disgrace for the future, is to show greater
firmness.'

'I know it is,' said Gilbert, sorrowfully.

'I cannot look into your heart,' added Mr. Kendal.  'I can only hope
and believe that your grief for the sin is as deep, or deeper, than
that for the public stigma, for which comparatively, I care little.'

Gilbert exclaimed that so indeed it was, and this was no more than
the truth.  Out of sight of temptation, and in that pure atmosphere,
the loud revel and coarse witticisms that had led him on, were only
loathsome and disgusting, and made him miserable in the recollection.

'I am ready to submit to anything,' he added, fervently.  'As long as
you forgive me, I am ready to bear anything.'

'I forgive you from my heart,' said Mr. Kendal, warmly.  'I only wish
to consider what may be most expedient for you.  I should scarcely
like to send you back to Oxford to retrieve your character, unless I
were sure that you would be more resolute in resisting temptation.
No, do not reply; your actions during this time of penance will be a
far more satisfactory answer than any promises.  I had thought of
again applying to your cousin John, to take you into his bank, though
you could not now go on such terms as you might have done when there
was no error in the background, and I still sometimes question
whether it be not the safer method.'

'Whatever you please,' said Gilbert; 'I deserve it all.'

'Nay, do not look upon my decision, whatever it may be, as
punishment, but only as springing from my desire for your real
welfare.  I will write to your cousin and ask whether he still has a
vacancy, but without absolutely proposing you to him, and we will
look on the coming months as a period of probation, during which we
may judge what may be the wisest course.  I will only ask one other
question, Gilbert, and you need not be afraid to answer me fully and
freely.  Have you any debts at Oxford?'

'A few,' stammered Gilbert, with a great effort.

'Can you tell me to whom, and the amount?'

He tried to recollect as well as he could, while completely
frightened and confused by the gravity with which his father was
jotting them down in his pocket-book.

'Well, Gilbert,' he concluded, 'you have dealt candidly with me, and
you shall never have cause to regret having done so.  And now we will
only feel that you are at home, and dwell no longer on the cause that
has brought you.  Come out, and see what we have been doing in the
meadow.'

Gilbert seemed more overthrown and broken down by kindness than by
reproof.  He hardly exerted himself even to play with Maurice, or to
amuse his grandmother; and though his sisters treated him as usual,
he never once lifted up his eyes to meet Sophy's glance, and scarcely
used his voice.

Nothing could be more disarming than such genuine sorrow; and Sophy,
pardoning him with all her heart, and mourning for her past want of
charity, watched him, longing to do something for his comfort, and to
evince her tenderness; but only succeeded in encumbering every petty
service or word of intercourse with a weight of sad consciousness.


CHAPTER XXI.


'I had almost written to ask your pardon,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, as
Albinia entered her drawing-room on the afternoon following.  'I
should like by way of experiment to know what _would_ put that boy
out of countenance.  He listened with placid graciousness to his
uncle's lecture, and then gave us to understand that he was obliged
for his solicitude, and that there was a great deal of jealousy and
misrepresentation at Oxford; but he thought it best always to submit
to authorities, however unreasonable.  And this morning, after
amiably paying his respects to me, he said he was going to inquire
for Gilbert.  I intimated that Willow Lawn was the last place where
he would be welcome, but he was far above attending to me.  Did
Gilbert see him?'

'Gilbert was in the garden with us when we were told he was in the
house.  Poor fellow, he shuddered, and looked as if he wanted me to
guard him, so I sent him out walking with Maurice while I went in,
and found Lucy entertaining the gentleman.  I made myself as cold and
inhospitable as I could, but I am afraid he rather relishes a
dignified retenue.'

'Poor boy!  I wonder what on earth is to be done with him.  I never
before knew what John's love and patience were.'

'Do you think he will remain here?'

'I cannot tell; we talk of tutors, but John is really, I believe,
happier for having him here, and besides one can be sure the worst he
is doing is painting a lobster.  However, much would depend on what
you and Mr. Kendal thought.  If he and Gilbert were doing harm to
each other, everything must give way.'

'If people of that age will not keep themselves out of harm's way,
nobody can do it for them,' said Albinia, 'and as long as Gilbert
continues in his present mood, there is more real separation in
voluntarily holding aloof, than if they were sent far apart, only to
come together again at college.'

Gilbert did continue in the same mood.  The tender cherishing of his
home restored his spirits; but he was much subdued, and deeply
grateful, as he manifested by the most eager and affectionate
courtesy, such as made him almost the servant of everybody, without
any personal aim or object, except to work up his deficient studies,
and to avoid young Dusautoy.  He seemed to cling to his family as his
protectors, and to follow the occupations least likely to lead to a
meeting with the Polysyllable; he was often at church in the week,
rode with his father, went parish visiting with the ladies, and was
responsible when Maurice fished for minnows in the meadows.  Nothing
could be more sincerely desirous to atone for the past and enter on a
different course, and no conduct could be more truly humble or
endearing.

The imaginary disdain of Ulick O'More was entirely gone, and
perceiving that the Irishman's delicacy was keeping him away from
Willow Lawn, Gilbert himself met him and brought him home, in the
delight of having heard of a naval cadetship having been offered to
his brother, and full of such eager joy as longed for sympathy.

'Happy fellow!' Gilbert murmured to himself.

Younger in years, more childish in character, poor Gilbert had
managed to make his spirit world-worn and weary, compared with the
fresh manly heart of the Irishman, all centered in the kindred
'points of Heaven and home,' and enjoying keenly, for the very reason
that he bent dutifully with all his might to a humble and uncongenial
task.

Yet somehow, admire and esteem as he would, there arose no intimacy
or friendship between Gilbert and Ulick; their manners were frank and
easy, but there was no spontaneous approach, no real congeniality,
nor exchange of mind and sympathy as between Ulick and Mr. Kendal.
Albinia had a theory that the friendship was too much watched to
take; Sophy hated herself for the recurring conviction that 'Gilbert
was not the kind of stuff,' though she felt day by day how far he
excelled her in humility, gentleness, and sweet temper.

When the Goldsmiths gave their annual dinner-party, Albinia felt a
sudden glow at the unexpected sight of Ulick O'More.

'I am only deputy for the Orange man,' he said; 'it is Hyder Ali who
ought to be dining here!  Yes, it is his doing, I'd back him against
any detective!'

'What heroism have you been acting together?'

'We had just given Farmer Martin L120 in notes, when as he went out,
we heard little Hyder growling and giving tongue, and a fellow
swearing as if he was at the fair of Monyveagh, and the farmer
hallooing thieves.  I found little Hyder had nailed the rascal fast
by the leg, just as he had the notes out of the farmer's pouch.  I
collared him, Johns ran for the police, and the rascal is fast.'

'What a shame to cheat Mr. Kendal of the committal.'

'The policeman said he was gone out, so we had the villain up to the
Admiral with the greater satisfaction, as he was a lodger in one of
the Admiral's pet public-houses in Tibb's Alley.'

'Ah, when Gilbert is of age,' said Albinia, 'woe to Tibb's!  So you
are a testimonial to the Tripod?'

'So I suspect, for I found an invitation when I came home, I would
have run down to tell you, but I had been kept late, and one takes
some getting up for polite society.'

There was a great deal of talk about Hyder's exploit, and some
disposition to make Mr. O'More the hero of the day; but this was
quickly nipped by his uncle's dry shortness, and the superciliousness
with which Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy turned the conversation to the
provision of pistols, couriers, and guards, for travelling through
the Abruzzi.  The polysyllabic courage, and false alarms on such a
scale, completely eclipsed a real pick-pocket, caught by a gipsy's
cur and a banker's clerk.

Not that Ulick perceived any disregard until later in the evening,
when the young Kendals arrived, and of course he wanted each and all
to hear of his Tripod's achievement.  He met with ready attention
from Sophy and Gilbert, who pronounced that as the cat was to
Whittington, so was Hyder to O'More; but when in his overflowing he
proceeded to Lucy, she had neither eyes nor ears for him, and when
the vicar told her Mr. O'More was speaking to her, she turned with an
air of petulance, so that he felt obliged to beg her pardon and
retreat.

The Bayford parties never lasted later than a few minutes after ten,
but when once Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy and Miss Kendal had possession
of the piano and guitar, there was no conclusion.  Song succeeded
song, they wanted nothing save their own harmony, and hardly waited
for Miss Goldsmith's sleepy thanks.  The vicar hated late hours, and
the Kendals felt every song a trespass upon their hosts, but the
musicians had their backs to the world, and gave no interval, so that
it was eleven o'clock before Mr. Kendal, in desperation, laid his
hand on his daughter, and barbarously carried her off.

The flirtation was so palpable, that Albinia mused on the means of
repressing it; but she believed that to remonstrate, would only be to
give Lucy pleasure, and held her peace till a passion for riding
seized upon the young lady.  The old pony had hard service between
Sophy's needs and Maurice's exactions, but Lucy's soul soared far
above ponies, and fastened upon Gilbert's steed.

'And pray what is Gilbert to ride?'

'Oh! papa does not always want Captain, or Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy
would lend him Bamfylde.'

'Thank you,' returned Gilbert, satirically.

Next morning Lucy, radiant with smiles, announced that all was
settled.  Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's Lady Elmira would be brought down
for her to try this afternoon, so Gilbert might keep his own horse
and come too, which permission he received with a long whistle and
glance at Mrs. Kendal, and then walked out of the room.

'How disobliging!' said Lucy.  'Well then, Sophy, you must make your
old hat look as well as you can, for I suppose it will not quite do
to go without anyone.'

Sophy, like her brother, looked at Mrs. Kendal, and with an eye of
indignant appeal and entreaty, while Albinia's countenance was so
full of displeasure, that Lucy continued earnestly, 'O, mamma, you
can't object.  You used to go out riding with papa when he was at
Colonel Bury's.'

'Well, Lucy!' exclaimed her sister, 'I did not think even you capable
of such a comparison.'

'It's all the same,' said Lucy tartly, blushing a good deal.

Sophy leapt up to look at her, and Albinia trying to be calm and
judicious, demanded, 'What is the same as what?'

'Why, Algernon and _me_,' was the equally precise reply.

In stately horror, Sophy rose and seriously marched away, leaving, by
her look and manner, a species of awe upon both parties, and some
seconds passed ere, with crimson blushes, Albania ventured to invite
the dreaded admission, by demanding, 'Now, Lucy, will you be so good
as to tell me the meaning of this extraordinary allusion?'

'Why, to be sure--I know it was very different.  Papa was so old, and
_there were us_,' faltered Lucy, 'but I meant, you would know how it
all is--how those things--'

'Stop, Lucy, am I to understand by those things, that you wish me to
believe you and Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy are on the game terms as--No,
I can't say it.'

'I don't know what you mean,' said Lucy, growing frightened, 'I never
thought there could be such an uproar about my just going out
riding.'

'You have led me to infer so much more, that it becomes my duty to
have an explanation, at least,' she added, thinking this sounded
cold, 'I should have hoped you would have given me your confidence.'

'O, but you always would make game of him!' cried Lucy.

'Not now; this is much too serious, if you have been led to believe
that his attentions are not as I supposed, because you are the only
girl about here whom he thinks worthy of his notice.'

'It's a great deal more,' said Lucy, with more feeling and less
vanity than had yet been apparent.

'And what has he been making you think, my poor child?' said Albinia.
'I know it is very distressing, but it would be more right and safe
if I knew what it amounts to.'

'Not much after all,' said Lucy, her tone implying the reverse, and
though her cheeks were crimson, not averse to the triumph of the
avowal, nor enduring as much embarrassment as her auditor, 'only he
made me sure of it--he said--(now, mamma, you have made me, so I
must) that he had changed his opinion of English beauty--you know,
mamma.  And another time he said he had wandered Europe over to--to
find loveliness on the banks of the Baye.  Wasn't it absurd?  And he
says he does not think it half so much that a woman should be
accomplished herself, as that she should be able to appreciate other
people's talents--and once he said the Principessa Bianca di Moretti
would be very much disappointed.'

'Well, my dear,' said Albinia, kindly putting her arm round Lucy's
waist, 'perhaps by themselves the things did not so much require to
be told.  I can hardly blame you, and I wish I had been more on my
guard, and helped you more.  Only if he seems to care so little about
disappointing this lady might he not do the same by you?'

'But she's an Italian, and a Roman Catholic,' exclaimed Lucy.

Albinia could not help smiling, and Lucy, perceiving that this was
hardly a valid excuse for her utter indifference towards her
Grandison's Clementina, continued, 'I mean--of course there was
nothing in it.'

'Very possibly; but how would it be, if by-and-by he told somebody
that Miss Kendal would be very much disappointed?'

'O, mamma,' cried Lucy, hastily detaching herself, 'you don't know!'

'I cannot tell, my poor Lucy,' said Albinia.  'I fear there must be
grief and trouble any way, if you let yourself attend to him, for you
know, even if he were in earnest, it would not be right to think of a
person who has shown so little wish to be good.'

Lucy stood for a few moments before the sense reached her mind, then
she dropped into a chair, and exclaimed,

'I see how it is!  You'll treat him as grandpapa treated Captain
Pringle, but I shall break my heart, quite!' and she burst into
tears.

'My dear, your father and I will do our best for your happiness, and
we would never use concealment.  Whatever we do shall be as Christian
people working together, not as tyrants with a silly girl.'

Lucy was pleased, and let Albinia take her hand.

'Then I will write to decline the horse.  It would be far too
marked.'

'But oh, mamma! you wont keep him away!'

'I shall not alter our habits unless I see cause.  He is much too
young for us to think seriously of what he may have said; and I
entreat you to put it out of your mind, for it would be very sad for
you to fix your thoughts on him, and then find him not in earnest,
and even if he were, you know it would be wrong to let affection grow
up where there is no real dependence upon a person's goodness.'

The kindness soothed Lucy, and though she shed some tears, she did
not resist the decision.   Indeed she was sensible of that calm
determination of manner, which all the family had learnt to mean that
the measures thus taken were unalterable, whereas the impetuous
impulses often were reversed.

Many a woman's will is like the tide, ever fretting at the verge of
the boundary, but afraid to overpass it, and only tempting the utmost
limit in the certainty of the recall, and Lucy perhaps felt a kind of
protection in the curb, even while she treated it as an injury.  She
liked to be the object of solicitude, and was pleased with Albinia's
extra kindness, while, perhaps, there was some excitement in the
belief that Algernon was missing her, so she was particularly
amenable, and not much out of spirits.

The original Meadows character, and Bayford breeding, had for a time
been surmounted by Albinia's influence and training; but so ingrain
was the old disposition, that a touch would at once re-awaken it, and
the poor girl was in a neutral state, coloured by whichever
impression had been most recent.  Albinia's hopes of prevailing in
the end increased when Mrs. Dusautoy told her, with a look of
intelligence, that Algernon was going to stay with a connexion of his
mother, a Mr. Greenaway, with six daughters, very stylish young
ladies.

Six stylish young ladies!  Albinia could have embraced them all, and
actually conferred a cordial nod on Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy when she
met him on the way home.

But as she entered the house, so ominous a tone summoned her to the
library, that she needed not to be told that Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy
had been there.

'I told him,' said Mr. Kendal, 'that he was too young for me to
entertain his proposal, and I intimated that he had character to
redeem before presenting himself in such capacity.'

'I hope you made the refusal evident to his intellect.'

'He drove me to be more explicit than I intended.  I think he was
astonished.  He stared at me for full three minutes before he could
believe in the refusal.  Poor lad, it must be real attachment, there
could be no other inducement.'

'And Lucy is exceedingly pretty.'

Mr. Kendal glanced at the portrait over the mantelpiece smiled sadly,
and shook his head.

'Poor dear,' continued Albinia, 'what a commotion there will be in
her head; but she has behaved so well hitherto, that I hope we may
steer her safely through, above all, if one of the six cousins will
but catch him in the rebound!  Have you spoken to her?'

'Is it necessary?'

"I am sure you will grow up, one of these days, to be a very good
woman," continued Major Lazelle, looking with an admiring smile
at the graceful little girl seated on his knee.

"You tell me you have never been at school. I hope you do not mean to
frolic all your life? What were little girls made for, do you
think?"
Dotty reflected a moment.

"What are little girls made for, sir? Why, they are made to play,
'cause they can't play when they grow to be ladies."

The major laughed.

"Pretty well said! You're rather too shrewd for such an 'old mustache'
as I.

So little girls are made to play?

Then suppose we two have a game.
Let us play chip-chop."

Dotty was becoming sleepy, but aroused herself, and patted her little
soft hands as hard as she could, tossing them hither and thither,
sometimes hitting her companion's thumb, sometimes his little
finger.
Major Lazelle laughed, and then she laughed too; for when he tried
to strike her hands, he said it was like aiming at a pair of
rose-leaves fluttering in the air.

The chip-chop was a complete failure; but it had set them both in
great glee.

If truth be told, they became excessively rude.

"Now, sir," said Dotty, as they ran across the room, playing a game
of romps, "if you do catch me again, I'll--O, dear, I don't know
what I'll do!"
Mr. Parlin looked up from his letter a little annoyed, for the floor
was shaking so that he could scarcely write.
"Do not be rude, my daughter," said he, though he knew very well
the major was really the one to be chided.Have you never observed what I mean?'

'Oh! I never observe anything.  I did not find out Maurice and
Winifred till he told me.  Who do you think it is?  I always thought
love would be the making of Sophy.  I see she is another being.  What
is your guess, Mr. Hope?'

Mr. Kendal made a face of astonishment at such an improbable guess,
and was driven into exclaiming, 'How could any one help thinking of
O'More?'

'Oh! only too delightful!' cried Albinia.  'Why didn't I think of
it--but then his way is so free and cousinly with us all.'

'There may be nothing in it,' said Mr. Kendal; 'and under present
circumstances it would hardly be desirable.'

'If old Mr. Goldsmith acts as he ought,' continued Albinia, 'we
should never lose our Sophy--and what a son we should have! he has so
exactly the bright temper that she needs.'

'Well, well, that is all in the clouds,' said Mr. Kendal.  'I wish
the present were equally satisfactory.'

'Ah, I had better call poor Lucy.'

'Come back with her, pray,' called Mr. Kendal, nervously.

Albinia regretted her superfluous gossip when Lucy appeared with eyes
so sparkling, and cheeks so flushed, that it was plain that she had
been in all the miseries of suspense.  Her countenance glowed with
feeling, that lifted her beyond her ordinary doll-like prettiness.
Albinia's heart sank with compassion as she held her hand, and her
father stood as if struck by something more like the vision or his
youth than he had been prepared for; each feeling that something
genuine was present, and respecting it accordingly.

'Lucy,' said Mr. Kendal, tenderly, 'I see I need not tell you why I
have sent for you.  You are very young, my dear, and you must trust
us to care for your happiness.'

'Yes.'  Lucy looked up wistfully.

'This gentleman has some qualities such as may make him shine in the
eyes of a young lady; but it is our duty to look farther, and I am
afraid I know nothing of him that could justify me in trusting him
with anything so precious to me.'

Lucy's face became full of consternation, her hand lay unnerved in
Albinia'a pressure, and Mr. Kendal turned his eyes from her to his
wife, as he proceeded,

'I have seen so much wretchedness caused by want of religious
principle, that even where the morals appeared unblemished, I should
feel no confidence where I saw no evidence of religion, and I should
consider it as positively wrong to sanction an engagement with such a
person.  Now you must perceive that we have every means of forming an
opinion of this young man, and that he has given us no reason to
think he would show the unselfish care for your welfare that we
should wish to secure.'

Albinia tried to make it comprehensible.  'You know, my dear, we have
always seen him resolved on his own way, and not caring how he may
inconvenience his uncle and aunt.  We know his temper is not always
amiable, and differently as you see him, you must let us judge.'

Wrenching her hand away, Lucy burst into tears.  Her father looked at
Albinia, as if she ought to have saved him this infliction, and she
began a little whispering about not distressing papa, which checked
the sobs, and enabled him to say, 'There, that's right, my dear, I
see you are willing to submit patiently to our judgment, and I
believe you will find it for the best.  We will do all in our power
to help you, and make you happy,' and bending down he kissed her, and
left her to his wife.

In such family scenes, logic is less useful than the power of coming
to a friendly conclusion; Lucy's awe of her father was a great
assistance, she was touched with his unwonted softness, and did not
apprehend how total was the rejection.  But what he was spared, was
reserved for Albinia.  There was a lamentable scene of sobbing and
weeping, beyond all argument, and only ending in physical exhaustion,
which laid her on the bed all the rest of the day.

Gilbert and Sophy could not but be aware of the cause of her
distress.  The former thought it a great waste.

'Tell Lucy,' he said, 'that if she wishes to be miserable for life,
she has found the best way!  He is a thorough-bred tyrant at heart,
pig-headed, and obstinate, and with the very worst temper I ever came
across.  Not a soul can he feel for, nor admire but himself.  His
wife will be a perfect slave.  I declare I would as soon sell her to
Legree.'

Sophy's views of the gentleman were not more favourable, but she was
in terror lest Lucy should have a permanently broken heart, after the
precedent of Aunt Maria.  And on poor Sophy fell the misfortune of
being driven up by grandmamma's inquiries, to own that the proposal
had been rejected.

Shade of poor dear Mr. Meadows, didst thou not stand aghast!  Five
thousand a year refused!  Grandmamma would have had a fit if she had
not conceived a conviction, that imparted a look of shrewdness to her
mild, simple old face.  Of course Mr. Kendal was only holding off
till the young man was a little older.  He could have no intention of
letting his daughter miss such a match, and dear Lucy would have her
carriage, and be presented at court.

Sophy argued vehemently against this, and poor grandmamma, who had
with difficulty been taught worldly wisdom as a duty, and always
thought herself good when she talked prudently, began to cry.  Sophy,
quite overcome, was equally distressing with her apologies; Albinia
found them both in tears, and Sophy was placed on the sick-list by
one of her peculiar headaches of self-reproach.

It was a time of great perplexity.  Lucy cried incessantly, bursting
out at every trifle, but making no complaints, and submitting so
meekly, that the others were almost as unhappy as herself.

She was first cheered by the long promised visit from Mrs. Annesley
and Miss Ferrars.  Albinia had now no fears of showing off home or
children, and it was a great success.

The little Awk was in high beauty, and graciously winning, and
Maurice's likeness to his Uncle William enchanted the aunts, though
they were shocked at his mamma's indifference to his constant
imperilling of life and limb, and grievously discomfited his sisters
by adducing children who talked French and read history, whereas he
could not read d-o-g without spelling, and had peculiar views as to b
and d, p and q. However, if he could not read he could ride, and Mrs.
Annesley scarcely knew the extent of the favour she conferred, when
she commissioned Gilbert to procure for him a pony as his private
property.

Miss Ferrars had not expected one of the thirty-six O'Mores to turn
up here.  She gave some good advice about hasty intimacies, and as it
was received with a defence of the gentility of the O'Mores, the two
good ladies agreed that dear Albinia was quite a child still, not fit
for the care of those girls, and it would be only acting kindly to
take Lucy to Brighton, and show her something of the world, or
Albinia would surely let her fall a prey to that Irish clerk.

They liked Lucy's pretty face and obliging ways, and were fond of
having a young lady in their house; they saw her looking ill and
depressed, and thought sea air would be good for her, and though Lucy
fancied herself past caring for gaiety, and was very sorry to leave
home and mamma, she was not insensible to the refreshment of her
wardrobe, and the excitement and honour of the invitation.  At night
she cried lamentably, and clung round Albinia'a neck, sobbing, 'Oh,
mamma, what will become of me without you?' but in the morning she
went off in very fair spirits, and Albinia augured hopefully that
soon her type of perfection would be no longer Polysyllabic.  Her
first letters were deplorable, but they soon became cheerful, as her
mornings were occupied by lessons in music and drawing, and her
evenings in quiet parties among the friends whom the aunts met at
Brighton.  Aunt Gertrude wrote to announce that her charge had
recovered her looks and was much admired, and this was corroborated
by the prosperous complacency of Lucy's style.  Albinia was more
relieved than surprised when the letters dwindled in length and
number, well knowing that the Family Office was not favourable to
leisure; and devoid of the epistolary gift herself, she always
wondered more at people's writing than at their silence, and scarcely
reciprocated Lucy's effusions by the hurried notes which she enclosed
in the well-filled envelopes of Gilbert and Sophy, who, like their
father, could cover any amount of sheets of paper.


CHAPTER XXII.


'There!' cried Ulick O'More, 'I may wish you all good-bye.  There's
an end of it.'

Mr. Kendal stood aghast.

'He's insulted my father and my family,' cried Ulick, 'and does he
think I'll write another cipher for him?'

'Your uncle?'

'Don't call him my uncle.  I wish I'd never set eyes on his wooden
old face, to put the family name and honour in the power of such as
he.'

'What has he done to you?'

'He has offered to take me as his partner,' cried Ulick, with
flashing eyes; and as an outcry arose, not in sympathy with his
resentment, he continued vehemently, 'Stay, you have not heard!
'Twas on condition I'd alter my name, leave out the O that has come
down to me from them that were kings and princes before his
grandfathers broke stones on the road.'

'He offered to take you into partnership,' repeated Mr. Kendal.

'Do you think I could listen to such terms!' cried the indignant lad.
'Give up the O!  Why, I would never be able to face my brothers!'

'But, Ulick--'

'Don't talk to me, Mr. Kendal; I wouldn't sell my name if you were to
argue to me like Plato, nor if his bank were the Bank of England.  I
might as well be an Englishman at once.'

'Then this was the insult?'

'And enough too, but it wasn't all.  When I answered, speaking as
coolly, I assure you, as I'm doing this minute, what does he do, but
call it a folly, and taunt us for a crew of Irish beggars!  Beggars
we may be, but we'll not be bought by him.'

'Well, this must have been an unexpected reception of such a
proposal.'

'You may say that!  The English think everything may be bought with
money!  I'd have overlooked his ignorance, poor old gentleman, if he
would not have gone and spoken of my O as vulgar.  Vulgar!  So when I
began to tell him how it began from Tigearnach, the O'More of
Ballymakilty, that was Tanist of Connaught, in the time of King Mac
Murrough, and that killed Phadrig the O'Donoghoe in single combat at
the fight of Shoch-knockmorty, and bit off his nose, calling it a
sweet morsel of revenge, what does he do but tell me I was mad, and
that he would have none of my nonsensical tales of the savage Irish.
So I said I couldn't stand to hear my family insulted, and then--would
you believe it? he would have it that it was I that was insolent,
and when I was not going to apologize for what I had borne from him,
he said he had always known how it would be trying to deal with one
of our family, no better than making a silk purse out of a sow's ear.
"And I'm obliged for the compliment," said I, quite coolly and politely,
"but no Irish pig would sell his ear for a purse;" and so I came away,
quite civilly and reasonably.  Aye, I see what you would do, Mr. Kendal,
but I beg with all my heart you won't.  There are some things a gentleman
should not put up with, and I'll not take it well of you if you call it
my duty to hear my father and his family abused.  I'll despise myself
if I could.  _You_ don't--' cried he, turning round to Albinia.

'Oh, no, but I think you should try to understand Mr. Goldsmith's
point of view.'

'I understand it only too well, if that would do any good.  Point of
view--why, 'tis the farmyard cock's point of view, strutting on the
top of that bank of his own, and patronizing the free pheasant out in
the woods.  More fool I for ever letting him clip my wings, but he's
seen the last of me.  No, don't ask me to make it up.  It can't be
done--'

'What can be done to the boy?' asked Albinia; 'how can he be brought
to hear reason?'

'Leave him alone,' Mr. Kendal said, aside; while Ulick in a torrent
of eager cadences protested his perfect sanity and reason, and Mr.
Kendal quietly left the room, again to start on a peace-making
mission, but it was unpromising, for Mr. Goldsmith began by declaring
he would not hear a single word in favour of the ungrateful young
dog.

Mr. Kendal gathered that young O'More had become so valuable, and
that cold and indifferent as Mr. Goldsmith appeared, he had been
growing so fond and so proud of his nephew, as actually to resolve on
giving him a share of the business, and dividing the inheritance
which had hitherto been destined to a certain Andrew Goldsmith,
brought up in a relation's office at Bristol.  Surprised at his own
graciousness, and anticipating transports of gratitude, his dismay
and indignation at the reception of his proposal were extreme,
especially as he had no conception of the offence he had given
regarding the unfortunate O as a badge of Hibernianism and vulgarity.
'I put it to you, Mr. Kendal, as a sensible man, whether it would not
be enough to destroy the credit of the bank to connect it with such a
name as that, looking like an Irish haymaker's.  I should be ashamed
of every note I issued.'

'It is unlucky,' said Mr. Kendal, 'and a difficulty the lad could
hardly appreciate, since it is a good old name, and the O is a
special mark of nobility.'

'And what has a banker to do with nobility?  Pretty sort of nobility
too, at that dog-kennel of theirs in Ireland, and his father, a mere
adventurer if ever there lived one!  But I swore when he carried off
poor Ellen that his speculation should do him no good, and I've kept
my word.  I wish I hadn't been fool enough to meddle with one of the
concern!  No, no, 'tis no use arguing, Mr. Kendal, I have done with
him!  I would not make him a partner, not if he offered to change his
name to John Smith!  I never thought to meet with such ingratitude,
but it runs in the breed!  I might have known better than to make
much of one of the crew.  Yet it is a pity too, we have not had such
a clear-headed, trustworthy fellow about the place since young Bowles
died; he has a good deal of the Goldsmith in him when you set him to
work, and makes his figures just like my poor father.  I thought it
was his writing the other day till I looked at the date.  Clever lad,
very, but it runs in the blood.  I shall send for Andrew Goldsmith.'

One secret of Mr. Kendal's power was that he never interrupted, but
let people run themselves down and contradict themselves; and all he
observed was, 'However it may end, you have done a great deal for
him.  Even if you parted now, he would be able to find a situation.'

'Why--yes,' said Mr. Goldsmith, 'the lad knew nothing serviceable
when he came, we had an infinity of maggots about algebra and
logarithms to drive out of his head; but now he really is nearly as
good an accountant as old Johns.'

'You would be sorry to part with him, and I cannot help hoping this
may be made up.'

'You don't bring me any message!  I've said I'll listen to nothing.'

'No; the poor boy's feelings are far too much wounded,' said Mr.
Kendal.  'Whether rightly or wrongly, he fancies that his father and
family have been slightingly spoken of, and he is exceedingly hurt.'

'His father!  I'm sure I did not say a tenth part of what the fellow
richly deserves.  If the young gentleman is so touchy, he had better
go back to Ireland again.'

Nothing more favourable could Mr. Kendal obtain, though he thought
Mr. Goldsmith uneasy, and perhaps impressed by the independence of
his nephew's attitude.

It was an arduous office for a peace-maker, where neither party could
comprehend the feelings of the other, but on his return he found that
Ulick had stormed himself into comparative tranquillity, and was
listening the better to the womankind, because they had paid due
honour to the amiable ancestral Tigearnach and all his guttural
posterity, whose savage exploits and bloody catastrophes acted as
such a sedative, that by the time he had come down to Uncle Bryan of
the Kaffir war, he actually owned that as to the mighty 'O,' Mr.
Goldsmith might have erred in sheer ignorance.

'After all,' said Albinia, 'U. O'More is rather personal in writing
to a creditor'

'It might be worse,' said Ulick, laughing, 'if my name was John.  I.
O'More would be a dangerous confession.  But I'll not be come round
even by your fun, Mrs. Kendal, I'll not part with my father's name.'

'No, that would be base,' said Sophy.

'Who would wish to persuade you?' added Albinia.  'I am sure you are
right in refusing with your feelings; I only want you to forgive your
uncle, and not to break with him.'

'I'd forgive him his ignorance, but my mother herself could not wish
me to forgive what he said of my father.'

'And how if he thinks this explosion needs forgiveness?'

'He must do without it,' said Ulick.  'No, I was cool, I assure you,
cool and collected, but it was not fit for me to stand by and hear my
father insulted.'

Albinia closed the difficult discussion by observing that it was time
to dress, and Sophy followed her from the room burning with indignant
sympathy.  'It would be meanly subservient to ask pardon for
defending a father whom he thought maligned,' said Albinia, and Sophy
took exception at the word 'thought.'

'Ah! of course _he_ cannot be deceived!' said Albinia--but no sooner
were the words spoken than she was half-startled, half-charmed by
finding they had evoked a glow of colour.

'How do you think it will end?' asked Sophy.

'I can hardly fancy he will not be forgiven, and yet--it might be
better.'

'Yes, I do think he would get on faster in India,' said Sophy
eagerly; 'he could do just as Gilbert might have done.'

Was it possible for Albinia to have kept out of her eyes a
significant glance, or to have disarmed her lips of a merry smile of
amused encouragement!  How she had looked she knew not, but the red
deepened on Sophy's whole face, and after one inquiring gaze from the
eyes they were cast down, and an ineffable brightness came over the
expression, softening and embellishing.

'What have I done?' thought Albinia.  'Never mind--it must have been
all there, or it would not have been wakened so easily--if he goes
they will have a scene first.'

But when Mr. Kendal came back he only advised Ulick to go to his desk
as usual the next day, as if nothing had happened.

And Ulick owned that, turn out as things might, he could not quit his
work in the first ardour of his resentment, and with a great exertion
of Christian forgiveness, he finally promised not to give notice of
his retirement unless his uncle should repeat the offence.  This time
Albinia durst not look at Sophy.

Rather according to his friend's hopes than his own, he was able to
report at the close of the next day, that he had not 'had a word from
his uncle, except a nod;' and thus the days passed on, Andrew
Goldsmith did not appear, and it became evident that he was to remain
on sufferance as a clerk.  Nor did Albinia and Sophy venture to renew
the subject between themselves.  At first there was consciousness in
their silence; soon their minds were otherwise engrossed.

Mrs. Meadows was suddenly stricken with paralysis, and was thought to
be dying.  She recovered partial consciousness in the course of the
next day, but was constantly moaning the name of her eldest and
favourite granddaughter, and when telegraph and express train brought
home the startled and trembling Lucy, she was led at once to the sick
bed--where at her name there was the first gleam of anything like
pleasure.

'And where have you been, my dear, this long time?'

'I've been at--at Brighton, dear grandmamma,' said Lucy, so much
agitated as scarcely to be able to recall the name, or utter the
words.

'And--I say, my dear love,' said Mrs. Meadows, earnestly and
mysteriously, 'have you seen _him_?'

Poor Lucy turned scarlet with distress and confusion, but she was
held fast, and grandmamma pursued, 'I'm sure he has not his equal for
handsomeness and stateliness, and there must have been a pair of
you.'

'Dear grandmamma, we must let Lucy go and take off her things; she
shall come back presently, but she has had a long journey,'
interposed Albinia, seeing her ready to sink into the earth.

But Mrs. Meadows had roused into eagerness, and would not let her go.
'I hope you danced with him, dear,' she went on; 'and it's all
nonsense about his being high and silent.  Your papa is bent on it,
and you'll live like a princess in India.'

'She takes you for your mother--she means papa, whispered Albinia,
not without a secret flash at once of indignation at perceiving how
his first love had been wasted, yet of exultation in finding that no
one but herself had known how to love him; but poor Lucy, completely
and helplessly overcome, could only exclaim in a faltering voice:
'Oh, grandmamma, don't--' and Albinia was forced to disengage her,
support her out of the room, and leaving her to her sister, hasten
back to soothe the old lady, who had been terrified by her emotion.
It had been a great mistake to bring her in abruptly, when tired with
her journey, and not fully aware what awaited her.  But there was at
that time reason to think all would soon be over, and Albinia was
startled and confused.

Albinia had hitherto been the only efficient nurse of the family.
Sophy's presence seemed to stir up instincts of the old wrangling
habits, and the invalid was always fretful when left to her, so that
to her own exceeding distress she was kept almost entirely out of the
sick room.

Lucy, on the other hand, was extremely valuable there, her bright
manner and unfailing chatter always amused if needful, and her light
step and tender hand made her useful, and highly appreciated by the
regular nurse.

For the first few days, they watched in awe for the last dread
summons, but gradually it was impossible not to become in a manner
habituated to the suspense, so that common things resumed their
interest, and though Sophy was pained by the incongruity, it could
not have been otherwise without the spirits and health giving way
under the strain.  Nothing could be more trying than to have the mind
wrought up to hourly anticipation of the last parting, and then the
delay, without the reaction of recovery, the spirit beyond all reach
of intercourse, and the mortal frame languishing and drooping.  Mr.
Kendal had from the first contemplated the possibility of the long
duration of such lingering, and did his utmost to promote such
enlivenment and change for the attendants as was consistent with
their care of the sufferer.  They never dared to be all beyond call
at once, since a very little agitation might easily suffice to bring
on a fatal attack, and Albinia and Lucy were forced to share the
hours of exercise and employment between them, and often Albinia
could not leave the house and garden at all.

Gilbert was an excellent auxiliary, and would devote many an hour to
the cheering of the poor shattered mind.  His entrance seldom failed
to break the thread of melancholy murmurs, and he had exactly the
gentle, bright attentive manner best fitted to rouse and enliven.
Nothing could be more irreproachable, than his conduct, and his
consideration and gentleness so much endeared him, that he had never
been so much at peace.  All he dreaded was the leaving what was truly
to him the sanctuary of home, he feared alike temptation and the
effort of resistance and could not bear to go away when his
grandmother was in so precarious a state, and he could so much
lighten Mrs. Kendal's cares both by being with her, and by watching
over Maurice.  His parents were almost equally afraid of trusting him
in the world; and the embodiment of the militia for the county
offered a quasi profession, which would keep him at home and yet give
him employment.  He was very anxious to be allowed to apply for a
commission, and pleaded so earnestly and humbly that it would be his
best hope of avoiding his former errors, that Mr. Kendal yielded,
though with doubt whether it would be well to confine him to so
narrow a sphere.  Meantime the corps was quartered at Bayford, and
filled the streets with awkward louts in red jackets, who were
inveterate in mistaking the right for the left, Gilbert had a certain
shy pride in his soldiership, and Maurice stepped like a young Field
Marshal when he saw his brother saluted.

Nothing had so much decided this step as the finding that young
Dusautoy was to return to his college after Easter.  He was at the
Vicarage again, marking his haughty avoidance of the Kendal family,
and to their great joy, Lucy did not appear distressed, she was
completely absorbed in her grandmother, and shrank from all allusion
to her lover.  Had the small flutter of vanity been cured by a
glimpse beyond her own corner of the world?

But soon Albinia became sensible of an alteration in Gilbert.  He had
no sooner settled completely into his new employment, than a certain
restless dissatisfaction seemed to have possessed him.  He was
fastidious at his meals, grumbled at his horse, scolded the groom,
had fits of petulance towards his brother, and almost neglected Mrs.
Meadows.  No one could wonder at a youth growing weary of such
attendance, but his tenderness and amiability had been his best
points, and it was grievous to find them failing.  Albinia would have
charged the alteration on his brother officers, if they had not been
a very steady and humdrum set, whose society Gilbert certainly did
not prefer.  She was more uneasy at finding that he sometimes saw
Algernon Dusautoy, though for Lucy's sake, he always avoided bringing
his name forward.

A woman was ill in the bargeman's cottage by the towing-path, and
Albinia had walked to see her.  As she came down-stairs, she heard
voices, and beheld Mr. Hope evidently on the same errand with
herself, talking to Gilbert.  She caught the words, ere she could
safely descend the rickety staircase, Gilbert was saying,

'Oh! some happy pair from the High Street!'

'I beg your pardon,' said Mr. Hope, 'I am so blind, I really took it
for your sister, but our shopkeepers' daughters do dress so!'

Albinia looking in the same direction, beheld in a walk that skirted
the meadow towards the wood, two figures, of which only one was
clearly visible, it was nearly a quarter of a mile off, but there was
something about it that made her exclaim, 'Why, that's Mr. Cavendish
Dusautoy! whom can he be walking with?'

Gilbert started violently at hearing her behind him, and a word or
two of greeting passed with Mr. Hope, then there was some spying at
the pair, but they were getting further off, and disappeared in the
wood, while Gilbert, screwing up his eyes, and stammering, declared
he did not know; it might be, he did not think any one could be
recognised at such a distance; and then saying that he had fallen in
with Mr. Hope by chance, he hastened on.  The curate made a brief
visit, and walked home with her, examining her on her impression that
the gentleman was young Dusautoy, and finally consulting her on the
expediency of mentioning the suspicion to the vicar, in case he
should be deluding some foolish tradesman's daughter.  Albinia
strongly advised his doing so; she had much faith in her own keen
eyesight, and could not mistake the majestic mien of Algernon; she
thought the vicar ought at once to be warned, but felt relieved that
it was not her part to speak.

She was very glad when Mr. Hope took an opportunity of telling her
that young Dusautoy was going to the Greenaways in a day or two.

As to Gilbert, it was as if this departure had relieved him from an
incubus; he was in better spirits from that moment, and returned to
his habits of kindness to both grandmamma and Maurice.

The manifold duties of head sick-nurse, governess, and housekeeper,
were apt to clash, and valiant and unwearied as Albinia was, she was
obliged perforce to leave the children more to others than she would
have preferred.  Little Albinia was all docility and sweetness, and
already did such wonders with her ivory letters, that the exulting
Sophy tried to abash Maurice by auguring that she would be the first
to read; to which, undaunted, he replied, 'She'll never be a boy!'
Nevertheless Maurice was developing a species of conscience,
rendering him trustworthy and obedient out of sight, better, in fact,
alone with his own honour and his mother's commands, than with any
authority that he could defy.  He knew when his father meant to be
obeyed, and Gilbert managed him easily; but he warred with Lucy,
ruled Sophy, and had no chivalry for any one but little Albinia, nor
obedience except for his mother, and was a terror to maid-servants
and elder children.  With much of promise, he was anything but an
agreeable child, and whilst no one but herself ever punished,
contradicted, or complained of him, Albinia had a task that would
have made her very uneasy, had not her mind been too fresh and strong
for over-sense of responsibility.  Each immediate duty in its turn
was sufficient for her.

Maurice's shadow-like pursuit of Gilbert often took him off her
hands.  It might sometimes be troublesome to the elder brother, and
now and then rewarded with a petulant rebuff, but Maurice was only
the more pertinacious, and on the whole his allegiance was requited
with ardent affection and unbounded indulgence.  Nay, once when
Maurice and his pony, one or both, were swept on by the whole hunt,
and obliged to follow the hounds, Gilbert in his anxiety took leaps
that he shuddered to remember, while the urchin sat the first
gallantly, and though he fell into the next ditch, scrambled up on
the instant, and was borne by his spirited pony over two more, amid
universal applause.  Mr. Nugent himself rode home with the brothers
to tell the story; papa and mamma were too much elated at his prowess
to scold.

The eventful year 1854 had begun, and General Ferrars was summoned
from Canada to a command in the East.  On his arrival in England, he
wrote to his brother and sister to meet him in London, and the aunts,
delighted to gather their children once more round them, sent
pressing invitations, only regretting that there was not room enough
in the Family Office for the younger branches.

Mr. Ferrars' first measure was to ride to Willow Lawn.  Knocking at
the door of his sister's morning-room, he found Maurice with a
pouting lip, back rounded, and legs twisted, standing upon his
elbows, which were planted upon the table on either side of a calico
spelling-book.  Mr. Kendal stood up straight before the fire, looking
distressed and perplexed, and Albinia sat by, a little worn, a little
irritable, and with the expression of a wilful victim.

All greeted the new-comer warmly, and Maurice exclaimed, 'Mamma, I
may have a holiday now!'

'Not till you have learnt your spelling.'  There was some sharpness
in the tone, and Maurice's shoulder-blades looked sulky.

'In consideration of his uncle,' began Mr. Kendal, but she put her
hand on the boy, saying, 'You know we agreed there were to be no
holidays for a week, because we did not use the last properly.'

He moved off disconsolately, and his father said, 'I hope you are
come to arrange the journey to London.  Is Winifred coming with you?'

'No; a hurry and confusion, and the good aunts would be too much for
her, you will be the only one for inspection.'

'Yes, take him with you, Maurice,' said Albinia, 'he must see
William.'

'You must be the exhibitor, then,' her brother replied.

'Now, Maurice, I know what you are come for, but you ought to know
better than to persuade me, when you know there are six good reasons
against my going.'

'I know of one worth all the six.'

'Yes,' said Mr. Kendal; 'I have been telling her that she is
convincing me that I did wrong in allowing her to burthen herself
with this charge.'

'That's nothing to the purpose,' said Albinia; 'having undertaken it,
when you all saw the necessity, I cannot forsake it now--'

'If Mrs. Meadows were in the same condition as she was in two months
ago, there might be a doubt,' said Mr. Kendal; but she is less
dependent on your attention, and Lucy and Gilbert are most anxious to
devote themselves to her in your absence.'

'I know they all wish to be kind, but if anything went wrong, I
should never forgive myself!'

'Not if you went out for pleasure alone,' said her brother; 'but
relationship has demands.'

'Of course,' she said, petulantly, 'if Edmund is resolved, I must go,
but that does not convince me that it is right to leave everything to
run riot here.'

Mr. Kendal looked serious, and Mr. Ferrars feared that the winter
cares had so far told on her temper, that perplexity made her wilful
in self-sacrifice.  There was a pause, but just as she began to
perceive she had said something wrong, the lesser Maurice burst out
in exultation,

'There, it is not indestructible!'

'What mischief have you been about?'  The question was needless, for
the table was strewn with snips of calico.

'This nasty spelling-book!  Lucy said it was called indestructible,
because nobody could destroy it, but I've taken my new knife to it.
And see there!'

'And now can you make another?' said his uncle.

'I don't want _to_.'

'Nor _one_ either, sir,' said Mr. Kendal.  'What shall we have to
tell Uncle William about you!  I'm afraid you are one of the chief
causes of mamma not knowing how to go to London.'

Maurice did not appear on the way to penitence, but his mother said,
'Bring me your knife.'

He hung down his head, and obeyed without a word.  She closed it, and
laid it on the mantel-shelf, which served as a sort of pound for
properties in sequestration.

'Now, then, go,' she said, 'you are too naughty for me to attend to
you.'

'But when will you, mamma?' laying a hand on her dress.

'I don't know.  Go away now.'

He slowly obeyed, and as the door shut, she said, 'There!' in a tone
as if her view was established.

'You must send him to Fairmead,' said the uncle.

'To "terrify" Winifred?  No, no, I know better than that; Gilbert can
look after him.  I don't so much care about that.'

The admission was eagerly hailed, and objection after objection
removed, and having recovered her good humour, she was candid, and
owned how much she wished to go.  'I really want to make acquaintance
with William.  I've never seen him since I came to my senses, and
have only taken him on trust from you.'

'I wish equally that he should see you,' said her brother.  'It would
be good for him, and I doubt whether he has any conception what you
are like.'

'I'd better stay at home, to leave you and Edmund to depict for his
benefit a model impossible idol--the normal woman.'

Maurice looked at her, and shook his head.

'No--it would be rather--it and its young one, eh?'

Maurice took both her hands.  'I should not like to tell William what
I shall believe if you do not come.'

'Well, what--'

'That Edmund is right, and you have been overtasked till you are
careful and troubled about many things.'

'Only too much bent on generous self-devotion,' said Mr. Kendal,
eagerly; 'too unselfish to cast the balance of duties.'

'Hush, Edmund,' said Albinia.  'I don't deserve fine words.  I
honestly believe I want to do what is right, but I can't be sure what
it is, and I have made quite fuss enough, so you two shall decide,
and then I shall be made right anyway.  Only do it from your
consciences.'

They looked at each other, taken aback by the sudden surrender.  Mr.
Ferrars waited, and her husband said, 'She ought to see her brother.
She needs the change, and there is no sufficient cause to detain
her.'

'She must be content sometimes to trust,' said Mr. Ferrars.

'Aye, and all that will go wrong, when my back is turned.'

'Let it,' said her brother.  'The right which depends on a single
human eye is not good for much.  Let the weeds grow, or you can't
pull them up.'

'Let the mice play, that the cat may catch them,' said Albinia,
striving to hide her care.  'One good effect is, that Edmund has not
begun to groan.'

Indeed, in his anxiety that she should consent to enjoy herself, he
had not had time to shrink from the introduction.

Outside the door they found Maurice waiting, his spelling learnt from
a fragment of the indestructible spelling-book, and the question
followed, 'Now, mamma, you wont say I'm too naughty for you to go to
London and see Uncle William?'

'No, my little boy, I mean to trust you, and tell Uncle William that
my young soldier is learning the soldier's first duty--obedience.'

'And may I have my knife, mamma?'

Papa had settled that question by himself taking it off the chimney-piece
and restoring it.  If mamma wished the penance to have been longer,
she neither looked it nor said it.

The young people received the decision with acclamation, and the two
elder ones vied with one another in attempts to set her mind at rest
by undertaking everything, and promising for themselves and the
children perfect regularity and harmony.  Sophy, with a bluntness
that King Lear would have highly disapproved, said, 'She was glad
mamma was going, but she knew they should be all at sixes and sevens.
She would do her best, and very bad it would be.'

'Not if you don't make up your mind beforehand that it must be bad,'
said her uncle.

Sophy smiled, she was much less impervious to cheerful auguries, and
spoke with gladness of the pleasure it would give her friend
Genevieve to see Mrs. Kendal.

Mr. Ferrars had a short interview with Ulick, and was amused by
observing that little Maurice had learnt as much Irish as Ulick had
dropped.  After the passing fever about his O had subsided, he was
parting with some of his ultra-nationality.  The whirr of his R's and
his Irish idioms were far less perceptible, and though a word of
attack on his country would put him on his mettle, and bring out the
Kelt in full force, yet in his reasonable state, his good sense and
love of order showed an evident development, and instead of
contending that Galway was the most perfect county in the world, he
only said it might yet be so.

'Isn't he a noble fellow?' cried Albinia, warmly.

'Yes,' said her brother; 'I doubt whether all the O'Mores put
together have ever made such a conquest as he has.'

'It was fun to see how the aunts were dismayed to find one of the
horde in full force here.  I believe it was as a measure of
precaution that they took Lucy away.  I was very glad for Lucy to go,
but hers was not exactly the danger.'

'Ha!' said Maurice; and Albinia blushed.  Whereupon he said
interrogatively, 'Hem?' which made her laugh so consciously that he
added, 'Don't you go and be romantic about either of your young
ladies, or there will be a general burning of fingers.'

'If you knew all our secrets, Maurice, you would think me a model of
prudence and forbearance.'

'Ho!' was his next interjection, 'so much the worse.  For my own
part, I don't expect prudence will come to you naturally till the
little Awk has a lover.'

'Won't it come any other way?'

'Yes, in _one_ way,' he said, gravely.

'And that way is not easily found by those who have neither humility
nor patience,' she said, sadly, 'who rush on their own will.'

'Nay, Albinia, it is being sought, I do believe; and remember the
lines--


  "Thine own mild energy bestow,
   And deepen while thou bidst it flow,
   More calm our stream of love."'


Forced to resign herself to her holiday, Albinia did so with a good
grace, in imitation of her brother, who assured her that he had
brought a bottle of Lethe, and had therein drowned wife, children,
and parish.  Mr. Kendal's spirits, as usual, rose higher every mile
from Bayford, and they were a very lively party when they arrived in
Mayfair.

The good aunts were delighted to have round them all those whom they
called their children; all except Fred, whom the new arrangements had
sent to rejoin his regiment in Ireland.

Sinewy, spare, and wiry, with keen gray eyes under straight brows,
narrow temples, a sunburnt face, and alert, upright bearing and quick
step, William Ferrars was every inch a soldier; but nothing so much
struck Mr. and Mrs. Kendal as the likeness to their little Maurice,
though it consisted more in air and gesture than in feature.  His
speech was brief and to the point, softened into delicately-polished
courtesy towards womankind, in the condescension of strength to
weakness--the quality he evidently thought their chief characteristic.

Albinia was amused as she watched him with grown-up eyes, and
compared present with past impressions.  She could now imagine that
she had been an inconvenient charge to a young soldier brother, and
that he had been glad to make her over to the aunts, only petting and
indulging her as a child; looking down on her fancies, and smiling at
her sauciness when she was an enthusiastic maiden--treatment which
she had so much resented, that she had direfully offended Maurice by
pronouncing William a mere martinet, when she was hurt at his neither
reading the Curse of Kehama, nor entering into her plans for Fairmead
school.

Having herself become a worker, she could better appreciate a man who
had seen and acted instead of reading, recollected herself as an
emanation of conceit, and felt shy and anxious, even more for her
husband than for herself.  How would the scholar and the soldier fare
together? and could she and Maurice keep them from wearying of each
other?  She had little trust in her own fascinations, though she saw
the General's eye approvingly fixed on her, and believing herself to
be a more pleasing object in her womanly bloom than in her unformed
girlhood.

'How does the Montreal affair go on?' she asked.

'What affair?'

'Fred and Miss Kinnaird.'

'I am sorry to say he has not put it out of his head.'

'Surely she is a very nice person.'

'Pshaw!  He has no right to think of a wife these dozen years.'

'Not even think?  When he is not to have one at any rate till he is a
field officer!'

'And he is a fool to have one then.  A mere encumbrance to himself
and the entire corps.'

'Yes, I know,' said Albinia, 'she always gets the best cabin.'

'And that is no place for her!  No man, as I have told Fred over and
over again, ought to drag a woman into hardships for which she is not
fitted, and where she interferes with his effectiveness and the
comfort of every one else.'

The identical lecture of twelve years since, when he had feared
Albinia's becoming this inconvenient appendage!  If he had repeated
it on all like occasions, she did not wonder that it had wearied his
aide-de-camp.

'Perhaps,' she said, 'the backwoods may have fitted Miss Emily for
the life; and I can't but be glad of Fred's having been steady to
anything.'

Considering this speech like the Kehama days, the General went on to
dilate on the damage that marriage was to the 'service,' removing the
best officers, first from the mess, and then from the army.

'What a pity William was born too late to be a Knight of St. John!'
said Albinia.

All laughed, but she doubted whether he were pleased, for he
addressed himself to one of the aunts, while Maurice spoke to her in
an under tone--'I believe he is quite right.  Homes are better for
the individual man, but not for the service.  How remarkably the
analogy holds with this other service!'

'You mean what St. Paul says of the married and unmarried?'

'I always think he and his sayings are the most living lessons I know
on the requirements of the other army.'

Albinia mused on the insensible change in Maurice.  He had not
embraced his profession entirely by choice.  It had always been
understood that one of the younger branches must take the family
living; and as Fred had spurned study, he had been bred up to
consider it as his fate, and if he had ever had other wishes, he had
entirely accepted his destiny, and sincerely turned to his vocation.
The knowledge that he must be a clergyman had ruled him and formed
him from his youth, and acting through him on his sister, had
rendered her more than the accomplished, prosperous young lady her
aunts meant to have made her.  Yet, even up to a year or two after
his Ordination, there had been a sense of sacrifice; he loved
sporting, and even balls, and it had been an effort to renounce them.
He had avoided coming to London because his keen enjoyment of society
tended to make him discontented with his narrow sphere; she had even
known him to hesitate to ride with the staff at a review, lest he
should make himself liable to repinings.  And now how entirely had
all this passed away, not merely by outgrowing the enterprising
temper and boyish habits, nor by contentment in a happy home, but by
the sufficiency and rest of his service, the engrossment in the
charge from his great Captain.  Without being himself aware of it, he
had ceased to distrust a holiday, because it was no longer a
temptation; and his animation and mirth were the more free, because
self-regulation was so thoroughly established, that restraint was no
longer felt.

Mrs. Annesley was talking of the little Kendals, who she had ruled
should be at Fairmead.

'No,' said Maurice, 'Albinia thought her son too mighty for Winifred.
Our laudable efforts at cousinly friendship usually produce war-whoops
that bring the two mammas each to snatch her own offspring from the
fray, with a scolding for the sake of appearances though believing the
other the only guilty party.'

'Now, Maurice,' cried Albinia, 'you confess how fond Mary is of
setting people to rights.'

'Well--when Maurice bullies Alby.'

'Aye, you talk of the mammas, and you only want to make out poor
Maurice the aggressor.'

'Never mind, they will work in better than if they were fabulous
children.  Ah, you are going to contend that yours is a fabulous
child.  Take care I don't come on you with the indestructible--'

'Take care I don't come on you with Mary's lessons to Colonel Bury on
the game-law.'

'Does it not do one good to see those two quarrelling just like old
times?' exclaimed one aunt to the other.

'And William looking on as contemptuous as ever?' said Albinia.

'Not at all.  I rejoice to have this week with you.  I should like to
see your boy.  Maurice says he is a thorough young soldier.'

Mr. Kendal looked pleased.

The man of study had a penchant for the man of action, and the
brothers-in-law were drawing together.  Mars, the great geographical
master, was but opening his gloomy school on the Turkish soil, and
the world was discovering its ignorance beyond the Pinnock's
Catechisms of its youth.  Maurice treated Mr. Kendal as a dictionary,
and his stores of Byzantine, Othman, and Austrian lore, chimed in
with the perceptions of the General, who, going by military maps,
described plans of operations which Mr. Kendal could hardly believe
he had not found in history, while he could as little credit that Mr.
Kendal had neither studied tactics, nor seen the spots of which he
could tell such serviceable minutiae.

They had their heads together over the map the whole evening, and the
next morning, when the General began to ask questions about Turkish,
his sister was proud to hear her husband answering with the
directness and precision dear to a military man.

'That's an uncommonly learned man, Albinia's husband,' began the
General, as soon as he had started with his brother on a round of
errands.

'I never met a man of more profound and universal knowledge.'

'I don't see that he is so grave and unlike other people.  Fred
reported that he was silence itself, and she might as well have
married Hamlet's ghost.'

'Fred saw him at a party,' said Maurice; then remembering that this
might not be explanatory, he added, 'He shines most when at ease, and
every year since his marriage has improved and enlivened him.'

'I am satisfied.  I hardly knew how to judge, though I did not think
myself called upon to remonstrate against the marriage, as the aunts
wished.  I knew I might depend on you, and I thought it high time
that she should be settled.'

'I have been constantly admiring her discernment, for I own that at
first his reserve stood very much in my way, but since she has raised
his spirits, and taught him to exert himself, he has been a most
valuable brother to me.

'Then you think her happy?  I was surprised to see her such a fine-looking
woman; my aunts had croaked so much about his children and his mother,
that I thought she would be worn to a shadow.'

'Very happy.  She has casual troubles, and a great deal of work, but
that is what she is made for.'

'How does she get on with his children?'

'Hearty love for them has carried her through the first difficulties,
which appalled me, for they had been greatly mismanaged.  I am afraid
that she has not been able to undo some of the past evil; and with
all her good intentions, I am sometimes afraid whether she is old
enough to deal with grown-up young people.'

'You don't mean that Kendal's children are grown up?  I should think
him younger than I am.'

'He is so, but civil servants marry early, and not always wisely; and
the son is about twenty.  Poor Albinia dotes on him, and has done
more for him than ever his father did; but the lad is weak and tender
every way, with no stamina, moral or physical, and with just enough
property to do him harm.  He has been at Oxford and has failed, and
now he is in the militia, but what can be expected of a boy in a
country town, with nothing to do?  I did not like his looks last
week, and I don't think his being there, always idle, is good for
that little manly scamp of Albinia's own.'

'Why don't they put him into the service?'

'He is too old.'

'Not too old for the cavalry!'

'He can ride, certainly, and is a tall, good-looking fellow; but I
should not have thought him the stuff to make a dragoon.  He has
always been puling and delicate, unfit for school, wanting force.'

'Wanting discipline,' said the General.  'I have seen a year in a
good regiment make an excellent officer of that very stamp of
youngster, just wanting a mould to give him substance.'

'The regiment should be a very good one,' said Mr. Ferrars; 'he would
be only too easily drawn in by the bad style of subaltern.'

'Put him into the 25th Lancers,' said the General, 'and set Fred to
look after him.  Rattlepate as he is, he can take excellent care of a
lad to whom he takes a fancy, and if Albinia asked him, he would do
it with all his heart.'

'I wish you would propose it, though I am afraid his father will
never consent.  I would do a great deal to get him away before he has
led little Maurice into harm.'

'This consideration moved the Rector of Fairmead himself to broach
the subject, but neither Mr. Kendal nor Albinia could think of
venturing their fragile son in the army, though assured that there
was little chance that the 25th Lancers would be summoned to the
east, and they would only hold out hopes of little Maurice by and by.

Albinia's martial ardour was revived as she listened with greater
grasp of comprehension to subjects familiar in her girlhood.  She
again met old friends of her father, the lingering glories of the
Peninsula and Waterloo, who liked her for her own sake as well as for
her father's, while Maurice looked on, amused by her husband's silent
pride in her, and her hourly progress in the regard of the General,
who began to talk of making a long visit to Fairmead, after what he
expected would be a slight demonstration on the Danube.  He even
began to regret the briefness of the time that he could spend in
their society.

Much was crowded into that week, but Albinia contrived to find an
hour for a call on her little French friend, to whom she had already
forwarded the parcels she had brought from home--a great barm-brack
from Biddy, and a store of delicate convent confections from
Hadminster.

She was set down at a sober old house in the lawyers' quarter of the
world, and conducted to a pretty, though rather littered drawing-room,
where she found a delicate-looking young mamma, and various small
children.

'I'm so glad,' said little Mrs. Rainsforth, 'that you have been able
to come; it will be such a pleasure to dear Miss Durant; and while
one of the children was sent to summon the governess, the lady
continued, nervously but warmly, 'I hope you will think Miss Durant
looking well; I am afraid she shuts herself up too much.  I'm sure
she is the greatest comfort, the greatest blessing to us.'

Albinia's reply was prevented by a rush of children, followed by the
dear little trim, slight figure.  There was no fear that Genevieve
did not look well or happy.  Her olive complexion was healthy; her
dark eyes lustrous with gladness; her smile frank and unquelled; her
movements full of elastic life.

She led the way to the back parlour, dingy by nature, but bearing
living evidence to the charm which she infused into any room.
Scratched table, desks, copybooks, and worn grammars, had more the
air of a comfortable occupation than of the shabby haunt of irksome
taskwork.  There were flowers in the window, and the children's
treasures were arranged with taste.  Genevieve loved her school-room,
and showed off its little advantages with pretty exultation.  If Mrs.
Kendal could only see how well it looked with the curtains down,
after tea!

And then came the long, long talk over home affairs, and the history
of half the population of Bayford, Genevieve making inquiries, and
drinking in the answers as if she could not make enough of her
enjoyment.

Not till all the rest had been discussed, did she say, with dropped
eyelids, and a little blush, 'Is Mr. Gilbert Kendal quite strong?'

'Thank you, he has been much better this winter, and so useful and
kind in nursing grandmamma!'

'Yes, he was always kind.'

'He was going to beg me to remember him to you, but he broke off, and
said you would not care.'

'I care for all goodness towards me,' answered Genevieve, lifting her
eyes with a flash of inquiry.

'I am afraid he is as bad as ever, poor fellow,' said Albinia, with a
little smile and sigh; 'but he has behaved very well.  I must tell
you that you were in the same train with him on his journey from
Oxford, and he was ashamed to meet your eye.'

'Ah, I remember well.  I thought I saw him.  I was bringing George
and Fanny from a visit to their aunts, and I was sure it must be Mr.
Gilbert.'

'As prudent as ever, Genevieve.'

'It would not have been right,' she said, blushing; 'but it was such
a treat to see a Bayford face, that I had nearly sprung out of the
waiting-room to speak to him at the first impulse.'

'My poor little exile!' said Albinia.

'No, that is not my name.  Call me my aunt's bread-winner.  That's my
pride!  I mean my cause of thankfulness.  I could not have earned
half so much at home.'

'I hope indeed you have a home here.'

'That I have,' she fervently answered.  'Oh, without being a homeless
orphan, one does not learn what kind hearts there are.  Mr. and Mrs.
Rainsforth seemed only to fear that they should not be good enough to
me.'

'Do you mean that you found it a little oppressive?'

'Fi donc, Madame!  Little girls like you are not expected to have
judgment like grown women. If you only do the best you know how,
it is all that should be required of you."
Dotty's face emerged from the cloud.

She looked away down the aisle at Mrs.

Lovejoy, who was patting the uninteresting baby to sleep.

"Well," thought she, her self-esteem reviving, "I wish that woman
only could know I wasn't to blame! I don't believe _she_ could have
take care of that baby when she was six years old."
"Here we are at Boston," said Mr. Parlin.

"Is your hat tied on?

Keep close to me, and don't be afraid of the crowd."
Dotty was not in the least afraid. She was not like Prudy, who, on
the same journey, had clung tremblingly to her father at every
change of cars. In Dotty's case there was more danger of her
being reckless than too timid.

They went to a hotel. Mr. Parlin's business would detain him an hour
or two, he said; after that he would take his little daughter to
walk on the Common; and next morning, bright and early, they would
proceed on their journey.

It was the first time Dotty had ever dined at a public house. A bill
of fare was something entirely new to her. She wondered how it
happened that the Boston printers knew what the people in that
hotel were about to have for dinner.

Mr. Parlin looked with amusement at the demure little lady beside
him.

Not a sign of curiosity did she betray, except to gaze around her
with keen eyes, which saw everything, even to the pattern of
the napkins.
Some time she would have questions to ask, but not now.

"And what would you like for dinner, Alice?"
Mr. Parlin said this as they were sipping their soup. Dotty glanced at
the small table before them, which offered scarcely anything but
salt-cellars and castors, and then at the paper her father held in
his hand.

She was about to reply that she would wait till the table was ready;
but as there was one man seated opposite her, and another standing
at the back of her chair, she merely said,-- 
"I don't know, papa."

"A-la-mode beef; fricasseed chicken; Calcutta curry," read her
mischievous father from the bill, as fast as he could read; "macaroni;
salsify; flummery; sirup of cream.

You see it is hard to make a choice, dear. Escaloped oysters; pigeon
pie postponed."
"I'll take some of that, papa," broke in Dotty.

"What, dear?"

"Some of the pigeon pie 'sponed," answered Dotty, in a low voice,
determined to come to a decision of some sort. It was not likely
to make much difference what she should choose, when everything was
alike wonderful and strange.

"Pigeon pie postponed," said Mr.

Parlin to the man at the back of Dotty's chair; "turkey with oysters
for me."
The polite waiter smiled so broadly that he showed two long rows
of white teeth.

It could not be Dotty who amused him. Her conduct was all that
is prim and proper. She sat beside her papa as motionless as a waxen
baby, her eyes rolling right and left, as if they were jerked by a
secret wire. It certainly could not have been Dotty. Then what was
it the man saw which was funny?

"Only one pigeon pie in the house, sir," said he, trying to look
very solemn, "and if the young lady will be pleased to wait, I'll
bring it to her in a few minutes. No such dish on any of the other
bills of fare.I have told
Maurice that I am heartily rejoiced to see you in such excellent
hands.'

'You must come and see the children, and know him better.'

'I hope so, when this affair is over, and I expect it will be soon
settled.  Anyway, I am glad we have been together.  If we meet again,
we will try to see more of one another.'

He had said much more to his brother, expressing regret that he had
been so much separated from his sister.  Thorough soldier as he was,
and ardent for active service, the sight of her and her husband had
renewed gentler thoughts, and he was so far growing old that the idea
of home and rest came invitingly before him.  He was softened at the
parting, and when he wrung their hands for the last time on the deck
of the steamer, they were glad that his last words were, 'God bless
you.'

There had been some uncertainty as to the time of his sailing, and
Fairmead and Bayford had been told that unless their travellers
arrived by the last reasonable train on Friday, they were not to be
expected till the same time on Saturday, Maurice having concocted a
scheme for crossing by several junction lines, so as to save waiting;
but they had not reckoned on the discourtesies of two rival companies
whose lines met at the same station, and the southern train was only
in time to hear the parting snort of the engine that it professed to
catch.

The Ferrars' nature, above all when sore with farewells, was not made
to submit to having time wasted by treacherous trains on a cold
wintry day, and at a small new station, with an apology for a
waiting-room, no bookstall, and nothing to eat but greasy gingerbread
and hard apples.

Maurice relieved his feelings by heartily rowing all the officials,
but he could obtain no redress, as he knew full well the whole time,
nor would any train pick them up for full three hours.

So indignant was he, that amusement rendered Albinia patient,
especially when he took to striding up and down the platform,
devising cases in which the delay might be actionable, and
vituperating the placability of Mr. Kendal, who having wrapt up his
wife in plaids and seated her on the top of the luggage, had set his
back to the wall, and was lost to the present world in a book.

'Never mind, Maurice,' said Albinia; 'in any other circumstances we
should think three hours of each other a great boon.'

'If anything could be an aggravation, it would be to see Albinia
philosophical.'

'You make me so on the principle of the Helots and Spartans.'

It was possible to get to Hadminster by half-past seven, and on to
Bayford by nine o'clock, but Fairmead lay further from the line, and
the next train did not stop at the nearest station, so Maurice agreed
to sleep at Bayford that night; and this settled, set out with his
sister to explore the neighbourhood for eatables and church
architecture.  They made an ineffectual attempt to rouse Mr. Kendal
to go with them, but he was far too deep in his book, and only
muttered something about looking after the luggage.  They found a
stale loaf of bread, and a hideous church, but it was a merry walk,
and brought them back in their liveliest mood, which lasted even to
pronouncing it 'great fun' that the Hadminster flies were all at a
ball, and that the omnibus must convey them home by the full
moonlight.


CHAPTER XXIII.


Slowly the omnibus rumbled over the wooden bridge, and then with a
sudden impulse it thundered up to the front door.

Albinia jumped out, and caught Sophy in her arms, exclaiming, 'And
how are you all, my dear?'

'We had quite given you up,' Gilbert was saying.  'The fire is in the
library,' he added, as Mr. Kendal was opening the drawing-room door,
and closing it in haste at the sight of a pale, uninviting patch of
moonlight, and the rush of a blast of cold wind.

'And how is grandmamma? and the children?  My Sophy, you don't look
well, and where's Lucy?'

Ere she could receive an answer, down jumped, two steps at a time, a
half-dressed figure, all white stout legs and arms which were
speedily hugging mamma.

'There's my man!' said Mr. Kendal, 'a good boy, I know.'

'No!' cried the bold voice.

'No?' (incredulously) what have you been doing?'

'I broke the conservatory with the marble dog, and--' he looked at
Gilbert.

'There's my brave boy,' said Mr. Kendal, who had suffered so much
from his elder son's equivocation as to be ready to overlook anything
for the sake of truth.  'Here, Uncle Maurice, shake hands with your
godson, who always tells truth.'

The urchin folded his arms on his bosom, and looked like a young
Bonaparte.

'Where's your hand? said his uncle.  'Wont you give it to me?'

'No.'

'He will be wiser to-morrow, if you are so good as to try him again,'
said Albinia, who knew nothing did him more harm than creating a
commotion by his caprices; 'he is up too late, and fractious with
sleepiness.  Go to bed now, my dear.'

'I shall not be wiser to-morrow,' quoth the child, marching out of
the room in defiance.

'Monkey! what's the matter now?' exclaimed Albinia; 'I suppose you
have all been spoiling him.  But what's become of Lucy?'

'Gilbert said she was at the Dusautoys,' replied Sophy; 'but if you
would but come to grandmamma!  She found out that you were expected,
and she is in such a state that we have not known what to do.'

'I'll come, only, Sophy dear, please order tea and something to eat.
Your uncle looks ravenous.'

She broke off, as there advanced into the room a being like Lucy, but
covered with streams and spatters of flowing sable tears, like a
heraldic decoration, over face, neck, and dress.

All unconscious, she came with outstretched hands and words of
welcome, but an astonished cry of 'Lucy!' met her, and casting her
eyes on her dress, she screamed, 'Oh goodness! it's ink!'

'Where can you have been? what have you been doing?'

'I--don't know--Oh! it was the great inkstand, and not the scent--Oh!
it is all over me!  It's in my hair!' shuddering.  'Oh, dear! oh
dear! I shall never get it out!' and off she rushed, followed by
Gilbert, and was soon heard calling the maids to bring hot water to
her room.

'What is all this?' asked Mr. Kendal.

'I do not know,' mournfully answered Sophy.

Albinia left the library, and taking a candle, went into the empty
drawing-room.  The moonlight shone white upon the table, and showed
the large cut-glass ink-bottle in a pool of its own contents; and the
sofa-cover had black spots and stains as if it had partaken of the
libation.

Sophy saw, and stood like a statue.

'You know nothing, I am sure,' said Albinia.

'Nothing!' repeated Sophy, with a blank look of wretchedness.

'If you please, ma'am,' said the nurse at the door, 'could you be
kind enough to come to Mrs. Meadows, she will be quieter when she has
seen you?'

'Sophy dear, we must leave it now,' said Albinia.  'You must see to
their tea, they have had nothing since breakfast.'

She hastened to the sick room, where she found Mrs. Meadows in a
painful state of agitation and excitement.  The nurse said that until
this evening, she had been as usual, but finding that Mrs. Kendal was
expected, she had been very restless; Miss Kendal was out, and
neither Miss Sophy nor Mr. Gilbert could soothe her.

She eagerly grasped the hand of Albinia who bent down to kiss her,
and asked how she had been.

'Oh! my dear, very unwell, very.  They should not leave me to myself
so long, my dear.  I thought you would never come back,' and she
began to cry, and say, 'no one cared for an old woman.'

Albinia assured her that she was not going away, and restrained her
own eager and bewildered feelings to tranquillize her, by prosing on
in the lengthy manner which always soothed the poor old lady.  It was
a great penance, in her anxiety to investigate the mysteries that
seemed to swarm in the house, but at last she was able to leave the
bedside, though not till she had been twice summoned to tea.

Sophy, lividly pale, was presiding with trembling hands; Gilbert,
flushed and nervous, waiting on every one, and trying to be lively
and at ease, but secret distress was equally traceable in each.

She durst only ask after the children, and heard that her little
namesake had been as usual as good and sweet as child could be.  And
Maurice?

'He's a famous fellow, went on capitally,' said Gilbert.

'Yes, till yesterday,' hoarsely gasped Sophy, sincerity wrenching out
the protest by force.

'Ah, what has he been doing to the conservatory?'

'He let the little marble dog down from the morning-room window with
my netting silk; it fell, and made a great hole,' said Sophy.

'What, as a form of dawdling at his lessons?'

'Yes, but he has not been at all tiresome about them except to-day
and yesterday.'

'And he has told the exact truth,' said Mr. Kendal, 'his gallant
confession has earned the little cannon I promised him.'

'I believe,' said Albinia, 'that it would be greater merit in Maurice
to learn forbearance than to speak truth and be praised for it.  I
have never seen his truth really tried.'

'I value truth above all other qualities,' said Mr. Kendal.

'So do I,' said Albinia, 'and it is my greatest joy in that little
fellow; but some time or other it must cost him something, or it will
not be tested.'

Mr. Kendal did not like this, and repeated that he must have his
cannon.  Albinia fancied that she heard something like a groan from
Gilbert.

When they broke up for the night, she threw her arm round Sophy as
they went upstairs, saying, 'My poor dear, you look half dead.  Have
things been going very wrong?'

'Only these two days,' said Sophy, 'and I don't know that they have
either.  I am glad you are come!'

'What kind of things?' said Albinia, following her into her room.

'Don't ask,' at first began Sophy, but then, frowning as if she could
hardly speak, she added, 'I mean, I don't know whether it is my own
horrid way, or that there is really an atmosphere of something I
don't make out.'

'Didn't you tell me Lucy was at the Vicarage?' said Albinia,
suddenly.

'Gilbert said yes, when I asked if she could be with the Dusautoys,'
said Sophy, 'when grandmamma wanted her and she did not come.  Mamma,
please don't think of what I said, for very likely it is only that I
am cross, because of being left alone with grandmamma so long this
evening, and then Maurice being slow at his lessons.'

'You are not cross, Sophy; you are worn out, and perplexed, and
unhappy.'

'Oh! not now you are come home,' and Sophy laid her head on her
shoulder and cried with relief and exhaustion.  Albinia caressed her,
saying,

'My trust, my mainstay, my poor Sophy!  There, go to bed and sleep,
and don't think of it now.  Only first tell me one thing, is that
Algernon at home?'

'No!' said Sophy, vehemently, 'certainly not!'

Albinia breathed more freely.

'Everybody,' said Sophy, collecting herself, 'has gone on well,
Gilbert and Lucy have been as kind as could be, and Maurice very
good, but yesterday morning he went on in his foolish way at lessons,
and Gilbert took him out riding before he had finished them.  They
came in very late, and I think Maurice must have been overtired, for
he was so idle this morning, that I threatened to tell, and put him
in mind of the cannon papa promised him; but somehow I must have
managed badly for he only grew more defiant, and ended by letting the
marble dog out of window, so that it went through the roof of the
conservatory.'

'Yes, of course it was your fault, or the marble dog's,' said
Albinia, smiling, and stroking her fondly.  'Ah! we ought to have
come home at the fixed time, and not left you to their mercy; but one
could not hurry away from William, when he was so much more sorry to
leave us than we ever expected.'

'Oh! mamma, don't talk so!  We were so glad.  If only we could help
being such a nuisance!'

Albinia contrived to laugh, and withdrew, intending to make a visit
of inquiry to Lucy, but she could not refuse herself the refreshment
of a kiss to the little darling who could have no guile to hide, no
wrong to confess.  She had never so much realized the value of the
certainty of innocence as when she hung over the crib, and thought
that when those dark fringed lids were lifted, the eyes would flash
with delight at meeting her, without one drawback.

Suddenly a loud roar burst from the little room next to Gilbert's, in
which Maurice had lately been installed.  She hurried swiftly in that
direction, but a passage and some steps lay between, and Gilbert had
been beforehand with her.

She heard the words, 'I don't care!  I don't care if it is manly!  I
will tell; I can't bear this!' then as his brother seemed to be
hushing him, he burst out again, 'I wouldn't have minded if papa
wouldn't give me the cannon, but he will, and that's as bad as
telling a lie!'  I can't sleep if you wont let me off my promise!'

Trembling from head to foot, her voice low and quivering with
concentrated, incredulous wrath, Albinia advanced.  'Are you teaching
my child falsehood?' she said; and Gilbert felt as if her look were
worse to him than a thousand deaths.

'O mamma! mamma!  Gilbert! let me tell her,' cried the child; and
Albinia, throwing herself on her knees, clasped him in her arms, as
though snatching him from the demon of deceit.

'Tell all, Maurice,' said Gilbert, folding his arms; 'it is to your
credit, if you would believe so.  I shall be glad to have this misery
ended any way!  It was all for the sake of others.'

'Mamma,' Maurice said, in the midst of these mutterings of his
unhappy brother, 'I can't have the cannon without papa knowing it
all.  I couldn't shake hands with Uncle Maurice for telling the
truth, for I had not told it.'

'And what is it, my boy?' tell me now, no one can hinder you.'

'I scratched and fought him--Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy--I kicked down
the decanter of wine.  They told me it was manly not to tell, and I
promised.'

He was crying with the exceeding pain and distress of a child whose
tears were rare, and Albinia rocked him in her arms.

Gilbert cautiously shut the door, and said sadly, 'Maurice behaved
nobly, if he would only believe so.  You would be proud of your son
if you had seen him.  They wanted to make him drink wine, and he was
fighting them off.'

'And where were you, Gilbert, you to whom I trusted him?'

'I could not help it,' said Gilbert; then as her lip curled with
contempt, and her eye spoke disappointment, he cast himself on the
ground, exclaiming, 'Oh, if you knew how I have been mixed up with
others, and what I have gone through, you would pity me.  Oh,
Maurice, don't cry, when I would give worlds to be like you.  Why do
you let him cry? why don't you tell him what a brave noble boy he
is?'

'I don't know what to think or believe,' said Albinia, coldly, but
returning vehemently to her child, she continued, 'Maurice, my dear,
no one is angry with you!  You, at least, I can depend on.  Tell me
where you have been, and what they have been doing to you.'

Even with Gilbert's explanations, she could hardly understand
Maurice's narrative, but she gathered that on Thursday, the brothers
had ridden out, and were about to turn homewards, when Archie
Tritton, of whom to her vexation Maurice spoke familiarly, had told
Gilbert that a friend was waiting for him at the inn connected with
the training stables, three miles farther on.  Gilbert had demurred,
but was told the matter would brook no delay, and yielded on being
pressed.  He tried to suppress the friend's name, but Maurice had
called him Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy.

While Gilbert was engaged with him, Tritton had introduced Maurice to
the horses and stable boys, whose trade had inspired him with such
emulation, that he broke off in the midst of his confession to ask
whether he could be a jockey and also a gentleman.  All this had
detained them till so late, that they had been drawn into staying to
dinner.  Maurice had gone on very happily, secure that he was right
in Gilbert's hands, and only laying up a few curious words for
explanation; but when he was asked to drink wine, he stoutly answered
that mamma did not allow it.

Idle mischief prompted Dusautoy and Tritton to set themselves to
overpower his resistance.  Gilbert's feeble remonstrances were
treated as a jest, and Algernon, who could brook no opposition, swore
that he would conquer the little prig.  Maurice found himself
pinioned by strong arms, but determined and spirited, he made a
vigorous struggle, and so judiciously aimed a furious kick, that Mr.
Cavendish Dusautoy staggered back, stumbling against the table, and
causing a general overthrow.

The victory was with Maurice, but warned as he had often been against
using his natural weapons, he thought himself guilty of a great
crime.  The others, including, alas! Gilbert, strove to persuade him
it was a joke, and, above all, to bind him to silence, for Tritton
and Dusautoy would never have ventured so far, could they have
imagined the possibility of such terms as those on which he lived
with his parents.  They attacked the poor child on the score of his
manly aspirations, telling him it was babyish to tell mamma and
sisters everything, a practice fit for girls, not for boys or men.
These assurances extracted a pledge of secrecy, which was kept as
long as his mother was absent, and only rendered him reckless by the
sense that he had forfeited the prize of good conduct; but the sight
of her renewed the instinct of confidence, and his father's reliance
on his truth so acted on his sense of honour, that he could not hold
his peace.

'May I tell papa? and will he let me have the cannon?' he finished.

'You shall certainly tell him, my dear, dear little boy, and we will
see what he says about the cannon,' she said, fervently kissing him.
'It will be some comfort for him to hear how you have behaved, my
precious little man.  I thank God with all my heart that He has saved
you from putting anything before truth.  I little thought I was
leaving you to a tempter!'

The child did not fully understand her.  His was a very simple
nature, and he was tired out by conflicting emotions.  His breast was
relieved, and his mother caressed him; he cared for nothing more, and
drawing her hand so as to rest his cheek on it, he looked up in her
face with soft weary happiness in his eyes, then let the lids sink
over them, and fell peacefully asleep, while the others talked on.
'At least you will do me the poor justice of believing it was not
willingly,' said Gilbert.

'I wish you would not talk to me,' she answered, averting her face
and speaking low as if to cut the heart; 'I don't want to reproach
you, and I can't speak to you properly.'

'If you would only hear me, my only friend and helper!  But it was
all that was wanting!  I have forfeited even your toleration!  I
wonder why I was born!'

He was taking up his light to depart, but Albinia's fear of her own
temper made her suspect that she had spoken vindictively, and she
said, 'What can I do, Gilbert?  Here is this poor child, whom I
trusted to you, who can never again be ignorant of the sound of evil
words, and only owes it to God's mercy on his brave spirit that this
has not been the beginning of destruction.  I feel as if you had been
trying to snatch away his soul!'

'And will you, can you not credit,' said Gilbert, nearly inaudibly,
'that I did not act by my free will?  I had no notion that any such
thing could befall him, and would never have let them try to silence
him, but to shield others.'

'Others!  Yes, Archie Tritton and Algernon Dusautoy!  I know what
your free-will is in their hands, and yet I thought you cared for
your brother enough to guard him, if not yourself.'

'If you knew the coercion,' muttered Gilbert.  'I protest, as I would
to my dying day, that I had no intention of going near the stables
when I set out, and would never have consented could I have helped
it.'

'And why could not you help it?'

Gilbert gasped.  'Tritton brought me a message from Dusautoy,
insisting on my meeting him there.  It was too late to take Maurice
home, and I could not send him with Archie.  I expected only to
exchange a few words at the door.  It was Tritton who took Maurice
away to the stables.'

'I hear, but I do not see the compulsion, only the extraordinary
weakness that leads you everywhere after those men.'

'I must tell you, I suppose,' groaned Gilbert; 'I can bear anything
but this.  There's a miserable money entanglement that lays me under
a certain obligation to Dusautoy.'

'Your father believed you had told him of all your debts,' she said,
in a tone of increased scorn and disappointment.

'I did--I mean--Oh!  Mrs. Kendal, believe me, I intended to have told
him the utmost farthing--I thought I had done so--but this was a
thing--Dusautoy had persuaded me into half consenting to have some
wine with him from a cheating Portuguese--then ordered more than ever
I knew of, and the man went and became bankrupt, and sent in a great
abominable bill that I no more owned, nor had reason to expect than
my horse.'

'So you preferred intriguing with this man to applying openly to your
father?'

'It was no doing of mine.  It was forced upon me, and, in fact, the
account was mixed up with his.  It was the most evil hour of my life
when I consented.  I've not had a moment's peace or happiness since,
and it was the promise of the bill receipted that led me to this
place.'

'And why was this place chosen for the meeting?  You and Mr.
Cavendish Dusautoy live only too near one another.'

'He is not at the Vicarage,' faltered Gilbert.

Albinia suddenly grew pale with apprehension.  'Gilbert,' she said,
'there is only one thing that could make this business worse;' and as
she saw his change of countenance, she continued, 'Then it is so, and
Lucy is his object.'

'He did not speak, but his face was that of a convicted traitor, and
fresh perceptions crowded on her, as she exclaimed, horror struck,
'The ink!  Yes, when you said she was with the Dusautoys!  I
understand!  He has been in hiding, he has been here!  And this
expedition was to arrange a clandestine meeting between them under
your father's own roof!  You conniving! you who said you would sooner
see your sister sold to Legree!'

'It is all true,' said Gilbert, moodily, his elbows on the table and
his face in his hands,  'and if the utmost misery for weeks past
could be any atonement, it would be mine.  But at least I have done
nothing willingly to bring them together.  I have only gone on in the
hope and trust that I was some protection to poor Lucy.'

'Fine protection,' sighed Albinia.  'And how has it been? how does it
stand?'

'Why, they met at Brighton, I believe.  She used to walk on the chain
pier before breakfast, and he met her there.  If he chooses, he can
make any one do what he likes, because he does not understand no for
an answer.  Then when she came home, he used to meet her on the
bridge, when you sent her out for a turn in the evening, and
sometimes she would make me take her out walking to meet him.  Don't
you see how utterly miserable it was for me; when they had
volunteered this help all out of kindness, it was impossible for me
to speak to you.'

Albinia made a sound of contempt, and said, 'Go on.'

'That time when you and Mr. Hope saw them, Lucy was frightened, and
they had a quarrel, he went away, and I hoped and trusted it had died
out.  I heard no more till yesterday, when I was dragged into giving
him this meeting.  It seems that he had only just discovered your
absence, and wanted to take the opportunity of seeing her.  I was in
hopes you would have come back; I assured him you would; but he chose
to watch, till evening, and then Lucy was to meet him in the
conservatory.  Poor Lucy, you must not be very angry with her, for
she was much averse to it, and I enclosed a letter from her to forbid
him to come.  I thought all was safe, till I actually heard their
voices, and grandmamma got into an agitation, and Sophy was running
about wild to find Lucy.  When you came home, papa's opening the door
frightened Lucy, and it seems that Dusautoy thought that she was
going to faint and scream, and laid hold of the ink instead of the
eau-de-cologne.  There!  I believe the ink would have betrayed it
without me.  Now you have heard everything, Mrs. Kendal, and can
believe there is not a more wretched and miserable creature breathing
than I am.'

Albinia slowly rose, and put her hand to her brow, as though confused
with the tissue of deceit and double dealing.

'Oh!  Mrs. Kendal, will you not speak to me?'  I solemnly declare
that I have told you all.'

'I am thinking of your father.'

With a gesture of acquiescent anguish and despair, he let her pass,
held open the door, and closed it softly, so as not to awaken the
happy sleeper.

'Good night,' she said, coldly, and turned away, but his mournful,
resigned 'Good night,' was so utterly broken down that her heart was
touched, and turning she said, 'Good night, Gilbert, I am sorry for
you; I believe it is weakness and not wickedness.'

She held out her hand, but instead of being shaken, it was pressed to
his lips, and the fingers were wet with his tears.

Feeling as though the bad dreams of a night had taken shape and life,
Albinia stood by the fire in her sitting-room the next morning,
trying to rally her judgment, and equally dreading the sight of those
who had caused her grief, and of those who would share the shock she
had last night experienced.

The first knock announced one whom she did not expect--Gilbert,
wretchedly pale from a sleepless night, and his voice scarcely
audible.

'I beg your pardon,' he said; 'but I thought I might have led you to
be hard on Lucy: I do believe it was against her will.'

Before she could answer, the door flew wide, and in rushed Maurice,
shouting, 'Good morning, mamma;' and at his voice Mr. Kendal's
dressing-room door was pushed back, and he called, 'Here, Maurice.'

As the boy ran forward, he was met and lifted to his father's breast,
while, with a fervency he little understood, though he never forgot
it, the words were uttered,

'God bless you, Maurice, and give you grace to go on to withstand
temptation, and speak the truth from your heart!'

Maurice was impressed for a moment, then he recurred to his leading
thought--

'May I have the cannon, papa?  I did kick--I broke the bottle, but
may I have the cannon?'

'Maurice, you are too young to understand the value of your
resistance.  Listen to me, my boy, for you must never forget this:
you have been taken among persons who, I trust, will never be your
companions.'

'Oh!' interrupted Maurice, 'must I never be a jockey?'

'No, Maurice.  Horses are perverted to bad purposes by thoughtless
men, and you must keep aloof from such.  You were not to blame, for
you refused to do what you knew to be wrong, and did not know it was
an improper place for you.'

'Gilbert took me,' said Maurice, puzzled at the gravity, which
convinced him that some one was in fault, and of course it must be
himself.

'Gilbert did very wrong,' said Mr. Kendal, 'and henceforth you must
learn that you must trust to your own conscience, and no longer
believe that all your brother tells you is right.'

Maurice gazed in inquiry, and perceiving his brother's downcast air,
ran to his mother, crying, 'Is papa angry?'

'Yes,' said Gilbert, willing to spare her the pain of a reply, 'he is
justly angry with me for having exposed you to temptation.  Oh,
Maurice, if I had been made such as you, it would have been better
for us all!'

It was the first perception that a grown person could do wrong, and
that person his dear Gilbert.  As if the grave countenances were
insupportable, he gave a long-drawn breath, hid his face on his
mother's knee, and burst into an agony of weeping.  He was lifted on
her lap in a moment, father and mother both comforting him with
assurances that he was a very good boy, and that papa was much
pleased with him, Mr. Kendal even putting the cannon into his hand,
as a tangible evidence of favour; but the child thrust aside the toy,
and sliding down, took hold of his brother's languid, dejected hand,
and cried, with a sob and stamp of his foot,

'You shan't say you are naughty: I wont let you!'

Alas! it was a vain repulsion of the truth that this is a wicked
world.  Gilbert only put him back, saying,

'You had better go away from me, Maurice: you cannot understand what
I have done.  Pray Heaven yon may never know what I feel!'

Maurice did but cling the tighter, and though Mr. Kendal had not yet
addressed the culprit, he respected the force of that innocent love
too much to interfere.  The bell rang, and they went down, Maurice
still holding by his brother, and when his uncle met them, it was
touching to see the generous little fellow hanging back, and not
giving his own hand till he had seen Gilbert receive the ordinary
greeting.

Though Mr. Ferrars had been told nothing, he could not but be aware
of the symptoms of a family crisis--the gravity of some, and the
pale, jaded looks of others.  Lucy was not one of these; she came
down with little Albinia in her arms, and began to talk rather
airily, excusing herself for not having come down in the evening
because that 'horrid ink' had got into her hair, and tittering a
little over the absurdity of her having picked up the inkstand in the
dark.  Not a word of response did she meet, and her gaiety died away
in vague alarm.  Sophy, the most innocent, looked wretched, and
Maurice absolutely began to cry again, at the failure of some
manoeuvre to make his father speak to Gilbert.

His tears broke up the breakfast-party.  His mother led him away to
reason with him, that, sad as it was, it was better that people
should be grieved when they had transgressed, as the only hope of
their forgiveness and improvement.  Maurice wanted her to reverse the
declaration that Gilbert had done wrong; but, alas! this could not
be, and she was obliged to send him out with his little sister,
hoping that he would work off his grief by exercise.  It was mournful
to see the first shadow of the penalty of sin falling on the Eden of
his childhood!

With an aching heart, she went in search of Lucy, who had taken
sanctuary in Mrs. Meadows's room, and was not easily withdrawn from
thence to a tete-a-tete.  Fearful of falsehood, Albinia began by
telling her she knew all, and how little she had expected such a
requital of trust.

Lucy exclaimed that it had not been her fault, she had always wanted
to tell, and gradually Albinia drew from her the whole avowal, half
shamefaced, half exultant.

She had never dreamt of meeting Algernon at Brighton--it was quite by
chance that she came upon him at the officers' ball when he was
staying with Captain Greenaway.  He asked her to dance, and she had
said yes, all on a sudden, without thinking, and then she fancied he
would go away; she begged him not to come again, but whenever she
went out on the chain-pier before breakfast, there he was.

Why did she go thither?  She hung her head.  Mrs. Annesley had
desired her to walk; she could not help it; she was afraid to write
and tell what was going on--besides, he would come, though she told
him she would not see him; and she could not bear to make him
unhappy.  Then, when she came home, she had been in hopes it was all
over, but she had been very unhappy, and had been on the point of
telling all about it many times, when mamma looked at her kindly; but
then he came to the Vicarage, and he would wait for her at the
bridge, and write notes to her, and she could not stop it; but she
had always told him it was no use, she never would be engaged to him
without papa's consent.  She had only promised that she would not
marry any one else, only because he was so very desperate, and she
was afraid to break it off entirely, lest he should go and marry the
Principessa Bianca, a foreigner and Papist, which would be so
shocking for him and his uncle.  Gilbert could testify how grieved
she was to have any secrets from mamma; but Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy
was so dreadful when she talked of telling, that she did not know
what would happen.

When he went away, and she thought it was all over--mamma might
recollect how hard it was for her to keep up, and what a force she
put upon herself--but she would rather have pined to death than have
said one word to bring him back, and was quite shocked when Gilbert
gave her his note, to beg her to let him see her that evening, before
the party returned; she said, with all her might, that he must not
come, and when he did, she was begging him all the time to go away,
and she was so dreadfully frightened when they actually came, that
she had all but gone into hysterics, or fainted away, and that was
the way he came to throw the ink at her--she was so very much
shocked, and so would he be--and really she felt the misfortune to
the beautiful new sofa-cover as a most serious calamity and
aggravation of her offence.

It was not easy to know how to answer; Albinia was scornful of the
sofa-cover, and yet it was hard to lay hold of a tangible subject on
which to show Lucy her error, except in the concealment, which, by
her own showing, she had lamented the whole time.  She had always
said no, but, unluckily, her noes were of the kind that might easily
be made to mean yes, and she evidently had been led on partly by her
own heart, partly by the force of the stronger will, though her
better principles had filled her with scruples and misgivings at
every stage.  She had been often on the point of telling all, and
asking forgiveness; and here it painfully crossed Albinia, that if
she herself had been less hurried, and less disposed to take
everything for granted, a little tenderness might have led to a
voluntary confession.

Still Lucy defended herself by the compulsion exercised on her, and
she would hear none of the conclusions Albinia drew therefrom; she
would not see that the man who drove her to a course of disobedience
and subterfuge could be no fit guide, and fired up at a word of
censure, declaring that she knew that mamma had always hated him, and
that now he was absent, she would not hear him blamed.  The one drop
of true love made her difficult to deal with, for the heart was
really made over to the tyrant, and Albinia did not feel herself
sufficiently guiltless of negligence and imprudence to rebuke her
with a comfortable conscience.

Mr. Kendal had been obliged to attend to some justice business--
better for him, perhaps, than acting as domestic magistrate--and
meanwhile the Vicar of Fairmead found himself forgotten.  He wanted
to be at home, yet did not like to leave his sister in unexplained
trouble, though not sure whether he might not be better absent.

Indeed, she was in such a state of excitement that her hot hands
and bright eyes made Aunt Deborah think herself right about
the chill, and keep her in bed for four days.

Millicent felt rather a hypocrite when the twins, in much concern,
brought her up nice things to eat, which she, in her turn, secretly
carried to the old knight, who was now recovering fast; while she
sallied forth in the dark to the buttery to get more substantial
fare for her own healthy appetite.

By the time Aunt Deborah pronounced her well enough to be up, the house
was once more quiet, the soldiers having been recalled to London.

More than two weeks passed, and the days were growing cold, for it
was now October, when one afternoon Millicent was walking up and
down the garden in deep perplexity.

Ferrars's purpose of
immediate departure, and returning to the drawing-room he said, 'If
there were any way in which I could be of use.'

'Then you do not know?' said Gilbert, veiling his face with his hand,
as he leant on the mantel-shelf.

'I know nothing.  I could only see that something was amiss.  I was
wishing to know whether my presence or absence would be best for you
all.'

'Oh! don't go!' cried Gilbert.  Nobody must go who can be any comfort
to Mrs. Kendal.'

A few kind words drew forth the whole piteous history that lay so
heavily on his heart.  Reserves were all over now; and irregularly
and incoherently he laid open his griefs and errors, his gradual
absorption into the society with which he had once broken, and the
inextricable complication of mischief in which he had been involved
by his debt.

'Yet,' he said, 'all the time I longed from my heart to do well.  It
was the very thing that led me into this scrape.  I thought if the
man applied to my father, as he threatened, that I should be
suspected of having concealed this on purpose, and be sent to India,
and I was so happy, and thought myself so safe here.  I did believe
that home and Mrs. Kendal would have sheltered me, but my destiny
must needs hunt me out here, and alienate even her!'

'The way to find the Devil behind the Cross, is to cower beneath it
in weak idolatry, instead of grasping it in courageous faith,' said
Mr. Ferrars.  'Such faith would have made you trust yourself
implicitly to your father.  Then you would either have gone forth in
humble acceptance of the punishment, or else have stayed at home,
free, pardoned, and guarded; but, as it was, no wonder temptation
followed you, and you had no force to resist it.'

'And so all is lost!  Even dear little Maurice can never be trusted
to me again!  And his mother, who would, if she could, be still
merciful and pitying as an angel, she cannot forget to what I exposed
him!  She will never be the same to me again!  Yet I could lay down
my life for any of them!'

Mr. Ferrars watched the drooping figure, crouching on his chairs,
elbows on knees, head bowed on the supporting hands, and face hidden,
and, listening to the meek, affectionate hopelessness of the tone, he
understood the fond love and compassion that had often surprised him
in his sister, but he longed to read whether this were penitence
towards God, or remorse towards man.

'Miserable indeed, Gilbert,' he said, 'but if all were irretrievably
offended, there still is One who can abundantly pardon, where
repentance is true.'

'I thought'--cried Gilbert--'I thought it had been true before!  If
pain, and shame, and abhorrence could so render it, I know it was
when I came home.  And then it was comparative happiness; I thought I
was forgiven, I found joy and peace where they are promised'--the
burning tears dropped between his fingers--but it was all delusion;
not prayers nor sacraments can shield me--I am doomed, and all I ask
is to be out of the way of ruining Maurice!'

'This is mere despair,' said Mr. Ferrars.  'I cannot but believe your
contrition was sincere; but steadfast courage was what you needed,
and you failed in the one trial that may have been sent you to
strengthen and prove you.  The effects have been terrible, but there
is every hope that you may retrieve your error, and win back the
sense of forgiveness.'

'If I could dare to hope so--but I cannot presume to take home to
myself those assurances, when I know that I only resolve, that I may
have resolutions to break.'

'Have you ever laid all this personally before Mr. Dusautoy?'

'No; I have thought of it, but, mixed up as this is with his nephew
and my sister, it is impossible!  But you are a clergyman, Mr.
Ferrars!' he added, eagerly.

Mr. Ferrars thought, and then said,

'If you wish it, Gilbert, I will gladly do what I can for you.  I
believe that I may rightly do so.'

His face gleamed for a moment with the light of grateful gladness, as
if at the first ray of comfort, and then he said, 'I am sure none was
ever more grieved and wearied with the burden of sin--if that be
all.'

'I think,' said Mr. Ferrars, 'that it might be better to give time to
collect yourself, examine the past, separate the sorrow for the sin
from the disgrace of the consequences, and then look earnestly at the
sole ground of hope.  How would it be to come for a couple of nights
to Fairmead, at the end of next week?'

Gilbert gratefully caught at the invitation; and Mr. Ferrars gave him
some advice as to his reading and self-discipline, speaking to him as
gently and tenderly as Albinia herself.  Both lingered in case the
other should have more to say, but at last Gilbert stood up, saying,

'I would thankfully go to Calcutta now, but the situation is filled
up, and my father said John Kendal had been enough trifled with.  If
I saw any fresh opening, where I should be safe from hurting
Maurice!'

'There is no reason you and your brother should not be a blessing to
each other.'

'Yes, there is.  Till I lived at home, I did not know how impossible
it is to keep clear of old acquaintance.  They are good-natured
fellows--that Tritton and the like--and after all that has come and
gone, one would be a brute to cut them entirely, and Maurice is
always after me, and has been more about with them than his mother
knows.  Even if I were very different, I should be a link, and though
it might be no great harm if Maurice were a tame mamma's boy--you
see, being the fellow he is, up to anything for a lark, and frantic
about horses--I could never keep him from them.  There's no such
great harm in themselves--hearty, good-natured fellows they are--but
there's a worse lot that they meet, and Maurice will go all lengths
whenever he begins.  Now, so little as he is now, if I were once
gone, he would never run into their way, and they would never get a
hold of him.'

Mr. Ferrars had unconsciously screwed up his face with dismay, but he
relaxed it, and spoke kindly.

'You are right.  It was a mistake to stay at home.  Perhaps your
regiment may be stationed elsewhere.'

'I don't know how long it may be called out.  If it were but possible
to make a fresh beginning.'

'Did you hear of my brother's suggestion?'

'I wish--but it is useless to talk about that.  I could not presume
to ask my father for a commission--Heaven knows when I shall dare to
speak to him!'

'You have not personally asked his pardon after full confession.'

'N-o--Mrs. Kendal knows all.'

'Did you ever do such a thing in your life?'

'You don't know what my father is.'

'Neither do you, Gilbert.  Let that be the first token of sincerity.'

Without leaving space for another word, Mr. Ferrars went through the
conservatory into the garden, where, meeting the children, he took
the little one in his arms, and sent Maurice to fetch his mamma.
Albinia came down, looking so much heated and harassed, that he was
grieved to leave her.

'Oh, Maurice, I am sorry!  You always come in for some catastrophe,'
she said, trying to smile.  'You have had a most forlorn morning.'

'Gilbert has been with me,' he said.  'He has told me all, my dear,
and I think it hopeful: I like him better than I ever did before.'

'Poor feather, the breath of your lips has blown him the other way,'
said Albinia, too unhappy for consolation.

'Well, it seems to me that you have done more for him than I ever
quite believed.  I did not expect such sound, genuine religious
feeling.'

'He always had plenty of religious sentiment,' said Albinia, sadly.

'I have asked him to come to us next week.  Will you tell Edmund so?'

'Yes.  He will be thankful to you for taking him in hand.  Poor boy,
I know how attractive his penitence is, but I have quite left off
building on it.'

Mr. Ferrars defended him no longer.  The vessel was the _Hope_, of
Liverpool, and we had a cargo of Manchester goods. It was roughish
weather when we started, and it kept on getting worse and worse,
and by-and-bye such a storm arose as it seemed impossible for any ship
to weather.
'I must go,' he said, 'though I am sorry to leave you in perplexity.
I am afraid I can do nothing for you.'

'Nothing--but feel kindly to Gilbert,' said Albinia.  'I can't do so
yet.  I don't feel as if I ever could again, when I think what he was
doing with Maurice.  Yes, and how easily he could have brought poor
Lucy to her senses, if he had been good for anything!  Oh! Maurice,
this is sickening work!  You should be grateful to me for not
scolding you for having taken me from home!'

'I do not repent,' said her brother.  'The explosion is better than
the subterranean mining.'

'It may be,' said Albinia, 'and I need not boast of the good I did at
home!  My poor, poor Lucy!  A little discreet kindness and
watchfulness on my part would have made all the difference!  It was
all my running my own way with my eyes shut, but then, I had always
lived with trustworthy people.  Well, I wont keep you listening to my
maundering, when Winifred wants you.  Oh! why did that Polysyllable
ever come near the place?'

Mr. Ferrars said the kindest and most cheering things he could
devise, and drove away, not much afraid of her being unforgiving.

He was disposed to stake all his hopes of the young man on the issue
of his advice to make a direct avowal to his father.  And Gilbert
made the effort, though rather in desperation than resolution,
knowing that his condition could not be worse, and seeing no hope
save in Mr. Ferrars' counsel.  He was the first to seek Mr. Kendal,
and dreadful to him as was the unaltering melancholy displeasure of
the fixed look, the steadily penetrating deep dark eyes, and the
subdued sternness of the voice, he made his confession fully, without
reserve or palliation.

It was more than Mr. Kendal had expected, and more, perhaps, than he
absolutely trusted, for Gilbert had not hitherto inspired faith in
his protestations that he spoke the whole truth and nothing but the
truth, nor had he always the power of doing so when overpowered by
fright.  The manner in which his father laid hold of any inadvertent
discrepancy, treating it as a wilful prevarication, was terror and
agony; and well as he knew it to be the meed of past equivocation, he
felt it cruel to torture him by implied suspicion.  Yet how could it
be otherwise, when he had been introducing his little brother to his
own corrupters, and conniving at his sister's clandestine
correspondence with a man whom he knew to be worthless?'

The grave words that he obtained at last, scarcely amounted to
pardon; they implied that he had done irreparable mischief and acted
disgracefully, and such forgiveness as was granted was only made
conditional on there being no farther reserves.

Alas! even with all tender love and compassion, no earthly parent can
forgive as does the Heavenly Father.  None but the Omniscient can
test the fulness of the confession, nor the sincerity of 'Father, I
have sinned against Heaven and before Thee, and am no more worthy to
be called Thy son.'  This interview only sent the son away more
crushed and overwhelmed, and yearning towards the more deeply
offended, and yet more compassionate Father.

Mr. Kendal, after this interview, so far relaxed his displeasure as
to occasionally address Gilbert when they met at luncheon after this
deplorable morning, while towards Lucy he observed a complete
silence.  It was not at first that she perceived this, and even then
it struck more deeply on Sophia than it did on her.

Mr. Kendal shrank from inflicting pain on the good vicar, and it was
decided that the wives should be the channel through which the
information should be imparted.  Albinia took the children, sending
them to play in the garden while she talked to Mrs. Dusautoy.  She
found that keen little lady had some shrewd suspicions, but had
discovered nothing defined enough to act upon, and was relieved to
have the matter opened at last.

As to the ink, no mortal could help laughing over it; even Albinia,
who had been feeling as if she could never laugh again, was suddenly
struck by the absurdity, and gave way to a paroxysm of merriment.

'Properly managed, I do think it might put an end to the whole
affair,' said Mrs. Dusautoy.  'He could not stand being laughed at.'

'I'm afraid he never will believe that he can be laughed at.'

'Yes, that is unlucky,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, gravely; but recollecting
that she was not complimentary, she added, 'You must not think we
undervalue Lucy.  John is very fond of her, and the only objection
is, that it would require a person of more age and weight to deal
with Algernon.'

'Never mind speeches,' sighed Albinia; 'we know too well that nothing
could be worse for either.  Can't you give him a tutor and send him
to travel.'

'I'll talk to John; but unluckily he is of age next month, and
there's an end of our power.  And John would never keep him away from
hence, for he thinks it his only chance.'

'I suppose we must do something with Lucy.  Heigh-ho!  People used
not to be always falling in love in my time, except Fred, and that
was in a rational way; that could be got rid of!'

The effect of the intelligence on the vicar was to make him set out
at once to the livery-stables in quest of his nephew, but he found
that the young gentleman had that morning started for London, whither
he proposed to follow him on the Monday.  Lucy cried incessantly, in
the fear that the gentle-hearted vicar might have some truculent
intentions towards his nephew, and was so languid and unhappy that no
one had the heart to scold her; and comforting her was still more
impossible.

Mr. Kendal used to stride away from the sight of her swollen eyes,
and ask Albinia why she did not tell her that the only good thing
that could happen to her would be, that she should never see nor hear
of the fellow again.

Why he did not tell her so himself was a different question.


CHAPTER XXIV.


'Well, Albinia,' said Mr. Kendal, after seeing Mr. Dusautoy on his
return from London.

There was such a look of deprecation about him, that she exclaimed,
'One would really think you had been accepting this charming son-in-law.'

'Suppose I had,' he said, rather quaintly; then, as he saw her hands
held up, 'conditionally, you understand, entirely conditionally.
What could I do, when Dusautoy entreated me, with tears in his eyes,
not to deprive him of the only chance of saving his nephew?'

'Umph,' was the most innocent sound Albinia could persuade herself to
make.

'Besides,' continued Mr. Kendal, 'it will be better to have the
affair open and avowed than to have all this secret plotting going on
without being able to prevent it.  I can always withhold my consent
if he should not improve, and Dusautoy declares nothing would be such
an incentive.'

'May it prove so!'

'You see,' he pursued, 'as his uncle says, nothing can be worse than
driving him to these resorts, and when he is once of age, there's an
end of all power over him to hinder his running straight to ruin.
Now, when he is living at the Vicarage, we shall have far more
opportunity of knowing how he is going on, and putting a check on
their intercourse, if he be unsatisfactory.'

'If we can.'

'After all, the young man has done nothing that need blight his
future life.  He has had great disadvantages, and his steady
attachment is much in his favour.  His uncle tells me he promises to
become all that we could wish, and, in that case, I do not see that I
have the right to refuse the offer, when things have gone so far--
conditionally, of course.'  He dwelt on that saving clause like a
salve for his misgivings.

'And what is to become of Gilbert and Maurice, with him always about
the house?' exclaimed Albinia.

'We will take care he is not too much here.  He will soon be at
Oxford.  Indeed, my dear, I am sorry you disapprove.  I should have
been as glad to avoid the connexion as you could be, but I do not
think I had any alternative, when Mr. Dusautoy pressed me so warmly,
and only asked that he should be taken on probation; and besides,
when poor Lucy's affections are so decidedly involved.'

Albinia perceived that there had been temper in her tone, and could
object no further, since it was too late, and as she could not
believe that her husband had been weak, she endeavoured to acquiesce
in his reasoning, and it was a strong argument that they should see
Lucy bright again.

'I suppose,' he said, 'that you would prefer that I should announce
my decision to her myself!'

It was a more welcome task than spreading gloom over her countenance,
but she entered in great trepidation, prepared to sink under some
stern mandate, and there was nothing at first to undeceive her, for
her father was resolved to atone for his concession by sparing her no
preliminary thunders, and began by depicting her indiscretion and
deceit, as well as the folly of attaching herself to a man without
other recommendations than figure and fortune.

How much Lucy heard was uncertain; she leant on a chair with drooping
head and averted face, trembling, and suppressing a sob, apparently
too much frightened to attend.  The water was pouring down in a cataract,
and after it rattled the pails Mrs. Clifford ran to the rescue.
Phebe was looking aghast, making a wild gesture with one hand, and
rubbing her nose with the other.
"You didn't fall on your _nose_, Phebe?"Dusautoy's kind representation, I
have resolved to give the young man a trial, and provided he
convinces me by his conduct that I may safely entrust your happiness
to him, I have told his uncle that I will not withhold my sanction.'

