287. If one make off with a virgin decked out [for the bridal], he
shall pay the highest fine; if she be not so circumstanced, then the
lowest fine. Thus it is, if the virgin be of equal cast: if she be of
higher cast, [the penalty of] death is ordained.

288. In the case of a virgin consenting and of inferior cast, no
offence [is committed]; otherwise, there is a fine.[369] For ravishing
her, the man's hand shall be cut off: if the virgin be of the highest
cast, [the penalty is] death.

289. Whoso speaks disparagingly of a woman shall forfeit one hundred
_panas_; but, two hundred, one who brings a false charge against [a
woman]. Whoso has carnal knowledge of a brute animal shall forfeit one
hundred _panas_; if of a lowest cast woman[370] or of a cow, the
middle fine.

290. If a man[371] have carnal intercourse with female slaves or
servants, or even with common women, [such slaves, &c.] being kept [by
those to whom they belong] secluded,[372] he shall pay a fine of fifty
_panas._

291. For forcing a female slave,[373] it is written, there shall be a
fine of ten _panas_; if many [men so] attack one slave, each one
shall pay twenty-four _panas._

292. A public woman who refuses after taking her hire, shall forfeit
twice the amount; so, if the man [decline after contracting, yet] he
shall pay.

293. Whoso knows a woman unnaturally, or voids his water upon a man,
also one who has carnal knowledge of a female mendicant, shall be
fined twenty-four _panas._

294. [The monarch] shall banish him who goes to a woman of the lowest
grade, having branded him with dishonoring emblems: if a Súdrá so
act, he shall be [classed among] the lowest. Death shall be to the man
of lowest grade who goes to a respectable woman.

295. Whoso fabricates a royal grant,[374] be it for much or little, or
sets free one who has kidnapped a woman, shall pay the highest fine.

296. One who brings dishonor to a bráhman by giving as food what is
unfit to be eaten, is amenable to the highest fine; if to a
kshattriya, the medium fine; if to a vaisyá, the lowest fine; if to
Súdrá, half the lowest.

297. If one trade with counterfeit gold, or sell tainted meat; three
of his members[375] shall be amputated, and he shall pay the highest
fine.

298. Damage caused by four-footed animals shall not be borne by their
owner, if he have given warning to clear the way: so, with regard to
wood, earth, arrows, stones, a man's arm, or any yoked animals.

299. If death be caused by a vehicle through the breaking of the
[animal's] nose-bridle, or through breaking of the yoke, or the like,
or from its running backwards, the owner is [to be held]
blameless.[376]

300. If the owner of biting or horned animals do not, although able,
rescue [a person attacked], he shall pay the lowest fine: but, if
there was a cry for help, then, double that fine.

301. He who calls an adulterer, 'thief,' shall be made to pay a fine
of five hundred _panas_: whoever releases such an one, being bribed
thereto,[377] shall be made to pay eight-fold the amount [of the
bribe].[378]

302. Whoso speaks what is offensive to the monarch, or reproaches the
monarch, or divulges the monarch's counsel, shall have his tongue
excised and be banished.

303. Whoso makes sale of garments [used to wrap] the dead, or strikes
his _guru_, or seats himself on the vehicle or on the seat of the
monarch, shall pay the highest fine.

304. Whoso beats out both [a person's] eyes, a bearer of odious
tidings to the monarch, also a Súdrá holding himself out as a
bráhman,--[each of these] shall be fined eight hundred _panas_.

305. Such law suits as have been decided unrighteously shall be
re-investigated by the monarch: [in case of reversal of the judgment]
the judges and the winning party shall be amerced in double the amount
of the fine decreed in the suit.

