"And to me also," said Sir Thomas.

"I do not know anything about that. Like a good many others, you may
like to have a seat in Parliament, and may like to get it without any
trouble and without any money. I have sat for Percycross for many
years, and have spent a treasure, and have worked myself off my legs.
I don't know that I care much for anything except for keeping my
place in the House. The House is everything to me,--meat and drink;
employment and recreation; and I can tell you I'm not going to lose
my seat if I can help it. You came in for the second chance, Sir
Thomas; and a very good second chance it was if you'd just have
allowed others who knew what they were about to manage matters for
you. That chance is over now, and according to all rules that ever I
heard of in such matters, you ought to surrender. Isn't that so, Mr.
Trigger?"

"Certainly, Mr. Griffenbottom, according to my ideas," said Mr.
Trigger.

"That's about it," said Mr. Spicer.

Sir Thomas was still standing. Indeed they were all standing now.
"Mr. Griffenbottom," he said, "I have nothing further that I can
say at the present moment. To the offer made to me by Mr. Trigger I
at present positively decline to accede. I look upon that offer as
unfriendly, and can therefore only wish you a good morning."

"Unfriendly," said Mr. Griffenbottom with a sneer.

"Good-bye, Sir Thomas," said Mr. Pile, putting out his hand. Sir
Thomas shook hands with Mr. Pile cordially. "It's my opinion that
he's right," said Mr. Pile. "I don't like his notions, but I do like
his pluck. Good-bye, Sir Thomas." Then Mr. Pile led the way out of
the room, and the others followed him.

"Oh!" said Stemm, as soon as he had shut the door behind their backs.
"That's a deputation from Percycross, is it, Sir Thomas? You were
saying as how you didn't quite approve of the Percycrossians." To
this, however, Sir Thomas vouchsafed no reply.


CHAPTER XL.

WHAT SIR THOMAS THOUGHT ABOUT IT.


Sir Thomas Underwood had been engaged upon a very great piece of work
ever since he had been called to the Bar in the twenty-fifth year of
his life. He had then devoted himself to the writing of a life of
Lord Verulam, and had been at it ever since. But as yet he had not
written a word. In early life, that is, up to his fortieth year,
he had talked freely enough about his opus magnum to those of his
compeers with whom he had been intimate; but of late Bacon's name had
never been on his lips. Patience, at home, was aware of the name and
nature of her father's occupation, but Clarissa had not yet learned
to know that he who had been the great philosopher and little Lord
Chancellor was not to be lightly mentioned. To Stemm the matter had
become so serious, that in speaking of books, papers, and documents
he would have recourse to any periphrasis rather than mention in his
master's hearing the name of the fallen angel. And yet Sir Thomas was
always talking to himself about Sir Francis Bacon, and was always
writing his life.

There are men who never dream of great work, who never realise to
themselves the need of work so great as to demand a lifetime, but who
themselves never fail in accomplishing those second-class tasks with
which they satisfy their own energies. Men these are who to the world
are very useful. Some few there are, who seeing the beauty of a great
work and believing in its accomplishment within the years allotted
to man, are contented to struggle for success, and struggling, fail.
Here and there comes one who struggles and succeeds. But the men are
many who see the beauty, who adopt the task, who promise themselves
the triumph, and then never struggle at all. The task is never
abandoned; but days go by and weeks; and then months and years,--and
nothing is done. The dream of youth becomes the doubt of middle life,
and then the despair of age. In building a summer-house it is so easy
to plant the first stick, but one does not know where to touch the
sod when one begins to erect a castle. So it had been with Sir Thomas
Underwood and his life of Bacon. It would not suffice to him to
scrape together a few facts, to indulge in some fiction, to tell a
few anecdotes, and then to call his book a biography. Here was a man
who had risen higher and was reported to have fallen lower,--perhaps
than any other son of Adam. With the finest intellect ever given to
a man, with the purest philanthropy and the most enduring energy, he
had become a by-word for greed and injustice. Sir Thomas had resolved
that he would tell the tale as it had never yet been told, that he
would unravel facts that had never seen the light, that he would let
the world know of what nature really had been this man,--and that
he would write a book that should live. He had never abandoned his
purpose; and now at sixty years of age, his purpose remained with
him, but not one line of his book was written.

And yet the task had divorced him in a measure from the world. He
had not been an unsuccessful man in life. He had made money, and had
risen nearly to the top of his profession. He had been in Parliament,
and was even now a member. But yet he had been divorced from
the world, and Bacon had done it. By Bacon he had justified to
himself,--or rather had failed to justify to himself,--a seclusion
from his family and from the world which had been intended for
strenuous work, but had been devoted to dilettante idleness. And he
had fallen into those mistakes which such habits and such pursuits
are sure to engender. He thought much, but he thought nothing out,
and was consequently at sixty still in doubt about almost everything.
Whether Christ did or did not die to save sinners was a question
with him so painfully obscure that he had been driven to obtain what
comfort he might from not thinking of it. The assurance of belief
certainly was not his to enjoy;--nor yet that absence from fear which
may come from assured unbelief. And yet none who knew him could say
that he was a bad man. He robbed no one. He never lied. He was not
self-indulgent. He was affectionate. But he had spent his life in an
intention to write the life of Lord Verulam, and not having done it,
had missed the comfort of self-respect. He had intended to settle
for himself a belief on subjects which are, of all, to all men the
most important; and, having still postponed the work of inquiry, had
never attained the security of a faith. He was for ever doubting, for
ever intending, and for ever despising himself for his doubts and
unaccomplished intentions. Now, at the age of sixty, he had thought
to lessen these inward disturbances by returning to public life, and
his most unsatisfactory alliance with Mr. Griffenbottom had been the
result.

They who know the agonies of an ambitious, indolent, doubting,
self-accusing man,--of a man who has a skeleton in his cupboard
as to which he can ask for sympathy from no one,--will understand
what feelings were at work within the bosom of Sir Thomas when his
Percycross friends left him alone in his chamber. The moment that he
knew that he was alone he turned the lock of the door, and took from
out a standing desk a whole heap of loose papers. These were the
latest of his notes on the great Bacon subject. For though no line
of the book had ever been written,--nor had his work even yet taken
such form as to enable him to write a line,--nevertheless, he always
had by him a large assemblage of documents, notes, queries, extracts
innumerable, and references which in the course of years had become
almost unintelligible to himself, upon which from time to time he
would set himself to work. Whenever he was most wretched he would fly
at his papers. When the qualms of his conscience became very severe,
he would copy some passage from a dusty book, hardly in the belief
that it might prove to be useful, but with half a hope that he might
cheat himself into so believing. Now, in his misery, he declared
that he would bind himself to his work and never leave it. There, if
anywhere, might consolation be found.

With rapid hands he moved about the papers, and tried to fix his eyes
upon the words. But how was he to fix his thoughts? He could not even
begin not to think of those scoundrels who had so misused him. It
was not a week since they had taken £50 from him for the poor of
Percycross, and now they came to him with a simple statement that he
was absolutely to be thrown over! He had already paid £900 for his
election, and was well aware that the account was not closed. And
he was a man who could not bear to speak about money, or to make
any complaint as to money. Even though he was being so abominably
misused, still he must pay any further claim that might be made on
him in respect of the election that was past. Yes;--he must pay for
those very purchased votes, for that bribery, as to which he had so
loudly expressed his abhorrence, and by reason of which he was now to
lose his seat with ignominy.

But the money was not the worst of it. There was a heavier sorrow
than that arising from the loss of his money. He alone had been just
throughout the contest at Percycross; he alone had been truthful,
and he alone straightforward! And yet he alone must suffer! He began
to believe that Griffenbottom would keep his seat. That he would
certainly lose his own, he was quite convinced. He might lose it
by undergoing an adverse petition, and paying ever so much more
money,--or he might lose it in the manner that Mr. Trigger had
so kindly suggested. In either way there would be disgrace, and
contumely, and hours of the agony of self-reproach in store for him!

What excuse had he for placing himself in contact with such filth? Of
what childishness had he not been the victim when he allowed himself
to dream that he, a pure and scrupulous man, could go among such
impurity as he had found at Percycross, and come out, still clean
and yet triumphant? Then he thought of Griffenbottom as a member of
Parliament, and of that Legislation and that Constitution to which
Griffenbottoms were thought to be essentially necessary. That there
are always many such men in the House he had always known. He had sat
there and had seen them. He had stood shoulder to shoulder with them
through many a division, and had thought about them,--acknowledging
their use. But now that he was brought into personal contact with
such an one, his very soul was aghast. The Griffenbottoms never do
anything in politics. They are men of whom in the lump it may be
surmised that they take up this or that side in politics, not from
any instructed conviction, not from faith in measures or even in men,
nor from adherence either through reason or prejudice to this or that
set of political theories,--but simply because on this side or on
that there is an opening. That gradually they do grow into some shape
of conviction from the moulds in which they are made to live, must
be believed of them; but these convictions are convictions as to
divisions, convictions as to patronage, convictions as to success,
convictions as to Parliamentary management; but not convictions as
to the political needs of the people. So said Sir Thomas to himself
as he sat thinking of the Griffenbottoms. In former days he had told
himself that a pudding cannot be made without suet or dough, and
that Griffenbottoms were necessary if only for the due adherence of
the plums. Whatever most health-bestowing drug the patient may take
would bestow anything but health were it taken undiluted. It was
thus in former days Sir Thomas had apologised to himself for the
Griffenbottoms in the House;--but no such apology satisfied him now.
This log of a man, this lump of suet, this diluting quantity of most
impure water,--'twas thus that Mr. Griffenbottom was spoken of by Sir
Thomas to himself as he sat there with all the Bacon documents before
him,--this politician, whose only real political feeling consisted in
a positive love of corruption for itself, had not only absolutely got
the better of him, who regarded himself at any rate as a man of mind
and thought, but had used him as a puppet, and had compelled him
to do dirty work. Oh,--that he should have been so lost to his own
self-respect as to have allowed himself to be dragged through the
dirt of Percycross!

But he must do something;--he must take some step. Mr. Griffenbottom
had declared that he would put himself to no expense in defending the
seat. Of course he, Sir Thomas, could do the same. He believed that
it might be practicable for him to acknowledge the justice of the
petition, to declare his belief that his own agents had betrayed him,
and to acknowledge that his seat was indefensible. But, as he thought
of it, he found that he was actually ignorant of the law in the
matter. That he would make no such bargain as that suggested
to him by Mr. Trigger,--of so much he thought that he was sure.
At any rate he would do nothing that he himself knew to be
dishonourable. He must consult his own attorney. That was the end
of his self-deliberation,--that, and a conviction that under no
circumstances could he retain his seat.

Then he struggled hard for an hour to keep his mind fixed on the
subject of his great work. He had found an unknown memoir respecting
Bacon, written by a German pen in the Latin language, published at
Leipzig shortly after the date of Bacon's fall. He could translate
that. It is always easiest for the mind to work in such emergencies,
on some matter as to which no creative struggles are demanded from
it.


CHAPTER XLI.

A BROKEN HEART.


It was very bad with Clarissa when Ralph Newton was closeted with
Mary at Popham Villa. She had suspected what was about to take place,
when Sir Thomas and Ralph went together into the room; but at that
moment she said nothing. She endeavoured to seem to be cheerful, and
attempted to joke with Mary. The three girls were sitting at the
table on which lunch was spread,--a meal which no one was destined
to eat at Popham Villa on that day,--and thus they remained till Sir
Thomas joined them. "Mary," he had said, "Ralph Newton wishes to
speak to you. You had better go to him."

"To me, uncle?"

"Yes, to you. You had better go to him."

"But I had rather not."

"Of course you must do as you please, but I would advise you to go to
him." Then she had risen very slowly and had gone.

All of them had understood what it meant. To Clarissa the thing
was as certain as though she already heard the words spoken. With
Patience even there was no doubt. Sir Thomas, though he had told
nothing, did not pretend that the truth was to be hidden. He looked
at his younger daughter sorrowfully, and laid his hand upon her
head caressingly. With her there was no longer the possibility of
retaining any secret, hardly the remembrance that there was a secret
to retain. "Oh, papa," she said;--"oh, papa!" and burst into tears.

"My dear," he said, "believe me that it is best that it should be
so. He is unworthy." Patience said not a word, but was now holding
Clarissa close to her bosom. "Tell Mary," continued Sir Thomas, "that
I will see her when she is at liberty. Patience, you can ask Ralph
whether it will suit him to stay for dinner. I am tired and will go
up-stairs myself." And so the two girls were left together.

"Patty, take me away," said Clarissa. "I must never see him
again,--never!--nor her."

"She will not accept him, Clary."

"Yes, she will. I know she will. She is a sly, artful creature. And I
have been so good to her."

"No, Clary;--I think not;--but what does it matter? He is unworthy.
He can be nothing to you now. Papa was right. He is unworthy."

"I care nothing for that. I only care for him. Oh, Patty, take me
away. I could not bear to see them when they come out."

Then Patience took her sister up to their joint room, and laid the
poor sufferer on the bed, and throwing herself on her knees beside
the bed, wept over her sister and caressed her. That argument of
Ralph's unworthiness was nothing to Clarissa. She did not consider
herself to be so worthy but what she might forgive any sin, if only
the chance of forgiving such sin were given to her. At this moment in
her heart of hearts her anger was more against her rival than against
the man. She had not yet taught herself to think of all his baseness
to her,--had only as yet had time to think that that evil had come
upon her which she had feared from the first moment of her cousin's
arrival.

Presently Patience heard the door opened of the room down-stairs
and heard Mary's slow step as she crossed the hall. She understood
well that some one should be below, and with another single word of
affection to her sister, she went down-stairs. "Well, Mary," she
said, looking into her cousin's face.

"There is nothing particular to tell," said Mary, with a gentle
smile.

"Of course we all knew what he wanted."

"Then of course you all knew what I should say to him."

"I knew," said Patience.

"I am sure that Clary knew," said Mary. "But he is all alone there,
and will not know what to do with himself. Won't you go to him?"

"You will go up to Clary?" Mary nodded her head, and then Patience
crossed the hall to liberate the rejected suitor. Mary stood for
awhile thinking. She already knew from what Patience had said, that
Clarissa had suspected her, and she felt that there should have been
no such suspicion. Clarissa had not understood, but ought to have
understood. For a moment she was angry, and was disposed to go to
her own room. Then she remembered all her cousin's misery, and crept
up-stairs to the door. She had come so softly, that though the door
was hardly closed, nothing had been heard of her approach. "May I
come in, dear?" she said very gently.

"Well, Mary; tell me all," said Clarissa.

"There is nothing to tell, Clary;--only this, that I fear Mr. Newton
is not worthy of your love."

"He asked you to take him?"

"Never mind, dearest. We will not talk of that. Dear, dearest Clary,
if I only could make you happy."

"But you have refused him?"

"Don't you know me better than to ask me? Don't you know where my
heart is? We will carry our burdens together, dearest, and then they
will be lighter."

"But he will come to you again;--that other one."

"Clary, dear; we will not think about it. There are things which
should not be thought of. We will not talk of it, but we will love
each other so dearly." Clarissa, now that she was assured that her
evil fortune was not to be aggravated by any injury done to her by
her cousin, allowed herself to be tranquillised if not comforted.
There was indeed something in her position that did not admit of
comfort. All the family knew the story of her unrequited love,
and treated her with a compassion which, while its tenderness was
pleasant to her, was still in itself an injury. A vain attachment in
a woman's heart must ever be a weary load, because she can take no
step of her own towards that consummation by which the burden may be
converted into a joy. A man may be active, may press his suit even a
tenth time, may do something towards achieving success. A woman can
only be still and endure. But Clarissa had so managed her affairs
that even that privilege of being still was hardly left to her. Her
trouble was known to them all. She doubted whether even the servants
in the house did not know the cause of her woe. How all this had
come to pass she could not now remember. She had told Patience,--as
though in compliance with some compact that each should ever tell the
other all things. And then circumstances had arisen which made it so
natural that she should be open and candid with Mary. The two Ralphs
were to be their two lovers. That to her had been a delightful dream
during the last few months. He, whose inheritance at that moment was
supposed to have been gone, had, as Clarissa thought, in plainest
language told his love to her. "Dear, dear Clary, you know I love
you." The words to her sense had been so all-important, had meant
so much, had seemed to be so final, that they hardly wanted further
corroboration. Then, indeed, had come the great fault,--the fault
which she had doubted whether she could ever pardon; and she, because
of the heinousness of that offence, had been unable to answer the
question that had been asked. But the offence, such as it was, had
not lightened the solemnity of her assurance, as far as love went,
that Ralph ought to be her own after the speaking of such words as he
had spoken. There were those troubles about money, but yet she was
entitled to regard him as her own. Then had come the written offer
from the other Ralph to Mary,--the offer written in the moment of
his believed prosperity; and it had been so natural that Clarissa
should tell her cousin that as regarded the splendour of position
there should be no jealousy between them. Clarissa did not herself
think much of a lover who wrote letters instead of coming and
speaking,--had perhaps an idea that open speech, even though offence
might follow, was better than formal letters; but all that was Mary's
affair. This very respectful Ralph was Mary's lover, and if Mary were
satisfied, she would not quarrel with the well-behaved young man. She
would not even quarrel with him because he was taking from her own
Ralph the inheritance which for so many years had been believed to be
his own. Thus in the plenitude of her affection and in the serenity
of her heart she had told everything to her cousin. And now also her
father knew it all. How this had come to pass she did not think to
inquire. She suspected no harm from Patience. The thing had been so
clear, that all the world might see it. Ralph, that false one, knew
it also. Who could know it so well as he did? Had not those very
words been spoken by him,--been repeated by him? Now she was as one
stricken, where wounds could not be hidden.

On that day Ralph was driven back to town in his cab, in a rather
disheartened condition, and no more was seen or heard of him for the
present at Popham Villa. His late guardian had behaved very ill to
him in telling Mary Bonner the story of Polly Neefit. That was his
impression,--feeling sure that Mary had alluded to the unfortunate
affair with the breeches-maker's daughter, of which she could have
heard tidings only from Sir Thomas. As to Clarissa, he had not
exactly forgotten the little affair on the lawn; but to his eyes that
affair had been so small as to be almost overlooked amidst larger
matters. Mary, he thought, had never looked so beautiful as she had
done while refusing him. He did not mean to give her up. Her heart,
she had told him, was not her own. He thought he had read of young
ladies in similar conditions, of young ladies who had bestowed their
hearts and had afterwards got them back again for the sake of making
second bestowals. He was not sure but that such an object would lend
a zest to life. There was his brother Gregory in love with Clarissa,
and still true to her. He would be true to Mary, and would see
whether, in spite of that far-away lover, he might not be more
successful than his brother. At any rate he would not give her
up,--and before he had gone to bed that night he had already
concocted a letter to her in his brain, explaining the whole of that
Neefit affair, and asking her whether a man should be condemned to
misery for life because he had been led by misfortune into such a
mistake as that. He dined very well at his club, and on the following
morning went down to the Moonbeam by an early train, for that day's
hunting. Thence he returned to Newton Priory in time for Christmas,
and as he was driven up to his own house, through his own park,
meeting one or two of his own tenants, and encountering now and then
his own obsequious labourers, he was not an unhappy man in spite of
Mary Bonner's cruel answer. It may be doubted whether his greatest
trouble at this moment did not arise from his dread of Neefit. He had
managed to stay long enough in London to give orders that Neefit's
money should be immediately paid. He knew that Neefit could not harm
him at law; but it would not be agreeable if the old man were to go
about the country telling everyone that he, Ralph Newton of Newton,
had twice offered to marry Polly. For the present we will leave him,
although he is our hero, and will return to the girls at Popham
Villa.

"It is all very well talking, Patience, but I don't mean to try to
change," Clarissa said. This was after that visit of the Percycross
deputation to Sir Thomas, and after Christmas. More than a week had
now passed by since Ralph had rushed down to Fulham with his offer,
and the new year had commenced. Sir Thomas had been at home for
Christmas,--for the one day,--and had then returned to London. He had
seen his attorney respecting the petition, who was again to see Mr.
Griffenbottom's London attorney and Mr. Trigger. In the meantime
Sir Thomas was to remain quiet for a few days. The petition was not
to be tried till the end of February, and there was still time for
deliberation. Sir Thomas just now very often took out that great
heap of Baconian papers, but still not a word of the biography was
written. He was, alas! still very far from writing the first word.
"It is all very well, Patience, but I do not mean to try to change,"
said Clarissa.

Poor Patience could make no answer, dreadful as was to her such an
assertion from a young woman. "There is a man who clearly does not
want to marry you, who has declared in the plainest way that he does
want to marry some one else, who has grossly deceived you, and who
never means to think of you again; and yet you say that you will
wilfully adhere to your regard for him!" Such would have been the
speech which Patience would have made, had she openly expressed her
thoughts. But Clarissa was ill, and weak, and wretched; and Patience
could not bring herself to say a word that should distress her
sister.

"If he came to me to-morrow, of course I should forgive him,"
Clarissa said again. These conversations were never commenced by
Patience, who would rather have omitted any mention of that base
young man. "Of course I should. Men do do those things. Men are not
like women. They do all manner of things and everybody forgives them.
I don't say anything about hoping. I don't hope for anything. I am
not happy enough to hope. I shouldn't care if I knew I were going to
die to-morrow. But there can be no change. If you want me to be a
hypocrite, Patience, I will; but what will be the use? The truth will
be the same."

The two girls let her have her way, never contradicted her, coaxed
her, and tried to comfort her;--but it was in vain. At first she
would not go out of the house, not even to church, and then she took
to lying in bed. This lasted into the middle of January, and still
Sir Thomas did not come home. He wrote frequently, short notes to
Patience, sending money, making excuses, making promises, always
expressing some word of hatred or disgust as to Percycross; but still
he did not come. At last, when Clarissa declared that she preferred
lying in bed to getting up, Patience went up to London and fetched
her father home. It had gone so far with Sir Thomas now that he was
unable even to attempt to defend himself. He humbly said that he was
sorry that he had been away so long, and returned with Patience to
the villa.

"My dear," said Sir Thomas, seating himself by Clarissa's bedside,
"this is very bad."

"If I had known you were coming, papa, I would have got up."

"If you are not well, perhaps you are better here, dear."

"I don't think I am quite well, papa."

"What is it, my love?" Clarissa looked at him out of her large
tear-laden eyes, but said nothing. "Patience says that you are not
happy."

"I don't know that anybody is happy, papa."

"I wish that you were with all my heart, my child. Can your father do
anything that will make you happy?"

"No, papa."

"Tell me, Clary. You do not mind my asking you questions?"

"No, papa."

"Patience tells me that you are still thinking of Ralph Newton."

"Of course I think of him."

"I think of him too;--but there are different ways of thinking. We
have known him, all of us, a long time."

"Yes, papa."

"I wish with all my heart that we had never seen him. He is not
worthy of our solicitude."

"You always liked him. I have heard you say you loved him dearly."

"I have said so, and I did love him. In a certain way I love him
still."

"So do I, papa."

"But I know him to be unworthy. Even if he had come here to offer you
his hand I doubt whether I could have permitted an engagement. Do you
know that within the last two months he has twice offered to marry
another young woman, and I doubt whether he is not at this moment
engaged to her?"

"Another?" said poor Clarissa.

"Yes, and that without a pretence of affection on his part, simply
because he wanted to get money from her father."

"Are you sure, papa?" asked Clarissa, who was not prepared to
believe, and did not believe this enormity on the part of the man she
loved.

"I am quite sure. The father came to me to complain of him, and I had
the confession from Ralph's own lips, the very day that he came here
with his insulting offer to Mary Bonner."

"Did you tell Mary?"

"No. I knew that it was unnecessary. There was no danger as to Mary.
And who do you think this girl was? The daughter of a tailor, who had
made some money. It was not that he cared for her, Clary;--no more
than I do! Whether he meant to marry her or not I do not know."

"I'm sure he didn't, papa," said Clarissa, getting up in bed.

"And will that make it better? All that he wanted was the tradesman's
money, and to get that he was willing either to deceive the girl, or
to sell himself to her. I don't know which would have been the baser
mode of traffic. Is that the conduct of a gentleman, Clary?"

Poor Clarissa was in terrible trouble. She hardly believed the story,
which seemed to tell her of a degree of villany greater than ever her
imagination had depicted to her;--and yet, if it were true, she would
be driven to look for means of excusing it. The story as told was
indeed hardly just to Ralph, who in the course of his transactions
with Mr. Neefit had almost taught himself to believe that he could
love Polly very well; but it was not in this direction that Clarissa
looked for an apology for such conduct. "They say that men do all
manner of things," she said, at last.

"I can only tell you this," said Sir Thomas very gravely, "what men
may do I will not say, but no gentleman can ever have acted after
this fashion. He has shown himself to be a scoundrel."

"Papa, papa; don't say that!" screamed Clarissa.

"My child, I can only tell you the truth. I know it is hard to bear.
I would save you if I could; but it is better that you should know."

"Will he always be bad, papa?"

"Who can say, my dear? God forbid that I should be too severe upon
him. But he has been so bad now that I am bound to tell you that you
should drive him from your thoughts. When he told me, all smiling,
that he had come down here to ask your cousin Mary to be his wife, I
was almost minded to spurn him from the door. He can have no feeling
himself of true attachment, and cannot know what it means in others.
He is heartless,--and unprincipled."

"Oh, papa, spare him. It is done now."

"And you will forget him, dearest?"

"I will try, papa. But I think that I shall die. I would rather die.
What is the good of living when nobody is to care for anybody, and
people are so bad as that?"

"My Clarissa must not say that nobody cares for her. Has any person
ever been false to you but he? Is not your sister true to you?"

"Yes, papa."

"And Mary?"

"Yes, papa." He was afraid to ask her whether he also had not been
true to her? Even in that moment there arose in his mind a doubt,
whether all this evil might not have been avoided, had he contented
himself to live beneath the same roof with his children. He said
nothing of himself, but she supplied the want. "I know you love me,
papa, and have always been good to me. I did not mean that. But I
never cared for any one but him,--in that way."

Sir Thomas, in dealing with the character of his late ward, had been
somewhat too severe. It is difficult, perhaps, to say what amount of
misconduct does constitute a scoundrel, or justifies the critic in
saying that this or that man is not a gentleman. There be those who
affirm that he who owes a debt for goods which he cannot pay is no
gentleman, and tradesmen when they cannot get their money are no
doubt sometimes inclined to hold that opinion. But the opinion is
changed when the money comes at last,--especially if it comes with
interest. Ralph had never owed a shilling which he did not intend to
pay, and had not property to cover. That borrowing of money from Mr.
Neefit was doubtless bad. No one would like to know that his son had
borrowed money from his tailor. But it is the borrowing of the money
that is bad, rather than the special dealing with the tradesman. And
as to that affair with Polly, some excuse may be made. He had meant
to be honest to Neefit, and he had meant to be true to Neefit's
daughter. Even Sir Thomas, high-minded as he was, would hardly have
passed so severe a sentence, had not the great sufferer in the matter
been his own daughter.

But the words that he spoke were doubtless salutary to poor Clarissa.
She never again said to Patience that she would not try to make a
change, nor did she ever again declare that if Ralph came back again
she would forgive him. On the day after the scene with her father
she was up again, and she made an effort to employ herself about the
house. On the next Sunday she went to church, and then they all knew
that she was making the necessary struggle. Ralph's name was never
mentioned, nor for a time was any allusion made to the family of the
Newtons. "The worst of it, I think, is over," said Patience one day
to Mary.

"The worst of it is over," said Mary; "but it is not all over. It is
hard to forget when one has loved."


CHAPTER XLII.

NOT BROKEN-HEARTED.


Christmas had come and gone at Newton Priory, and the late Squire's
son had left the place,--protesting as he did so that he left it
for ever. To him also life in that particular spot of earth was
impossible, unless he could live there as the lord and master of
all. Everybody throughout that and neighbouring parishes treated him
not only with kindness, but with the warmest affection. The gentry,
the farmers, and the labourers, all men who had known him in the
hunting-field, in markets, on the bench, or at church, men, women and
children, joined together in forming plans by means of which he could
remain at Newton. The young Squire asked him to make the house his
home, at any rate for the hunting season. The parson offered half the
parsonage. His friend Morris, who was a bachelor, suggested a joint
home and joint stables between them. But it was all of no avail. Had
it not been for the success which had so nearly crowned the late
Squire's efforts during the last six months, it might have been that
his friends would have prevailed with him. But he had been too near
being the master to be able to live at Newton in any other capacity.
The tenants had been told that they were to be his tenants. The
servants had been told that they were to be his servants. During a
few short weeks, he had almost been master, so absolute had been the
determination of the old Squire to show to all around him that his
son, in spite of the blot upon the young man's birth, was now the
heir in all things, and possessed of every privilege which would
attach itself to an elder son. He himself while his father lived had
taken these things calmly, had shown no elation, had even striven to
moderate the vehemence of his father's efforts on his behalf;--but
not the less had he been conscious of the value of what was being
done for him. To be the promised future owner of the acres on which
he had lived, of the coverts through which he had ridden, of every
tree and bank which he had known from his boyhood, had been to him
a source of gratified pride not the less strong because he had
concealed it. The disappointment did hit him sorely. His dreams
had been of Parliament, of power in the county, of pride of place,
and popularity. He now found that they were to be no more than
dreams;--but with this additional sorrow, that all around him knew
that they had been dreamed. No;--he could not stay at Newton even
for the sake of living with friends who loved him so dearly. He said
little or nothing of this to any one. Not even to Gregory Newton or
to his friend Morris did he tell much of his feeling. He was not
proud of his dreamings, and it seemed to himself that his punishment
was just. Nor could he speak to either of them or to any man of his
past ambition, or of what hopes might remain to him in reference to
Mary Bonner. The young Squire had gone forth with the express purpose
of wooing her, had declared his purpose of doing so, and had returned
to Newton at any rate without any ready tale of triumph on his
tongue. What had been his fortune the rival would not ask; and while
the two remained together at the priory no further word was spoken
of Mary Bonner. He, Ralph the dispossessed one, while he believed
himself to be the heir, had intended to bring her home as a fitting
queen to share his throne. It might be that she would consent to be
his without a throne to share; but in thinking of her he could not
but remember what his ambition had been, and he could hardly bring
himself now to offer to her that which was comparatively so little
worth the having. To suppose that she should already "be fond of
him," should already long for him as he longed for her, was contrary
to his nature. Hitherto when he had been in her presence, he had
stood there as a man whose position in life was almost contemptible;
and though it would be unjust to him to say that he had hoped to
win her by his acres, still he had felt that his father's success
on his behalf might justify him in that which would otherwise be
unjustifiable. For the present, however, he could take no steps in
that direction. He could only suggest to himself what had already
been her answer, or what at some future time might be the answer
she would make to his rival. He had lost a father between whom and
himself there had existed ties, not only of tender love, but of
perfect friendship, and for awhile he must bewail his loss. That
he could not bewail his lost father without thinking of his lost
property, and of the bride that had never been won, was an agony to
his soul.

He had found a farm down in Norfolk, near to Swaffham, which he could
take for twelve months, with the option of purchase at the expiration
of that time, and thither he betook himself. There were about four
hundred acres, and the place was within his means. He did not think
it likely that Mary Bonner would choose to come and live upon a
Norfolk farm; and yet what other work in life was there for which
he was fit? Early in January he went down to Beamingham Hall, as
the place was called, and there we will leave him for the present,
consoling himself with oil-cake, and endeavouring to take a pride in
a long row of stall-fed cattle.

At this time the two brothers were living at Newton Priory. Ralph the
heir had bought some of his uncle's horses, and had commenced hunting
with the hounds around him; though he had not as yet withdrawn his
stud from the Moonbeam. He was not altogether at his ease, as he
had before the end of February received three or four letters from
Neefit, all of them dictated by Waddle, in which his conduct was
painted not in the most flattering colours. Neefit's money had
been repaid, but Neefit would not understand that the young heir's
obligations to him had by any means been acquitted by that very
ordinary process. He had risked his money when payment was very
doubtful, and now he intended to have something beyond cash in return
for all that he had done. "There are debts of honour which a real
gentleman feels himself more bound to pay than any bills," Waddle had
written. And to such dogmatic teachings as these Neefit would always
add something out of his own head. "There ain't nobody who shan't
know all about it, unless you're on the square again." Ralph had
written one reply since he had been at Newton, in which he explained
at some length that it was impossible that he should renew his
addresses to a young lady who had twice rejected them, and who had
assured him that she did not love him. He professed the greatest
respect for Miss Neefit, a respect which had, if possible, been
heightened by her behaviour in this matter,--but it must now be
understood that the whole affair was at an end. Neefit would not
understand this, but Neefit's further letters, which had not been
unfrequent, were left unanswered. Ralph had now told the whole
story to his brother, and had written his one reply from Newton in
conformity with his brother's advice. After that they both thought
that no further rejoinder could be of any service.

The parsonage was for the time deserted, Gregory having for the
present consented to share his brother's house. In spite of that
little thorn in the flesh which Neefit was, Ralph was able to enjoy
his life very thoroughly. He went on with all the improvements about
the place which the Squire had commenced, and was active in making
acquaintance with every one who lived upon his land. He was not
without good instincts, and understood thoroughly that respectability
had many more attractions than a character for evil living. He was,
too, easily amenable to influence from those around him; and under
Gregory's auspices, was constant at his parish church. He told
himself at once that he had many duties to perform, and he attempted
to perform them. He did not ask Lieutenant Cox or Captain Fooks to
the Priory, and quite prepared himself for the character of Henry
V. in miniature, as he walked about his park, and rode about his
farms, and talked with the wealthier farmers on hunting mornings. He
had a full conception of his own dignity, and some not altogether
inaccurate idea of the manner in which it would become him to sustain
it. He was, perhaps, a little too self-conscious, and over-inclined
to suppose that people were regarding his conduct because he was
Newton of Newton;--Newton of Newton with no blot on his shield, by
right of his birth, and subject to no man's reproach.

He had failed grievously in one matter on which he had set his heart;
but as to that he was, as the reader knows, resolved to try again. He
had declared his passion to the other Ralph, but his rival had not
made the confidence mutual. But hitherto he had said nothing on the
subject to his brother. He had put it by, as it were, out of his mind
for awhile, resolving that it should not trouble him immediately, in
the middle of his new joys. It was a thing that would keep,--a thing,
at any rate, that need not overshadow him night and morning. When
Neefit continued to disturb him with threats of publicity in regard
to Polly's wrongs, he did tell himself that in no way could he so
effectually quiet Mr. Neefit as by marrying somebody else, and that
he would, at some very early date, have recourse to this measure;
but, in the meantime, he would enjoy himself without letting his
unrequited passion lie too heavily as a burden on his heart. So
he eat and drank, and rode and prayed, and sat with his brother
magistrates on the bench, and never ceased to think of his good
fortune, in that he had escaped from the troubles of his youth,
unscathed and undegraded.

Then there came a further letter from Mr. Neefit, from which there
arose some increase of confidence among the brothers. There was
nothing special in this letter. These letters, indeed, were very
like to each other, and, as had now come to be observed, were always
received on a Tuesday morning. It was manifest to them that Neefit
spent the leisure hours of his Sundays in meditating upon the
hardness of his position; and that, as every Monday morning came,
he caused a new letter to be written. On this particular Tuesday,
Ralph had left home before the post had come, and did not get the
breeches-maker's epistle till his return from hunting. He chucked
it across the table to Gregory when he came down to dinner, and the
parson read it. There was no new attack in it; and as the servant was
in the room, nothing was then said about it. But after dinner the
subject was discussed.

"I wish I knew how to stop the fellow's mouth," said the elder
brother.

"I think I should get Carey to see him," suggested Gregory. "He would
understand a lawyer when he was told that nothing could come of it
but trouble to himself and his daughter."

"She has no hand in it, you know."

"But it must injure her."

"One would think so. But she is a girl whom nothing can injure. You
can't imagine how good and how great she is;--great in her way, that
is. She is as steady as a rock; and nobody who knows her will ever
imagine her to be a party to her father's folly. She may pick and
choose a husband any day she pleases. And the men about her won't
mind this kind of thing as we should. No doubt all their friends joke
him about it, but no one will think of blaming Polly."

"It can't do her any good," said Gregory.

"It cannot do her any harm. She has a strength of her own that even
her father can't lessen."

"All the same, I wish there were an end of it."

"So do I, for my own sake," said Ralph. As he spoke he filled his
glass, and passed the bottle, and then was silent for a few moments.
"Neefit did help me," he continued, "and I don't want to speak
against him; but he is the most pig-headed old fool that ever
existed. Nothing will stop him but Polly's marriage, or mine."

"I suppose you will marry soon now. You ought to be married," said
Gregory, in a melancholy tone, in which was told something of the
disappointment of his own passion.

"Well;--yes. I believe I might as well tell you a little secret,
Greg."

"I suppose I can guess it," said Gregory, with still a deeper sound
of woe.

"I don't think you can. It is quite possible you may, however. You
know Mary Bonner;--don't you?"

The cloud upon the parson's brow was at once lightened. "No," said
he. "I have heard of her, of course."

"You have never seen Mary Bonner?"

"I have not been up in town since she came. What should take me up?
And if I were there, I doubt whether I should go out to Fulham. What
is the use of going?" But still, though he spoke thus, there was
something less of melancholy in his voice than when he had first
spoken. Ralph did not immediately go on with his story, and his
brother now asked a question. "But what of Mary Bonner? Is she to be
the future mistress of the Priory?"

"God only knows."

"But you mean to ask her?"

"I have asked her."

"And you are engaged?"

"By no means. I wish I were. You haven't seen her, but I suppose you
have heard of her?"

"Ralph spoke of her,--and told me that she was very lovely."

"Upon my word, I don't think that even in a picture I ever saw
anything approaching to her beauty. You've seen that thing at
Dresden. She is more like that than anything I know. She seems almost
too grand for a fellow to speak to, and yet she looks as if she
didn't know it. I don't think she does know it." Gregory said not a
word, but looked at his brother, listening. "But, by George there's
a dignity about her, a sort of self-possession, a kind of noli me
tangere, you understand, which makes a man almost afraid to come near
her. She hasn't sixpence in the world."

"That needn't signify to you now."

"Not in the least. I only just mention it to explain. And her father
was nobody in particular,--some old general who used to wear a cocked
hat and keep the niggers down out in one of the colonies. She herself
talked of coming home here to be a governess;--by Jove! yes, a
governess. Well, to look at her, you'd think she was born a countess
in her own right."

"Is she so proud?"

"No;--it's not that. I don't know what it is. It's the way her head
is put on. Upon my word, to see her turn her neck is the grandest
thing in the world. I never saw anything like it. I don't know that
she's proud by nature,--though she has got a dash of that too. Don't
you know there are some horses show their breeding at a glance? I
don't suppose they feel it themselves; but there it is on them, like
the Hall-mark on silver. I don't know whether you can understand a
man being proud of his wife."

"Indeed I can."

"I don't mean of her personal qualities, but of the outside get up.
Some men are proud of their wives' clothes, or their jewels, or their
false hair. With Mary nothing of that sort could have any effect; but
to see her step, or move her head, or lift her arm, is enough to make
a man feel,--feel,--feel that she beats every other woman in the
world by chalks."

"And she is to be mistress here?"

"Indeed she should,--to-morrow, if she'd come."

"You did ask her?"

"Yes,--I asked her."

"And what did she say?"

"Nothing that I cared to hear. She had just been told all this
accursed story about Polly Neefit. I'll never forgive Sir
Thomas,--never." The reader will be pleased to remember that
Sir Thomas did not mention Miss Neefit's name, or any of the
circumstances of the Neefit contract, to his niece.

"He could hardly have wished to set her against you."

"I don't know; but he must have told her. She threw it in my teeth
that I ought to marry Polly."

"Then she did not accept you?"

"By George! no;--anything but that. She is one of those women who,
as I fancy, never take a man at the first offer. It isn't that they
mean to shilly and shally and make a fuss, but there's a sort of
majesty about them which instinctively declines to yield itself.
Unconsciously they feel something like offence at the suggestion that
a man should think enough of himself to ask for such a possession.
They come to it, after a time."

"And she will come to it, after a time?"

"I didn't mean to say that. I don't intend, however, to give it up."
Ralph paused in his story, considering whether he would tell his
brother what Mary had confessed to him as to her affection for some
one else, but he resolved, at last, that he would say nothing of
that. He had himself put less of confidence in that assertion than he
did in her rebuke with reference to the other young woman to whom she
chose to consider that he owed himself. It was his nature to think
rather of what absolutely concerned himself, than of what related
simply to her. "I shan't give her up. That's all I can say," he
continued. "I'm not the sort of fellow to give things up readily." It
did occur to Gregory at that moment that his brother had not shown
much self-confidence on that question of giving up the property. "I'm
pretty constant when I've set my mind on a thing. I'm not going to
let any woman break my heart for me, but I shall stick to it."

He was not going to let any woman break his heart for him! Gregory,
as he heard this, knew that his brother regarded him as a man whose
heart was broken, and he could not help asking himself whether or
not it was good for a man that he should be able to suffer as he
suffered, because a woman was fair and yet not fair for him. That his
own heart was broken,--broken after the fashion of which his brother
was speaking,--he was driven to confess to himself. It was not that
he should die, or that his existence would be one long continued hour
of misery to him. He could eat and drink, and do his duty and enjoy
his life. And yet his heart was broken. He could not piece it so that
it should be fit for any other woman. He could not teach himself not
to long for that one woman who would not love him. The romance of his
life had formed itself there, and there it must remain. In all his
solitary walks it was of her that he still thought. Of all the bright
castles in the air which he still continued to build, she was ever
the mistress. And yet he knew that she would never make him happy.
He had absolutely resolved that he would not torment her by another
request. But he gave himself no praise for his constancy, looking
on himself as being somewhat weak in that he could not overcome his
longing. When Ralph declared that he would not break his heart, but
that, nevertheless, he would stick to the girl, Gregory envied him,
not doubting of his success, and believing that it was to men of this
calibre that success in love is generally given. "I hope with all my
heart that you may win her," he said.

"I must run my chance like another. There's no 'Veni, vidi, vici,'
about it, I can tell you; nor is it likely that there should be with
such a girl as Mary Bonner. Fill your glass, old fellow. We needn't
sit mumchance because we're thinking of our loves."

"I had thought,--" began Gregory very slowly.

"What did you think?"

"I had thought once that you were thinking of--Clarissa."

"What put that into your head?"

"If you had I should never have said a word, nor fancied any wrong.
Of course she'll marry some one. And I don't know why I should ever
wish that it should not be you."

"But what made you think of it?"

"Well; I did. It was just a word that Patience said in one of her
letters."

"What sort of word?" asked Ralph, with much interest.

"It was nothing, you know. I just misunderstood her. When one is
always thinking of a thing everything turns itself that way. I got it
into my head that she meant to hint to me that as you and Clary were
fond of each other, I ought to forget it all. I made up my mind that
I would;--but it is so much easier to make up one's mind than to do
it." There came a tear in each eye as he spoke, and he turned his
face towards the fire that his brother might not see them. And there
they remained hot and oppressive, because he would not raise his hand
to rub them away.

"I wonder what it was she said," asked Ralph.

"Oh, nothing. Don't you know how a fellow has fancies?"

"There wasn't anything in it," said Ralph.

"Oh;--of course not."

"Patience might have imagined it," said Ralph. "That's just like such
a sister as Patience."

"She's the best woman that ever lived," said Gregory.

"As good as gold," said Ralph. "I don't think, however, I shall very
soon forgive Sir Thomas."

"I don't mind saying now that I am glad it is so," said Gregory;
"though as regards Clary that seems to be cruel. But I don't think I
could have come much here had she become your wife."

"Nothing shall ever separate us, Greg."

"I hope not;--but I don't know whether I could have done it. I almost
think that I oughtn't to live where I should see her; and I did fear
it at one time."

"She'll come to the parsonage yet, old fellow, if you'll stick to
her," said Ralph.

"Never," said Gregory. Then that conversation was over.


CHAPTER XLIII.

ONCE MORE.


At the end of February Ralph declared his purpose of returning to the
Moonbeam, for the rest of the hunting season. "I'm not going to be
such an ass," he said to his brother, "as to keep two sets of horses
going. I bought my uncle's because it seemed to suit just at the
time; and there are the others at Horsball's, because I've not had
time to settle down yet. I'll go over for March, and take a couple
with me; and, at the end of it, I'll get rid of those I don't like.
Then that'll be the end of the Moonbeam, as far as I am concerned."
So he prepared to start, and on the evening before he went his
brother declared that he would go as far as London with him. "That's
all right," said Ralph, "but what's taking you up now?" The parson
said that he wanted to get a few things, and to have his hair cut. He
shouldn't stay above one night. Ralph asked no more questions, and
the two brothers went up to London together.

We fear that Patience Underwood may not have been in all respects a
discreet preserver of her sister's secrets. But then there is nothing
more difficult of attainment than discretion in the preservation
of such mysteries. To keep a friend's secret well the keeper of it
should be firmly resolved to act upon it in no way,--not even for the
advantage of the owner of it. If it be confided to you as a secret
that your friend is about to make his maiden speech in the House, you
should not even invite your acquaintances to be in their places,--not
if secrecy be the first object. In all things the knowledge should be
to you as though you had it not. Great love is hardly capable of such
secrecy as this. In the fulness of her love Patience had allowed her
father to learn the secret of poor Clary's heart; and in the fulness
of her love she had endeavoured to make things smooth at Newton.
She had not told the young clergyman that Clarissa had given to his
brother that which she could not give to him; but, meaning to do a
morsel of service to both of them, if that might be possible, she had
said a word or two, with what effect the reader will have seen from
the conversation given in the last chapter.

"She'll come to the parsonage yet," Ralph had said; and Gregory in
one word had implied his assured conviction that any such coming was
a thing not to be hoped for,--an event not even to be regarded as
possible. Nevertheless, he made up his mind that he would go up to
London,--to have his hair cut. In so making up his mind he did not
for a moment believe that it could be of any use to him. He was not
quite sure that when in London he would go to Popham Villa. He was
quite sure that if he did go to Popham Villa he would make no further
offer to Clarissa. He knew that his journey was foolish, simply
the result of an uneasy, restless spirit,--that it would be better
for him to remain in his parish and move about among the old women
and bed-ridden men; but still he went. He would dine at his club,
he said, and perhaps he might go down to Fulham on the following
morning. And so the brothers parted. Ralph, as a man of property,
with many weighty matters on hand, had, of course, much to do.
He desired to inspect some agricultural implements, and a new
carriage,--he had ever so many things to say to Carey, the lawyer,
and wanted to order new harnesses for the horses. So he went to his
club, and played whist all the afternoon.

Gregory, as soon as he had secured a bed at a quiet inn, walked off
to Southampton Buildings. From the direct manner in which this was
done, it might have been argued that he had come up to London with
the purpose of seeing Sir Thomas; but it was not so. He turned his
steps towards the place where Clary's father was generally to be
found, because he knew not what else to do. As he went he told
himself that he might as well leave it alone;--but still he went.
Stemm at once told him, with a candour that was almost marvellous,
that Sir Thomas was out of town. The hearing of the petition was
going on at Percycross, and Sir Thomas was there, as a matter of
course. Stemm seemed to think it rather odd that an educated man,
such as was the Rev. Gregory Newton, should have been unaware that
the petition against the late election at Percycross was being
carried on at this moment. "We've got Serjeant Burnaby, and little
Mr. Joram down, to make a fight of it," said Mr. Stemm; "but, as
far as I can learn, they might just as well have remained up in town.
It's only sending good money after bad." The young parson hardly
expressed that interest in the matter which Stemm had expected, but
turned away, thinking whether he had not better have his hair cut at
once, and then go home.

But he did go to Popham Villa on the same afternoon, and,--such was
his fortune,--he found Clarissa alone. Since her father had seen her
in bed, and spoken to her of what he had called the folly of her
love, she had not again given herself up to the life of a sick-room.
She dressed herself and came down to breakfast of a morning, and then
would sit with a needle in her hand till she took her book, and then
with a book till she took her needle. She tried to work, and tried to
read, and perhaps she did accomplish a little of each. And then, when
Patience would tell her that exercise was necessary, she would put
on her hat and creep out among the paths. She did make some kind of
effort to get over the evil that had come upon her; but still no
one could watch her and not know that she was a wounded deer. "Miss
Clarissa is at home," said the servant, who well knew that the young
clergyman was one of the rejected suitors. There had been hardly a
secret in the house in reference to Gregory Newton's love. The two
other young ladies, the girl said, had gone to London, but would be
home to dinner. Then, with a beating heart, Gregory was ushered into
the drawing-room. Clarissa was sitting near the window, with a novel
in her lap, having placed herself there with the view of getting what
was left of the light of the early spring evening; but she had not
read a word for the last quarter of an hour. She was thinking of
that word scoundrel, with which her father had spoken of the man she
loved. Could it be that he was in truth so bad as that? And, if it
were true, would she not take him, scoundrel as he was, if he would
come to her? He might be a--scoundrel in that one thing, on that one
occasion, and yet be good to her. He might repent his scoundrelism,
and she certainly would forgive it. Of one thing she was quite
sure;--he had not looked like a scoundrel when he had given her that
assurance on the lawn! And so she thought of young men in general.
It was very easy to call a young man a scoundrel, and yet to forgive
him all his iniquities when it suited to do so. Young men might get
in debt, and gamble, and make love wherever they pleased, and all at
once,--and yet be forgiven. All these things were very bad. It might
be just to call a man a scoundrel because he could not pay his debts,
or because he made bets about horses. Young men did a great many
things which would be horrid indeed were a girl to do them. Then one
papa would call such a man a scoundrel, because he was not wanted
to come to the house; while another papa would make him welcome,
and give him the best of everything. Ralph Newton might be a
scoundrel; but if so,--as Clarissa thought,--there were a great
many good-looking scoundrels about in the world, as to whom their
scoundrelism did very little to injure them in the esteem of all
their friends. It was thus that Clarissa was thinking over her own
affairs when Gregory Newton was shown into the room.

The greeting on both sides was at first formal and almost cold. Clary
had given a little start of surprise, and had then subsided into a
most demure mode of answering questions. Yes; papa was at Percycross.
She did not know when he was expected back. Mary and Patience were in
London. Yes;--she was at home all alone. No; she had not seen Ralph
since his uncle's death. The question which elicited this answer had
been asked without any design, and Clary endeavoured to make her
reply without emotion. If she displayed any, Gregory, who had his own
affairs upon his mind, did not see it. No;--they had not seen the
other Mr. Newton as he passed through town. They had all understood
that he had been very much disturbed by his father's horrible
accident and death. Then Gregory paused in his questions, and
Clarissa expressed a hope that there might be no more hunting in the
world.

It was very hard work, this conversation, and Gregory was beginning
to think that he had done no good by coming, when on a sudden he
struck a chord from whence came a sound of music. "Ralph and I have
been living together at the Priory," he said.

"Oh;--indeed; yes;--I think I heard Patience say that you were at the
Priory."

"I suppose I shall not be telling any secret to you in talking about
him and your cousin Mary?"

Clarissa felt that she was blushing up to her brow, but she made a
great effort to compose herself. "Oh, no," she said, "we all know of
it."

"I hope he may be successful," said Gregory.

"I do not know. I cannot tell."

"I never knew a man more thoroughly in love than he is."

"I don't believe it," said Clarissa.

"Not believe it! Indeed you may, Clary. I have never seen her, but
from what he says of her I suppose her to be most beautiful."

"She is,--very beautiful." This was said with a strong emphasis.

"And why should you not believe it?"

"It will not be of the slightest use, Mr. Newton; and you may tell
him so. Though I suppose it is impossible to make a man believe
that."

"Are we both so unfortunate?" he asked.

The poor girl with her wounded love, and every feeling sore within
her, had not intended to say anything that should be cruel or
injurious to Gregory himself, and it was not till the words were
out of her mouth that she herself perceived their effect. "Oh, Mr.
Newton, I was only thinking of him," she said, innocently. "I only
meant that Ralph is one of those who always think they are to have
everything they want."

"I am not one of those, Clarissa. And yet I am one who seem never to
be tired of asking for that which is not to be given to me. I said to
myself when last I went from here that I would never ask again;--that
I would never trouble you any more." She was sitting with the book in
her hand, looking out into the gloom, and now she made no attempt to
answer him. "And yet you see here I am," he continued. She was still
silent, and her head was still turned away from him; but he could see
that tears were streaming down her cheeks. "I have not the power not
to come to you while yet there is a chance," he said. "I can live and
work without you, but I can have no life of my own. When I first saw
you I made a picture to myself of what my life might be, and I cannot
get that moved from before my eyes. I am sorry, however, that my
coming should make you weep."

"Oh, Mr. Newton, I am so wretched!" she said, turning round sharply
upon him. For a moment she had thought that she would tell him
everything, and then she checked herself, and remembered how
ill-placed such a confidence would be.

"What should make you wretched, dearest?"

"I do not know. I cannot tell. I sometimes think the world is bad
altogether, and that I had better die. People are so cruel and so
hard, and things are so wrong. But you may tell your brother that
he need not think of my cousin, Mary. Nothing ever would move her.
H--sh--. Here they are. Do not say that I was crying."

He was introduced to the beauty, and as the lights came, Clarissa
escaped. Yes;--she was indeed most lovely; but as he looked on her,
Gregory felt that he agreed with Clarissa that nothing on earth would
move her. He remained there for another half-hour; but Clarissa did
not return, and then he went back to London.


CHAPTER XLIV.

THE PETITION.


The time for hearing the petition at Percycross had at length come,
and the judge had gone down to that ancient borough. The day fixed
was Monday, the 27th, and Parliament had then been sitting for three
weeks. Mr. Griffenbottom had been as constant in his place as though
there had been no sword hanging over his head; but Sir Thomas had not
as yet even taken the oaths. He had made up his mind that he would
not even enter the house while this bar against him as a legislator
existed, and he had not as yet even been seen in the lobby. His
daughters, his colleague, Mr. Trigger, and Stemm had all expostulated
with him on the subject, assuring him that he should treat the
petition with the greatest contempt, at any rate till it should have
proved itself by its success to be a matter not contemptible; but to
these counsellors he gave no ear, and when he went down to give his
evidence before the judge at Percycross his seat had as yet availed
him nothing.

Mr. Griffenbottom had declared that he would not pay a shilling
towards the expense of the petition, maintaining that his own seat
was safe, and that any peril incurred had been so incurred simply
on behalf of Sir Thomas. Nothing, according to Mr. Griffenbottom's
views, could be more unjust than to expect that he should take any
part in the matter. Trigger, too, had endeavoured to impress this
upon Sir Thomas more than once or twice. But this had been all in
vain; and Sir Thomas, acting under the advice of his own attorney,
had at last compelled Mr. Griffenbottom to take his share in the
matter. Mr. Griffenbottom did not scruple to say that he was very
ill-used, and to hint that any unfair practices which might possibly
have prevailed during the last election at Percycross, had all been
adopted on behalf of Sir Thomas, and in conformity with Sir Thomas's
views. It will, therefore, be understood that the two members did
not go down to the borough in the best humour with each other. Mr.
Trigger still nominally acted for both; but it had been almost avowed
that Sir Thomas was to be treated as a Jonah, if by such treatment
any salvation might be had for the ship of which Griffenbottom was to
be regarded as the captain.

Mr. Westmacott was also in Percycross,--and so was Moggs, reinstated
in his old room at the Cordwainers' Arms. Moggs had not been
summoned, nor was his presence there required for any purpose
immediately connected with the inquiry to be made; but Purity and the
Rights of Labour may always be advocated; and when better than at a
moment in which the impurity of a borough is about to be made the
subject of public condemnation? And Moggs, moreover, had now rankling
in his bosom a second cause of enmity against the Tories of the
borough. Since the election he had learned that his rival, Ralph
Newton, was in some way connected with the sitting member, Sir
Thomas, and he laid upon Sir Thomas's back the weight of his full
displeasure in reference to the proposed marriage with Polly Neefit.
He had heard that Polly had raised some difficulty,--had, indeed,
rejected her aristocratic suitor, and was therefore not without hope;
but he had been positively assured by Neefit himself that the match
would be made, and was consequently armed with a double purpose in
his desire to drive Sir Thomas ignominiously out of Percycross.

Sir Thomas had had more than one interview with Serjeant Burnaby
and little Mr. Joram, than whom two more astute barristers in such
matters were not to be found at that time practising,--though perhaps
at that time the astuteness of the Serjeant was on the wane; while
that of Jacky Joram, as he was familiarly called, was daily rising
in repute. Sir Thomas himself, barrister and senior to these two
gentlemen, had endeavoured to hold his own with them, and to impress
on them the conviction that he had nothing to conceal; that he had
personally endeavoured, as best he knew how, to avoid corruption,
and that if there had been corruption on the part of his own agents,
he was himself ready to be a party in proclaiming it. But he found
himself to be absolutely ignored and put out of court by his own
counsel. They were gentlemen with whom professionally he had had no
intercourse, as he had practised at the Chancery, and they at the
Common Law Bar. But he had been Solicitor-General, and was a bencher
of his Inn, whereas Serjeant Burnaby was only a Serjeant, and Jacky
Joram still wore a stuff gown. Nevertheless, he found himself to be
"nowhere" in discussing with them the circumstances of the election.
Even Joram, whom he seemed to remember having seen only the other day
as an ugly shame-faced boy about the courts, treated him, not exactly
with indignity, but with patronising good-nature, listening with
an air of half-attention to what he said, and then not taking the
slightest heed of a word of it. Who does not know this transparent
pretence of courtesies, which of all discourtesies is the most
offensive? "Ah, just so, Sir Thomas; just so. And now, Mr. Trigger,
I suppose Mr. Puffer's account hasn't yet been settled." Any word
from Mr. Trigger was of infinitely greater value with Mr. Joram than
all Sir Thomas's protestations. Sir Thomas could not keep himself
from remembering that Jacky Joram's father was a cheesemonger at
Gloucester, who had married the widow of a Jew with a little money.
Twenty times Sir Thomas made up his mind to retire from the business
altogether; but he always found himself unable to do so. When he
mentioned the idea, Griffenbottom flung up his hands in dismay at
such treachery on the part of an ally,--such treachery and such
cowardice! What!--had not he, Sir Thomas, forced him, Griffenbottom,
into all this ruinous expenditure? And now to talk of throwing up the
sponge! It was in vain that Sir Thomas explained that he had forced
nobody into it. It was manifestly the case that he had refused to go
on with it by himself, and on this Mr. Griffenbottom and Mr. Trigger
insisted so often and with so much strength that Sir Thomas felt
himself compelled to stand to his guns, bad as he believed those guns
to be.

If Sir Thomas meant to retreat, why had he not retreated when a
proposition to that effect was made to him at his own chambers? Of
all the weak, vacillating, ill-conditioned men that Mr. Griffenbottom
had ever been concerned with, Sir Thomas Underwood was the weakest,
most vacillating, and most ill-conditioned. To have to sit in the
same boat with such a man was the greatest misfortune that had ever
befallen Mr. Griffenbottom in public life. Mr. Griffenbottom did not
exactly say these hard things in the hearing of Sir Thomas, but he
so said them that they became the common property of the Jorams,
Triggers, Spiveycombs, and Spicers; and were repeated piecemeal to
the unhappy second member.

He had secured for himself a separate sitting-room at the "Percy
Standard," thinking that thus he would have the advantage of being
alone; but every one connected with his party came in and out of his
room as though it had been specially selected as a chamber for public
purposes. Even Griffenbottom came into it to have interviews there
with Trigger, although at the moment Griffenbottom and Sir Thomas
were not considered to be on speaking terms. Griffenbottom in these
matters seemed to have the hide of a rhinoceros. He had chosen to
quarrel with Sir Thomas. He had declared that he would not speak to a
colleague whose Parliamentary ideas and habits were so repulsive to
him. He had said quite aloud, that Trigger had never made a greater
mistake in his life than in bringing Sir Thomas to the borough, and
that, let the petition go as it would, Sir Thomas should never be
returned for the borough again. He had spoken all these things,
almost in the hearing of Sir Thomas. And yet he would come to Sir
Thomas's private room, and sit there half the morning with a cigar in
his mouth! Mr. Pile would come in, and make most unpleasant speeches.
Mr. Spicer called continually, with his own ideas about the borough.
The thing could be still saved if enough money were spent. If Mr.
Givantake were properly handled, and Mr. O'Blather duly provided for,
the two witnesses upon whom the thing really hung would not be found
in Percycross when called upon to-morrow. That was Mr. Spicer's idea;
and he was very eager to communicate it to Serjeant Burnaby. Trigger,
in his energy, told Mr. Spicer to go and be ----. All this occurred
in Sir Thomas's private room. And then Mr. Pabsby was there
constantly, till he at last was turned out by Trigger. In his agony,
Sir Thomas asked for another sitting-room; but was informed that the
house was full. The room intended for the two members was occupied
by Griffenbottom; but nobody ever suggested that the party might
meet there when Sir Thomas's vain request was made for further
accommodation. Griffenbottom went on with his cigar, and Mr. Pile
sat picking his teeth before the fire, and making unpleasant little
speeches.

The judge, who had hurried into Percycross from another town, and who
opened the commission on the Monday evening, did not really begin
his work till the Tuesday morning. Jacky Joram had declared that the
inquiry would last three days, he having pledged himself to be at
another town early on the following Friday. Serjeant Burnaby, whose
future services were not in such immediate demand, was of opinion
that they would not get out of Percycross till Saturday night. Judge
Crumbie, who was to try the case, and who had been trying similar
cases ever since Christmas, was not due at his next town till the
Monday; but it was understood by everybody that he intended if
possible to spend his Saturday and Sunday in the bosom of his family.
Trigger, however, had magnificent ideas. "I believe we shall carry
them into the middle of next week," he said, "if they choose to
go on with it." Trigger thoroughly enjoyed the petition; and even
Griffenbottom, who was no longer troubled by gout, and was not now
obliged to walk about the borough, did not seem to dislike it. But to
poor Sir Thomas it was indeed a purgatory.

The sitting members were of course accused, both as regarded
themselves and their agents, of every crime known in electioneering
tactics. Votes had been personated. Votes had been bought. Votes
had been obtained by undue influence on the part of masters and
landlords, and there had been treating of the most pernicious and
corrupt description. As to the personating of votes, that according
to Mr. Trigger, had been merely introduced as a pleasant commencing
fiction common in Parliamentary petitions. There had been nothing
of the kind, and nobody supposed that there had, and it did not
signify. Of undue influence,--what purists choose to call undue
influence,--there had of course been plenty. It was not likely that
masters paying thousands a year in wages were going to let these men
vote against themselves. But this influence was so much a matter
of course that it could not be proved to the injury of the sitting
members. Such at least was Mr. Trigger's opinion. Mr. Spicer might
have been a little imprudent with his men; but no case could be
brought up in which a man had been injured. Undue influence at
Percycross was--"gammon." So said Mr. Trigger, and Jacky Joram agreed
with Mr. Trigger. Serjeant Burnaby rubbed his hands, and would give
no opinion till he had heard the evidence. That votes had been bought
during the day of the election there was no doubt on earth. On this
matter great secrecy prevailed, and Sir Thomas could not get a word
spoken in his own hearing. It was admitted, however, that votes had
been bought. There were a dozen men, perhaps more than a dozen,
who would prove that one Glump had paid them ten shillings a piece
between one and two on the day of the election. There was a general
belief that perhaps over a hundred had been bought at that rate. But
Trigger was ready to swear that he did not know whence Glump had got
the money, and Glump himself was,--nobody knew where Glump was, but
strange whispers respecting Glump were floating about the borough.
Trigger was disposed to believe that they, on their side, could prove
that Glump had really been employed by Westmacott's people to vitiate
the election. He was quite sure that nothing could connect Glump
with him as an agent on behalf of Griffenbottom and Underwood. So
Mr. Trigger asserted with the greatest confidence; but what was in
the bottom of Mr. Trigger's mind on this subject no one pretended
to know. As for Glump himself he was a man who would certainly
take payment from anybody for any dirty work. It was the general
impression through the borough that Glump had on this occasion been
hired by Trigger, and Trigger certainly enjoyed the prestige which
was thus conferred upon him.

As to the treating,--there could be no doubt about that. There had
been treating. The idea of conducting an election at Percycross
without beer seemed to be absurd to every male and female
Percycrossian. Of course the publicans would open their taps and then
send in their bills for beer to the electioneering agents. There was
a prevailing feeling that any interference with so ancient a practice
was not only un-English, but unjust also;--that it was beyond the
power of Parliament to enforce any law so abominable and unnatural.
Trigger was of opinion that though there had been a great deal
of beer, no attempt would be made to prove that votes had been
influenced by treating. There had been beer on both sides, and
Trigger hoped sincerely that there might always be beer on both sides
as long as Percycross was a borough.

Sir Thomas found that his chance of success was now spoken of in a
tone very different from that which had been used when the matter
was discussed in his own chamber. He had been then told that it was
hardly possible that he should keep his seat;--and he had in fact
been asked to resign it. Though sick enough of Percycross, this
he would not do in the manner then proposed to him. Now he was
encouraged in the fight;--but the encouragement was of a nature which
gave him no hope, which robbed him even of the wish to have a hope.
It was all dirt from beginning to end. Whatever might be the verdict
of the judge,--from the judge the verdict was now to come,--he should
still believe that nothing short of absolute disfranchisement would
meet the merits of the case.

The accusation with regard to the personation of votes was
abandoned,--Serjeant Burnaby expressing the most extreme disgust that
any such charge should have been made without foundation,--although
he himself at the borough which he had last left had brought forward
the same charge on behalf of his then clients, and had abandoned it
in the same way. Then the whole of the remaining hours of the Tuesday
and half the Wednesday were passed in showing that Messrs. Spicer,
Spiveycomb, and Roodylands had forced their own men to vote blue. Mr.
Spicer had dismissed one man and Mr. Spiveycomb two men; but both
these gentlemen swore that the men dismissed were not worth their
salt, and had been sent adrift upon the world by no means on account
of their politics. True: they had all voted for Moggs; but then they
had done that simply to spite their late master. On the middle of
Wednesday, when the matter of intimidation had been completed,--the
result still lying in the bosom of Baron Crumbie,--Mr. Trigger
thought that things were looking up. That was the report which he
brought to Mr. Griffenbottom, who was smoking his midday cigar in
Sir Thomas's arm-chair, while Sir Thomas was endeavouring to master
the first book of Lord Verulam's later treatise "De dignitate
scientiarum," seated in a cane-bottomed chair in a very small
bed-room up-stairs.

By consent the question of treating came next. Heaven and earth were
being moved to find Glump. When the proposition was made that the
treating should come before the bribery Trigger stated in court that
he was himself doing his very best to find the man. There might yet
be a hope, though, alas, the hope was becoming slighter every hour.
His own idea was that Glump had been sent away to Holland by,--well,
he did not care to name the parties by whom he believed that Glump
had been expatriated. However, there might be a chance. The counsel
on the other side remarked that there might, indeed, be a chance.
Baron Crumbie expressed a hope that Mr. Glump might make his
appearance,--for the sake of the borough, which might otherwise fare
badly; and then the great beer question was discussed for two entire
days.

There was no doubt about the beer. Trigger, who was examined after
some half-score of publicans, said openly that thirsty Conservative
souls had been allowed to slake their drought at the joint expense
of the Conservative party in the borough,--as thirsty Liberal souls
had been encouraged to do on the other side. When reminded that any
malpractice in that direction on the part of a beaten candidate could
not affect the status of the elected members, he replied that all
the beer consumed in Percycross during the election had not, to the
best of his belief, affected a vote. The Percycrossians were not men
to vote this way or that because of beer! He would not believe it
even in regard to a Liberal Percycrossian. It might be so in other
boroughs, but of other boroughs he knew absolutely nothing. Who paid
for the beer? Mr. Trigger at once acknowledged that it was paid for
out of the general funds provided for the election. Who provided
those funds? There was not a small amount of fencing on this point,
during the course of which Mr. Joram snapped very sharply and very
frequently at the counsel on the other side,--hoping thereby somewhat
to change the issue. But at last there came out these two facts,
that there was a general fund, to which all Conservatives might
subscribe, and that the only known subscribers to this fund were
Mr. Griffenbottom, Sir Thomas Underwood, and old Mr. Pile, who had
given a £10 note,--apparently with the view of proving that there
was a fund. It was agreed on all hands that treating had been
substantiated; but it was remarked by some that Baron Crumbie had
not been hard upon treating in other boroughs. After all, the result
would depend upon what the Baron thought about Mr. Glump. It might be
that he would recommend further inquiry, under a special commission,
into the practices of the borough, because of the Glump iniquities,
and that he should, nevertheless, leave the seats to the sitting
members. That seemed to be Mr. Trigger's belief on the evening of the
Thursday, as he took his brandy and water in Sir Thomas's private
sitting-room.

There is nothing in the world so brisk as the ways and manners of
lawyers when in any great case they come to that portion of it which
they know to be the real bone of the limb and kernel of the nut. The
doctor is very brisk when after a dozen moderately dyspeptic patients
he comes on some unfortunate gentleman whose gastric apparatus
is gone altogether. The parson is very brisk when he reaches the
minatory clause in his sermon. The minister is very brisk when he
asks the House for a vote, telling his hoped-for followers that this
special point is absolutely essential to his government. Unless he
can carry this, he and all those hanging on to him must vacate their
places. The horse-dealer is very brisk when, after four or five
indifferent lots, he bids his man bring out from the stable the
last thorough-bred that he bought, and the very best that he ever
put his eye on. But the briskness of none of these is equal to the
briskness of the barrister who has just got into his hands for
cross-examination him whom we may call the centre witness of a great
case. He plumes himself like a bullfinch going to sing. He spreads
himself like a peacock on a lawn. He perks himself like a sparrow on
a paling. He crows amidst his attorneys and all the satellites of
the court like a cock among his hens. He puts his hands this way and
that, settling even the sunbeams as they enter, lest a moat should
disturb his intellect or dull the edge of his subtlety. There is a
modesty in his eye, a quiescence in his lips, a repose in his limbs,
under which lie half-concealed,--not at all concealed from those
who have often watched him at his work,--the glance, the tone, the
spring, which are to tear that unfortunate witness into pieces,
without infringing any one of those conventional rules which
have been laid down for the guidance of successful well-mannered
barristers.

Serjeant Burnaby, though astute, was not specially brisk by nature;
but on this Friday morning Mr. Joram was very brisk indeed. There
was a certain Mr. Cavity, who had acted as agent for Westmacott, and
who,--if anybody on the Westmacott side had been so guilty,--had been
guilty in the matter of Glump's absence. Perhaps we should not do
justice to Mr. Joram's acuteness were we to imagine him as believing
that Glump was absent under other influence than that used on behalf
of the conservative side; but there were subsidiary points on which
Mr. Cavity might be made to tell tales. Of course there had been
extensive bribery for years past in Percycross on the liberal as well
as on the conservative side, and Mr. Joram thought that he could make
Mr. Cavity tell a tale. And then, too, he could be very brisk in that
affair of Glump. He was pretty nearly sure that Mr. Glump could not
be connected by evidence with either of the sitting members or with
any of their agents. He would prove that Glump was neutral ground,
and that as such his services could not be traced to his friend, Mr.
Trigger. Mr. Joram on this occasion was very brisk indeed.

A score of men were brought up, ignorant, half-dumb, heavy-browed
men, all dressed in the amphibious garb of out-o'-door town
labourers,--of whom there exists a class of hybrids between the rural
labourer and the artizan,--each one of whom acknowledged that after
noon on the election day he received ten shillings, with instructions
to vote for Griffenbottom and Underwood. And they did vote for
Griffenbottom and Underwood. At all elections in Percycross they had,
as they now openly acknowledged, waited till about the same hour on
the day of election, and then somebody had bought their votes for
somebody. On this occasion the purchase had been made by Mr. Glump.
There was a small empty house up a little alley in the town, to which
there was a back door opening on a vacant space in the town known
as Grinder's Green. They entered this house by one door, leaving it
by the other, and as they passed through, Glump gave to each man
half a sovereign with instructions, entering their names in a small
book;--and then they went in a body and voted for Griffenbottom and
Underwood. Each of the twenty knew nearly all the other twenty, but
none of them knew any other men who had been paid by Glump. Of course
none of them had the slightest knowledge of Glump's present abode.
It was proved that at the last election Glump had acted for the
Liberals; but it was also proved that at the election before he had
been active in bribing for the Conservatives. Very many things were
proved,--if a thing be proved when supported by testimony on oath.
Trigger proved that twenty votes alone could have been of no
service, and would not certainly have been purchased in a manner so
detrimental. According to Trigger's views it was as clear as daylight
that Glump had not been paid by them. When asked whether he would
cause Mr. Glump to be repaid that sum of ten pounds, should Mr. Glump
send in any bill to that effect, he simply stated that Mr. Glump
would certainly send no such bill to him. He was then asked whether
it might not be possible that the money should be repaid by Messrs.
Griffenbottom and Underwood through his hands, reaching Glump again
by means of a further middleman. Mr. Trigger acknowledged that were
such a claim made upon him by any known agent of his party, he would
endeavour to pass the ten pounds through the accounts, as he thought
that there should be a certain feeling of honour in these things;
but he did not for a moment think that any one acting with him would
have dealings with Glump. On the Saturday morning, when the case was
still going on, to the great detriment of Baron Grumble's domestic
happiness, Glump had not yet been caught. It seemed that the man
had no wife, no relative, no friend. The woman at whose house he
lodged declared that he often went and came after this fashion. The
respect with which Glump's name was mentioned, as his persistency in
disobeying the law and his capability for intrigue were thus proved,
was so great, that it was a pity he could not have been there to
enjoy it. For the hour he was a great man in Percycross,--and the
greater because Baron Crumbie did not cease to threaten him with
terrible penalties.

Much other bribery was alleged, but none other was distinctly brought
home to the agents of the sitting members. As to bringing bribery
home to Mr. Griffenbottom himself;--that appeared to be out of the
question. Nobody seemed even to wish to do that. The judge, as it
appeared, did not contemplate any result so grave and terrible as
that. There was a band of freemen of whom it was proved that they had
all been treated with most excessive liberality by the corporation of
the town; and it was proved, also, that a majority of the corporation
were supporters of Mr. Griffenbottom. A large number of votes
had been so secured. Such, at least, was the charge made by the
petitioners. But this allegation Jacky Joram laughed to scorn. The
corporation, of course, used the charities and privileges of the town
as they thought right; and the men voted,--as they thought right. The
only cases of bribery absolutely proved were those manipulated by
Glump, and nothing had been adduced clearly connecting Glump and
the Griffenbottomites. Mr. Trigger was in ecstasies; but Mr. Joram
somewhat repressed him by referring to these oracular words which had
fallen from the Baron in respect to the corporation. "A corporation
may be guilty as well as an individual," the Baron had said. Jacky
Joram had been very eager in assenting to the Baron, but in asserting
at the same time that the bribery must be proved. "It won't be
assumed, my lord, that a corporation has bribed because it has
political sympathies." "It should have none," said the Baron. "Human
nature is human nature, my lord,--even in corporations," said Jacky
Joram. This took place just before luncheon,--which was made a solemn
meal on all sides, as the judge had declared his intention of sitting
till midnight, if necessary.

Immediately after the solemn meal Mr. Griffenbottom was examined.
It had been the declared purpose of the other side to turn Mr.
Griffenbottom inside out. Mr. Griffenbottom and his conduct had on
various former occasions been the subject of parliamentary petitions
under the old form; but on such occasions the chief delinquent
himself was never examined. Now Mr. Griffenbottom would be made to
tell all that he knew, not only of his present, but of his past,
iniquities. And yet Mr. Griffenbottom told very little; and it
certainly did seem to the bystanders, that even the opposing counsel,
even the judge on the bench, abstained from their prey because
he was a member of Parliament. It was notorious to all the world
that Griffenbottom had debased the borough; had so used its venal
tendencies as to make that systematic which had before been too
frequent indeed, but yet not systematized; that he had trained the
rising generation of Percycross politicians to believe in political
corruption;--and yet he escaped that utter turning inside out of
which men had spoken.

The borough had cost him a great deal of money certainly; but as far
as he knew the money had been spent legally. It had at least always
been his intention before an election was commenced that nothing
illegal should be done. He had no doubt always afterwards paid sums
of money the use of which he did not quite understand, and as to some
of which he could not but fear that it had been doubtfully applied.
The final accounts as to the last election had not reached him, but
he did not expect to be charged with improper expenses. There no
doubt would be something for beer, but that was unavoidable. As to
Mr. Glump he knew literally nothing of the man,--nor had he wanted
any such man's assistance. Twenty votes indeed! Let them look at his
place upon the poll. There had been a time in the day when twenty
votes this way or that might be necessary to Sir Thomas. He had been
told that it was so. On the day of the election his own position
on the poll had been so certain to him, that he should not have
cared,--that is, for himself,--had he heard that Glump was buying
votes against him. He considered it to be quite out of the question
that Glump should have bought votes for him,--with any purpose of
serving him. And so Mr. Griffenbottom escaped from the adverse
counsel and from the judge.

There was very little in the examination of Sir Thomas Underwood to
interest any one. No one really suspected him of corrupt practices.
In all such cases the singular part of the matter is that everybody,
those who are concerned and those who are not concerned, really know
the whole truth which is to be investigated; and yet, that which
everybody knows cannot be substantiated. There were not five men in
court who were not certain that Griffenbottom was corrupt, and that
Sir Thomas was not; that the borough was rotten as a six-months-old
egg; that Glump had acted under one of Trigger's aides-de-camp; that
intimidation was the law of the borough; and that beer was used so
that men drunk might not fear that which sober they had not the
courage to encounter. All this was known to everybody; and yet, up
to the last, it was thought by many in Percycross that corruption,
acknowledged, transparent, egregious corruption, would prevail even
in the presence of a judge. Mr. Trigger believed it to the last.

But it was not so thought by the Jacky Jorams or by the Serjeant
Burnabys. They made their final speeches,--the leading lawyer on each
side, but they knew well what was coming. At half-past seven, for to
so late an hour had the work been continued, the judge retired to
get a cup of tea, and returned at eight to give his award. It was as
follows:--

As to the personation of votes, there should have been no allegation
made. In regard to the charge of intimidation it appeared that the
system prevailed to such an extent as to make it clear to him that
Percycross was unfit to return representatives to Parliament. In the
matter of treating he was not quite prepared to say that had no other
charge been made he should have declared this election void, but of
that also there had been sufficient to make him feel it to be his
duty to recommend to the Speaker of the House of Commons that further
inquiry should be made as to the practices of the borough. And as
to direct bribery, though he was not prepared to say that he could
connect the agents of the members with what had been done,--and
certainly he could not connect either of the two members
themselves,--still, quite enough had been proved to make it
imperative upon him to declare the election void. This he should
do in his report to the Speaker, and should also advise that a
commission be held with the view of ascertaining whether the
privilege of returning members of Parliament should remain with the
borough. With Griffenbottom he dealt as tenderly as he did with Sir
Thomas, sending them both forth to the world, unseated indeed, but as
innocent, injured men.

There was a night train up to London at 10 P.M., by which on that
evening Sir Thomas Underwood travelled, shaking off from his feet as
he entered the carriage the dust of that most iniquitous borough.


CHAPTER XLV.

"NEVER GIVE A THING UP."


Mr. Neefit's conduct during this period of disappointment was not
exactly what it should to have been, either in the bosom of his
family or among his dependents in Conduit Street. Herr Bawwah, over
a pot of beer in the public-house opposite, suggested to Mr. Waddle
that "the governor might be ----," in a manner that affected Mr.
Waddle greatly. It was an eloquent and energetic expression of
opinion,--almost an expression of a settled purpose as coming from
the German as it did come; and Waddle was bound to admit that cause
had been given. "Fritz," said Waddle pathetically, "don't think about
it. You can't better the wages." Herr Bawwah looked up from his pot
of beer and muttered a German oath. He had been told that he was
beastly, skulking, pig-headed, obstinate, drunken, with some other
perhaps stronger epithets which may be omitted,--and he had been told
that he was a German. In that had lain the venom. There was the word
that rankled. He had another pot of beer, and though it was then only
twelve o'clock on a Monday morning Herr Bawwah swore that he was
going to make a day of it, and that old Neefit might cut out the
stuff for himself if he pleased. As they were now at the end of
March, which is not a busy time of the year in Mr. Neefit's trade,
the great artist's defalcation was of less immediate importance;
but, as Waddle knew, the German was given both to beer and obstinacy
when aroused to wrath; and what would become of the firm should the
obstinacy continue?

"Where's that pig-headed German brute?" asked Mr. Neefit, when Mr.
Waddle returned to the establishment. Mr. Waddle made no reply; and
when Neefit repeated the question with a free use of the epithets
previously omitted by us, Waddle still was dumb, leaning over his
ledger as though in that there were matters so great as to absorb his
powers of hearing. "The two of you may go and be ---- together!" said
Mr. Neefit. If any order requiring immediate obedience were contained
in this, Mr. Waddle disobeyed that order. He still bent himself over
the ledger, and was dumb. Waddle had been trusted with his master's
private view in the matter of the Newton marriage, and felt that on
this account he owed a debt of forbearance to the unhappy father.

The breeches-maker was in truth very unhappy. He had accused his
German assistant of obstinacy, but the German could hardly have been
more obstinate than his master. Mr. Neefit had set his heart upon
making his daughter Mrs. Newton, and had persisted in declaring that
the marriage should be made to take place. The young man had once
given him a promise, and should be compelled to keep the promise
so given. And in these days Mr. Neefit seemed to have lost that
discretion for which his friends had once given him credit. On the
occasion of his visit to the Moonbeam early in the hunting season he
had spoken out very freely among the sportsmen there assembled; and
from that time all reticence respecting his daughter seemed to have
been abandoned. He had paid the debts of this young man, who was now
lord of wide domains, when the young man hadn't "a red copper in his
pocket,"--so did Mr. Neefit explain the matter to his friends,--and
he didn't intend that the young man should be off his bargain.
"No;--he wasn't going to put up with that;--not if he knew it." All
this he declared freely to his general acquaintance. He was very
eloquent on the subject in a personal interview which he had with Mr.
Moggs senior, in consequence of a visit made to Hendon by Mr. Moggs
junior, during which he feared that Polly had shown some tendency
towards yielding to the young politician. Mr. Moggs senior might take
this for granted;--that if Moggs junior made himself master of Polly,
it would be of Polly pure and simple, of Polly without a shilling of
dowry. "He'll have to take her in her smock." That was the phrase in
which Mr. Neefit was pleased to express his resolution. To all of
which Mr. Moggs senior answered never a word. It was on returning
from Mr. Moggs's establishment in Bond Street to his own in Conduit
Street that Mr. Neefit made himself so very unpleasant to the
unfortunate German. When Ontario put on his best clothes, and took
himself out to Hendon on the previous Sunday, he did not probably
calculate that, as one consequence of that visit, the Herr Bawwah
would pass a whole week of intoxication in the little back parlour of
the public-house near St. George's Church.

It may be imagined how very unpleasant all this must have been to
Miss Neefit herself. Poor Polly indeed suffered many things; but she
bore them with an admirable and a persistent courage. Indeed, she
possessed a courage which greatly mitigated her sufferings. Let her
father be as indiscreet as he might, he could not greatly lower her,
as long as she herself was prudent. It was thus that Polly argued
with herself. She knew her own value, and was not afraid that she
should ever lack a lover when she wanted to find a husband. Of course
it was not a nice thing to be thrown at a man's head, as her father
was constantly throwing her at the head of young Newton; but such a
man as she would give herself to at last would understand all that.
Ontario Moggs, could she ever bring herself to accept Ontario, would
not be less devoted to her because of her father's ill-arranged
ambition. Polly could be obstinate too, but with her obstinacy there
was combined a fund of feminine strength which, as we think, quite
justified the devotion of Ontario Moggs.

Amidst all these troubles Mrs. Neefit also had a bad time of it; so
bad a time that she was extremely anxious that Ontario should at once
carry off the prize;--Ontario, or the gasfitter, or almost anybody.
Neefit was taking to drink in the midst of all this confusion, and
was making himself uncommonly unpleasant in the bosom of his family.
On the Sunday,--the Sunday before the Monday on which the Herr
decided that his wisest course of action would be to abstain from
work and make a beast of himself, in order that he might spite his
master,--Mr. Neefit had dined at one o'clock, and had insisted on his
gin-and-water and pipe immediately after his dinner. Now Mr. Neefit,
when he took too much, did not fall into the extreme sins which
disgraced his foreman. He simply became very cross till he fell
asleep, very heavy while sleeping, and more cross than ever when
again awake. While he was asleep on this Sunday afternoon Ontario
Moggs came down to Hendon dressed in his Sunday best. Mrs. Neefit
whispered a word to him before he was left alone with Polly. "You be
round with her, and run your chance about the money." "Mrs. Neefit,"
said Ontario, laying his hand upon his heart, "all the bullion in the
Bank of England don't make a feather's weight in the balance." "You
never was mercenary, Mr. Ontario," said the lady. "My sweetheart is
to me more than a coined hemisphere," said Ontario. The expression
may have been absurd, but the feeling was there.

Polly was not at all coy of her presence,--was not so, though she
had been specially ordered by her father not to have anything to
say to that long-legged, ugly fool. "Handsome is as handsome does,"
Polly had answered. Whereupon Mr. Neefit had shown his teeth and
growled;--but Polly, though she loved her father, and after a fashion
respected him, was not afraid of him; and now, when her mother left
her alone with Ontario, she was free enough of her conversation. "Oh,
Polly," he said, after a while, "you know why I'm here."

"Yes; I know," said Polly.

"I don't think you do care for that young gentleman."

"I'm not going to break my heart about him, Mr. Moggs."

"I'd try to be the death of him, if you did."

"That would be a right down tragedy, because then you'd be hung,--and
so there'd be an end of us all. I don't think I'd do that, Mr.
Moggs."

"Polly, I sometimes feel as though I didn't know what to do."

"Tell me the whole story of how you went on down at Percycross. I was
so anxious you should get in."

"Were you now?"

"Right down sick at heart about it;--that I was. Don't you think we
should all be proud to know a member of Parliament?"

"Oh; if that's all--"

"I shouldn't think anything of Mr. Newton for being in Parliament.
Whether he was in Parliament or out would be all the same. Of course
he's a friend, and we like him very well; but his being in Parliament
would be nothing. But if you were there--!"

"I don't know what's the difference," said Moggs despondently.

"Because you're one of us."

"Yes; I am," said Moggs, rising to his legs and preparing himself
for an oration on the rights of labour. "I thank my God that I am no
aristocrat." Then there came upon him a feeling that this was not a
time convenient for political fervour. "But, I'll tell you something,
Polly," he said, interrupting himself.

"Well;--tell me something, Mr. Moggs."

"I'd sooner have a kiss from you than be Prime Minister."

"Kisses mean so much, Mr. Moggs," said Polly.

"I mean them to mean much," said Ontario Moggs. Whereupon Polly,
declining further converse on that delicate subject, and certainly
not intending to grant the request made on the occasion, changed the
subject.

"But you will get in still;--won't you, Mr. Moggs? They tell me that
those other gentlemen ain't to be members any longer, because what
they did was unfair. Oughtn't that to make you member?"

"I think it ought, if the law was right;--but it doesn't."

"Doesn't it now? But you'll try again;--won't you? Never give a thing
up, Mr. Moggs, if you want it really." As the words left her lips she
understood their meaning,--the meaning in which he must necessarily
take them,--and she blushed up to her forehead. Then she laughed as
she strove to recall the encouragement she had given him. "You know
what I mean, Mr. Moggs. I don't mean any silly nonsense about being
in love."

"If that is silly, I am the silliest man in London."

"I think you are sometimes;--so I tell you fairly."

In the meantime Mr. Neefit had woke from his slumbers. He was in his
old arm-chair in the little back room, where they had dined, while
Polly with her lover was in the front parlour. Mrs. Neefit was seated
opposite to Mr. Neefit, with an open Bible in her lap, which had been
as potent for sleep with her as had been the gin-and-water with her
husband. Neefit suddenly jumped up and growled. "Where's Polly?" he
demanded.

"She's in the parlour, I suppose," said Mrs. Neefit doubtingly.

"And who is with her?"

"Nobody as hadn't ought to be," said Mrs. Neefit.

"Who's there, I say?" But without waiting for an answer, he stalked
into the front room. "It's no use in life your coming here," he said,
addressing himself at once to Ontario; "not the least. She ain't
for you. She's for somebody else. Why can't one word be as good as
a thousand?" Moggs stood silent, looking sheepish and confounded.
It was not that he was afraid of the father; but that he feared to
offend the daughter should he address the father roughly. "If she
goes against me she'll have to walk out of the house with just what
she's got on her back."

"I should be quite contented," said Ontario.

"But I shouldn't;--so you may just cut it. Anybody who wants her
without my leave must take her in her smock."

"Oh, father!" screamed Polly.

"That's what I mean,--so let's have done with it. What business have
you coming to another man's house when you're not welcome? When I
want you I'll send for you; and till I do you have my leave to stay
away."

"Good-bye, Polly," said Ontario, offering the girl his hand.

"Good-bye, Mr. Moggs," said Polly; "and mind you get into Parliament.
You stick to it, and you'll do it."

When she repeated this salutary advice, it must have been that she
intended to apply to the double event. Moggs at any rate took it in
that light. "I shall," said he, as he opened the door and walked
triumphantly out of the house.

"Father," said Polly, as soon as they were alone, "you've behaved
very bad to that young man."

"You be blowed," said Mr. Neefit.

"You have, then. You'll go on till you get me that talked about that
I shall be ashamed to show myself. What's the good of me trying to
behave, if you keep going on like that?"

"Why didn't you take that chap when he came after you down to
Margate?"

"Because I didn't choose. I don't care enough for him; and it's all
no use of you going on. I wouldn't have him if he came twenty times.
I've made up my mind, so I tell you."

"You're a very grand young woman."

"I'm grand enough to have a will of my own about that. I'm not going
to be made to marry any man, I know."

"And you mean to take that long-legged shoemaker's apprentice."

"He's not a shoemaker's apprentice any more than I'm a
breeches-maker's apprentice." Polly was now quite in earnest, and in
no mood for picking her words. "He is a bootmaker by his trade; and
I've never said anything about taking him."

"You've given him a promise."

"No; I've not."

"And you'd better not, unless you want to walk out of this house with
nothing but the rags on your back. Ain't I doing it all for you?
Ain't I been sweating my life out these thirty years to make you a
lady?" This was hard upon Polly, as she was not yet one-and-twenty.

"I don't want to be a lady; no more than I am just by myself, like.
If I can't be a lady without being made one, I won't be a lady at
all."

"You be blowed."

"There are different kinds of ladies, father. I want to be such a
one as neither you nor mother shall ever have cause to say I didn't
behave myself."

"You'd talk the figures off a milestone," said Mr. Neefit, as he
returned to his arm-chair, to his gin-and-water, to his growlings,
and before long to his slumbers. Throughout the whole evening he was
very unpleasant in the bosom of his family,--which consisted on this
occasion of his wife only, as Polly took the opportunity of going out
to drink tea with a young lady friend. Neefit, when he heard this,
suggested that Ontario was drinking tea at the same house, and would
have pursued his daughter but for mingled protestations and menaces
which his wife used for preventing such a violation of parental
authority. "Moggs don't know from Adam where she is; and you never
knowed her do anything of that kind. And you'll go about with your
mad schemes and jealousies till you about ruin the poor girl; that's
what you will. I won't have it. If you go, I'll go too, and I'll
shame you. No; you shan't have your hat. Of course she'll be off some
day, if you make the place that wretched that she can't live in it. I
know I would,--with the fust man as'd ask me." By these objurgations,
by a pertinacious refusal as to his hat, and a little yielding in the
matter of gin-and-water, Mr. Neefit was at length persuaded to remain
at home.

On the following morning he said nothing before he left home, but as
soon as he had opened his letters and spoken a few sharp things to
the two men in Conduit Street, he went off to Mr. Moggs senior. Of
the interview between Mr. Neefit and Mr. Moggs senior sufficient has
already been told. Then it was, after his return to his own shop,
that he so behaved as to drive the German artist into downright
mutiny and unlimited beer. Through the whole afternoon he snarled at
Waddle; but Waddle sat silent, bending over the ledger. One question
Waddle did answer.

"Where's that pig-headed German gone?" asked Mr. Neefit for the tenth
time.

"I believe he's cutting his throat about this time," said Mr. Waddle.

"He may wait till I come and sew it up," said the breeches-maker.

All this time Mr. Neefit was very unhappy. He knew, as well as did
Mr. Waddle or Polly, that he was misbehaving himself. He was by no
means deficient in ideas of duty to his wife, to his daughter, and to
his dependents. Polly was the apple of his eye; his one jewel;--in
his estimation the best girl that ever lived. He admired her in all
her moods, even though she would sometimes oppose his wishes with
invincible obstinacy. He knew in his heart that were she to marry
Ontario Moggs he would forgive her on the day of her marriage. He
could not keep himself from forgiving her though she were to marry a
chimney-sweep. But, as he thought, a great wrong was being done him.
He could not bring himself to believe that Polly would not marry
the young Squire, if the young Squire would only be true to his
undertaking; and then he could not endure that the young Squire
should escape from him, after having been, as it were, saved from
ruin by his money, without paying for the accommodation in some
shape. He had some inkling of an idea that in punishing Ralph by
making public the whole transaction, he would be injuring his
daughter as much as he injured Ralph. But the inkling did not
sufficiently establish itself in his mind to cause him to desist.
Ralph Newton ought to be made to repeat his offer before all the
world; even though he should only repeat it to be again refused. The
whole of that evening he sat brooding over it, so that he might come
to some great resolution.


CHAPTER XLVI.

MR. NEEFIT AGAIN.


The last few days in March and the first week in April were devoted
by Ralph the heir to a final visit to the Moonbeam. He had resolved
to finish the hunting season at his old quarters, and then to remove
his stud to Newton. The distinction with which he was welcomed
by everybody at the Moonbeam must have been very gratifying to
him. Though he had made no response whatever to Lieutenant Cox's
proposition as to a visit to Newton, that gentleman received him as a
hero. Captain Fooks also had escaped from his regiment with the sole
object of spending these last days with his dear old friend. Fred
Pepper too was very polite, though it was not customary with Mr.
Pepper to display friendship so enthusiastic as that which warmed the
bosoms of the two military gentlemen. As to Mr. Horsball, one might
have thought from his manner that he hoped to engage his customer to
remain at the Moonbeam for the rest of his life. But it was not so.
It was in Mr. Horsball's nature to be civil to a rich hunting country
gentleman; and it was the fact also that Ralph had ever been popular
with the world of the Moonbeam,--even at times when the spasmodic,
and at length dilatory, mode of his payment must have become matter
for thought to the master of the establishment. There was no doubt
about the payments now, and Ralph's popularity was increased
fourfold. Mrs. Horsball got out from some secluded nook a special
bottle of orange-brandy in his favour,--which Lieutenant Cox would
have consumed on the day of its opening, had not Mrs. Horsball with
considerable acrimony declined to supply his orders. The sister with
ringlets smiled and smirked whenever the young Squire went near the
bar. The sister in ringlets was given to flirtations of this kind,
would listen with sweetest complacency to compliments on her beauty,
and would return them with interest. But she never encouraged this
sort of intimacy with gentlemen who did not pay their bills, or with
those whose dealings with the house were not of a profitable nature.
The man who expected that Miss Horsball would smile upon him because
he ordered a glass of sherry and bitters or half-a-pint of pale ale
was very much mistaken; but the softness of her smiles for those who
consumed the Moonbeam champagne was unbounded. Love and commerce
with her ran together, and regulated each other in a manner that was
exceedingly advantageous to her brother. If I were about to open such
a house as the Moonbeam the first thing I should look for would be
a discreet, pleasant-visaged lady to assist me in the bar department,
not much under forty, with ringlets, having no particular leaning
towards matrimony, who knew how to whisper little speeches while she
made a bottle of cherry-brandy serve five-and-twenty turns at the
least. She should be honest, patient, graceful, capable of great
labour, grasping,--with that wonderful capability of being greedy for
the benefit of another which belongs to women,--willing to accept
plentiful meals and a power of saving £20 a year as sufficient
remuneration for all hardships, with no more susceptibility than a
milestone, and as indifferent to delicacy in language as a bargee.
There are such women, and very valuable women they are in that trade.
Such a one was Miss Horsball, and in these days the sweetest of her
smiles were bestowed upon the young Squire.

Ralph Newton certainly liked it, though he assumed an air of laughing
at it all. "One would think that old Hossy thought that I am going to
go on with this kind of thing," he said one morning to Mr. Pepper as
the two of them were standing about near the stable doors with pipes
in their mouths. Old Hossy was the affectionate nickname by which Mr.
Horsball was known among the hunting men of the B. B. Mr. Pepper and
Ralph had already breakfasted, and were dressed for hunting except
that they had not yet put on their scarlet coats. The meet was within
three miles of their head-quarters; the captain and the lieutenant
were taking advantage of the occasion by prolonged slumbers; and
Ralph had passed the morning in discussing hunting matters with Mr.
Pepper.

"He don't think that," said Mr. Pepper, taking a very convenient
little implement out of his pocket, contrived for purposes of
pipe-smoking accommodation. He stopped down his tobacco, and drew the
smoke, and seemed by his manner to be giving his undivided attention
to his pipe. But that was Mr. Pepper's manner. He was short in
speech, but always spoke with a meaning.

"Of course he doesn't really," said Ralph. "I don't suppose I shall
ever see the old house again after next week. You see when a man has
a place of one's own, if there be hunting there, one is bound to take
it; if there isn't, one can go elsewhere and pick and choose."

"Just so," said Mr. Pepper.

"I like this kind of thing amazingly, you know."

"It has its advantages."

"Oh dear, yes. There is no trouble, you know. Everything done for
you. No servants to look after,--except just the fellow who brings
you your breeches and rides your second horse." Mr. Pepper never had
a second horse, or a man of his own to bring him his breeches, but
the allusion did not on that account vex him. "And then you can do
what you like a great deal more than you can in a house of your own."

"I should say so," remarked Mr. Pepper.

"I tell you what it is, Fred," continued Ralph, becoming very
confidential. "I don't mind telling you, because you are a man who
understands things. There isn't such a great pull after all in having
a property of your own."

"I shouldn't mind trying it,--just for a year or so," said Mr.
Pepper.

"I suppose not," said Ralph, chuckling in his triumph. "And yet there
isn't so much in it. What does it amount to when it's all told? You
keep horses for other fellows to ride, you buy wine for other fellows
to drink, you build a house for other fellows to live in. You've a
deal of business to do, and if you don't mind it you go very soon to
the dogs. You have to work like a slave, and everybody gets a pull at
you. The chances are you never have any ready money, and become as
stingy as an old file. You have to get married because of the family,
and the place, and all that kind of thing. Then you have to give
dinners to every old fogy, male and female, within twenty miles
of you, and before you know where you are you become an old fogy
yourself. That's about what it is."

"You ought to know," said Mr. Pepper.

"I've been expecting it all my life,--of course. It was what I was
born to, and everybody has been telling me what a lucky fellow I am
since I can remember. Now I've got it, and I don't find it comes to
so very much. I shall always look back upon the dear old Moonbeam,
and the B. B., and Hossy's wonderful port wine with regret. It hasn't
been very swell, you know, but it's been uncommonly cosy. Don't you
think so?"

"You see I wasn't born to anything better," said Mr. Pepper.

Just at this moment Cox and Fooks came out of the house. They had
not as yet breakfasted, but had thought that a mouthful of air in
the stable-yard might enable them to get through their toast and
red herrings with an amount of appetite which had not as yet been
vouchsafed to them. Second and third editions of that wonderful port
had been produced on the previous evening, and the two warriors had
played their parts with it manfully. Fooks was bearing up bravely as
he made his way across the yard; but Cox looked as though his friends
ought to see to his making that journey to Australia very soon if
they intended him to make it at all. "I'm blessed if you fellows
haven't been and breakfasted," said Captain Fooks.

"That's about it," said the Squire.

"You must be uncommon fond of getting up early."

"Do you know who gets the worm?" asked Mr. Pepper.

"Oh, bother that," said Cox.

"There's nothing I hate so much as being told about that nasty worm,"
said Captain Fooks. "I don't want a worm."

"But the early birds do," said Mr. Pepper.

Captain Fooks was rather given to be cross of mornings. "I think, you
know, that when fellows say over night they'll breakfast together, it
isn't just the sort of thing for one or two to have all the things
brought up at any unconscionable hour they please. Eh, Cox?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said Cox. "I shall just have another go of
soda and brandy with a devilled biscuit. That's all I want."

"Fooks had better go to bed again, and see if he can't get out the
other side," said Ralph.

"Chaff doesn't mean anything," said Captain Fooks.

"That's as you take it," said Mr. Pepper.

"I shall take it just as I please," said Captain Fooks.

Just at this moment Mr. Horsball came up to them, touching his hat
cheerily in sign of the commencement of the day. "You'll ride Mr.
Pepper's little 'orse, I suppose, sir?" he said, addressing himself
to the young Squire.

"Certainly,--I told Larking I would."

"Exactly, Mr. Newton. And Banker might as well go out as second."

"I said Brewer. Banker was out on Friday."

"That won't be no odds, Mr. Newton. The fact is. Brewer's legs is a
little puffed."

"All right," said the Squire.

"Well, old Hossy," said Lieutenant Cox, summing up all his energy in
an attempt at matutinal joviality as he slapped the landlord on the
back, "how are things going with you?"

Mr. Horsball knew his customers, and did not like being slapped
on the back with more than ordinary vigour by such a customer as
Lieutenant Cox. "Pretty well, I thank you, Mr. Cox," said he. "I
didn't take too much last night, and I eat my breakfast 'earty this
morning."

"There is one for you, young man," said Captain Fooks. Whereupon
the Squire laughed heartily. Mr. Horsball went on nodding his
head, intending to signify his opinion that he had done his work
thoroughly; Mr. Pepper, standing on one foot with the other raised
on a horse-block, looked on without moving a muscle of his face. The
lieutenant was disgusted, but was too weak in his inner man to be
capable of instant raillery;--when, on a sudden, the whole aspect of
things was changed by the appearance of Mr. Neefit in the yard.

"D----tion!" exclaimed our friend Ralph. The apparition had been so
sudden that the Squire was unable to restrain himself. Mr. Neefit, as
the reader will perhaps remember, had been at the Moonbeam before. He
had written letters which had been answered, and then letters,--many
letters,--to which no reply had been given. In respect of the Neefit
arrangements Ralph Newton felt himself to be peculiarly ill-used by
persecutions such as these, because he had honestly done his best
to make Polly his wife. No doubt he acknowledged that fortune had
favoured him almost miraculously, in first saving him from so
injurious a marriage by the action of the young lady, and then at
once bestowing upon him his estate. But the escape was the doing of
fortune and Polly Neefit combined, and had not come of any intrigue
on his own part. He was in a position,--so he thought,--absolutely
to repudiate Neefit, and to throw himself upon facts for his
protection;--but then it was undoubtedly the case that for a year
or two Mr. Neefit could make his life a burden to him. He would
have bought off Neefit at a considerable price, had Neefit been
purchaseable. But Neefit was not in this matter greedy for himself.
He wanted to make his daughter a lady, and he thought that this
was the readiest way to accomplish that object. The Squire, in his
unmeasurable disgust, uttered the curse aloud; but then, remembering
himself, walked up to the breeches-maker with his extended hand. He
had borrowed the man's money. "What's in the wind now, Mr. Neefit?"
he said.

"What's in the wind, Captain? Oh, you know. When are you coming to
see us at the cottage?"

"I don't think my coming would do any good. I'm not in favour with
the ladies there." Ralph was aware that all the men standing round
him had heard the story, and that nothing was to be gained by an
immediate attempt at concealment. It behoved him, above all things,
to be upon his metal, to put a good face upon it, and to be at any
rate equal to the breeches-maker in presence of mind and that kind of
courage which he himself would have called "cheek."

"My money was in favour with you, Captain, when you promised as how
you would be on the square with me in regard to our Polly."

"Mr. Neefit," said Ralph, speaking in a low voice, but still clearly,
so that all around him could hear him, "your daughter and I can never
be more to each other than we are at present. She has decided that.
But I value her character and good name too highly to allow even you
to injure them by such a discussion in a stableyard." And, having
said this, he walked away into the house.

"My Polly's character!" said the infuriated breeches-maker, turning
round to the audience, and neglecting to follow his victim in his
determination to vindicate his daughter. "If my girl's character
don't stand higher nor his or any one's belonging to him I'll eat
it!"

"Mr. Newton meant to speak in favour of the young lady, not against
her," said Mr. Pepper.

"Then why don't he come out on the square? Now, gents, I'll tell you
just the whole of it. He came down to my little box, where I, and my
missus, and my girl lives quiet and decent, to borrow money;--and he
borrowed it. He won't say as that wasn't so."

"And he's paid you the money back again," said Mr. Pepper.

"He have;--but just you listen. I know you, Mr. Pepper, and all about
you; and do you listen. He have paid it back. But when he come there
borrowing money, he saw my girl; and, says he,--'I've got to sell
that 'eritance of mine for just what it 'll fetch.' 'That's bad,
Captain,' says I. 'It is bad,' says he. Then says he again, 'Neefit,
that girl of yours there is the sweetest girl as ever I put my eyes
on.' And so she is,--as sweet as a rose, and as honest as the sun,
and as good as gold. I says it as oughtn't; but she is. 'It's a pity,
Neefit,' says he,' about the 'eritance; ain't it?' 'Captain,' says
I,--I used to call him Captain 'cause he come down quite familiar
like to eat his bit of salmon and drink his glass of wine. Laws,--he
was glad enough to come then, mighty grand as he is now."

"I don't think he's grand at all," said Mr. Horsball.

"Well;--do you just listen, gents. 'Captain,' says I, 'that 'eritance
of yourn mustn't be sold no how. I says so. What's the figure as is
wanted?' Well; then he went on to say as how Polly was the sweetest
girl he ever see;--and so we came to an understanding. He was to have
what money he wanted at once, and then £20,000 down when he married
Polly. He did have a thousand. And, now,--see what his little game
is."

"But the young lady wouldn't have anything to say to him," suggested
Captain Fooks, who, even for the sake of his breakfast, could not
omit to hear the last of so interesting a conversation.

"Laws, Captain Fooks, to hear the likes of that from you, who is an
officer and a gentleman by Act of Parliament! When you have anything
sweet to say to a young woman, does she always jump down your throat
the first go off?"

"If she don't come at the second time of asking I always go
elsewhere," said Captain Fooks.

"Then it's my opinion you have a deal of travelling to do," said Mr.
Neefit, "and don't get much at the end of it. It's because he's come
in for his 'eritance, which he never would have had only for me, that
he's demeaning himself this fashion. It ain't acting the gentleman;
it ain't the thing; it's off the square. Only for me and my money
there wouldn't be an acre his this blessed minute;--d----d if there
would! I saved it for him, by my ready money,--just that I might see
my Polly put into a station as she'd make more genteel than she found
it. That's what she would;--she has that manners, not to talk of her
being as pretty a girl as there is from here to,--to anywheres. He
made me a promise, and he shall keep it. I'll worry the heart out
of him else. Pay me back my money! Who cares for the money? I can
tell guineas with him now, I'll be bound. I'll put it all in the
papers,--I will. There ain't a soul shan't know it. I'll put the
story of it into the pockets of every pair of breeches as leaves my
shop. I'll send it to every M. F. H. in the kingdom."

"You'll about destroy your trade, old fellow," said Mr. Pepper.

"I don't care for the trade, Mr. Pepper. Why have I worked like a
'orse? It's only for my girl."

"I suppose she's not breaking her heart for him?" said Captain Fooks.

"What she's a doing with her heart ain't no business of yours,
Captain Fooks. I'm her father, and I know what I'm about. I'll make
that young man's life a burden to him, if 'e ain't on the square
with my girl. You see if I don't. Mr. 'Orsball, I want a 'orse to go
a 'unting on to-day. You lets 'em. Just tell your man to get me a
'orse. I'll pay for him."

"I didn't know you ever did anything in that way," said Mr. Horsball.

"I may begin if I please, I suppose. If I can't go no other way, I'll
go on a donkey, and I'll tell every one that's out. Oh, 'e don't know
me yet,--don't that young gent."

Mr. Neefit did not succeed in getting any animal out of Mr.
Horsball's stables, nor did he make further attempt to carry his last
threat into execution on that morning. Mr. Horsball now led the way
into the house, while Mr. Pepper mounted his nag. Captain Fooks and
Lieutenant Cox went in to their breakfast, and the unfortunate father
followed them. It was now nearly eleven o'clock, and it was found
that Ralph's horses had been taken round to the other door, and that
he had already started. He said very little to any one during the
day, though he was somewhat comforted by information conveyed to him
by Mr. Horsball in the course of the afternoon that Mr. Neefit had
returned to London. "You send your lawyer to him, Squire," said Mr.
Horsball. "Lawyers cost a deal of money, but they do make things
straight." This suggestion had also been made to him by his brother
Gregory.

On the following day Ralph went up to London, and explained all the
circumstances of the case to Mr. Carey. Mr. Carey undertook to do his
best to straighten this very crooked episode in his client's life.


CHAPTER XLVII.

THE WAY WHICH SHOWS THAT THEY MEAN IT.


If this kind of thing were to go on, life wouldn't be worth having.
That was the feeling of Ralph, the squire of Newton, as he returned
on that Saturday from London to the Moonbeam; and so far Mr. Neefit
had been successful in carrying out his threat. Neefit had sworn
that he would make the young man's life a burden to him, and the
burden was already becoming unbearable. Mr. Carey had promised to do
something. He would, at any rate, see the infatuated breeches-maker
of Conduit Street. In the meantime he had suggested one remedy of
which Ralph had thought before,--"If you were married to some one
else he'd give it up," Mr. Carey had suggested. That no doubt was
true.

Ralph completed his sojourn at the Moonbeam, leaving that place at
the end of the first week in April, took a run down to his own place,
and then settled himself up to London for the season. His brother
Gregory had at this time returned to the parsonage at Newton; but
there was an understanding that he was to come up to London and be
his brother's guest for the first fortnight in May. Ralph the heir
had taken larger rooms, and had a spare chamber. When Ralph had given
this invitation, he had expressed his determination of devoting his
spring in town to an assiduous courtship of Mary Bonner. At the
moment in which he made that assertion down at Newton, the nuisance
of the Neefit affair was less intolerable to him than it had since
become. He had spoken cheerily of his future prospects, declaring
himself to be violently in love with Mary, though he declared at the
same time that he had no idea of breaking his heart for any young
woman. That last assertion was probably true.

As for living in the great house at the Priory all alone, that he
had declared to be impossible. Of course he would be at home for
the hunting next winter; but he doubted whether he should be there
much before that time, unless a certain coming event should make it
necessary for him to go down and look after things. He thought it
probable that he should take a run abroad in July; perhaps go to
Norway for the fishing in June. He was already making arrangements
with two other men for a move in August. He might be at home for
partridge shooting about the middle of September, but he shouldn't
"go into residence" at Newton before that. Thus he had spoken of it
in describing his plans to his brother, putting great stress on his
intention to devote the spring months to the lovely Mary. Gregory
had seen nothing wrong in all this. Ralph was now a rich man, and
was entitled to amuse himself. Gregory would have wished that his
brother would at once make himself happy among his own tenants
and dependents, but that, no doubt, would come soon. Ralph did
spend two nights at Newton after the scene with Neefit in the
Moonbeam yard,--just that he might see his nags safe in their new
quarters,--and then went up to London. He was hardly yet strong in
heart, because such a trouble as that which vexed him in regard to
Polly does almost make a man's life a burden. Ralph was gifted with
much aptitude for throwing his troubles behind, but he hardly was yet
able to rid himself of this special trouble. That horrid tradesman
was telling his story to everybody. Sir Thomas Underwood knew
the story; and so, he thought, did Mary Bonner. Mary Bonner, in
truth, did not know it; but she had thrown in Ralph's teeth, as an
accusation against him, that he owed himself and his affections to
another girl; and Ralph, utterly forgetful of Clarissa and that now
long-distant scene on the lawn, had believed, and still did believe,
that Mary had referred to Polly Neefit. On the 10th of April he
established himself at his new rooms in Spring Gardens, and was
careful in seeing that there was a comfortable little bed-room for
his brother Greg. His uncle had now been dead just six months, but he
felt as though he had been the owner of the Newton estate for years.
If Mr. Carey could only settle for him that trouble with Mr. Neefit,
how happy his life would be to him. He was very much in love with
Mary Bonner, but his trouble with Mr. Neefit was of almost more
importance to him than his love for Mary Bonner.

In the meantime the girls were living, as usual, at Popham Villa, and
Sir Thomas was living, as usual, in Southampton Buildings. He and his
colleague had been unseated, but it had already been decided by the
House of Commons that no new writ should be at once issued, and that
there should be a commission appointed to make extended inquiry at
Percycross in reference to the contemplated disfranchisement of the
borough. There could be no possible connexion between this inquiry
and the expediency of Sir Thomas living at home; but, after some
fashion, he reconciled further delay to his conscience by the fact
that the Percycross election was not even yet quite settled. No doubt
it would be necessary that he should again go to Percycross during
the sitting of the Commission.

The reader will remember the interview between Gregory Newton and
Clarissa, in which poor Clary had declared with so much emphasis her
certainty that his brother's suit to Mary must be fruitless. This she
had said, with artless energy, in no degree on her own behalf. She
was hopeless now in that direction, and had at last taught herself to
feel that the man was unworthy. The lesson had reached her, though
she herself was ignorant not only of the manner of the teaching, but
of the very fact that she had been taught. She had pleaded, more
than once, that men did such things, and were yet held in favour and
forgiven, let their iniquities have been what they might. She had
hoped to move others by the doctrine; but gradually it had ceased to
be operative, even on herself. She could not tell how it was that her
passion faded and died away. It can hardly be said that it died away;
but it became to herself grievous and a cause of soreness, instead of
a joy and a triumph. She no longer said, even to herself, that he was
to be excused. He had come there, and had made a mere plaything of
her,--wilfully. There was no earnestness in him, no manliness, and
hardly common honesty. A conviction that it was so had crept into
her poor wounded heart, in spite of those repeated assertions which
she had made to Patience as to the persistency of her own affection.
First dismay and then wrath had come upon her when the man who ought
to be her lover came to the very house in which she was living, and
there offered his hand to another girl, almost in her very presence.
Had the sin been committed elsewhere, and with any rival other than
her own cousin, she might have still clung to that doctrine of
forgiveness, because the sinner was a man, and because it is the way
of the world to forgive men. But the insult had been too close for
pardon; and now her wrath was slowly changing itself to contempt. Had
Mary accepted the man's offer this phase of feeling would not have
occurred. Clarissa would have hated the woman, but still might have
loved the man. But Mary had treated him as a creature absolutely
beneath her notice, had evidently despised him, and Mary's scorn
communicated itself to Clarissa. The fact that Ralph was now Newton
of Newton, absolutely in harbour after so many dangers of shipwreck,
assisted her in this. "I would have been true to him, though
he hadn't had a penny," she said to herself: "I would never
have given him up though all the world had been against him."
Debts, difficulties, an inheritance squandered, idle habits, even
profligacy, should not have torn him from her heart, had he possessed
the one virtue of meaning what he said when he told her that he loved
her. She remembered the noble triumph she had felt when she declared
to Mary that that other Ralph, who was to have been Mary's lover,
was welcome to the fine property. Her sole ambition had been to be
loved by this man; but the man had been incapable of loving her.
She herself was pretty, and soft, bright on occasions, and graceful.
She knew so much of herself; and she knew, also, that Mary was far
prettier than herself, and more clever. This young man to whom she
had devoted herself possessed no power of love for an individual,--no
capability of so joining himself to another human being as to feel,
that in spite of any superiority visible to the outside world, that
one should be esteemed by him superior to all others,--because of
his love. The young man had liked prettiness and softness and grace
and feminine nicenesses; and seeing one who was prettier and more
graceful,--all which poor Clary allowed, though she was not so sure
about the softness and niceness,--had changed his aim without an
effort! Ah, how different was poor Gregory!

She thought much of Gregory, reminding herself that as was her sorrow
in regard to her own crushed hopes, so were his. His hopes, too, had
been crushed, because she had been so obdurate to him. But she had
never been false. She had never whispered a word of love to Gregory.
It might be that his heart was as sore, but he had not been injured
as she had been injured. She despised the owner of Newton Priory. She
would scorn him should he come again to her and throw himself at her
feet. But Gregory could not despise her. She had, indeed, preferred
the bad to the good. There had been lack of judgment. But there had
been on her side no lack of truth. Yes;--she had been wrong in her
choice. Her judgment had been bad. And yet how glorious he had looked
as he lay upon the lawn, hot from his rowing, all unbraced, brown and
bold and joyous as a young god, as he bade her go and fetch him drink
to slake his thirst! How proud, then, she had been to be ordered by
him, as though their mutual intimacies and confidences and loves were
sufficient, when they too were alone together, to justify a reversal
of those social rules by which the man is ordered to wait upon the
woman. There is nothing in the first flush of acknowledged love that
is sweeter to the woman than this. All the men around her are her
servants; but in regard to this man she may have the inexpressibly
greater pleasure of serving him herself. Clarissa had now thought
much of these things, and had endeavoured to define to herself what
had been those gifts belonging to Ralph which had won from her her
heart. He was not, in truth, handsomer than his brother Gregory,
was certainly less clever, was selfish in small things from habit,
whereas Gregory had no thought for his own comfort. It had all come
from this,--that a black coat and a grave manner of life and serious
pursuits had been less alluring to her than idleness and pleasure. It
had suited her that her young god should be joyous, unbraced, brown,
bold, and thirsty. She did not know Pope's famous line, but it all
lay in that. She was innocent, pure, unknowing in the ways of vice,
simple in her tastes, conscientious in her duties, and yet she was
a rake at heart,--till at last sorrow and disappointment taught her
that it is not enough that a man should lie loose upon the grass with
graceful negligence and call for soda-water with a pleasant voice.
Gregory wore black clothes, was sombre, and was a parson;--but, oh,
what a thing it is that a man should be true at heart!

She said nothing of her changing feelings to Mary, or even to
Patience. The household at this time was not very gay or joyous.
Sir Thomas, after infinite vexation, had lost the seat of which
they had all been proud. Mary Bonner's condition was not felt to be
deplorable, as was that of poor Clary, and she certainly did not
carry herself as a lovelorn maiden. Of Mary Bonner it may be said
that no disappointment of that kind would affect her outward manner;
nor would she in any strait of love be willing to make a confidence
or to discuss her feelings. Whatever care of that kind might be
present to her would be lightened, if not made altogether as nothing,
by her conviction that such loads should be carried in silence, and
without any visible sign to the world that the muscles are overtaxed.
But it was known that the banished Ralph had, in the moment of his
expected prosperity, declared his purpose of giving all that he had
to give to this beauty, and it was believed that she would have
accepted the gift. It had, therefore, come to pass that the name
of neither Ralph could be mentioned at the cottage, and that life
among these maidens was sober, sedate, and melancholy. At last there
came a note from Sir Thomas to Patience. "I shall be home to dinner
to-morrow. I found the enclosed from R. N. this morning. I suppose
he must come. Affectionately, T. U." The enclosed note was as
follows:--"Dear Sir Thomas, I called this morning, but old Stemm was
as hard as granite. If you do not object I will run down to the villa
to-morrow. If you are at home I will stay and dine. Yours ever, Ralph
Newton."

The mind of Sir Thomas when he received this had been affected
exactly as his words described. He had supposed that Ralph must come.
He had learned to hold his late ward in low esteem. The man was now
beyond all likelihood of want, and sailing with propitious winds; but
Sir Thomas, had he been able to consult his own inclinations, would
have had no more to do with him. And yet the young Squire had not
done anything which, as Sir Thomas thought, would justify him in
closing his doors against one to whom he had been bound in a manner
peculiarly intimate. However, if his niece should choose at last
to accept Ralph, the match would be very brilliant; and the uncle
thought that it was not his duty to interfere between her and so
great an advantage. Sir Thomas, in truth, did not as yet understand
Mary Bonner,--knew very little of her character; but he did know that
it was incumbent on him to give her some opportunity of taking her
beauty to market. He wrote a line to Ralph, saying that he himself
would dine at home on the day indicated.

"Impossible!" said Clary, when she was first told.

"You may be sure he's coming," said Patience.

"Then I shall go and spend the day with Mrs. Brownlow. I cannot stand
it."

"My dear, he'll know why you are away."

"Let him know," said Clarissa. And she did as she said she would.
When Sir Thomas came home at about four o'clock on the Thursday which
Ralph had fixed,--Thursday, the fourteenth of April,--he found that
Clarissa had flown. The fly was to be sent for her at ten, and it was
calculated that by the time she returned, Ralph would certainly have
taken his leave. Sir Thomas expressed neither anger nor satisfaction
at this arrangement,--"Oh; she has gone to Mrs. Brownlow's, has she?
Very well. I don't suppose it will make much difference to Ralph."
"None in the least," said Patience, severely. "Nothing of that kind
will make any difference to him." But at that time Ralph had been
above an hour in the house.

We will now return to Ralph and his adventures. He had come up to
London with the express object of pressing his suit upon Mary Bonner;
but during his first day or two in London had busied himself rather
with the affairs of his other love. He had been with Mr. Carey, and
Mr. Carey had been with Mr. Neefit. "He is the maddest old man that
I ever saw," said Mr. Carey. "When I suggested to him that you were
willing to make any reasonable arrangement,--meaning a thousand
pounds, or something of that kind,--I couldn't get him to understand
me at all."

"I don't think he wants money," said Ralph.

"'Let him come down and eat a bit of dinner at the cottage,' said he,
'and we'll make it all square.' Then I offered him a thousand pounds
down."

"What did he say?"

"Called to a fellow he had there with a knife in his hand, cutting
leather, to turn me out of the shop. And the man would have done it,
too, if I hadn't gone."

This was not promising, but on the following morning Ralph received a
letter which put him into better heart. The letter was from Polly
herself, and was written as follows:--


   Alexandra Cottage, Hendon,
   April 10th, 186--.

   MY DEAR SIR,

   Father has been going on with all that nonsense of his,
   and I think it most straightforward to write a letter
   to you at once, so that things may be understood and
   finished. Father has no right to be angry with you, anyway
   not about me. He says somebody has come and offered him
   money. I wish they hadn't, but perhaps you didn't send
   them. There's no good in father talking about you and
   me. Of course it was a great honour, and all that, but
   I'm not at all sure that anybody should try to get above
   themselves, not in the way of marrying. And the heart is
   everything. So I've told father. If ever I bestow mine, I
   think it will be to somebody in a way of business,--just
   like father. So I thought I would just write to say that
   there couldn't be anything between you and me, were it
   ever so; only that I was very much honoured by your coming
   down to Margate. I write this to you, because a very
   particular friend advises me, and I don't mind telling you
   at once,--it is Mr. Moggs. And I shall show it to father.
   That is, I have written it twice, and shall keep the
   other. It's a pity father should go on so, but he means it
   for the best. And as to anything in the way of money,--oh,
   Mr. Newton, he's a deal too proud for that.

   Yours truly,

   MARYANNE NEEFIT.


As to which letter the little baggage was not altogether true in one
respect. She did not keep a copy of the whole letter, but left out
of that which she showed to her father the very material passage
in which she referred to the advice of her particular friend, Mr.
Moggs. Ralph, when he received this letter, felt really grateful to
Polly, and wrote to her a pretty note, in which he acknowledged her
kindness, and expressed his hope that she might always be as happy
as she deserved to be. Then it was that he made up his mind to go
down at once to Popham Villa, thinking that the Neefit nuisance
was sufficiently abated to enable him to devote his time to a more
pleasurable pursuit.

He reached the villa between three and four, and learned from the
gardener's wife at the lodge that Sir Thomas had not as yet returned.
He did not learn that Clarissa was away, and was not aware of that
fact till they all sat down to dinner at seven o'clock. Much had been
done and much endured before that time came. He sauntered slowly up
the road, and looked about the grounds, hoping to find the young
ladies there, as he had so often done during his summer visits; but
there was no one to be seen, and he was obliged to knock at the door.
He was shown into the drawing-room, and in a few minutes Patience
came to him. There had been no arrangement between her and Mary as
to the manner in which he should be received. Mary on a previous
occasion had given him an answer, and really did believe that that
would be sufficient. He was, according to her thinking, a light,
inconstant man, who would hardly give himself the labour necessary
for perseverance in any suit. Patience at once began to ask him
after his brother and the doings at the Priory. He had been so
intimate at the house, and so dear to them all, that in spite of
the disapprobation with which he was now regarded by them, it was
impossible that there should not be some outer kindness. "Ah," said
he, "I do so look forward to the time when you will all be down
there. I have been so often welcome at your house, that it will be my
greatest pleasure to make you welcome there."

"We go so little from home," said Patience.

"But I am sure you will come to me. I know you would like to see
Greg's parsonage and Greg's church."

"I should indeed."

"It is the prettiest church, I think, in England, and the park is
very nice. The whole house wants a deal of doing to, but I shall set
about it some day. I don't know a pleasanter neighbourhood anywhere."
It would have been so natural that Patience should tell him that he
wanted a mistress for such a home; but she could not say the words.
She could not find the proper words, and soon left him, muttering
something as to directions for her father's room.

He had been alone for twenty minutes when Mary came into the room.
She knew that Patience was not there; and had retreated up-stairs.
But there seemed to be a cowardice in such retreating, which
displeased herself. She, at any rate, had no cause to be afraid of
Mr. Newton. So she collected her thoughts, and arranged her gait,
and went down, and addressed him with assumed indifference,--as
though there had never been anything between them beyond simple
acquaintance. "Uncle Thomas will be here soon, I suppose," she said.

"I hope he will give me half-an-hour first," Ralph answered. There
was an ease and grace always present in his intercourse with women,
and a power of saying that which he desired to say,--which perhaps
arose from the slightness of his purposes and the want of reality in
his character.

"We see so little of him that we hardly know his hours," said Mary.
"Uncle Thomas is a sad truant from home."

"He always was, and I declare I think that Patience and Clary have
been the better for it. They have learned things of which they would
have known nothing had he been with them every morning and evening. I
don't know any girls who are so sweet as they are. You know they have
been like sisters to me."

"So I have been told."

"And when you came, it would have been like another sister coming;
only--"

"Only what?" said Mary, assuming purposely a savage look.

"That something else intervened."

"Of course it must be very different,--and it should be different.
You have only known me a few months."

"I have known you enough to wish to know you more closely than
anybody else for the rest of my life."

"Mr. Newton, I thought you had understood me before."

"So I did." This he said with an assumed tone of lachrymose
complaint. "I did understand you,--thoroughly. I understood that I
was rebuked, and rejected, and disdained. But a man, if he is in
earnest, does not give over on that account. Indeed, there are things
which he can't give over. You may tell a man that he shouldn't drink,
or shouldn't gamble; but telling will do no good. When he has once
begun, he'll go on with it."

"What does that mean?"

"That love is as strong a passion, at any rate, as drinking or
gambling. You did tell me, and sent me away, and rebuked me because
of that tradesman's daughter."

"What tradesman's daughter?" asked Mary. "I have spoken of no
tradesman's daughter. I gave you ample reason why you should not
address yourself to me."

"Of course there are ample reasons," said Ralph, looking into his
hat, which he had taken from the table. "The one,--most ample of all,
is that you do not care for me."

"I do not," said Mary resolutely.

"Exactly;--but that is a sort of reason which a man will do his best
to conquer. Do not misunderstand me. I am not such a fool as to think
that I can prevail in a day. I am not vain enough to think that I can
prevail at all. But I can persist."

"It will not be of the slightest use; indeed, it cannot be allowed. I
will not allow it. My uncle will not allow it."

"When you told me that I was untrue to another person--; I think that
was your phrase."

"Very likely."

"I supposed you had heard that stupid story which had got round to my
uncle,--about a Mr. Neefit's daughter."

"I had heard no stupid story."

"What then did you mean?"

Mary paused a moment, thinking whether it might still be possible
that a good turn might be done for her cousin. That Clarissa had
loved this man with her whole heart she had herself owned to Mary.
That the man had professed his love for Clary, Clary had also let
her know. And Clary's love had endured even after the blow it had
received from Ralph's offer to her cousin. All this that cousin knew;
but she did not know how that love had now turned to simple soreness.
"I have heard nothing of the man's daughter," said Mary.

"Well then?"

"But I do know that before I came here at all you had striven to gain
the affections of my cousin."

"Clarissa!"

"Yes; Clarissa. Is it not so?" Then she paused, and Ralph remembered
the scene on the lawn. In very truth it had never been forgotten.
There had always been present with him when he thought of Mary Bonner
a sort of remembrance of the hour in which he had played the fool
with dear Clary. He had kissed her. Well; yes; and with some girls
kisses mean so much,--as Polly Neefit had said to her true lover. But
then with others they mean just nothing. "If you want to find a wife
in this house you had better ask her. It is certainly useless that
you should ask me."

"Do you mean quite useless?" asked Ralph, beginning to be somewhat
abashed.

"Absolutely useless. Did I not tell you something else,--something
that I would not have hinted to you, had it not been that I desired
to prevent the possibility of a renewal of anything so vain? But you
think nothing of that! All that can be changed with you at a moment,
if other things suit."

"That is meant to be severe, Miss Bonner, and I have not deserved it
from you. What has brought me to you but that I admire you above all
others?"

"You shouldn't admire me above others. Is a man to change as he likes
because he sees a girl whose hair pleases him for the moment better
than does hers to whom he has sworn to be true?" Ralph did not forget
at this moment to whisper to himself for his own consolation, that
he had never sworn to be true to Clarissa. And, indeed, he did feel,
that though there had been a kiss, the scene on the lawn was being
used unfairly to his prejudice. "I am afraid you are very fickle, Mr.
Newton, and that your love is not worth much."

"I hope we may both live till you learn that you have wronged me."

"I hope so. If my opinion be worth anything with you, go back to her
from whom you have allowed yourself to stray in your folly. To me you
must not address yourself again. If you do, it will be an insult."
Then she rose up, queenly in her beauty, and slowly left the room.

There must be an end of that. Such was Ralph's feeling as she
left the room, in spite of those protestations of constancy and
persistence which he had made to himself. "A fellow has to go on with
it, and be refused half a dozen times by one of those proud ones," he
had said; "but when they do knuckle under, they go in harness better
than the others." It was thus that he had thought of Mary Bonner, but
he did not so think of her now. No, indeed. There was an end of that.
"There is a sort of way of doing it, which shows that they mean it."
Such was his inward speech; and he did believe that Miss Bonner meant
it. "By Jove, yes; if words and looks ever can mean anything." But
how about Clarissa? If it was so, as Mary Bonner had told him, would
it be the proper kind of thing for him to go back to Clarissa? His
heart, too,--for he had a heart,--was very soft. He had always been
fond of Clarissa, and would not, for worlds, that she should be
unhappy. How pretty she was, and how soft, and how loving! And how
proudly happy she would be to be driven about the Newton grounds by
him as their mistress. Then he remembered what Gregory had said to
him, and how he had encouraged Gregory to persevere. If anything of
that kind were to happen, Gregory must put up with it. It was clear
that Clarissa couldn't marry Gregory if she were in love with him.
But how would he look Sir Thomas in the face? As he thought of this
he laughed. Sir Thomas, however, would be glad enough to give his
daughter, not to the heir but to the owner of Newton. Who could be
that fellow whom Mary Bonner preferred to him--with all Newton to
back his suit? Perhaps Mary Bonner did not know the meaning of being
the mistress of Newton Priory.

After a while the servant came to show him to his chamber. Sir Thomas
had come and had gone at once to his room. So he went up-stairs and
dressed, expecting to see Clarissa when they all assembled before
dinner. When he went down, Sir Thomas was there, and Mary, and
Patience,--but not Clarissa. He had summoned back his courage and
spoke jauntily to Sir Thomas. Then he turned to Patience and asked
after her sister. "Clarissa is spending the day with Mrs. Brownlow,"
said Patience, "and will not be home till quite late."

"Oh, how unfortunate!" exclaimed Ralph. Taking all his difficulties
into consideration, we must admit that he did not do it badly.

After dinner Sir Thomas sat longer over his wine than is at present
usual, believing, perhaps, that the young ladies would not want to
see much more of Ralph on the present occasion. The conversation was
almost entirely devoted to the affairs of the late election, as to
which Ralph was much interested and very indignant. "They cannot do
you any harm, sir, by the investigation," he said.

"No; I don't think they can hurt me."

"And you will have the satisfaction of knowing that you have been the
means of exposing corruption, and of helping to turn such a man as
Griffenbottom out of the House. Upon my word, I think it has been
worth while."

"I am not sure that I would do it again at the same cost, and with
the same object," said Sir Thomas.

Ralph did have a cup of tea given to him in the drawing-room, and
then left the villa before Clarissa's fly had returned.


CHAPTER XLVIII.

MR. MOGGS WALKS TOWARDS EDGEWARE.


The judge's decision in Percycross as to the late election was no
sooner known than fresh overtures were made to Ontario Moggs by the
Young Men's Association. A letter of triumph was addressed to him at
the Cheshire Cheese, in which he was informed that Intimidation and
Corruption had been trodden under foot in the infamous person of Mr.
Griffenbottom, and that Purity and the Rights of Labour were still
the watchwords of that wholesome party in the borough which was
determined to send Mr. Moggs to Parliament. Did not Mr. Moggs think
it best that he should come down at once to the borough and look
after his interests? Now Mr. Moggs junior, when he received this
letter, had left the borough no more than three or four days since,
having been summoned there as a witness during the trial of the
petition;--and such continued attendance to the political interests
of a small and otherwise uninteresting town, without the advantage of
a seat in Parliament, was felt by Mr. Moggs senior to be a nuisance.
The expense in all these matters fell of course upon the shoulders
of the father. "I don't believe in them humbugs no longer," said Mr.
Moggs senior. Moggs junior, who had felt the enthusiasm of the young
men of Percycross, and who had more to get and less to lose than his
father, did believe. Although he had been so lately at Percycross,
he went down again, and again made speeches to the young men at the
Mechanics' Institute. Nothing could be more triumphant than his
speeches, nothing more pleasant than his popularity; but he could
not fail to become aware, after a further sojourn of three days at
Percycross, of two things. The first was this,--that if the borough
were spared there would be a compromise between the leading men on
the two sides, and Mr. Westmacott would be returned together with a
young Griffenbottom. The second conviction forced upon him was that
the borough would not be spared. There was no comfort for him at
Percycross,--other than what arose from a pure political conscience.
On the very morning on which he left, he besought his friends, the
young men,--though they were about to be punished, degraded, and
disfranchised for the sins of their elders, though it might never be
allowed to them again to stir themselves for the political welfare
of their own borough,--still to remember that Purity and the Rights
of Labour were the two great wants of the world, and that no man
could make an effort, however humble, in a good cause without doing
something towards bringing nearer to him that millennium of political
virtue which was so much wanted, and which would certainly come
sooner or later. He was cheered to the echo, and almost carried down
to the station on the shoulders of a chairman, or president, and
a secretary; but he left Percycross with the conviction that that
borough would never confer upon him the coveted honour of a seat in
Parliament.

All this had happened early in March, previous to that Sunday on
which Mr. Neefit behaved so rudely to him at the cottage. "I think as
perhaps you'd better stick to business now a bit," said old Moggs. At
that moment Ontario was sitting up at a high desk behind the ledger
which he hated, and was sticking to business as well as he knew how
to stick to it. "No more Cheshire Cheeses, if you please, young man,"
said the father. This was felt by the son to be unfair, cruel, and
even corrupt. While the election was going on, as long as there was
a hope of success at Percycross, Moggs senior had connived at the
Cheshire Cheese, had said little or nothing about business, had even
consented on one occasion to hear his son make a speech advocating
the propriety of combination among workmen. "It ain't my way of
thinking," Moggs senior had said; "but then, perhaps, I'm old." To
have had a member of the firm in Parliament would have been glorious
even to old Moggs, though he hardly knew in what the glory would have
consisted. But as soon as he found that his hopes were vain, that the
Cheshire Cheese had been no stepping-stone to such honour, and that
his money had been spent for nothing, his mind reverted to its old
form. Strikes became to him the work of the devil, and unions were
once more the bane of trade.

"I suppose," said Ontario, looking up from his ledger, "if I work for
my bread by day, I may do as I please with my evenings. At any rate
I shall," he continued to say after pausing awhile. "It's best we
should understand each other, father." Moggs senior growled. At a
word his son would have been off from him, rushing about the country,
striving to earn a crust as a political lecturer. Moggs knew his son
well, and in truth loved him dearly. There was, too, a Miss Moggs
at home, who would give her father no peace if Ontario were turned
adrift. There is nothing in the world so cruel as the way in which
sons use the natural affections of their fathers, obtaining from
these very feelings a power of rebelling against authority! "You must
go to the devil if you please, I suppose," said Moggs senior.

"I don't know why you say that. What do I do devilish?"

"Them Unions is devilish."

"I think they're Godlike," said Moggs junior. After that they were
silent for a while, during which Moggs senior was cutting his nails
with a shoemaker's knife by the fading light of the evening, and
Moggs junior was summing up an account against a favoured aristocrat,
who seemed to have worn a great many boots, but who was noticeable to
Ontario, chiefly from the fact that he represented in Parliament the
division of the county in which Percycross was situated. "I thought
you was going to make it all straight by marrying that girl," said
Moggs senior.

Here was a subject on which the father and the son were in
unison;--and as to which the romantic heart of Miss Moggs, at home at
Shepherd's Bush, always glowed with enthusiasm. That her brother was
in love, was to her, of whom in truth it must be owned that she was
very plain, the charm of her life. She was fond of poetry, and would
read to her brother aloud the story of Juan and Haidee, and the
melancholy condition of the lady who was loved by the veiled prophet.
She sympathised with the false Queen's passion for Launcelot, and,
being herself in truth an ugly old maid very far removed from things
romantic, delighted in the affairs of the heart when they did not run
smooth. "O Ontario," she would say, "be true to her;--if it's for
twenty years." "So I will;--but I'd like to begin the twenty years
by making her Mrs. Moggs," said Ontario. Now Mr. Moggs senior knew
to a penny what money old Neefit could give his daughter, and placed
not the slightest trust in that threat about the smock in which she
stood upright. Polly would certainly get the better of her father as
Ontario always got the better of him. Ontario made no immediate reply
to his father, but he found himself getting all wrong among the boots
and shoes which had been supplied to that aristocratic young member
of Parliament. "You don't mean as it's all off?" asked Moggs senior.

"No; it isn't all off."

"Then why don't you go in at it?"

"Why don't I go in at it?" said Ontario, closing the book in hopeless
confusion of mind and figures. "I'd give every pair of boots in this
place, I'd give all the business, to get a kind word from her."

"Isn't she kind?"

"Kind;--yes, she's kind enough in a way. She's everything just
what she ought to be. That's what she is. Don't you go on about it,
father. I'm as much in earnest as you can be. I shan't give it up
till she calls somebody else her husband; and then,--; why then
I shall just cut it, and go off to uncle in Canada. I've got my
mind made up about all that." And so he left the shop, somewhat
uncourteously perhaps. But he had worked his way back into his
father's good graces by his determination to stick to Neefit's girl.
A young man ought to be allowed to attend trades' unions, or any
other meetings, if he will marry a girl with twenty thousand pounds.
That evening Ontario Moggs went to the Cheshire Cheese, and was
greater than ever.

It has been already told how, on a Sunday subsequent to this, he
managed to have himself almost closeted with Polly, and how he was
working himself into her good graces, when he was disturbed by Mr.
Neefit and turned out of the house. Polly's heart had been yielding
during the whole of that interview. There had come upon her once a
dream that it would be a fine thing to be the lady of Newton;--and
the chance had been hers. But when she set herself to work to
weigh it all, and to find out what it was that young Newton really
wanted,--and what he ought to want, she shook off from herself that
dream before it had done her any injury. She meant to be married
certainly. As to that she had no doubt. But then Ontario Moggs was
such a long-legged, awkward, ugly, shambling fellow, and Moggs as
a name was certainly not euphonious. The gasfitter was handsome,
and was called Yallolegs, which perhaps was better than Moggs. He
had proposed to her more than once; but the gasfitter's face meant
nothing, and the gasfitter himself hadn't much meaning in him. As to
outside appearance, young Newton's was just what he ought to be,--but
that was a dream which she had shaken off. Onty Moggs had some
meaning in him, and was a man. If there was one thing, too, under the
sun of which Polly was quite sure, it was this,--that Onty Moggs did
really love her. She knew that in the heart, and mind, and eyes of
Onty Moggs she possessed a divinity which made the ground she stood
upon holy ground for him. Now that is a conviction very pleasant to a
young woman.

Ontario was very near his victory on that Sunday. When he told her
that he would compass the death of Ralph Newton if Ralph Newton was
to cause her to break her heart, she believed that he would do it,
and she felt obliged to him,--although she laughed at him. When he
declared to her that he didn't know what to do because of his love,
she was near to telling him what he might do. When he told her that
he would sooner have a kiss from her than be Prime Minister, she
believed him, and almost longed to make him happy. Then she had
tripped, giving him encouragement which she did not intend,--and had
retreated, telling him that he was silly. But as she said so she made
up her mind that he should be perplexed not much longer. After all,
in spite of his ugliness, and awkwardness, and long legs, this was
to be her man. She recognised the fact, and was happy. It is so much
for a girl to be sure that she is really loved! And there was no word
which fell from Ontario's mouth which Polly did not believe. Ralph
Newton's speeches were very pretty, but they conveyed no more than
his intention to be civil. Ontario's speeches really brought home to
her all that the words could mean. When he told her father that he
was quite contented to take her just as she was, without a shilling,
she knew that he would do so with the utmost joy. Then it was that
she resolved that he should have her, and that for the future all
doubtings, all flirtations, all coyness, should be over. She had been
won, and she lowered her flag. "You stick to it, and you'll do it,"
she said;--and this time she meant it. "I shall," said Ontario;--and
he walked all the way back to London, with his head among the clouds,
disregarding Percycross utterly, forgetful of all the boots and
aristocrats' accounts, regardless almost of the Cheshire Cheese, not
even meditating a new speech in defence of the Rights of Labour. He
believed that on that day he had gained the great victory. If so,
life before him was one vista of triumph. That he himself was what
the world calls romantic, he had no idea,--but he had lived now for
months on the conviction that the only chance of personal happiness
to himself was to come from the smiles and kindness and love of a
certain human being whom he had chosen to beatify. To him Polly
Neefit was divine, and round him also there would be a halo of
divinity if this goddess would consent to say that she would become
his wife.

It was impossible that many days should be allowed to pass before he
made an effort to learn from her own lips, positively, the meaning
of those last words which she had spoken to him. But there was
a difficulty. Neefit had warned him from the house, and he felt
unwilling to knock at the door of a man in that man's absence, who,
if present, would have refused to him the privilege of admittance.
That Mrs. Neefit would see him, and afford him opportunity of
pleading his cause with Polly, he did not doubt;--but some idea that
a man's house, being his castle, should not be invaded in the owner's
absence, restrained him. That the man's daughter might be the dearer
and the choicer, and the more sacred castle of the two, was true
enough; but then Polly was a castle which, as Moggs thought, ought to
belong to him rather than to her father. And so he resolved to waylay
Polly.

His weekdays, from nine in the morning till seven in the evening,
were at this time due to Booby and Moggs, and he was at present
paying that debt religiously, under a conviction that his various
absences at Percycross had been hard upon his father. For there was,
in truth, no Booby. Moggs senior, and Moggs junior, constituted the
whole firm;--in which, indeed, up to this moment Moggs junior had no
recognised share,--and if one was absent, the other must be present.
But Sunday was his own, and Polly Neefit always went to church.
Nevertheless, on the first Sunday he failed. He failed, though he saw
her, walking with two other ladies, and though, to the best of his
judgment, she also saw him. On the second Sunday he was at Hendon
from ten till three, hanging about in the lanes, sitting on gates,
whiling away the time with a treatise on political economy which he
had brought down in his pocket, thinking of Polly while he strove
to confine his thoughts to the great subject of man's productive
industry. Is there any law of Nature,--law of God, rather,--by which
a man has a right to enough of food, enough of raiment, enough of
shelter, and enough of recreation, if only he will work? But Polly's
cheeks, and Polly's lips, the eager fire of Polly's eye as she would
speak, and all the elastic beauty of Polly's gait as she would walk,
drove the great question from his mind. Was he ever destined to hold
Polly in his arms,--close, close to his breast? If not, then the laws
of Nature and the laws of God, let them be what they might, would not
have been sufficient to protect him from the cruellest wrong of all.

It was as she went to afternoon church that he hoped to intercept
her. Morning church with many is a bond. Afternoon church is a virtue
of supererogation,--practised often because there is nothing else to
do. It would be out of the question that he should induce her to give
up the morning service; but if he could only come upon her in the
afternoon, a little out of sight of others, just as she would turn
down a lane with which he was acquainted, near to a stile leading
across the fields towards Edgeware, it might be possible that he
should prevail. As the hour came near, he put the useless volume into
his pocket, and stationed himself on the spot which he had selected.
Almost at the first moment in which he had ventured to hope for her
presence, Polly turned into the lane. It was six months after this
occurrence that she confessed to him that she had thought it just
possible that he might be there. "Of course you would be there,--you
old goose; as if Jemima hadn't told me that you'd been about all day.
But I never should have come, if I hadn't quite made up my mind."
Then Ontario administered to her one of those bear's hugs which were
wont to make Polly declare that he was an ogre. It was thus that
Polly made her confession after the six months, as they were sitting
very close to each other on some remote point of the cliffs down
on the Kentish coast. At that time the castle had been altogether
transferred out of the keeping of Mr. Neefit.

But Polly's conduct on this occasion was not at all of a nature to
make it supposed that Jemima's eyes had been so sharp. "What, Mr.
Moggs!" she said. "Dear me, what a place to find you in! Are you
coming to church?"

"I want you just to take a turn with me for a few minutes, Polly."

"But I'm going to church."

"You can go to church afterwards;--that is, if you like. I can't come
to the house now, and I have got something that I must say to you."

"Something that you must say to me!" And then Polly followed him over
the stile.

They had walked the length of nearly two fields before Ontario had
commenced to tell the tale which of necessity must be told; but
Polly, though she must have known that her chances of getting back to
church were becoming more and more remote, waited without impatience.
"I want to know," he said, at last, "whether you can ever learn to
love me."

"What's the use, Mr. Moggs?"

"It will be all the use in the world to me."

"Oh, no it won't. It can't signify so very much to anybody."

"Nothing, I sometimes think, can ever be of any use to me but that."

"As for learning to love a man,--I suppose I could love a man without
any learning if I liked him."

"But you don't like me, Polly?"

"I never said I didn't like you. Father and mother always used to
like you."

"But you, Polly?"

"Oh, I like you well enough. Don't, Mr. Moggs."

"But do you love me?" Then there was a pause, as they stood leaning
upon a gateway. "Come, Polly; tell a fellow. Do you love me?"

"I don't know." Then there was another pause; but he was in a seventh
heaven, with his arm round her waist. "I suppose I do; a little,"
whispered Polly.

"But better than anybody else?"

"You don't think I mean to have two lovers;--do you?"

"And I am to be your lover?"

"There's father, you know. I'm not going to be anybody's wife because
he tells me; but I wouldn't like to vex him, if we could help it."

"But you'll never belong to any one else?"

"Never," said she solemnly.

"Then I've said what I've got to say, and I'm the happiest man in all
the world, and you may go to church now if you like." But his arm was
still tight round her waist.

"It's too late," said Polly, in a melancholy tone,--"and it's all
your doing."

The walk was prolonged not quite to Edgeware; but so far that Mr.
Neefit was called upon to remark that the parson was preaching a very
long sermon. Mrs. Neefit, who perhaps had also had communication
with Jemima, remarked that it was not to be expected, but that Polly
should take a ramble with some of her friends. "Why can't she ramble
where I want her to ramble?" said Mr. Neefit.

Many things were settled during that walk. Within five minutes of
the time in which she had declared that it was too late for her
to go to church, she had brought herself to talk to him with all
the delightful confidence of a completed engagement. She made him
understand at once that there was no longer any doubt. "A girl must
have time to know," she said, when he half-reproached her with the
delay. A girl wasn't like a man, she said, who could just make up his
mind at once,--a girl had to wait and see. But she was quite sure of
this,--that having once said the word she would never go back from
it. She didn't quite know when she had first begun to love him, but
she thought it was when she heard that he had made up his mind to
stand for Percycross. It seemed to her to be such a fine thing,--his
going to Percycross. "Then," said Ontario, gallantly, "Percycross has
done ten times more for me than it would have done, had it simply
made me a member of Parliament." Once, twice, and oftener he was
made happier than he could have been had fortune made him a Prime
Minister. For Polly, now that she had given her heart and promised
her hand, would not coy her lips to the man she had chosen.

Many things were settled between them. Polly told her lover all her
trouble about Ralph Newton, and it was now that she received that
advice from her "very particular friend, Mr. Moggs," which she
followed in writing to her late suitor. The letter was to be written
and posted that afternoon, and then shown to her father. We know
already that in making the copy for her father she omitted one
clause,--having resolved that she would tell her mother of her
engagement, and that her mother should communicate it to her father.
As for naming any day for their marriage, "That was out of the
question," she said. She did not wish to delay it; but all that
she could do was to swear to her father that she would never marry
anybody else. "And he'll believe me too," said Polly. As for eloping,
she would not hear of it. "Just that he might have an excuse to give
his money to somebody else," she said.

"I don't care for his money," protested Moggs.

"That's all very well; but money's a good thing in its way. I hate a
man who'd sell himself; he's a mean fellow;--or a girl either. Money
should never be first. But as for pitching it away just because
you're in a hurry, I don't believe in that at all. I'm not going
to be an old woman yet, and you may wait a few months very well."
She walked with him direct up to the gate leading up to their own
house,--so that all the world might see her, if all the world
pleased; and then she bade him good-bye. "Some day before very long,
no doubt," she said when, as he left her, he asked as to their next
meeting.

And so Polly had engaged herself. I do not know that the matter
seemed to her to be of so much importance as it does to many girls.
It was a piece of business which had to be done some day, as she had
well known for years past; and now that it was done, she was quite
contented with the doing of it. But there was not much of that
ecstasy in her bosom which was at the present moment sending Ontario
Moggs bounding up to town, talking, as he went, to himself,--to the
amazement of passers by, and assuring himself that he had triumphed
like an Alexander or a Cæsar. She made some steady resolves to do her
duty by him, and told herself again and again that nothing should
ever move her now that she had decided. As for beauty in a man;--what
did it signify? He was honest. As for awkwardness;--what did it
matter? He was clever. And in regard to being a gentleman; she rather
thought that she liked him better because he wasn't exactly what some
people call a gentleman. Whatever sort of a home he would give her
to live in, nobody would despise her in it because she was not grand
enough for her place. She was by no means sure that a good deal of
misery of that kind might not have fallen to her lot had she become
the mistress of Newton Priory. "When the beggar woman became a queen,
how the servants must have snubbed her," said Polly to herself.

That evening she showed her letter to her father. "You haven't sent
it, you minx?" said he.

"Yes, father. It's in the iron box."

"What business had you to write to a young man?"

"Come, father. I had a business."

"I believe you want to break my heart," said old Neefit.

That evening her mother asked her what she had been doing that
afternoon. "I just took a walk with Ontario Moggs," said Polly.

"Well?"

"And I've just engaged myself straight off, and you had better tell
father. I mean to keep to it, mother, let anybody say anything. I
wouldn't go back from my promise if they were to drag me. So father
may as well know at once."


CHAPTER XLIX.

AMONG THE PICTURES.


Norfolk is a county by no means devoted to hunting, and Ralph
Newton,--the disinherited Ralph as we may call him,--had been
advised by some of his friends round Newton to pitch his tent
elsewhere,--because of his love of that sport. "You'll get a bit of
land just as cheap in the shires," Morris had said to him. "And, if
I were you, I wouldn't go among a set of fellows who don't think of
anything in the world except partridges." Mr. Morris, who was a very
good fellow in his way, devoted a considerable portion of his mental
and physical energies to the birth, rearing, education, preservation,
and subsequent use of the fox,--thinking that in so doing he employed
himself nobly as a country gentleman; but he thoroughly despised a
county in which partridges were worshipped.

"They do preserve foxes," pleaded Ralph.

"One man does, and the next don't. You ought to know what that means.
It's the most heart-breaking kind of thing in the world. I'd sooner
be without foxes altogether, and ride to a drag;--I would indeed."
This assertion Mr. Morris made in a sadly solemn tone, such as men
use when they speak of some adversity which fate and fortune may be
preparing for them. "I'd a deal rather die than bear it," says the
melancholy friend; or,--"I'd much sooner put up with a crust in a
corner." "I'd rather ride to a drag;--I would indeed," said Mr.
Morris, with a shake of the head, and a low sigh. As for life without
riding to hounds at all, Mr. Morris did not for a moment suppose that
his friend contemplated such an existence.

But Ralph had made up his mind that, in going out into the world to
do something, foxes should not be his first object. He had to seek
a home certainly, but more important than his home was the work to
which he should give himself; and, as he had once said, he knew
nothing useful that he could do except till the land. So he went
down into Norfolk among the intermittent fox preservers, and took
Beamingham Hall.

Almost every place in Norfolk is a "ham," and almost every house is
a hall. There was a parish of Beamingham, four miles from Swaffham,
lying between Tillham, Soham, Reepham, and Grindham. It's down in
all the maps. It's as flat as a pancake; it has a church with a
magnificent square tower, and a new chancel; there is a resident
parson, and there are four or five farmers in it; it is under the
plough throughout, and is famous for its turnips; half the parish
belongs to a big lord, who lives in the county, and who does preserve
foxes, but not with all his heart; two other farms are owned by the
yeomen who farm them,--men who have been brought up to shoot, and who
hate the very name of hunting. Beamingham Hall was to be sold, and by
the beginning of May Ralph Newton had bought it. Beamingham Little
Wood belonged to the estate, and, as it contained about thirty acres,
Ralph determined that he would endeavour to have a fox there.

By the middle of May he had been four months in his new home. The
house itself was not bad. It was spacious; and the rooms, though
low, were large. And it had been built with considerable idea
of architectural beauty. The windows were all set in stone and
mullioned,--long, low windows, very beautiful in form, which had till
some fifteen years back been filled with a multitude of small diamond
panes;--but now the diamond panes had given way to plate glass. There
were three gables to the hall, all facing an old-fashioned large
garden, in which the fruit trees came close up to the house, and
that which perhaps ought to have been a lawn was almost an orchard.
But there were trim gravel walks, and trim flower-beds, and a trim
fish-pond, and a small walled kitchen-garden, with very old peaches,
and very old apricots, and very old plums. The plums, however, were
at present better than the peaches or the apricots. The fault of the
house, as a modern residence, consisted in this,--that the farm-yard,
with all its appurtenances, was very close to the back door. Ralph
told himself when he first saw it that Mary Bonner would never
consent to live in a house so placed.

For whom was such a house as Beamingham Hall originally built,--a
house not grand enough for a squire's mansion, and too large for a
farmer's homestead? Such houses throughout England are much more
numerous than Englishmen think,--either still in good repair, as was
Beamingham Hall, or going into decay under the lessened domestic
wants of the present holders. It is especially so in the eastern
counties, and may be taken as one proof among many that the
broad-acred squire, with his throng of tenants, is comparatively a
modern invention. The country gentleman of two hundred years ago
farmed the land he held. As years have rolled on, the strong have
swallowed the weak,--one strong man having eaten up half-a-dozen weak
men. And so the squire has been made. Then the strong squire becomes
a baronet and a lord,--till he lords it a little too much, and a
Manchester warehouseman buys him out. The strength of the country
probably lies in the fact that the change is ever being made, but is
never made suddenly.

To Ralph the great objection to Beamingham Hall lay in that fear,--or
rather certainty,--that it could not be made a fitting home for Mary
Bonner. When he first decided on taking it, and even when he decided
on buying it, he assured himself that Mary Bonner's taste might be
quite indifferent to him. In the first place, he had himself written
to her uncle to withdraw his claim as soon as he found that Newton
would never belong to him; and then he had been told by the happy
owner of Newton that Mary was still to be asked to share the throne
of that principality. When so told he had said nothing of his
own ambition, but had felt that there was another reason why he
should leave Newton and its neighbourhood. For him, as a bachelor,
Beamingham Hall would be only too good a house. He, as a farmer, did
not mean to be ashamed of his own dunghill.

By the middle of May he had heard nothing either of his namesake
or of Mary Bonner. He did correspond with Gregory Newton, and thus
received tidings of the parish, of the church, of the horses,--and
even of the foxes; but of the heir's matrimonial intentions he heard
nothing. Gregory did write of his own visits to the metropolis, past
and future, and Ralph knew that the young parson would again singe
his wings in the flames that were burning at Popham Villa; but
nothing was said of the heir. Through March and April that trouble
respecting Polly Neefit was continued, and Gregory in his letter of
course did not speak of the Neefits. At last May was come, and Ralph
from Beamingham made up his mind that he also would go up to London.
He had been hard at work during the last four months doing all those
wonderfully attractive things with his new property which a man can
do when he has money in his pocket,--knocking down hedges, planting
young trees or preparing for the planting of them, buying stock,
building or preparing to build sheds,--and the rest of it. There is
hardly a pleasure in life equal to that of laying out money with a
conviction that it will come back again. The conviction, alas, is
so often ill founded,--but the pleasure is the same. In regard to
the house itself he would do nothing, not even form a plan--as yet.
It might be possible that some taste other than his own should be
consulted.

In the second week in May he went up to London, having heard that
Gregory would be there at the same time; and he at once found himself
consorting with his namesake almost as much as with the parson. It
was now a month since the heir had been dismissed from Popham Villa,
and he had not since that date renewed his visit. Nor from that day
to the present had he seen Sir Thomas. It cannot be said with exact
truth that he was afraid of Sir Thomas or ashamed to see the girls.
He had no idea that he had behaved badly to anybody; and, if he
had, he was almost disposed to make amends for such sin by marrying
Clarissa; but he felt that should he ultimately make up his mind in
Clarissa's favour, a little time should elapse for the gradual cure
of his former passion. No doubt he placed reliance on his position
as a man of property, feeling that by his strength in that direction
he would be pulled through all his little difficulties; but it was
an unconscious reliance. He believed that he was perfectly free
from what he himself would have called the dirt and littleness of
purse-pride--or acre-pride, and would on some occasions assert that
he really thought nothing of himself because he was Newton of Newton.
And he meant to be true. Nevertheless, in the bottom of his heart,
there was a confidence that he might do this and that because of his
acres, and among the things which might be thus done, but which could
not otherwise have been done, was this return to Clarissa after his
little lapse in regard to Mary Bonner.

He was delighted to welcome Ralph from Norfolk to all the pleasures
of the metropolis. Should he put down Ralph's name at the famous
Carlton, of which he had lately become a member? Ralph already
belonged to an old-fashioned club, of which his father had been long
a member, and declined the new honour. As for balls, evening crushes,
and large dinner-parties, our Norfolk Ralph thought himself to be
unsuited for them just at present, because of his father's death. It
was not for the nephew of the dead man to tell the son that eight
months of mourning for a father was more than the world now required.
He could only take the excuse, and suggest the play, and a little
dinner at Richmond, and a small party to Maidenhead as compromises.
"I don't know that there is any good in a fellow being so heavy in
hand because his father is dead," the Squire said to his brother.

"They were so much to each other," pleaded Gregory in return. The
Squire accepted the excuse, and offered his namesake a horse for the
park. Would he make one of the party for the moors in August? The
Squire asserted that he had room for another gun, without entailing
any additional expense upon himself. This indeed was not strictly
true, as it had been arranged that the cost should be paid per
gun; but there was a vacancy still, and Ralph the heir, being
quite willing to pay for his cousin, thought no harm to cover his
generosity under a venial falsehood. The disinherited one, however,
declined the offer, with many thanks. "There is nothing, old fellow,
I wouldn't do for you, if I knew how," said the happy heir. Whereupon
the Norfolk Ralph unconsciously resolved that he would accept
nothing,--or as little as possible,--at the hands of the Squire.

All this happened during the three or four first days of his sojourn
in London, in which, he hardly knew why, he had gone neither to the
villa nor to Sir Thomas in Southampton Buildings. He meant to do so,
but from day to day he put it off. As regarded the ladies at the
villa the three young men now never spoke to each other respecting
them. Gregory believed that his brother had failed, and so believing
did not recur to the subject. Gregory himself had already been at
Fulham once or twice since his arrival in town; but had nothing
to say,--or at least did say nothing,--of what happened there. He
intended to remain away from his parish for no more than the parson's
normal thirteen days, and was by no means sure that he would make any
further formal offer. When at the villa he found that Clarissa was
sad and sober, and almost silent; and he knew that something was
wrong. It hardly occurred to him to believe that after all he might
perhaps cure the evil.

One morning, early, Gregory and Ralph from Norfolk were together at
the Royal Academy. Although it was not yet ten when they entered the
gallery, the rooms were already so crowded that it was difficult to
get near the line, and almost impossible either to get into or to
get out of a corner. Gregory had been there before, and knew the
pictures. He also was supposed by his friends to understand something
of the subject; whereas Ralph did not know a Cooke from a Hook, and
possessed no more than a dim idea that Landseer painted all the wild
beasts, and Millais all the little children. "That's a fine picture,"
he said, pointing up at an enormous portrait of the Master of the B.
B., in a red coat, seated square on a seventeen-hand high horse, with
his hat off, and the favourite hounds of his pack around him. "That's
by Grant," said Gregory. "I don't know that I care for that kind of
thing." "It's as like as it can stare," said Ralph, who appreciated
the red coat, and the well-groomed horse, and the finely-shaped
hounds. He backed a few steps to see the picture better, and found
himself encroaching upon a lady's dress. He turned round and found
that the lady was Mary Bonner. Together with her were both Clarissa
and Patience Underwood.

The greetings between them all were pleasant, and the girls were
unaffectedly pleased to find friends whom they knew well enough to
accept as guides and monitors in the room. "Now we shall be told all
about everything," said Clarissa, as the young parson shook hands
first with her sister and then with her. "Do take us round to the
best dozen, Mr. Newton. That's the way I like to begin." Her tone was
completely different from what it had been down at the villa.

"That gentleman in the red coat is my cousin's favourite," said
Gregory.

"I don't care a bit about that." said Clarissa.

"That's because you don't hunt," said Ralph.

"I wish I hunted," said Mary Bonner.

Mary, when she first saw the man, of whom she had once been told that
he was to be her lover, and, when so told, had at least been proud
that she was so chosen,--felt that she was blushing slightly; but
she recovered herself instantly, and greeted him as though there
had been no cause whatever for disturbance. He was struck almost
dumb at seeing her, and it was her tranquillity which restored him
to composure. After the first greetings were over he found himself
walking by her side without any effort on her part to avoid him,
while Gregory and the two sisters went on in advance. Poor Ralph had
not a word to say about the pictures. "Have you been long in London?"
she asked.

"Just four days."

"We heard that you were coming, and did think that perhaps you and
your cousin might find a morning to come down and see us;--your
cousin Gregory, I mean."

"Of course I shall come."

"My uncle will be so glad to see you;--only, you know, you
can't always find him at home. And so will Patience. You are a
great favourite with Patience. You have gone down to live in
Norfolk,--haven't you?"

"Yes--in Norfolk."

"You have bought an estate there?"

"Just one farm that I look after myself. It's no estate, Miss
Bonner;--just a farm-house, with barns and stables, and a horse-pond,
and the rest of it." This was by no means a fair account of the
place, but it suited him so to speak of it. "My days for having an
estate were quickly brought to a close;--were they not?" This he said
with a little laugh, and then hated himself for having spoken so
foolishly.

"Does that make you unhappy, Mr. Newton?" she asked. He did not
answer her at once, and she continued, "I should have thought that
you were above being made unhappy by that."

"Such disappointments carry many things with them of which people
outside see nothing."

"That is true, no doubt."

"A man may be separated from every friend he has in the world by such
a change of circumstances."

"I had not thought of that. I beg your pardon," said she, looking
into his face almost imploringly.

"And there may be worse than that," he said. Of course she knew what
he meant, but he did not know how much she knew. "It is easy to say
that a man should stand up against reverses,--but there are some
reverses a man cannot bear without suffering." She had quite made up
her mind that the one reverse of which she was thinking should be
cured; but she could take no prominent step towards curing it yet.
But that some step should be taken sooner or later she was resolved.
It might be taken now, indeed, if he would only speak out. But she
quite understood that he would not speak out now because that house
down in Norfolk was no more than a farm. "But I didn't mean to
trouble you with all that nonsense," he said.

"It doesn't trouble me at all. Of course you will tell us everything
when you come to see us."

"There is very little to tell,--unless you care for cows and pigs,
and sheep and horses."

"I do care for cows and pigs, and sheep and horses," she said.

"All the same, they are not pleasant subjects of conversation. A man
may do as much good with a single farm as he can with a large estate;
but he can't make his affairs as interesting to other people." There
was present to his own mind the knowledge that he and his rich
namesake were rivals in regard to the affections of this beautiful
girl, and he could not avoid allusions to his own inferiority. And
yet his own words, as soon as they were spoken and had sounded in
his ear, were recognised by himself as being mean and pitiful,--as
whining words, and sorry plaints against the trick which fortune had
played him. He did not know how to tell her boldly that he lamented
this change from the estate to the farm because he had hoped that
she would share the one with him, and did not dare even to ask her
to share the other. She understood it all, down to the look of
displeasure which crossed his face as he felt the possible effect of
his own speech. She understood it all, but she could not give him
much help,--as yet. There might perhaps come a moment in which she
could explain to him her own ideas about farms and estates, and the
reasons in accordance with which these might be selected and those
rejected. "Have you seen much of Ralph Newton lately?" asked the
other Ralph.

"Of your cousin?"

"Yes;--only I do not call him so. I have no right to call him my
cousin."

"No; We do not see much of him." This was said in a tone of voice
which ought to have sufficed for curing any anxiety in Ralph's bosom
respecting his rival. Had he not been sore and nervous, and, as it
must be admitted, almost stupid in the matter, he could not but have
gathered from that tone that his namesake was at least no favourite
with Miss Bonner. "He used to be a great deal at Popham Villa," said
Ralph.

"We do not see him often now. I fancy there has been some cause of
displeasure between him and my uncle. His brother has been with us
once or twice. I do like Mr. Gregory Newton."

"He is the best fellow that ever lived," exclaimed Ralph with energy.

"So much nicer than his brother," said Mary;--"though perhaps I ought
not to say so to you."

This at any rate could not but be satisfactory to him. "I like them
both," he said; "but I love Greg dearly. He and I have lived together
like brothers for years, whereas it is only quite lately that I have
known the other."

"It is only lately that I have known either;--but they seem to me
to be so different. Is not that a wonderfully beautiful picture, Mr.
Newton? Can't, you almost fancy yourself sitting down and throwing
stones into the river, or dabbling your feet in it?"

"It is very pretty," said he, not caring a penny for the picture.

"Have you any river at Beamingham?"

"There's a muddy little brook that you could almost jump over. You
wouldn't want to dabble in that."

"Has it got a name?"

"I think they call it the Wissey. It's not at all a river to be proud
of,--except in the way of eels and water-rats."

"Is there nothing to be proud of at Beamingham?"

"There's the church tower;--that's all."

"A church tower is something;--but I meant as to Beamingham Hall."

"That word Hall misleads people," said Ralph. "It's a kind of
upper-class farm-house with a lot of low rooms, and intricate
passages, and chambers here and there, smelling of apples, and a huge
kitchen, and an oven big enough for a small dinner-party."

"I should like the oven."

"And a laundry, and a dairy, and a cheese-house,--only we never make
any cheese; and a horse-pond, and a dung-hill, and a cabbage-garden."

"Is that all you can say for your new purchase, Mr. Newton?"

"The house itself isn't ugly."

"Come;--that's better."

"And it might be made fairly comfortable, if there were any use in
doing it."

"Of course there will be use."

"I don't know that there will," said Ralph. "Sometimes I think one
thing, and sometimes another. One week I'm full of a scheme about a
new garden and a conservatory, and a bow-window to the drawing-room;
and then, the next week, I think that the two rooms I live in at
present will be enough for me."

"Stick to the conservatory, Mr. Newton. But here are the girls, and I
suppose it is about time for us to go."

"Mary, where have you been?" said Clarissa.

"Looking at landscapes," said Mary.

"Mr. Newton has shown us every picture worth seeing, and described
everything, and we haven't had to look at the catalogue once. That's
just what I like at the Academy. I don't know whether you've been as
lucky."

"I've had a great deal described to me too," said Mary; "but I'm
afraid we've forgotten the particular duty that brought us here."
Then they parted, the two men promising that they would be at the
villa before long, and the girls preparing themselves for their
return home.

"That cousin of theirs is certainly very beautiful," said Gregory,
after some short tribute to the merits of the two sisters.

"I think she is," said Ralph.

"I do not wonder that my brother has been struck with her."

"Nor do I." Then after a pause he continued; "She said something
which made me think that she and your brother haven't quite hit it
off together."

"I don't know that they have," said Gregory. "Ralph does change his
mind sometimes. He hasn't said a word about her to me lately."


CHAPTER L.

ANOTHER FAILURE.


The day after the meeting at the Academy, as Ralph, the young Squire,
was sitting alone in his room over a late breakfast, a maid-servant
belonging to the house opened the door and introduced Mr. Neefit.
It was now the middle of May, and Ralph had seen nothing of the
breeches-maker since the morning on which he had made his appearance
in the yard of the Moonbeam. There had been messages, and Mr. Carey
had been very busy endeavouring to persuade the father that he
could benefit neither himself nor his daughter by persistence in so
extravagant a scheme. Money had been offered to Mr. Neefit,--most
unfortunately, and this offer had added to his wrongs. And he had
been told by his wife that Polly had at last decided in regard to her
own affections, and had accepted her old lover, Mr. Moggs. He had
raved at Polly to her face. He had sworn at Moggs behind his back. He
had called Mr. Carey very hard names;--and now he forced himself once
more upon the presence of the young Squire. "Captain," he said, as
soon as he had carefully closed the door behind him, "are you going
to be upon the square?" Newton had given special orders that Neefit
should not be admitted to his presence; but here he was, having made
his way into the chamber in the temporary absence of the Squire's own
servant.

"Mr. Neefit," said Newton, "I cannot allow this."

"Not allow it, Captain?"

"No;--I cannot. I will not be persecuted. I have received favours
from you--"

"Yes, you have, Captain."

"And I will do anything in reason to repay them."

"Will you come out and see our Polly?"

"No, I won't."

"You won't?"

"Certainly not. I don't believe your daughter wants to see me. She
is engaged to another man." So much Mr. Carey had learned from Mrs.
Neefit. "I have a great regard for your daughter, but I will not go
to see her."

"Engaged to another man;--is she?"

"I am told so."

"Oh;--that's your little game, is it? And you won't see me when I
call,--won't you? I won't stir out of this room unless you sends
for the police, and so we'll get it all into one of the courts of
law. I shall just like to see how you'll look when you're being
cross-hackled by one of them learned gents. There'll be a question or
two about the old breeches-maker as the Squire of Newton mayn't like
to see in the papers the next morning. I shall take the liberty of
ringing the bell and ordering a bit of dinner here, if you don't
mind. I shan't go when the police comes without a deal of row, and
then we shall have it all out in the courts."

This was monstrously absurd, but at the same time very annoying.
Even though he should disregard that threat of being "cross-hackled
by a learned gent," and of being afterwards made notorious in the
newspapers,--which it must be confessed he did not find himself able
to disregard,--still, independently of that feeling, he was very
unwilling to call for brute force to remove Mr. Neefit from the
arm-chair in which that worthy tradesman had seated himself. He
had treated the man otherwise than as a tradesman. He had borrowed
the man's money, and eaten the man's dinners; visited the man at
Ramsgate, and twice offered his hand to the man's daughter. "You are
very welcome to dine here," he said, "only I am sorry that I cannot
dine here with you."

"I won't stir from the place for a week."

"That will be inconvenient," said Ralph,

"Uncommon inconvenient I should say, to a gent like you,--especially
as I shall tell everybody that I'm on a visit to my son-in-law."

"I meant to yourself,--and to the business."

"Never you mind the business, Captain. There'll be enough left to
give my girl all the money I promised her, and I don't think I shall
have to ask you to keep your father-in-law neither. Sending an
attorney to offer me a thousand pounds! It's my belief I could buy
you out yet, Captain, in regard to ready money."

"I daresay you could, Mr. Neefit."

"And I won't stir from here till you name a day to come and see me
and my missus and Polly."

"This is sheer madness, Mr. Neefit."

"You think so;--do you, Captain? You'll find me madder nor you think
for yet. I'm not agoing to be put upon by you, and nothing come
of it. I'll have it out of you in money or marbles, as the saying
is. Just order me a glass of sherry wine, will you? I'm a thirsty
talking. When you came a visiting me, I always give you lashings of
drink." This was so true that Ralph felt himself compelled to ring
the bell, and order up some wine. "Soda and brandy let it be, Jack,"
said Mr. Neefit to Mr. Newton's own man. "It'll be more comfortable
like between near relations."

"Soda-water and brandy for Mr. Neefit," said the young Squire,
turning angrily to the man. "Mr. Neefit, you are perfectly welcome to
as much brandy as you can drink, and my man will wait upon you while
I'm away. Good morning." Whereupon Newton took up his hat and left
the room. He had not passed into the little back room, in which he
knew that the servant would be looking for soda-water, before he
heard a sound as of smashed crockery, and he was convinced that Mr.
Neefit was preparing himself for forcible eviction by breaking his
ornaments. Let the ornaments go, and the mirror, and the clock on
the chimney-piece, and the windows. It was a frightful nuisance, but
anything would be better than sending for the police to take away Mr.
Neefit. "Keep your eye on that man in the front room," said he, to
his Swiss valet.

"On Mr. Neefit, saar?"

"Yes; on Mr. Neefit. He wants me to marry his daughter, and I can't
oblige him. Let him have what he wants to eat and drink. Get rid of
him if you can, but don't send for the police. He's smashing all the
things, and you must save as many as you can." So saying, he hurried
down the stairs and out of the house. But what was he to do next?
If Mr. Neefit chose to carry out his threat by staying in the rooms,
Mr. Neefit must be allowed to have his own way. If he chose to amuse
himself by breaking the things, the things must be broken. If he got
very drunk, he might probably be taken home in a cab, and deposited
at the cottage at Hendon. But what should Ralph do at this moment?
He sauntered sadly down St. James's Street with his hands in his
trousers-pockets, and finding a crawling hansom at the palace-gate,
he got into it and ordered the man to drive him down to Fulham. He
had already made up his mind about "dear little Clary," and the thing
might as well be done at once. None of the girls were at home. Miss
Underwood and Miss Bonner had gone up to London to see Sir Thomas.
Miss Clarissa was spending the day with Mrs. Brownlow. "That will
just be right," said Ralph to himself, as he ordered the cabman to
drive him to the old lady's house on the Brompton Road.

Mrs. Brownlow had ever been a great admirer of the young Squire,
and did not admire him less now that he had come to his squireship.
She had always hoped that Clary would marry the real heir, and was
sounding his praises while Ralph was knocking at her door. "He is not
half so fine a fellow as his brother," said Clarissa.

"You did not use to think so," said Mrs. Brownlow. Then the door was
opened and Ralph was announced.

With his usual easy manner,--with that unabashed grace which Clarissa
used to think so charming,--he soon explained that he had been to
Fulham, and had had himself driven back to Bolsover House because
Clarissa was there. Clarissa, as she heard this, felt the blood
tingle in her cheeks. His manner now did not seem to her to be so
full of grace. Was it not all selfishness? Mrs. Brownlow purred
out her applause. It was not to be supposed that he came to see
an old woman;--but his coming to see a young woman, with adequate
intentions, was quite the proper thing for such a young man to do!
They were just going to take lunch. Of course he would stop and
lunch with them. He declared that he would like nothing better.
Mrs. Brownlow rang the bell, and gave her little orders. Clarissa's
thoughts referred quickly to various matters,--to the scene on the
lawn, to a certain evening on which she had walked home with him from
this very house, to the confessions which she had made to her sister,
to her confidence with her cousin;--and then to the offer that had
been made to Mary, now only a few weeks since. She looked at him,
though she did not seem to be looking at him, and told herself that
the man was nothing to her. He had caused her unutterable sorrow,
with which her heart was still sore;--but he was nothing to her. She
would eat her lunch with him, and endeavour to talk to him; but the
less she might see of him henceforth the better. He was selfish,
heartless, weak, and unworthy.

The lunch was eaten, and within three minutes afterwards, Mrs.
Brownlow was away. As they were returning to the little parlour in
which they had been sitting during the morning, she contrived to
escape, and Ralph found himself alone with his "dear, darling little
Clary." In spite of his graceful ease, the task before him was not
without difficulty. Clarissa, of course, knew that he had proposed to
Mary, and probably knew that he had proposed to Polly. But Mary had
told him that Clarissa was devoted to him,--had told him at least
that which amounted to almost as much. And then it was incumbent on
him to do something that might put an end to the Neefit abomination.
Clarissa would be contented to look back upon that episode with
Mary Bonner, as a dream that meant nothing;--just as he himself was
already learning to look at it. "Clary," he said, "I have hardly seen
you to speak to you since the night we walked home together from this
house."

"No, indeed, Mr. Newton," she said. Hitherto she had always called
him Ralph. He did not observe the change, having too many things of
his own to think of at the moment.

"How much has happened since that!"

"Very much, indeed, Mr. Newton."

"And yet it seems to be such a short time ago,--almost yesterday. My
poor uncle was alive then."

"Yes, he was."

He did not seem to be getting any nearer to his object by these
references to past events. "Clary," he said, "there are many things
which I wish to have forgotten, and some perhaps which I would have
forgiven."

"I suppose that is so with all of us," said Clarissa.

"Just so, though I don't know that any of us have ever been so
absurdly foolish as I have,--throwing away what was of the greatest
value in the world for the sake of something that seemed to be
precious, just for a moment." It was very difficult, and he already
began to feel that the nature of the girl was altered towards him.
She had suddenly become hard, undemonstrative, and almost unkind.
Hitherto he had always regarded her, without much conscious thought
about it, as a soft, sweet, pleasant thing, that might at any moment
be his for the asking. And Mary Bonner had told him that he ought to
ask. Now he was willing to beseech her pardon, to be in very truth
her lover, and to share with her all his prosperity. But she would
give him no assistance in his difficulty. He was determined that she
should speak, and, trusting to Mrs. Brownlow's absence, he sat still,
waiting for her.

"I hope you have thrown away nothing that you ought to keep," she
said at last. "It seems to me that you have got everything."

"No,--not as yet everything. I do not know whether I shall ever get
that which I desire the most." Of course she understood him now;
but she sat hard, and fixed, and stern,--so absolutely unlike the
Clarissa whom he had known since they were hardly more than children
together! "You know what I mean, Clarissa."

"No;--I do not," she said.

"I fear you mean that you cannot forgive me."

"I have nothing to forgive."

"Oh yes, you have; whether you will ever forgive me I cannot say. But
there is much to forgive;--very much. Your cousin Mary for a short
moment ran away with us all."

"She is welcome,--for me."

"What do you mean, Clarissa?"

"Just what I say. She is welcome for me. She has taken nothing
that I prize. Indeed I do not think she has condescended to take
anything,--anything of the sort you mean. Mary and I love each other
dearly. There is no danger of our quarrelling."

"Come, Clary," he got up as he spoke, and stood over her, close to
her shoulder, "you understand well enough what I mean. We have known
each other so long, and I think we have loved each other so well,
that you ought to say that you will forgive me. I have been foolish.
I have been wrong. I have been false, if you will. Cannot you forgive
me?"

Not for a moment was there a look of forgiveness in her eye, or a
sign of pardon in the lines of her face. But in her heart there was
a contest. Something of the old passion remained there, though it
was no more than the soreness it had caused. For half a moment she
thought whether it might not be as he would have it. But if so, how
could she again look any of her friends in the face and admit that
she had surrendered herself to so much unworthiness? How could she
tell Patience, who was beginning to be full of renewed hope for
Gregory? How could she confess such a weakness to her father? How
could she stand up before Mary Bonner? And was it possible that
she should really give herself, her whole life, and all her future
hopes, to one so weak and worthless as this man? "There is nothing to
forgive," she said, "but I certainly cannot forget."

"You know that I love you," he protested.

"Love me;--yes, with what sort of love? But it does not matter. There
need be no further talk about it. Your love to me can be nothing."

"Clarissa!"

"And to you it will be quite as little. Your heart will never suffer
much, Ralph. How long is it since you offered your hand to my cousin?
Only that you are just a boy playing at love, this would be an
insult." Then she saw her old friend through the window. "Mrs.
Brownlow," she said, "Mr. Newton is going, and I am ready for our
walk whenever you please."

"Think of it twice, Clarissa;--must this be the end of it?" pleaded
Ralph.

"As far as I am concerned it must be the end of it. When I get home I
shall probably find that you have already made an offer to Patience."
Then he got up, took his hat, and having shaken hands cordially with
Mrs. Brownlow through the window, went out to his hansom cab, which
was earning sixpence a quarter of an hour out on the road, while he
had been so absolutely wasting his quarter of an hour within the
house.

"Has he said anything, my dear?" asked Mrs. Brownlow.

"He has said a great deal."

"Well, my dear?"

"He is an empty, vain, inconstant man."

"Is he, Clarissa?"

"And yet he is so good-humoured, and so gay, and so pleasant, that I
do not see why he should not make a very good husband to some girl."

"What do you mean, Clarissa? You have not refused him?"

"I did not say he had offered;--did I?"

"But he has?"

"If he did,--then I refused him. He is good-natured; but he has no
more heart than a log of wood. Don't talk about it any more, dear
Mrs. Brownlow. I dare say we shall all be friends again before long,
and he'll almost forget everything that he said this morning."

Throughout the afternoon she was gay and almost happy, and before she
went home she had made up her mind that she would tell Patience, and
then get rid of it from her thoughts for ever. Not to tell Patience
would be a breach of faith between them, and would moreover render
future sisterly intercourse between them very difficult. But had
it been possible she would have avoided the expression of triumph
without which it would be almost impossible for her to tell the
story. Within her own bosom certainly there was some triumph. The man
for whose love she had sighed and been sick had surrendered to her at
last. The prize had been at her feet, but she had not chosen to lift
it. "Poor Ralph," she said to herself; "he means to do as well as he
can, but he is so feeble." She certainly would not tell Mary Bonner,
nor would she say a word to her father. And when she should meet
Ralph again,--as she did not doubt but that she would meet him
shortly, she would be very careful to give no sign that she was
thinking of his disgrace. He should still be called Ralph,--till
he was a married man; and when it should come to pass that he was
about to marry she would congratulate him with all the warmth of old
friendship.

That night she did tell it all to Patience. "You don't mean," she
said, "that I have not done right?"

"I am sure you have done quite right."

"Then why are you so sober about it, Patty?"

"Only if you do love him--! I would give my right hand, Clary, that
you might have that which shall make you happy in life."

"If you were to give your right and left hand too, a marriage with
Ralph Newton would not make me happy. Think of it, Patty;--to both
of us within two months! He is just like a child. How could I ever
have respected him, or believed in him? I could never have respected
myself again. No, Patty, I did love him dearly. I fancied that life
without him must all be a dreary blank. I made him into a god;--but
his feet are of the poorest clay! Kiss me, dear, and congratulate
me;--because I have escaped."

Her sister did kiss her and did congratulate her;--but still there
was a something of regret in the sister's heart. Clarissa was, to her
thinking, so fit to be the mistress of Newton Priory.


CHAPTER LI.

MUSIC HAS CHARMS.


The Commission appointed to examine into the condition of the borough
of Percycross cannot exactly be said to have made short work of it,
for it sat daily for many consecutive weeks, and examined half the
voters in the town; but it made sharp work, and reported to the
Speaker of the House such a tale of continual corruption, that all
the world knew that the borough would be disfranchised. The glory
of Percycross was gone, and in regard to political influence it was
to be treated as the cities of the plain, and blotted from off the
face of existence. The learned gentlemen who formed the Commission
had traced home to Mr. Griffenbottom's breeches-pockets large sums
of money which had been expended in the borough for purposes of
systematised corruption during the whole term of his connection
with it;--and yet they were not very hard upon Mr. Griffenbottom
personally in their report. He had spent the money no doubt, but
had so spent it that at every election it appeared that he had not
expected to spend it till the bills were sent to him. He frankly
owned that the borough had been ruinous to him; had made a poor man
of him,--but assured the Commission at the same time that all this
had come from his continued innocence. As every new election came
round, he had hoped that that would at least be pure, and had been
urgent in his instructions to his agents to that effect. He had at
last learned, he said, that he was not a sufficient Hercules to
cleanse so foul a stable. All this created no animosity against him
in Percycross during the sitting of the Commission. His old friends,
the Triggers, and Piles, and Spiveycombs, clung to him as closely as
ever. Every man in Percycross knew that the borough was gone, and
there really seemed at last to be something of actual gratitude
in their farewell behaviour to the man who had treated the place
as it liked to be treated. As the end of it all, the borough was
undoubtedly to be disfranchised, and Mr. Griffenbottom left it,--a
ruined man, indeed, according to his own statement,--but still with
his colours flying, and, to a certain extent, triumphantly. So we
will leave him, trusting,--or perhaps rather hoping,--that the days
of Mr. Griffenbottom are nearly at an end.

His colleague, Sir Thomas, on the occasion of his third visit to
Percycross,--a visit which he was constrained to make, sorely against
his will, in order that he might give his evidence before the
Commission,--remained there but a very short time. But while there he
made a clean breast of it. He had gone down to the borough with the
most steadfast purpose to avoid corruption; and had done his best in
that direction. But he had failed. There had been corruption, for
which he had himself paid in part. There had been treating of the
grossest kind. Money had been demanded from him since the election,
as to the actual destination of which he was profoundly ignorant. He
did not, however, doubt but that this money had been spent in the
purchase of votes. Sir Thomas was supposed to have betrayed the
borough in his evidence, and was hooted out of the town. On this
occasion he only remained there one night, and left Percycross for
ever, after giving his evidence.

This happened during the second week in May. On his return to London
he did not go down to Fulham, but remained at his chambers in a most
unhappy frame of mind. This renewed attempt of his to enter the world
and to go among men that he might do a man's work, had resulted in
the loss of a great many hundred pounds, in absolute failure, and, as
he wrongly told himself, in personal disgrace. He was almost ashamed
to show himself at his club, and did for two days absolutely have his
dinner brought to him in his chambers from an eating-house.

"I'm sure you won't like that, Sir Thomas," Stemm had said to him,
expostulating, and knowing very well the nature of his master's
sufferings.

"I don't know that I like anything very much," said Sir Thomas.

"I wouldn't go and not show my face because of other people's
roguery," rejoined Stemm, with cruel audacity. Sir Thomas looked at
him, but did not answer a word, and Stemm fetched the food.

"Stemm," said Sir Thomas the same evening, "it's getting to be fine
weather now."

"It's fine enough," said Stemm.

"Do you take your nieces down to Southend for an outing. Go down on
Thursday and come back on Saturday. I shall be at home. There's a
five-pound note for the expenses." Stemm slowly took the note, but
grunted and grumbled. The girls were nuisances to him, and he didn't
want to take them an outing. They wouldn't care to go before July,
and he didn't care to go at all. "You can go when you please," said
Sir Thomas. Stemm growled and grumbled, and at last left the room
with the money.

The morning afterwards Sir Thomas was sitting alone in his room
absolutely wretched. He had so managed his life that there seemed to
be nothing left to him in it worth the having. He had raised himself
to public repute by his intellect and industry, and had then, almost
at once, allowed himself to be hustled out of the throng simply
because others had been rougher than he,--because other men had
pushed and shouldered while he had been quiet and unpretending. Then
he had resolved to make up for this disappointment by work of another
kind,--by work which would, after all, be more congenial to him. He
would go back to the dream of his youth, to the labours of former
days, and would in truth write his Life of Bacon. He had then
surrounded himself with his papers, had gotten his books together and
read up his old notes, had planned chapters and sections, and settled
divisions, had drawn up headings, and revelled in those paraphernalia
of work which are so dear to would-be working men;--and then nothing
had come of it. Of what use was it that he went about ever with a
volume in his pocket, and read a page or two as he sat over his wine?
When sitting alone in his room he did read; but when reading he knew
that he was not working. He went, as it were, round and round the
thing, never touching it, till the labour which he longed to commence
became so frightful to him that he did not dare to touch it. To do
that thing was the settled purpose of his life, and yet, from day to
day and from month to month, it became more impossible to him even
to make a beginning. There is a misery in this which only they who
have endured it can understand. There are idle men who rejoice in
idleness. Their name is legion. Idleness, even when it is ruinous, is
delightful to them. They revel in it, look forward to it, and almost
take a pride in it. When it can be had without pecuniary detriment,
it is to such men a thing absolutely good in itself. But such a
one was not Sir Thomas Underwood. And there are men who love work,
who revel in that, who attack it daily with renewed energy, almost
wallowing in it, greedy of work, who go to it almost as the drunkard
goes to his bottle, or the gambler to his gaming-table. These are not
unhappy men, though they are perhaps apt to make those around them
unhappy. But such a one was not Sir Thomas Underwood. And again there
are men, fewer in number, who will work though they hate it, from
sheer conscience and from conviction that idleness will not suit them
or make them happy. Strong men these are;--but such a one certainly
was not Sir Thomas Underwood. Then there are they who love the idea
of work, but want the fibre needful for the doing it. It may be that
such a one will earn his bread as Sir Thomas Underwood had earned
his, not flinching from routine task or even from the healthy efforts
necessary for subsistence. But there will ever be present to the
mind of the ambitious man the idea of something to be done over and
above the mere earning of his bread;--and the ambition may be very
strong, though the fibre be lacking. Such a one will endure an
agony protracted for years, always intending, never performing,
self-accusing through every wakeful hour, self-accusing almost
through every sleeping hour. The work to be done is close there
by the hand, but the tools are loathed, and the paraphernalia of
it become hateful. And yet it can never be put aside. It is to be
grasped to-morrow, but on every morrow the grasping of it becomes
more difficult, more impossible, more revolting. There is no
peace, no happiness for such a man;--and such a one was Sir Thomas
Underwood.

In this strait he had been tempted to make another effort in
political life, and he had made it. There had been no difficulty in
this,--only that the work itself had been so disagreeable, and that
he had failed in it so egregiously. During his canvass, and in all
his intercourse with the Griffenbottomites, he had told himself,
falsely, how pleasant to him it would be to return to his books;--how
much better for him would be a sedentary life, if he could only bring
himself to do, or even attempt to do, the work which he had appointed
for himself. Now he had returned to his solitude, had again dragged
out his papers, his note-book, his memoranda, his dates, and yet he
could not in truth get into his harness, put his neck to the collar,
and attempt to drag the burden up the hill.

He was sitting alone in his room in this condition, with a book
in his hand of no value to his great purpose, hating himself and
wretched, when Stemm opened his door, ushering Patience and Mary
Bonner into his room. "Ah, my dears," he said, "what has brought
you up to London? I did not think of seeing you here." There was
no expression of positive displeasure in his voice, but it was
understood by them all, by the daughter, by the cousin, by old Stemm,
and by Sir Thomas himself, that such a visit as this was always to be
regarded more or less as an intrusion. However, he kissed them both,
and handed them chairs, and was more than usually civil to them.

"We do so want to hear about Percycross, papa," said Patience.

"There is nothing to be told about Percycross."

"Are you to stand again, papa?"

"Nobody will ever stand for Percycross again. It will lose its
members altogether. The thing is settled."

"And you have had all the trouble for nothing, uncle?" Mary asked.

"All for nothing,--and the expense. But that is a very common thing,
and I have no ground of complaint beyond many others."

"It does seem so hard," said Patience.

"So very hard," said Mary. And then they were silent. They had not
come without a purpose; but, as is common with young ladies, they
kept their purpose for the end of the interview.

"Are you coming home, papa?" Patience asked.

"Well, yes; I won't settle any day now, because I am very busy just
at present. But I shall be home soon,--very soon."

"I do so hope you'll stay some time with us, papa."

"My dear, you know--" And then he stopped, having been pounced upon
so suddenly that he had not resolved what excuse he would for the
moment put forward. "I've got my papers and things in such confusion
here at present,--because of Percycross and the trouble I have
had,--that I cannot leave them just now."

"But why not bring the papers with you, papa?"

"My dear, you know I can't."

Then there was another pause. "Papa, I think you ought," said
Patience. "Indeed I do, for Clary's sake,--and ours." But even this
was not the subject which had specially brought them on that morning
to Southampton Buildings.

"What is there wrong with Clary?" asked Sir Thomas.

"There is nothing wrong," said Patience

"What do you mean then?"

"I think it would be so much more comfortable for her that you should
see things as they are going on."

"I declare I don't know what she means. Do you know what she means,
Mary?"

"Clary has not been quite herself lately," said Mary.

"I suppose it's something about that scamp, Ralph Newton," said Sir
Thomas.

"No, indeed, papa; I am sure she does not think of him now." On this
very morning, as the reader may perhaps remember, the scamp had
gone down to Fulham, and from Fulham back to Brompton, in search of
Clarissa; but of the scamp's energy and renewed affections, Patience
as yet knew nothing. "Gregory has been up in London and has been down
at Fulham once or twice. We want him to come again before he goes
back on Saturday, and we thought if you would come home on Thursday,
we could ask him to dinner." Sir Thomas scratched his head, and
fidgeted in his chair. "Their cousin is in London also," continued
Patience.

"The other Ralph; he who has bought Beamingham Hall?"

"Yes, papa; we saw him at the Academy. I told him how happy you would
be to see him at Fulham."

"Of course I should be glad to see him; that is, if I happened to be
at home," said Sir Thomas.

"But I could not name a day without asking you, papa."

"He will have gone back by this time," said Sir Thomas.

"I think not, papa."

"And what do you say, Mary?"

"I have nothing to say at all, uncle. If Mr. Newton likes to come to
the villa, I shall be glad to see him. Why should I not? He has done
nothing to offend me." There was a slight smile on her face as she
spoke, and the merest hint of a blush on her cheek.

"They tell me that Beamingham Hall isn't much of a place after all,"
said Sir Thomas.

"From what Mr. Newton says, it must be a very ugly place," said Mary,
with still the same smile and the same hint of a blush;--"only I
don't quite credit all he tells us."

"If there is anything settled you ought to tell me," said Sir Thomas.

"There is nothing settled, uncle, or in any way of being settled.
It so happened that Mr. Newton did speak to me about his new house.
There is nothing more."

"Nevertheless, papa, pray let us ask him to dinner on Thursday." It
was for the purpose of making this request that Patience had come to
Southampton Buildings, braving her father's displeasure. Sir Thomas
scratched his head, and rubbed his face, and yielded. Of course he
had no alternative but to yield, and yet he did it with a bad grace.
Permission, however, was given, and it was understood that Patience
would write to the two young men, Ralph of Beamingham Hall and the
parson, asking them to dinner for the day but one following. "As
the time is so short, I've written the notes ready," said Patience,
producing them from her pocket. Then the bell was rung, and the two
notes were confided to Stemm. Patience, as she was going, found a
moment in which to be alone with her father, and to speak one more
word to him. "Dear papa, it would be so much better for us that you
should come and live at home. Think of those two, with nobody, as
it were, to say a word for them." Sir Thomas groaned, and again
scratched his head; but Patience left him before he had arranged his
words for an answer.

When they were gone, Sir Thomas sat for hours in his chair without
moving, making the while one or two faint attempts at the book before
him, but in truth giving up his mind to contemplation of the past
and to conjectures as to the future, burdened by heavy regrets, and
with hopes too weak to afford him any solace. The last words which
Patience had spoken rang in his ears,--"Think of those two, with
nobody, as it were, to say a word for them." He did think of them,
and of the speaker also, and knew that he had neglected his duty. He
could understand that such a girl as his own Clarissa did require
some one "to say a word for her," some stalwart arm to hold her up,
some loving strength to support her, some counsel to direct her. Of
course those three girls were as other girls, looking forward to
matrimony as their future lot in life, and it would not be well that
they should be left to choose or to be chosen, or left to reject and
be rejected, without any aid from their remaining parent. He knew
that he had been wrong, and he almost resolved that the chambers in
Southampton Buildings should be altogether abandoned, and his books
removed to Popham Villa.

But such men do not quite resolve. Before he could lay his hand upon
the table and assure himself that the thing should be done, the
volume had been taken up again, used for a few minutes, and then the
man's mind had run away again to that vague contemplation which is
so much easier than the forming of a steady purpose. It was one of
those almost sultry days which do come to us occasionally amidst
the ordinary inclemency of a London May, and he was sitting with
his window open, though there was a fire in the grate. As he sat,
dreaming rather than thinking, there came upon his ear the weak,
wailing, puny sound of a distant melancholy flute. He had heard it
often before, and had been roused by it to evil wishes, and sometimes
even to evil words, against the musician. It was the effort of some
youth in the direction of Staple's Inn to soothe with music the
savageness of his own bosom. It was borne usually on the evening air,
but on this occasion the idle swain had taken up his instrument
within an hour or two of his early dinner. His melody was burdened
with no peculiar tune, but consisted of a few low, wailing,
melancholy notes, such as may be extracted from the reed by a breath
and the slow raising and falling of the little finger, much, we
believe, to the comfort of the player, but to the ineffable disgust
of, too often, a large circle of hearers.

Sir Thomas was affected by the sound long before he was aware that he
was listening to it. To-whew, to-whew; to-whew, to-whew; whew-to-to,
whew-to-to, whew, to-whew. On the present occasion the variation
was hardly carried beyond that; but so much was repeated with a
persistency which at last seemed to burden the whole air round
Southampton Buildings. The little thing might have been excluded by
the closing of the window; but Sir Thomas, though he suffered, did
not reflect for a while whence the suffering came. Who does not know
how such sounds may serve to enhance the bitterness of remorse, to
add a sorrow to the present thoughts, and to rob the future of its
hopes?

There come upon us all as we grow up in years, hours in which it is
impossible to keep down the conviction that everything is vanity,
that the life past has been vain from folly, and that the life to
come must be vain from impotence. It is the presence of thoughts such
as these that needs the assurance of a heaven to save the thinker
from madness or from suicide. It is when the feeling of this
pervading vanity is strongest on him, that he who doubts of heaven
most regrets his incapacity for belief. If there be nothing better
than this on to the grave,--and nothing worse beyond the grave, why
should I bear such fardels?

Sir Thomas, as he sat there listening and thinking, unable not to
think and not to listen, found that the fardels were very heavy. What
good had come to him of his life,--to him or to others? And what
further good did he dare to promise to himself? Had it not all been
vanity? Was it not all vain to him now at the present? Was not life
becoming to him vainer and still vainer every day? He had promised
himself once that books should be the solace of his age, and he was
beginning to hate his books, because he knew that he did no more than
trifle with them. He had found himself driven to attempt to escape
from them back into public life; but had failed, and had been
inexpressibly dismayed in the failure. While failing, he had promised
himself that he would rush at his work on his return to privacy and
to quiet; but he was still as the shivering coward, who stands upon
the brink, and cannot plunge in among the bathers. And then there was
sadness beyond this, and even deeper than this. Why should he have
dared to arrange for himself a life different from the life of the
ordinary men and women who lived around him? Why had he not contented
himself with having his children around him; walking with them to
church on Sunday morning, taking them to the theatre on Monday
evening, and allowing them to read him to sleep after tea on the
Tuesday? He had not done these things, was not doing them now,
because he had ventured to think himself capable of something that
would justify him in leaving the common circle. He had left it, but
was not justified. He had been in Parliament, had been in office,
and had tried to write a book. But he was not a legislator, was
not a statesman, and was not an author. He was simply a weak, vain,
wretched man, who, through false conceit, had been induced to neglect
almost every duty of life! To-whew, to-whew, to-whew, to-whew! As the
sounds filled his ears, such were the thoughts which lay heavy on his
bosom. So idle as he had been in thinking, so inconclusive, so frail,
so subject to gusts of wind, so incapable of following his subject to
the end, why had he dared to leave that Sunday-keeping, church-going,
domestic, decent life, which would have become one of so ordinary a
calibre as himself? There are men who may doubt, who may weigh the
evidence, who may venture to believe or disbelieve in compliance with
their own reasoning faculties,--who may trust themselves to think
it out; but he, too clearly, had not been, was not, and never
would be one of these. To walk as he saw other men walking around
him,--because he was one of the many; to believe that to be good
which the teachers appointed for him declared to be good; to do
prescribed duties without much personal inquiry into the causes which
had made them duties; to listen patiently, and to be content without
excitement; that was the mode of living for which he should have
known himself to be fit. But he had not known it, and had strayed
away, and had ventured to think that he could think,--and had been
ambitious. And now he found himself stranded in the mud of personal
condemnation,--and that so late in life, that there remained to him
no hope of escape. Whew-to-to; whew-to-to; whew,--to-whew. "Stemm,
why do you let that brute go on with his cursed flute?" Stemm at that
moment had opened the door to suggest that as he usually dined at
one, and as it was now past three, he would go out and get a bit of
something to eat.

"He's always at it, sir," said Stemm, pausing for a moment before he
alluded to his own wants.

"Why the deuce is he always at it? Why isn't he indited for a
nuisance? Who's to do anything with such a noise as that going on for
hours together? He has nearly driven me mad."

"It's young Wobble as has the back attic, No. 17, in the Inn," said
Stemm.

"They ought to turn him out," said Sir Thomas.

"I rather like it myself," said Stemm. "It suits my disposition,
sir." Then he made his little suggestion in regard to his own
personal needs, and of course was blown up for not having come in
two hours ago to remind Sir Thomas that it was dinner-time. "It's
because I wouldn't disturb you when you has the Bacon papers out, Sir
Thomas," said Stemm serenely. Sir Thomas winced and shook his head;
but such scenes as this were too common to have much effect. "Stemm!"
he called aloud, as soon as the old clerk had closed the door;
"Stemm!" Whereupon Stemm reappeared. "Stemm, have some one here next
week to pack all these books."

"Pack all the books, Sir Thomas!"

"Yes;--to pack all the books. There must be cases. Now, go and get
your dinner."

"New cases, Sir Thomas!"

"That will do. Go and get your dinner." And yet his mind was not
quite made up.


CHAPTER LII.

GUS EARDHAM.


Whether Mr. Neefit broke Ralph Newton's little statuette,--a
miniature copy in porcelain of the Apollo Belvidere, which stood in a
corner of Ralph's room, and in the possession of which he took some
pride,--from awkwardness in his wrath or of malice prepense, was
never known. He told the servant that he had whisked it down with
his coat tails; but Ralph always thought that the breeches-maker had
intended to make a general ruin, but had been cowed by the noise of
his first attack. He did, at any rate, abstain from breaking other
things, and when the servant entered the room, condescended to make
some careless apology. "A trifle like that ain't nothing between me
and your master, Jack," said Mr. Neefit, after accounting for the
accident by his coat-tails.

"I am not Jack," said the indignant valet, with a strong foreign
accent. "I am named--Adolphe."

"Adolphe, are you? I don't think much of Adolphe for a name;--but it
ain't no difference to me. Just pick up them bits; will you?"

The man turned a look of scorn on Mr. Neefit, and did pick up the
bits. He intended to obey his master as far as might be possible,
but was very unwilling to wait upon the breeches-maker. He felt that
the order which had been given to him was very cruel. It was his
duty,--and his pleasure to wait upon gentlemen; but this man he
knew to be a tradesman who measured customers for hunting apparel
in his own shop. It was hard upon him that his master should go
and leave him to be insulted, ordered about, and trodden upon by
a breeches-maker. "Get me a bit of steak, will you?" demanded
Neefit;--"a bit of the rump, not too much done, with the gravy in
it,--and an onion. What are you staring at? Didn't you hear what your
master said to you?"

"Onion,--and romp-steak!"

"Yes; rump-steak and onion. I ain't going out of this till I've had a
bit of grub. Your master knows all about it. I'm going to have more
nor that out of him before I've done with him."

Neefit did at last succeed, and had his rump-steak and onion,
together with more brandy and soda-water, eating and drinking as he
sat in Ralph's beautiful new easy chair,--not very much to his own
comfort. A steak at the Prince's Feathers in Conduit Street would
have been very much more pleasant to him, and he would have preferred
half-and-half in the pewter to brandy and soda-water;--but he felt a
pride in using his power in a fashion that would be disgraceful to
his host. When he had done his steak he pulled his pipe out of his
pocket, and smoked. Against this Adolphe remonstrated stoutly, but
quite in vain. "The Captain won't mind a little baccy-smoke out of my
pipe," he said. "He always has his smoke comfortable when he comes
down to me." At last, about four o'clock, he did go away, assuring
Adolphe that he would repeat his visit very soon. "I means to see
a deal of the Captain this season," he said. At last, however, he
retreated, and Adolphe opened the door of the house for him without
speaking a word. "Bye, bye," said Neefit. "I'll be here again before
long."

Ralph on that afternoon came home to dress for dinner at about seven,
in great fear lest Neefit should still be found in his rooms. "No,
saar; he go away at last!" said Adolphe, with a melancholy shake of
his head.

"Has he done much harm?"

"The Apollo gone!--and he had romp-steak,--and onions,--and a pipe.
Vat vas I to do? I hope he vill never come again." And so also did
Mr. Newton hope that Neefit would never come again.

He was going to dine with Lady Eardham, the wife of a Berkshire
baronet, who had three fair daughters. At this period of his life he
found the aristocracy of Berkshire and Hampshire to be very civil to
him; and, indeed, the world at large was disposed to smile on him.
But there was very much in his lot to make him unhappy. He had on
that morning been utterly rejected by Clarissa Underwood. It may,
perhaps, be true that he was not a man to break his heart because a
girl rejected him. He was certainly one who could have sung the old
song, "If she be not fair for me, what care I how fair she be." And
yet Clarissa's conduct had distressed him, and had caused him to go
about throughout the whole afternoon with his heart almost in his
boots. He had felt her coldness to him much more severely than he had
that of Mary Bonner. He had taught himself to look upon that little
episode with Mary as though it had really meant nothing. She had just
crossed the sky of his heaven like a meteor, and for a moment had
disturbed its serenity. And Polly also had been to him a false light,
leading him astray for awhile under exceptional, and, as he thought,
quite pardonable circumstances. But dear little Clary had been his
own peculiar star,--a star that was bound to have been true to him,
even though he might have erred for a moment in his worship,--a
star with a sweet, soft, enduring light, that he had always assured
himself he might call his own when he pleased. And now this soft,
sweet star had turned upon him and scorched him. "When I get home,"
she had said to him, "I shall find that you have already made an
offer to Patience!" He certainly had not expected such scorn from
her. And then he was so sure in his heart that if she would have
accepted him, he would have been henceforth so true to her, so good
to her! He would have had such magnanimous pleasure in showering upon
her pretty little head all the good things at his disposal, that,
for her own sake, the pity was great. When he had been five minutes
in his cab, bowling back towards his club, he was almost minded to
return and give her one more chance. She would just have suited him.
And as for her,--would it not be a heaven on earth for her if she
would only consent to forget that foolish, unmeaning little episode.
Could Clary have forgotten the episode, and been content to care
little or nothing for that easiness of feeling which made our Ralph
what he was, she might, probably, have been happy as the mistress of
the Priory. But she would not have forgotten, and would not have been
content. She had made up her little heart stoutly that Ralph the heir
should sit in it no longer, and it was well for him that he did not
go back.

He went to his club instead,--not daring to go to his rooms. The
insanity of Neefit was becoming to him a terrible bane. It was, too,
a cruelty which he certainly had done nothing to deserve. He could
lay his hand on his heart and assure himself that he had treated that
mad, pig-headed tradesman well in all respects. He knew himself to
be the last man to make a promise, and then to break it wilfully. He
had certainly borrowed money of Neefit;--and at the probable cost
of all his future happiness he had, with a nobleness which he could
not himself sufficiently admire, done his very best to keep the
hard terms which in his distress he had allowed to be imposed upon
himself. He had been loyal, even to the breeches-maker;--and this was
the return which was made to him!

What was he to do, should Neefit cling to his threat and remain
permanently at his chambers? There were the police, and no doubt
he could rid himself of his persecutor. But he understood well the
barbarous power which some underbred, well-trained barrister would
have of asking him questions which it would be so very disagreeable
for him to answer! He lacked the courage to send for the police.
Jacky Joram had just distinguished himself greatly, and nearly
exterminated a young gentleman who had married one girl while he was
engaged to another. Jacky Joram might ask him questions as to his
little dinners at Alexandra Lodge, which it would nearly kill him
to answer. He was very unhappy, and began to think that it might
be as well that he should travel for twelve months. Neefit could
not persecute him up the Nile, or among the Rocky Mountains. And
perhaps Clary's ferocity would have left her were he to return after
twelve months of glorious journeyings, still constant to his first
affections. In the meantime he did not dare to go home till it would
be absolutely necessary that he should dress for dinner.

In the billiard-room of his club he found Lord Polperrow,--the eldest
son of the Marquis of Megavissey,--pretty Poll, as he was called by
many young men, and by some young ladies, about town. Lord Polperrow
had become his fast friend since the day on which his heirship was
established, and now encountered him with friendly intimacy. "Halloa,
Newton," said the young lord, "have you seen old Neefit lately?"
There were eight or ten men in the room, and suddenly there was
silence among the cues.

Ralph would have given his best horse to be able to laugh it off, but
he found that he could not laugh. He became very hot, and knew that
he was red in the face. "What about old Neefit?" he said.

"I've just come from Conduit Street, and he says that he has been
dining with you. He swears that you are to marry his daughter."

"He be d----!" said Newton. It was a poor way of getting out of the
scrape, and so Ralph felt.

"But what's the meaning of it all? He's telling everybody about
London that you went down to stay with him at Margate."

"Neefit has gone mad lately," said Captain Fooks, with a good-natured
determination to stand by his friend in misfortune.

"But how about the girl, Newton?" asked his lordship.

"You may have her yourself, Poll,--if she don't prefer a young
shoemaker, to whom I believe she's engaged. She's very pretty, and
has got a lot of money--which will suit you to a T." He tried to put
a good face on it; but, nevertheless, he was very hot and red in the
face.

"I'd put a stop to this if I were you," said another friend,
confidentially and in a whisper. "He's not only telling everybody,
but writing letters about it."

"Oh, I know," said Ralph. "How can I help what a madman does? It's a
bore of course." Then he sauntered out again, feeling sure that his
transactions with Mr. Neefit would form the subject of conversation
in the club billiard-room for the next hour and a half. It would
certainly become expedient that he should travel abroad.

He felt it to be quite a relief when he found that Mr. Neefit was not
waiting for him at his chambers. "Adolphe," he said as soon as he was
dressed, "that man must never be allowed to put his foot inside the
door again."

"Ah;--the Apollo gone! And he did it express!"

"I don't mind the figure;--but he must never be allowed to enter the
place again. I shall not stay up long, but while we are here you must
not leave the place till six. He won't come in the evening." Then he
put a sovereign into the man's hand, and went out to dine at Lady
Eardham's.

Lady Eardham had three fair daughters, with pretty necks, and
flaxen hair, and blue eyes, and pug noses, all wonderfully alike.
They ranged from twenty-seven to twenty-one, there being sons
between,--and it began to be desirable that they should be married.
Since Ralph had been in town the Eardham mansion in Cavendish Square
had been opened to him with almost maternal kindness. He had accepted
the kindness; but being fully alive to the purposes of matronly
intrigue, had had his little jokes in reference to the young ladies.
He liked young ladies generally, but was well aware that a young man
is not obliged to offer his hand and heart to every girl that is
civil to him. He and the Eardham girls had been exceedingly intimate,
but he had had no idea whatever of sharing Newton Priory with an
Eardham. Now, however, in his misery he was glad to go to a house in
which he would be received with an assured welcome.

Everybody smiled upon him. Sir George in these days was very cordial,
greeting him with that genial esoteric warmth which is always felt by
one English country gentleman with a large estate for another equally
blessed. Six months ago, when it was believed that Ralph had sold
his inheritance to his uncle, Sir George when he met the young man
addressed him in a very different fashion. As he entered the room he
felt the warmth of the welcoming. The girls, one and all, had ever so
many things to say to him. They all hunted, and they all wanted him
to look at horses for them. Lady Eardham was more matronly than ever,
and at the same time was a little fussy. She would not leave him
among the girls, and at last succeeded in getting him off into a
corner of the back drawing-room. "Now, Mr. Newton," she said, "I am
going to show you that I put the greatest confidence in you."

"So you may," said Ralph, wondering whether one of the girls was to
be offered to him, out of hand. At the present moment he was so low
in spirits that he would probably have taken either.

"I have had a letter," said Lady Eardham, whispering the words into
his ear;--and then she paused. "Such a strange letter, and very
abominable. I've shown it to no one,--not even to Sir George. I
wouldn't let one of the girls see it for ever so much." Then there
was another pause. "I don't believe a word of it, Mr. Newton; but I
think it right to show it to you,--because it's about you."

"About me?" said Ralph, with his mind fixed at once upon Mr. Neefit.

"Yes, indeed;--and when I tell you it refers to my girls too, you
will see how strong is my confidence in you. If either had been
specially named, of course I could not have shown it." Then she
handed him the letter, which poor Ralph read, as follows:--


   MY LADY,--I'm told as Mr. Ralph Newton, of Newton Priory,
   is sweet upon one of your ladyship's daughters. I think
   it my duty to tell your ladyship he's engaged to marry my
   girl, Maryanne Neefit.

   Yours most respectful,

   THOMAS NEEFIT,
   Breeches-Maker, Conduit Street.


"It's a lie," said Ralph.

"I'm sure it's a lie," said Lady Eardham, "only I thought it right to
show it you."

Ralph took Gus Eardham down to dinner, and did his very best to make
himself agreeable. Gus was the middle one of the three, and was
certainly a fine girl. The Eardham girls would have no money; but
Ralph was not a greedy man,--except when he was in great need. It
must not be supposed, however, that on this occasion he made up his
mind to marry Gus Eardham. But, as on previous occasions, he had been
able to hold all the Eardhams in a kind of subjection to himself,
feeling himself to be bigger than they,--as hitherto he had been
conscious that he was bestowing and they receiving,--so now, in his
present misfortune, did he recognise that Gus was a little bigger
than himself, and that it was for her to give and for him to take.
And Gus was able to talk to him as though she also entertained the
same conviction. Gus was very kind to him, and he felt grateful to
her.

Lady Eardham saw Gus alone in her bedroom that night. "I believe he's
a very good young man," said Lady Eardham, "if he's managed rightly.
And as for all this about the horrid man's daughter, it don't matter
at all. He'd live it down in a month if he were married."

"I don't think anything about that, mamma. I dare say he's had his
fun,--just like other men."

"Only, my dear, he's one of that sort that have to be fixed."

"It's so hard to fix them, mamma."

"It needn't be hard to fix him,--that is, if you'll only be steady.
He's not sharp and hard and callous, like some of them. He doesn't
mean any harm, and if he once speaks out, he isn't one that can't be
kept to time. His manners are nice. I don't think the property is
involved; but I'll find out from papa; and he's just the man to think
his wife the pink of perfection." Lady Eardham had read our hero's
character not inaccurately.


CHAPTER LIII.

THE END OF POLLY NEEFIT.


Rumours, well-supported rumours, as to the kind of life which Mr.
Neefit was leading reached Alexandra Cottage, filling Mrs. Neefit's
mind with dismay, and making Polly very angry indeed. He came home
always somewhat the worse for drink, and would talk of punching the
heads both of Mr. Newton and of Mr. Ontario Moggs. Waddle, who was
very true to his master's interests, had taken an opportunity of
seeing Mrs. Neefit, and of expressing a very distinct idea that the
business was going to the mischief. Mrs. Neefit was of opinion that
in this emergency the business should be sold, and that they might
safely remove themselves to some distant country,--to Tunbridge, or
perhaps to Ware. Polly, however, would not accede to her mother's
views. The evil must, she thought, be cured at once. "If father goes
on like this, I shall just walk straight out of the house, and marry
Moggs at once," Polly said. "Father makes no account of my name, and
so I must just look out for myself." She had not as yet communicated
these intentions to Ontario, but she was quite sure that she would be
supported in her views by him whenever she should choose to do so.

Once or twice Ontario came down to the cottage, and when he did so,
Mr. Neefit was always told of the visit. "I ain't going to keep
anything from father, mother," Polly would say. "If he chooses
to misbehave, that isn't my fault. I mean to have Mr. Moggs, and
it's only natural I should like to see him." Neefit, when informed
of these visits, after swearing that Moggs junior was a sneaking
scoundrel to come to his house in his absence, would call upon Moggs
senior, and swear with many threats that his daughter should have
nothing but what she stood up in. Moggs senior would stand quite
silent, cutting the skin on his hand with his shoemaker's knife, and
would simply bid the infuriated breeches-maker good morning, when
he left the shop. But, in truth, Mr. Moggs senior had begun to doubt.
"I'd leave it awhile, Onty, if I was you," he said. "May be, after
all, he'll give her nothing."

"I'll take her the first day she'll come to me,--money or no money,"
said Moggs junior.

Foiled ambition had, in truth, driven the breeches-maker to madness.
But there were moments in which he was softened, melancholy, and
almost penitent. "Why didn't you have him when he come down to
Margate," he said, with the tears running down his cheek, that very
evening after eating his rump-steak in Mr. Newton's rooms. The
soda-water and brandy, with a little gin-and-water after it, had
reduced him to an almost maudlin condition, so that he was unable to
support his parental authority.

"Because I didn't choose, father. It wasn't his fault. He spoke fair
enough,--though I don't suppose he ever wanted it. Why should he?"

"You might have had him then. He'd 've never dared to go back. I'd a
killed him if he had."

"What good would it have done, father? He'd never have loved me, and
he'd have despised you and mother."

"I wouldn't 've minded that," said Mr. Neefit, wiping his eyes.

"But I should have minded. What should I have felt with a husband
as wouldn't have wanted me ever to have my own father in his house?
Would that have made me happy?"

"It 'd 've made me happy to know as you was there."

"No, father; there would have been no happiness in it. When I came to
see what he was I knew I should never love him. He was just willing
to take me because of his word;--and was I going to a man like that?
No, father;--certainly not." The poor man was at that moment too far
gone in his misery to argue the matter further, and he lay on the
old sofa, very much at Polly's mercy. "Drop it, father," she said.
"It wasn't to be, and it couldn't have been. You'd better say you'll
drop it." But, sick and uncomfortable as he was on that evening, he
couldn't be got to say that he would drop it.

Nor could he be got to drop it for some ten days after that;--but
on a certain evening he had come home very uncomfortable from the
effects of gin-and-water, and had been spoken to very sensibly both
by his wife and daughter.

By seven on the following morning Ontario Moggs was sitting in the
front parlour of the house at Hendon, and Polly Neefit was sitting
with him. He had never been there at so early an hour before, and
it was thought afterwards by both Mr. and Mrs. Neefit that his
appearance, so unexpected by them, had not surprised their daughter
Polly. Could it have been possible that she had sent a message to him
after that little scene with her father? There he was, at any rate,
and Polly was up to receive him. "Now, Onty, that'll do. I didn't
want to talk nonsense, but just to settle something."

"But you'll tell a fellow that you're glad to see him?"

"No, I won't. I won't tell a fellow anything he doesn't know already.
You and I have got to get married."

"Of course we have."

"But we want father's consent. I'm not going to have him made
unhappy, if I can help it. He's that wretched sometimes at present
that my heart is half killed about him."

"The things he says are monstrous," asserted Moggs, thinking of the
protestation lately made by the breeches-maker in his own hearing,
to the effect that Ralph Newton should yet be made to marry his
daughter.

"All the same I've got to think about him. There's a dozen or so
of men as would marry me, Mr. Moggs; but I can never have another
father."

"I'll be the first of the dozen any way," said the gallant Ontario.

"That depends. However, mother says so, and if father 'll consent,
I won't go against it. I'll go to him now, before he's up, and I'll
tell him you're here. I'll bring him to his senses if I can. I don't
know whatever made him think so much about gentlemen."

"He didn't learn it from you, Polly."

"Perhaps he did, after all; and if so, that's the more reason why I'd
forgive him." So saying, Polly went up-stairs upon her mission. On
the landing she met her mother, and made known the fact that Ontario
was in the parlour. "Don't you go to him, mother;--not yet," said
Polly. Whereby it may be presumed that Mrs. Neefit had been informed
of Mr. Moggs's visit before Polly had gone to him.

Mr. Neefit was in bed, and his condition apparently was not a happy
one. He was lying with his head between his hands, and was groaning,
not loudly, but very bitterly. His mode of life for the last month
had not been of a kind to make him comfortable, and his conscience,
too, was ill at ease. He had been a hard-working man, who had loved
respectability and been careful of his wife and child. He had been
proud to think that nobody could say anything against him, and that
he had always paid his way. Up to the time of this disastrous fit of
ambition on Polly's behalf he had never made himself ridiculous, and
had been a prosperous tradesman, well thought of by his customers.
Suddenly he had become mad, but not so mad as to be unconscious
of his own madness. The failure of his hopes, joined to the
inexpressibly bitter feeling that in their joint transactions young
Newton had received all that had been necessary to him, whereas he,
Neefit, had got none of that for which he had bargained,--these
together had so upset him that he had lost his balance, had travelled
out of his usual grooves, and had made an ass of himself. He knew he
had made an ass of himself,--and was hopelessly endeavouring to show
himself to be less of an ass than people thought him, by some success
in his violence. If he could only punish young Newton terribly,
people would understand why he had done all this. But drink had been
necessary to give him courage for his violence, and now as he lay
miserable in bed, his courage was very low.

"Father," said Polly, "shall I give you a drink?" Neefit muttered
something, and took the cold tea that was offered to him. It was
cold tea, with just a spoonful of brandy in it to make it acceptable.
"Father, there ought to be an end of all this;--oughtn't there?"

"I don't know about no ends. I'll be down on him yet."

"No you won't, father. And why should you? He has done nothing wrong
to you or me. I wouldn't have him if it was ever so."

"It's all been your fault, Polly."

"Yes;--my fault; that I wouldn't be made what you call a lady; to be
taken away, so that I'd never see any more of you and mother!" Then
she put her hand gently on his shoulder. "I couldn't stand that,
father."

"I'd make him let you come to us."

"A wife must obey her husband, father. Mother always obeyed you."

"No, she didn't. She's again me now."

"Besides, I don't want to be a lady," said Polly, seeing that she had
better leave that question of marital obedience; "and I won't be a
lady. I won't be better than you and mother."

"You've been brought up better."

"I'll show my breeding, then, by being true to you, and true to the
man I love. What would you think of your girl, if she was to give her
hand to a--gentleman, when she'd given her heart to a--shoemaker?"

"Oh, d---- the shoemaker!"

"No, father, I won't have it. What is there against Ontario? He's a
fine-hearted fellow, as isn't greedy after money,--as 'd kiss the
very ground I stand on he's that true to me, and is a tradesman as
yourself. If we had a little place of our own, wouldn't Ontario be
proud to have you there, and give you the best of everything; and
wouldn't I wait upon you, just only trying to know beforehand every
tittle as you'd like to have. And if there was to be babies, wouldn't
they be brought up to love you. If I'd gone with that young man down
to his fine place, do you think it would have been like that? How 'd
I've felt when he was too proud to let his boy know as you was my
father?" Neefit turned on his bed and groaned. He was too ill at ease
as to his inner man to argue the subject from a high point of view,
or to assert that he was content to be abased himself in order that
his child and grandchildren might be raised in the world. "Father,"
said Polly, "you have always been kind to me. Be kind to me now."

"The young 'uns is always to have their own way," said Neefit.

"Hasn't my way been your way, father?"

"Not when you wouldn't take the Captain when he come to Margate."

"I didn't love him, father. Dear father, say the word. We haven't
been happy lately;--have we, father?"

"I ain't been very 'appy," said Neefit, bursting out into sobs.

She put her face upon his brow and kissed it. "Father, let us be
happy again. Ontario is down-stairs,--in the parlour now."

"Ontario Moggs in my parlour!" said Neefit, jumping up in bed.

"Yes, father; Ontario Moggs,--my husband, as will be; the man I
honour and love; the man that will honour and love you; as true a
fellow as ever made a young woman happy by taking her. Let me tell
him that you will have him for a son." In truth, Neefit did not speak
the word;--but when Polly left the room, which she presently did
after a long embrace, Mr. Neefit was aware that his consent to the
union would be conveyed to Ontario Moggs in less than five minutes.

"And now you can name the day," said Ontario.

"I cannot do any such thing," replied Polly; "and I think that quite
enough has been settled for one morning. It's give an inch and take
an ell with some folks."

Ontario waited for breakfast, and had an interview with his future
father-in-law. It was an hour after the scene up-stairs before Mr.
Neefit could descend, and when he did come down he was not very
jovial at the breakfast-table. "It isn't what I like, Moggs," was the
first word that he spoke when the young politician rose to grasp the
hand of his future father-in-law.

"I hope you'll live to like it, Mr. Neefit," said Ontario, who, now
that he was to have his way in regard to Polly, was prepared to
disregard entirely any minor annoyances.

"I don't know how that may be. I think my girl might have done
better. I told her so, and I just tell you the same. She might a'
done a deal better, but women is always restive."

"We like to have our own way about our young men, father," said
Polly, who was standing behind her father's chair.

"Bother young men," said the breeches-maker. After that the interview
passed off, if not very pleasantly, at least smoothly,--and it was
understood that Mr. Neefit was to abandon that system of persecution
against Ralph Newton, to which his life had been devoted for the last
few weeks.

After that there was a pretty little correspondence between Polly and
Ralph, with which the story of Polly's maiden life may be presumed to
be ended, and which shall be given to the reader, although by doing
so the facts of our tale will be somewhat anticipated. Polly, with
her father's permission, communicated the fact of her engagement to
her former lover.


   Hendon, Saturday.

   DEAR SIR,--

   Father thinks it best that I should tell you that I
   am engaged to marry Mr. Ontario Moggs,--whom you will
   remember. He is a most respectable tradesman, and stood
   once for a member of Parliament, and I think he will make
   me quite happy; and I'm quite sure that's what I'm fitted
   for.


Whether Polly meant that she was fitted to be made happy, or fitted
to be the wife of a tradesman who stood for Parliament, did not
appear quite clearly.


   There have been things which we are very sorry for, and
   hope you'll forgive and forget. Father bids me say how
   sorry he is he broke a figure of a pretty little man in
   your room. He would get another, only he would not know
   where to go for it.

   Wishing you always may be happy, believe me to remain,

   Yours most respectfully,

   MARYANNE NEEFIT.


Ralph's answer was dated about a fortnight afterwards;--


   --, Cavendish Square, 1 June, 186--.

   MY DEAR POLLY,--

   I hope you will allow me to call you so now for the
   last time. I am, indeed, happy that you are going to
   be married. I believe Mr. Moggs to be a most excellent
   fellow. I hope I may often see him,--and sometimes you.
   He must allow you to accept a little present which I send
   you, and never be jealous if you wear it at your waist.
   The pretty little man that your father broke by accident
   in my rooms did not signify at all. Pray tell him so from
   me.

   Believe me to be your very sincere friend,

   RALPH NEWTON.

   I may as well tell you my own secret. I am going to be
   married, too. The young lady lives in this house, and her
   name is Augusta Eardham.


This letter was sent by messenger from Cavendish Square, with a very
handsome watch and chain. A month afterwards, when he was preparing
to leave London for Brayboro' Park, he received a little packet, with
a note as follows;--


   Linton, Devonshire, Wednesday.

   DEAR MR. NEWTON,--

   I am so much obliged for the watch, and so is Ontario, who
   will never be jealous, I'm sure. It is a most beautiful
   thing, and I shall value it, oh! so much. I am very glad
   you are going to be married, and should have answered
   before, only I wanted to finish making with my own hand a
   little chain which I send you. And I hope your sweetheart
   won't be jealous either. We looked her out in a book, and
   found she is the daughter of a great gentleman with a
   title. That is all just as it should be. Ontario sends his
   respects. We have come down here for the honeymoon.

   I remain, yours very sincerely,

   MARYANNE MOGGS.


CHAPTER LIV.

MY MARY.


Both the invitations sent by Patience Underwood were accepted, and
Sir Thomas, on the day named, was at home to receive them. Nothing
had as yet been done as to the constructing of those cases which he
so suddenly ordered to be made for his books; and, indeed, Stemm had
resolved to take the order as meaning nothing. It would not be for
him to accelerate his master's departure from Southampton Buildings,
and he knew enough of the man to be aware that he must have some very
strong motive indeed before so great a change could be really made.
When Sir Thomas left Southampton Buildings for Fulham, on the day
named for the dinner, not a word further had been said about packing
the books.

There was no company at the villa besides Sir Thomas, the three
girls, and the two young men. As to Clarissa, Patience said not a
word, even to her father,--that must still be left till time should
further cure the wound that had been made;--but she did venture to
suggest, in private with Sir Thomas, that it was a pity that he who
was certainly the more worthy of the two Ralphs should not be made
to understand that others did not think so much of the present
inferiority of his position in the world as he seemed to think
himself.

"You mean that Mary would take him?" asked Sir Thomas.

"Why should she not, if she likes him? He is very good."

"I can't tell him to offer to her, without telling him also that he
would be accepted."

"No;--I suppose not," said Patience.

Nevertheless, Sir Thomas did speak to Ralph Newton before
dinner,--stuttering and muttering, and only half finishing his
sentence. "We had a correspondence once, Mr. Newton. I dare say you
remember."

"I remember it very well, Sir Thomas."

"I only wanted to tell you;--you seem to think more about what has
taken place,--I mean as to the property,--than we do;--that is, than
I do."

"It has made a change."

"Yes; of course. But I don't know that a large place like Newton
is sure to make a man happy. Perhaps you'd like to wash your hands
before dinner." Gregory, in the meantime, was walking round the
garden with Mary and Clarissa.

The dinner was very quiet, but pleasant and cheerful. Sir Thomas
talked a good deal, and so did Patience. Mary also was at her ease,
and able to do all that was required of her. Ralph certainly was not
gay. He was seated next to Clarissa, and spoke a few words now and
again; but he was arranging matters in his mind; and Patience, who
was observing them all, knew that he was pre-occupied. Clarissa,
who now and again would forget her sorrow and revert to her former
self,--as she had done in the picture-gallery,--could not now, under
the eye as it were of her father, her sister, and her old lover,
forget her troubles. She knew what was expected of her; but she
could not do it;--she could not do it at least as yet. Nevertheless,
Patience, who was the engineer in the present crisis, was upon the
whole contented with the way in which things were going.

The three girls sat with the gentlemen for a quarter of an hour after
the decanters were put upon the table, and then withdrew. Sir Thomas
immediately began to talk about Newton Priory, and to ask questions
which might interest the parson without, as he thought, hurting the
feelings of the disinherited Ralph. This went on for about five
minutes, during which Gregory was very eloquent about his church and
his people, when, suddenly, Ralph rose from his chair and withdrew.
"Have I said anything that annoyed him?" asked Sir Thomas anxiously.

"It is not that, I think," said Gregory.

Ralph walked across the passage, opened the door of the drawing-room,
in which the three girls were at work, walked up to the chair in
which Mary Bonner was sitting, and said something in so low a voice
that neither of the sisters heard him.

"Certainly I will," said Mary, rising from her chair. Patience
glanced round, and could see that the colour, always present in her
cousin's face, was heightened,--ever so little indeed; but still the
tell-tale blush had told its tale. Ralph stood for a moment while
Mary moved away to the door, and then followed her without speaking a
word to the other girls, or bestowing a glance on either of them.

"He is going to propose to her," said Clarissa as soon as the door
was shut.

"No one can be sure," said Patience.

"Only fancy,--asking a girl to go out of the room,--in that brave
manner! I shouldn't have gone because I'm a coward; but it's just
what Mary will like."

"Let me get my hat, Mr. Newton," said Mary, taking the opportunity to
trip up-stairs, though her hat was hanging in the hall. When she was
in her room she merely stood upright there, for half a minute, in the
middle of the chamber, erect and stiff, with her arms and fingers
stretched out, thinking how she would behave herself. Half a minute
sufficed for her to find her clue, and then she came down as quickly
as her feet would carry her. He had opened the front door, and was
standing outside upon the gravel, and there she joined him.

"I had no other way but this of speaking to you," he said.

"I don't dislike coming out at all," she answered. Then there was
silence for a moment or two as they walked along into the gloom of
the shrubbery. "I suppose you are going down to Norfolk soon?" she
said.

"I do not quite know. I thought of going to-morrow."

"So soon as that?"

"But I've got something that I want to settle. I think you must know
what it is." Then he paused again, almost as though he expected her
to confess that she did know. But Mary was well aware that it was not
for her to say another word till he had fully explained in most open
detail what it was that he desired to settle. "You know a good deal
of my history, Miss Newton. When I thought that things were going
well with me,--much better than I had ever allowed myself to expect
in early days, I,--I,--became acquainted with you." Again he paused,
but she had not a word to say. "I dare say you were not told, but I
wrote to your uncle then, asking him whether I might have his consent
to,--just to ask you to be my wife." Again he paused, but after that
he hurried on, speaking the words as quickly as he could throw them
forth from his mouth. "My father died, and of course that changed
everything. I told your uncle that all ground for pretension
that I might have had before was cut from under me. He knew the
circumstances of my birth,--and I supposed that you would know it
also."

Then she did speak. "Yes, I did," she said.

"Perhaps I was foolish to think that the property would make a
difference. But the truth of it is, I have not got over the feeling,
and shall never get over it. I love you with all my heart,--and
though it be for no good, I must tell you so."

"The property can make no difference," she said. "You ought to have
known that, Mr. Newton."

"Ah;--but it does. I tried to tell you the other day something of my
present home."

"Yes;--I know you did;--and I remember it all."

"There is nothing more to be said;--only to ask you to share it with
me."

She walked on with him in silence for a minute; but he said nothing
more to press his suit, and certainly it was her turn to speak now.
"I will share it with you," she said, pressing her arm upon his.

"My Mary!"

"Yes;--your Mary,--if you please." Then he took her in his arms, and
pressed her to his bosom, and kissed her lips and forehead, and threw
back her hat, and put his fingers among her hair. "Why did you say
that the property would make a difference?" she asked, in a whisper.
To this he made no answer, but walked on silently, with his arm round
her waist, till they came out from among the trees, and stood upon
the bank of the river. "There are people in the boats. You must put
your arm down," she said.

"I wonder how you will like to be a farmer's wife?" he asked.

"I have not an idea."

"I fear so much that you'll find it rough and hard."

"But I have an idea about something." She took his hand, and looked
up into his face as she continued. "I have an idea that I shall like
to be your wife." He was in a seventh heaven of happiness, and would
have stood there gazing on the river with her all night, if she
would have allowed him. At last they walked back into the house
together,--and into the room where the others were assembled, with
very little outward show of embarrassment. Mary was the first to
enter the room, and though she blushed she smiled also, and every one
knew what had taken place. There was no secret or mystery, and in
five minutes her cousins were congratulating her. "It's all settled
for you now," said Clarissa laughing.

"Yes, it's all settled for me now, and I wouldn't have it unsettled
for all the world."

While this was being said in the drawing-room,--being said even in
the presence of poor Gregory, who could not but have felt how hard it
was for him to behold such bliss, Sir Thomas and Ralph had withdrawn
into the opposite room. Ralph began to apologise for his own
misfortunes,--his misfortune in having lost the inheritance, his
misfortune in being illegitimate; but Sir Thomas soon cut his
apologies short. "You think a great deal more of it than she does, or
than I do," said Sir Thomas.

"If she does not regard it, I will never think of it again," said
Ralph. "My greatest glory in what had been promised me was in
thinking that it might help to win her."

"You have won her without such help as that," said Sir Thomas, with
his arm on the young man's shoulder.

There was another delicious hour in store for him as they sat over
their late tea. "Do you still think of going to Norfolk to-morrow?"
she said to him, with that composure which in her was so beautiful,
and, at the same time, so expressive.

"By an early train in the morning."

"I thought that perhaps you might have stayed another day now."

"I thought that perhaps you might want me to come back again," said
Ralph;--"and, if so, I could make arrangements;--perhaps for a week
or ten days."

"Do come back," she said. "And do stay."

Ralph's triumph as he returned that evening to London received
Gregory's fullest sympathy; but still it must have been hard to bear.
Perhaps his cousin's parting words contained for him some comfort.
"Give her a little time, and she will be yours yet. I shall find it
all out from Mary, and you may be sure we shall help you."


CHAPTER LV.

COOKHAM.


We have been obliged to anticipate in some degree the course of
our story by the necessity which weighed upon us of completing the
history of Polly Neefit. In regard to her we will only further
express an opinion,--in which we believe that we shall have the
concurrence of our readers,--that Mr. Moggs junior had chosen well.
Her story could not be adequately told without a revelation of that
correspondence, which, while it has explained the friendly manner in
which the Neefit-Newton embarrassments were at last brought to an
end, has, at the same time, disclosed the future lot in life of our
hero,--as far as a hero's lot in life may be said to depend on his
marriage.

Mr. Neefit had been almost heart-broken, because he was not satisfied
that his victim was really punished by any of those tortures which
his imagination invented, and his energy executed. Even when the
"pretty little man" was smashed, and was, in truth, smashed of malice
prepense by a swinging blow from Neefit's umbrella, Neefit did not
feel satisfied that he would thereby reach his victim's heart. He
could project his own mind with sufficient force into the bosom of
his enemy to understand that the onions and tobacco consumed in that
luxurious chamber would cause annoyance;--but he desired more than
annoyance;--he wanted to tear the very heart-strings of the young man
who had, as he thought, so signally outwitted him. He did not believe
that he was successful; but, in truth, he did make poor Ralph very
unhappy. The heir felt himself to be wounded, and could not eat and
drink, or walk and talk, or ride in the park, or play billiards at
his club, in a manner befitting the owner of Newton Priory. He was
so injured by Neefit that he became pervious to attacks which would
otherwise have altogether failed in reaching him. Lady Eardham would
never have prevailed against him as she did,--conquering by a quick
repetition of small blows,--had not all his strength been annihilated
for the time by the persecutions of the breeches-maker.

Lady Eardham whispered to him as he was taking his departure on the
evening of the dinner in Cavendish Square. "Dear Mr. Newton,--just
one word," she said, confidentially,--"that must be a very horrid
man,"--alluding to Mr. Neefit.

"It's a horrid bore, you know, Lady Eardham."

"Just so;--and it makes me feel,--as though I didn't quite know
whether something ought not to be done. Would you mind calling at
eleven to-morrow? Of course I shan't tell Sir George,--unless you
think he ought to be told." Ralph promised that he would call, though
he felt at the moment that Lady Eardham was an interfering old fool.
Why should she want to do anything; and why should she give even a
hint as to telling Sir George? As he walked across Hanover Square and
down Bond Street to his rooms he did assert to himself plainly that
the "old harridan," as he called her, was at work for her second
girl, and he shook his head and winked his eye as he thought of
it. But, even in his solitude, he did not feel strong against Lady
Eardham, and he moved along the pavement oppressed by a half-formed
conviction that her ladyship would prevail against him. He did not,
however, think that he had any particular objection to Gus Eardham.
There was a deal of style about the girl, a merit in which either
Clarissa or Mary would have been sadly deficient. And there could be
no doubt in this,--that a man in his position ought to marry in his
own class. The proper thing for him to do was to make the daughter
of some country gentleman,--or of some nobleman, just as it might
happen,--mistress of the Priory. Dear little Clary would hardly have
known how to take her place properly down in Hampshire. And then he
thought for a moment of Polly! Perhaps, after all, fate, fashion, and
fortune managed marriage for young men better than they could manage
it for themselves. What a life would his have been had he really
married Polly Neefit! Though he did call Lady Eardham a harridan, he
resolved that he would keep his promise for the following morning.

Lady Eardham when he arrived was mysterious, eulogistic, and
beneficent. She was clearly of opinion that something should be done.
"You know it is so horrid having these kind of things said." And yet
she was almost equally strong in opinion that nothing could be done.
"You know I wouldn't have my girl's name brought up for all the
world;--though why the horrid wretch should have named her I cannot
even guess." The horrid wretch had not, in truth, named any special
her, though it suited Lady Eardham to presume that allusion had been
made to that hope of the flock, that crowning glory of the Eardham
family, that most graceful of the Graces, that Venus certain to
be chosen by any Paris, her second daughter, Gus. She went on to
explain that were she to tell the story to her son Marmaduke, her
son Marmaduke would probably kill the breeches-maker. As Marmaduke
Eardham was, of all young men about town, perhaps the most careless,
the most indifferent, and the least ferocious, his mother was
probably mistaken in her estimate of his resentful feelings. "As for
Sir George, he would be for taking the law of the wretch for libel,
and then we should be--! I don't know where we should be then; but my
dear girl would die."

Of course there was nothing done. During the whole interview Lady
Eardham continued to press Neefit's letter under her hand upon the
table, as though it was of all documents the most precious. She
handled it as though to tear it would be as bad as to tear an
original document bearing the king's signature. Before the interview
was over she had locked it up in her desk, as though there were
something in it by which the whole Eardham race might be blessed or
banned. And, though she spoke no such word, she certainly gave Ralph
to understand that by this letter he, Ralph Newton, was in some
mysterious manner so connected with the secrets, and the interests,
and the sanctity of the Eardham family, that, whether such connection
might be for weal or woe, the Newtons and the Eardhams could never
altogether free themselves from the link. "Perhaps you had better
come and dine with us in a family way to-morrow," said Lady Eardham,
giving her invitation as though it must necessarily be tendered, and
almost necessarily accepted. Ralph, not thanking her, but taking it
in the same spirit, said that he would be there at half past seven.
"Just ourselves," said Lady Eardham, in a melancholy tone, as though
they two were doomed to eat family dinners together for ever after.

"I suppose the property is really his own?" said Lady Eardham to her
husband that afternoon.

Sir George was a stout, plethoric gentleman, with a short temper and
many troubles. Marmaduke was expensive, and Sir George himself had
spent money when he was young. The girls, who knew that they had no
fortunes, expected that everything should be done for them, at least
during the period of their natural harvest,--and they were successful
in having their expectations realised. They demanded that there
should be horses to ride, servants to attend them, and dresses to
wear; and they had horses, servants, and dresses. There were also
younger children; and Sir George was quite as anxious as Lady Eardham
that his daughters should become wives. "His own?--of course it's his
own. Who else should it belong to?"

"There was something about that other young man."

"The bastard! It was the greatest sin that ever was thought of to
palm such a fellow as that off on the county;--but it didn't come to
anything."

"I'm told, too, he has been very extravagant. No doubt he did get
money from the,--the tailor who wants to make him marry his
daughter."

"A flea-bite," said Sir George. "Don't you bother about that." Thus
authorised, Lady Eardham went to the work with a clear conscience and
a good will.

On the next morning Ralph received by post an envelope from Sir
Thomas Underwood containing a letter addressed to him from Mr.
Neefit. "Sir,--Are you going to make your ward act honourable to me
and my daughter?--Yours, respectful, THOMAS NEEFIT." The reader will
understand that this was prior to Polly's triumph over her father.
Ralph uttered a deep curse, and made up his mind that he must either
throw himself entirely among the Eardhams, or else start at once for
the Rocky Mountains. He dined in Cavendish Square that day, and again
took Gus down to dinner.

"I'm very glad to see you here," said Sir George, when they two
were alone together after the ladies had left them. Sir George, who
had been pressed upon home service because of the necessity of the
occasion, was anxious to get off to his club.

"You are very kind, Sir George," said Ralph.

"We shall be delighted to see you at Brayboro', if you'll come for
a week in September and look at the girls' horses. They say you're
quite a pundit about horseflesh."

"Oh, I don't know," said Ralph.

"You'll like to go up to the girls now, I dare say, and I've got
an engagement." Then Sir George rang the bell for a cab, and Ralph
went up-stairs to the girls. Emily had taken herself away; Josephine
was playing bésique with her mother, and Gus was thus forced into
conversation with the young man. "Bésique is so stupid," said Gus.

"Horribly stupid," said Ralph.

"And what do you like, Mr. Newton?"

"I like you," said Ralph. But he did not propose on that evening.
Lady Eardham thought he ought to have done so, and was angry with
him. It was becoming almost a matter of necessity with her that young
men should not take much time. Emily was twenty-seven, and Josephine
was a most difficult child to manage,--not pretty, but yet giving
herself airs and expecting everything. She had refused a clergyman
with a very good private fortune, greatly to her mother's sorrow. And
Gus had already been the source of much weary labour. Four eldest
sons had been brought to her feet and been allowed to slip away; and
all, as Lady Eardham said, because Gus would "joke" with other young
men, while the one man should have received all her pleasantry. Emily
was quite of opinion that young Newton should by no means have been
allotted to Gus. Lady Eardham, who had played bésique with an energy
against which Josephine would have mutinied but that some promise was
made as to Marshall and Snelgrove, could see from her little table
that young Newton was neither abject nor triumphant in his manner.
He had not received nor had he even asked when he got up to take his
leave. Lady Eardham could have boxed his ears; but she smiled upon
him ineffably, pressed his hand, and in the most natural way in the
world alluded to some former allusion about riding and the park.

"I shan't ride to-morrow," said Gus, with her back turned to them.

"Do," said Ralph.

"No; I shan't."

"You see what she says, Lady Eardham," said Ralph.

"You promised you would before dinner, my dear," said Lady Eardham,
"and you ought not to change your mind. If you'll be good-natured
enough to come, two of them will go." Of course it was understood
that he would come.

"Nothing on earth, mamma, shall ever induce me to play bésique
again," said Josephine, yawning.

"It's not worse for you than for me," said the old lady sharply.

"But it isn't fair," said Josephine, who was supposed to be the
clever one of the family. "I may have to play my bésique a quarter of
a century hence."

"He's an insufferable puppy," said Emily, who had come into the room,
and had been pretending to be reading.

"That's because he don't bark at your bidding, my dear," said Gus.

"It doesn't seem that he means to bark at yours," said the elder
sister.

"If you go on like that, girls, I'll tell your papa, and we'll go to
Brayboro' at once. It's too bad, and I won't bear it."

"What would you have me do?" said Gus, standing up for herself
fiercely.

Gus did ride, and so did Josephine, and there was a servant with them
of course. It had been Emily's turn,--there being two horses for the
three girls; but Gus had declared that no good could come if Emily
went;--and Emily's going had been stopped by parental authority.
"You do as you're bid," said Sir George, "or you'll get the worst of
it." Sir George suffered much from gout, and had obtained from the
ill-temper which his pangs produced a mastery over his daughters
which some fathers might have envied.

"You behaved badly to me last night, Mr. Newton," said Gus, on
horseback. There was another young man riding with Josephine, so that
the lovers were alone together.

"Behaved badly to you?"

"Yes, you did, and I felt it very much,--very much indeed."

"How did I behave badly?"

"If you do not know, I'm sure that I shall not tell you." Ralph did
not know;--but he went home from his ride an unengaged man, and may
perhaps have been thought to behave badly on that occasion also.

But Lady Eardham, though she was sometimes despondent and often
cross, was gifted with perseverance. A picnic party up the river
from Maidenhead to Cookham was got up for the 30th of May, and Ralph
Newton of course was there. Just at that time the Neefit persecution
was at its worst. Letters directed by various hands came to him
daily, and in all of them he was asked when he meant to be on the
square. He knew the meaning of that picnic as well as does the
reader,--as well as did Lady Eardham; but it had come to that with
him that he was willing to yield. It cannot exactly be said for him
that out of all the feminine worth that he had seen, he himself had
chosen Gus Eardham as being the most worthy,--or even that he had
chosen her as being to him the most charming. But it was evident
to him that he must get married, and why not to her as well as to
another? She had style, plenty of style; and, as he told himself,
style for a man in his position was more than anything else. It can
hardly be said that he had made up his mind to offer to her before
he started for Cookham,--though doubtless through all the remaining
years of his life he would think that his mind had been so
fixed,--but he had concluded, that if she were thrown at his head
very hard, he might as well take her. "I don't think he ever does
drink champagne," said Lady Eardham, talking it all over with Gus on
the morning of the picnic.

At Cookham there is, or was, a punt,--perhaps there always will be
one, kept there for such purposes;--and into this punt either Gus was
tempted by Ralph, or Ralph by Gus. "My darling child, what are you
doing?" shouted Lady Eardham from the bank.

"Mr. Newton says he can take me over," said Gus, standing up in the
punt, shaking herself with a pretty tremor.

"Don't, Mr. Newton; pray don't!" cried Lady Eardham, with affected
horror.

Lunch was over, or dinner, as it might be more properly called, and
Ralph had taken a glass or two of champagne. He was a man whom no one
had ever seen the "worse for wine;" but on this occasion that which
might have made others drunk had made him bold. "I will not let you
out, Gus, till you have promised me one thing," said Ralph.

"What is the one thing?"

"That you will go with me everywhere, always."

"You must let me out," said Gus.

"But will you promise?" Then Gus promised; and Lady Eardham, with
true triumph in her voice, was able to tell her husband on the
following morning that the cost of the picnic had not been thrown
away.

On the next morning early Ralph was in the square. Neither when
he went to bed at night, nor when he got up in the morning, did
he regret what he had done. The marriage would be quite a proper
marriage. Nobody could say that he had been mercenary, and he hated a
mercenary feeling in marriages. Nobody could say that the match was
beneath him, and all people were agreed that Augusta Eardham was a
very fine girl. As to her style, there could be no doubt about it.
There might be some little unpleasantness in communicating the fact
to the Underwoods,--but that could be done by letter. After all, it
would signify very little to him what Sir Thomas thought about him.
Sir Thomas might think him feeble; but he himself knew very well that
there had been no feebleness in it. His circumstances had been very
peculiar, and he really believed that he had made the best of them.
As Squire of Newton, he was doing quite the proper thing in marrying
the daughter of a baronet out of the next county. With a light heart,
a pleased face, and with very well got-up morning apparel, Ralph
knocked the next morning at the door in Cavendish Square, and asked
for Sir George Eardham. "I'll just run up-stairs for a second," said
Ralph, when he was told that Sir George was in the small parlour.

He did run up-stairs, and in three minutes had been kissed by Lady
Eardham and all her daughters. At this moment Gus was the "dearest
child" and the "best love of a thing" with all of them. Even Emily
remembered how pleasant it might be to have a room at Newton Priory,
and then success always gives a new charm.

"Have you seen Sir George?" asked Lady Eardham.

"Not as yet;--they said he was there, but I had to come up and see
her first, you know."

"Go down to him," said Lady Eardham, patting her prey on the back
twice. "When you've daughters of your own, you'll expect to be
consulted."

"She couldn't have done better, my dear fellow," said Sir George,
with kind, genial cordiality. "She couldn't have done better, to my
thinking, even with a peerage. I like you, and I like your family,
and I like your property; and she's yours with all my heart. A better
girl never lived."

"Thank you, Sir George."

"She has no money, you know."

"I don't care about money, Sir George."

"My dear boy, she's yours with all my heart; and I hope you'll make
each other happy."


CHAPTER LVI.

RALPH NEWTON IS BOWLED AWAY.


A day or two after his engagement, Ralph did write his letter to Sir
Thomas, and found when the moment came that the task was difficult.
But he wrote it. The thing had to be done, and there was nothing to
be gained by postponing it.


   ---- Club, June 2, 186--.

   MY DEAR SIR THOMAS,--

   You will, I hope, be glad to hear that I am engaged to be
   married to Augusta Eardham, the second daughter of Sir
   George Eardham, of Brayboro' Park, in Berkshire. Of course
   you will know the name, and I rather think you were in
   the House when Sir George sat for Berkshire. Augusta
   has got no money, but I have not been placed under the
   disagreeable necessity of looking out for a rich wife. I
   believe we shall be married about the end of August. As
   the ceremony will take place down at Brayboro', I fear
   that I cannot expect that you or Patience and Clarissa
   should come so far. Pray tell them my news, with my best
   love.

   Yours, most grateful for all your long kindness,

   RALPH NEWTON.

   I am very sorry that you should have been troubled by
   letters from Mr. Neefit. The matter has been arranged at
   last.


The letter when done was very simple, but it took him some time, and
much consideration. Should he or should he not allude to his former
loves? It was certainly much easier to write his letter without any
such allusion, and he did so.

About a week after this Sir Thomas went home to Fulham, and took
the letter with him. "Clary," he said, taking his youngest daughter
affectionately by the waist, when he found himself alone with her.
"I've got a piece of news for you."

"For me, papa?"

"Well, for all of us. Somebody is going to be married. Who do you
think it is?"

"Not Ralph Newton?" said Clarissa, with a little start.

"Yes, Ralph Newton."

"How quick he arranges things!" said Clarissa. There was some little
emotion, just a quiver, and a quick rush of blood into her cheeks,
which, however, left them just as quickly.

"Yes;--he is quick."

"Who is it, papa?"

"A very proper sort of person,--the daughter of a Berkshire baronet."

"But what is her name?"

"Augusta Eardham."

"Augusta Eardham. I hope he'll be happy, papa. We've known him a long
time."

"I think he will be happy;--what people call happy. He is not
gifted,--or cursed, as it may be,--with fine feelings, and is what
perhaps may be called thick-skinned; but he will love his own wife
and children. I don't think he will be a spendthrift now that he has
plenty to spend, and he is not subject to what the world calls vices.
I shouldn't wonder if he becomes a prosperous and most respectable
country gentleman, and quite a model to his neighbours."

"It doesn't seem to matter much;--does it?" said Clarissa, when she
told the story to Mary and Patience.

"What doesn't matter?" asked Mary.

"Whether a man cares for the girl he's going to marry, or doesn't
care at all. Ralph Newton cannot care very much for Miss Eardham."

"I think it matters very much," said Mary.

"Perhaps, after all, he'll be just as fond of his wife, in a way,
as though he had been making love to her,--oh, for years," said
Clarissa. This was nearly all that was said at the villa, though, no
doubt, poor Clary had many thoughts on the matter, in her solitary
rambles along the river. That picture of the youth, as he lay upon
the lawn, looking up into her eyes, and telling her that she was
dear to him, could not easily be effaced from her memory. Sir Thomas
before this had written his congratulations to Ralph. They had been
very short, and in them no allusion had been made to the young ladies
at Popham Villa.

In the meantime Ralph was as happy as the day was long, and delighted
with his lot in life. For some weeks previous to his offer he had
been aware that Lady Eardham had been angling for him as for a fish,
that he had been as a prey to her and to her daughter, and that it
behoved him to amuse himself without really taking the hook between
his gills. He had taken the hook, and now had totally forgotten all
those former notions of his in regard to a prey, and a fish, and a
mercenary old harridan of a mother. He had no sooner been kissed all
round by the women, and paternally blessed by Sir George, than he
thought that he had exercised a sound judgment, and had with true
wisdom arranged to ally himself with just the woman most fit to be
his wife, and the future mistress of Newton Priory. He was proud,
indeed, of his success, when he read the paragraph in the "Morning
Post," announcing as a fact that the alliance had been arranged, and
was again able to walk about among his comrades as one of those who
make circumstances subject to them, rather than become subject to
circumstances. His comrades, no doubt, saw the matter in another
light. "By Jove," said Pretty Poll at his club, "there's Newton been
and got caught by old Eardham after all. The girl has been running
ten years, and been hawked about like a second-class race-horse."

"Yes, poor fellow," said Captain Fooks. "Neefit has done that
for him. Ralph for a while was so knocked off his pins by the
breeches-maker, that he didn't know where to look for shelter."

Whether marriages should be made in heaven or on earth, must be
a matter of doubt to observers;--whether, that is, men and women
are best married by chance, which I take to be the real fashion of
heaven-made marriages; or should be brought into that close link and
loving bondage to each other by thought, selection, and decision.
That the heavenly mode prevails the oftenest there can hardly be a
doubt. It takes years to make a friendship; but a marriage may be
settled in a week,--in an hour. If you desire to go into partnership
with a man in business, it is an essential necessity that you should
know your partner; that he be honest,--or dishonest, if such be your
own tendency,--industrious, instructed in the skill required, and of
habits of life fit for the work to be done. But into partnerships for
life,--of a kind much closer than any business partnership,--men rush
without any preliminary inquiries. Some investigation and anxiety as
to means there may be, though in this respect the ordinary parlance
of the world endows men with more caution, or accuses them of more
greed than they really possess. But in other respects everything is
taken for granted. Let the woman, if possible, be pretty;--or if
not pretty, let her have style. Let the man, if possible, not be a
fool; or if a fool, let him not show his folly too plainly. As for
knowledge of character, none is possessed, and none is wanted. The
young people meet each other in their holiday dresses, on holiday
occasions, amidst holiday pleasures,--and the thing is arranged. Such
matches may be said to be heaven-made.

It is a fair question whether they do not answer better than those
which have less of chance,--or less of heaven,--in their manufacture.
If it be needful that a man and woman take five years to learn
whether they will suit each other as husband and wife, and that then,
at the end of the five years, they find that they will not suit, the
freshness of the flower would be gone before it could be worn in the
button-hole. There are some leaps which you must take in the dark, if
you mean to jump at all. We can all understand well that a wise man
should stand on the brink and hesitate; but we can understand also
that a very wise man should declare to himself that with no possible
amount of hesitation could certainty be achieved. Let him take the
jump or not take it,--but let him not presume to think that he can
so jump as to land himself in certain bliss. It is clearly God's
intention that men and women should live together, and therefore let
the leap in the dark be made.

No doubt there had been very much of heaven in Ralph Newton's last
choice. It may be acknowledged that in lieu of choosing at all, he
had left the matter altogether to heaven. Some attempt he had made at
choosing,--in reference to Mary Bonner; but he had found the attempt
simply to be troublesome and futile. He had spoken soft, loving words
to Clarissa, because she herself had been soft and lovable. Nature
had spoken,--as she does when the birds sing to each other. Then,
again, while suffering under pecuniary distress he had endeavoured
to make himself believe that Polly Neefit was just the wife for him.
Then, amidst the glories of his emancipation from thraldom, he had
seen Mary Bonner,--and had actually, after a fashion, made a choice
for himself. His choice had brought upon him nothing but disgrace
and trouble. Now he had succumbed at the bidding of heaven and Lady
Eardham, and he was about to be provided with a wife exactly suited
for him. It may be said at the same time that Augusta Eardham was
equally lucky. She also had gotten all that she ought to have wanted,
had she known what to want. They were both of them incapable of what
men and women call love when they speak of love as a passion linked
with romance. And in one sense they were cold-hearted. Neither of
them was endowed with the privilege of pining because another person
had perished. But each of them was able to love a mate, when assured
that that mate must continue to be mate, unless separation should
come by domestic earthquake. They had hearts enough for paternal and
maternal duties, and would probably agree in thinking that any geese
which Providence might send them were veritable swans. Bickerings
there might be, but they would be bickerings without effect; and
Ralph Newton, of Newton, would probably so live with this wife of his
bosom, that they, too, might lie at last pleasantly together in the
family vault, with the record of their homely virtues visible to the
survivors of the parish on the same tombstone. The means by which
each of them would have arrived at these blessings would not redound
to the credit of either; but the blessings would be there, and it may
be said of their marriage, as of many such marriages, that it was
made in heaven, and was heavenly.

The marriage was to take place early in September, and the first
week in August was passed by Sir George and Lady Eardham and their
two younger daughters at Newton Priory. On the 14th Ralph was to be
allowed to run down to the moors just for one week, and then he was
to be back, passing between Newton and Brayboro', signing deeds and
settlements, preparing for their wedding tour, and obedient in all
things to Eardham influences. It did occur to him that it would
be proper that he should go down to Fulham to see his old friends
once before his marriage; but he felt that such a visit would be
to himself very unpleasant, and therefore he assured himself, and
moreover made himself believe, that, if he abstained from the visit,
he would abstain because it would be unpleasant to them. He did
abstain. But he did call at the chambers in Southampton Buildings; he
called, however, at an hour in which he knew that Sir Thomas would
not be visible, and made no second pressing request to Stemm for the
privilege of entrance.

He had great pride in showing his house and park and estate to the
Eardhams, and had some delicious rambles with his Augusta through the
shrubberies and down by the little brook. Ralph had an enjoyment in
the prettiness of nature, and Augusta was clever enough to simulate
the feeling. He was a little annoyed, perhaps, when he found that the
beauty of her morning dresses did not admit of her sitting upon the
grass or leaning against gates, and once expressed an opinion that
she need not be so particular about her gloves in this the hour of
their billing and cooing. Augusta altogether declined to remove her
gloves in a place swarming, as she said, with midges, or to undergo
any kind of embrace while adorned with that sweetest of all hats,
which had been purchased for his especial delight. But in other
respects she was good humoured, and tried to please him. She learned
the names of all his horses, and was beginning to remember those
of his tenants. She smiled upon Gregory, and behaved with a pretty
decorum when the young parson showed her his church. Altogether her
behaviour was much better than might have been expected from the
training to which she had been subjected during her seven seasons in
London. Lord Polperrow wronged her greatly when he said that she had
been "running" for ten years.

There was a little embarrassment in Ralph's first interview with
Gregory. He had given his brother notice of his engagement by letter
as soon as he had been accepted, feeling that any annoyance coming to
him, might be lessoned in that way. Unfortunately he had spoken to
his brother in what he now felt to have been exaggerated terms of his
passion for Mary Bonner, and he himself was aware that that malady
had been quickly cured. "I suppose the news startled you?" he had
said, with a forced laugh, as soon as he met his brother.

"Well;--yes, a little. I did not know that you were so intimate with
them."

"The truth is, I had thought a deal about the matter, and I had come
to see how essential it was for the interests of us all that I should
marry into our own set. The moment I saw Augusta I felt that she was
exactly the girl to make me happy. She is very handsome. Don't you
think so?"

"Certainly."

"And then she has just the style which, after all, does go so far.
There's nothing dowdy about her. A dowdy woman would have killed me.
She attracted me from the first moment; and, by Jove, old fellow, I
can assure you it was mutual. I am the happiest fellow alive, and
I don't think there is anything I envy anybody." In all this Ralph
believed that he was speaking the simple truth.

"I hope you'll be happy, with all my heart," said Gregory.

"I am sure I shall;--and so will you if you will ask that little puss
once again. I believe in my heart she loves you." Gregory, though he
had been informed of his brother's passion for Mary, had never been
told of that other passion for Clarissa; and Ralph could therefore
speak of ground for hope in that direction without uncomfortable
twinges.

There did occur during this fortnight one or two little matters,
just sufficiently laden with care to ruffle the rose-leaves of our
hero's couch. Lady Eardham thought that both the dining-room and
drawing-room should be re-furnished, that a bow-window should be
thrown out to the breakfast-parlour, and that a raised conservatory
should be constructed into which Augusta's own morning sitting-room
up-stairs might be made to open. Ralph gave way about the furniture
with a good grace, but he thought that the bow-window would disfigure
the house, and suggested that the raised conservatory would
cost money. Augusta thought the bow-window was the very thing
for the house, and Lady Eardham knew as a fact that a similar
conservatory,--the sweetest thing in the world,--which she had seen
at Lord Rosebud's had cost almost absolutely nothing. And if anything
was well-known in gardening it was this, that the erection of such
conservatories was a positive saving in garden expenses. The men
worked under cover during the rainy days, and the hot-water served
for domestic as well as horticultural purposes. There was some debate
and a little heat, and the matter was at last referred to Sir George.
He voted against Ralph on both points, and the orders were given.

Then there was the more important question of the settlements. Of
course there were to be settlements, in the arrangement of which
Ralph was to give everything and to get nothing. With high-handed
magnanimity he had declared that he wanted no money, and therefore
the trifle which would have been adjudged to be due to Gus was
retained to help her as yet less fortunate sisters. In truth
Marmaduke at this time was so expensive that Sir George was obliged
to be a little hard. Why, however, he should have demanded out of
such a property as that of Newton a jointure of £4,000 a year, with
a house to be found either in town or country as the widow might
desire, on behalf of a penniless girl, no one acting in the Newton
interest could understand, unless Sir George might have thought that
the sum to be ultimately obtained might depend in some degree on that
demanded. Had he known Mr. Carey he would probably not have subjected
himself to the rebuke which he received.

Ralph, when the sum was first named to him by Sir George's lawyer,
who came down purposely to Newton, looked very blank, and said
that he had not anticipated any arrangement so destructive to the
property. The lawyer pointed out that there was unfortunately no
dowager's house provided; that the property would not be destroyed
as the dower would only be an annuity; that ladies now were more
liberally treated in this matter than formerly;--and that the
suggestion was quite the usual thing. "You don't suppose I mean my
daughter to be starved?" said Sir George, upon whom gout was then
coming. Ralph plucked up spirit and answered him. "Nor do I intend
that your daughter, sir, should be starved." "Dear Ralph, do be
liberal to the dear girl," said Lady Eardham afterwards, caressing
our hero in the solitude of her bed-room. Mr. Carey, however,
arranged the whole matter very quickly. The dower must be £2,000, out
of which the widow must find her own house. Sir George must be well
aware, said Mr. Carey, that the demand made was preposterous. Sir
George said one or two very nasty things; but the dower as fixed by
Mr. Carey was accepted, and then everything smiled again.

When the Eardhams were leaving Newton the parting between Augusta
and her lover was quite pretty. "Dear Gus," he said, "when next I am
here, you will be my own, own wife," and he kissed her. "Dear Ralph,"
she said, "when next I am here, you will be my own, own husband," and
kissed him; "but we have Como, and Florence, and Rome, and Naples to
do before that;--and won't that be nice?"

"It will be very nice to be anywhere with you," said the lover.

"And mind you have your coat made just as I told you," said Augusta.
So they parted.

Early in September they were married with great éclat at Brayboro',
and Lady Eardham spared nothing on the occasion. It was her first
maternal triumph, and all the country round was made to know of her
success. The Newtons had been at Newton for--she did not know how
many hundred years. In her zeal she declared that the estate had been
in the same hands from long before the Conquest. "There's no title,"
she said to her intimate friend, Lady Wiggham, "but there's that
which is better than a title. We're mushrooms to the Newtons, you
know. We only came into Berkshire in the reign of Henry VIII." As the
Wigghams had only come into Buckinghamshire in the reign of George
IV., Lady Wiggham, had she known the facts, would probably have
reminded her dear friend that the Eardhams had in truth first been
heard of in those parts in the time of Queen Anne,--the original
Eardham having made his money in following Marlborough's army. But
Lady Wiggham had not studied the history of the county gentry. The
wedding went off very well, and the bride and bridegroom were bowled
away to the nearest station with four grey post-horses from Reading
in a manner that was truly delightful to Lady Eardham's motherly
feelings.

And with the same grey horses shall the happy bride and bridegroom
be bowled out of our sight also. The writer of this story feels
that some apology is due to his readers for having endeavoured
to entertain them so long with the adventures of one of whom it
certainly cannot be said that he was fit to be delineated as a hero.
It is thought by many critics that in the pictures of imaginary life
which novelists produce for the amusement, and possibly for the
instruction of their readers, none should be put upon the canvas but
the very good, who by their noble thoughts and deeds may lead others
to nobility, or the very bad, who by their declared wickedness will
make iniquity hideous. How can it be worth one's while, such critics
will say,--the writer here speaks of all critical readers, and not
of professional critics,--how can it be worth our while to waste our
imaginations, our sympathies, and our time upon such a one as Ralph,
the heir of the Newton property? The writer, acknowledging the force
of these objections, and confessing that his young heroes of romance
are but seldom heroic, makes his apology as follows.

The reader of a novel,--who has doubtless taken the volume up simply
for amusement, and who would probably lay it down did he suspect
that instruction, like a snake in the grass, like physic beneath the
sugar, was to be imposed upon him,--requires from his author chiefly
this, that he shall be amused by a narrative in which elevated
sentiment prevails, and gratified by being made to feel that the
elevated sentiments described are exactly his own. When the heroine
is nobly true to her lover, to her friend, or to her duty, through
all persecution, the girl who reads declares to herself that she also
would have been a Jeannie Deans had Fate and Fortune given her an
Effie as a sister. The bald-headed old lawyer,--for bald-headed old
lawyers do read novels,--who interests himself in the high-minded,
self-devoting chivalry of a Colonel Newcombe, believes he would have
acted as did the Colonel had he been so tried. What youth in his
imagination cannot be as brave, and as loving, though as hopeless
in his love, as Harry Esmond? Alas, no one will wish to be as
was Ralph Newton! But for one Harry Esmond, there are fifty Ralph
Newtons,--five hundred and fifty of them; and the very youth whose
bosom glows with admiration as he reads of Harry,--who exults in the
idea that as Harry did, so would he have done,--lives as Ralph lived,
is less noble, less persistent, less of a man even than was Ralph
Newton.

It is the test of a novel writer's art that he conceals his
snake-in-the-grass; but the reader may be sure that it is always
there. No man or woman with a conscience,--no man or woman with
intellect sufficient to produce amusement, can go on from year
to year spinning stories without the desire of teaching; with no
ambition of influencing readers for their good. Gentle readers, the
physic is always beneath the sugar, hidden or unhidden. In writing
novels we novelists preach to you from our pulpits, and are keenly
anxious that our sermons shall not be inefficacious. Inefficacious
they are not, unless they be too badly preached to obtain attention.
Injurious they will be unless the lessons taught be good lessons.

What a world this would be if every man were a Harry Esmond, or every
woman a Jeannie Deans! But then again, what a world if every woman
were a Beckie Sharp and every man a Varney or a Barry Lyndon! Of
Varneys and Harry Esmonds there are very few. Human nature, such as
it is, does not often produce them. The portraits of such virtues
and such vices serve no doubt to emulate and to deter. But are no
other portraits necessary? Should we not be taught to see the men
and women among whom we really live,--men and women such as we are
ourselves,--in order that we should know what are the exact failings
which oppress ourselves, and thus learn to hate, and if possible
to avoid in life the faults of character which in life are hardly
visible, but which in portraiture of life can be made to be so
transparent.

Ralph Newton did nothing, gentle reader, which would have caused
thee greatly to grieve for him, nothing certainly which would have
caused thee to repudiate him, had he been thy brother. And gentlest,
sweetest reader, had he come to thee as thy lover, with sufficient
protest of love, and with all his history written in his hand, would
that have caused thee to reject his suit? Had he been thy neighbour,
thou well-to-do reader, with a house in the country, would he not
have been welcome to thy table? Wouldst thou have avoided him at
his club, thou reader from the West-end? Has he not settled himself
respectably, thou grey-haired, novel-reading paterfamilias, thou
materfamilias, with daughters of thine own to be married? In life
would he have been held to have disgraced himself,--except in the
very moment in which he seemed to be in danger? Nevertheless, the
faults of a Ralph Newton, and not the vices of a Varney or a Barry
Lyndon are the evils against which men should in these days be taught
to guard themselves;--which women also should be made to hate. Such
is the writer's apology for his very indifferent hero, Ralph the
Heir.


CHAPTER LVII.

CLARISSA'S FATE.


In the following October, while Newton of Newton and his bride
were making themselves happy amidst the glories of Florence, she
with her finery from Paris, and he with a newly-acquired taste for
Michael Angelo and the fine arts generally, Gregory the parson again
went up to London. He had, of course, "assisted" at his brother's
marriage,--in which the heavy burden of the ceremony was imposed
on the shoulders of a venerable dean, who was related to Lady
Eardham,--and had since that time been all alone at his parsonage.
Occasionally he had heard of the Underwoods from Ralph Newton of
Beamingham, whose wedding had been postponed till Beamingham Hall had
been made fit for its mistress; and from what he had heard Gregory
was induced,--hardly to hope,--but to dream it to be possible
that even yet he might prevail in love. An idea had grown upon
him, springing from various sources, that Clarissa had not been
indifferent to his brother, and that this feeling on her part had
marred, and must continue to mar, his own happiness. He never
believed that there had been fault on his brother's part; but still,
if Clarissa had been so wounded,--he could hardly hope,--and perhaps
should not even wish,--that she would consent to share with him his
parsonage in the close neighbourhood of his brother's house. During
all that September he told himself that the thing should be over, and
he began to teach himself,--to try to teach himself,--that celibacy
was the state in which a clergyman might best live and do his duty.
But the lesson had not gone far with him before he shook himself, and
determined that he would try yet once again. If there had been such
a wound, why should not the wound be cured? Clarissa was at any rate
true. She would not falsely promise him a heart, when it was beyond
her power to give it. In October, therefore, he went again up to
London.

The cases for packing the books had not even yet been made, and Sir
Thomas was found in Southampton Buildings. The first words had, of
course, reference to the absent Squire. The squire of one's parish,
the head of one's family, and one's elder brother, when the three
are united in the same personage, will become important to one, even
though the personage himself be not heroic. Ralph had written home
twice, and everything was prospering with him. Sir Thomas, who had
become tired of his late ward, and who had thought worse of the
Eardham marriage than the thing deserved, was indifferent to the joys
of the Italian honeymoon. "They'll do very well, no doubt," said Sir
Thomas. "I was delighted to learn that Augusta bore her journey so
well," said Gregory. "Augustas always do bear their journeys well,"
said Sir Thomas; "though sometimes, I fancy, they find the days a
little too long."

But his tone was very different when Gregory asked his leave to make
one more attempt at Popham Villa. "I only hope you may succeed,--for
her sake, as well as for your own," said Sir Thomas. But when he was
asked as to the parson's chance of success, he declared that he could
say nothing. "She is changed, I think, from what she used to be,--is
more thoughtful, perhaps, and less giddy. It may be that such
change will turn her towards you." "I would not have her changed in
anything," said Gregory,--"except in her feelings towards myself."

He had been there twice or thrice before he found what he thought to
be an opportunity fit for the work that he had on hand. And yet both
Patience and Mary did for him and for her all that they knew how
to do. But in such a matter it is so hard to act without seeming
to act! She who can manoeuvre on such a field without displaying
her manoeuvres is indeed a general! No man need ever attempt the
execution of a task so delicate. Mary and Patience put their heads
together, and resolved that they would say nothing. Nor did they
manifestly take steps to leave the two alone together. It was a
question with them, especially with Patience, whether the lover had
not come too soon.

But Clarissa at last attacked her sister. "Patience," she said, "why
do you not speak to me?"

"Not speak to you, Clary?"

"Not a word,--about that which is always on my mind. You have not
mentioned Ralph Newton's name once since his marriage."

"I have thought it better not to mention it. Why should I mention
it?"

"If you think that it would pain me, you are mistaken. It pains me
more that you should think that I could not bear it. He was welcome
to his wife."

"I know you wish him well, Clary."

"Well! Oh, yes, I wish him well. No doubt he will be happy with her.
She is fit for him, and I was not. He did quite right."

"He is not half so good as his brother," said Patience.

"Certainly he is not so good as his brother. Men, of course, will be
different. But it is not always the best man that one likes the best.
It ought to be so, perhaps."

"I know which I like the best," said Patience. "Oh, Clary, if you
could but bring yourself to love him."

"How is one to change like that? And I do not know that he cares for
me now."

"Ah;--I think he cares for you."

"Why should he? Is a man to be sacrificed for always because a girl
will not take him? His heart is changed. He takes care to show me so
when he comes here. I am glad that it should be changed. Dear Patty,
if papa would but come and live at home, I should want nothing else."

"I want something else," said Patience.

"I want nothing but that you should love me;--and that papa should be
with us. But, Patty, do not make me feel that you are afraid to speak
to me."

On the day following Gregory was again at Fulham, and he had come
thither fully determined that he would now for the last time ask that
question, on the answer to which, as it now seemed to him, all his
future happiness must depend. He had told himself that he would shake
off this too human longing for a sweet face to be ever present with
him at his board, for a sweet heart to cherish him with its love, for
a dear head to lie upon his bosom. But he had owned to himself that
it could not be shaken off, and having so owned, was more sick than
ever with desire. Mary and Clarissa were both out when he arrived,
and he was closeted for a while with Patience. "How tired you must be
of seeing me," he said.

"Tired of seeing you? Oh no!"

"I feel myself to be going about like a phantom, and I am ashamed of
myself. My brother is successful and happy, and has all that he
desires."

"He is easily satisfied," said Patience, with something of sarcasm in
her voice.

"And my cousin Ralph is happy and triumphant. I ought not to pine,
but in truth I am so weak that I am always pining. Tell me at
once,--is there a chance for me?"

Did it occur to him to think that she to whom he was speaking, ever
asked herself why it was not given to her to have even a hope of that
joy for which he was craving? Did she ever pine because, when others
were mating round her, flying off in pairs to their warm mutual
nests, there came to her no such question of mating and flying off
to love and happiness? If there was such pining, it was all inward,
hidden from her friends so that their mirth should not be lessened by
her want of mirth, not expressed either by her eye or mouth because
she knew that on the expression of her face depended somewhat of the
comfort of those who loved her. A homely brow, and plain features,
and locks of hair that have not been combed by Love's attendant
nymphs into soft and winning tresses, seems to tell us that Love is
not wanted by the bosom that owns them. We teach ourselves to regard
such a one, let her be ever so good, with ever so sweet temper, ever
so generous in heart, ever so affectionate among her friends, as
separated alike from the perils and the privileges of that passion
without which they who are blessed or banned with beauty would regard
life but as a charred and mutilated existence. It is as though we
should believe that passion springs from the rind, which is fair
or foul to the eye, and not in the heart, which is often fairest,
freshest, and most free, when the skin is dark and the cheeks are
rough. This young parson expected Patience to sympathise with him, to
greet for him, to aid him if there might be aid, and to understand
that for him the world would be blank and wretched unless he could
get for himself a soft sweet mate to sing when he sang, and to wail
when he wailed. The only mate that Patience had was this very girl
that was to be thus taken from her. But she did sympathise with him,
did greet for him, did give him all her aid. Knowing what she was
herself and how God had formed her, she had learned to bury self
absolutely and to take all her earthly joy from the joys of others.
Shall it not come to pass that, hereafter, she too shall have a lover
among the cherubim? "What can I say to you?" replied Patience to the
young man's earnest entreaty. "If she were mine to give, I would give
her to you instantly."

"Then you think there is no chance. If I thought that, why should I
trouble her again?"

"I do not say so. Do you not know, Mr. Newton, that in such matters
even sisters can hardly tell their thoughts to each other? How can
they when they do not even know their own wishes?"

"She does not hate me then?"

"Hate you! no;--she does not hate you. But there are so many degrees
between hating and that kind of love which you want from her! You may
be sure of this, that she so esteems you that your persistence cannot
lessen you in her regard."

He was still pleading his case with the elder sister,--very uselessly
indeed, as he was aware; but having fallen on the subject of his love
it was impossible for him to change it for any other,--when Clarissa
came into the room swinging her hat in her hand. She had been over
at Miss Spooner's house and was full of Miss Spooner's woes and
complaints. As soon as she had shaken hands with her lover and spoken
the few words of courtesy which the meeting demanded of her, she
threw herself into the affairs of Miss Spooner as though they were of
vital interest. "She is determined to be unhappy, Patty, and it is no
use trying to make her not so. She says that Jane robs her, which I
don't believe is true, and that Sarah has a lover,--and why shouldn't
Sarah have a lover? But as for curing her grievances, it would be
the cruellest thing in the world. She lives upon her grievances.
Something has happened to the chimney-pot, and the landlord hasn't
sent a mason. She is revelling in her chimney-pot."

"Poor dear Miss Spooner," said Patience, getting up and leaving the
room as though it were her duty to look at once after her old friend
in the midst of these troubles.

Clarissa had not intended this. "She's asleep now," said Clarissa.
But Patience went all the same. It might be that Miss Spooner would
require to be watched in her slumbers. When Patience was gone Gregory
Newton got up from his seat and walked to the window. He stood
there for what seemed to be an endless number of seconds before he
returned, and Clarissa had time to determine that she would escape.
"I told Mary that I would go to her," she said, "you won't mind being
left alone for a few minutes, Mr. Newton."

"Do not go just now, Clarissa."

"Only that I said I would," she answered, pleading that she must keep
a promise which she had never made.

"Mary can spare you,--and I cannot. Mary is staying with you, and I
shall be gone,--almost immediately. I go back to Newton to-morrow,
and who can say when I shall see you again?"

"You will be coming up to London, of course."

"I am here now at any rate," he said smiling, "and will take what
advantage of it I can. It is the old story, Clarissa;--so old that I
know you must be sick of it."

"If you think so, you should not tell it again."

"Do not be ill-natured to me. I don't know why it is but a man gets
to be ashamed of himself, as though he were doing something mean
and paltry, when he loves with persistence, as I do." Had it been
possible that she should give him so much encouragement she would
have told him that the mean man, and paltry, was he who could love or
pretend to love with no capacity for persistency. She could not fail
to draw a comparison between him and his brother, in which there was
so much of meanness on the part of him who had at one time been as a
god to her, and so much nobility in him to whom she was and ever had
been as a goddess. "I suppose a man should take an answer and have
done with it," he continued. "But how is a man to have done with it,
when his heart remains the same?"

"A man should master his heart."

"I am, then, to understand that that which you have said so often
before must be said again?" He had never knelt to her, and he did not
kneel now; but he leaned over her so that she hardly knew whether
he was on his knees or still seated on his chair. And she herself,
though she answered him briskly,--almost with impertinence,--was so
little mistress of herself that she knew not what she said. She would
take him now,--if only she knew how to take him without disgracing
herself in her own estimation. "Dear Clary, think of it. Try to love
me. I need not tell you again how true is my love for you." He had
hold of her hand, and she did not withdraw it, and he ought to have
known that the battle was won. But he knew nothing. He hardly knew
that her hand was in his. "Clary, you are all the world to me. Must I
go back heart-laden, but empty-handed, with no comfort?"

"If you knew all!" she said, rising suddenly from her chair.

"All what?"

"If you knew all, you would not take me though I offered myself."
He stood staring at her, not at all comprehending her words, and
she perceived in the midst of her distress that it was needful that
she should explain herself. "I have loved Ralph always;--yes, your
brother."

"And he?"

"I will not accuse him in anything. He is married now, and it is
past."

"And you can never love again?"

"Who would take such a heart as that? It would not be worth the
giving or worth the taking. Oh--how I loved him!" Then he left her
side, and went back to the window, while she sank back upon her
chair, and, burying her face in her hands, gave way to tears and
sobs. He stood there perhaps for a minute, and then returning to her,
so gently that she did not hear him, he did kneel at her side. He
knelt, and putting his hand upon her arm, he kissed the sleeve of her
gown. "You had better go from me now," she said, amidst her sobs.

"I will never go from you again," he answered. "God's mercy can cure
also that wound, and I will be his minister in healing it. Clarissa,
I am so glad that you have told me all. Looking back I can understand
it now. I once thought that it was so."

"Yes," she said, "yes; it was so."

Gradually one hand of hers fell into his, and though no word of
acceptance had been spoken he knew that he was at last accepted. "My
own Clary," he said. "I may call you my own?" There was no answer,
but he knew that it was so. "Nothing shall be done to trouble
you;--nothing shall be said to press you. You may be sure of this, if
it be good to be loved,--that no woman was ever loved more tenderly
than you are."

"I do know it," she said, through her tears.

Then he rose and stood again at the window, looking out upon the lawn
and the river. She was still weeping, but he hardly heeded her tears.
It was better for her that she should weep than restrain them. And,
as to himself and his own feelings,--he tried to question himself,
whether, in truth, was he less happy in this great possession, which
he had at last gained, because his brother had for a while interfered
with him in gaining it? That she would be as true to him now, as
tender and as loving, as though Ralph had never crossed her path,
he did not for a moment doubt. That she would be less sweet to him
because her sweetness had been offered to another he would not admit
to himself,--even though the question were asked. She would be all
his own, and was she not the one thing in the world which he coveted?
He did think that for such a one as his Clarissa he would be a better
mate than would have been his brother, and he was sure that she
herself would learn to know that it was so. He stood there long
enough to resolve that this which had been told him should be no
drawback upon his bliss. "Clary," he said, returning to her, "it is
settled?" She made him no answer. "My darling, I am as happy now
as though Ralph had never seen your sweet face, or heard your dear
voice. Look up at me once." Slowly she looked up into his eyes, and
then stood before him almost as a suppliant, and gave him her face to
be kissed. So at last they became engaged as man and wife;--though
it may be doubted whether she spoke another word before he left the
room.

It was, however, quite understood that they were engaged; and, though
he did not see Clarissa again, he received the congratulations both
of Patience and Mary Bonner before he left the house; and that very
night succeeded in hunting down Sir Thomas, so that he might tell the
father that the daughter had at last consented to become his wife.


CHAPTER LVIII.

CONCLUSION.


Clarissa had found it hard to change the object of her love, so hard,
that for a time she had been unwilling even to make the effort;--and
she had been ashamed that those around her should think that she
would make it; but when the thing was done, her second hero was
dearer to her than ever had been the first. He at least was true.
With him there was no need of doubt. His assurances were not conveyed
in words so light that they might mean much or little. This second
lover was a lover, indeed, who thought no pains too great to show her
that she was ever growing in his heart of hearts. For a while,--for
a week or two,--she restrained her tongue; but when once she had
accustomed herself to the coaxing kindness of her sister and her
cousin, then her eloquence was loosened, and Gregory Newton was a
god indeed. In the course of time she got a very pretty note from
Ralph, congratulating her, as he also had congratulated Polly, and
expressing a fear that he might not be home in time to be present
at the wedding. Augusta was so fond of Rome that they did not mean
to leave it till the late spring. Then, after a while, there came
to her, also, a watch and chain, twice as costly as those given to
Polly,--which, however, no persuasion from Gregory would ever induce
Clarissa to wear. In after time Ralph never noticed that the trinkets
were not worn.

The winter at Popham Villa went on very much as other winters had
gone, except that two of the girls living there were full of future
hopes, and preparing for future cares, while the third occupied her
heart and mind with the cares and hopes of the other two. Patience,
however, had one other task in hand, a task upon the performance of
which her future happiness much depended, and in respect to which she
now ventured to hope for success. Wherever her future home might be,
it would be terrible to her if her father would not consent to occupy
it with her. It had been settled that both the marriages should take
place early in April,--both on the same day, and, as a matter of
course, the weddings would be celebrated at Fulham. Christmas had
come and gone, and winter was going, before Sir Thomas had absolutely
promised to renew that order for the making of the packing-cases for
his books. "You won't go back, papa, after they are married,"
Patience said to her father, early in March.

"If I do it shall not be for long."

"Not for a day, papa! Surely you will not leave me alone? There will
be plenty of room now. The air of Fulham will be better for your work
than those stuffy, dark, dingy lawyers' chambers."

"My dear, all the work of my life that was worth doing was done in
those stuffy, dingy rooms." That was all that Sir Thomas said, but
the accusation conveyed to him by his daughter's words was very
heavy. For years past he had sat intending to work, purposing to
achieve a great task which he set for himself, and had done--almost
nothing. Might it be yet possible that that purer air of which
Patty spoke should produce new energy, and lead to better results?
The promise of it did at least produce new resolutions. It was
impossible, as Patience had said, that his child should be left to
dwell alone, while yet she had a father living.

"Stemm," he said, "I told you to get some packing-cases made."

"Packing-cases, Sir Thomas?"

"Yes;--packing-cases for the books. It was months ago. Are they
ready?"

"No, Sir Thomas. They ain't ready."

"Why not?"

"Well, Sir Thomas;--they ain't; that's all." Then the order was
repeated in a manner so formal, as to make Stemm understand that it
was intended for a fact. "You are going away from this; are you, Sir
Thomas?"

"I believe that I shall give the chambers up altogether at midsummer.
At any rate, I mean to have the books packed at once."

"Very well, Sir Thomas." Then there was a pause, during which Stemm
did not leave the room. Nor did Sir Thomas dismiss him, feeling that
there might well be other things which would require discussion. "And
about me, Sir Thomas?" said Stemm.

"I have been thinking about that, Stemm."

"So have I, Sir Thomas,--more nor once."

"You can come to Fulham if you like,--only you must not scold the
maids."

"Very well, Sir Thomas," said Stemm, with hardly any variation in his
voice, but still with less of care upon his brow.

"Mind, I will not have you scolding them at the villa."

"Not unless they deserve it, Sir Thomas," said Stemm. Sir Thomas
could say nothing further. For our own part we fear that the maidens
at the villa will not be the better in conduct, as they certainly
will not be more comfortable in their lives, in consequence of this
change.

And the books were moved in large packing-cases, not one of which had
yet been opened when the two brides returned to Popham Villa after
their wedding tours, to see Patience just for a day before they were
taken to their new homes. Nevertheless, let us hope that the change
of air and of scene may tend to future diligence, and that the magnus
opus may yet be achieved. We have heard of editions of Aristophanes,
of Polybius, of the Iliad, of Ovid, and what not, which have ever
been forthcoming under the hands of notable scholars, who have grown
grey amidst the renewed promises which have been given. And some of
these works have come forth, belying the prophecies of incredulous
friends. Let us hope that the great Life of Bacon may yet be written.





      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

   Trollope was sometimes inconsistent with names of people or places.
   In the early pages of this novel the name of Mr. Neefit's home was
   Alexandrina Cottage. In the middle of the book it became Alexandria
   Cottage, and in later pages it was Alexandra Cottage. The names have
   been transcribed as they were in the original.