History of the United Netherlands, 1608(a)


CHAPTER L.

     Movements of the Emperor Rudolph--Marquis Spinola's reception at the
     Hague--Meeting of Spinola and Prince Maurice--Treaty of the Republic
     with the French Government--The Spanish commissioners before the
     States-General--Beginning of negotiations--Stormy discussions--Real
     object of Spain in the negotiations--Question of the India trade--
     Abandonment of the peace project--Negotiations for a truce--
     Prolongation of the armistice--Further delays--Treaty of the States
     with England--Proposals of the Spanish ambassadors to Henry of
     France and to James of England--Friar Neyen at the court of Spain--
     Spanish procrastination--Decision of Philip on the conditions of
     peace--Further conference at the Hague--Answer of the States-General
     to the proposals of the Spanish Government--General rupture.

Towards the close of the year 1607 a very feeble demonstration was made
in the direction of the Dutch republic by the very feeble Emperor of
Germany.  Rudolph, awaking as it might be from a trance, or descending
for a moment from his star-gazing tower and his astrological pursuits to
observe the movements of political spheres, suddenly discovered that the
Netherlands were no longer revolving in their preordained orbit.  Those
provinces had been supposed to form part of one great system, deriving
light and heat from the central imperial sun.  It was time therefore to
put an end to these perturbations.  The emperor accordingly, as if he had
not enough on his hands at that precise moment with the Hungarians,
Transylvanians, Bohemian protestants, his brother Matthias and the Grand
Turk, addressed a letter to the States of Holland, Zeeland, and the
provinces confederated with them.

Reminding them of the care ever taken by himself and his father to hear
all their petitions, and to obtain for them a good peace, he observed
that he had just heard of their contemplated negotiations with King
Philip and Archduke Albert, and of their desire to be declared free
states and peoples.  He was amazed, he said, that they should not have
given him notice of so important an affair, inasmuch as all the United
Provinces belonged to and were fiefs of the holy Roman Empire.  They were
warned, therefore, to undertake nothing that might be opposed to the
feudal law except with his full knowledge.  This letter was dated the 9th
of October.  The States took time to deliberate, and returned no answer
until after the new year.

On the 2nd of January, 1608, they informed the emperor that they could
never have guessed of his requiring notification as to the approaching
conferences.  They had not imagined that the archduke would keep them a
secret from his brother, or the king from his uncle-cousin.  Otherwise,
the States would have sent due notice to his Majesty.  They well
remembered, they said, the appeals made by the provinces to the emperor
from time to time, at the imperial diets, for help against the tyranny of
the Spaniards.  They well remembered, too, that no help was ever given
them in response to those appeals.  They had not forgotten either the
famous Cologne negotiations for peace in presence of the imperial envoys,
in consequence of which the enemy had carried on war against them with
greater ferocity than before.  At that epoch they had made use of an
extreme remedy for an intolerable evil, and had solemnly renounced
allegiance to the king.  Since that epoch a whole generation of mankind
had passed away, and many kings and potentates had recognised their
freedom, obtained for just cause and maintained by the armed hand.
After a long and bloody war, Albert and Philip had at last been brought
to acknowledge the provinces as free countries over which they pretended
to no right, as might be seen by the letters of both, copies of which
were forwarded to the emperor.  Full confidence was now expressed,
therefore, that the emperor and all Germany would look with favour on
such a God-fearing transaction, by which an end would be put to so
terrible a war.  Thus the States-General; replying with gentle scorn to
the antiquated claim of sovereignty on the part of imperial majesty.
Duly authenticated by citations of investitures, indulgences, and
concordates, engrossed on yellowest parchment, sealed with reddest
sealing-wax, and reposing in a thousand pigeon-holes in mustiest
archives, no claim could be more solemn or stately.  Unfortunately,
however, rebel pikes and matchlocks, during the past forty years, had
made too many rents in those sacred parchments to leave much hope of
their ever being pieced handsomely together again.  As to the historical
theory of imperial enfeoffment, the States thought it more delicate to
glide smoothly and silently over the whole matter.  It would have been
base to acknowledge and impolite to refute the claim.

It is as well to imitate this reserve.  It is enough simply to remind the
reader that although so late as the time of Charles V., the provinces had
been declared constituent parts of the empire, liable to its burthens,
and entitled to its protection; the Netherlanders being practical people,
and deeming burthens and protection correlative, had declined the burthen
because always deprived of the protection.

And now, after a year spent in clearing away the mountains of dust which
impeded the pathway to peace, and which one honest vigorous human breath
might at once have blown into space, the envoys of the archduke set forth
towards the Hague.

Marquis Spinola, Don Juan de Mancicidor, private secretary to the King of
Spain, President Richardot, Auditor Verreyken, and Brother John Neyen--
a Genoese, a Spaniard, a Burgundian, a Fleming, and a Franciscan friar
--travelling in great state, with a long train of carriages, horses,
lackeys, cooks, and secretaries, by way of Breda, Bergen-op-Zoom,

Dort, Rotterdam, and Delft, and being received in each town and village
through which they passed with great demonstrations of respect and
cordial welcome, arrived at last within a mile of the Hague.

It was the dead of winter, and of the severest winter that had occurred
for many years.  Every river, estuary, canal was frozen hard.  All
Holland was one broad level sheet of ice, over which the journey had been
made in sledges.  On the last day of January Prince Maurice, accompanied
by Lewes William, and by eight state coaches filled with distinguished
personages, left the Hague and halted at the Hoorn bridge, about midway
between Ryswyk and the capital.  The prince had replied to the first
request of the States that he should go forward to meet Spinola, by
saying that he would do so willingly if it were to give him battle;
otherwise not.  Olden-Barneveld urged upon him however that, as servant
of the republic, he was bound to do what the States commanded, as a
matter involving the dignity of the nation.  In consequence of this
remonstrance Maurice consented to go, but he went unwillingly.  The
advancing procession of the Spanish ambassadors was already in sight.
Far and wide in whatever direction the eye could sweep, the white surface
of the landscape was blackened with human beings.  It seemed as if the
whole population of the Netherlands had assembled, in mass meeting, to
witness the pacific interview between those two great chieftains who had
never before stood face to face except upon the battle-field.

In carriages, in donkey carts, upon horseback, in sledges, on skates,
upon foot-men, women, and children, gentle and simple, Protestants,
Catholics, Gomarites, Armenians, anabaptists, country squires in buff and
bandaleer, city magistrates and merchants in furs and velvet, artisans,
boatmen, and peasants, with their wives and daughters in well-starched
ruff and tremendous head-gear--they came thronging in countless
multitudes, those honest Hollanders, cheering and throwing up their caps
in honour of the chieftain whose military genius had caused so much
disaster to their country.  This uproarious demonstration of welcome on
the part of the multitude moved the spleen of many who were old enough to
remember the horrors of Spanish warfare within their borders.  "Thus
unreflecting, gaping, boorish, are nearly all the common people of these
provinces," said a contemporary, describing the scene, and forgetting
that both high and low, according to his own account, made up the mass of
spectators on that winter's day.  Moreover it seems difficult to
understand why the Hollanders should not have indulged a legitimate
curiosity, and made a holiday on this memorable occasion.  Spinola was
not entering their capital in triumph, a Spanish army was not marching
--as it might have done had the course of events been different--over the
protective rivers and marshes of the fatherland, now changed by the
exceptional cold into solid highways for invasion.  On the contrary, the
arrival of the great enemy within their gates, with the olive-branch
instead of the sword in his hand, was a victory not for Spain but for the
republic.  It was known throughout the land that he was commissioned by
the king and the archdukes to treat for peace with the States-General of
the United Provinces as with the representatives of a free and
independent nation, utterly beyond any foreign control.

Was not this opening of a cheerful and pacific prospect, after a half
century's fight for liberty, a fair cause for rejoicing?

The Spanish commissioners arrived at the Hoorn bridge, Spinola alighted
from his coach, Prince Maurice stepped forward into the road to greet
him.  Then the two eminent soldiers, whose names had of late been so
familiar in the mouths of men, shook hands and embraced with heroic
cordiality, while a mighty shout went up from the multitude around.  It
was a stately and dramatic spectacle, that peaceful meeting of the rival
leaders in a war which had begun before either of them was born.  The
bystanders observed, or thought that they observed, signs of great
emotion on the faces of both.  It has also been recorded that each
addressed the other in epigrammatic sentences of compliment.  "God is my
witness," Maurice was supposed to have said, "that the arrival of these
honourable negotiators is most grateful to me.  Time, whose daughter is
truth, will show the faith to be given to my words."

"This fortunate day," replied Spinola, "has filled full the measure of my
hopes and wishes, and taken from me the faculty of ever wishing for
anything again.  I trust in divine clemency that an opportunity may be
given to show my gratitude, and to make a fit return for the humanity
thus shown me by the most excellent prince that the sun shines upon."

With this both got into the stadholder's carriage, Spinola being placed
on Maurice's right hand.  Their conversation during their brief drive to
the capital, followed by their long retinue, and by the enthusiastic and
vociferating crowd, has not been chronicled.  It is also highly probable
that the second-rate theatrical dialogue which the Jesuit historian,
writing from Spinola's private papers, has preserved for posterity, was
rather what seemed to his imagination appropriate for the occasion than a
faithful shorthand report of anything really uttered.  A few commonplace
phrases of welcome, with a remark or two perhaps on the unexampled
severity of the frost, seem more likely to have formed the substance of
that brief conversation.

A couple of trumpeters of Spinola went braying through the streets of the
village capital, heralding their master's approach with superfluous
noise, and exciting the disgust of the quieter portion of the burghers.
At last however the envoys and their train were all comfortably housed.
The Marquis, President Richardot, and Secretary Mancicidor, were
established at a new mansion on the Vyverberg, belonging to Goswyn
Menskens.  The rest of the legation were lodged at the house of
Wassenaer.

It soon became plain that the ways of life and the style housekeeping
habitual to great officers of the Spanish crown were very different from
the thrifty manners and customs of Dutch republicans.  It was so long
since anything like royal pomp and circumstance had been seen in their
borders that the exhibition, now made, excited astonishment.  It was a
land where every child went to school, where almost every individual
inhabitant could read and write, where even the middle classes were
proficients in mathematics and the classics, and could speak two or more
modern languages; where the whole nation, with but few exceptions, were
producers of material or intellectual wealth, and where comparatively
little of unproductive consumption prevailed.  Those self-governing and
self-sustaining municipalities had almost forgotten the existence of the
magnificent nothings so dear to the hearts of kings.

Spinola's house was open day and night.  The gorgeous plate, gigantic
candelabra, mighty ewers, shields and layers of silver and gold, which
decorated his tables and sideboards, amazed the gaping crowd.  He dined
and supped in state every day, and the public were admitted to gaze upon
his banquets as if he had been a monarch.  It seemed, said those homely
republicans, as if "a silver christening were going on every day in his
house."

There were even grave remonstrances made to the magistracy and to, the
States-General against the effect of such ostentatious and immoral
proceedings upon the popular mind, and suggestions that at least the
doors should be shut, so that the scandal might be confined to Spinola's
own household.  But the republican authorities deciding, not without
wisdom, that the spectacle ought to serve rather as a wholesome warning
than as a contaminating example, declined any inquisitorial interference
with the housekeeping of the Spanish ambassadors.

Before the negotiations began, a treaty had been made between the
republic and the French Government, by which it was stipulated that every
effort should be made by both contracting parties to bring about an
honourable and assured peace between the United Provinces, Spain, and the
archdukes.  In case of the continuance of the war, however, it was agreed
that France should assist the States with ten thousand men, while in case
at any time, during the continuance of the league, France should be
attacked by a foreign enemy, she should receive from her ally five
thousand auxiliary troops, or their equivalent in maritime assistance.
This convention was thought by other powers to be so profitable to the
Netherlands as to excite general uneasiness and suspicion.

The States would have gladly signed a similar agreement with England, but
nothing was to be done with that Government until an old-standing dispute
in regard to the cloth trade had been arranged.  Middelburg had the
exclusive right of deposit for the cloths imported from England.  This
monopoly for Zealand being naturally not very palatable to Amsterdam and
other cities of Holland, the States-General had at last authorized the
merchant-adventurers engaged in this traffic to deposit their goods in
any city of the United Provinces.   The course of trade had been to
import the raw cloth from England, to dress and dye it in the
Netherlands, and then to re-export it to England.  Latterly, however,
some dyers and clothiers emigrating from the provinces to that country,
had obtained a monopoly from James for practising their art in his
dominions.  In consequence of this arrangement the exportation of undyed
cloths had been forbidden.  This prohibition had caused irritation both
in the kingdom and the republic, had necessarily deranged the natural
course of trade and manufacture, and had now prevented for the time any
conclusion of an alliance offensive and defensive between the countries,
even if political sentiment had made such a league possible.  The States-
General had recourse to the usual expedient by which bad legislation on
one side was countervailed by equally bad legislation on the other.  The
exportation of undyed English cloths being forbidden by England, the
importation of dyed English cloths was now prohibited by the Netherlands.
The international cloth trade stopped.  This embargo became at last so
detestable to all parties that concession was made by the crown for a
limited export of raw cloths.  The concession was soon widened by custom
into a general exportation, the royal Government looking through its
fingers at the open infraction of its own laws, while the natural laws of
trade before long re-established the old equilibrium.  Meantime the ill-
feeling produced by this dissension delayed any cordial political
arrangement between the countries.

On the 5th of February the Spanish commissioners came for the first time
before the States-General, assembled to the number of a hundred and
thirty, in their palace at the Hague.

The first meeting was merely one of mutual compliment, President
Richardot, on behalf of his colleagues, expressing gratitude for the
cordial welcome which had been manifested to the envoys on their journey
through so many towns of the United Provinces.  They had been received,
he said, not as enemies with whom an almost perpetual war had been waged,
but as friends, confederates, and allies.  A warmer reception they could
never have hoped for nor desired.

Two special commissioners were now appointed by the States-General to
negotiate with the envoys.  These were count Lewis William and Brederode.
With these delegates at large were associated seven others, one from each
province.  Barneveld of course represented Holland; Maldere, Zeeland;
Berk, Utrecht; Hillama, Friesland; Bloat, Overyssel; Koender van Helpen,
Groningen; Cornelius Vail Gend, Gelderland.

The negotiations began at once.  The archdukes had empowered the five
envoys to deal in their name and in that of the King of Spain.  Philip
had authorized the archdukes to take this course by an instrument dated
10th January.

In this paper he called the archdukes hereditary sovereigns of the
Netherlands.

It was agreed that the various points of negotiation should be taken up
in regular order; but the first question of all that presented itself was
whether the conferences should be for a truce or, a peace.

The secret object of Spain was for a truce of years.  Thus she thought to
save her dignity, to reserve her rights of re-conquest, to replenish her
treasury, and to repair her military strength.  Barneveld and his party,
comprising a large majority of the States-General, were for peace.
Prince Maurice, having done his utmost to oppose negotiations for peace,
was, for still stronger reasons, determined to avoid falling into what he
considered the ambush of a truce.  The French ambassadors were also for
peace.  The Spanish envoys accordingly concealed their real designs, and
all parties began discussions for the purpose of establishing a permanent
peace.

This preliminary being settled, Barneveld asked the Spaniards if they had
full powers to treat with the States as with a free nation, and if they
recognised them as such.

"The most ample power," was the reply; "and we are content to treat with
you even if you should choose to call yourself a kingdom."

"By what right then are the archdukes called by the king hereditary
sovereigns of the Netherlands, and why do they append the seals of the
seven United Provinces to this document?" asked the Advocate, taking up
from the table the full power of Albert and Isabella and putting his
finger on the seals."

"By the same right," replied President Richardot, "that the King of
France calls himself King of Navarre, that the King of Great Britain
calls himself King of France, that the King of Spain calls himself King
of Jerusalem."

Nothing could be more logical, nothing more historically accurate.
But those plain-spoken republicans saw no advantage in beginning a
negotiation for peace on the basis of their independence by permitting
the archduke to call himself their sovereign, and to seal solemn state
papers with their signet.  It might seem picturesque to genealogical
minds, it might be soothing to royal vanity, that paste counterfeits
should be substituted for vanished jewels.  It would be cruelty to
destroy the mock glitter without cause.  But there was cause.  On this
occasion the sham was dangerous.  James Stuart might call himself King of
France.  He was not more likely to take practical possession of that
kingdom than of the mountains in the moon.  Henry of Bourbon was not at
present contemplating an invasion of the hereditary possessions of the
house of Albret.  It was a matter of indifference to the Netherlands
whether Philip III. were crowned in Jerusalem that very day, or the week
afterwards, or never.  It was very important however that the United
Provinces should have it thoroughly recognised that they were a free and
independent republic, nor could that recognition be complete so long as
any human being in the whole world called himself their master, and
signed with their seals of state.  "'Tis absurd," said the Hollanders,
"to use the names and arms of our provinces.  We have as yet no precedent
to prove that you consider the United Provinces as lost, and name and
arms to be but wind."  Barneveld reminded them that they had all
expressed the most straightforward intention, and that the father
commissary especially had pledged his very soul for the sincerity of the
king and the archdukes.  "We ourselves never wished and never could
deceive any one," continued the Advocate, "and it is also very difficult
for others to deceive us."

This being the universal sentiment of the Netherlanders, it was thought
proper to express it in respectful but vigorous language.  This was done
and the session was terminated.  Tile Spanish envoys, knowing very well
that neither the king nor the archduke regarded the retention of the
titles and seals of all the seventeen Netherlands as an empty show, but
that a secret and solid claim lurked beneath that usurpation, were very
indignant.  They however dissembled their wrath from the States'
commissioners.  They were unwilling that the negotiations should be
broken up at the very first session, and they felt that neither Prince
Maurice nor Barneveld was to be trifled with upon this point.  But they
were loud and magnificent in their demonstrations when they came to talk
the matter over with the ambassadors of France and England.  It was most
portentous, they thought, to the cause of monarchy and good government
all over the world, that these republicans, not content to deal with
kings and princes on a footing of equality, should presume to dictate to
them as to inferiors.  Having passed through rebellion to liberty, they
were now proceeding to trample upon the most hallowed customs and rites.
What would become of royalty, if in the same breath it should not only
renounce the substance, but even put away the symbols of authority.  This
insolence of the people was not more dangerous to the king and the
archdukes than it was to every potentate in the universe.  It was a
sacred duty to resist such insults.  Sage Jeannin did his best to pacify
the vehemence of the commissioners.  He represented to them that foreign
titles borne by anointed kings were only ensigns of historical
possessions which they had for ever renounced; but that it might become
one day the pleasure of Spain, or lie in the power of Spain, to vindicate
her ancient rights to the provinces.

Hence the anxiety of the States was but natural.  The old Leaguer and
political campaigner knew very well, moreover, that at least one half of
Richardot's noble wrath was feigned.  The commissioners would probably
renounce the title and the seven seals, but in so doing would drive a
hard bargain.  For an empty phrase and a pennyworth of wax they would
extort a heavy price.  And this was what occurred.  The commissioners
agreed to write for fresh instructions to Brussels.  A reply came in due
time from the archdukes, in which they signified their willingness to
abandon the title of sovereigns over all the Netherlands, and to abstain
from using their signet.  In exchange for this concession they merely
demanded from the States-General a formal abandonment of the navigation
to both the Indies.  This was all.  The archdukes granted liberty to the
republic.  The republic would renounce its commerce with more than half
the world.

The scorn of the States' commissioners at this proposition can be
imagined, and it became difficult indeed for them to speak on the subject
in decorous language.  Because the archdukes were willing to give up
something which was not their property, the republic was voluntarily to
open its veins and drain its very life-blood at the bidding of a foreign
potentate.  She was to fling away all the trophies of Heemskerk and
Sebalt de Weerd, of Balthasar de Cordes, Van der Hagen, Matelieff, and
Verhoeff; she was to abdicate the position which she had already acquired
of mistress of the seas, and she was to deprive herself for ever of that
daily increasing ocean commerce which was rapidly converting a cluster of
puny, half-submerged provinces into a mighty empire.  Of a certainty the
Spanish court at this new epoch was an astounding anachronism.  In its
view Pope Alexander VI. still lived and reigned.

Liberty was not a boon conferred upon the Netherlanders by their defeated
enemy.  It had been gained by their own right hands; by the blood, and
the gold, and the sweat of two generations.  If it were the king's to
give, let him try once more if he could take it away.  Such were the
opinions and emotions of the Dutchmen, expressed in as courteous language
as they could find.

"It would be a political heresy," said Barneveld to the Spanish
commissioners at this session, "if my lords the States should by contract
banish their citizens out of two-thirds of the world, both land and sea."

"'Tis strange," replied the Spaniards, "that you wish to have more than
other powers--kings or republics--who never make any such pretensions.
The Indies, East and West, are our house, privately possessed by us for
more than a hundred years, and no one has a right to come into it without
our permission.  This is not banishment, but a custom to which all other
nations submit.  We give you your sovereignty before all the world,
quitting all claims upon it.  We know very well that you deny receiving
it from us; but to give you a quit claim, and to permit free trade
besides, would be a little more than you have a right to expect."

Was it not well for the cause of liberty, commercial intercourse, and
advancement of the human intellect, that there was this obstinate little
republic in the world, refusing to tolerate that to which all other great
powers of the earth submitted; that there was one nation determined not
to acknowledge three-quarters of the world, including America and India,
as the private mansion of the King of Spain, to be locked against the
rest of the human race?

The next session of the negotiators after the arrival of this
communication from the archdukes was a stormy one.  The India trade
was the sole subject of discussion.  As the States were firmly resolved
never to relinquish that navigation which in truth was one of their most
practical and valuable possessions, and as the royal commissioners were
as solemnly determined that it should never be conceded, it may be
imagined how much breath, how much foolscap paper, was wasted.

In truth, the negotiation for peace had been a vile mockery from the
beginning.  Spain had no real intention of abdicating her claim to the
United Provinces.

At the very moment when the commissioners were categorically making that
concession in Brussels, and claiming such a price for it, Hoboken, the
archduke's diplomatic representative in London, was earnestly assuring
King James that neither his master nor Philip had the remotest notion of
renouncing their sovereignty over all the Netherlands.  What had been
said and written to that effect was merely a device, he asserted, to
bring about a temporary truce.  During the interval of imaginary freedom
it was certain that the provinces would fall into such dire confusion
that it would be easier for Spain to effect their re-conquest, after a
brief delay for repairing her own strength, than it would be by
continuing the present war without any cessation.

The Spanish ambassador at Vienna too on his part assured the Emperor
Rudolph that his master was resolved never to abdicate the sovereignty
of the provinces.  The negotiations then going on, he said, were simply
intended to extort from the States a renunciation of the India trade and
their consent to the re-introduction of the Catholic religion throughout
their territories.

Something of all this was known and much more suspected at the Hague;
the conviction therefore that no faith would be kept with rebels and
heretics, whatever might be said or written, gained strength every day.
That these delusive negotiations with the Hollanders were not likely to
be so successful as the comedy enacted twenty years before at Bourbourg,
for the amusement of Queen Elizabeth and her diplomatists while the
tragedy of the Armada was preparing, might be safely prophesied.
Richardot was as effective as ever in the part which he had so often
played, but Spinola laboured under the disadvantage of being a far
honester man than Alexander Farnese.  Far from equal to that famous
chieftain in the management of a great military campaign, it is certain
that he was infinitely inferior to him in genteel comedy.  Whether
Maurice and Lewis William, Barneveld and Brederode, were to do better in
the parts formerly assigned to John Rogers, Valentine Dale, Comptroller
Croft, and their colleagues, remained to be seen.

On the 15th of February, at the fifth conference of the commissioners,
the first pitched battle on the India trade was fought.  Thereafter the
combat was almost every day renewed.  Exactly, as a year before, the
news of Heemskerk's victory at Gibraltar had made the king and the
archdukes eager to obtain an armistice with the rebels both by land and
sea, so now the report of Matelieff's recent achievements in the Indian
ocean was increasing their anxiety to exclude the Netherlanders from the
regions which they were rapidly making their own.

As we look back upon the negotiations, after the lapse of two centuries
and a half, it becomes difficult to suppress our amazement at those
scenes of solemn trickery and superhuman pride.  It is not necessary to
follow, step by step, the proceedings at each daily conference, but it is
impossible for me not to detain the reader for yet a season longer with
those transactions, and especially to invite him to ponder the valuable
lesson which in their entirety they convey.

No higher themes could possibly be laid before statesmen to discuss.
Questions of political self-government, religious liberty, national
independence, divine Right, rebellious Power, freedom of commerce,
supremacy of the seas, omnipotence claimed by the old world over the
destiny of what was called the new, were importunately demanding
solution.  All that most influenced human passion, or stirred human
reason to its depths--at that memorable point of time when two great
epochs seemed to be sweeping against each other in elemental conflict--
was to be dealt with.  The emancipated currents of human thought, the
steady tide of ancient dogma, were mingling in wrath.  There are times of
paroxysm in which Nature seems to effect more in a moment, whether
intellectually or materially, than at other periods during a lapse of
years.  The shock of forces, long preparing and long delayed, is apt at
last to make itself sensible to those neglectful of gradual but vital
changes.  Yet there are always ears that are deaf to the most portentous
din.

Thus, after that half century of war, the policy of Spain was still
serenely planting itself on the position occupied before the outbreak of
the revolt.  The commonwealth, solidly established by a free people,
already one of the most energetic and thriving among governments, a
recognised member of  the great international family, was now gravely
expected to purchase from its ancient tyrant the independence which it
had long possessed, while the price demanded for the free papers was not
only extravagant, but would be disgraceful to an emancipated slave.
Holland was not likely at that turning point in her history, and in the
world's history, to be false to herself and to the great principles of
public law.  It was good for the cause of humanity that the republic
should reappear at that epoch.  It was wholesome for Europe that there
should be just then a plain self-governing people, able to speak homely
and important truths.  It was healthy for the moral and political
atmosphere--in those days and in the time to come--that a fresh breeze
from that little sea-born commonwealth should sweep away some of the
ancient fog through which a few very feeble and very crooked mortals had
so long loomed forth like giants and gods.

To vindicate the laws of nations and of nature; to make a noble effort
for reducing to a system--conforming, at least approximately, to divine
reason--the chaotic elements of war and peace; to recal the great facts
that earth, sea, and sky ought to belong to mankind, and not to an
accidental and very limited selection of the species was not an unworthy
task for a people which had made such unexampled sacrifice for liberty
and right.

Accordingly, at the conference on the 15th February, the Spanish
commissioners categorically summoned the States to desist entirely from
the trade to either India, exactly as before the war.  To enforce this
prohibition, they said, was the principal reason why Philip desired
peace.  To obtain their freedom was surely well worth renunciation of
this traffic; the more so, because their trade with Spain, which was so
much shorter and safer, was now to be re-opened.  If they had been able
to keep that commerce, it was suggested, they would have never talked
about the Indies.  The commissioners added, that this boon had not been
conceded to France nor England, by the treaties of Vervins and London,
and that the States therefore could not find it strange that it should be
refused to them.

The States' commissioners stoutly replied that commerce was open to all
the world, that trade was free by the great law of nature, and that
neither France, England, nor the United Provinces, were to receive edicts
on this great subject from Spain and Portugal.  It was absurd to
circumscribe commercial intercourse at the very moment of exchanging
war for peace.  To recognise the liberty of the States upon paper,
and to attempt the imposition of servitude in reality, was a manifest
contradiction.  The ocean was free to all nations.  It had not been
enclosed by Spain with a rail-fence.

The debate grew more stormy every hour.  Spinola expressed great
indignation that the Netherlanders should be so obstinate upon this
point.  The tall, spare President arose in wrath from his seat at the
council-board, loudly protesting that the King of Spain would never
renounce his sovereignty over the provinces until they had forsworn the
India trade; and with this menace stalked out of the room.

The States' commissioners were not frightened.  Barneveld was at least a
match for Richardot, and it was better, after all, that the cards should
be played upon the table.  Subsequent meetings were quite as violent as
the first, the country was agitated far and wide, the prospects of
pacification dwindled to a speck in the remote horizon.  Arguments at
the Board of Conference, debates in the States-General, pamphlets by
merchants and advocates--especially several emanating from the East India
Company--handled the great topic from every point of view, and it became
more and more evident that Spain could not be more resolute to prohibit
than the republic to claim the trade.

"Daim is the French for deer, and cerf for stag; elan is the true term,
when one would speak of an elk."
"Yes," muttered the Indian, in his native tongue; "the pale faces are
prattling women! they have two words for each thing, while a red-skin will
make the sound of his voice speak to him." Then, changing his language,
he continued, adhering to the imperfect nomenclature of his provincial
instructors. "The deer is swift, but weak; the elk is swift, but strong;
and the son of 'Le Serpent' is 'Le Cerf Agile.' Has he leaped the river
to the woods?"
"If you mean the younger Delaware, he, too, has gone down with the water."

As there was nothing improbable to an Indian in the manner of the escape,
Magua admitted the truth of what he had heard, with a readiness that
afforded additional evidence how little he would prize such worthless
captives. With his companions, however, the feeling was manifestly
different.

The Hurons had awaited the result of this short dialogue with characteristic
patience, and with a silence that increased until there was a general
stillness in the band. When Heyward ceased to speak, they turned their
eyes, as one man, on Magua, demanding, in this expressive manner, an
explanation of what had been said.

Their interpreter pointed to the river, and made them acquainted with the
result, as much by the action as by the few words he uttered. When the
fact was generally understood, the savages raised a frightful
yell, which declared the extent of their disappointment. Some ran
furiously to the water's edge, beating the air with frantic gestures,
while others spat upon the element, to resent the supposed treason it
had committed against their acknowledged rights as conquerors.

A few, and they not the least powerful and terrific of the band, threw
lowering looks, in which the fiercest passion was only tempered by habitual
self-command, at those captives who still remained in their power, while
one or two even gave vent to their malignant feelings by the most
menacing gestures, against which neither the sex nor the beauty of the
sisters was any protection.
The young soldier made a desperate but fruitless effort to spring to the
side of Alice, when he saw the dark hand of a savage twisted in the rich
tresses which were flowing in volumes over her shoulders, while a
knife was passed around the head from which they fell, as if to denote
the horrid manner in which it was about to be robbed of its beautiful
ornament. But his hands were bound; and at the first movement he made, he
felt the grasp of the powerful Indian who directed the band, pressing
his shoulder like a vise. Immediately conscious how unavailing any
struggle against such an overwhelming force must prove, he submitted
to his fate, encouraging his gentle companions by a few low and tender
assurances, that the natives seldom failed to threaten more than they
performed.

But while Duncan resorted to these words of consolation to quiet the
apprehensions of the sisters, he was not so weak as to deceive himself.

He well knew that the authority of an Indian chief was so little conventional,
that it was oftener maintained by physical superiority than by any moral
supremacy he might possess. The danger was, therefore, magnified exactly
in proportion to the number of the savage spirits by which they were
surrounded. The most positive mandate from him who seemed the acknowledged
leader, was liable to be violated at each moment by any rash hand that
might choose to sacrifice a victim to the manes of some dead friend
or relative. While, therefore, he sustained an outward appearance
of calmness and fortitude, his heart leaped into his throat,
whenever any of their fierce captors drew nearer than common to the
helpless sisters, or fastened one of their sullen, wandering looks
on those fragile forms which were so little able to resist the
slightest assault.

His apprehensions were, however, greatly relieved, when he saw that
the leader had summoned his warriors to himself in counsel. Their
deliberations were short, and it would seem, by the silence of most
of the party, the decision unanimous. By the frequency with which
the few speakers pointed in the direction of the encampment of Webb,
it was apparent they dreaded the approach of danger from that quarter.
This consideration probably hastened their determination, and quickened
the subsequent movements.

During his short conference, Heyward, finding a respite from his gravest
fears, had leisure to admire the cautious manner in which the
Hurons had made their approaches, even after hostilities had ceased.

It has already been stated that the upper half of the island was a
naked rock, and destitute of any other defenses than a few scattered
logs of driftwood.

They had selected this point to make their descent, having borne the
canoe through the wood around the cataract for that purpose.
Placing their arms in the little vessel a dozen men clinging to its
sides had trusted themselves to the direction of the canoe, which was
controlled by two of the most skillful warriors, in attitudes that
enabled them to command a view of the dangerous passage. Favored by this
arrangement, they touched the head of the island at that point which had
proved so fatal to their first adventurers, but with the advantages of
superior numbers, and the possession of firearms. That such had been
the manner of their descent was rendered quite apparent to Duncan; for
they now bore the light bark from the upper end of the rock, and placed
it in the water, near the mouth of the outer cavern. As soon as this
change was made, the leader made signs to the prisoners to descend and
enter.

As resistance was impossible, and remonstrance useless, Heyward set the
example of submission, by leading the way into the canoe, where he was
soon seated with the sisters and the still wondering David.
Notwithstanding the Hurons were necessarily ignorant of the little
channels among the eddies and rapids of the stream, they knew the
common signs of such a navigation too well to commit any material
blunder.

When the pilot chosen for the task of guiding the canoe had taken his
station, the whole band plunged again into the river, the vessel glided
down the current, and in a few moments the captives found themselves on
the south bank of the stream, nearly opposite to the point where
they had struck it the preceding evening.

Here was held another short but earnest consultation, during which the
horses, to whose panic their owners ascribed their heaviest misfortune,
were led from the cover of the woods, and brought to the sheltered spot.

The band now divided. The great chief, so often mentioned, mounting
the charger of Heyward, led the way directly across the river,
followed by most of his people, and disappeared in the woods, leaving
the prisoners in charge of six savages, at whose head was Le Renard
Subtil. Duncan witnessed all their movements with renewed uneasiness.

He had been fond of believing, from the uncommon forbearance of the
savages, that he was reserved as a prisoner to be delivered to Montcalm.

As the thoughts of those who are in misery seldom slumber, and the invention
is never more lively than when it is stimulated by hope, however feeble
and remote, he had even imagined that the parental feelings of Munro were
to be made instrumental in seducing him from his duty to the king. For
though the French commander bore a high character for courage and
enterprise, he was also thought to be expert in those political practises
which do not always respect the nicer obligations of morality, and
which so generally disgraced the European diplomacy of that period.

All those busy and ingenious speculations were now annihilated
by the conduct of his captors. That portion of the band who had followed
the huge warrior took the route toward the foot of the Horican, and no
other expectation was left for himself and companions, than that they
were to be retained as hopeless captives by their savage conquerors.
Anxious to know the worst, and willing, in such an emergency, to
try the potency of gold he overcame his reluctance to speak to Magua.

Addressing himself to his former guide, who had now assumed the authority
and manner of one who was to direct the future movements of the party,
he said, in tones as friendly and confiding as he could assume:

"I would speak to Magua, what is fit only for so great a chief to hear."

The Indian turned his eyes on the young soldier scornfully, as he
answered:

"Speak; trees have no ears."
"But the red Hurons are not deaf; and counsel that is fit for the great
men of a nation would make the young warriors drunk. If Magua will not
listen, the officer of the king knows how to be silent."
The savage spoke carelessly to his comrades, who were busied, after
their awkward manner, in preparing the horses for the reception of
the sisters, and moved a little to one side, whither by a cautious
gesture he induced Heyward to follow.

"Now, speak," he said; "if the words are such as Magua should hear."
"Le Renard Subtil has proved himself worthy of the honorable name given
to him by his Canada fathers," commenced Heyward; "I see his wisdom,
and all that he has done for us, and shall remember it when the
hour to reward him arrives.

Yes! Renard has proved that he is not only a great chief in council, but
one who knows how to deceive his enemies!"

"What has Renard done?" coldly demanded the Indian.

"What!

has he not seen that the woods were filled with outlying parties of the
enemies, and that the serpent could not steal through them without
being seen?

Then, did he not lose his path to blind the eyes of the Hurons? Did he not
pretend to go back to his tribe, who had treated him ill, and driven him
from their wigwams like a dog? And when he saw what he wished to do, did
we not aid him, by making a false face, that the Hurons might think the
white man believed that his friend was his enemy? Is not all this true?
And when Le Subtil had shut the eyes and stopped the ears of his nation
by his wisdom, did they not forget that they had once done him
wrong, and forced him to flee to the Mohawks?
And did they not leave him on the south side of the river, with their
prisoners, while they have gone foolishly on the north?

Does not Renard mean to turn like a fox on his footsteps, and to carry
to the rich and gray-headed Scotchman his daughters?

Yes, Magua, I see it all, and I have already been thinking how so much
wisdom and honesty should be repaid. First, the chief of William
Henry will give as a great chief should for such a service.

The medal* of Magua will no longer be of tin, but of beaten gold; his
horn will run over with powder; dollars will be as plenty in his
pouch as pebbles on the shore of Horican; and the deer will lick
his hand, for they will know it to be vain to fly from the rifle
he will carry!

As for myself, I know not how to exceed the gratitude of the Scotchman, but
I--yes, I will--"

* It has long been a practice with the whites to conciliate the
important men of the Indians by presenting medals, which are worn
in the place of their own rude ornaments.

Those given by the English generally bear the impression of the
reigning king, and those given by the Americans that of the
president.

"What will the young chief, who comes from toward the sun, give?" demanded
the Huron, observing that Heyward hesitated in his desire to end the
enumeration of benefits with that which might form the climax of an
Indian's wishes.

"He will make the fire-water from the islands in the salt lake flow before
the wigwam of Magua, until the heart of the Indian shall be lighter
than the feathers of the humming-bird, and his breath sweeter than the
wild honeysuckle."
Le Renard had listened gravely as Heyward slowly proceeded in this
subtle speech. When the young man mentioned the artifice he supposed the
Indian to have practised on his own nation, the countenance of the listener
was veiled in an expression of cautious gravity. At the allusion
to the injury which Duncan affected to believe had driven the Huron
from his native tribe, a gleam of such ungovernable ferocity flashed
from the other's eyes, as induced the adventurous speaker to believe
he had struck the proper chord.

And by the time he reached the part where he so artfully blended the thirst
of vengeance with the desire of gain, he had, at least, obtained a
command of the deepest attention of the savage. The question put by Le
Renard had been calm, and with all the dignity of an Indian; but it was
quite apparent, by the thoughtful expression of the listener's
countenance, that the answer was most cunningly devised. The Huron mused
a few moments, and then laying his hand on the rude bandages of his
wounded shoulder, he said, with some energy:

"Do friends make such marks?"
"Would 'La Longue Carbine' cut one so slight on an enemy?"
"Do the Delawares crawl upon those they love like snakes, twisting themselves
to strike?"
"Would 'Le Gros Serpent' have been heard by the ears of one he wished
to be deaf?"
"Does the white chief burn his powder in the faces of his brothers?"

"Does he ever miss his aim, when seriously bent to kill?" returned Duncan,
smiling with well acted sincerity.

Another long and deliberate pause succeeded these sententious questions
and ready replies. Duncan saw that the Indian hesitated. In order to
complete his victory, he was in the act of recommencing the enumeration
of the rewards, when Magua made an expressive gesture and said:

"Enough; Le Renard is a wise chief, and what he does will be seen.
Go, and keep the mouth shut. When Magua speaks, it will be the time to
answer."

Heyward, perceiving that the eyes of his companion were warily fastened
on the rest of the band, fell back immediately, in order to avoid the
appearance of any suspicious confederacy with their leader.
Magua approached the horses, and affected to be well pleased with
the diligence and ingenuity of his comrades.

He then signed to Heyward to assist the sisters into the saddles, for he
seldom deigned to use the English tongue, unless urged by some
motive of more than usual moment.

There was no longer any plausible pretext for delay; and Duncan was obliged,
however reluctantly, to comply. As he performed this office, he whispered
his reviving hopes in the ears of the trembling females, who, through
dread of encountering the savage countenances of their captors, seldom
raised their eyes from the ground. The mare of David had been taken
with the followers of the large chief; in consequence, its owner, as
well as Duncan, was compelled to journey on foot. The latter did not,
however, so much regret this circumstance, as it might enable him
to retard the speed of the party; for he still turned his longing
looks in the direction of Fort Edward, in the vain expectation of
catching some sound from that quarter of the forest, which might
denote the approach of succor.

When all were prepared, Magua made the signal to proceed, advancing
in front to lead the party in person. Next followed David, who was
gradually coming to a true sense of his condition, as the effects of the
wound became less and less apparent. The sisters rode in his rear, with
Heyward at their side, while the Indians flanked the party, and brought
up the close of the march, with a caution that seemed never to
tire.

In this manner they proceeded in uninterrupted silence, except when Heyward
addressed some solitary word of comfort to the females, or David
gave vent to the moanings of his spirit, in piteous exclamations,
which he intended should express the humility of resignation.

Their direction lay toward the south, and in a course nearly opposite to
the road to William Henry. Notwithstanding this apparent adherence
in Magua to the original determination of his conquerors, Heyward
could not believe his tempting bait was so soon forgotten; and he
knew the windings of an Indian's path too well to suppose that its
apparent course led directly to its object, when artifice was at
all necessary.

Mile after mile was, however, passed through the boundless woods, in this
painful manner, without any prospect of a termination to their
journey.

Heyward watched the sun, as he darted his meridian rays through
the branches of the trees, and pined for the moment when the policy
of Magua should change their route to one more favorable to his
hopes. Sometimes he fancied the wary savage, despairing of passing the
army of Montcalm in safety, was holding his way toward a well-known border
settlement, where a distinguished officer of the crown, and a favored
friend of the Six Nations, held his large possessions, as well as
his usual residence.

To be delivered into the hands of Sir William Johnson was far preferable
to being led into the wilds of Canada; but in order to effect even
the former, it would be necessary to traverse the forest for many weary
leagues, each step of which was carrying him further from the scene of the
war, and, consequently, from the post, not only of honor, but of duty.

Cora alone remembered the parting injunctions of the scout, and whenever
an opportunity offered, she stretched forth her arm to bend aside
the twigs that met her hands.

But the vigilance of the Indians rendered this act of precaution both
difficult and dangerous. She was often defeated in her purpose, by
encountering their watchful eyes, when it became necessary to feign
an alarm she did not feel, and occupy the limb by some gesture of
feminine apprehension.

Once, and once only, was she completely successful; when she broke down
the bough of a large sumach, and by a sudden thought, let her glove
fall at the same instant. This sign, intended for those that might
follow, was observed by one of her conductors, who restored the glove,
broke the remaining branches of the bush in such a manner that it
appeared to proceed from the struggling of some beast in its branches,
and then laid his hand on his tomahawk, with a look so significant,
that it put an effectual end to these stolen memorials of their
passage.

As there were horses, to leave the prints of their footsteps, in both bands
of the Indians, this interruption cut off any probable hopes of assistance
being conveyed through the means of their trail.

Heyward would have ventured a remonstrance had there been anything
encouraging in the gloomy reserve of Magua. But the savage, during
all this time, seldom turned to look at his followers, and never spoke.
With the sun for his only guide, or aided by such blind marks as
are only known to the sagacity of a native, he held his way along
the barrens of pine, through occasional little fertile vales, across
brooks and rivulets, and over undulating hills, with the accuracy
of instinct, and nearly with the directness of a bird.

He never seemed to hesitate.
Whether the path was hardly distinguishable, whether it disappeared, or
whether it lay beaten and plain before him, made no sensible difference
in his speed or certainty. It seemed as if fatigue could not affect
him.
Whenever the eyes of the wearied travelers rose from the decayed
leaves over which they trod, his dark form was to be seen glancing
among the stems of the trees in front, his head immovably fastened
in a forward position, with the light plume on his crest fluttering
in a current of air, made solely by the swiftness of his own motion.

But all this diligence and speed were not without an object. After
crossing a low vale, through which a gushing brook meandered, he suddenly
ascended a hill, so steep and difficult of ascent, that the sisters
were compelled to alight in order to follow.

When the summit was gained, they found themselves on a level spot, but
thinly covered with trees, under one of which Magua had thrown his
dark form, as if willing and ready to seek that rest which was so
much needed by the whole party.

CHAPTER 11
"Cursed be my tribe If I forgive him." --Shylock
The Indian had selected for this desirable purpose one of those steep,
pyramidal hills, which bear a strong resemblance to artificial
mounds, and which so frequently occur in the valleys of America. The one
in question was high and precipitous; its top flattened, as usual; but
with one of its sides more than ordinarily irregular. It possessed no other
apparent advantage for a resting place, than in its elevation and form,
which might render defense easy, and surprise nearly impossible. As
Heyward, however, no longer expected that rescue which time and distance
now rendered so improbable, he regarded these little peculiarities
with an eye devoid of interest, devoting himself entirely to the comfort
and condolence of his feebler companions. The Narragansetts were suffered
to browse on the branches of the trees and shrubs that were thinly
scattered over the summit of the hill, while the remains of their
provisions were spread under the shade of a beech, that stretched
its horizontal limbs like a canopy above them.

Notwithstanding the swiftness of their flight, one of the Indians had found
an opportunity to strike a straggling fawn with an arrow, and had borne
the more preferable fragments of the victim, patiently on his shoulders,
to the stopping place. Without any aid from the science of cookery, he
was immediately employed, in common with his fellows, in gorging himself
with this digestible sustenance. Magua alone sat apart, without
participating in the revolting meal, and apparently buried in the
deepest thought.

This abstinence, so remarkable in an Indian, when he possessed the means
of satisfying hunger, at length attracted the notice of Heyward. The
young man willingly believed that the Huron deliberated on the most
eligible manner of eluding the vigilance of his associates. With a view
to assist his plans by any suggestion of his own, and to strengthen
the temptation, he left the beech, and straggled, as if without an object,
to the spot where Le Renard was seated.

"Has not Magua kept the sun in his face long enough to escape all
danger from the Canadians?"

he asked, as though no longer doubtful of the good intelligence established
between them; "and will not the chief of William Henry be better
pleased to see his daughters before another night may have hardened his
heart to their loss, to make him less liberal in his reward?"
"Do the pale faces love their children less in the morning than at
night?" asked the Indian, coldly.

"By no means," returned Heyward, anxious to recall his error, if he had
made one; "the white man may, and does often, forget the burial place
of his fathers; he sometimes ceases to remember those he should
love, and has promised to cherish; but the affection of a parent for his
child is never permitted to die."
Don Pedro took little by his propositions.  The king stoutly declared
that the Netherlands were very near to his heart, and that he would never
abandon them on any consideration.  So near, indeed, that he meant to
bring them still nearer, but this was not then suspected by the Spanish
court; Henry, the while, repelling as a personal insult to himself the
request that he should secretly labour to reduce the United Provinces
under subjection to the archdukes.  It had even been proposed that he
should sign a secret convention to that effect, and there were those
about the court who were not ill-disposed for such a combination.
The king was, however, far too adroit to be caught in any such trap.
The marriage proposals in themselves he did not dislike, but Jeannin
and he were both of a mind that they should be kept entirely secret.

Don Pedro, on the contrary, for obvious reasons, was for making the
transactions ostentatiously public, and, as a guarantee of his master's
good faith in regard to the heritage of the Netherlands, he proposed that
every portion of the republic, thenceforth to be conquered by the allies,
should be confided to hands in which Henry and the archdukes would have
equal confidence.

But these artifices were too trivial to produce much effect.  Henry
remained true, in his way, to the States-General, and Don Pedro was much
laughed at in Paris, although the public scarcely knew wherefore.

These intrigues had not been conducted so mysteriously but that Barneveld
was aware of what was going on.  Both before Jeannin's departure from the
Hague in June, and on his return in the middle of August, he catechised
him very closely on the subject.  The old Leaguer was too deep, however,
to be thoroughly pumped, even by so practised a hand as the Advocate's,
so that more was suspected than at the time was accurately known.

As, at the memorable epoch of the accession of the King of Scots to the
throne of Elizabeth, Maximilian de Bethune had flattered the new monarch
with the prospect of a double marriage, so now Don Fernando Girono had
been sent on solemn mission to England, in order to offer the same
infants to James which Don Pedro was placing at the disposition of Henry.

The British sovereign, as secretly fascinated by the idea of a Spanish
family alliance as he had ever been by the proposals of the Marquis de
Rosny for the French marriages, listened with eagerness.  Money was
scattered as profusely among the English courtiers by Don Fernando as had
been done by De Bethune four years before.  The bribes were accepted, and
often by the very personages who knew the colour of Bourbon money, but
the ducats were scarcely earned.  Girono, thus urging on the English
Government the necessity of deserting the republic and cementing a
cordial, personal, and political understanding between James and Philip,
effected but little.  It soon became thoroughly understood in England
that the same bargaining was going on simultaneously in France.  As it
was evident that the Spanish children could not be disposed of in both
markets at the same time, it was plain to the dullest comprehension that
either the brokerage of Toledo or of Girono was a sham, and that a policy
erected upon such flimsy foundations would soon be washed away.

It is certain, however, that James, while affecting friendship for the
States, and signing with them the league of mutual assistance, was
secretly longing to nibble the bait dangled before him by Girono, and was
especially determined to prevent, if possible, the plans of Toledo.

Meantime, brother John Neyen was dealing with Philip and the Duke of
Lerma, in Spain.

The friar strenuously urged upon the favourite and the rest of the royal
advisers the necessity of prompt action with the States.  This needed not
interfere with an unlimited amount of deception.  It was necessary to
bring the negotiations to a definite agreement.  It would be by no means
requisite, however, to hold to that agreement whenever a convenient
opportunity for breaking it should present itself.  The first object of
Spanish policy, argued honest John, should be to get the weapons out of
the rebels' hands.  The Netherlanders ought to be encouraged to return to
their usual pursuits of commerce and manufactures, whence they derived
their support, and to disband their military and naval forces.  Their
sailors and traders should be treated kindly in Spain, instead of being
indulged as heretofore with no hospitality save that of the Holy
Inquisition and its dungeons.  Let their minds be disarmed of all
suspicion.  Now the whole population of the provinces had been convinced
that Spain, in affecting to treat, was secretly devising means to re-
impose her ancient yoke upon their necks.

Time went by in Aranjuez and Madrid.  The forty days, promised as the
period of Neyen's absence, were soon gone; but what were forty days, or
forty times forty, at the Spanish court?  The friar, who, whatever his
faults, was anything but an idler, chafed at a procrastination which
seemed the more stupendous to him, coming fresh as he did from a busy
people who knew the value of time.  In the anguish of his soul he went to
Rodrigo Calderon, of the privy council, and implored his influence with
Government to procure leave for him to depart.  Calderon, in urbane but
decisive terms, assured him that this would be impossible before the king
should return to Madrid.  The monk then went to Idiaquez, who was in
favour of his proceeding at once to the Netherlands, but who on being
informed that Calderon was of a different opinion, gave up the point.
More distressed than ever, Neyen implored Prada's assistance, but Prada
plunged him into still deeper despair.  His Majesty, said that
counsellor, with matchless effrontery, was studying the propositions of
the States-General, and all the papers in the negotiation, line by line,
comma by comma.  There were many animadversions to make, many counter
suggestions to offer.  The king was pondering the whole subject most
diligently.  When those lucubrations were finished, the royal decision,
aided by the wisdom of the privy council, would be duly communicated to
the archdukes.

To wait for an answer to the propositions of the suspicious States-
General until Philip III.  had mastered the subject in detail, was a
prospect too dreary even for the equable soul of Brother John.  Dismayed
at the position in which he found himself, he did his best to ferret out
the reasons for the preposterous delay; not being willing to be paid off
in allusions to the royal investigations.  He was still further appalled
at last by discovering that the delay was absolutely for the delay's
sake.  It was considered inconsistent with the dignity of the Government
not to delay.  The court and cabinet had quite made up their minds as to
the answer to be made to the last propositions of the rebels, but to make
it known at once was entirely out of the question.  In the previous year
his Majesty's administration, so it was now confessed with shame, had
acted with almost indecent haste.  That everything had been conceded to
the confederated provinces was the--common talk of Europe.  Let the time-
honoured, inveterate custom of Spain in grave affairs to proceed slowly,
and therefore surely, be in future observed.  A proper self-respect
required the king to keep the universe in suspense for a still longer
period upon the royal will and the decision of the royal council.

Were the affairs of the mighty Spanish empire so subordinate to the
convenience of that portion of it called the Netherlands that no time was
to be lost before settling their affairs?

Such dismal frivolity, such palsied pride, seems scarcely credible; but
more than all this has been carefully recorded in the letters of the
friar.

If it were precipitation to spend the whole year 1607 in forming a single
phrase; to wit, that the archdukes and the king would treat with the
United Provinces as with countries to which they made no pretensions; and
to spend the best part of another year in futile efforts to recal that
phrase; if all this had been recklessness and haste, then, surely, the
most sluggish canal in Holland was a raging cataract, and the march of a
glacier electric speed.

Midsummer had arrived.  The period in which peace was to be made or
abandoned altogether had passed.  Jeannin had returned from his visit to
Paris; the Danish envoys, sent to watch the negotiations, had left the
Hague, utterly disgusted with a puppet-show, all the strings of which,
they protested, were pulled from the Louvre.  Brother John, exasperated
by the superhuman delays, fell sick of a fever at Burgos, and was sent,
on his recovery, to the court at Valladolid to be made ill again by the
same cause, and still there came no sound from the Government of Spain.

At last the silence was broken.  Something that was called the voice of
the king reached the ears of the archduke.  Long had he wrestled in
prayer on this great subject, said Philip III., fervently had he besought
the Omnipotent for light.  "The red Hurons are without," he said; "let
us be ready." At the same time he laid his finger significantly
on another similar weapon, both being the fruits of his prowess among
their enemies during the evening.

"We will go," said Uncas.

"Whither?"
"To the Tortoises; they are the children of my grandfathers."
"Ay, lad," said the scout in English--a language he was apt to use when
a little abstracted in mind; "the same blood runs in your veins, I believe;
but time and distance has a little changed its color. What shall we
do with the Mingoes at the door? They count six, and this singer is as
good as nothing."
"The Hurons are boasters," said Uncas, scornfully; "their 'totem' is a
moose, and they run like snails. The Delawares are children of the
tortoise, and they outstrip the deer."
"Ay, lad, there is truth in what you say; and I doubt not, on a
rush, you would pass the whole nation; and, in a straight race of
two miles, would be in, and get your breath again, afore a knave
of them all was within hearing of the other village.

But the gift of a white man lies more in his arms than in his legs.
As for myself, I can brain a Huron as well as a better man; but when it
comes to a race the knaves would prove too much for me."
Uncas, who had already approached the door, in readiness to lead
the way, now recoiled, and placed himself, once more, in the bottom
of the lodge. But Hawkeye, who was too much occupied with his own
thoughts to note the movement, continued speaking more to himself
than to his companion.If the confederates, in consequence of the
conditions thus definitely announced, moved by their innate pride and
obstinacy, and relying on the assistance of their allies, should break
off the negotiations, then it would be desirable to adopt the plan
proposed by Jeannin to Richardot, and conclude a truce for five or six
years.  The king expressed his own decided preference for a truce rather
than a peace, and his conviction that Jeannin had made the suggestion by
command of his sovereign.

The negotiators stood exactly where they did when Friar John, disguised
as a merchant, first made his bow to the Prince and Barneveld in the
palace at the Hague.

The archduke, on receiving at last this peremptory letter from the king,
had nothing for it but to issue instructions accordingly to the
plenipotentiaries at the Hague.  A decisive conference between those
diplomatists and the States' commissioners took place immediately
afterwards.

It was on the 20th August.

Although it had been agreed on the 1st May to break off negotiations on
the ensuing 1st of August, should no result be reached, yet three weeks
beyond that period had been suffered to elapse, under a tacit agreement
to wait a little longer for the return of the friar.  President Jeannin,
too, had gone to Paris on the 20th June, to receive new and important
instructions; verbal and written, from his sovereign, and during his
absence it had not been thought expedient to transact much business.
Jeannin returned to the Hague on the 15th of August, and, as definite
instructions from king and archduke had now arrived, there seemed no
possibility of avoiding an explanation.

The Spanish envoys accordingly, with much gravity, and as if they had
been propounding some cheerful novelty, announced to the assembled
commissioners that all reports hitherto flying about as to the Spanish
king's intentions were false.

His Majesty had no intention of refusing to give up the sovereignty of
the provinces.  On the contrary, they were instructed to concede that
sovereignty freely and frankly to my lords the States-General--a pearl
and a precious jewel, the like of which no prince had ever given away
before.  He suddenly came to a grove of blossoming peach trees. It lined
both banks for several hundred paces and included not a single other
kind of tree. Petals of the dazzling and fragrant blossoms were falling
everywhere in profusion.
Thinking this place highly unusual, the fisherman advanced once again in
wanting to see how far it went.

The peach trees stopped at the stream's source, where the fisherman came
to a mountain with a small opening through which it seemed he could
see light. Leaving his boat, he entered the opening. At first it was so
narrow that he could barely pass, but after advancing a short distance it
suddenly opened up to reveal a broad, flat area with imposing
houses, good fields, beautiful ponds, mulberry trees, bamboo, and
the like.

The fisherman saw paths extending among the fields in all directions, and
could hear the sounds of chickens and dogs. Men and women working in the
fields all wore clothing that looked like that of foreign lands. The
elderly and children all seemed to be happy and enjoying
themselves.

The people were amazed to see the fisherman, and they asked him from
where he had come. He told them in detail, then the people invited him
to their home, set out wine, butchered a chicken [5], and prepared a
meal. Other villagers heard about the fisherman, and they all came to ask
him questions.
Then the villagers told him, "To avoid the chaos of war during the Qin
Dynasty [6], our ancestors brought their families and villagers to this
isolated place and never left it, so we've had no contact with the outside
world." They asked the fisherman what the present reign was. They were
not even aware of the Han Dynasty [7], let alone the Wei [8] and
Jin.

The fisherman told them everything he knew in great detail, and the villagers
were amazed and heaved sighs. Then other villagers also invited
the fisherman to their homes, where they gave him food and drink.
Spain was a power only to
be treated with on the battle-field.  In the tempest of general rage no
one would listen to argument, no one asked which would be the weaker,
which the stronger party, what resources for the renewed warfare could be
founds or who would be the allies of the republic.  Hatred, warlike fury
and scorn at the duplicity with which they had been treated, washed every
more politic sentiment away, and metamorphosed that body of burghers as
in an instant.  The negotiations should be broken off, not on one point,
but on all points, and nothing was left but to prepare instantly for war.
Three days later, after the French and  English ambassadors, as well as
Prince Maurice and Count Lewis William, had been duly consulted,
comparative calm was restored, and a decisive answer was unanimously
voted by the States-General.  The proposition of the commissioners was
simply declared to be in direct violation of the sovereignty and freedom
of the country, and it was announced that, if it should be persisted in,
the whole negotiation might be considered as broken off.  A formal answer
to the royal propositions would be communicated likewise to the envoys of
foreign powers, in order that the royal commissioners might be placed
completely in the wrong.

On the 25th August an elaborate response was accordingly delivered in
writing by the States' commissioners to those of the archdukes and king,
it being at the same time declared by Barneveld and his colleagues that
their functions were ended, and that this document, emanating from the
States-General, was a sovereign resolution, not a diplomatic note.

The contents of this paper may be inferred from all that has been
previously narrated.  The republic knew its own mind, and had always
expressed itself with distinctness.  The Spanish Government having at
last been brought to disclose its intentions, there was an end to the
negotiations for peace.  The rupture was formally announced.


ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Night brings counsel
This obstinate little republic
Triple marriages between the respective nurseries
Usual expedient by which bad legislation on one side countered