Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreaders.


THE LORD OF THE SEA

By M. P. SHIEL


CONTENTS

      I. THE EXODUS

     II. THE FEZ

    III. THE HUNTING-CROP

     IV. THE SWOON

      V. REID'S

     VI. "PEARSON'S WEEKLY"

    VII. THE ELM

   VIII. THE METEOR

     IX. HOGARTH'S GUNS

      X. ISAAC

     XI. WROXHAM BROAD

    XII. THE ROSE

   XIII. OUT OF THE WORLD

    XIV. THE PRIEST

     XV. MONSIGNOR

    XVI. THE ROPE

   XVII. OLD TOM'S LETTER

  XVIII. CHLOROFORM

    XIX. THE GREAT BELL

     XX. THE INFIRMARY

    XXI. IN THE DEEP

   XXII. OLD TOM

  XXIII. UNDER THE ELM

   XXIV. FRANKL SEES THE METEORITE

    XXV. CHURCH ARCHITECTURE

   XXVI. FRANKL AND O'HARA

  XXVII. THE BAG OF LIGHT

 XXVIII. THE LETTER

   XXIX. PRIORITY OF CLAIM

    XXX. MR. BEECH

   XXXI. THE HAMMERS

  XXXII. WONDER

 XXXIII. REEFS OF STEEL

  XXXIV. THE "KAISER"

   XXXV. THE CUP OF TREMBLING

  XXXVI. THE "BOODAH" AND THE BATTLESHIPS

 XXXVII. THE STRAITS

XXXVIII. THE MANIFESTO

  XXXIX. THE "BOODAH'S" LOCK-UP

     XL. THE WEDDING

    XLI. THE VISIT

   XLII. REBEKAH TELLS

  XLIII. THE LAND BILL

   XLIV. THE REGENCY

    XLV. ESTRELLA, THE PROPHETESS

   XLVI. THE ORDER IN COUNCIL

  XLVII. THE EMIGRANTS

 XLVIII. THE SEA-FORTS

   XLIX. THE DÉBACLE

      L. THE DECISION

     LI. THE MODEL


I

THE EXODUS


In the Calle Las Gabias--one of those by-streets of Lisbon below St.
Catherine--there occurred one New Year a little event in the
Synagogue there worth a mention in this history of Richard, Lord of
the Sea.

It was Kol Nidrè, eve of the Day of Atonement, and the little Beth-
El, sweltering in a dingy air, was transacting the long-drawn
liturgy, when, behind the curtain where the women sat, an old dame
who had been gazing upward smote her palms together, and let slip a
little scream: "The Day is coming...!"

She then fainted, and till near ten lay on her bed, lit by the Yom
Kippur candle, with open eyes, but without speech, her sere face
still beautiful, on each temple a little pyramid of plaits, with
gold-and-coral ear-rings: a holy _belle._ About ten P.M. three women
watching heard her murmur: "My child, Rebekah...!"

She was childless, and whom she meant was not known. However, soon
afterwards there was a form at the amulet-guarded door, and Estrella
sat up, saying: "Rebekah, my child..."

A young lady of twenty-two ran in and embraced her, saying: "I have
been to Paris and Madrid with my father--just arrived, so flew to
see you. We leave for London to-night".

"No: I shall keep you seven days. Tell Frankl _I_ say so. What
jewels! You have grown into a rose of glory, the eyes are profounder
and blacker, and that brow was made for high purpose. Tell me--have
you a lover?"

"No, mamma Estrella".

"Then, why the blush?"

"It is nothing at all," Miss Frankl answered: "five years ago when
at school in Bristol I thrice saw through a grating a young man with
whom I was frivolous enough to speak. Happily, I do not know what
has become of him--a wild, divine kind of creature, of whom I am
well rid, and never likely to see again".

The old lady mused. "What was he?"

"A sailor".

"Not a common sailor?"

"I fancy so, mamma".

"What name?"

"Hogarth--Richard".

"A Jew?"

"An Englishman!"

She laughed, as the old lady's eyes opened in sacred horror, and as
she whispered: "Child!"

Within three months of that night, one midnight the people of Prague
rose and massacred most of the Jewish residents; the next day the
flame broke out in Buda-Pesth; and within a week had become a
revolution.

On the twelfth morning one of two men in a City bank said to the
other: "Come, Frankl, you cannot fail a man in this crisis--I only
want 80,000 on all Westring--"

"No good to me, my lord," answered Frankl, who, though a man of only
forty--short, with broad shoulders,--already had his skin divided up
like a dry leaf; in spite of which, he was handsome, with a nose
ruled straight and long, a black beard on his breast.

But the telephone rattled and Frankl heard these words at the
receiver: "Wire to hand from Wertheimer: Austrian Abgeordneten-haus
passed a Resolution at noon virtually expelling Jewish Race...."

When Frankl turned again he had already resolved to possess Westring
Vale, and was saying to himself: "Within six months the value of
English land should be--doubled".

The bargain was soon made now: and within one week the foresight of
Frankl began to be justified.

Austria, during those days, was a nation of vengeful hearts: for the
Jews had acquired half its land, and had mortgages on the other
half: peasant, therefore, and nobleman flamed alike. And this fury
was contagious: now Germany--now France had it--Anti-Semite laws--
like the old May-Laws--but harsher still; and streaming they came,
from the Leopoldstadt, from Bukowina, from the Sixteen Provinces,
from all Galicia, from the Nicolas Colonies, from Lisbon, with
wandering foot and weary breast--the Heines, Cohens, Oppenheimers--
Sephardim, Aschkenasim. And Dover was the new Elim.

With alarm Britain saw them come! but before she could do anything,
the wave had overflowed it; and by the time it was finished there
was no desire to do anything: for within eight months such a tide of
prosperity was floating England as has hardly been known in a
country.

The reason of this was the increased number of hands--each making
more things than its owner could consume himself, and so making
every other richer.

There came, however, a change--almost suddenly--due to the new
demand for land, the "owners" determining to await still further
rises, before letting. This checked industry: for now people,
debarred from the land, had only air.

In Westring Vale, as everywhere, times were hard. It was now the
property of Baruch Frankl: for at the first failure of Lord Westring
to meet terms, Frankl had struck.

Now, one of the yeomen of Westring was a certain Richard Hogarth.


He publicly, and with violent outrage, made war on Rousseau.

Nor had he the heart of hiding his feelings under the semblance of
good humour or of contempt.

With all his great talents, and all his long experience of the world,
he had no more self-command than a petted child, or a hysterical
woman.

Whenever he was mortified, he exhausted the whole rhetoric of anger
and sorrow to express his mortification.

His torrents of bitter words, his stamping and cursing, his grimaces
and his tears of rage, were a rich feast to those abject
natures, whose delight is in the agonies of powerful spirits and
in the abasement of immortal names.

These creatures had now found out a way of galling him to the very
quick. In one walk, at least, it had been admitted by envy itself
that he was without a living competitor.

Since Racine had been laid among the great men whose dust made the
holy precinct of Port-Royal holier, no tragic poet had appeared
who could contest the palm with the author of Zaire, of Alzire, and
of Merope. At length a rival was announced.

Old Crebillon, who, many years before, had obtained some theatrical
success, and who had long been forgotten, came forth from his
garret in one of the meanest lanes near the Rue St.

Antoine, and was welcomed by the acclamations of envious men of
letters, and of a capricious populace.

A thing called Catiline, which he had written in his retirement,
was acted with boundless applause. Of this execrable piece it is
sufficient to say, that the plot turns on a love affair, carried
on in all the forms of Scudery, between Catiline, whose confidant
is the Praetor Lentulus, and Tullia, the daughter of Cicero.

The theatre resounded with acclamations. The King pensioned the
successful poet; and the coffee-houses pronounced that Voltaire
was a clever man, but that the real tragic inspiration, the celestial
fire which had glowed in Corneille and Racine, was to be found in
Crebillon alone.

The blow went to Voltaire's heart. Had his wisdom and fortitude been
in proportion to the fertility of his intellect, and to the
brilliancy of his wit, he would have seen that it was out of the
power of all the puffers and detractors in Europe to put Catiline
above Zaire; but he had none of the magnanimous patience with which
Milton and Bentley left their claims to the unerring judgment of
time.

He eagerly engaged in an undignified competition with Crebillon, and
produced a series of plays on the same subjects which his rival
had treated.

These pieces were coolly received. Angry with the court, angry with
the capital, Voltaire began to find pleasure in the prospect of exile.
His attachment for Madame du Chatelet long prevented him from
executing his purpose.

       Her death set him at liberty; and he determined to take refuge at
Berlin.

To Berlin he was invited by a series of letters, couched in terms
of the most enthusiastic friendship and admiration. For once the rigid
parsimony of Frederic seemed to have relaxed.

Orders, honourable offices, a liberal pension, a well-served table,
stately apartments under a royal roof, were offered in return for
the pleasure and honour which were expected from the society of the
first wit of the age.

A thousand louis were remitted for the charges of the journey.
No ambassador setting out from Berlin for a court of the first rank,
had ever been more amply supplied. But Voltaire was not satisfied.
At a later period, when he possessed an ample fortune, he was one
of the most liberal of men; but till his means had become equal
to his wishes, his greediness for lucre was unrestrained either by
justice or by shame.

You said that
you liked me: and as I am in the habit of speaking the truth myself,
I thought that--perhaps--But my meeting you, to be frank with you,
was for the sake of my brother".

"Well, you are as candid as they make them," he said, eyeing her
with his mild eye. "But what's the matter with your brother? Hard
up?"

"He's worried about something". "He must have some harvest-money put
away?"

"He has something in Reid's Bank at Yarmouth, I believe".

"Well, shall I tell you what's the matter with him? He's _afraid_,
your brother. He has refused to wear the cap, and he thinks that I
shall be down upon him like a thousand of bricks...But suppose I
exempt him, and you and I be friends? That's fair".

"What _do_ you mean?"

"Give us _one_--"

"Believe me, you talk--!"

"Don't let your angry passions rise. I am going to have a kiss off
those handsome lips--"

Before she could stir he was in the act of the embrace; but it was
never accomplished: for he saw her colour fade, heard crackling
twigs, a step! as someone emerged from the wood ten yards away--
Richard.

The thought in Margaret's mind was this: "Father in Heaven, whatever
will he think of me here with this Jew?"

The person on whom, during the decline of his influence, he
chiefly depended, to whom he confided his perplexities, whose
advice he solicited, whose intercession he employed, was his friend
Bacon. The lamentable truth must be told. This friend, so loved,
so trusted, bore a principal part in ruining the Earl's fortunes,
in shedding his blood, and in blackening his memory.

But let us be just to Bacon.

We believe that, to the last, he had no wish to injure Essex.

A pallor lay under his brown skin, brown almost as an Oriental's,
and he was called "the Black Hogarth"--the Hogarths being Saxon, on
the mantel in the dining-room being a very simple coat--a Bull on
Gules. But Richard was a startling exception. His hair grew away
flat and sparse from his round brow; on his cheeks three moles, jet-
black in their centre. Handsome one called his hairless face: the
nose delicate, the lips negroid in their thick pout, the left eye
red, streaked with bloodshot, the eyes' brown brightness very
beautiful and strange, with a sideward stare wild as that sideward
stare of the race-horse; and the lids had a way of lifting largely
anon.

He passed through Lagden Dip orchard into the old homestead, into
the dining-room, where cowered the old Hogarth, smoking, his hair a
mist of wool-white.

He glanced up, but said nothing; and Richard said nothing, but
walked about, his arms folded, frowning turbulently, while the
twilight deepened, and Margaret did not come.

Now he planted a chair near the old man, sat, and shouted: "Listen,
sir!"

Up went the old Hogarth's hand to push forward the inquiring ear,
while Richard, who, till now, had guarded him from all knowledge of
the Circular, snatched it from his breast-pocket, and loudly read.

As the sense entered his head, up the old man shot his palms,
shaking from them astonishment and deprecation, with nods; then,
with opening arms, and an under-look at Richard: "Well, there is
nothing to be said: the land is his...."

Hogarth leapt up and walked out; he muttered: "The land is his, but
he is mine...."

The question at the bottom of his mind had been this: "Does
_Margaret_, too, go with the land?" But he did not utter it even to
himself: went out, fingering the crop, stalking toward the spot
where he had left the man and the woman. But Margaret was then
coming through the wood; Frankl had gone up to the Hall; and Hogarth
crossed the bridge and went climbing toward the mansion.

It was a Friday evening, and up at the Hall the Sabbath had
commenced, two Sabbath-tapers shining now upon the Mezuzzah at the
dining-room door, Frankl being of the Cohanîm, the priestly class--a
Jew of Jews. As he had passed in, two Moghrabîm Jews had saluted him
with: "Shabbath"; and mildly he had replied: "Shabbath".

But swift upon his steps strode Hogarth: Hogarth was at the lodge-
gates--was on the drive--was in the hall.

But, since Frankl was just preparing to celebrate the _kiddush_, "He
cannot be seen now", said a man in the hall.

"He must", said Hogarth.

As he brushed past, two men raised an outcry: but Hogarth continued
his swift way, and had half traversed a _salon_ hung with a chaos of
cut-glass when from a side-door appeared the inquiring face of
Frankl in pious skull-cap.

"What is it?" he cried--"I cannot be seen--"

He recognized the man of the towing-path, and on his face grew a
look of scare, as he backed toward a study: but before he could slam
the door, Hogarth, too, was within.

"Who are you? What is it?" whined Frankl, who was both hard master
and cringing slave.

Hogarth produced the Circular: but of Margaret not a word.

"Caps-and-tassels, you?"--flicking Frankl on the cheek with a fillip
of his middle finger.

"You dare assault me! Why, I swear, I meant no harm--"

Down came the whip upon the Jew's shoulders, Frankl, as the stings
penetrated his caftan, giving out one roar, and the next instant,
seeing the two Jews at the doorway, groaned the mean whisper: "Oh,
don't make a man look small before the servants", crying out
immediately: "Help!"

Soon five or six servants were at the door, and, of these, two Arab
Jews rushed forward, one a tall fellow, the other an obese bulk with
bright black eyes, the former holding a slender blade--the knife
with which "shechita", or slaughtering, was done: and while the
corpulent Jew threw himself upon Hogarth, the other drew this knife
through the flesh of Hogarth's shoulder, at the same time happening
to cut the heavy Arab across the wrist.

Now, there was some quarrel between the two Arabs, and the injured
Arab, forgetting Hogarth, turned fiercely upon his fellow.

Hogarth, meanwhile, had not let go Frankl, nor delivered the
intended number of cuts: so he was again standing with uplifted
whip, when his eye happened to fall upon the doorway.

He saw there a sight which struck his arm paralysed: Rebekah Frankl.

Two months had she been here at Westring--and he had not known it!

There she stood peering, of a divine beauty in his eyes, like half-
mythical queens of Egypt and Babylon, blinking in a rather barbarous
superfluity of jewels: and, blinded and headlong, he was in flight.

As for Frankl, he locked that door upon himself, and remained there,
forgetting the sanctification of the Sabbath.

The Hebrew's eyes blazed like a wild beast's. The words: "As the
Lord liveth..." hissed in whispers from his lips.

He took up a pinch of old ashes, and cast it into the air.

As Shimei, the son of Gera, cursed David, so he cursed Richard
Hogarth that night--again and again--with grave rites, with
cancerous rancour.

"I will blight him, as the Lord liveth; as the Lord liveth, I will
blight him..." he said repeatedly, his draperied arms spread in
pompous imprecation.

As a beginning, he sat and wrote to Reid's Bank, requesting the
payment in gold of £14,000--to produce a stoppage of payment at the
little Bank in which were Richard's savings.

Afterwards, with mild eyes he repaired to the dining-hall, and
sanctified the Sabbath, blessing a cup of wine, dividing up two
napkined loaves, and giving to Rebekah his benediction.


IV

THE SWOON


Hogarth went moodily down the hillside to the Waveney, across the
bridge, and home, his sleeve stained with blood.

In the dining-room, he threw himself into an easy-chair in a gloom
lit only by the fireglow, in the room above mourning a little
harmonium which Margaret was playing, mixed with the sound of
Loveday's voice.

The old man said: "Richard, my boy..."

Hogarth did not answer.

"Richard, I have somewhat to say to you--are ye hearkening?"

Richard, losing blood, moaned a drowsy "Yes".

And the old Hogarth, all deaf and bedimmed, said: "I had to say it
to you, and this night let it be: Richard, you are no son of mine".

At this point Hogarth's head dropped forward: but many a time,
during long years, he remembered a dream in which he had heard those
words: "Richard, you are no son of mine..."

The old Hogarth continued to ears that did not hear:

"I have kept it from you--for I'm under a bargain with a firm of
solicitors in London; but, Dick, it doesn't strike me as I am long
for this world: a queer feeling I've had in this left side the last
hour or two; and there's that Circular--I never heard of such a
thing in all my born days. But what can we do? You'll have to wear
the cap--or be turned out. Always I've said to myself, from a young
man: 'Get hold of a bit of land someways as your own God's own': but
I never did; the days went by and by, and it all seems no longer
than an after-dinner nap in a barn on a hot harvest-day. But a bit
of land--the man who has that can make all the rest work to keep
him. And if they turn me out, I couldn't live, lad: the old house
has got into my bones, somehow. Anyhow, I think the time is come to
tell you in my own way how the thing was. No son are you of mine,
Richard. Your mother, Rachel, who was a Londoner, served me an ill
turn while we were sweethearting, hankering after another man--a Jew
millionaire he was, she being a governess in his house; but,
Richard, I couldn't give her up: I married her three months before
you were born; and not a living creature knows, except, perhaps,
one--perhaps one: a priest he was, called O'Hara. But that's how it
was. Your father was a Jew, and your mother was a Jew, and you are a
Jew, and in the under-bottom of the old grey trunk you will find a
roll of papers. Are you hearkening? And don't you be ashamed of
being a Jew, boy--_they_ are the people who've got the money; and
money buys land, Richard. Nor your father did not do so badly by
you, either: his name was Spinoza--Sir Solomon Spinoza--"

At that point Margaret, bearing a lamp, entered, followed by
Loveday, and at the sight of Richard uttered a cry.


V

REID'S


By noon Hogarth knew the news: his hundred and fifty at Reid's were
gone; and he owed for the Michaelmas quarter--twenty-one pounds
five, his only chattels of value being the thresher, not yet paid
for, half a rick, seed, manure, and "the furniture". If he could
realize enough for rent, he would lack capital for wages and
cultivation, for Reid's had been his credit-bank.

After dinner he stood long at a window, then twisted away, and
walked to Thring, where he captained in a football match, Loveday
watching his rage, his twisting waist, and then accompanying him
home: but in the dining-room they found the lord-of-the-manor's
bailiff; and Loveday, divining something embarrassing, took himself
away.

The same evening there were two appraisers in the house, and the
bailiff, on their judgment, took possession of the chattels on the
holding except some furniture, and some agricultural "fixtures". The
sale was arranged for the sixth day.

From the old Hogarth the truth could no longer be hidden...

Two days he continued quiet in the old nook by the hearth,
apparently in a kind of dotage doze; but on the third, he began to
poke about, hobbled into the dairy, peered into the churn, touched
the skimmer.

"You'll have to wear the cap", Margaret heard him mutter--"or be
turned out".

As if taking farewell, he would get up, as at a sudden thought, to
go to visit something. He kept murmuring: "I always said, Get a bit
of land as your own, but I never did; the days went by and by...."

Margaret, meantime, was busy, binding beds with sheets, making
bundles, preparing for the flitting, with a heaving breast; till, on
the fifth day, a van stood loaded with their things at the hall-
door, and she, with untidy hair, was helping heave the last trunk
upon the backboard, when the carman said: "Mrs. Mackenzie says, mum,
the things mustn't be took to the cottage, except you pay in
advance".

Now Margaret stood at a loss; but in a minute went bustling,
deciding to go to Loveday, not without twinges of reluctance: for
Loveday, with instinctive delicacy, had lately kept from the farm;
and to Margaret, whose point of view was different, the words "false
friends" had occurred.

Passing through an alley of the forest, she was met by a man--a
park-keeper of Frankl's--a German Jew, who had once handed her a
note from Frankl. And he, on seeing her, said: "Here have I a letter
for your brother".

"Who from?" she asked.

"That may I not say".

When he handed her an envelope rather stuffed with papers, she went
on her flurried way; and soon Loveday was bowing before her in his
sitting-room at Priddlestone.

"You will be surprised to see me, Mr. Loveday," said she, panting.

"A little surprised, but most awfully glad, too. Is all well?"

"Oh, far from that, I'm afraid. But I haven't got any time--and, oh
my, I don't know how to say it,--but to be frank with you--could you
lend Richard two pounds--?"

Loveday coloured to the roots of his hair.

He could not tell her: "Open that envelope in your hand", for that
would have meant that it was he who had sent the £50 it contained;
and he had now only one sixpence in Priddlestone.

"That is", she said--"if it is not an inconvenience to you--"

He could find no words. Some fifteen minutes before, having enclosed
the notes, he had descended to the bar to get mine host to find him
a messenger, and direct the envelope--for Hogarth knew his
handwriting. Mine host was not there--his wife could not write: but
she had pointed out the Jewish park-keeper sipping beer; so Loveday
had had the man upstairs, had made him write the address, and had
bribed him to deliver the envelope with a mum tongue.

"I'm afraid I've taken a great liberty--" she said, shrinking at his
silence.

Then he spoke: "Oh, liberty!--but--really--I'm quite broke myself--!"

"Then, good-afternoon to you", said she: "I am very sorry--but you
will excuse the liberty, won't you--?"

In the forest she began to cry, covering her eyes, moaning: "Why,
how could he be so _mean_? And I who loved that young man with all
my heart, God knows--!"

Her eyes searched the ground for two sovereigns. Then she happened
to look at the envelope: and instantly was interested. "Why, it is
the Jew's hand!" she thought, for the letters were angular in the
German manner, making a general similarity with Frankl's writing.

Curiosity overcame her: she opened, and saw...

"Oh, well, this is _generous_ though, after all!" she exclaimed.

And now she ran, coming out from mossy path upon wide forest-road:
and there, taking promenade, was Frankl, quite near, with
phylacteried left arm.

"Why, sweetheart..." said he.

She stopped before him. "Well, you can call me what you like for the
time being", said she, laughing rather hysterically; "for I am most
grateful to you for your generous present to my brother, Mr.
Frankl!"

She had still no suspicion of Richard's visit of chastisement to the
Hall!

"Now, what do you mean?" said Frankl.

"Why, you might guess that I know your handwriting by this time!"
she said coquettishly, and held out the notes and the envelope.

His eyes twinkled; he meditated; he had, more than ever, need of
her; and he said: "Well, you are as 'cute as they make them!"

"But instead of sending us this, which I am not at all sure that
Richard will touch, why couldn't you pay it to yourself, and not
turn us out--"

"I let business take its course: and afterwards I do my charity. But
it wasn't for your brother, you know, that I sent it--but for
_you_".

"I must be running--"

When she reached the farm, she gave the carman a secret glimpse of
the notes, while Hogarth, who was now there, went to seek the old
Hogarth, for whom a nest had been made among the furniture in the
cart.

He was found above-stairs in an empty room, searching the floor for
something.

"Come, sir", said Hogarth, and led him step by step.

But as the old man passed the threshold, he fell flat on the slabs
of the porch, striking his forehead, printing a stain there.

And the next day, the day of the sale, he still lay in the old
chamber, on the ancient bed, dead.


VI

"PEARSON'S WEEKLY"


"Rose Cottage" was without roses: but had a good-sized "garden" at
the back; and here Hogarth soon had a shed nailed together, with
bellows, anvil, sledges, rasps, setts, drifts, and so on, making a
little smithy.

He engaged a boy; and soon John Loveday would be leaning all a
forenoon at the shed door, watching the lithe ply of Hogarth's hips,
and the white-hot iron gushing flushes; while Margaret, peeping,
could see Loveday's slovenly ease of pose, his numberless
cigarettes, and hear the rhymes of the sledges chiming.

As to Loveday's £50, she had dared to say nothing to Richard, but
kept them, intending to make up the amount already spent, and give
them to Frankl. Loveday, meantime, she avoided with constant care.

So two weeks passed, till, one day, Loveday, leaning at the forge-
door, happened to say: "Are you interested in current politics? The
East Norfolk division is being contested, one of the candidates, Sir
Bennett Beaumont, is a friend of mine, and I was thinking that I
might go to the meeting to-night, if you could come--"

"I invite you to supper here instead".

"Not interested?" queried Loveday.

"Not at all. Stop--I'll show you something in which I _am_
interested".

He ran to a corner, picked up a _Pearson's Weekly_, and pointed to a
paragraph headed:

"FIVE HUNDRED-POUND NOTES!

"FIFTY TEN-POUND NOTES!!

"ONE HUNDRED FIVE-POUND NOTES!!!"

--a prize for "the most intelligent" article, explaining the cause,
or causes, of "the present distress and commercial crisis".

Loveday read it smiling.

"Ah", said he, "but who is to be the judge of 'the most intelligent'
article? Pearson must himself be of the highest intelligence to
decide".

"True", said Hogarth. "But the man who offered that prize has
indicated to the nation the thing which it should be doing. If I was
able to form an Association to enter this competition--and why not?
Stop--I will go with you--"

So that evening they walked to Beccles, and took train for Yarmouth.

The candidate to speak was a Mr. Moses Max, a Liberal Jew; the chair
to be taken by Baruch Frankl; and in the midst of a row, the stately
great men entered upon the platform and occupied it, hisses like the
escape of steam mixing with "He's a jolly good fellow". Midway down
the pit sat Loveday, and with him Hogarth, whose large stare ranged
solemnly round and down from galleries to floor.

Frankl sipped water, and rose, amid shouts of: "Circular!" "Caps-
and-tassels!"

He made a speech of which nothing was known, except the amiable
bows, for a continual noising filled the hall; and up rose Mr. Moses
Max, a stout fair Jew, whose fist struck with a regular, heavy
emphasis. After ten minutes, when he began to be heard, he was
saying:

"...Sir Bennett Beaumont! Is _he_ the sort of man you'd send to
represent you? (Cries of: "Yes!") What is he?--ask yourselves the
question: a fossilized Tory, a man who's about as much idea of
progress as a mummy--people actually say he's _got_ a collection of
mummies in his grand fashionable mansion at Aylesham, and it's only
what we should expect of him. (Cheers, and cries of: "Oh, oh!") And
what has he ever done for East Norfolk? Gentlemen, you may say as
you like about Jews--Jews this, and Jews that--and every man has a
right to his opinion in this land of glorious Saxon liberty--but no
one can deny that it's Jews who know how to make the money. (Cheers
and hisses.) They know how to make it for themselves (hisses)--and,
yes, they know how to make it for the nation! (Loud triumph of
cheers.) _That's_ the point--_that_ touches the spot! (Cries of:
"Oh, oh!") Righteousness, it is said, exalteth a nation: well, so do
Jews--"

"That is false", said a voice--Hogarth, who had stood up.

The words were the signal for a shower of cheers swept by gusts of
hisses; and immediately one region of the pit was seen to be a
scrimmage of fisticuffs, mixed with policemen, sticks, savage faces,
and bent backs; while the two galleries, craning to see, bellowed
like Bashan.

Moses Max was leaning wildly, gesticulating, with shouts; while
Loveday, who had turned pale on Hogarth's rising, touched Hogarth's
coat-tail, whereupon Hogarth, stooping to his ear, shouted: "We will
have some fun..."

"The paid agents of Beaumont!" now shouted Moses Max; "sent to
disturb our meeting! Englishmen! will you submit to this? The nation
shall hear--"

At that point Moses Max, in his gesticulation, happening to touch a
switch in the platform-rail, out glowered into darkness every light
at that end of the hall: at which thing the audience was thrown into
a state of boisterous lawlessness, a tumult reigning in the gloom
like the constant voice of Niagara, until suddenly the platform was
again lit up, and the uproar lulled.

And now again Moses Max was prone to speak, with lifted fist; but
before ever he could utter one single word, a voice was ringing
through the Assembly Rooms:

"_Where_ was Moses when the light went out?"

This again was Hogarth; and it ended Moses Max for that night.

Hogarth had not sat since he had called out "That is false": his
tall figure was recognized; and, with that electric spontaneity of
crowds, he was straightway the leader of the meeting, men darting
from their seats with waving hats, sticks, arms, and vociferous
mouth, the chairman half standing, with a shivering finger directed
upon Hogarth, shrieking to the police: but too late--Hogarth had
brushed past Loveday's knees--was dashing for the crowded platform-
steps--was picking his way, stumbling, darting up them.

Crumpled in his hand was a _Pearson's Weekly_.

Now he is to the front--near Frankl.

"Friends! I have ventured to take the place of our friend, Moses,
here--no ill-will to him--for with respect to the question before
us, whether we elect Beaumont or Max, I care, I confess, little. I'm
rather an Anti-Jew myself (hissing and cheers), but it strikes me
that the Jews are the least of our trouble. To a man who said to me
that the cause of all our evil days is the inability of England to
feed these few million Jews I'd answer: "I don't know how you can be
so silly!" Why, the whole human race, friends, can find room on the
Isle of Wight--the earth laughs at the insignificant drawings upon
her made by the small infantry called Man. Then, why do we suffer,
friends? We _do_ suffer, I suppose? I was once at Paris, and at a
place called 'the Morgue' I saw exposed young men with wounded
temples, and girls with dead mouths twisted, and innocent old women
drowned; and there must be a biggish cry, you know, rising each
night from the universal earth, accusing some hoary fault in the way
men live together! What is the fault? If you ask _me_, I answer that
I am only a common smith: _I_ don't know: but I know this about the
fault, that it is something simple, commonplace, yet deep-seated, or
we should all see it; but it is hidden from us by its very
ordinariness, like the sun which men seldom look at. It _must_ be
so. And shall we never find the time to think of it? Or will never
some grand man, mighty as a garrison, owning eyes that know the
glances of Truth, arise to see for us? Friends! but, lacking him,
what shall we do to be saved?--for truly this 'civilization' of ours
is a blood-washed civilization, friends, a reddish Juggernaut, you
know, whose wheels cease not: so we should be prying into it,
provided we be not now too hide-bound: for that's the trouble--that
our thoughts grow to revolve in stodgy grooves of use-and-wont, and
shun to soar beyond. Look at our Parliament--a hurdy-gurdy turning
out, age after age, a sing-song of pigmy regulations, accompanied
for grum kettledrum by a musketry of suicides, and for pibroch by a
European bleating of little children. We are still a million miles
from civilization! For what is a civilized society? It can only be
one in which the people are proud and happy! The people of Africa
are happy, not proud; not civilized; the people of England have a
certain pride, not a millionth part as superb as it might be, but
are far from happy: far from civilized. The fact is, Man has never
begun to live, but still sleeps a deep sleep. Well! let us do our
best, we here! I have here a paper offering a prize to the man of us
who will go to the root of our troubles, and my idea in usurping the
place of our friend, Mr. Max, was to ask you to form an association
with me to enter that competition. There is no reason why our
association should not be large as the nation, nor why it should not
spread to France and Turkey. For the thing presses, and to-morrow
more of the slaughtered dead will be swarming in the mortuaries of
London. Will you, then? The understanding will be this: that each
man who writes his name in a note-book which will lie at Rose
Cottage, Thring, or who sends his name, will devote sixty minutes
each day to the problem. I happen to be in a position to use a
chapel at Thring, and there I will hold a meeting--"

At this point Frankl rose: Thring was _his_, his own, own, own; and
now his eyes had in them that catlike blaze which characterized his
rages.

"Here, police! police!" he hissed low, "what's the use of police
that don't act!" And now he raised his voice to a scream: "Jews!
Shew yourselves! Don't let this man stay here...!"

About twenty Jews leapt at the challenge; at the same time Hogarth,
seeing two policemen running forward from the back, folded his arms,
and cried out: "Friends! I have not finished! Don't let me be
removed..."

Whereupon practically every man in the pit was in motion, for or
against him, the galleries two oblongs of battle.

As up the two curving stairs stormed the mob, by a sudden rush like
an ocean-current he was borne off his feet toward the side, and was
about to bring down his sharp-pointed little knuckles, when his eye
fell upon the face of a lady who had fainted.

He had had no idea that she was there!--Rebekah Frankl.

She had quietly fainted, not at the rush--but before--during
Hogarth's speech.

Hogarth managed to fight his way to a door at the platform back with
her, entered a room where some chairs were, but, seeing a stair,
could not let her go from his embrace, but descended, passed along a
passage and out into a patch of green.

She, under the dark sky, whispered: "It is you", her forehead on his
shoulder; and added: "My carriage, I think, is yonder".

Hogarth saw the carriage-lights at the field's edge, bore her
thither, laid her with care on the cushions, kissed her hand: and
this act Frankl saw--with incredulity of his own eyes. As he
approached, Hogarth walked away.

Frankl mastered his voice to say blandly in Spanish: "Well, how did
you get through, sweet child? Who was that man--? But stay: where
are those two fools?"

This meant the two familiars--the Arabs, Isaac and Mephibosheth, one
of whom had come as footman, the other as coachman--and, as he went
raging about the carriage, with stamps, his boot struck against a
body. There was enough light to reveal to his peering that it was
Mephibosheth, whom Isaac had stabbed, and fled...

Frankl lowered his ear--doubted whether he could detect a breathing;
and though scared, he being a Cohen, and the presence of death
defilement, yet he stayed, bending over Mephi several minutes,
thinking, not of him, but of Hogarth.

"It is that fool, Isaac, has done it", he thought; "and if the man
be dead--" What then? "_If_ he be dead, I've got you, Mr. Hogarth,
in the hollow of this hand...."

His fingers passed over the body: there, sticking in the breast, was
a cangiar which Isaac, in his panic, had left, and Frankl's hand
rested on the handle; if he did not consciously press the knife
home, very heavily his hand rested on it, eyes blazing, beard
shaking....

Then he drew out the knife carefully, to hide it in the carriage,
listened again close, felt sure now that death was there, and now
scuttled, as if from plague, guiltily hissing: "Putrid dog...!"

Presently he led his carriage to the station, and made a deposition
of the murder.

Asked if he had any suspicion as to the culprit, he said: "Not the
least: I left the man alone with the carriage, and who could have
had any motive for killing him beats me."


VII

THE ELM


Hogarth, meantime, had made his way to the front of the room, then
vomiting its throng, discovered Loveday, and, deciding to walk home,
they were soon on the cliffs.

And suddenly Loveday: "To-morrow will conclude my fifth week in
Westring. What, do you suppose, has made me stay?"

"I have wondered".

"I work better here...Hogarth, you inspirit me".

"Is that so?"

"It is, yes. Merely your presence is for me a freshness and an
enthusiasm: I catch in the turn of your body hints of adventurous
Columbuses, Drakes, nimble Achilles; and sibylline meanings in some
glance of yours infect my fancy with images of Moses, blind old
Homers--prophet, lawgiver, poet--"

They were passing along a stretch of sand, with some lights of
Lowestoft in sight, arm in arm; and Hogarth said: "Well, you speak
some big words. But my life, you understand, has been as simple and
small as possible. I will tell you: my father sent me to an
extraordinary school--where he got the coin I could never find out--
Lancing College at Shoreham. There I did very well--only that I was
continually _getting_ it! What was the matter with me when a boy I
can't understand: I was the devil. One summer vacation (I was
fourteen) I stole three pounds from the old man, and ran away one
Sunday night. Passed through London and soon was apprentice in a
blacksmith's shop in a Kent village called Bigham. But in six months
I had the forge at my fingers' ends, and was off: nothing could hold
me long. One day I turned up before the Recruiting Office of Marines
in Bristol--just of the right age for what they call 'second-class
boys'--and decided upon the sea--that sea there--which, from the
moment I saw it at the age of four, caused me a swelling of the
breast with which, to this day, it afflicts me. Well, I got the
birth-certificate of another boy, scraped through, was entered into
a District Ship, and finally sailed in the _St. Vincent_ to the
Pacific Station.

"However, my trial of His Majesty's ships was not a success: twice I
was in irons, once leapt into mid-ocean; nor could the battleship
hold me when she had nothing to teach me; so I did to the King what
I had done to the old man--cut and ran.

"It was at Valparaiso, and I made my way across the continent to
Buenos Ayres.

"I forget now what took me to Bristol: but there I was one day when
I happened to see--what do you think?--a girl--sixteen--I a
stripling of nineteen, or so--but she most precocious, spoke like a
woman--a grating in a wall between us. Ah, well, God is good, and
His Mercy endureth for ever. But she said it could never be--she a
Jewess: though that, by the way, is nonsense, for she is a Jewess,
and a Parisienne, and a Hindoo, and a Negress, and a Japanese, and
the man who marries her will have a harem. My friend, I have seen
her this very night!"

He was silent. Suddenly he broke out: "I came home raving! The old
man was scared out of his wits by my frenzy--I drank like ten men--
in a month was the terror of Westring. One midnight, going home
through the beech-wood--I don't know if you have noticed a hollow
elm-tree which stands to the right of the path?"

"I think I have", said Loveday.

"We shall pass near it presently; and at the moment when we approach
it, I shall feel a little thrill in my back: always it is so with
me. But I was saying: that midnight, as I passed the tree, drunk as
I was, I saw a naked black man with a long beard run out; I took to
my heels; he was after me; till I reached the bridge, when I
stopped, faced him, fired a blow into his eyes, and he vanished.

"During the week I continued to see apparitions. My groans were
heard in the farm-yard: Lord have mercy upon me! Christ have mercy
upon me! I was visited by the Methodist preacher at Thring; and
finally I found solace: I became a class-member, a leader, a local
preacher.

"For some time I have been conscious of dissatisfaction among the
people with my preaching, who say that my God 'is not a personal
God', and that my Christianity is 'rum stuff': I am therefore
meaning to give it up. But I still preach every second Thursday
night.

"It was about that time that, by accident, I found out the power of
my hand to cure headache, and things like that, and the sensation
among these villagers was enormous, I can tell you, six years ago;
now they come to be touched without the slighest sense of the
unusual. But what I have done well in was--the farming. I knew
little of agriculture--"

At this point they turned into the lane to Westring: and Loveday
went with him a little beyond Priddlestone to see the fatal elm.


VIII

THE METEOR


The next morning, after breakfast, Hogarth went down old Thring
Street, and spent a penny for a note-book to contain the signatures
of his association.

But this was no day for interest in that scheme: for under the
projecting first-floor of the paper-shop were newspaper placards
bearing such words as:

THE EARTH IN DANGER

SHALL WE PERISH TO-NIGHT?

and Hogarth was soon bending in the street over a paragraph, short--
but in _pica_.

M. Tissot, the astronomer, had, at half-past ten the previous night,
observed through the 40-inch telescope of the Nice observatory a
body which seemed a tiny planet or aerolite of abnormal size. It was
sighted at a point two degrees W. of _a_ Librae at an angle of
431/2° with the horizon, and had been photographed, its elements
calculated, its spectrum taken. The ascertained diameter was 3° 17",
or about 73 miles, and its substance seemed to consist of ironstone
mixed with diamond.

By noon a fresh light was thrown upon the little world, the Yerkes
observatory and Greenwich both uttering their voice, the Astronomer
Royal announcing that the so-called planet was merely a meteor--not
more than 400 yards in diameter, with a low velocity of two miles a
second; and its distance was less than a tenth of that estimated by
Tissot. The Yerkes observatory fixed the diameter at 230 yards. All,
however, agreed in the opinion that it must strike the earth between
ten and twelve that night.

These later announcements so much allayed the panic, that by one
o'clock Hogarth, on peeping into the note-book on the box before the
smithy, saw six signatures; and a young man who came about six P.M.
to sign, cried out: "Hullo! the book is filled up!" on which Hogarth
ran out, saying: "Don't run away on that account, I'll run and get--
" darting into the house to ask Margaret where a certain account-
book was.

"Didn't I throw it into the box of rubbish in the cellar at Lagden,
when we were leaving?" she asked; on which he threw off his apron,
and was off toward Lagden Dip to get it.

He had almost cleared the village when he was blocked by a crowd
before a cottage, from out of which were coming screams--a woman's;
and he ran in, found a man named Fred Bates beating his wife,
planted a blow on his chest.

The next morning the wife of Bates was found dead, greatly
disfigured about the face, whereupon Bates was arrested, and
Hogarth, as we shall see, was subpoenaed to give evidence of the
beating.

In ten minutes he was at the old farm-house of the Hogarths.

The new tenant was a Mr. Bond, a bankrupt metal-broker, who had two
hobbies--farming and astronomy; and, as Hogarth approached the yard-
gate, he saw Mr. Bond, his two daughters, his servants, grouped
round an optic tube mounted on a tripod. He asked permission to get
the account-book, got it, in a few minutes was again passing
through, and, as he went by, bowing his thanks, Mr. Bond said:
"But--have you seen the asteroid?"

"No--whereabouts?"

"Not quite visible to the naked eye yet: but come--you shall see".

He himself looked through, fixing the sight, turning the adjuster;
then with fussy suddenness: "Now, sir--"

Hogarth put an eager eye to the glass.

"You see her?" said Mr. Bond, rubbing his soft old palms; "straight
for us she comes--in a considerable hurry by this time, I can tell
you! and if she happens to break up in the air, then, pray, sir,
that a splinter of her may fall into your back yard--not too big a
one! but a nice little comfortable _piece_"--he rubbed his palms--
"for you know, no doubt, of what her substance is composed? Diamond,
sir, in extraordinary evidence! in conjunction with specular iron
ore, commonly called the red haematite, and the ferrous carbonate,
or spathic iron. You see her, sir? you see her?"

Hogarth whispered: "Yes".

There, fairest among ten thousand, sailing the high seas she came;
and longer than was modest he stopped there, gazing, then ran,
wondering at her daisy loveliness, not dreaming that between himself
and her was--a relation.

She broke up with a European display soon after eleven that night
over the North Sea.


IX

HOGARTH'S GUNS


At the moment when Hogarth was peering through the telescope, a man
was loitering before his cottage--one of the Hall's park-keepers;
and when Margaret put out her head to look for Richard's coming, the
man whistled.

In a moment a note was in her hand.

"DEAR MISS HOGARTH,

"This is to ask you to be certain sure to meet me this evening at 9
P.M. on the towpath. It isn't to-day that you are well aware of the
state of my feelings toward you: but it is not to talk sweethearting
that I wish to see you now, but about your brother, and the matter
is about as important as can be. If I were in your place, I should
destroy this letter.

"Yours, with my respects,

"BARUCH FRANKL".

Margaret tore it up, and "My goodness!" she thought, "what is anyone
to do? If I only had the money to make up those fifty pounds! May
the Holy Spirit guide me now...!"

Later in the evening she stole out, and met Frankl.

He assumed a very respectful tone.

"Miss Hogarth", said he at once, "have you heard?"

"No, sir".

"You have not been told that your brother has been to the Hall?"

"What in patience for?"

"He came--you couldn't believe--to beat me!"

"Richard! I don't understand. When?"

"Yesterday". (In reality it was four weeks before.)

"But what about?"

"Revenge! Blind, murderous revenge for turning him neck and crop out
of Lagden!"

"You _are_ in a temper! But I can't understand a word of it!"

"Well, that is what I had to tell you. He came to my house--And how
good have I been to this man! Didn't I send him the fifty pounds--?"

If the relation in which government ought to stand to the people
be, as Mr.

Gladstone tells us, a paternal relation, we are irresistibly led
to the conclusion that persecution is justifiable. For the right of
propagating opinions by punishment is one which belongs to
parents as clearly as the right to give instruction.

A boy is compelled to attend family worship: he is forbidden to
read irreligious books: if he will not learn his catechism, he is
sent to bed without his supper: if he plays truant at church-time
a task is set him.

If he should display the precocity of his talents by expressing
impious opinions before his brothers and sisters, we should not much
blame his father for cutting short the controversy with a horse-
whip. All the reasons which lead us to think that parents are
peculiarly fitted to conduct the education of their children, and
that education is the principal end of a parental relation, lead
us also to think that parents ought to be allowed to use punishment,
if necessary, for the purpose of forcing children, who are incapable
of judging for themselves, to receive religious instruction and to
attend religious worship.

Why, then, is this prerogative of punishment, so eminently paternal,
to be withheld from a paternal government?

It seems to us, also, to be the height of absurdity to employ civil
disabilities for the propagation of an opinion, and then to shrink
from employing other punishments for the same purpose.

For nothing can be clearer than that, if you punish at all, you
ought to punish enough.

The pain caused by punishment is pure unmixed evil, and never ought
to be inflicted, except for the sake of some good.

It is mere foolish cruelty to provide penalties which torment the
criminal without preventing the crime.

Now it is possible, by sanguinary persecution unrelentingly inflicted,
to suppress opinions.

In this way the Albigenses were put down. In this way the Lollards
were put down.

In this way the fair promise of the Reformation was blighted in
Italy and Spain. But we may safely defy Mr. Gladstone to point
out a single instance in which the system which he recommends has
succeeded.

And why should he be so tender-hearted? What reason can he give for
hanging a murderer, and suffering a heresiarch to escape without
even a pecuniary mulct?

Is the heresiarch a less pernicious member of society than the murderer?
Is not the loss of one soul a greater evil than the extinction of
many lives? And the number of murders committed by the most
profligate bravo that ever let out his poniard to hire in Italy,
or by the most savage buccaneer that ever prowled on the Windward
Station, is small indeed, when compared with the number of souls
which have been caught in the snares of one dexterous heresiarch.

If, then, the heresiarch causes infinitely greater evils than the
murderer, why is he not as proper an object of penal legislation
as the murderer?

We can give a reason, a reason, short, simple, decisive, and
consistent.

We do not extenuate the evil which the heresiarch produces; but we
say that it is not evil of that sort the sort against which it is
the end of government to guard.

But how Mr.

Gladstone, who considers the evil which the heresiarch produces as
evil of the sort against which it is the end of government to guard,
can escape from the obvious consequence of his doctrine, we do not
understand. The world is full of parallel cases. An orange-woman stops
up the pavement with her wheelbarrow; and a policeman takes her
into custody.

A miser who has amassed a million suffers an old friend and benefactor
to die in a workhouse, and cannot be questioned before any tribunal
for his baseness and ingratitude.

Is this because legislators think the orange-woman's conduct worse
than the miser's?

Not at all. It is because the stopping up of the pathway is one of
the evils against which it is the business of the public authorities
to protect society, and heartlessness is not one of those evils.

It would be the height of folly to say that the miser ought, indeed,
to be punished, but that he ought to be punished less severely than
the orange-woman.

The heretical Constantius persecutes Athanasius; and why not?
Shall Caesar punish the robber who has taken one purse, and spare
the wretch who has taught millions to rob the Creator of His honour,
and to bestow it on the creature?

The orthodox Theodosius persecutes the Arians, and with equal reason.

Shall an insult offered to the Caesarean majesty be expiated by death;
and shall there be no penalty for him who degrades to the rank of
a creature the almighty, the infinite Creator?

We have a short answer for both: "To Caesar the things which
are Caesar's.

Caesar is appointed for the punishment of robbers and rebels. He is
not appointed for the purpose of either propagating or exterminating
the doctrine of the consubstantiality of the Father and the Son."

"Not so," says Mr. Gladstone, "Caesar is bound in conscience to
propagate whatever he thinks to be the truth as to this question.
Constantius is bound to establish the Arian worship throughout the
empire, and to displace the bravest captains of his legions, and
the ablest ministers of his treasury, if they hold the Nicene faith.

Theodosius is equally bound to turn out every public servant whom
his Arian predecessors have put in.

But if Constantius lays on Athanasius a fine of a single aureus,
if Theodosius imprisons an Arian presbyter for a week, this is
most unjustifiable oppression."

Our readers will be curious to know how this distinction is made
out.

The reasons which Mr. Gladstone gives against persecution affecting
life, limb, and property, may be divided into two classes; first,
reasons which can be called reasons only by extreme courtesy, and
which nothing but the most deplorable necessity would ever have
induced a man of his abilities to use; and, secondly, reasons which
are really reasons, and which have so much force that they not only
completely prove his exception, but completely upset his general
rule.

His artillery on this occasion is composed of two sorts of pieces,
pieces which will not go off at all, and pieces which go off with
a vengeance, and recoil with most crushing effect upon himself.

"We, as fallible creatures," says Mr. Gladstone, "have no right,
from any bare speculations of our own to administer pains and
penalties to our fellow-creatures, whether on social or religious
grounds.

We have the right to enforce the laws of the land by such pains and
penalties, because it is expressly given by Him who has declared
that the civil rulers are to bear the sword for the punishment of
evil-doers, and for the encouragement of them that do well.

And so, in things spiritual, had it pleased God to give to the
Church or the State this power, to be permanently exercised over
their members, or mankind at large, we should have the right to use
it; but it does not appear to have been so received, and consequently,
it should not be exercised."

We should be sorry to think that the security of our lives and
property from persecution rested on no better ground than this.

Is not a teacher of heresy an evil-doer? Has not heresy been condemned
in many countries, and in our own among them, by the laws of the land,
which, as Mr. Gladstone says, it is justifiable to enforce by penal sanctions?
If a heretic is not specially mentioned in the text to which Mr. Gladstone
refers, neither is an assassin, a kidnapper, or a highwayman: and
if the silence of the New Testament as to all interference of
governments to stop the progress of heresy be a reason for not
fining or imprisoning heretics, it is surely just as good a reason
for not excluding them from office.

"God," says Mr.

Gladstone, "has seen fit to authorize the employment of force
in the one case and not in the other; for it was with regard to
chastisement inflicted by the sword for an insult offered to himself
that the Redeemer declared his kingdom not to be of this world:--
meaning, apparently in an especial manner, that it should be otherwise
than after this world's fashion, in respect to the sanctions by
which its laws should be maintained."

Now here Mr. Gladstone, quoting from memory, has fallen into an error.
The very remarkable words which he cites do not appear to have had
any reference to the wound inflicted by Peter on Malchus.

They were addressed to Pilate, in answer to the question, "Art thou
the King of the Jews?"

We can not help saying that we are surprised that Mr.

Gladstone should not have more accurately verified a quotation on
which, according to him, principally depends the right of a hundred
millions of his fellow-subjects, idolaters, Mussulmans, Catholics,
and dissenters, to their property, their liberty, and their lives.

Mr.

Gladstone's humane interpretations of Scripture are lamentably
destitute of one recommendation, which he considers as of the
highest value: they are by no means in accordance with the general
precepts or practice of the Church, from the time when the Christians
became strong enough to persecute down to a very recent period. A
dogma favourable to toleration is certainly not a dogma quod semper,
quod ubique, quod omnibus.

Bossuet was able to say, we fear with too much truth, that on one
point all Christians had long been unanimous, the right of the civil
magistrate to propagate truth by the sword; that even heretics had
been orthodox as to this right, and that the Anabaptists and Socinians
were the first who called it in question.

We will not pretend to say what is the best explanation of the text
under consideration; but we are sure that Mr.

Gladstone's is the worst.
According to him, Government ought to exclude Dissenters from office,
but not to fine them, because Christ's kingdom is not of this
world. We do not see why the line may not be drawn at a hundred other
places as well as that which he has chosen. We do not see why
Lord Clarendon, in recommending the act of 1664 against conventicles,
might not have said, "It hath been thought by some that this classis
of men might with advantage be not only imprisoned but pilloried.

But methinks, my Lords, we are inhibited from the punishment of
the pillory by that Scripture, 'My kingdom is not of this world."'
Archbishop Laud, when he sate on Burton in the Star-Chamber, might
have said, "I pronounce for the pillory; and, indeed, I could wish
that all such wretches were delivered to the fire, but that our
Lord hath said that His kingdom is not of this world."

And Gardiner might have written to the Sheriff of Oxfordshire "See
that execution be done without fall on Master Ridley and Master
Latimer, as you will answer the same to the Queen's grace at your
peril.

But if they shall desire to have some gunpowder for the shortening of
their torment, I see not but you may grant it, as it is written,
Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo; that is to say, My kingdom is not
of this world."

But Mr. Gladstone has other arguments against persecution, arguments
which are of so much weight, that they are decisive not only against
persecution but against his whole theory.

"The Government," he says, "is incompetent to exercise minute and
constant supervision over religious opinion." And hence he infers,
that "a Government exceeds its province when it comes to adapt a
scale of punishments to variations in religious opinion, according
to their respective degrees of variation from the established creed.

To decline affording countenance to sects is a single and simple
rule.

To punish their professors, according to their several errors,
even were there no other objection, is one for which the State
must assume functions wholly ecclesiastical, and for which it is
not intrinsically fitted."

This is, in our opinion, quite true. But how does it agree with Mr.

Gladstone's theory? What! the Government incompetent to exercise even
such a degree of supervision over religious opinion as is implied
by the punishment of the most deadly heresy! The Government incompetent
to measure even the grossest deviations from the standard of truth!

The Government not intrinsically qualified to judge of the comparative
enormity of any theological errors! The Government so ignorant
on these subjects that it is compelled to leave, not merely subtle
heresies, discernible only by the eye of a Cyril or a Bucer,
but Socinianism, Deism, Mahometanism, Idolatry, Atheism, unpunished!

To whom does Mr.
Gladstone assign the office of selecting a religion for the State,
from among hundreds of religions, every one of which lays claim
to truth?

Even to this same Government, which is now pronounced to be so unfit
for theological investigations that it cannot venture to punish a
man for worshipping a lump of stone with a score of heads and hands.

We do not remember ever to have fallen in with a more extraordinary
instance of inconsistency.
When Mr.

Gladstone wishes to prove that the Government ought to establish
and endow a religion, and to fence it with a Test Act, Government
is _to pan_ in the moral world.

Those who would confine it to secular ends take a low view of its
nature.

A religion must be attached to its agency; and this religion must be
that of the conscience of the governor, or none.

It is for the Governor to decide between Papists and Protestants,
Jansenists and Molinists, Arminians and Calvinists, Episcopalians
and Presbyterians, Sabellians and Tritheists, Homoousians and
Homoiousians, Nestorians and Eutychians, Monothelites and Monophysites,
Paedobaptists and Anabaptists.

It is for him to rejudge the Acts of Nice and Rimini, of Ephesus
and Chalcedon, of Constantinople and St.

John Lateran, of Trent and Dort.

It is for him to arbitrate between the Greek and the Latin procession,
and to determine whether that mysterious filioque shall or shall
not have a place in the national creed.

When he has made up his mind, he is to tax the whole community in
order to pay people to teach his opinion, what ever it may be.

He is to rely on his own judgment, though it may be opposed to that
of nine-tenths of the society.

He is to act on his own judgment, at the risk of exciting the most
formidable discontents.

He is to inflict, perhaps on a great majority of the population,
what, whether we choose to call it persecution or not, will always
be felt as persecution by those who suffer it.

He is, on account of differences often too slight for vulgar
comprehension, to deprive the State of the services of the ablest
men.

He is to debase and enfeeble the community which he governs, from
a nation into a sect.

In our own country, for example, millions of Catholics, millions
of Protestant Dissenters, are to be excluded from all power and
honours.

A great hostile fleet is on the sea; but Nelson is not to command
in the Channel if in the mystery of the Trinity he confounds the
persons.

An invading army has landed in Kent; but the Duke of Wellington is not
to be at the head of our forces if he divides the substance. And
after all this, Mr.
Gladstone tells us, that it would be wrong to imprison a Jew, a
Mussulman, or a Buddhist, for a day; because really a Government
cannot understand these matters, and ought not to meddle with
questions which belong to the Church.

A singular theologian, indeed, this Government! So learned, that
it is competent to exclude Grotius from office for being a
Semi-Pelagian, so unlearned that it is incompetent to fine a Hindoo
peasant a rupee for going on a pilgrimage to Juggernaut.

                      "To solicit and
                  persuade one another,"
                 says Mr. Gladstone,
                      "are privileges which belong to us all; and the wiser and better
man is bound to advise the less wise and good; but he is not only
not bound, he is not allowed, speaking generally, to coerce him.

It is untrue, then, that the same considerations which bind a
Government to submit a religion to the free choice of the people
would therefore justify their enforcing its adoption."

Granted. But it is true that all the same considerations which would
justify a Government in propagating a religion by means of civil
disabilities would justify the propagating of that religion by
penal laws.

To solicit! Is it solicitation to tell a Catholic Duke, that he must
abjure his religion or walk out of the House of Lords?

To persuade! Is it persuasion to tell a barrister of distinguished
eloquence and learning that he shall grow old in his stuff gown,
while his pupils are seated above him in ermine, because he cannot
digest the damnatory clauses of the Athanasian Creed?

Would Mr. Gladstone think that a religious system which he
considers as false, Socinianism for example, was submitted to his
free choice, if it were submitted in these terms?--"If you obstinately
adhere to the faith of the Nicene fathers, you shall not be burned
in Smithfield; you shall not be sent to Dorchester gaol; you shall
not even pay double land-tax.

But you shall be shut out from all situations in which you might
exercise your talents with honour to yourself and advantage to the
country.

The House of Commons, the bench of magistracy, are not for such
as you. You shall see younger men, your inferiors in station and
talents, rise to the highest dignities and attract the gaze of
nations, while you are doomed to neglect and obscurity.

If you have a son of the highest promise, a son such as other fathers
would contemplate with delight, the development of his fine
talents and of his generous ambition shall be a torture to you.
You shall look on him as a being doomed to lead, as you have led,
the abject life of a Roman or a Neapolitan in the midst of a great
English people.

All those high honours, so much more precious than the most costly
gifts of despots, with which a free country decorates its
illustrious citizens, shall be to him, as they have been to you,
objects not of hope and virtuous emulation, but of hopeless, envious
pining. Educate him, if you wish him to feel his degradation.

Educate him, if you wish to stimulate his craving for what he never
must enjoy.

Educate him, if you would imitate the barbarity of that Celtic
tyrant who fed his prisoners on salted food till they called
eagerly for drink, and then let down an empty cup into the dungeon
and left them to die of thirst."

Is this to solicit, to persuade, to submit religion to the free choice
of man? Would a fine of a thousand pounds, would imprisonment in
Newgate for six months, under circumstances not disgraceful, give
Mr Gladstone the pain which he would feel, if he were to be told
that he was to be dealt with in the way in which he would himself
deal with more than one half of his countrymen?

We are not at all surprised to find such inconsistency even
in a man of Mr. Gladstone's talents. The truth is, that every man
is, to a great extent, the creature of the age.

It is to no purpose that he resists the influence which the vast
mass, in which he is but an atom, must exercise on him.

He may try to be a man of the tenth century: but he cannot.

Whether he will or not, he must be a man of the nineteenth
century. He shares in the motion of the moral as well as in that
of the physical world.

He can no more be as intolerant as he would have been in the days
of the Tudors than he can stand in the evening exactly where
he stood in the morning. The globe goes round from west to east;
and he must go round with it.

When he says that he is where he was, he means only that he has moved
at the same rate with all around him.

When he says that he has gone a good way to the westward, he means
only that he has not gone to the eastward quite so rapidly as his
neighbours. Mr. Gladstone's book is, in this respect, a very
gratifying performance. It is the measure of what a man can do to
be left behind by the world. It is the strenuous effort of a very
vigorous mind to keep as far in the rear of the general progress
as possible.

And yet, with the most intense exertion Mr.
Gladstone cannot help being, on some important points, greatly in
advance of Locke himself; and, with whatever admiration he may
regard Laud, it is well for him, we can tell him, that he did
not write in the days of that zealous primate, who would certainly
have refuted the expositions of Scripture which we have quoted, by
one of the keenest arguments that can be addressed to human ears.

This is not the only instance in which Mr. Gladstone has shrunk
in a very remarkable manner from the consequences of his own theory.
If there be in the whole world a state to which this theory is
applicable, that state is the British Empire in India.

Even we, who detest paternal governments in general, shall admit that
the duties of the Government of India are, to a considerable extent,
paternal.

There, the superiority of the governors to the governed in moral
science is unquestionable.

The conversion of the whole people to the worst form that Christianity
ever wore in the darkest ages would be a most happy event.

It is not necessary that a man should be a Christian to wish for
the propagation of Christianity in India.

It is sufficient that he should be an European not much below the
ordinary European level of good sense and humanity. Compared with
the importance of the interests at stake, all those Scotch and
Irish questions which occupy so large a portion of Mr.

Gladstone's book, sink into insignificance. In no part of the world
since the days of Theodosius has so large a heathen population
been subject to a Christian government.

In no part of the world is heathenism more cruel, more licentious,
more fruitful of absurd rites and pernicious laws.

Surely, if it be the duty of Government to use its power and its
revenue in order to bring seven millions of Irish Catholics over
to the Protestant Church, it is a fortiori the duty of the Government
to use its power and its revenue in order to make seventy millions
of idolaters Christians.

If it be a sin to suffer John Howard or William Penn to
hold any office in England because they are not in communion with
the Established Church, it must be a crying sin indeed to admit to
high situations men who bow down, in temples covered with emblems
of vice, to the hideous images of sensual or malevolent gods.

But no. Orthodoxy, it seems, is more shocked by the priests of Rome
than by the priests of Kalee.

asked his lordship.

"Just a little bit weak, my lord".

"A _reciprocal_ weakness?"

"Well, my lord, you know the world--so do the gentlemen of the jury--"

"And of the Jewry!" screamed his lordship, amid laughter from the
merry wigs.

As Frankl stepped down, a name was called at which Hogarth went cold
as a ghost: "Rebekah Frankl".

And in she stepped splendent, to stand like a Nubian woman, with
that retreat of the hips, her ears torn with their load of gold, her
throat and breast ablaze, she bringing into that English court the
gaudy heat of the Orient, Baal and Astarté, orgies of Hindoo women
in temples of Parvati, the pallid passion of Bacchantes. Though not
tall, she was lofty, and her ebon eyes had that very royalty of the
stare of the bent form in the dock, whose heart throbbed quick like
paddle-wheels that thrash the sea, she his wild divinity, wild wife
of his wild youth....

At her shocking beauty the Court stood hushed.

She suggested the East: but in her speech was the energy of the
West--sharp--a bass almost like her father's.

"You recognize the prisoner?"

"Yes". She smiled.

"You were present on the day of the 11th November when the prisoner
entered your father's house, and attempted to strike him?"

"Did strike him".

"He did?"

"Yes".

"Did he seem in a passion?"

"Seemed severe".

"Severe! But was he not highly excited?"

"He did not seem so. Frowned and flogged".

"By whom was he ejected?"

"Went of his own accord".

"But--try to remember. What made him go?"

"He suddenly saw _me_, and fled".

Laughter droned through the court, in which she naïvely joined,
while Hogarth's eyes and hers met one instant, blazed outrageously,
and dropped....

That was all. Counsel bowed.

The day grew toward evening, and still the stuffy Court sat.

But Margaret Hogarth did not come; a defending counsel finished
examination, counsel on the other side again addressed the Court,
and again defending counsel. The judge then held the scales, the
jury trooped away, the crowd buzzed.

The light in the room seemed to brood to a denser yellow, and anon
to grow dim; the stuffed court festered; voices spoke, but low. The
King of Terrors was here.

When the jury came, the judge was called, Hogarth stood up, and the
clerk of arraigns put a question to the foreman.

The foreman said: "We find the prisoner guilty: but beg to recommend
him to the mercy of the Crown".

"On what grounds?" asked his lordship.

"On the grounds of past good conduct and strong provocation".

The judge then placed on his head a square of velvet and passed the
sentence of the Court.

During the reign of stillness that followed, while the court clock's
ticking was still loud, something which was thrown struck Hogarth on
the arm, a red rose, black at heart, that had lain on the breast of
Rebekah, who, when Hogarth looked round at her, was calmly drawing
her mass of cloak about her throat.


XIII

OUT OF THE WORLD


A week later a governor and a chaplain together entered Hogarth's
cell with news of his reprieve.

Eight months later he was being trundled in "Black Maria" to
Paddington Station amid a Babel of escaped tongues, when, sitting in
his pigeonhole, he heard the unknown voice before him cry: "Well,
Jim, we're away to the mountain's brow!"

Jim, nothing but a voice, was heard: "Worse luck! I knows Colmoor,
and I knows the Scrubs, and I knows Portland; and of the five I say--give
me Jedwood. Who's the guy in front o' you?"

"Hi, you in front there, who _are_ yer?" cried the first, pounding.

He was answered by a deep voice, which said:

"I AM WHO I AM".

"All right, keep yer 'air on, if you've any left! It's the Lawd
Chief Justice, mate! 'E says 'e's 'oo 'e are!"

"'Old on! _I_ knows who it is: it's that new-comer, 33. They say he
was once a priest--"

But now speech was swallowed up in hubbub, as the van ran battering
down a rough street near the station.

Then again Hogarth was whirled into night and space, and, toward
morning, after the bumping climb of a van, was bidden to alight on
moorland, where he spied, far off, set on a hill, a mighty palace of
Romance, all grim, aloof, which was Colmoor.

The next morning while the outdoor gangs were being searched on
parade before the exit, Hogarth saw a face which he knew; and "You,
Bates", he said, "I thought you were in Eternity!"

But no: there stood Bates, all capped and arrowed, cropped and neat,
not wearing the filthy old scarf of liberty any more.

The neighbor of Hogarth now was a stout man, with black hair, and
grey eyes.

He it was who had been--a priest: and in "Black Maria" had given
that answer: "I am who I am".


XIV

THE PRIEST


A year passed, during which John Loveday exhausted the resources of
civilization, (1)in seeking Margaret, and (2)in investigating the
innocence of Richard.

He had, however, a sprightly, adventurous nerve in the mind, and
would pull his velvet sleeves busily up--such was his little way. He
began to plot.

About the same time the ex-priest, in that far-off world of Colmoor,
said one day to Hogarth: "_You_ won't be here long!"

"You jest," Hogarth answered; "if I had the chance of escape, I
should never take it. I am here by due legal process".

"Tut, if I say that you will escape, it is not because I am a
prophet, but a man of the world, and know what happens in it".

Converse with this deep, world-wise, and fluent man had now become
to Hogarth like manna, or rather a vice, like opium: for in those
grey eyes of the cleric was hinted anon the baleful glint of the
cobra's.

That day, a Saturday, outdoor gangs were recalled early, to "clean
up" for Sunday, and out across the heath rang the great bell,
Colmoor being famous for its bell, its tone and great size, larger
than even the eight-ton "Mighty Tom" of Christ Church, for though
its thickness was only six inches, it weighed, bell and clapper, ten
tons, and was seven feet high and seven in diameter.

A busy Saturday afternoon ensued, and whatsoever Hogarth's hand
found to do he did it with his might, though his face now seemed all
eyes--brown, bloodshot, imperially large, morbidly staring.

He was giving the finishing touches of order to his wooden spoon and
salt-cellar, his tin knife, plate, and pint cup for gruel, when a
Warder Jennings peeped in with, "No. 76--you are to follow the
assistant warder at once", and Hogarth descended to an ante-room
where an official handed him a letter, which had been read and
initialed by governor and chaplain.

An event!--a letter in Colmoor, like a shark's fin on the voyages of
old sailing ships.

It was from Loveday, and concluded with a reference to Hogarth's
"poor old grandmother".

So Hogarth, who had no "grandmother", propped his forehead to ponder
that thing; and presently said: "Oh, it is a cypher".

And by noting little peculiarities in the shapes of the letters, a
double cross to a t, a q like a g, etc., he soon had "flemecops-
leftquary"--which he took to mean: "flee to me in the copse to the
left of the quarry".

He smiled with tenderness at the dear heart planning and daring so
very much for him. But in his smile was a touch of disdain also, he
not intending to "flee".


XV

MONSIGNOR


Hogarth's first thought, as getting-up bell clattered réveille
through the gallery, was of Loveday's cypher, and by the time the
warder came to ask if he would see governor or doctor, a thought of
Monsignor O'Hara had somehow mixed itself with the thought of the
cypher; when an orderly handed in the day's brown loaf, he was
thinking, "Strange that he never told me what he has done"; eating
his pint of gruel, he thought: "If I will not escape myself, I might
perhaps let another."

"What!" said O'Hara on the march out, "you still here?"

"Where should I be?" answered Hogarth, dull and sullen.

"Where palaces stand open for you, and bank-notes--have you ever
realized something very charming in the Helen pallor of a bank-note,
Hogarth? And gold-yellow, sparkling gold! Hogarth, I--_love_ gold!
It is a confession--"

"Is it that love which brought you here?" Hogarth asked with his
sideward stare.

Whereupon the priest turned a cold gaze upon him--had regarded
Hogarth as a well-bred man, or would hardly have conversed with him.

"I had a motive for asking", said Hogarth, eyeing the face of the
prelate--a man of very coarse feature; a small head, made to receive
the tonsure, with a low brow; a stern bottom lip, and long upper; a
fat neck held majestically erect; and up stuck his double chin. In
profile, the part between the sharp edge of the bottom lip and the
chin-tip was divided, down near the chin tip, by an angle and
crease; and the lower face seemed too massive for the size of the
head.

Nothing could be more exquisite than the contrast between his air of
force, authority and importance, and the knickerbockers, the coarse
cap, the canvas slop-jacket, which he wore.

Outwardly calm, he was yet very excited by that "I had a motive"; he
said to himself: "Suppose this man has some plan! He could invent
ten, if he only knew it. And suppose he would tell me it, if I make
him believe me innocent! It would be like him!"

When the eleven o'clock dinner-bell rang, and they two were again
together, O'Hara said: "Hogarth, I have for some time been intending
to give you my story. Have I in your eyes the air of a guilty man?"

"God knows," answered Hogarth, with a shrug; "you talk nicely, and
you know much".

"So much for the hollowness of friendship!"

"Don't be sentimental", said Hogarth: "I never pretended to be any
friend of yours; but I do respect your talents, do pity your misery:
and if I knew the solid facts of, as you have said, your
'innocence', I might--"

"_What_?" whispered O'Hara with a thievish, fierce glance.

"Help you".

"_In God's truth?_"

"I might".

O'Hara said: "I don't find it so cold as it was this morning. You
must have observed a certain peculiarity of moorland climates--the
same being true of the Roman Campagna, and of Irish peat-lands--that
they are colder than elsewhere in the absence of the sun, and warmer
in its presence. This afternoon--_I will tell you_--"

They had reached the great gates, and were marched to parade-ground
for the second of the four daily searches; then, after three ounces
of fat mutton and forty minutes' rest, the third search, the second
march-out.

And immediately beyond the gates O'Hara began: "In order to paint
you my life, Hogarth, I must give you at once to understand what has
been its mainspring and secret: my passion for my Church--"

He paused, while his lips moved in prayer, and he crossed himself.

"From boyhood my dream was to see my Church supreme in the warfare
of the world, I being a King's College and Maynooth man, at twenty-
three was Senior Chancellor's Medallist, and seven years later, sent
to Rome was quickly received into the Vatican household. It was
recognized that I had a future: both gifts and graces; piety; a
versatile tongue; a powerful voice; some learning; could dine, I
could look august; above all, I knew my man and could talk him over.
My great day came when, one morning, in St. Gregory the Great on
Mount Coelius, I was consecrated Bishop Coadjutor to his Eminence
the Archbishop of Westminster. Now I was on the heights. My life
during the next ten years was a life of bustling action--and was led
always with one unselfish object. No man ever spoke a greater number
of words than I, Hogarth. I have breakfasted with the Prime
Minister, lunched with a President of the Conference, and dined with
the Bishop of London: between the three meals I have written a
hundred letters and pitched into ten cabs. Such a life is very
exhilarating, in comparison, for example, with quarrying. Oh, my God
what am I fallen! Most of that time I was running over Europe: from
Madrid to Vienna, from Rouen to Rome. It happened that the
Archbishop of Paris was organizing a scheme of Church-workhouses in
France, in the absence of municipal ones, such as we have here....
Well, it was a grand thing, but was falling through for lack of
funds: so I, on my way to Rome, undertook the mission to plead the
cause before his Holiness, and succeeded to this extent that, on my
return, I had with me a casket from the good old man containing
seven diamonds, which I might either dispose of personally, or hand
over to the Paris fund. Now, it was during my stay at Rome that that
series of events, culminating in the Jewish exodus from Europe,
occurred; and on my journey home I was seized with the mighty
thought that, since many of the Jews were perishing of want, _that_
was the moment to reach their spirit through the body, and add their
race to the trophies of the Church. Was it not a thought? You
yourself, who are a Jew--"

Hogarth's eyes opened in surprise."_I_ am not a Jew ".

"No? I should have said that there was a hint of expression
somewhere--But to resume. I retained those seven diamonds, and
disposed of them".

"Honest behaviour!"

"Perfectly honest! I acquainted the Pope--he sanctioned it! And now,
I, single-handed almost, threw myself into that task. I hired, I
built, I begged, I borrowed, I formed committees, I haunted
Religious Houses, I sweated, I ran, I wept, I visited dens, I smoked
opium, I drank gin, I framed memorials, I learned Yiddish, I read
the Mishna and Gemara, I interviewed Rabbonim, I wrote tracts: I was
busy. In the midst of it, I had to visit Rome ceremoniously, to
assist at an interview between the Duke of York and his Holiness--
arrived on the Monday, and on the Wednesday, I remember, attended a
Court Ball in the suite of his Royal Highness. That night, when I
returned to the Vatican, I found all the Piazza di San Pietro
crowded. I do not know if you were free at the time when my friend,
M. Tissot, startled everybody by predicting the collision of an
asteroid with the earth? Tut, the silly being--he should have known
from the body's response to the spectroscope that its condition was
too friable to resist our atmosphere. But I never yet knew an
astronomer not imbued with sensationalism they acquire a certain
megalomania from their intercourse with space. But, at all events,
the people, dreading the destruction of everything, had crowded
toward the Vatican. The Duke of Genoa, I, and some of the College of
Cardinals, stood watching from a balcony; and very imposing, I
remember, was the moment when a glare appeared--I must stop--"

They were at the face of the rock, and the "halt" and "set to work"
parted them.

But again on the final march back at 5.15 when nightshades were
falling fast like snow, and the arm now felt the pick a load, O'Hara
began his muttering:

"I was telling you about the asteroid", he said. "Now this body, it
was given out, contained diamonds in large evidence, and the mere
thought of such a thing bursting in mid-air, and scattering itself
about was, I--I confess, a little fascinating to my mind. A man
might let his soul gloat upon such a hope till he went lunatic with
lust! I--I confess, the thought was alluring to me. Diamond, my son:
lucid--But when the body burst, and none of it came my way, I drove
it from my mind: in fact, I never heard of a trace of it having been
seen--hissed itself into gases in mid-air. Except in one instance--
one instance.

"When I reached Calais on my homeward way, stopped there a day,
awaiting the coming of Rouen, for whom I had nuncio communications,
and in the evening went to visit a cottage where I had once been a
great favourite with an old fellow called Santé-you know those
Calais fishers, with painted sabots, and ochred trousers. And
'What!' said I to Santé, 'the nets already spread at this hour?'
'Nothing to be done to-day, my Father', he answered, and explained
that he had attempted to pick up a stone before his door, and--it
had burned him: he showed it me: it had the appearance of a piece of
ferruginous rock, stuck with pieces of dirty glass; and it had
burned Santé on the midnight of the asteroid's scattering.

"Imagine my excitement: 'The asteroid', I thought, 'may add fifty
thousand Jews to the Church'. I asked Santé for the stone--Do you
blame me?"

"Go on," said Hogarth.

"That day two months I had the diamonds lying polished in a casket
in my house. My evil destiny, Hogarth, ordained that the casket was
the one given me for Paris by the Pope, the number of the new
diamonds the same--seven: and one day, about that time, the Vatican
organ, the _Osservatore Romano_, published a dreadful article,
hinting that I had applied to my own purposes seven diamonds
entrusted me for Paris: the Pope, just dead, must have left some
record of his gift. My friend, before I had heard a whisper of the
attack upon me, the casket, whose lid was mosaicked with the Papal
fanon, was secretly searched by a secretary in my house: the seven
diamonds were seen.

"Imagine the horror of what followed: I was abandoned by all--
superior and inferior; the story of the meteor was received with
sneers. The scandal reached the public papers--the public
prosecutor. And here now is the wretch, Patrick O'Hara."

The latter part of this narrative was fiction! The Pope's diamonds
O'Hara had duly handed to the Archbishop! and though there was such
a man as Santé, no asteroid had ever fallen at his door. So great
our love, it brought us to this door; We only ask to see her face
once more.

Then will we go to realms where we belong, And pay our penalty for
doing wrong.'
'And wert thou friends on earth?' (The Guard spake thus.)

'Nay, we were foes; but Death made friends of us.

The dominating thought within each Soul Brought us together, comrades,
to this goal, To see her face, and in its radiance bask For one
great moment--that is all we ask.

And, having seen her, we must journey back The path we came--a hard
and dangerous track.'

'Wait, then,' the Angel said, 'beside me here, But do not strive
within God's Gate to peer Nor converse hold with Spirits clothed
in light Who pass this way; thou hast not earned the right.'

They waited year on year.

Then, like a flame, News of the woman's death from earth-land came.

The eager lovers scanned with hungry eyes Each Soul that passed
the Gates of Paradise.
The well-beloved face in vain they sought, Until one day the Guardian
Angel brought A message to them.

'She has gone,' he said, 'Down to the lower regions of the dead;
Her chosen mate went first; so great her love She has resigned the
joys that wait above To dwell with him, until perchance some day,
Absolved from sin, he seeks the Better Way.'

Silent, the lovers turned.

The pitying Guard Said: 'Stay (the while his hand the door unbarred),
There waits for thee no darker grief or woe; Enter the Gates, and
all God's glories know.

But to be ready for so great a bliss, Pause for a moment and take
heed of this:
The dearest treasure by each mortal lost Lies yonder, when the
Threshold has been crossed, And thou shalt find within that Sacred
Place The shining wonder of her worshipped face.

All that is past is but a troubled dream; Go forward now and claim
the Fact Supreme.'

Then clothed like Angels, fitting their estate, Three Souls went
singing, singing through God's Gate.

WHEN LOVE IS LOST

When love is lost, the day sets towards the night, Albeit the morning
sun may still be bright, And not one cloud-ship sails across the sky.

Yet from the places where it used to lie Gone is the lustrous glory
of the light.

No splendour rests in any mountain height, No scene spreads fair
and beauteous to the sight; All, all seems dull and dreary to the
eye When love is lost.

Love lends to life its grandeur and its might; Love goes, and leaves
behind it gloom and blight; Like ghosts of time the pallid hours
drag by, And grief's one happy thought is that we die.

Ah, what can recompense us for its flight When love is lost?

OCCUPATION

There must in heaven be many industries And occupations, varied,
infinite; Or heaven could not be heaven.

What gracious tasks The Mighty Maker of the universe Can offer souls
that have prepared on earth By holding lovely thoughts and fair
desires!

Art thou a poet to whom words come not?
A dumb composer of unuttered sounds, Ignored by fame and to the
world unknown?

Thine may be, then, the mission to create Immortal lyrics and immortal
strains, For stars to chant together as they swing About the holy
centre where God dwells.

Hast thou the artist instinct with no skill To give it form or
colour? Unto thee It may be given to paint upon the skies
Astounding dawns and sunsets, framed by seas And mountains; or to
fashion and adorn New faces for sweet pansies and new dyes To tint
their velvet garments.

Oftentimes Methinks behind a beauteous flower I see, Or in the
tender glory of a dawn, The presence of some spirit who has gone
Into the place of mystery, whose call, Imperious and compelling,
sounds for all Or soon or late.

So many have passed on - So many with ambitions, hopes, and aims
Unrealised, who could not be content As idle angels even in paradise.

The unknown Michelangelos who lived With thoughts on beauty bent
while chained to toil That gave them only bread and burial - These
must find waiting in the world of space The shining timbers of their
splendid dreams, Ready for shaping temples, shrines, and towers,
Where radiant hosts may congregate to raise Their glad hosannas to
the God Supreme.

And will there not be gardens glorious, And mansions all embosomed
among blooms, Where heavenly children reach out loving arms To
lonely women who have been denied On earth the longed-for boon of
motherhood?

Surely God has provided work to do For souls like these, and for
the weary, rest.

THE VALLEY OF FEAR

In the journey of life, as we travel along To the mystical goal
that is hidden from sight, You may stumble at times into Roadways
of Wrong, Not seeing the sign-board that points to the right.

Through caverns of sorrow your feet may be led, Where the noon of
the day will like midnight appear.

But no matter whither you wander or tread, Keep out of the Valley
of Fear.

The Roadways of Wrong will wind out into light If you sit in the
silence and ask for a Guide; In the caverns of sorrow your soul
gains its sight Of beautiful vistas, ascending and wide.
In by-paths of worry and trouble and strife Full many a bloom grows
bedewed by a tear, But wretched and arid and void of all life Is
the desolate Valley of Fear.

The Valley of Fear is a maddening maze Of paths that wind on without
exit or end, From nowhere to nowhere lead all of its ways, And
shadows with shadows in more shadows blend.

Each guide-post is lettered, 'This way to Despair,' And the
River of Death in the darkness flows near, But there is a beautiful
Roadway of Prayer This side of the Valley of Fear.

This beautiful Roadway is narrow and steep, And it runs up the
side of the Mountain of Faith.
You may not perceive it at first if you weep, But it rises high over
the River of Death.
Though the Roadway is narrow and dark at the base, It widens
ascending, and ever grows clear, Till it shines at the top with the
Light of God's face, Far, far from the Valley of Fear.

When close to that Valley your footsteps shall fare, Turn, turn to
the Roadway of Prayer - The beautiful Roadway of Prayer.

WHAT WOULD IT BE?

Now what were the words of Jesus, And what would He pause and say,
If we were to meet in home or street, The Lord of the world
to-day?

Oh, I think He would pause and say:
'Go on with your chosen labour; Speak only good of your neighbour;
Widen your farms, and lay down your arms, Or dig up the soil with
each sabre.'

Now what were the answer of Jesus If we should ask for a creed, To
carry us straight to the wonderful gate When soul from body is
freed?
Oh, I think He would give us this creed:

'Praise God whatever betide you; Cast joy on the lives beside you;
Better the earth, by growing in worth, With love as the law to guide
you.'
Now what were the answer of Jesus If we should ask Him to tell Of
the last great goal of the homing soul Where each of us hopes to
dwell?

Oh, I think it is this He would tell:
'The soul is the builder--then wake it; The mind is the
kingdom--then take it; And thought upon thought let Eden be wrought,
For heaven will be what you make it.'

AMERICA

I am the refuge of all the oppressed, I am the boast of the free,
I am the harbour where ships may rest Safely 'twixt sea and sea.

I hold up a torch to a darkened world, I lighten the path with its
ray.
Let my hand keep steady And let me be ready For whatever comes my
way - Let me be ready.

Oh, better than fortresses, better than guns, Better than lance or
spear, Are the loyal hearts of my daughters and sons, Faithful and
without fear.

But my daughters and sons must understand THAT ATTILA DID NOT DIE.

And they must be ready, Their hands must be steady, If the hosts
of hell come nigh - They must be ready.

If Jesus were back on the earth with men, He would not preach to-day
Until He had made Him a scourge, and again He would drive the defilers
away.
He would throw down the tables of lust and greed And scatter the
changers' gold.

He would be ready, His hand would be steady, As it was in that
temple of old - He would be ready.

I am the cradle of God's new world, From me shall the new race rise,
And my glorious banner must float unfurled, Unsullied against
the skies.

My sons and daughters must be my strength, With courage to do and
to dare, With hearts that are ready, With hands that are steady,
And their slogan must be, PREPARE!

- They must be ready!

With a prayer on the lip they must shoulder arms, For after all has
been said, We must muster guns, If we master Huns - AND ATTILA IS
NOT DEAD - We must be ready!

WAR MOTHERS

There is something in the sound of drum and fife That stirs all the
savage instincts into life.

In the old times of peace we went our ways, Through proper days Of
little joys and tasks.

Lonely at times, When from the steeple sounded wedding chimes,
Telling to all the world some maid was wife - But taking patiently
our part in life As it was portioned us by Church and State, Believing
it our fate.

Our thoughts all chaste Held yet a secret wish to love and mate Ere
youth and virtue should go quite to waste.
But men we criticised for lack of strength, And kept them at arm's
length.

Then the war came - The world was all aflame!

The men we had thought dull and void of power Were heroes in an
hour.
He who had seemed a slave to petty greed Showed masterful in that
great time of need.
He who had plotted for his neighbour's pelf, Now for his fellows
offers up himself.
And we were only women, forced by war To sacrifice the things worth
living for.

Something within us broke, Something within us woke, The wild cave-woman
spoke.

When we heard the sound of drumming, As our soldiers went to camp,
Heard them tramp, tramp, tramp; As we watched to see them
coming, And they looked at us and smiled (Yes, looked back at us
and smiled), As they filed along by hillock and by hollow, Then our
hearts were so beguiled That, for many and many a day, We dreamed
we heard them say, 'Oh, follow, follow, follow!' And the distant,
rolling drum Called us 'Come, come, come!' Till our virtue seemed
a thing to give away.

War had swept ten thousand years away from earth.
We were primal once again.
There were males, not modern men; We were females meant to bring
their sons to birth.
And we could not wait for any formal rite, We could hear them calling
to us, 'Come to-night; For to-morrow, at the dawn, We move on!' And
the drum Bellowed, 'Come, come, come!'

And the fife Whistled, 'Life, life, life!'

So they moved on and fought and bled and died; Honoured and mourned,
they are the nation's pride.
We fought our battles, too, but with the tide Of our red blood,
we gave the world new lives.
Because we were not wives We are dishonoured.

Is it noble, then, To break God's laws only by killing men To
save one's country from destruction?

We took no man's life but gave our chastity, And sinned the
ancient sin To plant young trees and fill felled forests in.

Oh, clergy of the land, Bible in hand, All reverently you stand, On
holy thoughts intent While barren wives receive the sacrament!

Had you the open visions you could see Phantoms of infants murdered
in the womb, Who never knew a cradle or a tomb, Hovering about these
wives accusingly.

Bestow the sacrament! Their sins are not well known - Ours to the
four winds of the earth are blown.

A HOLIDAY

Berlin, Germany, gave the school children a half holiday to celebrate
the sinking of the Lusitania.

War declares a holiday; Little children, run and play.
Ring-a-rosy round the earth With the garland of your mirth.

Shrill a song brim full of glee Of a great ship sunk at sea.
Tell with pleasure and with pride How a hundred children died.

Sing of orphan babes, whose cries Beat against unanswering skies; Let
a mother's mad despair Lend staccato to your air.

Sing of babes who drowned alone; Sing of headstones, marked 'Unknown';
Sing of homes made desolate Where the stricken mourners wait.

Sing of battered corpses tossed By the heedless waves, and lost.

Run, sweet children, sing and play; War declares a holiday.

THE UNDERTONE

When I was very young I used to feel the dark despairs of youth; Out
of my little griefs I would invent great tragedies and woes;
Not only for myself, but for all those I held most dear I would
invent vast sorrows in my melancholy moods of thought.
Yet down deep, deep in my heart there was an undertone of rapture.

It was like a voice from some other world calling softly to me,
Saying things joyful.

As I grew older, and Life offered bitter gall for me to drink,
Forcing it through clenched teeth when I refused to take it willingly;
When Pain prepared some special anguish for my heart to bear, And
all the things I longed for seemed to be wholly beyond my reach -
Yet down deep, deep in my heart there was an undertone of rapture.

It was like a Voice, a Voice from some other world calling to me,
Bringing glad tidings.

Now when I look about me, and see the great injustices of men, See
Idleness and Greed waited upon by luxury and mirth, See prosperous
Vice ride by in state, while footsore Virtue walks; Now when I
hear the cry of need rise up from lands of shameful wealth - Yet
down deep, deep in my heart there is an undertone of rapture.

It is like a Voice--it is a Voice--calling to me and saying:
'Love rules triumphant.'

Now when each mile-post on the path of life seems marked by headstones,
And one by one dear faces that I loved are hid away from sight; Now
when in each familiar home I see a vacant chair, And in the throngs
once formed of friends I meet unrecognising eyes - Yet down deep,
deep in my heart there is an undertone of rapture.

It is the Voice, it is the Voice for ever saying unto me:
'Life is Eternal.'

GYPSYING
Gypsying, gypsying, through the world together, Never mind the way
we go, never mind what port.

Follow trails, or fashion sails, start in any weather:
While we journey hand in hand, everything is sport.

Gypsying, gypsying, leaving care and worry:

Never mind the 'if' and 'but' (words for coward lips).
Put them out with 'fear' and 'doubt,' in the pack with 'hurry,'
While we stroll like vagabonds forth to trails, or ships.

Gypsying, gypsying, just where fancy calls us; Never mind what others
say, or what others do.
Everywhere or foul or fair, liking what befalls us:
While you have me at your side, and while I have you.

Gypsying, gypsying, camp by hill or hollow; Never mind the why of
it, since it suits our mood.

Go or stay, and pay our way, and let those who follow Find, upspringing
from the soil, some small seed of good.

Gypsying, gypsying, through the world we wander:
Never mind the rushing years, that have come and gone.

There must be for you and me, lying over Yonder, Other lands, where
side by side we can gypsy on.

SONG OF THE ROAD

I am a Road; a good road, fair and smooth and broad; And I link
with my beautiful tether Town and Country together, Like a ribbon
rolled on the earth, from the reel of God.

Oh, great the life of a Road!

I am a Road; a long road, leading on and on; And I cry to the
world to follow, Past meadow and hill and hollow, Through desolate
night, to the open gates of dawn.

Oh, bold the life of a Road!

I am a Road; a kind road, shaped by strong hands.
I make strange cities neighbours; The poor grow rich with my
labours, And beauty and comfort follow me through the lands.
Oh, glad the life of a Road!

I am a Road; a wise road, knowing all men's ways; And I know how
each heart reaches For the things dear Nature teaches; And I am
the path that leads into green young Mays.

Oh, sweet the life of a Road!

I am a Road; and I speed away from the slums, Away from desolate
places, Away from unused spaces; Wherever I go, there order from
chaos comes.

Oh, brave the life of a Road!

I am a Road; and I would make the whole world one.
I would give hope to duty, And cover the earth with beauty.

Do you not see, O men! how all this might be done?
So vast the power of the Road!

THE FAITH WE NEED

Too tall our structures, and too swift our pace; Not so we mount,
not so we gain the race.
Too loud the voice of commerce in the land; Not so truth speaks,
not so we understand.

Too vast our conquests, and too large our gains; Not so comes
peace, not so the soul attains.

But the need of the world is a faith that will live anywhere;
In the still dark depths of the woods, or out in the sun's full
glare.

A faith that can hear God's voice, alike in the quiet glen, Or in the
roar of the street, and over the noises of men.

And the need of the world is a creed that is founded on joy;
A creed with the turrets of hope and trust, no winds can destroy;
A creed where the soul finds rest, whatever this life bestows, And
dwells undoubting and unafraid, because it knows, it knows.

And the need of the world is love that burns in the heart like flame;
A love for the Giver of Life, in sorrow or joy the same; A love that
blazes a trail to Go through the dark and the cold, Or keeps the
pathway that leads to Him clean, through glory and gold.

For the faith that can only thrive or grow in the solitude, And
droops and dies in the marts of men, where sights and sounds are
rude; That is not a faith at all, but a dream of a mystic's heart;
Our faith should point as the compass points, whatever be the
chart.

Our faith must find its centre of peace in a babel of noise; In
the changing ways of the world of men it must keep its poise; And
over the sorrowing sounds of earth it must hear God's call; And the
faith that cannot do all this, that is not faith at all.

THE PRICE HE PAID

I said I would have my fling, And do what a young man may; And I
didn't believe a thing That the parsons have to say.

I didn't believe in a God That gives us blood like fire, Then
flings us into hell because We answer the call of desire.

And I said: 'Religion is rot, And the laws of the world are nil;
For the bad man is he who is caught And cannot foot his bill.

And there is no place called hell; And heaven is only a truth When
a man has his way with a maid, In the fresh keen hour of youth.

'And money can buy us grace, If it rings on the plate of the church:

And money can neatly erase Each sign of a sinful smirch.'

For I saw men everywhere, Hotfooting the road of vice; And women and
preachers smiled on them As long as they paid the price.

So I had my joy of life:
I went the pace of the town; And then I took me a wife, And started
to settle down.

I had gold enough and to spare For all of the simple joys That belong
with a house and a home And a brood of girls and boys.

I married a girl with health And virtue and spotless fame.
I gave in exchange my wealth And a proud old family name.
And I gave her the love of a heart Grown sated and sick of sin!
My deal with the devil was all cleaned up, And the last bill handed
in.

She was going to bring me a child, And when in labour she cried
With love and fear I was wild - But now I wish she had died.
For the son she bore me was blind And crippled and weak and sore!

And his mother was left a wreck.
It was so she settled my score.

I said I must have my fling, And they knew the path I would go; Yet
no one told me a thing Of what I needed to know.

Folks talk too much of a soul From heavenly joys debarred - And not
enough of the babes unborn, By the sins of their fathers scarred.

DIVORCED

Thinking of one thing all day long, at night I fall asleep, brain
weary and heart sore; But only for a little while.

     At three, Sometimes at two o'clock, I wake and lie, Staring out
into darkness; while my thoughts Begin the weary treadmill-toil
again, From that white marriage morning of our youth Down to this
dreadful hour.

I see your face Lit with the lovelight of the honeymoon; I hear your
voice, that lingered on my name As if it loved each letter; and I
feel The clinging of your arms about my form, Your kisses on my
cheek--and long to break The anguish of such memories with tears,
But cannot weep; the fountain has run dry.

Was it true? Yes! He remembered facts of Yarmouth....

But since true, it was--strange.

Was the sea, then, a more productive element for men to work in than
the land? No, that was absurd: the land, in the nature of things,
was more productive.

Then, why could not _all_ men procure an easy superfluity by one
day's work, as the fisher could, if he chose to live naked in a
cave, eating fish alone? In that case the fisher could change some
of his day's-work fish for the shore people's day's-work things, and
so all have a variety as well as superabundance.

At the interest of this question, he leapt from his hammock, peering
into that thing, and his fleet feet were away, running after the
truth with that rapt abandonment that had characterized his hunting
and football. This was clear: that there was some difference between
land and sea as working-grounds for men. Shore people, like a
shoemaker, did not have for themselves enough shoes from even five,
or six, days' work on which to live in plenty for a week: and hence
would take nothing less than an enormous quantity of the fisher's
fish in exchange for a pair of shoes, making him, too, poor as
themselves. But since land work was as productive as sea work, and
far more so, it could only be that the shoemaker did not get for
himself all the shoes which he made, as the fisher got for himself
all the fish which he caught: some power took from shore people a
large part of what they made, a power which did not exist on the
sea. That much was sure.

What was this power, this inherent difference?

He could think of no inherent difference except this: that shore
workers paid rent for land--directly and indirectly--in a million
subtle ways; but fishers paid none for the sea.

So, then, if shore folk paid no rent, they would have a still
greater superfluity of shoes, etc., from one day's labour in six
than the fish-rich fisher?

So it seemed. So it _was_--as with savages. He started! But one
minute's reflection showed him that it was in the very nature of the
shore to pay rent: because one piece of land was better than
another--City land, for instance--and those working on the better
must pay for that benefit. Civilized land, therefore, was bound to
pay rent.

So that the shore people could never have the easy superfluity of
the fish-rich fisher--because land was bound to pay rent? And the
fisher must buy the shore things so dear with his easy-got fish,
toiling, he, too, all the week--because land was bound to pay rent?

The wretchedness of Man, then, was a Law?

Hogarth, confronted by a wall, groaned, and while his body was cold,
his brow rolled with sweat, he feeling himself on the brink of some
truth profound as the roots of the mountains....

"Land was bound to pay rent": he reached that point; and there
remained.

"But suppose the workers on shore paid the rent _among
themselves_....?"

At last those words: and he gave out a shout which begat mouths of
echo through the galleries of Colmoor.

"If the workers on shore paid rent among one another"--then they
would--on the whole--be in the very position of the fish-rich
workers on sea, who paid no rent at all, the nation--as a whole--
living on its country rent-free: England English, America American,
as the sea human: and our race might then begin to think, to live!

It seemed too sublime--and divine--to be true! Again, point by
point, he went over his reasoning with prying eye; and, on coming
back to the same conclusion, hugged himself, moaning. At last--he
knew.

And away now with the dullness and lowness! That blithe and hand-
clapping day! Good-bye, Colmoor! the daily massacre, the shame and
care. Men could begin--if in a baby way at first--to think, to see,
to sing, to live.

He saw, indeed, that that would hardly have been fair business if
he, for example, had paid his rent to the English Nation instead of
to Frankl, Frankl having bought Lagden with money earned. But he
thought that Frankl would hardly be slow to resign that rent, if
once he was shown....

But if Frankl _was_ slow--what then?

The oblong of ribbed glass over his flap-table showed a greyness of
morning, as he asked himself that thing.

In that case--Frankl could be argued with.

But if he still refused?

Then the question could be gone into as to whether that which is
good for forty millions, though apparently bad for Frankl, is not
_forty million times_ more just than unjust, goodness being justice;
also, as to which had the primary right to England, Frankl or the
English.

But if he still refused?

Suddenly Hogarth giggled--his first laugh in Colmoor.

_That_ could be arranged....

For him, Hogarth, the great fact was this: that he saw light. Into
that humble cell the rays of Heaven had blazed.

After standing motionless a long time, he dropped to his knees, and
"O, Thou, Thou", he said....

An hour later, when asked by an orderly if he wished to see doctor
or governor, he replied: "The Governor".


XVIII

CHLOROFORM


(Captain Bucknill, the Governor, was making his morning rounds, when
he heard that among the convicts claiming to see him was 76.)

A little man, prim, snappy, compact: an army officer, with
moustachios stuck upon him, to curve and finish him off.

"Well, what is it, 76?" said he busily at the cell door.

Hogarth struck a hand-salute--his old habit on His Majesty's ships.

"Sir, I wished to tell you that I have determined to escape from
this prison--if I can".

"Indeed, now! This is a most refreshing candour, 76!"

"I have said what I had to say", said Hogarth. "You keep a sharp eye
on me, and I, too, will keep a sharp eye".

The Governor puffed a breath of laughter, turned on his heels,
walked away, and that day spoke to three officials with regard to
Convict 76.

And during a week Hogarth lay deep, chained, in a punishment-cell.

But during its first four days he had invented three separate plans
of escape, and had determined upon the one which seemed the surest,
though longest.

When he again came up into the light, he was a marked man, under
Warder Black's constant suspicion.

Now, however, his expression was changed: he no longer belonged to
Colmoor, though he was there. Sometimes he felt like shouting at the
burden of his secret. In his impatience to proclaim it, he pined to
write to Loveday--but now his punishment had lost him that
privilege.

Meantime, the problem was to get ten good miles beyond Colmoor: a
hard one; but his brain had already accomplished a task far harder:
and the greater implied the less.

His first thought, when he had begun to plan, had been Loveday; his
second, that on no account could he permit Loveday to incur further
risk, or expense, for him; his third, that he might yet use Loveday
to any extent not involving risk or expense.

At the next weekly "School" he sat near a Thames-works hackle-maker,
who, though he could write, was no scholar, and was laboriously
spoiling a second letter-sheet, when Hogarth whispered him: "Can I
help you? I see it's to your mother. I could get her a quid from a
friend of mine".

"Well, I'm much obliged....!"

The laborious letter, after half an hour, had in it:

"If you go to 15, Cheyne Gardens, the gentleman will give you a
sovereign which he owed me for cutting down the elm in the beech-
wood at Teddington for him".

Now, Loveday lived at 15, Cheyne Gardens, and had only to see those
words "_the elm in the beechwood_," to scent a cypher from Hogarth.

He offered five pounds for that letter: but it was two weeks before
he decided upon the intended words: "Small chloroform--trenches--
rock".

There were several trenches, many rocks: yet one midnight, when a
blustering wind huddled the bracken, and the prison stood darkling,
wrapped in mystery, a lonely figure in an ulster was there; and
under each of three rocks he deposited two vials: for the formation
of only three gave the least chance of concealment.

What Hogarth's plan could be he racked his brain in vain to dream,
guessing that prisoners, on returning from the moor, must be
searched, even to the ears: Hogarth, therefore, could never use the
vial within the walls, and must mean to use it without--a
sufficiently wild proceeding. But the finding of the vials, was
sure: for the "rock" which Hogarth had had in mind was one of those
granite ones common on Colmoor, standing five feet high on a small
base; and one day he swept his hand among the gorse under it, and,
with a glad half-surprise, touched two vials.

Three days later he again swept his hand among the gorse, touched
the vials, breasted his handkerchief, laid the vials on it, and
presently contrived to tie them together with a twig.

At his feet now was a wheelbarrow full of marl, and two yards off
Warder Black, waiting for him to roll the barrow; but, inserting his
spade between a wheel and a side of the barrow, his back toward
Black, Hogarth, with a tug, bent the spade: then walked to Black.

"Look here", he said, "that spade isn't much good now...."

Black strode to look, Hogarth a little behind him: and at the
instant when the officer was a-stoop to lift the spade, Hogarth took
the vials from his breast, and laid them upright in the little
pocket of Black's tunic, near his bayonet-sheath and cartridge-box,
above the belt.

By the time the matter of the spade was settled, the great bell
rang, the gangs went marching over the old familiar level, up the
old path in the grass-mound on which the Palace stands, and so, in
lax order, like shabby French conscripts, powdered, toil-worn, into
the gates.

Then the search on parade: during which, as Black busily searched
him, Hogarth said: "Search well".

They were then led up to cells.

And the moment Hogarth's door closed upon him, he put his skilly-can
on the floor, and, with one stamp, stamped it out of shape; also he
broke his cup, and pocketed two fragments of it.

A few minutes afterwards, before cocoa, Black, trotting in heavy
haste here and there in the gallery, looked in to say: "Bath to-
night".

And Hogarth: "Warder! a word with you! sorry, I have trodden on my
can...."

Upon which Black went stooping to look, the can now standing on the
low shelf; and as he said "I shall report this", Hogarth, stooping,
with quick deftness had the vials picked from the thick pocket.

"Well, fall in", said Black to him; "better take your precious can,
and give it to a bath-room warder for the store-keeper to change".

Hogarth, as he passed out, placed the vials on the shelf over his
door, where they were secure, since cells were never searched; and,
the bathers having formed in single file, five feet between man and
man, away they moved and down--away and down--lost in space,
treading the journey of galleries, till, at the bottom, they passed
up a vaulted corridor, monastically dim, across a yard open to
starry sky, and into the door of a semi-detached, steep-roofed
building, which was the bath-house.

A row of thirty-five baths; a very long bench for undressing; in the
space between bench and baths three warders walking: such was the
bath-house: all whitewashed, galvanized iron, and rigour; but for
its old record of uneventfulness a scandal was preparing that night.

Outside the door a fourth officer paced, and a cord within rang a
little bell in one click, to tell when, the bathing over, the door
should be unlocked outside.

After giving up his can near the door to a warder, who laid it on
the bench, Hogarth undressed slowly; got off his boots; and now had
on only knickerbockers and stockings: he got off his stockings.

And the moment his bare soles touched the floor, he felt himself
once more agile on the ratlines, larky for a shore-row, handy in any
squall. Let them all come, therefore! He smiled; passed his palms
down his crib of lean ribs.

"Good gracious, why don't you hurry up there...?" an officer came
asking, stooping.

At "there" he saw stars-and-stripes, dropped upon his back: Hogarth
was away toward the door, while the bathers started with shouts,
though in no bosom arose any impulse to follow, the bath-house being
the centre of a maze of twenty unscaleable walls, prison within
prison.

But as for Hogarth, in such a dazzling flash did he dash toward the
door, that he had struck down the second officer before the outcry
of the first, and had pulled at the door-bell before the third could
cry _"Don't open!"_--a cry muffled into his maw by a cuff prompt as
thunder.

This third man, however, grasped the fugitive by the middle: and
while the overthrown two were running up, and the key without
seeking the lock, a short, venomous tussle was waged just near the
door, till Hogarth, wringing his naked body free, tossed his
antagonist by the knees to slide into the path of the two on-comers;
at the same time, catching up his battered can, and smashing it into
the face of the door-orderly, who now peeped in, he slipped through,
and was gone into a yard, small, of irregular shape, and dim, with
one wall-lantern, and but one egress (except the egress into the
prison-hall), namely a blind-alley between the laundry and carpet-
makers' building on one side, and stables on the other: blind alley,
yard, and all, being shut in by big buildings.

By the time the door-orderly opened his eyes, and one of the inside
three had rushed out, Hogarth had vanished; and these two, shrilling
whistles to reinforce the bath-room guard, pelted down the blind-
alley to effect, as they thought, a sure capture. But Hogarth was
not there.

Back they came trotting, breathless, rather at a loss. One panted:
"He must have run back into the great hall...."

The other panted: "He'd hardly do that--hiding in the yard still,
_must_ be. There's that little nook...."

The "little nook" is a three-sided space in a corner, very dark,
formed by one wall of the campanile, or bell-tower, together with a
wall of the laundry-house, and a third wall which shuts in the yard;
the entrance to it narrow, and one looking up within it seems to
stand at the bottom of a triangular well, split at one corner. It is
not far from the bathhouse, and into it Hogarth had really darted;
but when the officers came peering, no trace of him.

He had, in fact, gone up the lightning-conductor, which runs down a
bell-tower remarkably high, Colmoor having been built during the
Napoleonic wars for French prisoners at a time when the theory was
accepted that a lightning-conductor protects a space whose radius is
double the height of the conductor. The tower is a five-sided
structure with a Gothic window into which it is impossible to get
from the conductor, because a corner intervenes, and it is a feat to
swing from the conductor to the laundry-wall coping, and thence,
leaping up, to grip the window: at each of which ordeals Hogarth
hesitated, pierced with chills; to his observations from afar it had
seemed so much less stupendous; but in each case he dared, and
reached.

All this time the can was between his teeth.

Arrived on the window, his arms out groping, he felt a slanting
beam--climbed it--found it short-mounted upon a horizontal one, all
here, as he had expected, being a chaos of beams, raying every way.
Thrice he sneezed low, and felt cobwebs in his face.

And groping he went, seeking the great Bell of Colmoor, which he had
doomed, hearing sounds of the to-do, echoes that ran below, and the
vague shout of somebody, till he touched the flat top of the bell,
clamped to the swing-beam on which he sat astraddle; felt also that
along the top of the beam lay an iron bar; made sure that this was
in actual contact with the clamps of the bell: and, no longer
hesitating, set to work upon the can.

Tugging with his dog-teeth under the upper rim, he got a loose end,
and wrenched the rim off; then, tearing along the solder, got the
cylinder separated from the bottom; and, opening it out, had a sheet
of tin. And now, by the help of his fragments of cup, he set to
hack-sawing, breaking, tearing this into strips, no easy thing, in
spite of the thin-worn condition of the can: but finally had six
strips.

The edge of one strip he inserted under an end of the bar of iron on
the beam; then connected that strip with another by loops, slid
again to the window, and there lay connecting the six strips by a
smith's-trick, with skew loops, non-slipping, getting a tin string
five feet long. He then took the leap to the laundry coping, and
thence the spring to the conductor, this being all the more
ticklishly perilous because he could barely see it.

Hanging away now from the conductor by the left elbow, he reached
out the right arm across the corner to catch the tin, which stuck
toward him from the window: and he wound its end round the
conductor, electrically connecting the bell with the conductor.

And now, standing with one foot on a staple below the tin, he twice
sawed the conductor's soft metal with the fragments of cup, cutting
and tugging out three inches of it, thus isolating the conductor's
point atop from its earthing; then he tossed the piece cut out
behind the laundry-coping.

This done, he listened, cast a searching eye below, slid down the
rod.

The yard was at present silent, but as he moved to give himself up
in the prison-hall, five night-warders with bull's-eyes fell out,
still seeking him.

And as he knelt with clasped hands of supplication and bent bare
back, like a captured slave, they fell savagely upon him, and cried
one: "Well, of all the idiots...!"


XIX

THE GREAT BELL


The next morning Hogarth was not marched out, and near dinner-time
was summoned before the Governor. Here he stood in a cage of bars in
a room of "No.1" prison, devoted to prison-offences; and before him,
at a littered table, sat governor and chief warder, with the
witnesses of the outbreak near.

The case was gone into, the report made: whereupon the Governor
looked up and down the length of Hogarth, and suddenly gave vent to
a laugh.

"So, No. 76", said he, "this was the threatened escape?"

Hogarth was now all contrition and hanging head.

"I beg for mercy", he said, with a little smile.

"Oh, I am not your judge...Where were you when the officers were
looking for you in the yard?"

"I was hiding in that little nook".

"Confounded carelessness on someone's part...And what cut and
swelled your mouth?"

"I bashed into the wall in the nook" (The can had cut him!).

"You must have been mad!"

"Yes, sir".

During the next two weeks he had round his ankles a chain which,
rising in two loops, was fastened to a band round his waist; and he
was set to turn "the crank".

Finally, he was led forth to stand before the periodic Director,
who, after reading the report, turned to a volume of writing in
which was Hogarth's record: good--till lately; and the Director
addressed him with sternness, which yet was paternal: he would
sentence him to one month in a punishment cell, to two months in
chains, and to one dozen lashes.

And two days later he was led to the flogging-hall, which, as he
approached it, sent forth screams; the doctor looked at him and
consented; the Governor said: "Get it over".

Hogarth stripped to the waist, his teeth chattering: but not with
fear. On the contrary, he felt a touch of exultation.

The wrists of his outstretched arms having been bound to "the
triangle", the Governor gave the sign, the cat rose, and sang, and
fell.

Slowly up, and whistlingly down, rasping, reaping. At the seventh
shock he fainted: and thence onward had a long dream, in which he
saw Rebekah Frankl in Hindoo dress and jewellery, and she threw at
him a red rose black at heart with passion, and her body balanced in
dance, and her hands clapped at him.

During the next month he tholed the cold of that same punishment-
cell; and during the next was in his old cell, but in chains,
picking oakum. All this time, if he was aware of high winds by
night, he was in an agony, till the next day the great bell rang its
treble.

About the middle of February he was once more trenching in the open
air.

But a fear had stolen into his mind: for the string of tin was not
strong, and the winds of the last month may have dislocated it. In
any case, he might have to wait a year, two, ten....

Occasionally he would redden with suppressed and turbulent energy.

But on the 17th of March, toward evening, England was visited by a
storm long remembered, lasting three days, during which the poor
prisoners were comforted with rations of hot soup and cocoa.

On the morning of the fourth day when the gangs were once more taken
out Hogarth was hardly conscious of frigid winds or agued limbs: for
three days the great bell of Colmoor had not rung; and his ears were
open.

Of the prisoners, who, by practised instinct, get to know the moment
at which it should sound, three presently straightened up, spade in
hand, to glance at the prison: and suddenly heard--a sound.

A dull something somewhere--from the prison? unless it was some
shock of the wind...Hogarth gazed piteously into the faces near
him...No one seemed to have heard.

A few seconds, like eternities...Then he saw a warder look at his
watch; then--another! and--they glanced at the prison; and--they
approached each other; and--they laid whispering heads together.

Then--joy!--came five officers, wildly running from the prison
gates, calling, waving....

And now he knew, and smiled: the babble of that lalling tongue was
dumb.

And the very next day, when the afternoon-gangs were marching out,
they saw descending from a carriage before the Deputy Governor's
house a gentleman with a roll of diagram-paper--a bell-foundry
expert, summoned by telegraph from Cardiff.

Hogarth resolved to act that night.


XX

THE INFIRMARY


As soon as the cell-door clicked upon him, he commenced to work:
first took off his boots; then felt over the doorshelf for the
chloroform; wet his handkerchief with some of it: then inserted the
vials across the toes of his boots, which were a succession of
wrinkles, far too large; then put on the boots again.

He then lay on the floor, close to the low shelf; and, pressing the
handkerchief over his mouth and nose, breathed deep, knowing that in
four minutes, when he did not obey the order of "brooms out", his
cell would be opened.

As he sank deeper and deeper into dream, it was with a concentration
of his will upon one point--the handkerchief, which, if smelled by
anyone, would ruin all; and finally, as he drew the last gasp of
consciousness, he waved it languidly from him under the shelf; then,
with a sigh, was gone.

He had known that he must have about his body the unmistakable signs of
an abnormal condition in order to sleep a night in the infirmary--which
was what he wanted. And thither, when shakings and the bull's-eye had
sufficiently tested him, he was swung away, and the doctor's assistant
summoned.

Hogarth's pupils were hurriedly examined, his heartbeat tested; and
the freshman frowned, smelling an odour which, in another place,
might have been chloroform, but here was pharyngitis; and he
muttered, "Digitalis, perhaps...."

From a table Hogarth was swung to a bed by two of those well-behaved
convicts who act as hospital-orderlies, and there two hours later
had all his wits about him, and a racking headache.

His first thought was his boots--expecting to find them under his
stretcher, and himself in flannels; but he had them still on, and
also his work-clothes, humanity to the sick in the first stages not
being in the Colmoor code.

He spent half an hour in stealthily tearing a square foot from his
shirt-tail; then, weary and sick, went to sleep.

When, soon after 3 A.M. his eyes again opened, all was still. He lay
in a long room, rather dim, in the midst of a row of stretchers
which were shut in by bars containing locks and gates, and on the
other side of the room a row of stretchers, shut in by bars. At a
table in the middle, on which were bottles, lint, graduated glasses,
sat a warder, with outstretched legs and fallen head: near him,
standing listless, a convict hospital-orderly, who continually edged
nearer the stove; and, half-way down the room, another.

Occasionally there were calls from the sick-beds--whispered shouts--
apologetic and stealthy, as of men guiltily conscious of the luxury
of being ill; but neither night-warder nor orderlies made undue
haste to hear these summonses. There was, beside, an octagonal
clock, which ticked excessively in the stillness, as though the
whole place belonged to it.

Hogarth took off his boots under his blanket, and from them took out
the vials; then, sitting up, commenced to call the warder, at the
same time wetting the torn piece of shirt with some of the fluid.

"All right, I'm coming--shut up!" said the warder, but did not come.

So Hogarth grew loud; and the warder, presently rousing his drowsy
bulk, unlocked the gate of that compartment, as Hogarth said to
himself: "Do it handy..."

And as the warder stooped, Hogarth clapped the rag upon his mouth
and nose. A struggle followed a muffled sob, both standing upright
now, till the warder began to paw the air, sank, toppled upon the
bed, whereupon Hogarth slipped into the blanket again, and called
out in the voice of the warder: "Come here, Barrows--see if this man
is dead ".

He had now drawn the warder over him, holding up his chest with one
arm, had also poured chloroform upon the rag, and when the convict-
orderly came, Hogarth, by means of a short struggle, had him asleep,
then seized the warder's truncheon and keys, and ran out in his
stockinged feet.

At that sight, the sick, the dying, the two rows of stretchers, were
up on elbow, gazing with grins. To the second convict-orderly who
came running to meet him Hogarth hissed: "Not a word--or I brain you
with this! If I tie your feet, you won't have to answer for
anything. Come along...."

He was an old fellow, and when he realized the impending truncheon,
the menace of Hogarth's eyes, and the silence of the warder, he
permitted himself to be dragged toward Hogarth's stretcher; and his
feet were quickly knotted in his own stockings.

Now again Hogarth ran: but not many steps, when he felt himself
tapped on the back, and, glancing in a horror of alarm, saw one of
the two patients who had occupied with him his cage of bars--a wiry,
long-faced Cockney shop-boy, who had had his ankle crushed by a rock
at the quarry.

"Are you off?" he asked.

"That's _my_ business--"

"No, you don't. Part, or I give the alarm".

"What is it? Do you want to come with me?"

"That's about it".

"But--your foot's sick, you fool".

"You'll carry me in your awms, as a father beareth his children...."

"You are cool! What are you in for?"

"Murder, my son-red, grim, gory murder!"

"Guilty?"

"Guilty, ya'as. What do _you_ think?"

"Then you may go to hell".

"_'Ell_ is it? I'm _there_: and if I linger longer loo in it, you
linger, too, swelp me Gawd!"

Hogarth was nonplussed.

"But the foot..."

"Never mind the _foot_. Foot's still good for a run. Do we go
shares?"

"Come along, then".

"But you ain't 'alf up to snuff, I can see, though you are pretty
smart in your own way: I'd 'ave felt the confidence of a son in you,
if you 'adn't overlooked that wine--"

To Hogarth's dismay, he turned back to the table, put a black
bottle, half full, to his lips, and with tilts anc stoppages set to
gulp it, while eager jokes, touched with jealousy, began to jeer
from the beds.

"Lawd Gawd, that was good!" said the Cockney with upturned eyes,
"and what do I behold?--broth, ye gawds!"

Now a saucepan of cold broth was at his lips; and not till he had
drunk all did he run after Hogarth into the other arm of the ward,
where one of the keys unlocked the door at its end, and they passed
out into the infirmary exercise-hall, now dark, Hogarth dragging the
Cockney, who limped, and kept up a prattle of tipsy ribaldries.

Then, emerging upon a platform of slabs, from which the jump into
the infirmary exercise-yard is twenty feet, Hogarth leapt. The
Cockney stood hesitating on the brink.

"As sure as my name's 'Arris, you'll be the bloomin' ruin of me..."
he said aloud.

"_Sh-h-h_", went Hogarth, "one more word, and I leave or knock you
speechless".

Now at last Harris jumped, Hogarth catching him, and they ran across
the yard northerly, Harris complaining of cold, being in hospital
flannels, his feet bare, Hogarth bitterly regretting the burden of
this companion, meditating on deserting him. Accordingly, when they
had run down a passage, and were confronted by a great gate, spiked
a-top, Hogarth said: "I'll get up first", and, forcing the small end
of the truncheon into the space at the hinges, he got foot-hold from
which he caught the top hinge and scaled, a feat of which he
considered Harris incapable; and, instead of helping him up, leapt
down with a new feeling of lightness, hearing from the other side
"Dastardly treachery...!"

Again he ran through dark night wild with winds wheeling snowflakes;
and, seeing in the unpaved court in which he now was a clothes-line
supported on stakes, he seized both, to run with them to where the
court is bounded by the great outer wall: for though it is thirty
feet of sheer rock, the mere fact of stakes being found there, and
of a vanished rope, would furnish grounds for the belief that he had
scaled it: he therefore leant the stakes against it, and kept the
rope.

About to turn, he felt his back touched; and, spinning round, saw
Harris panting.

"There's a friend that sticketh closer than any bloomin' brother,
Mr. 76", Harris said. "Try that game on again, and I give myself up;
and where will _you_ be then?"

"You silly wretch!" said Hogarth: "before I am free, there'll be a
hundred difficulties and pains. Are you prepared to undergo them?
You couldn't, if you tried".

"Bear ye one another's burdens, it _is_", said Harris: "with thee by
me what need I fear? Lawd Gawd, that wine was good! it's got into my
poor 'ead, I believe. On, general; where thou leadest, I will
follow".

Hogarth looked at him, half inclined to knock him down, and half to
shelter, and save.

"All right", said he. "Can you climb?"

"Climb, yes, like a bag of monkeys".

"Come, then".

He mounted three low steps before four doors at the north end of the
infirmary buildings, where, as he had observed from the moor, a
spout runs up the wall at its east end; and up this he began to
climb.

"'Old on!" called Harris: "I can't do that lot".

"_Sh-h-h!_--you must!--come--"

Harris made three attempts before he reached the first footrest, and
there stuck, vowing in loud whispers that he would no further go,
and Hogarth had to come back, and encourage him up. Finally, they
went running southward on the leads between the infirmary roof and
its coping, and had hardly reached the south end when a whistle
shrilled, and they saw a warder run across the exercise-yard with a
lantern.

"Stoop!" whispered Hogarth.

Crouching, they stole along the south coping, and thence dropped to
a flat cistern-top, Hogarth, with a painful "_Sh-h-h_", catching
Harris as he fell, for the signs of alarm and activity every moment
increased.

Up a series of little brick steps, the base of a chimney over the
kitchen--then across another stretch of leads beneath which is the
tailor's shop--then, stealing in shadow under the beams of
overhanging eaves by a garret window, behind which was a light, and
someone moving--then a spring of three feet between two cornices--
then a running walk at a height of a hundred feet along a beading
four inches wide, holding on with the upstretched arms--then, with
course changed from south to east, along more leads--then a climb of
ten feet up a glazed main--and now they were skulking behind the
coping of the great No. 2 prison.

Now, contiguous with the back of the bath-house is a wall which runs
from No. 2 prison to the bell-tower, dividing the bath-house yard
from the bell-yard; but the top is not horizontal, being lower at
the bell-tower end, neither is it broad, and to reach it from the
prison coping a drop of seven feet is necessary: this Harris refused
to do. "Not for Joe", said he: "I've already run my 'ead into enough
perils by land and sea on your account. If this is what you've
brought me out moonlighting here for...."

Hogarth did not wait, but disappeared over the side: and Harris,
after five minutes' pleadings, followed. They then drew on the belly
to the bell-tower; and here again Harris refused the leap to the
conductor. When finally he dared, and Hogarth sought to steady him,
as he came sprawling upon the rod, both went gliding down, till
checked by a staple.

But they climbed again; Hogarth undid the half-fused string of tin
from the conductor, swung to the laundry coping, caught Harris,
leapt to the window, drew up Harris; and was ensconced far up among
the beams in thick darkness in the belfry an hour before daybreak.

At this time the great gates were open, and the moor being scoured
for the two.


XXI

IN THE DEEP


They had not been ten minutes in the tower when Harris began to
whine of the cold; whereupon Hogarth took off his slop-jacket and
waistcoat, and put them upon the Cockney.

As from two sound-escapes far down near the bell some twilight came
in, near eight Hogarth descended, working from beam to beam, to find
that on one side the bell-metal had been melted into a lumpish mass,
its rim shrivelled up, leaving an empty space under the motto
_Laudate Domino_ (mistake for _Dominum_) _omnes gentes_; and on the
opposite side ran a crack from top to rim. Sliding still lower on a
slanting beam, he could look obliquely upward into the bell's
interior, and see the clapper, a mass weighing eight hundredweight,
and so long, that quite down at the bell's rim were two hollows
where it had constantly struck. It, too, had been blasted; but the
bell-rope hung intact from a short beam at right angles to the swing
beam; and, having found this much, he searched where he had left the
bottom of his tin can, and clambered back with it into the upper
regions.

About eleven, lying along two beams, they could see the portal below
opened, and four men came in, looking unreal and small; whereupon
the leverage wheel was pulled, the swing-beam swung, the bell struck
the clapper, and throughout the tower growled grum sounds: after
which the four stood talking half an hour, and went away.

A little later--it must have been after the forty minutes' dinner-
interval--about twenty convicts entered with two warders, bearing
three ladders. When these had been fastened together and set up, and
the leverage wheel removed, they went away.

It was evidently to be slow work. Not till about four did a solitary
man mount the ladder, and take stand, far down under the bell,
gazing up a long while, with stoops, and changes of posture. Hogarth
thought that it was the bell-foundry expert whom he had seen; but
could only guess: for all here was dim and remote.

By now he had sawed the clothes-line into two pieces with the tin,
one piece eight feet, the other much longer--had intended tearing
his clothes into strips for ropes, but the clothes-line was still
better. In both ropes he made knots for hand-hold, a large knot at
one end of the short one, and he attached the string of tin to the
other end. Descending now, he tied the longer rope round the
swingbeam, let himself down to the rim of the bell, and with the
right hand pushed the tin into the hole in which the clapper swung,
reaching up, until the tin over-balanced, ran, and toppled down
beside the clapper; drawing the tin now, he brought the rope down
till it was stopped by the knot; and now, by a swing off from rope
to rope, could climb into the bell. He then reascended, taking the
longer rope, and the tin, with him.

As night fell, he judged that by the next he would succumb. Happily,
Harris, who had eaten later than he, was snoring in a nook; but
toward morning began to whine again, and sulk, and kept it up all
the day. Not a soul now entered, and as the blackness of night once
more filled the place, Harris threw up the sponge, with "Here goes
for this child....!" Hogarth flew across the space which divided
them, and a quarrel of cats ensued, both being under the influence
of the fury called "hunger-madness". It was only when Harris felt
the grip of Hogarth at his windpipe that he squealed submission,
whereupon Hogarth threw himself away; and half the night they sat,
nothing but four eyes, eyeing each other.

That night what was a revival of the great gale took place, belling
like bucks about their heads, and noising through the tower in many
a voice. This so increased their sense of desolation, that even the
heart of Hogarth fainted, they like castaways on some ocean whose
glooms no sunrise ever goldens; and now a doubt arose whether, even
if the bell were removed on the morrow, Harris would have strength
to cling on during the descent.

However, early the next day hope revived when five men entered, four
mounting among the beams to the swing-beam with tools, one at the
ladder-head shouting up orders; and Hogarth, when they had gone,
whispered Harris: "They have been unscrewing the sockets in which
the bell-beam swings".

"Let them unscrew away", said Harris, his chin shivering on his
hand.

Five more hours; during which only once did three men enter, seeming
to do nothing but talk, with upward glances.

But at three it was evident that there was considerable to-do,
though above there the row of the winds drowned all sound. A crowd,
chiefly of convicts, passed in and out; then twelve men, one after
the other, ran up the ladder, and thence climbed among the beams,
with six cables. Half went to the east, half to the west, side of
the bell; and three of the cables were fastened round the swing-beam
near one end, three near the other end; one three were then cast
over a beam higher than the swing-beam, to the north of it; the
other three cast over a beam to the south of it; and the six ends
lowered--operations which Hogarth, lying on his face, could just
see; and the twelve had hardly begun to descend, when he saw a lorry
backed into the gateway, filling half 1 the area of the tower;
whereupon over a hundred convicts were swarming over and round it.

"Now", said Hogarth; and he hurried down, tacking his way with
slides and runs among the intricate beams, tied the rope to a beam
above the swing-beam, and let himself down to the bell's rim;
reached out then, caught the knotted rope that was within the bell,
and climbed, the clapper now so rough, that hand and knee found
grip; and he spent a minute in estimating his power of holding on
with one arm, and with both, to its support-shaft.

And now he whispered Harris, and caught and half-sustained the
Cockney.

Now they could hear echoes of the tongues below; and now Harris,
clinging alternate with Hogarth, arms and legs, face to face, by
rope and shaft and clapper, whispered: "But-good Lord-look 'ere-
there are some people coming up!"

Four convicts were indeed climbing: but even directly beneath the
bell, where it was impossible to come, they would hardly have
distinguished the forms huddled in its dark cavern, and their aim
was higher, to stand ready, when the beam should lift, to swing it
diagonally across the square of beams which had supported it, so
that it might find space to descend. And soon the bell-beam stirred
at the tightening ropes: the fugitives felt themselves swinging,
rising, poised--descending.

They were dizzily aware of shouted orders, the creaking of the
toiling, slipping ropes, little jolts and stoppages, two hundred
eyes blinking up, not seeing their cringed-up limbs--unnecessary
cautious: for the nearer they descended to-ward the half-light, the
surer did the area of the lorry make their invisibility. At last
they were near; the bell lingered, swinging; babel was around them;
the Governor's voice; a cheer: the bell was on the lorry.

Someone struck the bell with a hammer, there was talk, swarmings
round it, then shoulders pushed at the lorry wheels, which squealed
and moved amid a still fussier babel drawn by four horses, and seven
yoke of cattle. The fugitives could hear the opening of the great
gate, the laborious exit, and, in a moment's pause, again the
Governor talking, it seemed far off, to the expert....

Wearily creaked the cart--beyond the moor--to a country road.

Now chattering words came from Harris: "All damned fine! I don't
deny that you know your way about--"

"Way out", said Hogarth.

"Yes, a gamesome sort of cock you are in all weathers...but what
next?"

"'Next' is to fall upon your knees and worship me, you cur".

"Thou shalt worship the Lawd thy Gawd", chattered Harris; "no
bloomin' fear! This is only a new kind of punishment cell. You've
got me in; 'ow are you going to get me out?"

Hogarth believed that the lorry was _en route_ for the railway, and
hoped to escape in the transfer of the bell; but that night lorry
and bell slept in a shed outside a village _en route_ for the sea.

At four A.M. they were again _en route_, and at intervals during the
day, opening their now feeble and sleep-infected eyes, could hear
the hoots of the two cattlemen, the sound of winds, the rowdy gait
of the crooked-legged oxen, and stoppages for drink or rest, and
anon an obstruction, with shouting and fuss. It was night before the
waggon came to rest on a jetty, the elaborate day's journey done.

The fugitives were then deep in sleep, and only awoke at the rattle
of a steam-crane in action above them, to find the bell beginning to
tilt, lift and swing; then they were on a deck; and soon afterwards
knew that it was a steamer's, when they heard the bray of her
whistle, and presently were aware of blaring winds, and billows of
the sea.

Harris was for then and there crying out, but Hogarth, now his
master, said: "To-morrow morning"; and they fell again into their
morbid slumber.

When they again awoke, uproar surrounded them, voices, a heaven-high
shouting of quenched fires and screaming steams; moreover, the bell
was leaning steeply, they two huddled together at its edge.

Harris began to bellow: but he was not heard, or not heeded....
There had been a collision.

"If you can't swim, better catch hold of me", Hogarth shouted--
"there will be--"

But the earth turned turtle, and Hogarth felt himself struck on the
shoulder, flung, and dragged down, down, into darkness.

After an upward climb and fight to slip the clutch of the ship's
suction, in the middle of a heavy sea he managed to get off his
clothes, and set to swimming, whither he did not know, a toy on
mountains of water.

Exultation raged in him--a crazy intoxication--at liberation
attained, at the sensation of warmth, at all that water and waste of
Nature.

But within ten minutes it is finished: he shivers, his false
strength changing to paltriness, the waves washing now over his
head; and now he is drowsing...drowning...


XXII

OLD TOM


He continued, however, to swim after his conscious efforts ceased:
for his body was found next morning on a strip of Cornish sand
between Gorran and Mevagissey, washed by every sheet of surf.

His rescuer, a shrimp-fisher, occupied one of three cots perched on
a ravine; and there on the evening of the second day he opened his
eyes on a settee, four children screaming in play around him; he so
far having been seen only by a reporter from Mevagissey, and the
doctor from Gorran, who, on his wide rounds, had been asked into the
cottage.

The same night Hogarth spoke to the fisher: told him that he was not
a wrecked sailor, had reasons for avoiding observation, and would
pay for shelter and silence: whereat the fisher, who was drinking
hot beer, winked, and promised; and the next day took for Hogarth a
telegram, signed "Elm Tree", to Mevagissey, asking of Loveday five
pounds.

Finally, one midnight, after two weeks of skulking, he reached
Whitechapel, where, the fact of his brown skin now giving him the
idea of orientalizing himself, at a Jew's, in a little interior
behind the counter, he bought sandals, a caftan, a black sudayree,
an old Bagdad shawl for girdle, and a greenish-yellow Bedouin head-
cloth, or kefie, which banded the forehead, draped the face like a
nun's wimple, and fell loose. For these he discarded the shrimp-
man's clothes; and now dubbed himself "Peter the Hermit".

For he meant to start-a Crusade.

At a police-station on the third day he saw a description of
himself: three moles, bloodshot eye, white teeth, pouting mouth; but
over the moles now hung the head-cloth.

For several days he lay low in a garret, considering himself,
abandoning himself to sensuality in cocoa, vast buns, tobacco:
rioting above all in the thought of the secret truth which lay in
his head.

Up to now, not a word to anyone about it; but on the seventh night
he spoke.

It was in some "Cocoa Rooms" in a "first-class room", strewn with
sawdust, where, as he sat alone, another man, bearing his jug, came
and sat; and soon he addressed Hogarth.

"Talk English?"

"I am an Englishman", answered Hogarth.

"What, in those togs? What countryman?"

"Norfolk".

"Know Manchester?"

"I was there one day".

"Difference between Manchester and London, isn't there? I am a
Manchester man, I am. All the difference in the world. This cold,
stiff, selfish city. Londoners, eh? A lot of peripatetic
tombstones!"

And so he went on; this being his whole theory of God and Man: that
Londoners are peripatetic tombstones, but Manchester-men just the
other way--seemed a mechanic, brisk-eyed, small; a man who had read;
but now, evidently, down on his luck.

"Then, why come to London?"--from Hogarth.

"Looking for work",--with a shrug--"looking for a needle in a bundle
of hay. What would you have? the whole place overrun with Jews.
England no longer belongs to the English, that's the long and short
of it".

Hogarth looked him in the face. "Did England belong to the English
before the Jews came?"

"How do you mean? Of course it did".

"Which part of it?"

"Why, all of it".

"But fix your mind upon some particular piece of England--some
street, or field, that you know--and then tell me: did that belong
to the English?"

"Belonged to some Englishman".

"But you don't mean to say that some Englishman is the English?"

"Ah, yes, I know what you are driving at", said the mechanic, with a
patronizing nod: "but the point is this: that, apart from vague
theorizing, a man did manage to make a good living before these dogs
overran the country".

"But--a _good_ living? How much did you make?--forty shillings a
week? toiling in grime six days, sleeping the seventh? I call that a
deadly living".

"Well, I _don't_, you see. Besides, I made, not forty, but forty-
_five_ shillings, under the sliding-scale".

"Yes, but no brave nation would submit one day to such petty
squalors after it was shown the way to escape them".

"There _is_ no way", said the mechanic: "there are the books, and
the talkers; but the economic laws that govern the units like you
and me are as relentless as gravitation. Don't believe anyone who
talks to you about 'ways of escape'".

"But suppose someone has a new thought?"

"There can be no new thoughts about _that_. The question has long
since been exhausted".

"Well, come "--with sudden decision--"I will tell you a thought of
my own ". And he told.

If the English people paid the rent for England to themselves--to
their government--instead of to a few Englishmen, then, by one day's
labour in six, Englishmen would be much more rich in all things than
a fisherman, by one day's labour in six, was rich in fish.

The expression which he awaited on the face before him was one of
illuminated astonishment; but, with a chill in his nerves, he saw
the workman's lips curve.

"Bah!" said the Manchester man, "that is an exploded theory!"

_Exploded!!!_

Hogarth was rather pale.

Yet he knew that it was true....Who, then, could have been
exploding the Almighty?

"Who has exploded it?"

"Been exploded again and again!" said the Manchester man; "of all
the theories of land-tenure, that is about the weakest: _I_ should
know, for I've studied them all. The fact is, no change in the
system of land-tenure will have the least effect upon the lot of the
masses; would only make things worse by unsettling the country--if
it didn't mean a civil war".

"I begin to see".

Hogarth got up, walked home meditating: and suddenly blushed.

It was known! by mechanics in cocoa-rooms!--that secret thing of
his secret cell. And it was not believed!

As for him, what was he now doing outside Colmoor? That question he
asked himself, as he sat unsandaling his feet; and he commenced to
dress himself again: but paused--would first see Loveday.

Accordingly, the next night, the two friends met at Cheyne Gardens.

And a long time they sat silent, Loveday feeding his eyes upon his
friend's face, that hard, rounded brow which seemed harder, and
frowned now, that gallant largeness of eye which seemed now wilder,
and that manly height, which seemed Mahomet's in the Oriental dress.

"But where have you been for five weeks?" asked Loveday.

"Skulking, and thinking. But about my sister...."

"Do not ask..." said Loveday.

There was a long silence.

"Did not O'Hara tell you to make no more efforts for my escape?"
asked Hogarth.

"Who is O'Hara?"

"Why, the priest who escaped, instead of me, through the copse".

"O'Hara was not the name he gave me; and no, he said nothing about
that. I got him off to America, and only saw him twice. I thought
him rather--But why didn't you escape youself?"

"I thought it improper".

"But you did finally?"

"For a reason: you remember the association which I was forming to
answer the question as to the cause of misery? Well, that question I
have answered for myself in prison".

"Really? Tell me!"

Hogarth absently took up a water-colour drawing from the table, and
turned it round and round, leaning forward on a knee, as he told how
the matter was. Meantime, he kept his eyes fixed upward upon
Loveday's face, who stood before him.

In the midst of his talk Loveday scratched the top of his head,
where the hair was rather thin, and said he, twisting round:
"Forgive me-let me ring for some brandy-and-soda--"

Hogarth stood briskly up.

"What I say, I can see, is not new to you?" said he.

"No, not new", Loveday confessed: "I believe that it is quite an
ancient theory; there are even savage tribes whose land-tenure is
not unlike what you advocate--the Basutos, for example".

"And are these Basutos richer, happier, prettier fellows than
average Englishmen?"

"Oh, beyond doubt. Don't suppose that I am gainsaying you: I am only
showing you that the theory is not new--"

"But why do you persist in calling it a _theory?_ Is the fact that
one and one make two a _theory?_"--Hogarth's brow growing every
moment redder.

"What can one call it?"

"Call it what you like! But do you believe it?"

"It is quite possibly true; and now that you say it I believe it;
but I have never seriously considered the matter"

"Why not?"

"Because--I don't know. It is out of my line".

"Your line! Yet you are a human being--"

"Well, partly, yes: say--a novelist".

"Do not jest! It is incredible to me that you have written book
after book, and knew of this divine thing, and did not cram your
books with it!"

Loveday flushed. "You misunderstand my profession; and as to this
theory of land-tenure, let me tell you: it will never be realized--
not in England. Anyway, it would mean civil war...."

Again those words! "Civil war...."

And as, for the second time, he heard them, Hogarth dashed the
picture which he held to the ground, shattering glass and frame:
which meant that, then and there, he washed his hands of the world
and its wagging; meant also his return to Colmoor.

He dashed from the room without a word; down the stairs; out into
the street.

As he ran along the King's Road, he asked a policeman the way to the
nearest police-station, then ran on through a number of smaller
streets, seeking it, till, at a corner, he stopped, once more
uncertain, the night dim and drizzling.

He was about to set off again, when, behind him, he heard: "Excuse
me, mister--could you give a poor man a penny to get a night's
lodging?"

Turning, he saw--old Tom Bates: still in the guernsey; but very
senile and broken now.

The fish-rich fisher...! he had come to this...

Hogarth had twenty-eight shillings about him, and, without
disclosing himself, put hand to pocket to give them all, just as the
old man reached up to his ear to say: "It's the lumbago; I got it
very bad; but it won't be long now. It wur a bad day for me as ever
I come to Lunnon! I'm Norfolk born, I am: and I had eight sons,
which the last was Fred, who, they say, met his death in Colmoor...."

At that word, "Fred", Hogarth started: for under the elm in the
beech-wood between Thring and Priddlestone Fred had concealed a
thing fallen from heaven, which could be sold for--a thousand
pounds.

That would keep the fisher rich during the few days that remained to
him!

But the old man could hardly go himself; if he could, would bungle:
the thing was heavy--on the lord-of-the-manor's land....

Do a kind act, Hogarth. He would see the old place, his father's
grave; and there was a girl who lived in the Hall at Westring whom
it was a thrilling thing to be near, even if one did not see....

"Here are two shillings", said he, in an assumed voice: "and if you
be at this spot, at this hour, on Thursday night coming, you shall
have more. Don't fail".

Again he ran, and took train, two hours later, for Beccles.


XXIII

UNDER THE ELM


His risk of arrest here, round about his old home, was enormous, and
he drew the Bedouin kefie well round his face, skulking from the
station to the "Fen", northward, where he got an urchin to buy him a
paper lantern in a general shop, and now trudged up to Priddlestone,
then down through meadows to the beech-wood, the night rough with
March winds.

It was not the winds, however, which made him draw close his Arab
cloak, but his approach to the elm: there, one night, he had seen a
naked black man! there had fallen the Arab Jew.

He stood twenty yards from the tree, till, with sudden resolution,
he strode, soon had the lantern ruby, and since the grave of "the
affair" had been digged with a piece of wood, for such a piece he
went seeking, having thrown off his caftan.

Instead, he found the rusted half-blade of a spade, and commenced to
dig round the roots, the lantern shine reddening a face strangely
agitated, uncertainty of finding what he sought heightening his
excitement: for the earth showed no disturbance, and since three
years had passed since that night of Bates in the wood, the object
might have been already unearthed. After an hour his back was
aching, his hands dabbled, his brow beaded, while the night-winds
blew, the light now was commoved, and now glowed a steady red; and
still he grovelled.

Presently, as he shovelled in a circle, always two feet deep, moving
the light as he moved, he saw on the top of a shovelful of marl--a
twig: barkless, black, cracked--_scorched!_

To an immoderate degree this thing agitated him--some whisper in the
back of his head--some half-thought: he began now to root furiously,
with a frowning intentness.

But suddenly he shuddered: a finger seemed to touch his shoulder
behind; and he twisted with wild eyes, caught up the light, peered,
saw no black man--nothing: but quite five minutes he stood defiant,
with clenched fists; then resumed the work, though with a constant
feeling now that he was being watched by the unseen seers.

After two new strokes he struck upon something hard, and, digging
eagerly round it, found a quart-can, full of earth. And instantly
all doubt vanished: for this must have been the beer-can carried by
Bates.

Strong curiosity now wrought in Hogarth, a zeal to lay eyes upon
that object which had careered through the heights of space to find
that beech-wood and that elm-tree; and during fifteen minutes his
little implement digged with the quick-plying movement of a distaff-
shuttle, he fighting for breath, anon casting a flying wild glance
behind, but still digging.

Now, frequently, he came upon burned objects, twigs, cinders. Even
the marl had a scorched look; and his agitation grew to ecstasy.

Something very singular had happened to his mind with regard to this
"affair" of Bates: Bates had said that it had fallen on the asteroid
night; and O'Hara had told him--falsely, indeed--that a piece of the
asteroid, fallen upon the French coast, had had diamonds; yet,
somehow, never once had his mind associated the Fred Bates "affair"
with the thought of diamonds, but only with the "thousand pounds"
which Bates had been promised by old Bond. So at the moment when he
had begun to dig, his whole thought was of "a thousand pounds"; but,
somehow, by the time his implement at last grated against something
two feet down, that word "diamonds" had grown up in his brain.

But diamonds! In the midst of his shovelling the thought flashed
through him: "The world is God's! and to whom He wills He gives
it...."

Now at last the thing lay definitely before him: he grated the spade
from end to end, scraping away the marl; and it was very rough....

The size and shape of a man's leg, and red, anyway in the red
lantern-shine--his sight dim--he moved and saw in an improbable
dream; and when he tried to lift the object and failed, for a long
time he sat on the edge of the trench, passing one palm across and
across his forehead, till the lantern-light leapt, and went out.

He sprang upright then--awake, sure: they were diamonds, those bits
of glass, big celestial ones, not of earth, in hundreds; when he
passed his hand along the meteorite he felt it leprous, octahedron,
dodecahedron, large and small: if they were truly diamonds, he
divined that their owner must be as wealthy as some nations.

About three in the morning he managed to raise the meteorite;
refilled the trench; and since it still rained, rolled the meteorite
to the hollow of the elm, put on his caftan, and with his back on
the interior of the tree, his feet on the meteorite, tumbled into a
wonderful slumber.


XXIV

FRANKL SEES THE METEORITE


He was awaked by a footstep, and, starting, saw rocking along the
forest path one Farmer Pollock, wearing now fez and tassel, and he
saw his clothes all clay, and, with a smile of fondness, saw how,
even beneath its grime, the meteor dodged and jeered, with frolic
leers, in the beams of a bright morning that seemed to him the
primal morning, a fresh wedding-morning, swarming with elves and
shell-tinted visions, imps and pixy princes, profligate Golcondas.

Going first to the spot where he had digged, to give to the surface
a natural look, he trampled the lantern into the mire, threw the tin
can far, then, taking a quantity of marl, plastered the meteorite,
to cover its roughness; then boldly left it, starting out with
consummate audacity for Thring, where everybody, police and all,
knew him well.

A singular light now in his eyes, an evil pride; and he had the step
of a Prince in Prettyland. Corresponding to an inward majesty, of
which, from youth, he had been conscious, he now felt an outward,
and had not been awake eight minutes when his brain was invaded by
plans--plans of debauchery, palaces, orgy, flying beds of ivory
arabesqued in fan-traceries of sapphire, in which Rebekah Frankl
lolled, and smiled; and on toward Thring he stepped, prince new-
crowned, yet by old heredity, high exalted above laws, government,
and the entire little muck of Man.

At one point where the path ran close to Westring-park proper, the
park on higher ground, a grass-bank seven feet high dividing them,
he saw a-top of the bank in caftan, priest-cap, and phylacteries,
taking snuff--Baruch Frankl.

Hogarth skipped up, and stood before the Jew, having drawn his face-
cloth well forward.

"What's the row?" asked Frankl.

"Could you give a poor man a job?"

"You a Jew?"

"Yes", replied Hogarth, not dreaming how truly: "London born".

"A Froom?"

"I keep the fasts".

"What you doing about here?"

"Tramping".

"Fine mess you are in".

"I slept in a hollow tree down yonder--an elm tree".

"Well, there's many a worse shake-down than that. Who are you? Ever
been about here before?"

"I was once".

"You put me in mind of an old chum of mine....Well, here's half-a-
crown for you to go on with".

"Make it a crown", said Hogarth, "and get me to clean up down there;
in a shocking state with mast and leaves".

Frankl considered. "All right, I don't mind".

"I shall want a spade, and--a barrow".

"Go down the path yonder, till you come to the stables, and tell
them".

Frankl resumed his musing stroll, and Hogarth ran for the barrow.

In twenty minutes he was again at the elm tree, and, with a scheme
in him for seeing Rebekah, heaped the barrow with refuse, pushed it
between a beck and the wood, till, wearying of this, he was about to
get the meteorite into the barrow, when he had the mad thought that
Frankl must be made to see and touch it, so set off to seek him: and
a few yards brought him face to face with Frankl.

"Well, how goes it?" asked the Jew.

"There is a weight there which I can't lift", said Hogarth. "Then
you must do the other thing. Don't lift it, and you don't get the
pay. What weight is it?"

"It is here".

Hogarth led him, led him, pointing. Frankl kicked the meteorite.

"What is it?" he asked.

"It can't be a branch", said Hogarth; "too heavy--more like a piece
of old iron".

"Well, slip into it. A strapping fellow like you ought to be able to
do that bit".

"But suppose it's valuable?"

"I make you a present of it, as you are so hard up".

Now Hogarth, by tilting the barrow, with strong effort of four
limbs, got the meteorite lodged, while Frankl, his smile lifting the
wrinkles above his thick moustache, watched the strain: then, with
arms behind, went his contemplative way.

Hogarth rolled the barrow toward Thring.


XXV

CHURCH ARCHITECTURE


It was already eleven o'clock, the sun shining in a bright sky,
under which the country round the Waveney lay broad to the hills of
mist which seemed to encompass the valley; yet, when one came to
them no hills were there, but were still beyond. When Hogarth came
out from the wood upon a footbridge, to his right a hand-sower was
sowing broadcast, with a two-handed rhythm, taking seed, as he
strode, from his scrip; and to the left ran a path between fields to
an eminence with a little church on it; straight northward some
Thring houses visible, and north-east, near the river, Lagden Dip
orchard. Only two stooping women in fields near Thring could Hogarth
see; also, still further, a gig-and-horse whose remote motion was
imperceptible; also the trudging two-handed process of the sower
nourishing the furrows. But for these, England, supposed to be
"overcrowded", seemed a land once inhabited, but abandoned.

To Hogarth the whole, so familiar, looked uplifted now, the sunlight
of a more celestial essence. Westring he would buy--though one
memorable night in Colmoor he had arrived at the knowledge that it
was not just that Westring should be anyone's; but then what one
bought with his own diamonds was surely his own--his name being
Richard.

He had passed the bridge, when, glancing to the left, he saw a fifth
person in the landscape--a man under a sycamore near the church,
gazing up, with hung jaw, at the apse window--dressed in a grey
jacket, but a clerical hat, and he had a note-book, in which he
wrote, or drew. Hogarth, whose mind was in weathercock state, rolled
the barrow to the hill, left it, went stealing fleetly up, and
gripped the man's collar, to whisper: "In the King's name I arrest
you".

The man's hand clapped his heart, as he turned a face of terror.

"There is--some mistake--My God! Are you--?"

"Yes".

"Hogarth?"

"Who else?"

"But you have killed me! My heart--"

"Serves you right. Why didn't you give your right name to Loveday?
And what are you doing here?"

"I was just examining this lovely old church, with its two south
aisles, and one north, like St. John's at Cirencester. When the
church fell in England, architecture was abolished--But as to why I
am in Norfolk at all, I am skulking: and here is as another place.
Your friend packed me off to America; but for some reasons I should
prefer Golmoor--old Colmoor, eh? I fear I am a voluptuary, my son,
fond of comfort, and old things, and pretty things. And all that I
shall have yet! Tut, O'Hara is not done with the world, nor it with
him. [Novum Organum, Lib. i. Aph. 71, 79. De Augmentis, Lib. iii.

Cap. iv. De principiis, atque originibus. Cogitata et visa.
Redargutio philosophiarum.]
Assuredly if the tree which Socrates planted and Plato watered
is to be judged of by its flowers and leaves, it is the noblest
of trees.

But if we take the homely test of Bacon, if we judge of the tree
by its fruits, our opinion of it may perhaps be less favourable.

When we sum up all the useful truths which we owe to that philosophy,
to what do they amount?

We find, indeed, abundant proofs that some of those who cultivated
it were men of the first order of intellect.

We find among their writings incomparable specimens both of dialectical
and rhetorical art.

We have no doubt that the ancient controversies were of use, in so
far as they served to exercise the faculties of the disputants; for
there is no controversy so idle that it may not be of use in this
way.

But, when we look for something more, for something which adds
to the comforts or alleviates the calamities of the human race, we
are forced to own ourselves disappointed. We are forced to say
with Bacon that this celebrated philosophy ended in nothing but
disputation, that it was neither a vineyard nor an olive-ground,
but an intricate wood of briars and thistles, from which those
who lost themselves in it brought back many scratches and no
food.

[Novum Organum, Lib. i.

Aph. 73.]
We readily acknowledge that some of the teachers of this unfruitful
wisdom were among the greatest men that the world has ever seen.
If we admit the justice of Bacon's censure, we admit it with regret,
similar to that which Dante felt when he learned the fate of those
illustrious heathens who were doomed to the first circle of
Hell:
"Gran duol mi prese al cuor quando lo 'ntesi, Perocche gente di
molto valore Conobbi che 'n quel limbo eran sospesi."

But in truth the very admiration which we feel for the eminent
philosophers of antiquity forces us to adopt the opinion that their
powers were systematically misdirected.

For how else could it be that such powers should effect so little for
mankind?

A pedestrian may show as much muscular vigour on a treadmill as on the
highway road. But on the road his vigour will assuredly carry
him forward; and on the treadmill he will not advance an inch.
The ancient philosophy was a treadmill, not a path. It was made up
of revolving questions, of controversies which were always beginning
again.

It was a contrivance for having much exertion and no progress.

We must acknowledge that more than once, while contemplating the
doctrines of the Academy and the Portico, even as they appear in
the transparent splendour of Cicero's incomparable diction, we have
been tempted to mutter with the surly centurion in Persius, "Cur
quis non prandeat hoc est?"

What is the highest good, whether pain be an evil, whether all
things be fated, whether we can be certain of anything, whether we
can be certain that we are certain of nothing, whether a wise man
can be unhappy, whether all departures from right be equally
reprehensible; these, and other questions of the same sort, occupied
the brains, the tongues, and the pens of the ablest men in the
civilised world during several centuries.

This sort of philosophy, it is evident, could not be progressive.

It might indeed sharpen and invigorate the minds of those who devoted
themselves to it; and so might the disputes of the orthodox
Lilliputians and the heretical Blefuscudians about the big ends and
the little ends of eggs.

But such disputes could add nothing to the stock of knowledge.

The human mind accordingly, instead of marching, merely marked time.
It took as much trouble as would have sufficed to carry it forward;
and yet remained on the same spot.

There was no accumulation of truth, no heritage of truth acquired
by the labour of one generation and bequeathed to another, to be
again transmitted with large additions to a third.

Where this philosophy was in the time of Cicero, there it continued
to be in the time of Seneca, and there it continued to be in the
time of Favorinus.

The same sects were still battling with the same unsatisfactory
arguments, about the same interminable questions.

There had been no want of ingenuity, of zeal, of industry.

Every trace of intellectual cultivation was there, except a harvest.

There had been plenty of ploughing, harrowing, reaping, threshing. But
the garners contained only smut and stubble.

The ancient philosophers did not neglect natural science but they
did not cultivate it for the purpose of increasing the power and
ameliorating the condition of man.

The taint of barrenness had spread from ethical to physical speculations.
Seneca wrote largely on natural philosophy, and magnified the
importance of that study. But why? Not because it tended to
assuage suffering, to multiply the conveniences of life, to extend
the empire of man over the material world; but solely because it
tended to raise the mind above low cares, to separate it from
the body, to exercise its subtilty in the solution of very obscure
questions.[Seneca, Nat. Quaest. praef. Lib. iii.]

Thus natural philosophy was considered in the light merely of a mental
exercise.

It was made subsidiary to the art of disputation; and it consequently
proved altogether barren of useful discoveries.

There was one sect which, however absurd and pernicious some of its
doctrines may have been, ought, it should seem, to have merited
an exception from the general censure which Bacon has pronounced
on the ancient schools of wisdom.

The Epicurean, who referred all happiness to bodily pleasure, and all
evil to bodily pain, might have been expected to exert himself for the
purpose of bettering his own physical condition and that of his
neighbours.

But the thought seems never to have occurred to any member of that
school. Indeed their notion, as reported by their great poet, was,
that no more improvements were to be expected in the arts which
conduce to the comfort of life.

"Ad victum quae flagitat usus Omnia jam ferme mortalibus esse parata."

This contented despondency, this disposition to admire what has
been done, and to expect that nothing more will be done, is strongly
characteristic of all the schools which preceded the school of Fruit
and Progress.

Widely as the Epicurean and the Stoic differed on most points, they
seem to have quite agreed in their contempt for pursuits so vulgar
as to be useful.

The philosophy of both was a garrulous, declaiming, canting,
wrangling philosophy. Century after century they continued to repeat
their hostile war-cries, Virtue and Pleasure; and in the end
it appeared that the Epicurean had added as little to the quantity
of pleasure as the Stoic to the quantity of virtue.

It is on the pedestal of Bacon, not on that of Epicurus, that those
noble lines ought to be inscribed
"0 tenebris tantis tam clarum extollere lumen Qui primus potuisti,
illustrans commoda vitae."

In the fifth century Christianity had conquered Paganism, and Paganism
had infected Christianity. The Church was now victorious and
corrupt.

The rites of the Pantheon had passed into her worship, the subtilties
of the Academy into her creed. In an evil day, though with great
pomp and solemnity,--we quote the language of Bacon,--was the
ill-starred alliance stricken between the old philosophy and the new
faith. [Cogitata et visa.]

Questions widely different from those which had employed the ingenuity
of Pyrrho and Carneades, but just as subtle, just as interminable,
and just as unprofitable, exercised the minds of the lively and
voluble Greeks.

When learning began to revive in the West, similar trifles occupied
the sharp and vigorous intellects of the Schoolmen. There was another
sowing of the wind, and another reaping of the whirlwind. The
great work of improving the condition of the human race was still
considered as unworthy of a man of learning.

Those who undertook that task, if what they effected could be
readily comprehended, were despised as mechanics; if not, they were
in danger of being burned as conjurers.

There cannot be a stronger proof of the degree in which the human
mind had been misdirected than the history of the two greatest
events which took place during the middle ages.

We speak of the invention of Gunpowder and of the invention of Printing.
The dates of both are unknown. The authors of both are unknown.

Nor was this because men were too rude and ignorant to value
intellectual superiority.

The inventor of gunpowder appears to have been contemporary with
Petrarch and Boccaccio. The inventor of printing was certainly
contemporary with Nicholas the Fifth, with Cosmo de' Medici, and
with a crowd of distinguished scholars.

But the human mind still retained that fatal bent which it had
received two thousand years earlier.

George of Trebisond and Marsilio Ficino would not easily have been
brought to believe that the inventor of the printing-press had done
more for mankind than themselves, or than those ancient writers of
whom they were the enthusiastic votaries.

At length the time arrived when the barren philosophy which had,
during so many ages, employed the faculties of the ablest of men, was
destined to fall. It had worn many shapes. It had mingled itself
with many creeds. It had survived revolutions in which empires,
religions, languages, races, had perished.

Driven from its ancient haunts, it had taken sanctuary in that Church
which it had persecuted, and had, like the daring fiends of the
poet, placed its seat
"next the seat of God, And with its darkness dared affront his
light."

Words, and more words, and nothing but words, had been all the fruit
of all the toil of all the most renowned sages of sixty generations.
But the days of this sterile exuberance were numbered.

Many causes predisposed the public mind to a change. The study
of a great variety of ancient writers, though it did not give a
right direction to philosophical research, did much towards
destroying that blind reverence for authority which had prevailed
when Aristotle ruled alone.

The rise of the Florentine sect of Platonists, a sect to which
belonged some of the finest minds of the fifteenth century, was
not an unimportant event.

The mere substitution of the Academic for the Peripatetic philosophy
would indeed have done little good. But anything was better than
the old habit of unreasoning servility.

It was something to have a choice of tyrants. "A spark of freedom,"
as Gibbon has justly remarked, "was produced by this collision of
adverse servitude."

Other causes might be mentioned. But it is chiefly to the great
reformation of religion that we owe the great reformation of
philosophy.

The alliance between the Schools and the Vatican had for ages
been so close that those who threw off the dominion of the Vatican
could not continue to recognise the authority of the Schools. Most
of the chiefs of the schism treated the Peripatetic philosophy with
contempt, and spoke of Aristotle as if Aristotle had been
answerable for all the dogmas of Thomas Aquinas.

"Nullo apud Lutheranos philosophiam esse in pretio," was a reproach
which the defenders of the Church of Rome loudly repeated, and
which many of the Protestant leaders considered as a compliment.

Scarcely any text was more frequently cited by the reformers than that
in which St. Paul cautions the Colossians not to let any man
spoil them by philosophy. Luther, almost at the outset of his career,
went so far as to declare that no man could be at once a proficient
in the school of Aristotle and in that of Christ.
Zwingle, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Calvin, held similar language.

In some of the Scotch universities, the Aristotelian system was
discarded for that of Ramus. Thus, before the birth of Bacon, the
empire of the scholastic philosophy had been shaken to its foundations.
There was in the intellectual world an anarchy resembling that
which in the political world often follows the overthrow of an old
and deeply rooted Government.

Antiquity, prescription, the sound of great names, have ceased to
awe mankind.

The dynasty which had reigned for ages was at an end; and the vacant
throne was left to be struggled for by pretenders.

The first effect of this great revolution was, as Bacon most justly
observed, [De Augmentis, Lib. i.] to give for a time an undue
importance to the mere graces of style.

The new breed of scholars, the Aschams and Buchanans, nourished
with the finest compositions of the Augustan age, regarded with
loathing the dry, crabbed, and barbarous diction of respondents and
opponents.

They were far less studious about the matter of their writing than
about the manner.

They succeeded in reforming Latinity; but they never even aspired to
effect a reform in Philosophy.

At this time Bacon appeared. It is altogether incorrect to say, as
has often been said, that he was the first man who rose up against
the Aristotelian philosophy when in the height of his power. The
authority of that philosophy had, as we have shown, received a
fatal blow long before he was born.

Several speculators, among whom Ramus is the best known, had recently
attempted to form new sects.

Bacon's own expressions about the state of public opinion in the
time of Luther are clear and strong: "Accedebat," says he, "odium
et contemptus, illis ipsis temporibus ortus erga Scholasticos."

And again, "Scholasticorum doctrina despectui prorsus haberi coepit
tanquam aspera et barbara." [Both these passages are in the
first book of the De Augmentis.] The part which Bacon played in this
great change was the part, not of Robespierre, but of Bonaparte.

The ancient order of things had been subverted. Some bigots still
cherished with devoted loyalty the remembrance of the fallen
monarchy, and exerted themselves to effect a restoration. But the
majority had no such feeling.

Freed, yet not knowing how to use their freedom, they pursued no
determinate course, and had found no leader capable of conducting
them.

That leader at length arose.

The philosophy which he taught was essentially new.

It differed from that of the celebrated ancient teachers, not merely
in method, but also in object.

Its object was the good of mankind, in the sense in which the
mass of mankind always have understood and always will understand
the word good. "Meditor," said Bacon, "instaurationem philosophiae
ejusmodi quae nihil inanis aut abstracti habeat, quaeque vitae
humanae conditiones in melius provehat."

[Redargutio Philosophiarum.]
The difference between the philosophy of Bacon and that of his
predecessors cannot, we think, be better illustrated than by
comparing his views on some important subjects with those of Plato.
We select Plato, because we conceive that he did more than any
other person towards giving to the minds of speculative men that
bent which they retained till they received from Bacon a new impulse
in a diametrically opposite direction.

It is curious to observe how differently these great men estimated
the value of every kind of knowledge.

Take Arithmetic for example. Plato, after speaking slightly of the
convenience of being able to reckon and compute in the ordinary
transactions of life, passes to what he considers as a far more
important advantage. The study of the properties of numbers,
he tells us, habituates the mind to the contemplation of pure
truth, and raises us above the material universe.

He would have his disciples apply themselves to this study, not
that they may be able to buy or sell, not that they may qualify
themselves to be shopkeepers or travelling merchants, but that
they may learn to withdraw their minds from the ever-shifting
spectacle of this visible and tangible world, and to fix them on
the immutable essences of things.

[Plato's Republic, Book vii.]
Bacon, on the other hand, valued this branch of knowledge, only on
account of its uses with reference to that visible and tangible
world which Plato so much despised.

He speaks with scorn of the mystical arithmetic of the later
Platonists, and laments the propensity of mankind to employ, on
mere matters of curiosity, powers the whole exertion of which is
required for purposes of solid advantage.

He advises arithmeticians to leave these trifles, and to employ
themselves in framing convenient expressions, which may be of use
in physical researches.

[De Augmentis, Lib. iii. Cap. 6.]
The same reasons which led Plato to recommend the study of
arithmetic led him to recommend also the study of mathematics.

The vulgar crowd of geometricians, he says, will not understand him.

They have practice always in view. They do not know that the
real use of the science is to lead men to the knowledge of abstract,
essential, eternal truth.

[Plato's Republic, Book vii.] Indeed, if we are to believe Plutarch,
Plato carried this feeling so far that he considered geometry as
degraded by being applied to any purpose of vulgar utility.

Archytas, it seems, had framed machines of extraordinary power on
mathematical principles.

[Plutarch, Sympos. viii. and Life of Marcellus. The machines of
Archytas are also mentioned by Aulus Gellius and Diogenes
Laertius.]

Plato remonstrated with his friend, and declared that this was to
degrade a noble intellectual exercise into a low craft, fit only
for carpenters and wheelwrights.

The office of geometry, he said, was to discipline the mind, not
to minister to the base wants of the body.

His interference was successful; and from that time, according to
Plutarch, the science of mechanics was considered as unworthy of
the attention of a philosopher.

Archimedes in a later age imitated and surpassed Archytas. But even
Archimedes was not free from the prevailing notion that geometry
was degraded by being employed to produce anything useful.

It was with difficulty that he was induced to stoop from speculation
to practice.

He was half ashamed of those inventions which were the wonder of
hostile nations, and always spoke of them slightingly as mere
amusements, as trifles in which a mathematician might be suffered
to relax his mind after intense application to the higher parts of
his science.

The opinion of Bacon on this subject was diametrically opposed to that
of the ancient philosophers.

He valued geometry chiefly, if not solely, on account of those uses,
which to Plato appeared so base.

And it is remarkable that the longer Bacon lived the stronger this
feeling became.

When in 1605 he wrote the two books on the Advancement of Learning,
he dwelt on the advantages which mankind derived from mixed
mathematics; but he at the same time admitted that the beneficial
effect produced by mathematical study on the intellect, though a
collateral advantage, was "no less worthy than that which was
principal and intended."

But it is evident that his views underwent a change.

When, near twenty years later, he published the De Augmentis, which
is the Treatise on the Advancement of Learning, greatly expanded and
carefully corrected, he made important alterations in the part
which related to mathematics.

He condemned with severity the high, pretensions of the mathematicians,
"delicias et fastum mathematicorum."

Assuming the well-being of the human race to be the end of
knowledge, [Usui et commodis hominum consulimus.] he pronounced that
mathematical science could claim no higher rank than that of an
appendage or auxiliary to other sciences.
Mathematical science, he says, is the handmaid of natural philosophy;
she ought to demean herself as such; and he declares that he cannot
conceive by what ill chance it has happened that she presumes to
claim precedence over her mistress.

He predicts-- a prediction which would have made Plato shudder--that
as more and more discoveries are made in physics, there will be
more and more branches of mixed mathematics. Of that collateral
advantage the value of which, twenty years before, he rated so
highly, he says not one word. This omission cannot have been the
effect of mere inadvertence. His own treatise was before him.

From that treatise he deliberately expunged whatever was favourable
to the study of pure mathematics, and inserted several keen reflections
on the ardent votaries of that study.

This fact, in our opinion, admits of only one explanation. Bacon's
love of those pursuits which directly tend to improve the condition
of mankind, and his jealousy of all pursuits merely curious,
had grown upon him, and had, it may be, become immoderate. He was
afraid of using any expression which might have the effect of
inducing any man of talents to employ in speculations, useful only
to the mind of the speculator, a single hour which might be employed
in extending the empire of man over matter. [Compare the passage
relating to mathematics in the Second Book of the Advancement of
Learning with the De Augmentis Lib. iii. Cap. 6.]

If Bacon erred here, we must acknowledge that we greatly prefer his
error to the opposite error of Plato. We have no patience with
a philosophy which, like those Roman matrons who swallowed abortives
in order to preserve their shapes, takes pains to be barren for
fear of being homely.

Let us pass to astronomy. This was one of the sciences which
Plato exhorted his disciples to learn, but for reasons far removed
from common habits of thinking. "Shall we set down astronomy,"
says Socrates, "among the subjects of study?" [Plato's Republic, Book
vii.]

"I think so," answers his young friend Glaucon: "to know something
about the seasons, the months, and the years is of use for military
purposes, as well as for agriculture and navigation." "It amuses
me," says Socrates, "to see how afraid you are, lest the common
herd of people should accuse you of recommending useless studies."

He then proceeds, in that pure and magnificent diction which,
as Cicero said, Jupiter would use if Jupiter spoke Greek, to
explain, that the use of astronomy is not to add to the vulgar
comforts of life, but to assist in raising the mind to the contemplation
of things which are to be perceived by the pure intellect alone.

The knowledge of the actual motions of the heavenly bodies Socrates
considers as of little value.

The appearances which make the sky beautiful at night are, he tells
us, like the figures which a geometrician draws on the sand, mere
examples, mere helps to feeble minds.

We must get beyond them; we must neglect them; we must attain to an
astronomy which is as independent of the actual stars as geometrical
truth is independent of the lines of an ill-drawn diagram.

This is, we imagine, very nearly if not exactly, the astronomy which
Bacon compared to the ox of Prometheus, [De Augmentis, Lib. iii.

Cap. 4] a sleek, well-shaped hide, stuffed with rubbish, goodly to look
at, but containing nothing to eat.

He complained that astronomy had, to its great injury, been separated
from natural philosophy, of which it was one of the noblest
provinces, and annexed to the domain of mathematics.

The world stood in need, he said, of a very different
                                   astronomy, of a living astronomy, [Astronomia viva.] of an astronomy
which should set forth the nature, the motion, and the influences
of the heavenly bodies, as they really are.

[Quae substantiam et motum et influxum ecelestium, prout re vera
sunt proponat."

Compare this language with Plato's "ta d'en to ourano easomen."]

On the greatest and most useful of all human inventions, the invention
of alphabetical writing, Plato did not look with much complacency.

He seems to have thought that the use of letters had operated on
the human mind as the use of the go-cart in learning to walk, or
of corks in learning to swim, is said to operate on the human body.
It was a support which, in his opinion, soon became indispensable
to those who used it, which made vigorous exertion first unnecessary
and then impossible.

Rebekah had, in fact, before setting out to the _rendezvous_ at
nine, seen her father and O'Hara return to the Hall, bearing the bag
between them; and, she, crouching at the side door, as before, had
heard them talk, arranging details. Her father had then said that
before he could write any document, he must either ring or go search
for paper: and suddenly she had heard an oath, a thud, a scuffle,
had turned the key, softly entered, seen the men struggling against
the other door, a revolver, held by the muzzle, in O'Hara's hand;
and before she had been sighted by the two desperate men, had had
the bag, lying near on an escritoire, and was gone. She had then
sent some servants to the scene, and hurried to her chamber.

Later she had heard that O'Hara had escaped through a window, and
that her father was raving below in a sort of fit: for Frankl
supposed that O'Hara had the jewels, as O'Hara that Frankl had them;
and after tending her father, she had dashed out to the
_rendezvous_, the jewels then in her room.

As for Hogarth, he did not neglect her warning: and, having left a
note for O'Hara, telling him where to find him, at Loveday's, took a
late train southwards.

By what marvel Rebekah had become possessed of the jewels he did not
even seek to fathom; but one of his uppermost feelings was shame for
having suspected O'Hara of stealing them: and for years could never
be got to believe in the bad faith of the prelate, his tutor.

Near midnight, on reaching the obscure townlet of Hadston, he there
took a bed--not to sleep.

At the tiny inn-window he made periodic arrivals, looked out
unseeing at a cart, a wall of flint and Flemish brick, and a moonlit
country, then weighed anchor, and swerved away on another voyage;
then arrived anew, looked out, saw nothing, and weighed.

He walked now in the dark of the valley of humiliation, with those
words written in flame in his brain: "This is my favoured lot--my
exaltation to afflictions high": he had allowed a woman to say them
to him, and he went "_I!_"

He, the richest of men, was, therefore, that night poorer than any
wretch, brought right down, naked, exposed to death, and he filled
that chamber with his moans: "God have mercy upon me! a vulgar rich
man...a dreadful contented clown...."

But toward morning he lay calmer, weeping like Peter, and at peace.

Being without money, he sent the next day a small stone to Loveday,
asking him to sell it; also to meet old Tom Bates on the night
appointed, and keep him till he, Hogarth, came to London.

Four days later he received the money in the name of "Mr. Beech",
but the old Bates had not kept the _rendezvous_; and a month later a
detective agency discovered that the fisher was dead.

At Hadston Hogarth remained two months, the most occupied man
anywhere, yet passing for a lounger in the townlet.

Here and now he was descended deep into himself, aspiring to
greatness, set on high designs; and, as the days passed, his
thoughts more and more took form, though sometimes, with a sudden
heart-pang, he would flinch and shrink, pierced by a consciousness
of the unwieldy thing which he was at; and he would mutter: "I
_must_ be mad". Anon he would start and cower at a distinct sound of
cannon in his ears.

Usually, during the day, he had with him an atlas, a pair of
compasses.

One day he took train, to see the sea.

Another day, happening to look into the goat-hair trunk, he saw that
account-book, containing the addresses of the signatories to his old
"association", and was overjoyed. "Quite a little army", he tenderly
said: "I won't forget them".

After two months he left Hadston for London, having in his head a
new age hatched.


XXVIII

THE LETTER


It was night when Hogarth broke into the presence of Loveday at
Cheyne Gardens with a glad face, crying: "Forgive me, my friend, for
being a boor!"

"You are forgiven", Loveday answered with his smile, hastening to
meet him: "the broken picture, you see, is in a better frame, and so
are we. What could have made us invent a quarrel about--land, of all
things!"

"Come, let us talk", said Hogarth: "not long--all about land, and
sea, too. I suppose you have nothing to tell about my sister? Never
mind--we shall find her. Come, sit and give me _all_ your
intelligence. You are not interested in land, then? You _will_ be in
ten minutes--it is interesting. Listen: all the land of the earth is
_mine_, and all the sea especially--a good thing, for, for a hundred
years Europe, especially England, has wanted a master: the anarchy
of our modern life is too terrible! it cannot arrange itself; and
now the hour has struck, though none has heard the bell".

"Hogarth! but you gabble like a mad god", cried Loveday. "I am all
in the dark--"

"I will tell you".

And he spoke, first going into his discovery at Colmoor, frowning
upon Loveday, ploughing the truth into his brow; proving how modern
misery, in its complexity, had its cause in one simple old fault,
sure as the fact that smoke ascends, or apples fall. And when he saw
conviction beam in Loveday's face, he next told what had happened at
the elm-tree, and what would happen-soon; whereat Loveday, like a
frightened child, clung to his arm, and once gasped: "Oh no--my
God!" and once felt a gory ghost raise horror in his hairs.

An hour afterwards they were bending over a sheet of paper, Hogarth
in his shirt-sleeves, writing, Loveday overlooking, suggesting, when
two men were announced, and in stepped O'Hara with bows and polished
hesitations, followed by his shadow, Harris; and, "Ah, O'Hara..."
cried Hogarth, still writing, "who is that with you?"

"A friend of mine", said Loveday, for O'Hara had introduced Harris
to him, and he had adopted Harris as a human study, horrid, but
amusing.

The moment O'Hara saw the face of Hogarth, he started, muttering:
"He has the diamonds back! God! is he a magician?"

And Harris drawled nasally: "Of course, you wouldn't know me now,
Mr. 76! Were there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine, it
_is_".

Hogarth was silent--had not yet decided what to do with Harris.

"This is my tenth call here, Hogarth", said O'Hara, "in the hope of
seeing you, and the streets, you know, are no small risk. You see
how I am muffled up, and this gentleman, too. By the bye, I have
selected a cargo of books for you--"

"No study for a month", said Hogarth, "but I shall want you all the
same. Just come over here and watch me write this thing. You,
Harris, sit right over there".

Harris cursed, but obeyed, while O'Hara came and bent under the
golden glow of the silk shade a brow puckered with a care of
puzzlement, as he read.

Then he fell into the work, and was soon the director of it--
invaluable! knew everything! remembered forgotten points;
explained technicalities; the proper person in each little State to
whom the document must be directed, the style of addressing him. Of
one sentence he said: "That will never do--lacks formality"; and of
another: "Tut, they will laugh at that--it is provincial and
insolent", distracted between the work and his brandy glass. At
last, about eleven, the three brains had produced a letter.

Hogarth laid claim to the sea as his private property, and warned
the nations.


XXIX

PRIORITY OF CLAIM


A gentleman--a Permanent Under-secretary--stood one noon, his back
to a fireplace in a bright-carpeted room at the Foreign Office,
letting his eyes move over some opened letters submitted to him, and
presently came upon the following document, its crest a flag,
containing in blue the letters "R. F.":

"17 LEADENHALL STR., E.G.

"To the Most Hon.,

"The Marquis of Hallam, K.G.,

"Foreign Office,

"Westminster, S.W.

"MY LORD MARQUIS:

"I have the honour hereby to make formal announcement to Your
Lordship that I am on the point of setting up in the midst of the
world a new Power, whose relations with the King's Government will,
I trust, be relations of friendliness.

"It is my desire that Your Lordship forthwith convey to the King's
Most Excellent Majesty the announcement which is the subject of this
Memorandum.

"My purposes and policy in the establishment of the new Power will
hereafter appear; and my properly accredited Ministers will, in due
course, present themselves at the Chancelleries of the world.

"Hitherto a British subject, it is my will to acquire diplomatic
recognition--as soon as such shall comport with the dignity of the
Great Powers--as an Independent Sovereign, under the title of: 'Lord
of the Sea'. (Address: 'Your Lordship's Majesty', or 'My Lord
King'.)

"The domain of my Power will be the sea: and to the sea I hereby set
up claim as far as such points of latitude as have been attained by
Man, and over all degrees of longitude. Provided only: that nothing
in this claim shall be held to infringe upon the prior claim of any
nation to a 'three-mile limit' round its coasts, nor to any national
fisheries whatsoever, nor to any claim of the Kingdom of Denmark
with respect to the Sound.

"The validity of my title to the sea must be considered to rest on
the same basis as the title of any private owner to any area of the
earth's crust: namely, Priority of Claim. If one is valid, so,
necessarily, is the other, this title to land, based on _Priority of
Claim_, being admitted in the Law of all civilized Nations.

"This my claim will come into operation on this day three years
hence.

"I have the honour to subscribe myself

"Your Lordship's

"Obdt. Servant,

"RICHARD HOGARTH ".

The Under-secretary, a pale, distinguished man, read this letter
with a little lift of one eyebrow, then let it drop from him into a
waste-paper basket.

At the German, the Turkish, capitals it met much the same reception.
Nowhere did it reach the eye of a Departmental Head. It went to
Siam, to the Prince of Monaco, to Ecuador, and was tossed to cumber
a basket, or moulder on a file.

But Hogarth, who knew that it would be instantly forgotten, had
written it so as to be able to say that he had written it.

At that time he was lodging in a top room in Bloomsbury, and had an
underground den in Leadenhall Street, on its doors the words: "R.
Beech & Co." Thither in a brougham he drove daily, lying very low,
but holding in that den interviews with all sorts and conditions of
men, and feeling his way toward operations of dimensions so immense,
that their mere project had a modifying influence upon industry.


XXX

MR. BEECH


During six weeks Hogarth lived that life of daily passage between
Keppel Street and his office, unknown to the general world, but
spreading a noise of rumour through certain circles of the business
world. All day in the den the gas-jets brawled upon him, he not for
minutes casting a glance, if a clerk brought a caller's name. And
here was no novice modesty in the tackling of affairs; as O'Hara,
who would be there, said: "You must have been _born_ in the City;
you have the airs, the very tricks, of Threadneedle Street, you--
Jew". In a day the prelate counted seven hundred and thirteen
telegrams from the Terni Cannon foundry, many a diamond dealer,
polisher, cutter, the Vulcan Shipyard of Stettin, the Clydebank,
Cramp of Philadelphia, the Russian Finance Minister, San Francisco,
Lloyd's, metal brokers, the Neva, and one night, the eve of a dash
to Amsterdam, he, with O'Hara, Loveday, and five clerks, sat
swotting till morning broke, sustained by gin and soda-water. The
priest lived with wide eyes at the easy fleetness with which Hogarth
rolled off him the greatest affairs: as when on the day after his
return from Holland he stood, his thumbs in his waistcoat armholes,
with quite the right air of serene City-king, his tallness
possessing considerable natural courtliness, and the De Beers'
Secretary sat before him, saying, "Well, Mr. Beech, I have spent the
morning with your brokers, and have felt that I must see you
personally before calling a meeting. This proposition is so
tremendous--"

"I only wish I had some time", said Hogarth, "I would invite you to
dine upon the matter; but it is really so simple--everything at
bottom is merely twice two are four. And you are not obliged to turn
over Kimberley to me: only, in that case, as I have said, I shall be
compelled to flood the market with diamonds as cheap as cat's-eyes--"

When De Beers stared, Hogarth shrugged, saying: "I suppose I must
convince you--" and, unlocking a safe, he took out an _écrin_ which
contained three stones. De Beers appeared to see Titania peering in
their fairy painting.

"Of stones of this water and carating", said Hogarth, "we have two
hundred and eleven in the Bank of England, two hundred and thirty-
eight in other English and Continental banks, and seventy-five in
safe-deposit. The carating of these three is 111-1/2; and in the
sixties, such as this one"--he took a stone from among coppers in
his pocket--"we have three hundred odd on hand, all flawless, and an
equal number cutting. When I point out, what you know, that our mine
is as yet without the delicate plant of Kimberley, the stones being
simply picked from the blue-earth by three inexpert friends of the
firm on the spot, you will recognize that the wealth of a mine can
no further go...."

He was rid of the visitor within six minutes, and within three
weeks, by knack and organization, had gathered into his hands most
of the reins necessary to the control of the world's trade in
diamonds.

In an outer room sat O'Hara, writing, reading Theocritus, or a
little book on mediaeval embroidery, forefinger on cheek; and anon,
absolutely without motive, he would rise, creep, and peep through a
keyhole at Hogarth, then on stalking, bowing tiptoe, grinning a
rancid grimace of stealth, get back to his seat, and read--the tutor
falling over head and ears in love with his pupil: one of those
passions that end tragically.

One day, as he so sat, the bell _pinged_, the door opened, and
O'Hara jumped to find himself face to face with--Frankl, who had
come to see the new diamond king, in the firm belief that Mr. Beech
was none other than O'Hara; and, "I thought as much!" said he.

"_Sh-h-h_", went O'Hara bitterly--"for God's sake! he is _in
there_--!"

"Who is?"

"_Hogarth!_"

"Well, but--"

"Outside--in the passage--"

They stepped out; and Frankl, his eyelids red, said: "I have only
this day crawled from bed with the blow you struck my temple, or I
should have had you before this--"

"_Sh-h-h_. Your own fault, sir. _You_ played false first--"

"Played false with my own diamonds? You hand me over this day one-
half those stones, or I bring a civil action for the whole, hound
you to beggary, and drag you back to your convict-cell where you
come from".

"Don't lift your voice, I beg of you. Tut, you rave. You can't bring
a civil action against a great millionaire who doesn't care to
defend; and as for me, I do assure you, I haven't fifty pounds to-
day. _It is Hogarth who is Mr. Beech!_"

"_Who?_"--Frankl obtruded a startled ear, frowning his eyes small.

"Hogarth. He has the diamonds back!"

"Which diamonds? How did he get 'em?"

"He is--_in_--_there_: better go and ask him! He got them by black
art--by the aid of the legion of mediaeval witches which wait on
him--_God_ knows how he got them! _You_ gave them to him! _I_ gave
them to him! but he's got them--_in--there_! Better go and ask him--don't
be afraid--just for the roaring fun of it--"

"Hogarth?"

"Yes--Hogarth, Hogarth".

"Cheated the gallows? And out of prison? And rolling in my wealth,
my riches, my diamonds? Oh, no!--is that fair? A dog? Is that how
the world is run? God of Israel!"

"There is this to be said for him: that he _deserves_ to be rich--"

"Who? So you are taking his part now?"

"Tut--!"

"There is no _tut_ about it! You confess that you are nothing more
than a penniless hanger-on: well, then, I have _you_! back to
prison you go this hour---!"

The great object of Austria was to regain Silesia; the great object
of France was to obtain an accession of territory on the side of
Flanders.

If they took opposite sides, the result would probably be that, after
a war of many years, after the slaughter of many thousands of
brave men, after the waste of many millions of crowns, they would
lay down their arms without having achieved either object; but,
if they came to an understanding, there would be no risk, and no
difficulty.

Austria would willingly make in Belgium such cessions as France could
not expect to obtain by ten pitched battles. Silesia would easily
be annexed to the monarchy of which it had long been a part.

The union of two such powerful governments would at once overawe the
King of Prussia. If he resisted, one short campaign would settle
his fate. France and Austria, long accustomed to rise from the game
of war both losers, would, for the first time, both be gainers.

There could be no room for jealousy between them. The power of both
would be increased at once; the equilibrium between them would be
preserved; and the only sufferer would be a mischievous and
unprincipled buccaneer, who deserved no tenderness from either.

These doctrines, attractive from their novelty and ingenuity, soon
became fashionable at the supper-parties and in the coffee- houses
of Paris, and were espoused by every gay marquis and every facetious
abbe who was admitted to see Madame de Pompadour's hair curled and
powdered. It was not, however, to any political theory that the
strange coalition between France and Austria owed its origin. The
real motive which induced the great continental powers to forget
their old animosities and their old state maxims was personal aversion
to the King of Prussia. This feeling was strongest in Maria Theresa;
but it was by no means confined to her. Frederic, in some respects
a good master, was emphatically a bad neighbour. That he was hard
in all dealings, and quick to take all advantages, was not his most
odious fault. His bitter and scoffing speech had inflicted keener
wounds than his ambition. In his character of wit he was under
less restraint than even in his character of ruler.

Satirical verses against all the princes and ministers of Europe
were ascribed to his pen.

In his letters and conversation he alluded to the greatest potentates
of the age in terms which would have better suited Colle, in a war
of repartee with young Crebillon at Pelletier's table, than a great
sovereign speaking of great sovereigns.

About women he was in the habit of expressing himself in a manner
which it was impossible for the meekest of women to forgive; and,
unfortunately for him, almost the whole Continent was then governed
by women who were by no means conspicuous for meekness.

Maria Theresa herself had not escaped his scurrilous jests. The
Empress Elizabeth of Russia knew that her gallantries afforded him a
favourite theme for ribaldry and invective. Madame de Pompadour, who
was really the head of the French Government, had been even more
keenly galled. She had attempted, by the most delicate flattery,
to propitiate the King of Prussia; but her messages had drawn from
him only dry and sarcastic replies. The Empress Queen took a very
different course. Though the haughtiest of princesses, though the
most austere of matrons, she forgot in her thirst for revenge both
the dignity of her race and the purity of her character, and
condescended to flatter the lowborn and low-minded concubine, who,
having acquired influence by prostituting herself, retained it by
prostituting others.

Maria Theresa actually wrote with her own hand a note, full of
expressions of esteem and friendship to her dear cousin, the
daughter of the butcher Poisson, the wife of the publican D'Etioles,
the kidnapper of young girls for the haram of an old rake, a strange
cousin for the descendant of so many Emperors of the West!

The mistress was completely gained over, and easily carried her point
with Lewis, who had, indeed, wrongs of his own to resent. His
feelings were not quick, but contempt, says the Eastern proverb,
pierces even through the shell of the tortoise; and neither
prudence nor decorum had ever restrained Frederic from expressing
his measureless contempt for the sloth, the imbecility, and the
baseness of Lewis.

France was thus induced to join the coalition; and the example
of France determined the conduct of Sweden, then completely subject
to French influence.

The enemies of Frederic were surely strong enough to attack him
openly; but they were desirous to add to all their other advantages
the advantage of a surprise.

He was not, however, a man to be taken off his guard. He had tools
in every Court; and he now received from Vienna, from Dresden, and
from Paris, accounts so circumstantial and so consistent, that he
could not doubt of his danger. He learnt, that he was to be assailed
at once by France, Austria, Russia, Saxony, Sweden, and the Germanic
body; that the greater part of his dominions was to be portioned
out among his enemies; that France, which from her geographical
position could not directly share in his spoils, was to receive an
equivalent in the Netherlands; that Austria was to have Silesia,
and the Czarina East Prussia; that Augustus of Saxony expected
Magdeburg; and that Sweden would be rewarded with part of Pomerania.

If these designs succeeded, the House of Brandenburg would at once
sink in the European system to a place lower than that of the Duke
of Wurtemberg or the Margrave of Baden.

And what hope was there that these designs would fail?

No such union of the continental powers had been seen for ages. A
less formidable confederacy had in a week conquered, all the
provinces of Venice, when Venice was at the height, of power, wealth,
and glory.

A less formidable confederacy had compelled Lewis the Fourteenth
to bow down his haughty head to the very earth.

A less formidable confederacy has, within our own memory, subjugated
a still mightier empire, and abused a still prouder name. Such
odds had never been heard of in war. The people whom Frederic
ruled were not five millions.

The population of the countries which were leagued against him
amounted to a hundred millions, The disproportion in wealth was
at least equally great.

Small communities, actuated by strong sentiments of patriotism
or loyalty, have sometimes made head against great monarchies
weakened by factions and discontents. But small as was Frederic's
kingdom, it probably contained a greater number of disaffected
subjects than were to be found in all the states of his
enemies.
Silesia formed a fourth part of his dominions; and from the
Silesians, born under Austrian princes, the utmost that he could
expect was apathy. From the Silesian Catholics he could hardly
expect anything but resistance.

Some states have been enabled, by their geographical position,
to defend themselves with advantage against immense force. The
sea has repeatedly protected England against the fury of the
whole Continent.

The Venetian Government, driven from its possessions on the land,
could still bid defiance to the confederates of Cambray from the
arsenal amidst the lagoons.

More than one great and well appointed army, which regarded
the shepherds of Switzerland as an easy prey, has perished in the
passes of the Alps. Frederic hid no such advantage. The form of his
states, their situation, the nature of the ground, all were against
him.
His long, scattered, straggling territory seemed to have
been shaped with an express view to the convenience of invaders,
and was protected by no sea, by no chain of hills. Scarcely any
corner of it was a week's march from the territory of the
enemy.
The capital itself, in the event of war, would be constantly
exposed to insult. In truth there was hardly a politician or a
soldier in Europe who doubted that the conflict would be terminated
in a very few days by the prostration of the House of Brandenburg.

Nor was Frederic's own opinion very different. He anticipated nothing
short of his own ruin, and of the ruin of his family. Yet there
was still a chance, a slender chance, of escape. His states had
at least the advantage of a central position; his enemies were
widely separated from each other, and could not conveniently unite
their overwhelming forces on one point.

They inhabited different climates, and it was probable that the season
of the year which would be best suited to the military operations
of one portion of the League, would be unfavourable to those of
another portion.

The Prussian monarchy, too, was free from some infirmities which
were found in empires far more extensive and magnificent.

Its effective strength for a desperate struggle was not to be measured
merely by the number of square miles or the number of people. In
that spare but well-knit and well-exercised body, there was nothing
but sinew, and muscle and bone. No public creditors looked for
dividends. No distant colonies required defence. No Court, filled
with flatterers and mistresses, devoured the pay of fifty battalions.
The Prussian army, though far inferior in number to the troops which
were about to be opposed to it, was yet strong out of all
proportion to the extent of the Prussian dominions.

It was also admirably trained and admirably officered, accustomed
to obey and accustomed to conquer.

The revenue was not only unincumbered by debt, but exceeded the
ordinary outlay in time of peace.

Alone of all the European princes, Frederic had a treasure laid up
for a day of difficulty. Above all, he was one, and his enemies
were many. In their camps would certainly be found the jealousy, the
dissension, the slackness inseparable from coalitions; on his side
was the energy, the unity, the secrecy of a strong dictatorship.

To a certain extent the deficiency of military means might be
supplied by the resources of military art. Small as the King's
army was, when compared with the six hundred thousand men whom the
confederates could bring into the field, celerity of movement might
in some degree compensate for deficiency of bulk. It was thus just
possible that genius, judgment, resolution, and good luck
united, might protract the struggle during a campaign or two;
and to gain even a month was of importance.

It could not be long before the vices which are found in all
extensive confederacies would begin to show themselves. Every member
of the League would think his own share of the war too large, and his
own share of the spoils too small.
Complaints and recriminations would abound. The Turk might stir on
the Danube; the statesmen of France might discover the error
which they had committed in abandoning the fundamental
principles of their national policy. Above all, death might rid
Prussia of its most formidable enemies. The war was the effect of
the personal aversion with which three or four sovereigns regarded
Frederic; and the decease of any one of those sovereigns might produce
a complete revolution in the state of Europe.

In the midst of a horizon generally dark and stormy, Frederic could
discern one bright spot.

The peace which had been concluded between England and France in
1748, had been in Europe no more than an armistice; and had
not even been an armistice in the other quarters of the globe.
In India the sovereignty of the Carnatic was disputed between
two great Mussulman houses; Fort Saint George had taken one side,
Pondicherry the other; and in a series of battles and sieges the
troops of Lawrence and Clive had been opposed to those of Dupleix. A
struggle less important in its consequences, but not less
likely to produce irritation, was carried on between those French
and English adventurers, who kidnapped negroes and collected gold
dust on the coast of Guinea.
But it was in North America that the emulation and mutual aversion
of the two nations were most conspicuous.

The French attempted to hem in the English colonists by a chain of
military posts, extending from the Great Lakes to the mouth of the
Mississippi. The English took arms. The wild aboriginal tribes
appeared on each side mingled with the Pale-Faces. Battles were
fought; forts were stormed; and hideous stories about stakes, scalpings,
and death-songs reached Europe, and inflamed that national animosity
which the rivalry of ages had produced.

The disputes between France and England came to a crisis at the
very time when the tempest which had been gathering was about to
burst on Prussia.

The tastes and interests of Frederic would have led him, if
he had been allowed an option, to side with the House of Bourbon.

But the folly of the Court of Versailles left him no choice.

France became the tool of Austria; and Frederic was forced to
become the ally of England. He could not, indeed, expect that a
power which covered the sea with its fleets, and which had to
make war at once on the Ohio and the Ganges, would be able to
spare a large number of troops for operations in Germany. But
England, though poor compared with the England of our time, was far
richer than any country on the Continent. The amount of her revenue,
and the resources which she found in her credit, though they may
be thought small by a generation which has seen her raise a hundred
and thirty millions in a single year, appeared miraculous to the
politicians of that age.

A very moderate portion of her wealth, expended by an able and economical
prince, in a country where prices were low, would be sufficient
to equip and maintain a formidable army.

Such was the situation in which Frederic found himself. He saw the
whole extent of his peril.

He saw that there was still a faint possibility of escape; and, with
prudent temerity, he determined to strike the first blow. It
was in the month of August 1756, that the great war of the Seven
Years commenced. The King demanded of the Empress Queen a
distinct explanation of her intentions, and plainly told her that
he should consider a refusal as a declaration of war.

"I want," he said, "no answer in the style of an oracle." He received
an answer at once haughty and evasive.

In an instant the rich electorate of Saxony was overflowed by sixty
thousand Prussian troops. Augustus with his army occupied a
strong position at Pirna. The Queen of Poland was at Dresden. In a
few days Pirna was blockaded and Dresden was taken. The first object
of Frederic was to obtain possession of the Saxon State papers;
for those papers, he well knew, contained ample proofs that, though
apparently an aggressor, he was really acting in self-defence.
The Queen of Poland, as well acquainted as Frederic with the importance
of those documents, had packed them up, had concealed them in
her bed-chamber, and was about to send them off to Warsaw, when
a Prussian officer made his appearance. In the hope that no soldier
would venture to outrage a lady, a queen, a daughter of an
emperor, the mother-in-law of a dauphin, she placed herself
before the trunk, and at length sat down on it. But all resistance
was vain. The papers were carried to Frederic, who found in them,
as he expected, abundant evidence of the designs of the coalition.
The most important documents were instantly published, and the
effect of the publication was great. It was clear that, of whatever
sins the King of Prussia might formerly have been guilty, he was
now the injured party, and had merely anticipated a blow intended
to destroy him.

The Saxon camp at Pirna was in the meantime closely invested; but the
besieged were not without hopes of succour. A great Austrian army
under Marshal Brown was about to pour through the passes which
separate Bohemia from Saxony.

Frederic left at Pirna a force sufficient to deal with the Saxons,
hastened into Bohemia, encountered Brown at Lowositz, and
defeated him. This battle decided the fate of Saxony. Augustus and
his favourite Bruhl fled to Poland. The whole army of the Electorate
capitulated.

From that time till the end of the war, Frederic treated Saxony as
a part of his dominions, or, rather, he acted towards the Saxons
in a manner which may serve to illustrate the whole meaning of that
tremendous sentence, "subjectos tanquam suos, viles tanquam alienos."

Saxony was as much in his power as Brandenburg; and he had no such
interest in the welfare of Saxony as he had in the welfare of
Brandenburg.

He accordingly levied troops and exacted contributions throughout
the enslaved province, with far more rigour than in any part of
his own dominions.

Seventeen thousand men who had been in the camp at Pirna were half
compelled, half persuaded to enlist under their conqueror. Thus,
within a few weeks from the commencement of hostilities, one of
the confederates had been disarmed, and his weapons were now
pointed against the rest.

The winter put a stop to military operations.

All had hitherto gone well. But the real tug of war was still to come.
It was easy to foresee that the year 1757 would be a
memorable era in the history of Europe.

The King's scheme for the campaign was simple, bold, and judicious.
The Duke of Cumberland with an English and Hanoverian array was
in Western Germany, and might be able to prevent the French
troops from attacking Prussia. The Russians, confined by their
snows, would probably not stir till the spring was far advanced.
Saxony was prostrated. Sweden could do nothing very important. During
a few months Frederic would have to deal with Austria alone. Even
thus the odds were against him. But ability and courage have often
triumphed against odds still more formidable.

Early in 1757 the Prussian army in Saxony began to move. Through
four defiles in the mountains they came pouring into Bohemia.
Prague was the King's first mark; but the ulterior object was probably
Vienna. At Prague lay Marshal Brown with one great army.
Daun, the most cautious and fortunate of the Austrian captains, was
advancing with another. Frederic determined to overwhelm Brown
before Daun should arrive. On the sixth of May was fought, under
those walls which, a hundred and thirty years before, had witnessed
the victory of the Catholic league and the flight of the unhappy
Palatine, a battle more bloody than any which Europe saw during the
long interval between Malplaquet and Eylau. The King and Prince
Ferdinand of Brunswick were distinguished on that day by their
valour and exertions. But the chief glory was with Schwerin.

When the Prussian infantry wavered, the stout old marshal snatched
the colours from an ensign, and, waving them in the air, led
back his regiment to the charge. Thus at seventy-two years
of age he fell in the thickest battle, still grasping the standard
which bears the black eagle on the field argent.

The victory remained with the King; but it had been dearly purchased.

Whole columns of his bravest warriors had fallen. He admitted that
he had lost eighteen thousand men. Of the enemy, twenty-four
thousand had been killed, wounded, or taken.

Part of the defeated army was shut up in Prague.

Part fled to join the troops which, under the command of Daun, were
now close at hand. Frederic determined to play over the same game
which had succeeded at Lowositz. He left a large force to besiege
Prague, and at the head of thirty thousand men he marched against
Daun.
The cautious Marshal, though he had a great superiority in
numbers, would risk nothing. He occupied at Kolin a position
almost impregnable, and awaited the attack of the King.

It was the eighteenth of June, a day which, if the Greek superstition
still retained its influence, would be held sacred to Nemesis, a
day on which the two greatest princes of modern times were
taught, by a terrible experience, that neither skill nor valour can
fix the inconstancy of fortune. The battle began before noon; and
part of the Prussian army maintained the contest till after the
midsummer sun had gone down. But at length the King found
that his troops, having been repeatedly driven back with frightful
carnage, could no longer be led to the charge. He was with difficulty
persuaded to quit the field. The officers of his personal staff
were under the necessity of expostulating with him, and one of
them took the liberty to say, "Does your Majesty mean to storm the
batteries alone?"

Thirteen thousand of his bravest followers had perished. Nothing
remained for him but to retreat in good order, to raise the siege of
Prague, and to hurry his army by different routes out of Bohemia.

This stroke seemed to be final. Frederic's situation had at best
been such, that only an uninterrupted run of good luck could save
him, as it seemed, from ruin. And now, almost in the outset of the
contest he had met with a check which, even in a war between
equal powers, would have been felt as serious. He had owed much
to the opinion which all Europe entertained of his army. Since his
accession, his soldiers had in many successive battles been victorious
over the Austrians. But the glory had departed from his arms. All
whom his malevolent sarcasms had wounded, made haste to avenge
themselves by scoffing at the scoffer. His soldiers had ceased
to confide in his star. In every part of his camp his dispositions
were severely criticised. Even in his own family he had
detractors. His next brother, William, heir- presumptive, or rather,
in truth, heir-apparent to the throne, and great-grandfather of
the present King, could not refrain from lamenting his own fate and
that of the House of Hohenzollern, once so great and so prosperous,
but now, by the rash ambition of its chief, made a by-word to all
nations. These complaints, and some blunders which William committed
during the retreat from Bohemia, called forth the bitter displeasure
of the inexorable King.

The prince's heart was broken by the cutting reproaches of his
brother; he quitted the army, retired to a country seat, and in a
short time died of shame and vexation.

It seemed that the King's distress could hardly be increased. Yet
at this moment another blow not less terrible than that of Kolin
fell upon him. The French under Marshal D'Estrees had invaded Germany.
The Duke of Cumberland had given them battle at Hastembeck, and
had been defeated.

In order to save the Electorate of Hanover from entire subjugation,
he had made, at Closter Seven, an arrangement with the French Generals,
which left them at liberty to turn their arms against the Prussian
dominions.

That nothing might be wanting to Frederic's distress, he lost his
mother just at this time; and he appears to have felt the loss more
than was to be expected from the hardness and severity of his
character.

In truth, his misfortunes had now cut to the quick. The mocker,
the tyrant, the most rigorous, the most imperious, the most cynical
of men, was very unhappy. His face was so haggard, and his form so
thin, that when on his return from Bohemia he passed through Leipsic,
the people hardly knew him again.

His sleep was broken; the tears, in spite of himself, often started
into his eyes; and the grave began to present itself to his agitated
mind as the best refuge from misery and dishonour. His resolution
was fixed never to be taken alive, and never to make peace on
condition of descending from his place among the powers of Europe.

He saw nothing left for him except to die; and he deliberately chose
his mode of death.

He always carried about with him a sure and speedy poison in a small
glass case; and to the few in whom he placed confidence, he made
no mystery of his resolution.

But we should very imperfectly describe the state of Frederic's
mind, if we left out of view the laughable peculiarities which
contrasted so singularly with the gravity, energy, and harshness
of his character.

It is difficult to say whether the tragic or the comic predominated
in the strange scene which was then acting. In the midst of all the
great King's calamities, his passion for writing indifferent
poetry grew stronger and stronger. Enemies all round him, despair
in his heart, pills of corrosive sublimate hidden in his clothes,
he poured forth hundreds upon hundreds of lines, hateful to gods
and men, the insipid dregs of Voltaire's Hippocrene, the faint echo
of the lyre of Chaulieu.

It is amusing to compare what he did during the last months of 1757,
with what he wrote during the same time.

It may be doubted whether any equal portion of the life of Hannibal,
of Caesar, or of Napoleon, will bear a comparison with that short
period, the most brilliant in the history of Prussia and of Frederic.

The
march of invention is from the complex to the simple: for simplicity
is strength; but to the moment when I began to construct, naval
construction had not followed this law: for from the old smooth-
bores, aimed with tackle and quoin, to the present regime of
electric wires, you have had a continual advance in complexity--
always within the same little arc of thought--till now the most
complex of things is a battleship; and if you ask me which is the
weaker, a battleship or a watch, I answer a battleship--_weak_
meaning liability to the injuries which they were built to resist.
In such a case as that of the _Maine_, sunk at Havana, one might
fancy that the task of naval constructors is to turn out a thing to
sink with a minimum of trouble; and you remember the _Camperdown_
and _Victoria_, how, playing about together, one happened to touch
the other, when down plunged that other. These ships are a
compromise between three _motifs_--speed, resisting attack, and
attacking: and the first is so antagonistic to the second, and also
to the third, that the net result is almost a Nonentity, or No-
Thing. Nothing, in fact, could be more _queer_, unfounded, than
these ships; and the future will look back upon them with pity.
Hence the simple islands, following the law: and don't think t hat
their efficacy is a thing riskier than arithmetic itself"

"Good", went Loveday. "But, Richard--captain your islands with
decent men".

"You have something on your mind: what is it?"

"It is--delicate. Have I your permission to speak?"

"Why, John, yes".

"Well then--is O'Hara to be an Admiral?"

"Old Pat? Hardly, I think. He may. But no--I don't think. Poor old
talky-talky. He has worked hard for us, John: and his fund of
experience, in one way and another, has been invaluable. Well, I
don't know: I have had the idea, but I don't suppose that, in
reality--Still, I am fond of him, John. Such a tongue, and such a
versatile brain, is he! He was my comfort for many a sombre day in
prison--"

Listening near with rancid grin behind some greenery, O'Hara kept
nodding emphatic assents of satisfaction to Hogarth's praise.

"But, stop", said Loveday: "do you know why he was in prison?"

"He was innocent".

"Of what?"

"Of stealing some diamonds entrusted him by the Pope".

"Bah! he lies. His trial was a _cause célèbre_, and hence the false
name he gave me at first: the moment I heard you say 'O'Hara' I knew
the man. He had committed an assault upon a lady in a train--"

"Beast that he is", went Hogarth, while O'Hara's eyes started from
his head: "and liar, too, it seems. Ha!--he gave me the most
circumstantial story. Why didn't you tell me this before?"

"It was delicate--"

"Beast that he is. Yet how complex is character! the man's
tenderness for his Church is so charming--"

"Fiddlesticks! Look here, Richard, I am come all the way from
Westring to tell you this thing. Don't you give vast powers to that
man: it isn't decent; and I have a feeling that it will be a baleful
piece of weakness. And don't get easy, and tolerant, and fat in the
eyes, Hogarth. That is a very significant Bible-story--the
implacable disaster sent upon old Eli for no greater crime than a
_bonhomme_ indolence. And in order to arouse your wrath against this
O'Hara, I am going now, against my will, to tell you something: the
name of that lady in that train".

"Someone whom I know?"

"Yes".

"Who?"

For a moment Loveday's answer hesitated: and in that moment, O'Hara,
with lightning decision, had his mouth at Hogarth's ear: "Come with
me quick--then fall down and worship me for a month! _Someone is in
the Malachite Hall!_"

Like sudden death Hogarth's colour fled his face; in another instant
he was a blind, oblivious wight...had known that she was in
Petersburg; but not that she was at the masque.

In a moment shrubbery, lights, all life, rushed into transformation
for him: and with an excitement of the eyes, the bloodshot left
looking bloodier, he went after O'Hara, tossing back at Loveday that
fatal saying: "_To-morrow_...."

A little previously O'Hara, having got from Frankl details of
Rebekah's dress, had spotted her in primrose silk, black mask and
domino, and soon with Hogarth refound her in the crush: whereas
Hogarth went about prospecting over the crowd, with that excitement
of his red-veined eyeballs, once even entered into talk with a group
of four diplomatists, but all the time with eyeballs absent in
hankering tracking, out prowling after one morbid form, as the
stallion's prowls after his Sally.

After an hour she said in French over her shoulder: "Why follow me?"

And as he bowed compliance, she added: "Are you well?"

He said: "Yes", and bowed, and she nodded twice, smiling a little,
as they parted.

He, on the wings of exaltation, made haste to salute the Throne and
leave the palace, rushing toward solitude to brood upon that smile,
those familiar nods, and the gentle "Are you well?"--in his landau
with him O'Hara, who persecuted him even to his bedroom; and when,
after an hour, the priest at last reappeared in a corridor, the
night-lights there shone upon an exultant visage, like a climber's
who, after long clamberings, at last stamps on the Matterhorn, and
looks abroad.

When he entered his own room, he stood with a hung head, till,
sharply looking up, he ejaculated with amazed, realization and
opening arms: "Well, it's done!--I've got it!" Now he put forefinger
to nose, and cut a beastly face at himself in the mirror-wall.

The next day Hogarth rather guiltily said to Loveday: "Well, I have
promised old O'Hara the _Mahomet_ for the Straits. Don't frown--I
owe him something, and the clever beast got over me in crazy
moment".

"Quite so", Loveday coldly said: and thenceforth, the thing being
done, was mum as to the name of the lady connected with O'Hara's
crime.

He returned immediately to England, having there many occupations,
which multiplied as the islands everywhere neared completion, the
first of the launches taking place at Spezzia on the 7th of
February.

A fortnight before this event the Beech-fever had revived, the
coming launch being no secret, and the doubt whether "Beech's Folly"
might be no folly, and the question what, on the whole, Beech's
Folly might really bode, filled once more the consciousness of the
Western world. By the 1st of February a drop was recorded in many
general securities, in "governments", rentes, and consols; in Berlin
the bank-rate rose one per cent.; it was stated that specie was
accumulating in European vaults; while up leapt futures-cotton in
the Liverpool market. At last the First Lord of the Treasury, in a
speech at Manchester, gave sign of the Government's consciousness of
the new fact, saying that he could only repeat the answer given by
the First Lord of the Admiralty to the recent Deputations of the
Chamber of Shipping and of Merchant Shippers, that Britain and the
other maritime nations would know how to protect the seas from any
nuisance. He anticipated no nuisance. The structures popularly known
as "Beech's Folly" (prolonged laughter) would be provided with
lighthouses: and until they proved a nuisance on the ocean's
fairways, the Governments must permit to private enterprise that
free hand which was the characteristic of our age; moreover, a
recognized Government had avowed its association with these
structures.

Nevertheless, the fever heightened. The light-system of the
_Boodah_, now included in the usual alphabetical lists of derelicts,
was conned by thousands of mariners, while in the crowded captains',
underwriters', and committee rooms at Lloyd's discussion buzzed and
speechified in every tone of gravity. Suddenly in the F. G. and S.
clause marine insurance underwent a profound modification; and it
was then that the millionaire, Schroeder, at that time a German
clerk in the City, managed to borrow five thousand pounds, and
quickly cleared his pile by underwriting on larger F. C. and S.
terms. And again raged the sale of the islands as penny salt-
cellars, finger-basins, etc.; in broker's and sub-editor's office
the tape-machine clicked the hourly progress of preparations at
Spezzia; while every by-street was dreadful with that music-hall
chorus:

  "To Spezzia runs the Pullman train;
   The Follies soon their sense will teach;
  We've Beech, O dear, upon the brain,
   He brains upon the beach".

Meantime, the question of the drawing-room was "Are you going to
Spezzia?" and by the 7th so great a pilgrimage of tourists--experts,
idlers, cinematographers, special correspondents, ministers of
state, Yankees, officers, social stars--had flocked to the scene,
that accommodation failed in the town and surrounding hill-country,
from Le Grazie on the west, to Lerici on the east of the Gulf.

The morning dawned bright--Italian sky, tranquil Italian sea--and by
nine the harbour was alive with small-craft and Portovenere
steamboats, all gala with flags; on the land side, too, over the
hills, up the old road called Giro della Foce, and before the
villages commanding the town, spread a cloud of witnesses; while the
multitude in possession of _permessos_ for the dock-region stretched
across a hundred and sixty acres, perched on every coign, and
murmuring like the sea.

And all in the air a fluttered consciousness of the to-come, the
present nothing, an hour hence everything--like the suspense of
nature before gales, and that greatness and novelty of marriage-
mornings: for such a bride that day would rush to the brine as it
had never embraced.

There lay the hulk, all nuptial in colours, her roof looking like a
_plaza_ of Lima or La Paz at Carnival, flags in mountain-ridges
round her edges, flags in festoons, in slanting clothes-lines, in
trophy-groups, on bandroled poles, bedecking her; some scaffolding
still round her; and three running derricks, capable of wielding
guns and boilers of 140 tons, craned their shears about her. A
temporary stair under flags ran right up to a ledge above the
waterline: from which ledge little steel steps led here and there to
the roof; round the edge of roof and ledge running two balustrades,
surrounding the hulk; and over that upper portion, four times
repeated in white letters ten feet high, the name _BOODAH_ boomed
itself.

By eleven some seven hundred people stood and sat on the roof--the
_élite_ of Europe, invited to the luncheon after the launch, seeming
to the tract of on-lookers quite dainty and visionary there, like
objects mirrored in an eye. And they formed groups, of which some
chatted, and were elegant, and some spoke the gravest words uttered
for centuries.

"What, really, is the _Boodah_?" asked a Servian Minister of a
French: "is she a whim, a threat, or a tool?"

"She is too heavy for a whim", answered the French, "too dear for a
threat, and too fantastic for a tool. Time will show".

But this was no answer at all: something more to the point came from
a multitudinous tumult of sledges below--the workmen "wedging-up".

At last, soon after noon, Hogarth, with a considerable following,
was seen ascending the steps, on his arm the Queen of the Ceremony--
a little Bavarian Gräfin, famous for her face: he, princely now with
that cosmopolitan polish picked up in Courts, bending above her with
laughter, making her laugh also, as they paced up. And at once the
invited, including the Board of Verification, entered the hull upon
a tour of sight-seeing, conducted by a manager of the contractors.

Already the set-up wedges had raised the _Boodah_ from her keel-
block, and left her resting on the great braced ground-ways; and now
down to the sea's brink the greasers were busy, prodigals in tallow,
while, within, the seven hundred trooped from spectacle to
spectacle, like a tourist group guided through the Louvre.

An hour, and they anew appeared on the roof, trooping toward that
balustrade that faced the sea: upon which the throngs felt the
impending of the event, and intently watched. But there seemed no
hurry, Hogarth all gay chatter, anon lowering the lids a moment, as
he looked over the water; till suddenly hundreds of glasses detected
a champagne-bottle with ribbons in the christener's hand; and the
consciousness of the moment come moved the hosts when Hogarth, even
as he chatted, disengaged a flag, and let it fall: it was a signal;
down it fluttered; and instantly, down there, bustle broke loose, as
the call "Saw-off!" went forth, and the saws set flurriedly to fret
through the timbers which bind groundways to slidingways.

"_Now?_" whispered Hogarth at the christener's ear: and, even as he
spoke, the voice of a noising arose and droned from Spezzia, its
hills, its villages, and its sea; the _Boodah_, only half-liberated,
strained in travail; crashed from her bands; slipped down the
greased gradient--plunged--and, gathering momentous way, went wading
deep, deeper--like Behemoth run mad--amid a wrath of froths and a
brawling of waters, into the sea.

There, deep-planted, she stretched: on the surface appeared a reef
of steel; and the stirred-up water slapped vapidly upon those
flanks, like waters upon the Norway wall.


XXXIII

REEFS OF STEEL


Nothing was ever so scrutinized as the movements of the _Boodah_
during the next two months.

One morning three weeks after her launch three steamers took her in
tow, with progress so slow, that at nightfall they were still
visible from land; but the next morning had vanished.

Two days later they were met on the Genoa-Leghorn _route_, six
steamers then towing the _Boodah_, their course S. by W.

Again and again it was met, that funeral of the sea: the prone,
tearing steamers, the reluctant bulk. Sometimes a captain's glass
might make out a few men lost on the roof like men on a raft,
smoking, seated, leaning over a balustrade.

Southward and westward it swam. On the seventh day there arrived at
Ajaccio from Marseilles twenty-five bluejackets; and these, in a
hired _speronare_, put to sea, and joined the _Boodah_ twenty miles
from the coast.

Thenceforth, a smoke would be seen at a point of the roof,
indicating that she, too, was steaming: for it was known that she
had a screw and a rudder; and so closely was she observed, that her
now added rate could be fixed--two to three knots a day.

She must therefore have some small engines about 4,000 H. P.: and
since their _motif_ could only be one thing, resistance to ocean
currents, this meant that the _Boodah_ was intended to rest always
in one spot: a startling conclusion.

Occasionally a Surveying Service warship would peep above the
horizon, watching her.

As she passed through the Straits, seventy-five English blue-jackets
put out from Trafalgar, and joined her.

With such reports passed the weeks. Occasionally five or six coal-
ships would be seen about the _Boodah_; her number of tug-ships
might be as low as two; sometimes nine, ten.

At night she made a fine display, and homeward-bound boats from Cape
Horn, from Pernambuco, Para, Madeira, spoke highly of her two
revolving-drum lighthouses: for these, from opposite corners of the
roof, at the rate of a revolution per minute, poured into space two
shimmering comets, like Calais and the Eddystone--rapt spinning-
dervishes of the sea that hold far converse with the dark, till
morning. And between these two ran a festoon of electric lanterns,
Japanese and Moorish, cut in ogives; and festoons of coloured moons
drooped round the balustrades, so that the blaze and complexity of
it presented to ships a spectacle of speckled mystery, fresh to the
sea.

After five weeks a hundred and seventeen blue-jackets put out from
Portsmouth in a chartered barque and joined her, she still in tow,
making now about N. by W.

But by the time this news reached Europe the eyes of Europe were no
longer given up to the _Boodah_: for _another Boodah_, called the
_Truth_, was a-tow through the North Channel from Belfast; and she
had not reached the Mull of Cantire, when a third was launched at
San Francisco, so that the interest of the islands became
complicated.

What would they do? What could they? Compared with this question,
the riddle of the Sphinx was simple, the supposition that they were
going to batter coast-walls in the S. Pacific being hardly now
tenable. The _Boodah_ finally came to rest some miles North of lat.
50° and East of long. 20°: and there--just on the northern rim of
the Gulf Stream where it divides, part toward Ireland, and part
toward Africa--she remained, precisely in the middle of the trade-
route between Europe and Boston, New York, Halifax: a _route_
covered for fifty miles--twenty-five north, twenty-five south--by
her 19.5-inch guns.

It is impossible to describe with how wild a heart, or thrilling a
boding, the world heard this thing: eight days later the
International Conference of Maritime Nations met at The Hague.

But nothing happened--or the opposite of what was feared: for, as
months passed, the _Boodah_, planted there in the ocean, rapidly
became the recognized gathering-point of the fashion and gaiety of
Europe, thither flocking the socially ambitious and the "arrived"
together, and to have been invited to those revels of taste and
elegance became a superiority. Gradually, as the names "Beech",
"Ecuador", ceased to be associated with the islands, the name of
Hogarth took their place; and Hogarth had engaged Wanda, sweetest of
tenors, to a year's stay in the _Boodah_, whose orchestra was the
most cultured anywhere; Roche, her _chef_, had two years previously
been put into a laboratory to devote his soul to the enlargement of
his art; and he and that tenor lived in suites of the _Boodah_ such
as most princes would consider Utopian.

Hardly anything in her interior suggested _the ship_: no hammocks
for marines, rolling-racks, sick-bay, lockers, steam-tables, wash-
rooms, she being just a palace planted in the Atlantic, her bottom
going down to a layer of comparative calm, so that hardly ever, in a
storm, when the ocean robed her sides in white, washed abroad her
slippery plateau, and drenched with spray her lighthouse tops, did
the ballroom below know shock or motion. Into her principal hall,
far down, circular, one descended by a circle of steps of marble,
round which stood a colonnade of Cuban cedar, supporting candelabra
and silks; and from atrium-pools sunk in the floor twelve twining
fountains brandished spiral sprays, the floor being of a glassy
marble, polished with snakestone, suffused with blushes at the
coloured silks and at a roof gross with rose and pomegranates,
hanging chandeliers; round the raised centre of the floor stood two
balustrades, three feet high, hung with silks, the inner circle
thirty feet across, higher than the outer, forty-five across: a
roseate room, strewn with cushions, colours, flushes; but that
raised space was empty: reserved for--a throne.

The throne, still unfinished, had been three years making in India.

And during nine months the _élite_ and joyous yachts arrived, not at
the _Boodah_ only, but at others of the twelve which, one by one,
were launched and towed to position; and a round of events
transacted themselves in the fortresses: Marie Antoinette balls,
classic concerts, theatrical functions by _troupe_ or amateur,
costume-balls, children's-balls, banquets of the gods, grave
receptions. By now there ran right across the _Boodah's_ roof, in
the form of a cross, two double colonnades of Doric pillars, at the
four ends being Roman arches: and here, some summer afternoon, the
passing ship would see a bazaar, all butterfly flutter, feminine
hues like flower-beds, cubes of coloured ice, flags, and a buzz of
gaiety, and strains of Tzigany music--rainbow-tints of Venice mixed
with the levity of the Andrássy Ut of Pesth. Sometimes a fleet of
craft would surround the islands. Besides, to each was attached a
yacht, and a trawler which continually plied for it between island
and land.

At this time Hogarth was deep in debt, and Beech's living upon
credit.

So, gradually, a good deal of the awe which the structures had
inspired passed off. On the whole, they seemed mere whimsical
castles-of-pleasure. The trains of industrious ships grew habituated
to their gaudy brightness by night, to their seething reefs, or
placid mass, by day. On foggy days the mariner was aware of the
islands wailing weird siren-sounds of warning. The islands waved
common-code signals of greeting to the passer. Trinity House sent
them the usual blanks and instruments for recording meteorological
observations. Their positions were marked in British Admiralty
Charts, in American Pilot Charts, in "Sailing Directions". The great
greyhounds, racing to Sandy Hook, raved with jest past them. The
islands began to seem a natural part of the sum of things. There
they lay, stable, rooted, trite, familiar; and the question almost
arose: "How came it that they were never there _before?_"--just that
object, of that form and colour, seemed so old and natural in that
particular spot. So the frogs hopped finally upon the log that God
sent them for sovereign.

Meantime, the more thoughtful of men did not fail to observe, and
never forgot, that no ship could possibly depart from, or arrive at
Europe, without passing within range of some one of the islands'
guns. A row of eight lay an irregular crescent (its convexity facing
Europe) from just outside the Straits of Gibraltar, where O'Hara
admiraled the _Mahomet_, to the 55th of latitude, where the _Goethe_
lay on the Quebec-Glasgow _route_: these commanding the European
trade with the States and with S. America, as well as with W. and S.
Africa, and with Australia by Cape Horn; another in the narrows of
the Gulf of Aden, commanding the world's traffic by Suez with the
East and with S. Africa; another in the middle of the narrows of the
Kattegat, commanding all Baltic trade; another, fifteen miles from
San Francisco, and another a hundred and fifty miles from Nagasaki,
on the edge of the Black Stream, commanding the Japanese-San
Francisco, the Australian-San Francisco trades, and great part of
the Japano-Russo-Chinese. These were the principal trades of the
world.

Like the despair of Samson awaking manacled and shaven, an
occasional shriek would go up from some lone thinker, who perceived
that the kingdoms of the world had lapsed into a single hand; and in
the privy cabinet the governors drank to the dregs the cup of
trembling. But their speech was bold, the matter hung long, the
peoples ignored and wrought: there was seed-time and harvest; the
newsboy brawled; the long street roared. Far yonder in the darkness
and distance of the deep the islands flashed and danced, and were
fashionable.

Richard Hogarth held back his hand.


XXXIV

THE "KAISER"


It was the habit of Hogarth, when in the _Boodah_, to rise very
early and ascend in flannels to one of the four doors opening upon
the ledge--blocks five feet thick, moved by hydraulic motors--and
sometimes Loveday would accompany these walks, they always seeing on
the plane of the sea some sail, or by a spyglass the fading light-
beam of the _Goethe_ north, of the _Solon_ south; or they watched
how the _Boodah's_ galaxy, too, waxed faint and garish as some drama
of colour evolved in the East; saw gulls hover and swing, fins
wander: and marking that simple ampleness of the plan of sea and
arch of heaven, their hearts felt enlargement.

One morning, the 3rd October, Loveday was up even before Hogarth,
having started awake from a gory nightmare, this altogether not
being a day like others: and when the two friends met on the ledge,
they walked a long time in silence.

Only after the dayspring began definitely to dabble in its chromatic
chemistries Loveday at last remarked: "Did you ever think why I took
such pains to get you to come down with me to Lord Woolacot's last
autumn two years?"

"Yes", answered Hogarth: "you wanted me to see the model farms, and
how the young ladies fed the poor, and how the tenants loved their
lord, and everyone thought himself happy. Only, I didn't see what
the pastimes of Lord Woolacot's daughters have to do with the
process of the suns, and with the woe of Oldham. Ah, Lord, it is a
job, I tell you, pulling this vile thing straight! Of course, the
eagle doesn't blink: but I am only one man, and the world, and its
stupid sins, are a tidy burden. Ha!--never mind. Look at that big
_Boodah_ of a sun how he blooms: isn't he launched and handled all
right? Let us of this desert bend the knee to him like the old
Sabæans. There is hope"....

It was known that on that day, at half-past eleven A.M., the _Kaiser
Wilhelm der Grösste_ would pass on her second voyage within some
miles of the _Boodah_, this ship being the greatest afloat, having a
cargo-carrying deadweight of 45,000 tons, and travelling the waters
like a railway-train at 37 miles (32 knots).

So toward noon Hogarth, in a peaked cap, jacket, and white boots,
was again on the roof, a glass and book of Costonlights in his hand,
while not far off a knot of five officers in frockcoats talked, and
near one light-house, where a number of men stood, a flagstaff flew
the ensign--blue letters "R. F." on a white ground, looking Russian;
on the northern horizon two fox-tails of smoke; on the western three
diminutive sails; between the two, quite real and big, a brig
becalmed; and now the _Kaiser Wilhelm_: for that yonder could be
only she, with so fervent a growth, from the first moment of her
upward climb, did she approach. It was twenty minutes to noon, and
she was somehow a little late, that punctual strong wrestler with
space.

The officers on the _Boodah_ spoke of her in low and stealthy
voices; looked at her with queer and stealthy glances.

"'As a bird to the snare...'" muttered one.

"She comes all right, but will never go", said another.

"She will be always near us", said a third.

"Life is an earnest thing, after all", said a fourth: "there are
wrongs, it seems, which only blood can wash out: it comes to that at
last".

Now Loveday ran up, looking scared and busy, a quill behind his ear,
Hogarth now having the glass at his face, while his eyes struggled
with the reek from his cigar-end.

"Is that she?" Loveday asked him.

"Yes, poor boat".

She was nine miles away; in four minutes she was less than seven,
and now distinct:--her three staysails; her four funnels; the
stretched-out space between her raked masts; her host of cowls and
boats; her high victorious hull, silently running.

And all along her lines were lines of faces thick as dahlia-rows in
June--globe-trotters; captains of industry; children; the Wall
Street operator who plotted a stroke in Black-Sea wool, and to him
time was money--I guess; commercial travellers, all-modern,
spinning, prone, to whom the sea was an insignificant and conquered
thing; engineers; capped enthusiastic Germans, going forth to
conquer; publishers, ladies, lords, all the nondescript prosperous:
and all ran there blithe, sublime, and long drawn-out; and they
toyed with oranges, nuts; and they looked abroad to see the
_Boodah_--ship's-surgeons and officers with them--jesting, as they
munched or sucked.

But the Captain who had often seen the _Boodah_, was log-writing in
the chart-room...

As her ensign of greeting ran up her main, her clocks struck twelve,
the full noon--like an omen--come; she not then three miles from the
_Boodah_.

And simultaneously with the hoisting of that ensign, and the
striking of those clocks, the old-worn wheels of Roman Civilization
stopped dead.

The _Boodah_ ran up the signal: "_Stop!_"

Those who understood rubbed their eyes: it was like a vision at high
noon; they could not believe.

At that news the Captain, a handsome fair-bearded man, rushed like a
madman from pilot-house to bridge, and the startled passengers saw
his lighted eyes. He had some moments of indecision; then down he,
too, rang that word: "_Stop_".

The engines left off; the _Kaiser's_ speed, as from heart-failure,
gave in, died away.

By this time all the passengers knew, in a state of tremor saw
confused runnings to and fro, and face caught from face dismay; the
voyage was spoiled, the record! What, then, had happened to the
world? And now again the _Boodah_ is signalling: "_Let the Captain
come_".

The Captain's hands were shaking; he could not speak, could only
gasp to the first-officer: "By God, no; O, by God, no". Then, as
great quantities of black-grey reek, wheeling all convolved, were
now enveloping the vessel, resting on the sea, reaching away in
thinner fog even to the _Boodah_, and as, the day being calm, there
was a difficulty in reading the flags, the Captain gasped: "Take the
trumpet--ask them--But don't they pay for this...?"

So out brayed the trumpeted query, and back the inexorable trumpeted
answer: "_Let the Captain come_".

So, then, the _Kaiser_ would never reach Sandy Hook? To put out
boats!--to parley!--while the earth span with quick-panting throbs,
every second worth seven thousand pounds!

"But don't they _pay_ for it...?" so, with a painful face of care,
the Captain questioned space.

But he would be mild and patient as a lamb that day! His order went
forth: the ship forged ahead; a longboat, hurriedly lowered to
starboard, was manned for the first-officer to put off in her, while
every heart of the passengers thumped, every face an ecstasy of
emotions.

Then a wretched, long interval...

The ship's-officers were received on the _Boodah_ in a deck-room
containing a number of boats with castored keels, capable of being
quickly launched down an incline, where Mr. F. Quilter-Beckett, the
Admiral, with some lieutenants, awaited them at a bureau on which
lay documents, while in the background stood Hogarth and Loveday,
and, "Gentlemen, this is a most damned wild piece of madness!" broke
out wrathfully the first-officer, as he dashed up wild-eyed to the
level: "in consideration of the guns you have in this thing--"

"But your Captain?" asked Quilter-Beckett, a courtly man, with a
dark-curling beard, a star on his breast.

"The Captain won't come!" whined the officer in perfect English: "I
suppose you realize the terrible consequences of this stoppage,
gentlemen?"

"But you are wasting time, sir. You represent your Captain?"

"Of course, I represent--!"

"Then just cast your eye over this"--that so slighted letter, sent
years before by Hogarth to Foreign Offices, claiming the sea as his
private manor.

The officer read it half through with flurried closeness; then,
"Well, but what is all this?" he broke out: "is it a piece of
comedy, or what, gentlemen?"

"It is serious; and the last clause comes into operation to-day:
only such ships being held authorized to pass on the sea as pay to
the first-reached sea-fort on any voyage a tax, or sea-rent, of 4s.
per ton on their registered tonnage, with an additional stamp-tax of
33s. 4d. for receipt, and a stamp-tax of £1 16s. 8d. for clearance.
You will see at a glance the clauses of the law, if you cast your
eyes over this schedule--"

"Law!" the other broke in: "you talk of _Law_! But doesn't the sea,
then, belong by right to all men--?"

"Not more than the land. Ask yourself: why should it? But I do hope
you won't argue: your time must be so precious".

Out shrilled the _Kaiser Wilhelm's_ whistle of recall.

"I must go!" said the officer with a worried hand-toss: "I must go.
If you give me those documents, I will show them to the Captain--but
he is not the sort of man--this is mere piracy, after all! But, good
God, gentlemen, if you only dare touch that ship, I shouldn't put
myself in your place this day week for all--"

He snatched the papers, dashed, and his men, in a passion of haste,
lay to the oars, the _Kaiser_ only four hundred yards from the
_Boodah_; and the officer, shaking aloft the documents, pitched up
the stair, the centre of five hundred pairs of scared eyes, while
the captain bored his way to him.

Two minutes of intense low speech, crowded with gestures: and
suddenly the Captain's face, till now haggard, reddened; out went
his shaken fist; with eyes blazing like lunacy, up he flew to the
bridge; and now he is bending down with howling throat: "Passengers
to their berths!"

Simultaneously, above the engine-room stair a bell jangled; round
swung the pointer to "_Full Ahead_"; and ere the decks were cleared
of their bustle the _Kaiser_, like a back-kicking hen, scratched up
under her poop a spreading pool of spume, which tossed spasmodic
spray-showers and spoutings: and she stirred, stretched like a
street, churned the sea, and, wheeling to reveal her receding stern,
was away.

By which time Hogarth was standing at a cubical cabin of steel on
the roof, with him Loveday and Quilter-Beckett, his brow puckered
with wrinkles, the sun troubling his eyes.

"I suppose the _chef_ is warned?"--he threw away his cigar.

"Oh, yes, my Lord King", Quilter-Beckett answered.

And Loveday: "She sweats like a thoroughbred"--haggard, but assuming
calm: "few things could be more profusely expeditious".

"Ah, make phrases, John," murmured Hogarth...."Well, but hadn't you
better be getting out the boats?"

Upon which Quilter-Beckett stepped into the little erection, touched
a button, and in a minute the water round the southern side was
swarming with twenty-three boats whose blue-jackets began to row
toward the _Kaiser_.

And presently, "It's no use waiting", said Hogarth, looking in upon
Quilter-Beckett: "I should mine and shell her at the same moment, if
I were you; tell them to get it in well amidships".

Now a few seconds, full of expectation, passed, the _Kaiser Wilhelm_
already two miles away: till suddenly space opened its throat in a
gulf to bay gruff and hollow like hell-gate dogs; and, almost at the
same moment, close by the _Kaiser_ a column of water hopped with one
humph of venom two hundred feet on high: when this dropped back
broad-showering with it came showering a rain of wreckage; and
instantly a shriek of lamentation floated over the sea, mixed with
another shriek of steam.

For the moment the ship, enveloped in vapours, could not be seen;
but in two minutes glimpses of her hull appeared, shewing the bluff
bulge of her starboard bottom: for she leaned steeply to port with a
forward crank, her two starboard screws, now free, spinning asleep
like humming-tops. A six-inch shell, beautifully aimed, had
shattered her engines, killing two stokers, and a torpedo-mine had
knocked a hole nine feet across in her port beam.

But as the _Boodah's_ boats, meanwhile, had been racing toward her,
and as her own port boats were quickly out, all were got off; in
fact, she floated so long, that her ship's papers with £270,000 in
specie, and a few hundred-weight of mailbags were saved, and even
after the boats reached the _Boodah_ she still stretched there
motionless, until, with a sudden flurry, she determined to plunge.

Soon afterwards Hogarth had the Captain in his suite, to tell him
that he did not wish any intelligence of the event to reach the
world for four days, during which passengers and crew would be his
guests, and then be sent on to America, his object, he said, being
to impress the loss of the _Kaiser_ upon the consciousness of all,
by making all anxious as to her fate.

So that night her passengers danced till late, for there was no
resisting the hospitality of Hogarth, or the witchery of those
vistas and arcades, grand hall and lost grot, _salons_ and
conservatories, there in the dark of the ocean, or such an
enchantment of music, and fabulousness of table; the host, too,
pleaded prettily for himself; and now they pardoned, and now they
pouted, but always they banqueted, kissed, lost themselves in
visions, were charmed, and danced.


XXXV

THE CUP OF TREMBLING


It was by the merest chance that Baruch Frankl and his daughter were
not on the _Kaiser_: for Frankl was the half-nephew of Mrs. Charles
P. Stickney, a New York Jewess, and as the marriage of Miss Stickney
with Lord Alfred Cowern was only fifteen days off, Frankl had made
arrangements to accompany the bridegroom across, but had been
detained by stress of business; happily for him--for Lord Alfred,
the bridegroom, was a dancing prisoner in the _Boodah_.

Early, then, on the third morning thence, Charles P. Stickney, the
bride's father, a natty little Yankee, hurried a-foot to the
Maritime Exchange: for, to his infinite surprise, the _Kaiser's_
arrival had not been in the morning's paper: so the little arch-
millionaire stepped toward Beaver Street, sure that the _Kaiser_ had
come in too late for the press.

Early as it was, he found the place as thickly a-buzz as though it
was that feverish hour between eleven and twelve.

He pushed his way to the bulletin-board, inscribed with the hours at
which ships are sighted and entered into dock: the Kaiser was not
there: and with prone outlook he went seeking an assistant
superintendent; but, sighting a fellow-operator, come, as usual, to
digest the world, from barometer-reports to coffee-quotations at
Rio, Charles P. Stickney cried to him: "Funny about the _Kaiser_!
Know anything?"

"It's the darndest thing..." mumbled the other, still star-gazing at
a blackboard prices-current of American staples: "raise Hell this
day, I guess"....

And on through the rooms Stickney shouldered: all in the air here an
odour of the sea, and of them that go down to it in ships; pilot,
captain, supercargo, purser; abstracts from logs, copies of
manifests and clearances, marks and numbers of merchandise, with
quantities, shippers, consignees; here peaked caps, and the jaw that
chewed once, and paused long, and, lo, it moved anew; Black Books,
massive volumes enshrining ancient wrecks; vast newspaper-files in
every tongue; records of changes in lightships, lights, buoys, and
beacons, from Shanghai to Cape Horn; reports, charts, atlases,
globes; the progress of the rebellion in Shantung, and the
earthquake last night in Quito; directories, and high-curved
reference-books, and storm-maps; every minute the arrival of cipher
cablegrams, breathless with the day's Amsterdam exchange on London,
or with the quantities of tea _in transitu_ via Suez or Pacific
Railway; and the drift of ocean-currents, and the latest position of
the _Jane Richardson_, derelict, and the arrival of the _Ladybird_
at Bahia; and the probabilities of wind-circulation, atmospheric
moisture, aberrations of audibility in fog; and in the middle of it
the pulse of the sun, the thundering engines and shooting shuttles
of this Loom; a tiptop briskness and bustle of action; a scramble of
wits; a _mêlée_ to the death; mixed with pea-jackets, and aromas of
chewed pigtail, and a rolling in the gait.

Fanny's propensity to novel-writing had for a time been kept down.
It now rose up stronger than ever.

The heroes and heroines of the tales which had perished in the
flames, were still present to the eye of her mind. One favourite
story, in particular, haunted her imagination. It was about a certain
Caroline Evelyn, a beautiful damsel who made an unfortunate
love-match, and died, leaving an infant daughter.

Frances began to image to herself the various scenes, tragic and
comic, through which the poor motherless girl, highly connected on
one side, meanly connected on the other, might have to pass. A
crowd of unreal beings, good and bad, grave and ludicrous,
surrounded the pretty, timid, young orphan; a coarse sea captain;
an ugly insolent fop, blazing in a superb court dress; another fop,
as ugly and as insolent, but lodged on Snow Hill, and tricked out
in second-hand finery for the Hampstead ball; an old woman, all
wrinkles and rouge, flirting her fan with the air of a miss of
seventeen, and screaming in a dialect made up of vulgar French and
vulgar English; a poet lean and ragged, with a broad Scotch accent.

By degrees these shadows acquired stronger and stronger consistence;
the impulse which urged Frances to write became irresistible;
and the result was the History of Evelina.

Then came, naturally enough, a wish, mingled with many fears, to
appear before the public; for, timid as Frances was, and bashful,
and altogether unaccustomed to hear her own praises, it is clear
that she wanted neither a strong passion for distinction, nor a
just confidence in her own powers.

Her scheme was to become, if possible, a candidate for fame, without
running any risk of disgrace. She had not money to bear the expense
of printing.

It was therefore necessary that some bookseller should be induced
to take the risk; and such a bookseller was not readily found.
Dodsley refused even to look at the manuscript unless he were intrusted
with the name of the author.
That day Man, as it were, rent his garments, sitting in ashes, and
to Heaven sent up a howl of fear, of anguish, and of hissing hate.

Those who lacked the intelligence to feel the fear, felt the hate:
every girl, the shirt-maker, the shopman, feeling himself robbed of
his very own; the Duke in the centre of his oak-lands felt it; the
burglar, the junk-dweller of the Yangtse, the pariah of the Hugli.
Lamentation and a voice in Ramah, wail on wail. For God had given
the sea to man, and it had been seized by a devil.

God had also given the shore; and it, too, had been seized: but, as
that had been before their birth, they had not observed it--in such
a numb somnambulism shambles humanity.

But the theft of the sea was new and flagrant, it, and the air,
being all that had remained: and a roar for vengeance--sharp, and
rolled in blood--rose from the throat of man.

Accordingly, when Mr. C. P. Stickney during the afternoon wired for
information to the White House, he received the reply: "Encourage
calm on 'Change. Government in touch with Europe. Great naval
activity. Await good news, seven P.M."

It was about seven P.M. that what the White House would have
considered specially good news occurred: for the _Boodah_ then
telegraphed through to O'Hara's _Mahomet_ at the Straits:

"B. 7651. Begins. After to-morrow (Monday) you begin taxation, as
per Order B., 7315, of 2nd inst. But if warships desire to pass out,
(not in), permit, till further order. Richard. Ends".

Which meant that if any Power, or Powers, desired to concentrate
force upon the attack of any island, the Lord of the Sea granted
them facilities.

The _Kaiser_ passengers had now been sent off to New York, the
_Boodah's_ halls seemed the home of desolation; and, as the night
advanced, Hogarth and Loveday walked on the roof: for they could
find no rest, the sky without moon or star, the sea making of three
sides of the _Boodah_ a roaring reef, the wind blowing cold, they
two wrapped to the nose in oilskins with sou'-westers, lashed by
rages of rain and spray.

The undertaking was generally regarded as bold, or rather rash;
but the event amply justified, the confidence with which Steele
relied on the fertility of Addison's genius. On the second of January
1711, appeared the last Tatler. At the beginning of March following
appeared the first of an incomparable series of papers containing
observations on life and literature by an imaginary Spectator.

The Spectator himself was conceived and drawn by Addison; and it is
not easy to doubt that the portrait was meant to be in some features
a likeness of the painter.

The Spectator is a gentleman who, after passing a studious youth
at the university, has travelled on classic ground, and has bestowed
much attention on curious points of antiquity.

  He has, on his return, fixed
  his residence in London, and has observed all the forms of life
which are to be found in that great city, has daily listened to the
wits of Will's, has smoked with the philosophers of the Grecian,
and has mingled with the parsons at Child's, and with the politicians
at the St.

James's. In the morning, he often listens to the hum of the Exchange;
in the evening, his face is constantly to be seen in the pit of
Drury Lane Theatre. But an insurmountable bashfulness prevents him
from opening his mouth, except in a small circle of intimate
friends.

These friends were first sketched by Steele.

Four of the club, the templar, the clergyman, the soldier, and the
merchant, were uninteresting figures, fit only for a background.
But the other two, an old country baronet and an old town rake,
though not delineated with a very delicate pencil, had some good
strokes.

Addison took the rude outlines into his own hands, retouched them,
coloured them, and is in truth the creator of the Sir Roger de
Coverley and the Will Honeycomb with whom we are all familiar.

The plan of the Spectator must be allowed to be both original and
eminently happy.

Every valuable essay in the series may be read with pleasure
separately; yet the five or six hundred essays form a whole, and
a whole which has the interest of a novel.

Britain had proposed the destruction of the islands in detail, the
Powers to contribute weights of metal proportionate to their
mercantile marines: as a basis for calculation she had offered her
force in Home and Mediterranean waters; and, this having been
accepted, by the 5th ships were under the pennant, and outfitting.

Now, all this time, things had been in a pretty whirl: oratory from
pulpit, platform, stump, eyes on fire, mobs that went in haste,
shrieks of newspaper passion, organized burglary, and a strange
epidemic of fires: for the modern nations lived by the sea, and it
was seized. Moreover, on the 6th, after a meeting at the Albert
Hall, organized by the Associated Chambers of Commerce, our
Government--"Liberal", under Sir Moses Cohen--suffered a defeat of
thirty-four votes on a division.

And it was during the turmoil that ensued upon this that the German
Foreign Office (on the 9th) sent to the new Russian the wireless
"_Bion_"-meaning--"Let us meet to discuss the subject of-England".

That meeting took place at Konigsberg.

It was now that a fort-man--formerly a Nottingham shoemaker--landed
from the Truth's yacht at Frederikshavn, and thence wrote to the
Daily Chronicle, to say, briefly, this: That, supposing the European
navies joined to batter away with l5-inch guns and torpedoes at five
feet of steel, they might finally succeed in mining a hole in it;
but if the thick steel happened to have still bigger guns, "_and
other things_", with which, meantime, to batter back at the thin
ships, then it would be the ships, probably, which would get holes
in them: it was a question of Time. Also he said that the islands
were defended by devoted men, every one of intelligence and high
principle, who knew what they wanted, and meant to have it--their
shooting average being 97 per 100. He advised his country not to try
it, especially in view of certain political rumours which he had
picked up in the Cattegat.

This letter, although badly spelled, aroused a sensation The "high
principle" of the fort-men, indeed, met with bitter laughter; but
its hearty patriotism, simplicity, technical knowledge, were so
remarkable, that now a doubt as to the battleship arose--and with it
a gnashing of teeth. The service-clubs, the "experts", wrote this
and that; the publics poured forth letters, schemes, plots,
inventions--like the brain of the world _versus_ the brain of
Hogarth. And then our children came. Deep in my soul, From the first
hour of conscious motherhood, I knew I should conserve myself for
this Most holy office; knew God meant it so.
Yet even then, I held your wishes first; And by my double duties
lost the bloom And freshness of my beauty; and beheld A look of
disapproval in your eyes.

But with the coming of our precious child, The lover's smile, tinged
with the father's pride, Returned again; and helped to make me
strong; And life was very sweet for both of us.

Another, and another birth, and twice The little white hearse paused
beside our door And took away some portion of my youth With my
sweet babies.

At the first you seemed To suffer with me, standing very near; But
when I wept too long, you turned away.
The Continent objected: Britain was "_firm_"; whereupon the French
Ambassador sent to Downing Street his withdrawal from the crusade.

And so when--on the 22nd--the fleets assembled at Portland and
Milford Haven before _rendezvous_ at the Lizard, the whole original
proposal had fallen through: for here was neither tricolour nor
saltire, only three German ships, only five Italian; the
"probability", moreover, of the capture of a sea-fort by England was
imminent: and on the evening of the mobilisation of the squadrons
feverish activity was reported from Toulon; a British Legation
_attaché,_, seeing fit to stroll round the Caserne Pepinière, beheld
in the yard an extraordinary crowd of limbers: and, pitching into a
cab, from the nearest _postes et télégraphes_ wired to London the
word: "Angleterre".

Too late: the British fleets were gone, leaving the Channel and
Western Mediterranean desert.

Now the nation awoke to a consciousness of dark skies: cloud of the
west rushing to meet a yet lurider eastern--with probability of
lightning.

The fleet could hardly return in less than five days--if it
returned! Would the hostile nations be good enough to await its
return? The lightning would be "near".

A day of fear, in which flash tracked flash: till at 11.30 P.M. the
rumour pervaded the crowd round St. Stephen's that the new Ministry
had suffered defeat: and the drifting ship was captainless.

She will bring that large virtue, self-control, And cherish it as her
supremest treasure.
Not at the call of sense or for man's pleasure Will she invite from
space an embryo soul, To live on earth again in mortal fashion,
Unless love stirs her with divinest passion.

To motherhood she will bring common sense - That most uncommon
virtue.

She will give Love that is more than she-wolf violence (Which
slaughters others that its own may live).

Love that will help each little tendril mind To grow and climb;
Love that will know the lordliest use of Time In training human
egos to be kind.

She will be formed to guide, but not to lead - Leaders are ever
lonely--and her sphere Will be that of the comrade and the mate,
Loved, loving, and with insight fine and clear, Which casts its
searchlight on the course of fate, And to the leaders says, 'Proceed'
or 'Wait.'

And best of all, she will bring holy faith To penetrate the shadowy
world of death, And show the road beyond it, bright and broad, That
leads straight up to God.

CERTITUDE

There was a time when I was confident That God's stupendous mystery
of birth Was mine to know. The wonder of it lent New ecstasy and
glory to the earth.
I heard no voice that uttered it aloud, Nor was it written for me
on a scroll; Yet, if alone or in the common crowd, I felt myself a
consecrated soul.

My child leaped in its dark and silent room And cried, 'I am,'
though all unheard by men.
So leaps my spirit in the body's gloom And cries, 'I live! I shall
be born again.' Elate with certitude towards death I go, Nor doubt,
nor argue, since I know, I know!

COMPASSION

He was a failure, and one day he died.
Across the border of the mapless land He found himself among a
sad-eyed band Of disappointed souls; they, too, had tried And missed
their purpose. With one voice they cried Unto the shining Angel
in command:
'Oh, lead us not before our Lord to stand, For we are failures,
failures!

Let us hide.'

Yet on the Angel fared, until they stood Before the Master. (Even His
holy place The hideous noises of the earth assailed.) Christ reached
His arms out to the trembling brood, With God's vast sorrow in
His listening face.

Come unto Me,' He said; 'I, too, have failed.'

LOVE

Dreaming of love, the ardent mind of youth Conceives it one with
passion's brief delights, With keen desire and rapture. But, in
truth, These are but milestones to sublime heights After the highways,
swept by strong emotions, Where wild winds blow and blazing sun
rays beat, After the billows of tempestuous oceans, Fair mountain
summits wait the lover's feet.
The path is narrow, but the view is wide, And beauteous the outlook
towards the west Happy are they who walk there side by side, Leaving
below the valleys of unrest, And on the radiant altitudes above
Know the serene intensity of love.

THREE SOULS
Three Souls there were that reached the Heavenly Gate, And gained
permission of the Guard to wait.And "Quick, Quilter-Beckett", he cried, "send that! What is the
speed of your quickest picket--?"

"Fifteen knots--"

"Then, go yourself to the British Admiral. _Make_ him fly back: he
has years to attack me in, tell him--I'll write a dispatch--"

On which Quilter-Beckett telephoned up for a picket, took the
dispatch, and was soon away, while Hogarth watched his flight over
the Sea.

An anxious hour passed, and by then a line of ships had been sighted
to the west--the Americans at last; ten minutes later, the picket,
too, was seen returning.

"Well, now", said Hogarth, watching her, "I wonder. The ships seem
to be coming on just the same. You have no idea, John, how the mind
of people in office becomes fixed, like hardened putty in a hole: I
am sorry now I didn't go myself".

Some minutes more and Quilter-Beckett was pelting up the steps, his
face pink as prickly-heat, blurting out: "My Lord King! I have been
grossly insulted...!"

"Ha!" went Hogarth.

"I met a dispatch-boat coming to make summons of surrender, and, in
spite of my white flag, they took me prisoner! How I restrained
myself--and these people in the hollow of my hand! When I got at
last to the Admiral--it is Yerburgh on the _Queen Mary_--he
'pirated' me--but I have no time Yonder, you see, are the Americans.
British won't go back: I doubt if they believe--'under orders', and
so on. By the way, you shouldn't stay there--no longer safe--"

He was away: for the moment was near, the _Boodah_ now surrounded
with a series of floating squares hanging deep torpedo-nets against
submarines, on both horizons effusions of smoke, the ships no more
visions, but middle-sized sea-things, seeming fixed in the thick of
the sea, though steaming quickly. Hogarth watched them through a
hand-glass, while Loveday, ghastly pallid, whispered: "Come,
Richard, come", but still lingered a little, seeing them grow up--
like the infant, the lad, the hairy man--toiling at the bigness of
the sea, looking stripped, prepared for tempest They were six miles
away--five.

Mute lay the _Boodah_; and, surrounding her, perniciously moved the
ships at forty-eight revolutions a minute, hardly a cable's interval
between the host of them, they seeming no more the playthings of the
sea, but its masters, each a travelling throne of power; and as they
pared so taciturn, with baleful aspect they trained their cannon
upon the sea-fort in their midst: not a soul visible on fort or
ships.

A long while it seems to last, that noonday stillness, a noonday
breezy and oceanic, the sea sharp-edged, hard-looking, dark-blue,
tossing spray along its ridges, not rough, but restless, shewing
against the ships white foams a moment, which silently glide away.

But their Admiral is signalling: _Let her have it!_ and in some
moments more yonder to the far north the _Florida_ breaks into
quick-flashing ecstasy, like quick-winking Gorgon glances; and the
north-east catches it in a single boom; and in ten seconds more it
is as if Nature, with sudden yell, feels to her womb the birth-hour
come and rueful throes: and where ships had been appears in one
minute nothing but a ring of stagnant smoke, tugged into rays and
out-sticking clouds, flushed with glares and rouges.

And no question of missing: the _Boodah_ stationary and huge; every
shell told. But, the deluge over, that thunder-marred visage again
looked grimly forth, a face new-risen from smallpox, an apparition,
roof-houses gone, lighthouse tops, one of her great 19.5 inchers in
fragments, in her casemates seventeen dead.

But where now is the one-masted _Hercules_, which but a moment since
went trembling at the bale of her own bellowing barbettes? The
_Hercules_ is in a Nessus-shirt of flame. And whither the _Hercules_
is going, thither is the _Idaho_ going, and the _Dante_ gone, and
gone the elongated length of the _Invincible_, and twenty
destroyers, and the bow-works of the old _Powerful_, which stoops
woefully there, screws in air, as the camel of the desert kneels and
waits, while into her beam comes crashing the ram of the poopless
_Deutschland_.

Yet the _Boodah_ has not fired a gun!

But now she fires: as the broadsides drench her anew, she fires, the
hulk--all round the horizon--lowing in travail: and as there is no
question of missing on the one side, so on the other is assurance,
the _Boodah's_ broad-sides of 19.5-inchers and 9.5-inchers, ninety-
two in all, being fired by the hand of Quilter-Beckett, who sits at
a table grim with knobs, buttons, dial-faces, in a cabinet near a
saloon where Hogarth, Loveday, and five lieutenants are lunching;
and where he sits he can hear the band in an alcove rendering for
the eaters Beethoven's Ninth Symphony: hear, not heed: for two
gunners in each casemate have sighted a ship through pivoted
glasses, whose fixing, disturbing an electrical circuit, prints the
ship's distance on an indicator before the Admiral: whereupon he
touches a button--many buttons--in intense succession: the _Boodah
bawls_: and the thrust-back of her resentment becomes intolerable,
the ships just like fawns under the paws of an old lion whose grisly
jaws drip gore; the sharks that infest her will fare well of her
hand.

Of forty-three ships fixed, thirty-nine are hit, eleven founder:
wreckage so vast and swift, that the Admiral, still afloat in a
_Queen Mary_ pierced above-belt, is like a man stung by the
tarantulas of distraction: tries to signal flight--flags cannot be
seen; fires coloured pistol-lights: "Retire!"--and soon, all round,
the circle is in flight.

But hapless flight: the _Boodah_ is an octopus whose feelers reach
far, and they, within her toils, cannot escape her omnipresence. She
sends after them no guns: yet they are blown to atoms; the sea
becomes a death-trap thick with pitfalls and shipwreck; one by one
they are caught, they fly aloft like startled fowl, or they succumb,
and lean, and stoop, and sink: the sea, for mile on mile, proving a
hell of torpedoes-dirigible, automobile, mine.

For in the matter of mines the _Boodah_ had all the advantages of a
shore, and as to dirigible torpedoes more than all.

Her mines, whose weight was adjusted to the specific gravity of salt
water, sank till the pressure at ten fathoms arrested them, they,
electrically connected with the forts, reaching out twenty miles;
and the whole network, charted to an inch, was coordinated with the
range-tables.

The ordinary l8-inch Whiteheads, moreover, were replaced by a longer
design running 6,000 yards, the added length being occupied by the
flask, whose compressed air runs the engine, they not sinking on
finishing their course: so, if they missed, there they lay, a trap
of 380 pounds of gun-cotton in the course of the numerous moving
foe.

With these three forms of the same plague the _Boodah_ hunted the
fleeing ships, and drove them stumbling through complicated
miseries, amazed and thunderstruck: so that seventy-three only,
several of them half-wrecks, reached her twenty-five mile limit;
and, there, over the mines of the _Solon_, reassembled.

Amid the throng on his ruined roof Hogarth watched their flight and
the ever-coming boatloads of blue-jackets through a mist of smoke
and the after-smell of war, while under the sea wide eyes in hosts
were a-gaze at a windfall of 2,400 bodies.

About half-past four captains and commanders of the survivors were
in the ward-room of the Second-in-Command on the _Orion_--the _Queen
Mary_ gone--when he, with splendid infatuation, proposed a return to
the attack, with a change of tactics to concentration upon one side
only of the _Boodah_; but the foreigners pointed out the obvious
added dangers; and in the midst of a wrangle a dispatch-boat from
the _Solon_, eleven miles south, arrived, demanding the usual sea-
rent, by draft, if not in gold; so out, at this unlooked-for
incident, broke a new quarrel, the British for a whole hour
resisting the inexorable; till the _Solon_ Lieutenant, his eyes
moist with pleading, explained their helplessness, adding that war
between the four Powers had been declared that day at noon from the
Stock Exchange steps: and only then the Vice-Admiral, breaking into
tears, yielded to destiny.

Hogarth, meanwhile, was like a wild man, imprisoned, till his yacht
returned at dusk with her excursionists; and without delay he was on
her, and away for England.


The whole line of their retreat might be tracked by the corpses of
thousands who had died of cold, fatigue, and hunger.

Many of those who reached their country carried with them the seeds
of death.

Bavaria was overrun by bands of ferocious warriors from that bloody
debatable land which lies on the frontier between Christendom and
Islam.

The terrible names of the Pandoor, the Croat, and the Hussar,
then first became familiar to Western Europe. The unfortunate
Charles of Bavaria, vanquished by Austria, betrayed by Prussia,
driven from his hereditary states, and neglected by his allies,
was hurried by shame and remorse to an untimely end.

An English army appeared in the heart of Germany, and defeated the
French at Dettingen. The Austrian captains already began to talk of
completing the work of Marlborough and Eugene, and of compelling
France to relinquish Alsace and the three Bishoprics.

The Court of Versailles, in this peril, looked to Frederic for
help. He had been guilty of two great treasons: perhaps he might be
induced to commit a third. The Duchess of Chateauroux then
held the chief influence over the feeble Lewis.

She, determined to send an agent to Berlin; and Voltaire was selected
for the mission.

He eagerly undertook the task; for, while his literary fame
filled all Europe, he was troubled with a childish craving for
political distinction. He was vain, and not without reason, of his
address, and of his insinuating eloquence: and he flattered
himself that he possessed boundless influence over the King
of Prussia.

The truth was that he knew, as yet, only one corner of Frederic's
character.

He was well acquainted with all the petty vanities and affectations
of the poetaster; but was not aware that these foibles were united
with all the talents and vices which lead to success in active life,
and that the unlucky versifier who pestered him with reams of middling
Alexandrines, was the most vigilant, suspicious, and severe of
politicians.

Voltaire was received with every mark of respect and friendship,
was lodged in the palace, and had a seat daily at the royal table.

The negotiation was of an extraordinary description.
Nothing can be conceived more whimsical than the conferences which
took place between the first literary man and the first
practical man of the age, whom a strange weakness had induced to
exchange their parts.

The great poet would talk of nothing but treaties and guarantees,
and the great King of nothing but metaphors and rhymes. On one
occasion Voltaire put into his Majesty's hands a paper on the
state of Europe, and received it back with verses scrawled on the
margin. In secret they both laughed at each other. Voltaire did not
spare the King's poems; and the King has left on record his opinion
of Voltaire's diplomacy. "He had no credentials," says Frederic, "and
the whole mission was a joke, a mere farce."

But what the influence of Voltaire could not effect, the rapid
progress of the Austrian arms effected. If it should be in the power
of Maria Theresa and George the Second to dictate terms of peace
to France, what chance was there that Prussia would long retain
Silesia?

Frederic's conscience told him that he had acted perfidiously and
inhumanly towards the Queen of Hungary.
, and another, catching it, cried
"Hurrah!"

For the French, German, and Russian fleets, in attempting to pass
the two narrows north and south of Europe, had been stopped by the
two sea-forts there; and though they had been so eager to pass, that
they had even offered to pay sea-rent, this, too, had been refused.
They had then, at five and at five-thirty in the afternoon, offered
battle to the islands: with the result that half their weight had
been annihilated before they took to flight. So said the
bulletin....

And Hogarth in the midst of the jubilee saw the man who jammed his
left shoulder, a broker in spectacles, grip the hand of the man on
his right, a ragamuffin, to cry out: "That scoundrel Hogarth! Isn't
there good in the damned thief, after all?"

And the other: "Aye, he knows how to give it 'em 'ot, don't 'e,
after all! Thank God for that!"

Three weeks later peace was proclaimed by a procession at Temple Bar
between England, Austro-Germany, France, Russia, and the Sea.


XXXVIII

THE MANIFESTO


The last effort of Europe to resist the Sea was made on the
afternoon of the 14th of October, when the British Prime Minister
refused to conclude a treaty of peace.

"Your master is only a pirate--on a large scale", he said to a
Minister of the Sea.

That was on the 14th.

On the 15th there was a stoppage of British trade nearly all the
world over.

On the 20th England was in a state of _émeute_ resembling
revolution.

On the 28th the Treaty of Peace was signed.

Its principal conditions were: (1) The undertaking by the Sea not to
raise sea-rent on British ships without certain formalities of
notice; and (2) The undertaking by Britain not to engage in the
making of any railway or overland trade-route, or of any marine
engine of war, without the consent of the Sea. And similar treaties
were signed by the Sea with the other nations.

Then followed the rush of the Ambassadors to the _Boodah_, and the
frivolous round of Court-life revolved, _levée_, audience, dinner,
drawing-room, investiture; the Lord of the Sea descended from the
throne before the Court to pin a cross upon the humble breast of his
best shot and give him the title of Præceps, gave fanciful honours
to emperors, received them of them--wore when throned a brow-band of
gold with only one stone, the biggest of the meteor octahedrons,
that glanced about his brow like an icicle in whose glass
gallivanted a fairy clad in rags of the rainbow.

Now the old gaieties recommenced, but more Olympian in tone, as
befitted the ruler of rulers, terrible now being the lifting of
Hogarth's brows at the least lapse in ritual; and only the chastest-
nurtured of the earth ever now stalked through gavotte or pavane in
those halls of the sea.

The world now lay at his feet. The dependence upon him of England,
of France, of that part of Austro-Germany called Germany, was
obvious: he could starve them. But over Austria proper, Russia,
Italy, his sway was no less omnipotent: for the panic cheapness of
scrip which followed the destruction of the _Kaiser_ had, of course,
been foreseen, and used by him; Beech had bought up, easily ousting
the Rothschilds from their old financial kingship: by tens of
millions the process had gone on; and still it continued
increasingly, for the wealth of Hogarth now, as compared with that
of other rich men, was like a ship to a skiff. If he threw upon the
market, the bankruptcy of several nations might follow: it was
doubtful if the United States could survive; certainly, Austria,
Russia, South America must go under.

How could I hope to win back wandering love, And make new flames
in dying embers leap, By such ungracious means?

And then She came, Firm-bosomed, round of cheek, with such young
eyes, And all the ways of youth.

I who had died A thousand deaths, in waiting the return Of that old
love-look to your face once more, Died yet again and went straight
into hell When I beheld it come at her approach.

My God, my God, how have I borne it all!

Yet since she had the power to wake that look - The power to sweep
the ashes from your heart Of burned-out love of me, and light new
fires, One thing remained for me--to let you go.

I had no wish to keep the empty frame From which the priceless picture
had been wrenched.
The document ran:

Richard, by the Will of God....I do hereby discern, declare, and
lay down: That:

1. What is no good cannot be owned: only goods can be owned.

2. "_Good_" is _well_, or pleasant; goods is _well_th (wealth) or
pleasures: thus, a coal-mine, being no pleasure, cannot be owned.

3. Coal _becomes_ goods after being moved, or taken. Moving does not
make it good; its nature does not make it good: moving-_plus_-Nature
makes it good, ownable. At the pit-head, already, it is a pleasure,
fewer pains being now needed to move it to a fireplace. Thus, Nature
apart from motion cannot be owned, being no good, as a cave is no
good to a caveman outside it: rain is wetting him; if he takes it,
moves in, it is good.

Animals and plants, by taking things from the planets presented to
them, by moving things, raise Nature into wealth, and own things.

4. Rest of mind and body seem to have re-established his health;
and he thanked God, with cheerful piety, for having set him free
both from his office and from his asthma. Many years seemed to
be before him, and he meditated many works, a tragedy on the death
of Socrates, a translation of the Psalms, a treatise on the
evidences of Christianity. Of this last performance, a part, which
we could well spare, has come down to us.

But the fatal complaint soon returned, and gradually prevailed
against all the resources of medicine.To say "own" is to say "take"; to say "take" is to say
"motion", i.e., the doing of work: "work done" being FD, i.e., Force
used into Distance moved-over. I cannot own the air: it is no good;
I own the air in my lungs, having taken, moved, it, done FD on it:
it is very good; and I own the air which, doing FD, moving to my
face, I do not evade, but accept, take: it is very good.

I say to Jack "take a cigar"; he loudly says "yes!", but does not
move it to his mouth, nor moves his mouth to it; instead, he moves a
pen to his mouth; this makes me laugh: he has not taken a cigar.

