     Better the musique, the more sicke it makes him
     Contempt of the ceremoniousnesse of the King of Spayne
     Listening to no reasoning for it, be it good or bad
     Many women now-a-days of mean sort in the streets, but no men
     Milke, which I drank to take away, my heartburne
     No money to do it with, nor anybody to trust us without it
     Rather hear a cat mew, than the best musique in the world
     Says, of all places, if there be hell, it is here
     So to bed in some little discontent, but no words from me
     The gentlemen captains will undo us
     To bed, after washing my legs and feet with warm water
     Venison-pasty that we have for supper to-night to the cook's
     With a shower of hail as big as walnuts
     World sees now the use of them for shelter of men (fore-castles)


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                            AUGUST & SEPTEMBER
                                  1666

August 1st.  Up betimes to the settling of my last month's accounts, and I
bless God I find them very clear, and that I am worth L5700, the most that
ever my book did yet make out.  So prepared to attend the Duke of Yorke as
usual, but Sir W. Pen, just as I was going out, comes home from
Sheernesse, and held me in discourse about publique business, till I come
by coach too late to St. James's, and there find that every thing stood
still, and nothing done for want of me.  Thence walked over the Parke with
Sir W. Coventry, who I clearly see is not thoroughly pleased with the late
management of the fight, nor with any thing that the Generalls do; only is
glad to hear that De Ruyter is out of favour, and that this fight hath
cost them 5,000 men, as they themselves do report.  And it is a strange
thing, as he observes, how now and then the slaughter runs on one hand;
there being 5,000 killed on theirs, and not above 400 or 500 killed and
wounded on ours, and as many flag-officers on theirs as ordinary captains
in ours; there being Everson, and the Admiral and Vice-Admiral of
Freezeland on theirs, and Seamour, Martin, and-----, on ours. I left him
going to Chappell, it being the common fast day, and the Duke of York at
Chappell.  And I to Mrs. Martin's, but she abroad, so I sauntered to or
again to the Abbey, and then to the parish church, fearfull of being seen
to do so, and so after the parish church was ended, I to the Swan and
there dined upon a rabbit, and after dinner to Mrs. Martin's, and there
find Mrs. Burroughs, and by and by comes a pretty widow, one Mrs.
Eastwood, and one Mrs. Fenton, a maid; and here merry kissing and looking
on their breasts, and all the innocent pleasure in the world.  But, Lord!
to see the dissembling of this widow, how upon the singing of a certain
jigg by Doll, Mrs. Martin's sister, she seemed to be sick and fainted and
God knows what, because the jigg, which her husband (who died this last
sickness) loved.  But by and by I made her as merry as is possible, and
towzed and tumbled her as I pleased, and then carried her and her sober
pretty kinswoman Mrs. Fenton home to their lodgings in the new market of
my Lord Treasurer's, and there left them. Mightily pleased with this
afternoon's mirth, but in great pain to ride in a coach with them, for
fear of being seen.  So home, and there much pleased with my wife's
drawing today in her pictures, and so to supper and to bed very pleasant.

2nd.  [Up] and to the office, where we sat, and in discourse at the table
with Sir W. Batten, I was obliged to tell him it was an untruth, which did
displease him mightily, and parted at noon very angry with me.  At home
find Lovett, who brought me some papers varnished, and showed me my
crucifix, which will be very fine when done.  He dined with me and Balty's
wife, who is in great pain for her husband, not hearing of him since the
fight; but I understand he was not in it, going hence too late, and I am
glad of it.  Thence to the office, and thither comes to me Creed, and he
and I walked a good while, and then to the victualling office together,
and there with Mr. Gawden I did much business, and so away with Creed
again, and by coach to see my Lord Bruncker, who it seems was not well
yesterday, but being come thither, I find his coach ready to carry him
abroad, but Tom, his footman, whatever the matter was, was lothe to desire
me to come in, but I walked a great while in the Piatza till I was going
away, but by and by my Lord himself comes down and coldly received me.  So
I soon parted, having enough for my over officious folly in troubling
myself to visit him, and I am apt to think that he was fearfull that my
coming was out of design to see how he spent his time [rather] than to
enquire after his health.  So parted, and I with Creed down to the New
Exchange Stairs, and there I took water, and he parted, so home, and then
down to Woolwich, reading and making an end of the "Rival Ladys," and find
it a very pretty play.  At Woolwich, it being now night, I find my wife
and Mercer, and Mr. Batelier and Mary there, and a supper getting ready.
So I staid, in some pain, it being late, and post night.  So supped and
merrily home, but it was twelve at night first.  However, sent away some
letters, and home to bed.

3rd.  Up and to the office, where Sir W. Batten and I sat to contract for
some fire-ships.  I there close all the morning.  At noon home to dinner,
and then abroad to Sir Philip Warwicke's at White Hall about Tangier one
quarter tallys, and there had some serious discourse touching money, and
the case of the Navy, wherein all I could get of him was that we had the
full understanding of the treasure as much as my Lord Treasurer himself,
and knew what he can do, and that whatever our case is, more money cannot
be got till the Parliament.  So talked of getting an account ready as soon
as we could to give the Parliament, and so very melancholy parted. So I
back again, calling my wife at her sister's, from whose husband we do now
hear that he was safe this week, and going in a ship to the fleete from
the buoy of the Nore, where he has been all this while, the fleete being
gone before he got down.  So home, and busy till night, and then to Sir W.
Pen, with my wife, to sit and chat, and a small supper, and home to bed.
The death of Everson, and the report of our success, beyond expectation,
in the killing of so great a number of men, hath raised the estimation of
the late victory considerably; but it is only among fools: for all that
was but accidental.  But this morning, getting Sir .W. Pen to read over
the Narrative with me, he did sparingly, yet plainly, say that we might
have intercepted their Zealand squadron coming home, if we had done our
parts; and more, that we might have spooned before the wind as well as
they, and have overtaken their ships in the pursuite, in all the while.

     [To spoom, or spoon, is to go right before the wind, without any
     sail.  Sea Dictionary.  Dryden uses the word

              "When virtue spooms before a prosperous gale,
               My heaving wishes help to fill the sail."
                                        Hind and Panther, iii. 96.]

4th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and, at noon to
dinner, and Mr. Cooke dined with us, who is lately come from
Hinchingbroke, [Lord Hinchingbrooke] who is also come to town: The family
all well.  Then I to the office, where very busy to state to Mr. Coventry
the account of the victuals of the fleete, and late at it, and then home
to supper and to bed.  This evening, Sir W. Pen come into the garden, and
walked with me, and told me that he had certain notice that at Flushing
they are in great distraction.  De Ruyter dares not come on shore for fear
of the people; nor any body open their houses or shops for fear of the
tumult: which is a every good hearing.

5th. (Lord's day).  Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there called Betty
Michell and her husband, and had two or three a long salutes from her out
of sight of 'su mari', which pleased me mightily, and so carried them by
water to West minster, and I to St. James's, and there had a meeting
before the Duke of Yorke, complaining of want of money, but nothing done
to any purpose, for want we shall, so that now our advices to him signify
nothing.  Here Sir W. Coventry did acquaint the Duke of Yorke how the
world do discourse of the ill method of our books, and that we would
consider how to answer any enquiry which shall be made after our practice
therein, which will I think concern the Controller most, but I shall make
it a memento to myself.  Thence walked to the Parish Church to have one
look upon Betty Michell, and so away homeward by water, and landed to go
to the church, where, I believe, Mrs. Horsely goes, by Merchant-tailors'
Hall, and there I find in the pulpit Elborough, my old schoolfellow and a
simple rogue, and yet I find him preaching a very good sermon, and in as
right a parson-like manner, and in good manner too, as I have heard any
body; and the church very full, which is a surprising consideration; but I
did not see her.  So home, and had a  good dinner, and after dinner with
my wife, and Mercer, and Jane by water, all the afternoon up as high as
Morclaeke with great pleasure, and a fine day, reading over the second
part of the, "Siege of Rhodes," with great delight.  We landed and walked
at Barne-elmes, and then at the Neat Houses I landed and bought a
millon,--[melon]--and we did also land and eat and drink at Wandsworth,
and so to the Old Swan, and thence walked home.  It being a mighty fine
cool evening, and there being come, my wife and I spent an houre in the
garden, talking of our living in the country, when I shall be turned out
of the office, as I fear the Parliament may find faults enough with the
office to remove us all, and I am joyed to think in how good a condition I
am to retire thither, and have wherewith very well to subsist.  Nan, at
Sir W. Pen's, lately married to one Markeham, a kinsman of Sir W. Pen's, a
pretty wench she is.

6th.  Up, and to the office a while, and then by water to my Lady
Montagu's, at Westminster, and there visited my Lard Hinchingbroke, newly
come from Hinchingbroke, and find him a mighty sober gentleman, to my
great content.  Thence to Sir Ph. Warwicke and my Lord Treasurer's, but
failed in my business; so home and in Fenchurch-streete met with Mr:
Battersby; says he, "Do you see Dan Rawlinson's door shut up?"  (which I
did, and wondered).  "Why," says he, "after all the sickness, and himself
spending all the last year in the country, one of his men is now dead of
the plague, and his wife and one of his mayds sicke, and himself shut up;"
which troubles me mightily.  So home; and there do hear also from Mrs.
Sarah Daniel, that Greenwich is at this time much worse than ever it was,
and Deptford too: and she told us that they believed all the towne would
leave the towne and come to London; which is now the receptacle of all the
people from all infected places.  God preserve us!  So by and by to
dinner, and, after dinner in comes Mrs. Knipp, and I being at the office
went home to her, and there I sat and talked with her, it being the first
time of her being here since her being brought to bed.  I very pleasant
with her; but perceive my wife hath no great pleasure in her being here,
she not being pleased with my kindnesse to her.  However, we talked and
sang, and were very pleasant.  By and by comes Mr. Pierce and his wife,
the first time she also hath been here since her lying-in, both having
been brought to bed of boys, and both of them dead.  And here we talked,
and were pleasant, only my wife in a chagrin humour, she not being pleased
with my kindnesse to either of them, and by and by she fell into some
silly discourse wherein I checked her, which made her mighty pettish, and
discoursed mighty offensively to Mrs. Pierce, which did displease me, but
I would make no words, but put the discourse by as much as I could (it
being about a report that my wife said was made of herself and meant by
Mrs. Pierce, that she was grown a gallant, when she had but so few suits
of clothes these two or three years, and a great deale of that silly
discourse), and by and by Mrs. Pierce did tell her that such discourses
should not trouble her, for there went as bad on other people, and
particularly of herself at this end of the towne, meaning my wife, that
she was crooked, which was quite false, which my wife had the wit not to
acknowledge herself to be the speaker of, though she has said it twenty
times.  But by this means we had little pleasure in their visit; however,
Knipp and I sang, and then I offered them to carry them home, and to take
my wife with me, but she would not go: so I with them, leaving my wife in
a very ill humour, and very slighting to them, which vexed me.  However, I
would not be removed from my civility to them, but sent for a coach, and
went with them; and, in our way, Knipp saying that she come out of doors
without a dinner to us, I took them to Old Fish Streete, to the very house
and woman where I kept my wedding dinner, where I never was since, and
there I did give them a joie of salmon, and what else was to be had.  And
here we talked of the ill-humour of my wife, which I did excuse as much as
I could, and they seemed to admit of it, but did both confess they
wondered at it; but from thence to other discourse, and among others to
that of my Lord Bruncker and Mrs. Williams, who it seems do speake mighty
hardly of me for my not treating them, and not giving her something to her
closett, and do speake worse of my wife, and dishonourably, but it is what
she do of all the world, though she be a whore herself; so I value it not.
But they told me how poorly my Lord carried himself the other day to his
kinswoman, Mrs. Howard, and was displeased because she called him uncle to
a little gentlewoman that is there with him, which he will not admit of;
for no relation is to be challenged from others to a lord, and did treat
her thereupon very rudely and ungenteely.  Knipp tells me also that my
Lord keeps another woman besides Mrs. Williams; and that, when I was there
the other day, there was a great hubbub in the house, Mrs. Williams being
fallen sicke, because my Lord was gone to his other mistresse, making her
wait for him, till his return from the other mistresse; and a great deale
of do there was about it; and Mrs. Williams swounded at it, at the very
time when I was there and wondered at the reason of my being received so
negligently.  I set them both at home, Knipp at her house, her husband
being at the doore; and glad she was to be found to have staid out so long
with me and Mrs. Pierce, and none else; and Mrs. Pierce at her house, and
am mightily pleased with the discretion of her during the simplicity and
offensiveness of my wife's discourse this afternoon.  I perceive by the
new face at Mrs. Pierces door that our Mary is gone from her.  So I home,
calling on W. Joyce in my coach, and staid and talked a little with him,
who is the same silly prating fellow that ever he was, and so home, and
there find my wife mightily out of order, and reproaching of Mrs. Pierce
and Knipp as wenches, and I know not what. But I did give her no words to
offend her, and quietly let all pass, and so to bed without any good looke
or words to or from my wife.

7th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and home to
dinner, and then to the office again, being pretty good friends with my
wife again, no angry words passed; but she finding fault with Mercer,
suspecting that it was she that must have told Mary, that must have told
her mistresse of my wife's saying that she was crooked.  But the truth is,
she is jealous of my kindnesse to her.  After dinner, to the office, and
did a great deale of business.  In the evening comes Mr. Reeves, with a
twelve-foote glasse, so I left the office and home, where I met Mr.
Batelier with my wife, in order to our going to-morrow, by agreement, to
Bow to see a dancing meeting.  But, Lord! to see how soon I could conceive
evil fears and thoughts concerning them; so Reeves and I and they up to
the top of the house, and there we endeavoured to see the moon, and
Saturne and Jupiter; but the heavens proved cloudy, and so we lost our
labour, having taken pains to get things together, in order to the
managing of our long glasse.  So down to supper and then to bed, Reeves
lying at my house, but good discourse I had from him: in his own trade,
concerning glasses, and so all of us late to bed.  I receive fresh
intelligence that Deptford and Greenwich are now afresh exceedingly
afflicted with the sickness more than ever.

8th.  Up, and with Reeves walk as far as the Temple, doing some business
in my way at my bookseller's and elsewhere, and there parted, and I took
coach, having first discoursed with Mr. Hooke a little, whom we met in the
streete, about the nature of sounds, and he did make me understand the
nature of musicall sounds made by strings, mighty prettily; and told me
that having come to a certain number of vibrations proper to make any
tone, he is able to tell how many strokes a fly makes with her wings
(those flies that hum in their flying) by the note that it answers to in
musique during their flying.  That, I suppose, is a little too much
refined; but his discourse in general of sound was mighty fine.  There I
left them, and myself by coach to St. James's, where we attended with the
rest of my fellows on the Duke, whom I found with two or three patches
upon his nose and about his right eye, which come from his being struck
with the bough of a tree the other day in his hunting; and it is a wonder
it did not strike out his eye.  After we had done our business with him,
which is now but little, the want of money being such as leaves us little
to do but to answer complaints of the want thereof, and nothing to offer
to the Duke, the representing of our want of money being now become
uselesse, I into the Park, and there I met with Mrs. Burroughs by
appointment, and did agree (after discoursing of some business of her's)
for her to meet me at New Exchange, while I by coach to my Lord
Treasurer's, and then called at the New Exchange, and thence carried her
by water to Parliament stayres, and I to the Exchequer about my Tangier
quarter tallys, and that done I took coach and to the west door of the
Abby, where she come to me, and I with her by coach to Lissen-greene where
we were last, and staid an hour or two before dinner could be got for us,
I in the meantime having much pleasure with her, but all honest. And by
and by dinner come up, and then to my sport again, but still honest; and
then took coach and up and down in the country toward Acton, and then
toward Chelsy, and so to Westminster, and there set her down where I took
her up, with mighty pleasure in her company, and so I by coach home, and
thence to Bow, with all the haste I could, to my Lady Pooly's, where my
wife was with Mr. Batelier and his sisters, and there I found a noble
supper, and every thing exceeding pleasant, and their mother, Mrs:
Batelier, a fine woman, but mighty passionate upon sudden news brought her
of the loss of a dog borrowed of the Duke of Albemarle's son to line a
bitch of hers that is very pretty, but the dog was by and by found, and so
all well again, their company mighty innocent and pleasant, we having
never been here before.  About ten o'clock we rose from table, and sang a
song, and so home in two coaches (Mr. Batelier and his sister Mary and my
wife and I in one, and Mercer alone in the other); and after being
examined at Allgate, whether we were husbands and wives, home, and being
there come, and sent away Mr. Batelierand his sister, I find Reeves there,
it being a mighty fine bright night, and so upon my leads, though very
sleepy, till one in the morning, looking on the moon and Jupiter, with
this twelve-foote glasse and another of six foote, that he hath brought
with him to-night, and the sights mighty pleasant, and one of the glasses
I will buy, it being very usefull.  So to bed mighty sleepy, but with much
pleasure.  Reeves lying at my house again; and mighty proud I am (and
ought to be thankfull to God Almighty) that I am able to have a spare bed
for my friends.

9th.  Up and to the office to prepare business for the Board, Reeves being
gone and I having lent him upon one of the glasses.  Here we sat, but to
little purpose, nobody coming at us but to ask for money, not to offer us
any goods.  At noon home to dinner, and then to the office again, being
mightily pleased with a Virgin's head that my wife is now doing of.  In
the evening to Lumbard-streete about money, to enable me to pay Sir G.
Carteret's L3000, which he hath lodged in my hands, in behalf of his son
and my Lady Jemimah, toward their portion, which, I thank God, I am able
to do at a minute's warning.  In my [way] I inquired, and find Mrs.
Rawlinson is dead of the sickness, and her mayde continues mighty ill.  He
himself is got out of the house.  I met also with Mr. Evelyn in the
streete, who tells me the sad condition at this very day at Deptford for
the plague, and more at Deale (within his precinct as one of the
Commissioners for sick and wounded seamen), that the towne is almost quite
depopulated.  Thence back home again, and after some business at my
office, late, home to supper and to bed, I being sleepy by my late want of
rest, notwithstanding my endeavouring to get a nap of an hour this
afternoon after dinner.  So home and to bed.

10th.  Up and to my chamber; there did some business and then to my
office, and towards noon by water to the Exchequer about my Tangier order,
and thence back again and to the Exchange, where little newes but what is
in the book, and, among other things, of a man sent up for by the King and
Council for saying that Sir W. Coventry did give intelligence to the Dutch
of all our matters here.  I met with Colvill, and he and I did agree about
his lending me L1000 upon a tally of L1000 for Tangier. Thence to Sympson,
the joyner, and I am mightily pleased with what I see of my presses for my
books, which he is making for me.  So homeward, and hear in
Fanchurch-streete, that now the mayde also is dead at Mr. Rawlinson's; so
that there are three dead in all, the wife, a man-servant, and
mayde-servant.  Home to dinner, where sister Balty dined with us, and met
a letter come to me from him.  He is well at Harwich, going to the fleete.
After dinner to the office, and anon with my wife and sister abroad, left
them in Paternoster Row, while Creed, who was with me at the office, and I
to Westminster; and leaving him in the Strand, I to my Lord Chancellor's,
and did very little business, and so away home by water, with more and
more pleasure, I every time reading over my Lord Bacon's "Faber Fortunae."
So home, and there did little business, and then walked an hour talking of
sundry things in the garden, and find him a cunning knave, as I always
observed him to be, and so home to supper, and to bed.  Pleased that this
day I find, if I please, I can have all my money in that I have out of my
hands, but I am at a loss whether to take it in or no, and pleased also to
hear of Mrs. Barbara Sheldon's good fortune, who is like to have Mr.
Wood's son, the mast-maker, a very rich man, and to be married speedily,
she being already mighty fine upon it.

11th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home
to dinner, where mighty pleased at my wife's beginnings of a little
Virgin's head.  To the office and did much business, and then to Mr.
Colvill's, and with him did come to an agreement about my L2600 assignment
on the Exchequer, which I had of Sir W. Warren; and, to my great joy, I
think I shall get above L100 by it, but I must leave it to be finished on
Monday.  Thence to the office, and there did the remainder of my business,
and so home to supper and to bed.  This afternoon I hear as if we had
landed some men upon the Dutch coasts, but I believe it is but a foolery
either in the report or the attempt.

12th (Lord's day).  Up and to my chamber, where busy all the morning, and
my thoughts very much upon the manner of my removal of my closett things
the next weeke into my present musique room, if I find I can spare or get
money to furnish it.  By and by comes Reeves, by appointment, but did not
bring the glasses and things I expected for our discourse and my
information to-day, but we have agreed on it for next Sunday.  By and by,
in comes Betty Michell and her husband, and so to dinner, I mightily
pleased with their company.  We passed the whole day talking with them,
but without any pleasure, but only her being there.  In the evening, all
parted, and I and my wife up to her closett to consider how to order that
the next summer, if we live to it; and then down to my chamber at night to
examine her kitchen accounts, and there I took occasion to fall out with
her for her buying a laced handkercher and pinner without my leave. Though
the thing is not much, yet I would not permit her begin to do so, lest
worse should follow.  From this we began both to be angry, and so
continued till bed, and did not sleep friends.

13th.  Up, without being friends with my wife, nor great enemies, being
both quiet and silent.  So out to Colvill's, but he not being come to town
yet, I to Paul's Church-yarde, to treat with a bookbinder, to come and
gild the backs of all my books, to make them handsome, to stand in my new
presses, when they come.  So back again to Colvill's, and there did end
our treaty, to my full content, about my Exchequer assignment of L2600 of
Sir W. Warren's, for which I give him L170 to stand to the hazard of
receiving it.  So I shall get clear by it L230, which is a very good jobb.
God be praised for it!  Having done with him, then he and I took coach,
and I carried him to Westminster, and there set him down, in our way
speaking of several things.  I find him a bold man to say any thing of any
body, and finds fault with our great ministers of state that nobody looks
after any thing; and I thought it dangerous to be free with him, for I do
not think he can keep counsel, because he blabs to me what hath passed
between other people and him.  Thence I to St. James's, and there missed
Sir W. Coventry; but taking up Mr. Robinson in my coach, I towards London,
and there in the way met Sir W. Coventry, and followed him to White Hall,
where a little discourse very kind, and so I away with Robinson, and set
him down at the 'Change, and thence I to Stokes the goldsmith, and sent
him to and again to get me L1000 in gold; and so home to dinner, my wife
and I friends, without any words almost of last night. After dinner, I
abroad to Stokes, and there did receive L1000 worth in gold, paying 18
1/2d.  and 19d.  for others exchange.  Home with them, and there to my
office to business, and anon home in the evening, there to settle some of
my accounts, and then to supper and to bed.

14th.  (Thanksgiving day.)

     [A proclamation ordering August 14th to be observed in London and
     Westminster, and August 23rd in other places, as a day of
     thanksgiving for the late victory at sea over the Dutch, was
     published on August 6th.]

Up, and comes Mr. Foley and his man, with a box of a great variety of
carpenter's and joyner's tooles, which I had bespoke, to me, which please
me mightily; but I will have more.  Then I abroad down to the Old Swan,
and there I called and kissed Betty Michell, and would have got her to go
with me to Westminster, but I find her a little colder than she used to
be, methought, which did a little molest me.  So I away not pleased, and
to White Hall, where I find them at Chappell, and met with Povy, and he
and I together, who tells me how mad my letter makes my Lord Peterborough,
and what a furious letter he hath writ to me in answer, though it is not
come yet.  This did trouble me; for though there be no reason, yet to have
a nobleman's mouth open against a man may do a man hurt; so I endeavoured
to have found him out and spoke with him, but could not.  So to the
chappell, and heard a piece of the Dean of Westminster's sermon, and a
special good anthemne before the king, after a sermon, and then home by
coach with Captain Cocke, who is in pain about his hempe, of which he says
he hath bought great quantities, and would gladly be upon good terms with
us for it, wherein I promise to assist him.  So we 'light at the 'Change,
where, after a small turn or two, taking no pleasure now-a-days to be
there, because of answering questions that would be asked there which I
cannot answer; so home and dined, and after dinner, with my wife and
Mercer to the Beare-garden,

     [The Bear Garden was situated on Bankside, close to the precinct of
     the Clinke Liberty, and very near to the old palace of the bishops
     of Winchester.  Stow, to his "Survey," says: "There be two Bear
     Gardens, the old and new Places."  The name still exists in a street
     or lane at the foot of Southwark Bridge, and in Bear Garden Wharf.]

where I have not been, I think, of many years, and saw some good sport of
the bull's tossing of the dogs: one into the very boxes.  But it is a very
rude and nasty pleasure.  We had a great many hectors in the same box with
us (and one very fine went into the pit, and played his dog for a wager,
which was a strange sport for a gentleman), where they drank wine, and
drank Mercer's health first, which I pledged with my hat off; and who
should be in the house but Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who saw us and spoke to
us.  Thence home, well enough satisfied, however, with the variety of this
afternoon's exercise; and so I to my chamber, till in the evening our
company come to supper.  We had invited to a venison pasty Mr. Batelier
and his sister Mary, Mrs. Mercer, her daughter Anne, Mr. Le Brun, and W.
Hewer; and so we supped, and very merry.  And then about nine o'clock to
Mrs. Mercer's gate, where the fire and boys expected us, and her son had
provided abundance of serpents and rockets; and there mighty merry (my
Lady Pen and Pegg going thither with us, and Nan Wright), till about
twelve at night, flinging our fireworks, and burning one another and the
people over the way.  And at last our businesses being most spent, we into
Mrs. Mercer's, and there mighty merry, smutting one another with candle
grease and soot, till most of us were like devils.  And that being done,
then we broke up, and to my house; and there I made them drink, and
upstairs we went, and then fell into dancing (W. Batelier dancing well),
and dressing, him and I and one Mr. Banister (who with his wife come over
also with us) like women; and Mercer put on a suit of Tom's, like a boy,
and mighty mirth we had, and Mercer danced a jigg; and Nan Wright and my
wife and Pegg Pen put on perriwigs.  Thus we spent till three or four in
the morning, mighty merry; and then parted, and to bed.

15th.  Mighty sleepy; slept till past eight of the clock, and was called
up by a letter from Sir W. Coventry, which, among other things, tells me
how we have burned one hundred and sixty ships of the enemy within the
Fly.

     [On the 8th August the Duke of Albemarle reported to Lord Arlington
     that he had "sent 1000 good men under Sir R. Holmes and Sir William
     Jennings to destroy the islands of Vlie and Schelling."  On the 10th
     James Hayes wrote to Williamson: "On the 9th at noon smoke was seen
     rising from several places in the island of Vlie, and the 10th
     brought news that Sir Robert had burned in the enemy's harbour 160
     outward bound valuable merchant men and three men-of-war, and taken
     a little pleasure boat and eight guns in four hours.  The loss is
     computed at a million sterling, and will make great confusion when
     the people see themselves in the power of the English at their very
     doors.  Sir Robert then landed his forces, and is burning the houses
     in Vlie and Schelling as bonfires for his good success at sea"
     ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp. 21,27).]

I up, and with all possible haste, and in pain for fear of coming late, it
being our day of attending the Duke of Yorke, to St. James's, where they
are full of the particulars; how they are generally good merchant ships,
some of them laden and supposed rich ships.  We spent five fire-ships upon
them.  We landed on the Schelling (Sir Philip Howard with some men, and
Holmes, I think; with others, about 1000 in all), and burned a town; and
so come away.  By and by the Duke of Yorke with his books showed us the
very place and manner, and that it was not our design or expectation to
have done this, but only to have landed on the Fly, and burned some of
their store; but being come in, we spied those ships, and with our long
boats, one by one, fired them, our ships running all aground, it being so
shoal water.  We were led to this by, it seems, a renegado captain of the
Hollanders, who found himself ill used by De Ruyter for his good service,
and so come over to us, and hath done us good service; so that now we
trust him, and he himself did go on this expedition.  The service is very
great, and our joys as great for it. All this will make the Duke of
Albemarle in repute again, I doubt, though there is nothing of his in
this.  But, Lord! to see what successe do, whether with or without reason,
and making a man seem wise, notwithstanding never so late demonstration of
the profoundest folly in the world.  Thence walked over the Parke with Sir
W. Coventry, in our way talking of the unhappy state of our office; and I
took an opportunity to let him know, that though the backwardnesses of all
our matters of the office may be well imputed to the known want of money,
yet, perhaps, there might be personal and particular failings; and that I
did, therefore, depend still upon his promise of telling me whenever he
finds any ground to believe any defect or neglect on my part, which he
promised me still to do; and that there was none he saw, nor, indeed, says
he, is there room now-a-days to find fault with any particular man, while
we are in this condition for money.  This, methought, did not so well
please me; but, however, I am glad I have said this, thereby giving myself
good grounds to believe that at this time he did not want an occasion to
have said what he pleased to me, if he had had anything in his mind, which
by his late distance and silence I have feared.  But then again I am to
consider he is grown a very great man, much greater than he was, and so
must keep more distance; and, next, that the condition of our office will
not afford me occasion of shewing myself so active and deserving as
heretofore; and, lastly, the muchness of his business cannot suffer him to
mind it, or give him leisure to reflect on anything, or shew the freedom
and kindnesse that he used to do.  But I think I have done something
considerable to my satisfaction in doing this; and that if I do but my
duty remarkably from this time forward, and not neglect it, as I have of
late done, and minded my pleasures, I may be as well as ever I was.
Thence to the Exchequer, but did nothing, they being all gone from their
offices; and so to the Old Exchange, where the towne full of the good
newes, but I did not stay to tell or hear any, but home, my head akeing
and drowsy, and to dinner, and then lay down upon the couch, thinking to
get a little rest, but could not.  So down the river, reading "The
Adventures of Five Houres," which the more I read the more I admire. So
down below Greenwich, but the wind and tide being against us, I back again
to Deptford, and did a little business there, and thence walked to
Redriffe; and so home, and to the office a while.  In the evening comes W.
Batelier and his sister, and my wife, and fair Mrs. Turner into the
garden, and there we walked, and then with my Lady Pen and Pegg in
a-doors, and eat and were merry, and so pretty late broke up, and to bed.
The guns of the Tower going off, and there being bonefires also in the
street for this late good successe.

16th.  Up, having slept well, and after entering my journal, to the
office, where all the morning, but of late Sir W. Coventry hath not come
to us, he being discouraged from the little we have to do but to answer
the clamours of people for money.  At noon home, and there dined with me
my Lady Pen only and W. Hewer at a haunch of venison boiled, where pretty
merry, only my wife vexed me a little about demanding money to go with my
Lady Pen to the Exchange to lay out.  I to the office, where all the
afternoon and very busy and doing much business; but here I had a most
eminent experience of the evil of being behindhand in business.  I was the
most backward to begin any thing, and would fain have framed to myself an
occasion of going abroad, and should, I doubt, have done it, but some
business coming in, one after another, kept me there, and I fell to the
ridding away of a great deale of business, and when my hand was in it was
so pleasing a sight to [see] my papers disposed of, and letters answered,
which troubled my book and table, that I could have continued there with
delight all night long, and did till called away by my Lady Pen and Pegg
and my wife to their house to eat with them; and there I went, and
exceeding merry, there being Nan Wright, now Mrs. Markham, and sits at
table with my Lady.  So mighty merry, home and to bed.  This day Sir W.
Batten did show us at the table a letter from Sir T. Allen, which says
that we have taken ten or twelve' ships (since the late great expedition
of burning their ships and towne), laden with hempe, flax, tarr, deales,
&c.  This was good newes; but by and by comes in Sir G. Carteret, and he
asked us with full mouth what we would give for good newes.  Says Sir W.
Batten, "I have better than you, for a wager."  They laid sixpence, and we
that were by were to give sixpence to him that told the best newes.  So
Sir W. Batten told his of the ten or twelve ships Sir G. Carteret did then
tell us that upon the newes of the burning of the ships and towne the
common people a Amsterdam did besiege De Witt's house, and he was force to
flee to the Prince of Orange, who is gone to Cleve to the marriage of his
sister.  This we concluded all the best newest and my Lord Bruncker and
myself did give Sir G. Carteret our sixpence a-piece, which he did give
Mr. Smith to give the poor.  Thus we made ourselves mighty merry.

17th.  Up and betimes with Captain Erwin down by water to Woolwich, I
walking alone from Greenwich thither, making an end of the "Adventures of
Five Hours," which when all is done is the best play that ever I read in
my life.  Being come thither I did some business there and at the Rope
Yarde, and had a piece of bride-cake sent me by Mrs. Barbary into the
boate after me, she being here at her uncle's, with her husband, Mr.
Wood's son, the mast-maker, and mighty nobly married, they say, she was,
very fine, and he very rich, a strange fortune for so odd a looked mayde,
though her hands and body be good, and nature very good, I think.  Back
with Captain Erwin, discoursing about the East Indys, where he hath often
been.  And among other things he tells me how the King of Syam seldom goes
out without thirty or forty thousand people with him, and not a word
spoke, nor a hum or cough in the whole company to be heard.  He tells me
the punishment frequently there for malefactors is cutting off the crowne
of their head, which they do very dexterously, leaving their brains bare,
which kills them presently.  He told me what I remember he hath once done
heretofore: that every body is to lie flat down at the coming by of the
King, and nobody to look upon him upon pain of death.  And that he and his
fellows, being strangers, were invited to see the sport of taking of a
wild elephant, and they did only kneel, and look toward the King. Their
druggerman did desire them to fall down, for otherwise he should suffer
for their contempt of the King.  The sport being ended, a messenger comes
from the King, which the druggerman thought had been to have taken away
his life; but it was to enquire how the strangers liked the sport.  The
druggerman answered that they did cry it up to be the best that ever they
saw, and that they never heard of any Prince so great in every thing as
this King.  The messenger being gone back, Erwin and his company asked
their druggerman what he had said, which he told them. "But why," say
they, "would you say that without our leave, it being not true?"--"It is
no matter for that," says he, "I must have said it, or have been hanged,
for our King do not live by meat, nor drink, but by having great lyes told
him."  In our way back we come by a little vessel that come into the river
this morning, and says he left the fleete in Sole Bay, and that he hath
not heard (he belonging to Sir W. Jenings, in the fleete) of any such
prizes taken as the ten or twelve I inquired about, and said by Sir W.
Batten yesterday to be taken, so I fear it is not true.  So to
Westminster, and there, to my great content, did receive my L2000 of Mr.
Spicer's telling, which I was to receive of Colvill, and brought it home
with me [to] my house by water, and there I find one of my new presses for
my books brought home, which pleases me mightily.  As, also, do my wife's
progresse upon her head that she is making.  So to dinner, and thence
abroad with my wife, leaving her at Unthanke's; I to White Hall, waiting
at the Council door till it rose, and there spoke with Sir W. Coventry,
who and I do much fear our Victuallers, they having missed the fleete in
their going.  But Sir W. Coventry says it is not our fault, but theirs, if
they have not left ships to secure them.  This he spoke in a chagrin sort
of way, methought.  After a little more discourse of several businesses, I
away homeward, having in the gallery the good fortune to see Mrs. Stewart,
who is grown a little too tall, but is a woman of most excellent features.
The narrative of the late expedition in burning the ships is in print, and
makes it a great thing, and I hope it is so.  So took up my wife and home,
there I to the office, and thence with Sympson the joyner home to put
together the press he hath brought me for my books this day, which pleases
me exceedingly.  Then to Sir W. Batten's, where Sir Richard Ford did very
understandingly, methought, give us an account of the originall of the
Hollands Bank,

     [This bank at Amsterdam is referred to in a tract entitled "An
     Appeal to Caesar," 1660, p. 22.  In 1640 Charles I. seized the money
     in the mint in the Tower entrusted to the safe keeping of the Crown.
     It was the practice of the London goldsmiths at this time to allow
     interest at the rate of six or eight per cent. on money deposited
     with them (J. Biddulph Martin, "The Grasshopper in Lombard Street,"
     1892, p. 152).]

and the nature of it, and how they do never give any interest at all to
any person that brings in their money, though what is brought in upon the
public faith interest is given by the State for.  The unsafe condition of
a Bank under a Monarch, and the little safety to a Monarch to have any; or
Corporation alone (as London in answer to Amsterdam) to have so great a
wealth or credit, it is, that makes it hard to have a Bank here.  And as
to the former, he did tell us how it sticks in the memory of most
merchants how the late King (when by the war between Holland and France
and Spayne all the bullion of Spayne was brought hither, one-third of it
to be coyned; and indeed it was found advantageous to the merchant to
coyne most of it), was persuaded in a strait by my Lord Cottington to
seize upon the money in the Tower, which, though in a few days the
merchants concerned did prevail to get it released, yet the thing will
never be forgot.  So home to supper and to bed, understanding this
evening, since I come home, that our Victuallers are all come in to the
fleete, which is good newes.  Sir John Minnes come home tonight not well,
from Chatham, where he hath been at a pay, holding it at Upnor Castle,
because of the plague so much in the towne of Chatham.  He hath, they say,
got an ague, being so much on the water.

18th.  All the morning at my office; then to the Exchange (with my Lord
Bruncker in his coach) at noon, but it was only to avoid Mr. Chr. Pett's
being invited by me to dinner.  So home, calling at my little mercer's in
Lumbard Streete, who hath the pretty wench, like the old Queene, and there
cheapened some stuffs to hang my roome, that I intend to turn into a
closett.  So home to dinner, and after dinner comes Creed to discourse
with me about several things of Tangier concernments and accounts, among
others starts the doubt, which I was formerly aware of, but did wink at
it, whether or no Lanyon and his partners be not paid for more than they
should be, which he presses, so that it did a little discompose me; but,
however, I do think no harm will arise thereby.  He gone, I to the office,
and there very late, very busy, and so home to supper and to bed.

19th (Lord's day).  Up and to my chamber, and there began to draw out fair
and methodically my accounts of Tangier, in order to shew them to the
Lords.  But by and by comes by agreement Mr. Reeves, and after him Mr.
Spong, and all day with them, both before and after dinner, till ten
o'clock at night, upon opticke enquiries, he bringing me a frame he closes
on, to see how the rays of light do cut one another, and in a darke room
with smoake, which is very pretty.  He did also bring a lanthorne with
pictures in glasse, to make strange things appear on a wall, very pretty.
We did also at night see Jupiter and his girdle and satellites, very fine,
with my twelve-foote glasse, but could not Saturne, he being very dark.
Spong and I had also several fine discourses upon the globes this
afternoon, particularly why the fixed stars do not rise and set at the
same houre all the yeare long, which he could not demonstrate, nor I
neither, the reason of.  So, it being late, after supper they away home.
But it vexed me to understand no more from Reeves and his glasses touching
the nature and reason of the several refractions of the several figured
glasses, he understanding the acting part, but not one bit the theory, nor
can make any body understand it, which is a strange dullness, methinks.  I
did not hear anything yesterday or at all to confirm either Sir Thos.
Allen's news of the 10 or 12 ships taken, nor of the disorder at Amsterdam
upon the news of the burning of the ships, that he [De Witt] should be
fled to the Prince of Orange, it being generally believed that he was gone
to France before.

20th.  Waked this morning, about six o'clock, with a violent knocking at
Sir J. Minnes's doore, to call up Mrs. Hammon, crying out that Sir J.
Minnes is a-dying.  He come home ill of an ague on Friday night.  I saw
him on Saturday, after his fit of the ague, and then was pretty lusty.
Which troubles me mightily, for he is a very good, harmless, honest
gentleman, though not fit for the business.  But I much fear a worse may
come, that may be more uneasy to me.  Up, and to Deptford by water,
reading "Othello, Moore of Venice," which I ever heretofore esteemed a
mighty good play, but having so lately read "The Adventures of Five
Houres," it seems a mean thing.  Walked back, and so home, and then down
to the Old Swan and drank at Betty Michell's, and so to Westminster to the
Exchequer about my quarter tallies, and so to Lumbard Streete to choose
stuff to hang my new intended closet, and have chosen purple. So home to
dinner, and all the afternoon till almost midnight upon my Tangier
accounts, getting Tom Wilson to help me in writing as I read, and at night
W. Hewer, and find myself most happy in the keeping of all my accounts,
for that after all the changings and turnings necessary in such an
account, I find myself right to a farthing in an account of L127,000. This
afternoon I visited Sir J. Minnes, who, poor man, is much impatient by
these few days' sickness, and I fear indeed it will kill him.

21st.  Up, and to the office, where much business and Sir W. Coventry
there, who of late hath wholly left us, most of our business being about
money, to which we can give no answer, which makes him weary of coming to
us.  He made an experiment to-day, by taking up a heape of petitions that
lay upon the table.  They proved seventeen in number, and found them thus:
one for money for reparation for clothes, four desired to have tickets
made out to them, and the other twelve were for money.  Dined at home, and
sister Balty with us.  My wife snappish because I denied her money to lay
out this afternoon; however, good friends again, and by coach set them
down at the New Exchange, and I to the Exchequer, and there find my
business of my tallys in good forwardness.  I passed down into the Hall,
and there hear that Mr. Bowles, the grocer, after 4 or 5 days' sickness,
is dead, and this day buried.  So away, and taking up my wife, went
homewards.  I 'light and with Harman to my mercer's in Lumbard Streete,
and there agreed for, our purple serge for my closett, and so I away home.
So home and late at the office, and then home, and there found Mr.
Batelier and his sister Mary, and we sat chatting a great while, talking
of witches and spirits, and he told me of his own knowledge, being with
some others at Bourdeaux, making a bargain with another man at a taverne
for some clarets, they did hire a fellow to thunder (which he had the art
of doing upon a deale board) and to rain and hail, that is, make the noise
of, so as did give them a pretence of undervaluing their merchants' wines,
by saying this thunder would spoil and turne them.  Which was so
reasonable to the merchant, that he did abate two pistolls per ton for the
wine in belief of that, whereas, going out, there was no such thing.  This
Batelier did see and was the cause of to his profit, as is above said.  By
and by broke up and to bed.

22nd.  Up and by coach with L100 to the Exchequer to pay fees there. There
left it, and I to St. James's, and there with; the Duke of Yorke. I had
opportunity of much talk with Sir. W. Pen to-day (he being newly come from
the fleete); and he, do much undervalue the honour that is given to the
conduct of the late business of Holmes in burning the ships and town

     [The town burned (see August 15th, ante) was Brandaris, a place of
     1000 houses, on the isle of Schelling; the ships lay between that
     island and the Fly (i.e. Vlieland), the adjoining island.  This
     attack probably provoked that by the Dutch on Chatham.]

saying it was a great thing indeed, and of great profit to us in being of
great losse to the enemy, but that it was wholly a business of chance, and
no conduct employed in it.  I find Sir W. Pen do hold up his head at this
time higher than ever he did in his life.  I perceive he do look after Sir
J. Minnes's place if he dies, and though I love him not nor do desire to
have him in, yet I do think [he] is the first man in England for it.  To
the Exchequer, and there received my tallys, and paid my fees in good
order, and so home, and there find Mrs. Knipp and my wife going to dinner.
She tells me my song, of "Beauty Retire" is mightily cried up, which I am
not a little proud of; and do think I have done "It is Decreed" better,
but I have not finished it.  My closett is doing by upholsters, which I am
pleased with, but fear my purple will be too sad for that melancholy
roome.  After dinner and doing something at the office, I with my wife,
Knipp, and Mercer, by coach to Moorefields, and there saw "Polichinello,"
which pleases me mightily, and here I saw our Mary, our last chamber-maid,
who is gone from Mrs. Pierces it seems. Thence carried Knipp home, calling
at the Cocke alehouse at the doore and drank, and so home, and there find
Reeves, and so up to look upon the stars, and do like my glasse very well,
and did even with him for it and a little perspective and the Lanthorne
that shows tricks, altogether costing me L9 5s. 0d.  So to bed, he lying
at our house.

23rd.  At the office all the morning, whither Sir W. Coventry sent me word
that the Dutch fleete is certainly abroad; and so we are to hasten all we
have to send to our fleete with all speed.  But, Lord! to see how my Lord
Bruncker undertakes the despatch of the fire-ships, when he is no more fit
for it than a porter; and all the while Sir W. Pen, who is the most fit,
is unwilling to displease him, and do not look after it; and so the King's
work is like to be well done.  At noon dined at home, Lovett with us; but
he do not please me in his business, for he keeps things long in hand, and
his paper do not hold so good as I expected--the varnish wiping off in a
little time--a very sponge; and I doubt by his discourse he is an odde
kind of fellow, and, in plain terms, a very rogue.  He gone, I to the
office (having seen and liked the upholsters' work in my roome--which they
have almost done), and there late, and in the evening find Mr. Batelier
and his sister there and then we talked and eat and were merry, and so
parted late, and to bed.

24th.  Up, and dispatched several businesses at home in the morning, and
then comes Sympson to set up my other new presses

     [These presses still exist, and, according to Pepys's wish, they are
     placed in the second court of Magdalene College in a room which they
     exactly fit, and the books are arranged in the presses just as they
     were when presented to the college.--M. B.]

for my books, and so he and I fell in to the furnishing of my new closett,
and taking out the things out of my old, and I kept him with me all day,
and he dined with me, and so all the afternoon till it was quite darke
hanging things, that is my maps and pictures and draughts, and setting up
my books, and as much as we could do, to my most extraordinary
satisfaction; so that I think it will be as noble a closett as any man
hath, and light enough--though, indeed, it would be better to have had a
little more light.  He gone, my wife and I to talk, and sup, and then to
setting right my Tangier accounts and enter my Journall, and then to bed
with great content in my day's worke.  This afternoon comes Mrs. Barbary
Sheldon, now Mrs. Wood, to see my wife.  I was so busy I would not see
her.  But she came, it seems, mighty rich in rings and fine clothes, and
like a lady, and says she is matched mighty well, at which I am very glad,
but wonder at her good fortune and the folly of her husband, and vexed at
myself for not paying her the respect of seeing her, but I will come out
of her debt another time.

25th.  All the morning at the office.  At noon dined at home, and after
dinner up to my new closett, which pleases me mightily, and there I
proceeded to put many things in order as far as I had time, and then set
it in washing, and stood by myself a great while to see it washed; and
then to the office, and then wrote my letters and other things, and then
in mighty good humour home to supper and to bed.

26th (Lord's day).  Up betimes, and to the finishing the setting things in
order in my new closett out of my old, which I did thoroughly by the time
sermon was done at church, to my exceeding joy, only I was a little
disturbed with newes my Lord Bruncker brought me, that we are to attend
the King at White Hall this afternoon, and that it is about a complaint
from the Generalls against us.  Sir W. Pen dined by invitation with me,
his Lady and daughter being gone into the country.  We very merry.  After
dinner we parted, and I to my office, whither I sent for Mr. Lewes and
instructed myself fully in the business of the Victualling, to enable me
to answer in the matter; and then Sir W. Pen and I by coach to White Hall,
and there staid till the King and Cabinet were met in the Green Chamber,
and then we were called in; and there the King begun with me, to hear how
the victualls of the fleete stood.  I did in a long discourse tell him and
the rest (the Duke of Yorke, Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, both the
Secretarys, Sir G. Carteret, and Sir W. Coventry,) how it stood, wherein
they seemed satisfied, but press mightily for more supplies; and the
letter of the Generalls, which was read, did lay their not going or too
soon returning from the Dutch coast, this next bout, to the want of
victuals.  They then proceeded to the enquiry after the fireships; and did
all very superficially, and without any severity at all.  But, however, I
was in pain, after we come out, to know how I had done; and hear well
enough.  But, however, it shall be a caution to me to prepare myself
against a day of inquisition.  Being come out, I met with Mr. Moore, and
he and I an houre together in the Gallery, telling me how far they are
gone in getting my Lord [Sandwich's] pardon, so as the Chancellor is
prepared in it; and Sir H. Bennet do promote it, and the warrant for the
King's signing is drawn.  The business between my Lord Hinchingbroke and
Mrs. Mallett is quite broke off; he attending her at Tunbridge, and she
declaring her affections to be settled; and he not being fully pleased
with the vanity and liberty of her carriage.  He told me how my Lord has
drawn a bill of exchange from Spayne of L1200, and would have me supply
him with L500 of it, but I avoyded it, being not willing to embarke myself
in money there, where I see things going to ruine.  Thence to discourse of
the times; and he tells me he believes both my Lord Arlington and Sir W.
Coventry, as well as my Lord Sandwich and Sir G. Carteret, have reason to
fear, and are afeard of this Parliament now coming on.  He tells me that
Bristoll's faction is getting ground apace against my Lord Chancellor.  He
told me that my old Lord Coventry was a cunning, crafty man, and did make
as many bad decrees in Chancery as any man; and that in one case, that
occasioned many years' dispute, at last when the King come in, it was
hoped by the party grieved, to get my Lord Chancellor to reverse a decree
of his.  Sir W. Coventry took the opportunity of the business between the
Duke of Yorke and the Duchesse, and said to my Lord Chancellor, that he
had rather be drawn up Holborne to be hanged, than live to see his father
pissed upon (in these very terms) and any decree of his reversed.  And so
the Chancellor did not think fit to do it, but it still stands, to the
undoing of one Norton, a printer, about his right to the printing of the
Bible, and Grammar, &c.  Thence Sir W. Pen and I to Islington and there
drank at the Katherine Wheele, and so down the nearest way home, where
there was no kind of pleasure at all.  Being come home, hear that Sir J.
Minnes has had a very bad fit all this day, and a hickup do take him,
which is a very bad sign, which troubles me truly.  So home to supper a
little and then to bed.

27th.  Up, and to my new closett, which pleases me mightily, and there did
a little business.  Then to break open a window, to the leads' side in my
old closett, which will enlighten the room mightily, and make it mighty
pleasant.  So to the office, and then home about one thing or other, about
my new closet, for my mind is full of nothing but that.  So at noon to
dinner, mightily pleased with my wife's picture that she is upon.  Then to
the office, and thither come and walked an hour with me Sir G. Carteret,
who tells me what is done about my Lord's pardon, and is not for letting
the Duke of Yorke know any thing of it beforehand, but to carry it as
speedily and quietly as we can.  He seems to be very apprehensive that the
Parliament will be troublesome and inquisitive into faults, but seems not
to value them as to himself.  He gone, I to the Victualling Office, there
with Lewes' and Willson setting the business of the state of the fleete's
victualling even and plain, and that being done, and other good discourse
about it over, Mr. Willson and I by water down the River for discourse
only, about business of the office, and then back, and I home, and after a
little at my office home to my new closet, and there did much business on
my Tangier account and my Journall for three days.  So to supper and to
bed.  We are not sure that the Dutch fleete is out.  I have another
memento from Sir W. Coventry of the want of provisions in the fleete,
which troubles me, though there is no reason for it; but will have the
good effect of making me more wary.  So, full of thoughts, to bed.

28th.  Up, and in my new closet a good while doing business.  Then called
on Mrs. Martin and Burroughs of Westminster about business of the former's
husband.  Which done, I to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At
noon I, with my wife and Mercer, to Philpott Lane, a great cook's shop, to
the wedding of Mr. Longracke, our purveyor, a good, sober, civil man, and
hath married a sober, serious mayde.  Here I met much ordinary company, I
going thither at his great request; but there was Mr. Madden and his lady,
a fine, noble, pretty lady, and he, and a fine gentleman seems to be.  We
four were most together; but the whole company was very simple and
innocent.  A good-dinner, and, what was best, good musique.  After dinner
the young women went to dance; among others Mr. Christopher Pett his
daughter, who is a very pretty, modest girle, I am mightily taken with
her; and that being done about five o'clock, home, very well pleased with
the afternoon's work.  And so we broke up mightily civilly, the bride and
bridegroom going to Greenwich (they keeping their dinner here only for my
sake) to lie, and we home, where I to the office, and anon am on a sudden
called to meet Sir W. Pen and Sir W. Coventry at the Victualling Office,
which did put me out of order to be so surprised. But I went, and there
Sir William Coventry did read me a letter from the Generalls to the King,

     [The letter from Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle to the king
     (dated August 27th, from the "Royal Charles," Sole Bay) is among the
     State Papers.  The generals complain of the want of supplies, in
     spite of repeated importunities.  The demands are answered by
     accounts from Mr. Pepys of what has been sent to the fleet, which
     will not satisfy the ships, unless the provisions could be found
     ".  .  .  Have not a month's provision of beer, yet Sir Wm. Coventry
     assures the ministers that they are supplied till Oct. 3; unless
     this is quickened they will have to return home too soon .  .  .  .
     Want provisions according to their own computation, not Sir Wm.
     Coventry's, to last to the end of October" ("Calendar," 1666-67, p.
     71).]

a most scurvy letter, reflecting most upon Sir W. Coventry, and then upon
me for my accounts (not that they are not true, but that we do not
consider the expence of the fleete), and then of the whole office, in
neglecting them and the King's service, and this in very plain and sharp
and menacing terms.  I did give a good account of matters according to our
computation of the expence of the fleete.  I find Sir W. Coventry willing
enough to accept of any thing to confront the Generalls.  But a great
supply must be made, and shall be in grace of God!  But, however, our
accounts here will be found the true ones.  Having done here, and much
work set me, I with greater content home than I thought I should have
done, and so to the office a while, and then home, and a while in my new
closet, which delights me every day more and more, and so late to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and there to fit some Tangier accounts, and then, by
appointment, to my Lord Bellasses, but about Paul's thought of the chant
paper I should carry with me, and so fain to come back again, and did, and
then met with Sir W. Pen, and with him to my Lord Bellasses, he sitting in
the coach the while, while I up to my Lord and there offered him my
account of the bills of exchange I had received and paid for him, wherein
we agree all but one L200 bill of Vernatty's drawing, wherein I doubt he
hath endeavoured to cheate my Lord; but that will soon appear. Thence took
leave, and found Sir W. Pen talking to Orange Moll, of the King's house,
who, to our great comfort, told us that they begun to act on the 18th of
this month.  So on to St. James's, in the way Sir W. Pen telling me that
Mr. Norton, that married Sir J. Lawson's daughter, is dead.  She left L800
a year jointure, a son to inherit the whole estate. She freed from her
father-in-law's tyranny, and is in condition to helpe her mother, who
needs it; of which I am glad, the young lady being very pretty.  To St.
James's, and there Sir W. Coventry took Sir W. Pen and me apart, and read
to us his answer to the Generalls' letter to the King that he read last
night; wherein he is very plain, and states the matter in full defence of
himself and of me with him, which he could not avoid; which is a good
comfort to me, that I happen to be involved with him in the same cause.
And then, speaking of the supplies which have been made to this fleete,
more than ever in all kinds to any, even that wherein the Duke of Yorke
himself was, "Well," says he, "if this will not do, I will say, as Sir J.
Falstaffe did to the Prince, 'Tell your father, that if he do not like
this let him kill the next Piercy himself,'"--["King Henry IV.," Part I,
act v., sc. 4.]--and so we broke up, and to the Duke, and there did our
usual business.  So I to the Parke and there met Creed, and he and I
walked to Westminster to the Exchequer, and thence to White Hall talking
of Tangier matters and Vernatty's knavery, and so parted, and then I
homeward and met Mr. Povy in Cheapside, and stopped and talked a good
while upon the profits of the place which my Lord Bellasses hath made this
last year, and what share we are to have of it, but of this all imperfect,
and so parted, and I home, and there find Mrs. Mary Batelier, and she
dined with us; and thence I took them to Islington, and there eat a
custard; and so back to Moorfields, and shewed Batelier, with my wife,
"Polichinello," which I like the more I see it; and so home with great
content, she being a mighty good-natured, pretty woman, and thence I to
the Victualling office, and there with Mr. Lewes and Willson upon our
Victualling matters till ten at night, and so I home and there late
writing a letter to Sir W. Coventry, and so home to supper and to bed. No
newes where the Dutch are.  We begin to think they will steale through the
Channel to meet Beaufort.  We think our fleete sayled yesterday, but we
have no newes of it.

30th.  Up and all the morning at the office, dined at home, and in the
afternoon, and at night till two in the morning, framing my great letter
to Mr. Hayes about the victualling of the fleete, about which there has
been so much ado and exceptions taken by the Generalls.

31st.  To bed at 2 or 3 in the morning and up again at 6 to go by
appointment to my Lord Bellasses, but he out of town, which vexed me. So
back and got Mr. Poynter to enter into, my book while I read from my last
night's notes the letter, and that being done to writing it fair. At noon
home to dinner, and then the boy and I to the office, and there he read
while I writ it fair, which done I sent it to Sir W. Coventry to peruse
and send to the fleete by the first opportunity; and so pretty betimes to
bed.  Much pleased to-day with thoughts of gilding the backs of all my
books alike in my new presses.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                SEPTEMBER
                                  1666

September 1st.  Up and at the office all the morning, and then dined at
home.  Got my new closet made mighty clean against to-morrow.  Sir W. Pen
and my wife and Mercer and I to "Polichinelly," but were there horribly
frighted to see Young Killigrew come in with a great many more young
sparks; but we hid ourselves, so as we think they did not see us.  By and
by, they went away, and then we were at rest again; and so, the play being
done, we to Islington, and there eat and drank and mighty merry; and so
home singing, and, after a letter or two at the office, to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  Some of our mayds sitting up late last night to get
things ready against our feast to-day, Jane called us up about three in
the morning, to tell us of a great fire they saw in the City.  So I rose
and slipped on my nightgowne, and went to her window, and thought it to be
on the backside of Marke-lane at the farthest; but, being unused to such
fires as followed, I thought it far enough off; and so went to bed again
and to sleep.  About seven rose again to dress myself, and there looked
out at the window, and saw the fire not so much as it was and further off.
So to my closett to set things to rights after yesterday's cleaning.  By
and by Jane comes and tells me that she hears that above 300 houses have
been burned down to-night by the fire we saw, and that it is now burning
down all Fish-street, by London Bridge.  So I made myself ready presently,
and walked to the Tower, and there got up upon one of the high places, Sir
J. Robinson's little son going up with me; and there I did see the houses
at that end of the bridge all on fire, and an infinite great fire on this
and the other side the end of the bridge; which, among other people, did
trouble me for poor little Michell and our Sarah on the bridge.  So down,
with my heart full of trouble, to the Lieutenant of the Tower, who tells
me that it begun this morning in the King's baker's' house in
Pudding-lane, and that it hath burned St. Magnus's Church and most part of
Fish-street already.  So I down to the water-side, and there got a boat
and through bridge, and there saw a lamentable fire.  Poor Michell's
house, as far as the Old Swan, already burned that way, and the fire
running further, that in a very little time it got as far as the
Steeleyard, while I was there.  Everybody endeavouring to remove their
goods, and flinging into the river or bringing them into lighters that
layoff; poor people staying in their houses as long as till the very fire
touched them, and then running into boats, or clambering from one pair of
stairs by the water-side to another.  And among other things, the poor
pigeons, I perceive, were loth to leave their houses, but hovered about
the windows and balconys till they were, some of them burned, their wings,
and fell down.  Having staid, and in an hour's time seen the fire: rage
every way, and nobody, to my sight, endeavouring to quench it, but to
remove their goods, and leave all to the fire, and having seen it get as
far as the Steele-yard, and the wind mighty high and driving it into the
City; and every thing, after so long a drought, proving combustible, even
the very stones of churches, and among other things the poor steeple  by
which pretty Mrs.--------lives, and whereof my old school-fellow Elborough
is parson, taken fire in the very top, an there burned till it fell down:
I to White Hall (with a gentleman with me who desired to go off from the
Tower, to see the fire, in my boat); to White Hall, and there up to the
Kings closett in the Chappell, where people come about me, and did give
them an account dismayed them all, and word was carried in to the King.
So I was called for, and did tell the King and Duke of Yorke what I saw,
and that unless his Majesty did command houses to be pulled down nothing
could stop the fire.  They seemed much troubled, and the King commanded me
to go to my Lord Mayor--[Sir Thomas Bludworth.  See June 30th,
1666.]--from him, and command him to spare no houses, but to pull down
before the fire every way.  The Duke of York bid me tell him that if he
would have any more soldiers he shall; and so did my Lord Arlington
afterwards, as a great secret.

     [Sir William Coventry wrote to Lord Arlington on the evening of this
     day, "The Duke of York fears the want of workmen and tools to-morrow
     morning, and wishes the deputy lieutenants and justices of peace to
     summon the workmen with tools to be there by break of day.  In some
     churches and chapels are great hooks for pulling down houses, which
     should be brought ready upon the place to-night against the morning"
     ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-66, p. 95).]

Here meeting, with Captain Cocke, I in his coach, which he lent me, and
Creed with me to Paul's, and there walked along Watlingstreet, as well as
I could, every creature coming away loaden with goods to save, and here
and there sicke people carried away in beds.  Extraordinary good goods
carried in carts and on backs.  At last met my Lord Mayor in
Canningstreet, like a man spent, with a handkercher about his neck.  To
the King's message he cried, like a fainting woman, "Lord!  what can I do?
I am spent: people will not obey me.  I have been pulling down houses; but
the fire overtakes us faster than we can do it."  That he needed no more
soldiers; and that, for himself, he must go and refresh himself, having
been up all night.  So he left me, and I him, and walked home, seeing
people all almost distracted, and no manner of means used to quench the
fire.  The houses, too, so very thick thereabouts, and full of matter for
burning, as pitch and tarr, in Thames-street; and warehouses of oyle, and
wines, and brandy, and other things.  Here I saw Mr. Isaake Houblon, the
handsome man, prettily dressed and dirty, at his door at Dowgate,
receiving some of his brothers' things, whose houses were on fire; and, as
he says, have been removed twice already; and he doubts (as it soon
proved) that they must be in a little time removed from his house also,
which was a sad consideration.  And to see the churches all filling with
goods by people who themselves should have been quietly there at this
time.  By this time it was about twelve o'clock; and so home, and there
find my guests, which was Mr. Wood and his wife Barbary Sheldon, and also
Mr. Moons: she mighty fine, and her husband; for aught I see, a likely
man.  But Mr. Moone's design and mine, which was to look over my closett
and please him with the sight thereof, which he hath long desired, was
wholly disappointed; for we were in great trouble and disturbance at this
fire, not knowing what to think of it.  However, we had an extraordinary
good dinner, and as merry, as at this time we could be.  While at dinner
Mrs. Batelier come to enquire after Mr. Woolfe and Stanes (who, it seems,
are related to them), whose houses in Fish-street are all burned; and they
in a sad condition.  She would not stay in the fright.  Soon as dined, I
and Moone away, and walked, through the City, the streets full of nothing
but people and horses and carts loaden with goods, ready to run over one
another, and, removing goods from one burned house to another.  They now
removing out of Canning-streets (which received goods in the morning) into
Lumbard-streets, and further;

and among others I now saw my little goldsmith, Stokes, receiving some
friend's goods, whose house itself was burned the day after.  We parted at
Paul's; he home, and I to Paul's Wharf, where I had appointed a boat to
attend me, and took in Mr. Carcasse and his brother, whom I met in the
streets and carried them below and above bridge to and again to see the
fire, which was now got further, both below and above and no likelihood of
stopping it.  Met with the King and Duke of York in their barge, and with
them to Queenhith and there called Sir Richard Browne to them. Their order
was only to pull down houses apace, and so below bridge the water-side;
but little was or could be done, the fire coming upon them so fast.  Good
hopes there was of stopping it at the Three Cranes above, and at
Buttolph's Wharf below bridge, if care be used; but the wind carries it
into the City so as we know not by the water-side what it do there. River
full of lighters and boats taking in goods, and good goods swimming in the
water, and only I observed that hardly one lighter or boat in three that
had the goods of a house in, but there was a pair of Virginalls

     [The virginal differed from the spinet in being square instead of
     triangular in form.  The word pair was used in the obsolete sense of
     a set, as we read also of a pair of organs.  The instrument is
     supposed to have obtained its name from young women, playing upon
     it.]

in it.  Having seen as much as I could now, I away to White Hall by
appointment, and there walked to St. James's Parks, and there met my wife
and Creed and Wood and his wife, and walked to my boat; and there upon the
water again, and to the fire up and down, it still encreasing, and the
wind great.  So near the fire as we could for smoke; and all over the
Thames, with one's face in the wind, you were almost burned with a shower
of firedrops.  This is very true; so as houses were burned by these drops
and flakes of fire, three or four, nay, five or six houses, one from
another.  When we could endure no more upon the water; we to a little
ale-house on the Bankside, over against the 'Three Cranes, and there staid
till it was dark almost, and saw the fire grow; and, as it grew darker,
appeared more and more, and in corners and upon steeples, and between
churches and houses, as far as we could see up the hill of the City, in a
most horrid malicious bloody flame, not like the fine flame of an ordinary
fire.  Barbary and her husband away before us.  We staid till, it being
darkish, we saw the fire as only one entire arch of fire from this to the
other side the bridge, and in a bow up the hill for an arch of above a
mile long: it made me weep to see it.  The churches, houses, and all on
fire and flaming at once; and a horrid noise the flames made, and the
cracking of houses at their ruins.  So home with a sad heart, and there
find every body discoursing and lamenting the fire; and poor Tom Hater
come with some few of his goods saved out of his house, which is burned
upon Fish-streets Hall.  I invited him to lie at my house, and did receive
his goods, but was deceived in his lying there, the newes coming every
moment of the growth of the fire; so as we were forced to begin to pack up
our owne goods; and prepare for their removal; and did by moonshine (it
being brave dry, and moon: shine, and warm weather) carry much of my goods
into the garden, and Mr. Hater and I did remove my money and iron chests
into my cellar, as thinking that the safest place.  And got my bags of
gold into my office, ready to carry away, and my chief papers of accounts
also there, and my tallys into a box by themselves.  So great was our
fear, as Sir W. Batten hath carts come out of the country to fetch away
his goods this night.  We did put Mr. Hater, poor man, to bed a little;
but he got but very little rest, so much noise being in my house, taking
down of goods.

3rd.  About four o'clock in the morning, my Lady Batten sent me a cart to
carry away all my money, and plate, and best things, to Sir W. Rider's at
Bednall-greene.  Which I did riding myself in my night-gowne in the cart;
and, Lord! to see how the streets and the highways are crowded with people
running and riding, and getting of carts at any rate to fetch away things.
I find Sir W. Rider tired with being called up all night, and receiving
things from several friends.  His house full of goods, and much of Sir W.
Batten's and Sir W. Pen's I am eased at my heart to have my treasure so
well secured.  Then home, with much ado to find a way, nor any sleep all
this night to me nor my poor wife.  But then and all this day she and I,
and all my people labouring to get away the rest of our things, and did
get Mr. Tooker to get me a lighter to take them in, and we did carry them
(myself some) over Tower Hill, which was by this time full of people's
goods, bringing their goods thither; and down to the lighter, which lay at
next quay, above the Tower Docke.  And here was my neighbour's wife,
Mrs.-------,with her pretty child, and some few of her things, which I did
willingly give way to be saved with mine; but there was no passing with
any thing through the postern, the crowd was so great.  The Duke of Yorke
of this day by the office, and spoke to us, and did ride with his guard up
and down the City, to keep all quiet (he being now Generall, and having
the care of all).  This day, Mercer being not at home, but against her
mistress's order gone to her mother's, and my wife going thither to speak
with W. Hewer, met her there, and was angry; and her mother saying that
she was not a 'prentice girl, to ask leave every time she goes abroad, my
wife with good reason was angry, and, when she came home, bid her be gone
again.  And so she went away, which troubled me, but yet less than it
would, because of the condition we are in, fear of coming into in a little
time of being less able to keepe one in her quality.  At night lay down a
little upon a quilt of W. Hewer's in the office, all my owne things being
packed up or gone; and after me my poor wife did the like, we having fed
upon the remains of yesterday's dinner, having no fire nor dishes, nor any
opportunity of dressing any thing.

4th.  Up by break of day to get away the remainder of my things; which I
did by a lighter at the Iron gate and my hands so few, that it was the
afternoon before we could get them all away.  Sir W. Pen and I to
Tower-streete, and there met the fire burning three or four doors beyond
Mr. Howell's, whose goods, poor man, his trayes, and dishes, shovells,
&c., were flung all along Tower-street in the kennels, and people working
therewith from one end to the other; the fire coming on in that narrow
streete, on both sides, with infinite fury.  Sir W. Batten not knowing how
to remove his wine, did dig a pit in the garden, and laid it in there; and
I took the opportunity of laying all the papers of my office that I could
not otherwise dispose of.  And in the evening Sir W. Pen and I did dig
another, and put our wine in it; and I my Parmazan cheese, as well as my
wine and some other things.  The Duke of Yorke was at the office this day,
at Sir W. Pen's; but I happened not to be within.  This afternoon, sitting
melancholy with Sir W. Pen in our garden, and thinking of the certain
burning of this office, without extraordinary means, I did propose for the
sending up of all our workmen from Woolwich and Deptford yards (none
whereof yet appeared), and to write to Sir W. Coventry to have the Duke of
Yorke's permission to pull down houses, rather than lose this office,
which would, much hinder, the King's business.  So Sir W. Pen he went down
this night, in order to the sending them up to-morrow morning; and I wrote
to Sir W. Coventry about the business, but received no answer.  This night
Mrs. Turner (who, poor woman, was removing her goods all this day, good
goods into the garden, and knows not how to dispose of them), and her
husband supped with my wife and I at night, in the office; upon a shoulder
of mutton from the cook's, without any napkin or any thing, in a sad
manner, but were merry.  Only now and then walking into the garden, and
saw how horridly the sky looks, all on a fire in the night, was enough to
put us out of our wits; and, indeed, it was extremely dreadful, for it
looks just as if it was at us; and the whole heaven on fire.  I after
supper walked in the darke down to Tower-streete, and there saw it all on
fire, at the Trinity House on that side, and the Dolphin Taverne on this
side, which was very near us; and the fire with extraordinary vehemence.
Now begins the practice of blowing up of houses in Tower-streete, those
next the Tower, which at first did frighten people more than anything, but
it stopped the fire where it was done, it bringing down the

     [A copy of this letter, preserved among the Pepys MSS. in the
     author's own handwriting, is subjoined:

     "SIR, The fire is now very neere us as well on Tower Streete as
     Fanchurch Street side, and we little hope of our escape but by this
     remedy, to ye want whereof we doe certainly owe ye loss of ye City
     namely, ye pulling down of houses, in ye way of ye fire.  This way
     Sir W. Pen and myself have so far concluded upon ye practising, that
     he is gone to Woolwich and Deptford to supply himself with men and
     necessarys in order to the doeing thereof, in case at his returne
     our condition be not bettered and that he meets with his R. Hs.
     approbation, which I had thus undertaken to learn of you.  Pray
     please to let me have this night (at whatever hour it is) what his
     R. Hs. directions are in this particular; Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
     Batten having left us, we cannot add, though we are well assured of
     their, as well as all ye neighbourhood's concurrence.

                              "Yr. obedient servnt.
                                                  "S. P.

     "Sir W. Coventry,
     "Septr.  4, 1666."]

houses to the ground in the same places they stood, and then it was easy
to quench what little fire was in it, though it kindled nothing almost. W.
Newer this day went to see how his mother did, and comes late home,
telling us how he hath been forced to remove her to Islington, her house
in Pye-corner being burned; so that the fire is got so far that way, and
all the Old Bayly, and was running down to Fleete-streete; and Paul's is
burned, and all Cheapside.  I wrote to my father this night, but the
post-house being burned, the letter could not go.

     [J. Hickes wrote to Williamson on September 3rd from the "Golden
     Lyon," Red Cross Street Posthouse.  Sir Philip [Frowde] and his lady
     fled from the [letter] office at midnight for: safety; stayed
     himself till 1 am. till his wife and childrens' patience could stay,
     no longer, fearing lest they should be quite stopped up; the passage
     was so tedious they had much ado to get where they are.  The Chester
     and Irish, mails have come-in; sends him his letters, knows not how
     to dispose of the business ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67,
     p. 95).]

5th.  I lay down in the office again upon W. Hewer's, quilt, being mighty
weary, and sore in my feet with going till I was hardly able to stand.
About two in the morning my wife calls me up and tells me of new cryes of
fire, it being come to Barkeing Church, which is the bottom of our lane. I
up, and finding it so, resolved presently to take her away, and did, and
took my gold, which was about L2350,  W. Newer, and Jane, down by
Proundy's boat to Woolwich; but, Lord! what sad sight it was by
moone-light to see, the whole City almost on fire, that you might see it
plain at Woolwich, as if you were by it.  There, when I come, I find the
gates shut, but no guard kept at all, which troubled me, because of
discourse now begun, that there is plot in it, and that the French had
done it. I got the gates open, and to Mr. Shelden's, where I locked up my
gold, and charged, my wife and W. Newer never to leave the room without
one of them in it, night, or day.  So back again, by the way seeing my
goods well in the lighters at Deptford, and watched well by people.  Home;
and whereas I expected to have seen our house on fire, it being now about
seven o'clock, it was not.  But to the fyre, and there find greater hopes
than I expected; for my confidence of finding our Office on fire was such,
that I durst not ask any body how it was with us, till I come and saw it
not burned.  But going to the fire, I find by the blowing up of houses,
and the great helpe given by the workmen out of the King's yards, sent up
by Sir W. Pen, there is a good stop given to it, as well as at Marke-lane
end as ours; it having only burned the dyall of Barking Church, and part
of the porch, and was there quenched.  I up to the top of Barking steeple,
and there saw the saddest sight of desolation that I ever saw; every where
great fires, oyle-cellars, and brimstone, and other things burning.  I
became afeard to stay there long, and therefore down again as fast as I
could, the fire being spread as far as I could see it; and to Sir W.
Pen's, and there eat a piece of cold meat, having eaten nothing since
Sunday, but the remains of Sunday's dinner.  Here I met with Mr. Young and
Whistler; and having removed all my things, and received good hopes that
the fire at our end; is stopped, they and I walked into the town, and find
Fanchurch-streete, Gracious-streete; and Lumbard-streete all in dust.  The
Exchange a sad sight, nothing standing there, of all the statues or
pillars, but Sir Thomas Gresham's picture in the corner.  Walked into
Moorefields (our feet ready to burn, walking through the towne among the
hot coles), and find that full of people, and poor wretches carrying their
good there, and every body keeping his goods together by themselves (and a
great blessing it is to them that it is fair weathe for them to keep
abroad night and day); drank there, and paid two-pence for a plain penny
loaf.  Thence homeward, having passed through Cheapside and Newgate
Market, all burned, and seen Anthony Joyce's House in fire.  And took up
(which I keep by me) a piece of glasse of Mercers' Chappell in the
streete, where much more was, so melted and buckled with the heat of the
fire like parchment.  I also did see a poor cat taken out of a hole in the
chimney, joyning to the wall of the Exchange; with, the hair all burned
off the body, and yet alive.  So home at night, and find there good hopes
of saving our office; but great endeavours of watching all night, and
having men ready; and so we lodged them in the office, and had drink and
bread and cheese for them.  And I lay down and slept a good night about
midnight, though when I rose I heard that there had been a great alarme of
French and Dutch being risen, which proved, nothing.  But it is a strange
thing to see how long this time did look since Sunday, having been always
full of variety of actions, and little sleep, that it looked like a week
or more, and I had forgot, almost the day of the week.

6th.  Up about five o'clock, and where met Mr. Gawden at the gate of the
office (I intending to go out, as I used, every now and then to-day, to
see how the fire is) to call our men to Bishop's-gate, where no fire had
yet been near, and there is now one broke out which did give great grounds
to people, and to me too, to think that there is some kind of plot

     [The terrible disaster which overtook London was borne by the
     inhabitants of the city with great fortitude, but foreigners and
     Roman Catholics had a bad dime.  As no cause for the outbreak of the
     fire could be traced, a general cry was raised that it owed its
     origin to a plot.  In a letter from Thomas Waade to Williamson
     (dated "Whitby, Sept. 14th") we read, "The destruction of London by
     fire is reported to be a hellish contrivance of the French,
     Hollanders, and fanatic party" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67,
     p. 124).]

in this (on which many by this time have been taken, and, it hath been
dangerous for any stranger to walk in the streets), but I went with the
men, and we did put it out in a little time; so that that was well again.
It was pretty to see how hard the women did work in the cannells, sweeping
of water; but then they would scold for drink, and be as drunk as devils.
I saw good butts of sugar broke open in the street, and people go and take
handsfull out, and put into beer, and drink it.  And now all being pretty
well, I took boat, and over to Southwarke, and took boat on the other side
the bridge, and so to Westminster, thinking to shift myself, being all in
dirt from top to bottom; but could not there find any place to buy a shirt
or pair of gloves, Westminster Hall being full of people's goods, those in
Westminster having removed all their goods, and the Exchequer money put
into vessels to carry to Nonsuch; but to the Swan, and there was trimmed;
and then to White Hall, but saw nobody; and so home.  A sad sight to see
how the River looks: no houses nor church near it, to the Temple, where it
stopped.  At home, did go with Sir W. Batten, and our neighbour, Knightly
(who, with one more, was the only man of any fashion left in all the
neighbourhood thereabouts, they all removing their goods and leaving their
houses to the mercy of the fire), to Sir R. Ford's, and there dined in an
earthen platter--a fried breast of mutton; a great many of us, but very
merry, and indeed as good a meal, though as ugly a one, as ever I had in
my life.  Thence down to Deptford, and there with great satisfaction
landed all my goods at Sir G. Carteret's safe, and nothing missed I could
see, or hurt.  This being done to my great content, I home, and to Sir W.
Batten's, and there with Sir R. Ford, Mr. Knightly, and one Withers, a
professed lying rogue, supped well, and mighty merry, and our fears over.
From them to the office, and there slept with the office full of
labourers, who talked, and slept, and walked all night long there.  But
strange it was to see Cloathworkers' Hall on fire these three days and
nights in one body of flame, it being the cellar full of oyle.

7th.  Up by five o'clock; and, blessed be God!  find all well, and by
water to Paul's Wharfe.  Walked thence, and saw, all the towne burned, and
a miserable sight of Paul's church; with all the roofs fallen, and the
body of the quire fallen into St. Fayth's; Paul's school also, Ludgate,
and Fleet-street, my father's house, and the church, and a good part of
the Temple the like.  So to Creed's lodging, near the New Exchange, and
there find him laid down upon a bed; the house all unfurnished, there
being fears of the fire's coming to them.  There borrowed a shirt of him,
and washed.  To Sir W. Coventry, at St. James's, who lay without curtains,
having removed all his goods; as the King at White Hall, and every body
had done, and was doing.  He hopes we shall have no publique distractions
upon this fire, which is what every body fears, because of the talke of
the French having a hand in it.  And it is a proper time for discontents;
but all men's minds are full of care to protect themselves, and save their
goods: the militia is in armes every where.  Our fleetes, he tells me,
have been in sight one of another, and most unhappily by fowle weather
were parted, to our great losse, as in reason they do conclude; the Dutch
being come out only to make a shew, and please their people; but in very
bad condition as to stores; victuals, and men.  They are at Bullen; and
our fleete come to St. Ellen's.  We have got nothing, but have lost one
ship, but he knows not what.  Thence to the Swan, and there drank: and so
home, and find all well.  My Lord Bruncker, at Sir W. Batten's, and tells
us the Generall is sent for up, to come to advise with the King about
business at this juncture, and to keep all quiet; which is great honour to
him, but I am sure is but a piece of dissimulation.  So home, and did give
orders for my house to be made clean; and then down to Woolwich, and there
find all well: Dined, and Mrs. Markham come to see my wife.  So I up
again, and calling at Deptford for some things of W. Hewer's, he being
with me, and then home and spent the evening with Sir R. Ford, Mr.
Knightly, and Sir W. Pen at Sir W. Batten's: This day our Merchants first
met at Gresham College, which, by proclamation, is to be their Exchange.
Strange to hear what is bid for houses all up and down here; a friend of
Sir W. Rider's: having L150 for what he used to let for L40 per annum.
Much dispute where the Custome-house shall be thereby the growth of the
City again to be foreseen.  My Lord Treasurer, they say, and others; would
have it at the other end of the towne.  I home late to Sir W. Pen's, who
did give me a bed; but without curtains or hangings, all being down.  So
here I went the first time into a naked bed, only my drawers on; and did
sleep pretty well: but still hath sleeping and waking had a fear of fire
in my heart, that I took little rest.  People do all the world over cry
out of the simplicity of my Lord Mayor in generall; and more particularly
in this business of the fire, laying it all upon' him.  A proclamation

     [On September 5th proclamation was made "ordering that for supply of
     the distressed people left destitute by the late dreadful and dismal
     fire.  .  .  .  great proportions of bread be brought daily, not
     only to the former markets, but to those lately ordained; that all
     churches, chapels, schools, and public buildings are to be open to
     receive the goods of those who know not how to dispose of them." On
     September 6th, proclamation ordered "that as the markets are burned
     down, markets be held in Bishopsgate Street, Tower Hill, Smithfield,
     and Leadenhall Street" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp.
     100, 104).]

is come out for markets to be kept at Leadenhall and Mileendgreene, and
several other places about the towne; and Tower-hill, and all churches to
be set open to receive poor people.

8th.  Up and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen by water to White Hall and
they to St. James's.  I stopped with Sir G. Carteret to desire him to go
with us, and to enquire after money.  But the first he cannot do, and the
other as little, or says, "when we can get any, or what shall we do for
it?"  He, it seems, is employed in the correspondence between the City and
the King every day, in settling of things.  I find him full of trouble, to
think how things will go.  I left him, and to St. James's, where we met
first at Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and there did what business we can,
without any books.  Our discourse, as every thing else, was confused.  The
fleete is at Portsmouth, there staying a wind to carry them to the Downes,
or towards Bullen, where they say the Dutch fleete is gone, and stays.  We
concluded upon private meetings for a while, not having any money to
satisfy any people that may come to us.  I bought two eeles upon the
Thames, cost me six shillings.  Thence with Sir W. Batten to the Cock-pit,
whither the Duke of Albemarle is come.  It seems the King holds him so
necessary at this time, that he hath sent for him, and will keep him here.
Indeed, his interest in the City, being acquainted, and his care in
keeping things quiet, is reckoned that wherein he will be very
serviceable.  We to him; he is courted in appearance by every body. He
very kind to us; I perceive he lays by all business of the fleete at
present, and minds the City, and is now hastening to Gresham College, to
discourse with the Aldermen.  Sir W. Batten and I home (where met by my
brother John, come to town to see how things are with us), and then
presently he with me to Gresham College; where infinity of people, partly
through novelty to see the new place, and partly to find out and hear what
is become one man of another.  I met with many people undone, and more
that have extraordinary great losses.  People speaking their thoughts
variously about the beginning of the fire, and the rebuilding; of the
City.  Then to Sir W. Batten's, and took my brothet with me, and there
dined with a great company of neighbours; and much good discourse; among
others, of the low spirits of some rich men in the City, in sparing any
encouragement to the, poor people that wrought for the saving their
houses.  Among others, Alderman Starling, a very rich man, without;
children, the fire at next door to him in our lane, after our men had
saved his house, did give 2s. 6d. among thirty of them, and did quarrel
with some that would remove the rubbish out of the way of the fire, saying
that they come to steal.  Sir W. Coventry told me of another this morning,
in Holborne, which he shewed the King that when it was offered to stop the
fire near his house for such a reward that came but to 2s. 6d. a man among
the neighbours he would, give but 18d.  Thence to Bednall Green by coach,
my brother with me, and saw all well there, and fetched away my journall
book to enter for five days past, and then back to the office where I find
Bagwell's wife, and her husband come home.  Agreed to come to their house
to-morrow, I sending him away to his ship to-day.  To the office and late
writing letters, and then to Sir W. Pen's, my brother lying with me, and
Sir W. Pen gone down to rest himself at Woolwich.  But I was much frighted
and kept awake in my bed, by some noise I heard a great while below
stairs; and the boys not coming up to me when I knocked.  It was by their
discovery of people stealing of some neighbours' wine that lay in vessels
in the streets.  So to sleep; and all well all night.

9th (Sunday).  Up and was trimmed, and sent my brother to Woolwich to my
wife, to dine with her.  I to church, where our parson made a melancholy
but good sermon; and many and most in the church cried, specially the
women.  The church mighty full; but few of fashion, and most strangers. I
walked to Bednall Green, and there dined well, but a bad venison pasty at
Sir W. Rider's.  Good people they are, and good discourse; and his
daughter, Middleton, a fine woman, discreet.  Thence home, and to church
again, and there preached Dean Harding; but, methinks, a bad, poor sermon,
though proper for the time; nor eloquent, in saying at this time that the
City is reduced from a large folio to a decimotertio.  So to my office,
there to write down my journall, and take leave of my brother, whom I sent
back this afternoon, though rainy; which it hath not done a good while
before.  But I had no room or convenience for him here till my house is
fitted; but I was very kind to him, and do take very well of him his
journey.  I did give him 40s. for his pocket, and so, he being gone, and,
it presently rayning, I was troubled for him, though it is good for the
fyre.  Anon to Sir W. Pen's to bed, and made my boy Tom to read me asleep.

10th.  All the morning clearing our cellars, and breaking in pieces all my
old lumber, to make room, and to prevent fire.  And then to Sir W.
Batten's, and dined; and there hear that Sir W. Rider says that the towne
is full of the report of the wealth that is in his house, and would be
glad that his friends would provide for the safety of their goods there.
This made me get a cart; and thither, and there brought my money all away.
Took a hackney-coach myself (the hackney-coaches now standing at Allgate).
Much wealth indeed there is at his house.  Blessed be God, I got all mine
well thence, and lodged it in my office; but vexed to have all the world
see it.  And with Sir W. Batten, who would have taken away my hands before
they were stowed.  But by and by comes brother Balty from sea, which I was
glad of; and so got him, and Mr. Tooker, and the boy, to watch with them
all in the office all night, while I upon Jane's coming went down to my
wife, calling at Deptford, intending to see Bagwell, but did not 'ouvrir
la porte comme je' did expect.  So down late to Woolwich, and there find
my wife out of humour and indifferent, as she uses upon her having much
liberty abroad.

11th.  Lay there, and up betimes, and by water with my gold, and laid it
with the rest in my office, where I find all well and safe.  So with Sir
W. Batten to the New Exchange by water and to my Lord Bruncker's house,
where Sir W. Coventry and Sir G. Carteret met.  Little business before us
but want of money.  Broke up, and I home by coach round the town.  Dined
at home, Balty and myself putting up my papers in m closet in the office.
He away, I down to Deptford and there spoke with Bagwell and agreed upon
to-morrow, and come home in the rain by water.  In the evening at Sir W.
Pen's; with my wife, at supper, he in a mad, ridiculous, drunken humour;
and it seems there have been some late distances between his lady and him,
as my [wife] tells me.  After supper, I home, and with Mr. Hater, Gibson,
and Tom alone, got all my chests and money into the further cellar with
much pains, but great content to me when done.  So very late and weary, to
bed.

12th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James's by water,
and there did our usual business with the Duke of Yorke.  Thence I to
Westminster, and there, spoke with Michell and Howlett, who tell me how
their poor young ones are going to Shadwell's.  The latter told me of the
unkindness of the young man to his wife, which is now over, and I have
promised to appear a counsellor to him.  I am glad she is like to be so
near us again.  Thence to Martin, and there did 'tout ce que je voudrais
avec' her, and drank, and away by water home and to dinner, Balty and his
wife there.  After dinner I took him down with me to Deptford, and there
by the Bezan loaded above half my goods and sent them away.  So we back
home, and then I found occasion to return in the dark and to Bagwell, and
there .  .  .  did do all that I desired, but though I did intend 'pour
avoir demeurais con elle' to-day last night, yet when I had done 'ce que
je voudrais I did hate both elle and la cose', and taking occasion from
the occasion of 'su marido's return .  .  .  did me lever', and so away
home late to Sir W. Pen's (Batty and his wife lying at my house), and
there in the same simple humour I found Sir W. Pen, and so late to bed.

13th.  Up, and down to Tower Wharfe; and there, with Batty and labourers
from Deptford, did get my goods housed well at home.  So down to Deptford
again to fetch the rest, and there eat a bit of dinner at the Globe, with
the master of the Bezan with me, while the labourers went to dinner. Here
I hear that this poor towne do bury still of the plague seven or eight in
a day.  So to Sir G. Carteret's to work, and there did to my content ship
off into the Bezan all the rest of my goods, saving my pictures and fine
things, that I will bring home in wherrys when the house is fit to receive
them: and so home, and unload them by carts and hands before night, to my
exceeding satisfaction: and so after supper to bed in my house, the first
time I have lain there; and lay with my wife in my old closett upon the
ground, and Batty and his wife in the best chamber, upon the ground also.

14th.  Up, and to work, having carpenters come to helpe in setting up
bedsteads and hangings; and at that trade my people and I all the morning,
till pressed by publique business to leave them against my will in the
afternoon: and yet I was troubled in being at home, to see all my goods
lie up and down the house in a bad condition, and strange workmen going to
and fro might take what they would almost.  All the afternoon busy; and
Sir W. Coventry come to me, and found me, as God would have it, in my
office, and people about me setting my papers to rights; and there
discoursed about getting an account ready against the Parliament, and
thereby did create me infinite of business, and to be done on a sudden;
which troubled me: but, however, he being gone, I about it late, and to
good purpose.  And so home, having this day also got my wine out of the
ground again, and set in my cellar; but with great pain to keep the
porters that carried it in from observing the money-chests there.  So to
bed as last night, only my wife and I upon a bedstead with curtains in
that which was Mercer's chamber, and Balty and his wife (who are here and
do us good service), where we lay last night.  This day, poor Tom Pepys,
the turner, was with me, and Kate, Joyce, to bespeake places; one for
himself, the other for her husband.  She tells me he hath lost L140 per
annum, but have seven houses left.

15th.  All the morning at the office, Harman being come to my great
satisfaction to put up my beds and hangings, so I am at rest, and followed
my business all day.  Dined with Sir W. Batten, mighty busy about this
account, and while my people were busy, wrote near thirty letters and
orders with my owne hand.  At it till eleven at night; and it is strange
to see how clear my head was, being eased of all the matter of all these
letters; whereas one would think that I should have been dazed. I never
did observe so much of myself in my life.  In the evening there comes to
me Captain Cocke, and walked a good while in the garden.  He says he hath
computed that the rents of houses lost by this fire in the City comes to
L600,000 per annum; that this will make the Parliament, more quiet than
otherwise they would have been, and give the, King a more ready supply;
that the supply must be by excise, as it is in Holland; that the
Parliament will see it necessary to carry on the warr; that the late storm
hindered our beating the Dutch fleete, who were gone out only to satisfy
the people, having no business to do but to avoid us; that the French, as
late in the yeare as it is, are coming; that the Dutch are really in bad
condition, but that this unhappinesse of ours do give them heart; that
there was a late difference between my Lord Arlington and Sir W. Coventry
about neglect in the last to send away an express of the other's in time;
that it come before the King, and the Duke of Yorke concerned himself in
it; but this fire hath stopped it.  The Dutch fleete is not gone home, but
rather to the North, and so dangerous to our Gottenburgh fleete.  That the
Parliament is likely to fall foul upon some persons; and, among others, on
the Vice-chamberlaine, though we both believe with little ground.  That
certainly never so great a loss as this was borne so well by citizens in
the world; he believing that not one merchant upon the 'Change will break
upon it.  That he do not apprehend there will be any disturbances in State
upon it; for that all men are busy in looking after their owne business to
save themselves.  He gone, I to finish my letters, and home to bed; and
find to my infinite joy many rooms clean; and myself and wife lie in our
own chamber again.  But much terrified in the nights now-a-days with
dreams of fire, and falling down of houses.

16th (Lord's day).  Lay with much pleasure in bed talking with my wife
about Mr. Hater's lying here and W. Hewer also, if Mrs. Mercer leaves her
house.  To the office, whither also all my people about this account, and
there busy all the morning.  At noon, with my wife, against her will, all
undressed and dirty, dined at Sir W. Pen's, where was all the company of
our families in towne; but, Lord! so sorry a dinner: venison baked in
pans, that the dinner I have had for his lady alone hath been worth four
of it.  Thence, after dinner, displeased with our entertainment, to my
office again, and there till almost midnight and my people with me, and
then home, my head mightily akeing about our accounts.

17th.  Up betimes, and shaved myself after a week's growth, but, Lord! how
ugly I was yesterday and how fine to-day!  By water, seeing the City all
the way, a sad sight indeed, much fire being still in.  To Sir W.
Coventry, and there read over my yesterday's work: being a collection of
the particulars of the excess of charge created by a war, with good
content.  Sir W. Coventry was in great pain lest the French fleete should
be passed by our fleete, who had notice of them on Saturday, and were
preparing to go meet them; but their minds altered, and judged them
merchant-men, when the same day the Success, Captain Ball, made their
whole fleete, and come to Brighthelmstone, and thence at five o'clock
afternoon, Saturday, wrote Sir W. Coventry newes thereof; so that we do
much fear our missing them.  Here come in and talked with him Sir Thomas
Clifford, who appears a very fine gentleman, and much set by at Court for
his activity in going to sea, and stoutness everywhere, and stirring up
and down.  Thence by coach over the ruines, down Fleete Streete and
Cheapside to Broad Streete to Sir G. Carteret, where Sir W. Batten (and
Sir J. Minnes, whom I had not seen a long time before, being his first
coming abroad) and Lord Bruncker passing his accounts.  Thence home a
little to look after my people at work and back to Sir G. Carteret's to
dinner; and thence, after some discourse; with him upon our publique
accounts, I back home, and all the day with Harman and his people
finishing the hangings and beds in my house, and the hangings will be as
good as ever, and particularly in my new closet.  They gone and I weary,
my wife and I, and Balty and his wife, who come hither to-day to helpe us,
to a barrel of oysters I sent from the river today, and so to bed.

18th.  Strange with what freedom and quantity I pissed this night, which I
know not what to impute to but my oysters, unless the coldness of the
night should cause it, for it was a sad rainy and tempestuous night. Soon
as up I begun to have some pain in my bladder and belly, as usual, which
made me go to dinner betimes, to fill my belly, and that did ease me, so
as I did my business in the afternoon, in forwarding the settling of my
house, very well.  Betimes to bed, my wife also being all this day ill in
the same manner.  Troubled at my wife's haire coming off so much. This day
the Parliament met, and adjourned till Friday, when the King will be with
them.

19th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to St. James's, and there did our
usual business before the Duke of Yorke; which signified little, our
business being only complaints of lack of money.  Here I saw a bastard of
the late King of Sweden's come to kiss his hands; a mighty modish
French-like gentleman.  Thence to White Hall, with Sir W. Batten and Sir
W. Pen, to Wilkes's; and there did hear the many profane stories of Sir
Henry Wood damning the parsons for so much spending the wine at the
sacrament, cursing that ever they took the cup to themselves, and then
another story that he valued not all the world's curses, for two pence he
shall get at any time the prayers of some poor body that is worth a 1000
of all their curses; Lord Norwich drawing a tooth at a health.  Another
time, he and Pinchbacke and Dr. Goffe, now a religious man, Pinchbacke did
begin a frolick to drink out of a glass with a toad in it that he had
taken up going out to shit, he did it without harm.  Goffe, who knew sacke
would kill the toad, called for sacke; and when he saw it dead, says he,
"I will have a quick toad, and will not drink from a dead toad."

     ["They swallow their own contradictions as easily as a hector can
     drink a frog in a glass of wine."--Benlivoglio and Urania, book v.,
     p. 92, 3rd edit.--B.]

By that means, no other being to be found, he escaped the health.  Thence
home, and dined, and to Deptford and got all my pictures put into
wherries, and my other fine things, and landed them all very well, and
brought them home, and got Sympson to set them all up to-night; and he
gone, I and the boy to finish and set up my books, and everything else in
my house, till two o'clock; in the morning, and then to bed; but mightily
troubled, and even in my sleep, at my missing four or five of my biggest
books.  Speed's Chronicle and Maps, and the two parts of Waggoner, and a
book of cards, which I suppose I have put up with too much care, that I
have forgot where they are; for sure they are not stole.  Two little
pictures of sea and ships and a little gilt frame belonging to my plate of
the River, I want; but my books do heartily trouble me.  Most of my gilt
frames are hurt, which also troubles me, but most my books.  This day I
put on two shirts, the first time this year, and do grow well upon it; so
that my disease is nothing but wind.

20th.  Up, much troubled about my books, but cannot, imagine where they
should be.  Up, to the setting my closet to rights, and Sir W. Coventry
takes me at it, which did not displease me.  He and I to discourse about
our accounts, and the bringing them to the Parliament, and with much
content to see him rely so well on my part.  He and I together to Broad
Streete to the Vice-Chamberlain, and there discoursed a while and parted.
My Lady Carteret come to town, but I did not see her.  He tells me how the
fleete is come into the Downes.  Nothing done, nor French fleete seen: we
drove all from our anchors.  But he says newes is come that De Ruyter is
dead, or very near it, of a hurt in his mouth, upon the discharge of one
of his own guns; which put him into a fever, and he likely to die, if not
already dead.  We parted, and I home to dinner, and after dinner to the
setting things in order, and all my people busy about the same work.  In
the afternoon, out by coach, my wife with me, which we have not done
several weeks now, through all the ruines, to shew her them, which frets
her much, and is a sad sight indeed.  Set her down at her brother's, and
thence I to Westminster Hall, and there staid a little while, and called
her home.  She did give me an account of great differences between her
mother and Balty's wife.  The old woman charges her with going abroad and
staying out late, and painting in the absence of her husband, and I know
not what; and they grow proud, both he and she, and do not help their
father and mother out of what I help them to, which I do not like, nor my
wife.  So home, and to the office, to even my journall, and then home, and
very late up with Jane setting my books in perfect order in my closet, but
am mightily troubled for my great books that I miss, and I am troubled the
more for fear there should be more missing than what I find, though by the
room they take on the shelves I do not find any reason to think it.  So to
bed.

21st.  Up, and mightily pleased with the setting of my books the last
night in order, and that which did please me most of all is that W. Hewer
tells me that upon enquiry he do find that Sir W. Pen hath a hamper more
than his own, which he took for a hamper of bottles of wine, and are books
in it.  I was impatient to see it, but they were carried into a
wine-cellar, and the boy is abroad with him at the House, where the
Parliament met to-day, and the King to be with them.  At noon after dinner
I sent for Harry, and he tells me it is so, and brought me by and by my
hamper of books to my great joy, with the same books I missed, and three
more great ones, and no more.  I did give him 5s. for his pains, And so
home with great joy, and to the setting of some off them right, but could
not finish it, but away by coach to the other end of the town, leaving my
wife at the 'Change, but neither come time enough to the Council to speak
with the Duke of Yorke, nor with Sir G. Carteret, and so called my wife,
and paid for some things she bought, and so home, and there after a little
doing at the office about our accounts, which now draw near the time they
should be ready, the House having ordered Sir G. Carteret, upon his
offering them, to bring them in on Saturday next, I home, and there, with
great pleasure, very late new setting all my books; and now I am in as
good condition as I desire to be in all worldly respects.  The Lord of
Heaven make me thankfull, and continue me therein! So to bed.  This day I
had new stairs of main timber put t my cellar going into the yard.

22nd.  To my closet, and had it new washed, and now my house is so clean
as I never saw it, or any other house in my life, and every thing in as
good condition as ever before the fire; but with, I believe, about L20
cost one way or other besides about L20 charge in removing my goods, and
do not find that I have lost any thing but two little pictures of ship and
sea, and a little gold frame for one of my sea-cards.  My glazier, indeed,
is so full of worke that I cannot get him to come to perfect my house.  To
the office, and there busy now for good and all about my accounts.  My
Lord Brunck come thither, thinking to find an office, but we have not yet
met.  He do now give me a watch, a plain one, in the roome of my former
watch with many motions which I did give him.  If it goes well, I care not
for the difference in worth, though believe there is above L5.  He and I
to Sir G. Carteret to discourse about his account, but Mr. Waith not being
there nothing could be done, and therefore I home again, and busy all day.
In the afternoon comes Anthony Joyce to see me, and with tears told me his
losse, but yet that he had something left that he can live well upon, and
I doubt it not.  But he would buy some place that he could have and yet
keepe his trade where he is settled in St. Jones's.  He gone, I to the
office again, and then to Sir G. Carteret, and there found Mr. Wayth, but,
Lord! how fretfully Sir G. Carteret do discourse with Mr. Wayth about his
accounts, like a man that understands them not one word.  I held my tongue
and let him go on like a passionate foole.  In the afternoon I paid for
the two lighters that carried my goods to Deptford, and they cost me L8.
Till past midnight at our accounts, and have brought them to a good issue,
so as to be ready to meet Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry to-morrow,
but must work to-morrow, which Mr. T. Hater had no mind to, it being the
Lord's day, but, being told the necessity, submitted, poor man!  This
night writ for brother John to come to towne.  Among other reasons, my
estate lying in money, I am afeard of any sudden miscarriage.  So to bed
mightily contented in dispatching so much business, and find my house in
the best condition that ever I knew it.  Home to bed.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up, and after being trimmed, all the morning at the
office with my people about me till about one o'clock, and then home, and
my people with me, and Mr. Wayth and I eat a bit of victuals in my old
closet, now my little dining-room, which makes a pretty room, and my house
being so clean makes me mightily pleased, but only I do lacke Mercer or
somebody in the house to sing with.  Soon as eat a bit Mr. Wayth and I by
water to White Hall, and there at Sir G. Carteret's lodgings Sir W.
Coventry met, and we did debate the whole business of our accounts to the
Parliament; where it appears to us that the charge of the war from
September 1st, 1664, to this Michaelmas, will have been but L3,200,000,
and we have paid in that time somewhat about L2,200,000; so that we owe
above L900,000: but our method of accounting, though it cannot, I believe,
be far wide from the mark, yet will not abide a strict examination if the
Parliament should be troublesome.  Here happened a pretty question of Sir
W. Coventry, whether this account of ours will not put my Lord Treasurer
to a difficulty to tell what is become of all the money the Parliament
have 'give' in this time for the war, which hath amounted to about
L4,000,000, which nobody there could answer; but I perceive they did doubt
what his answer could be.  Having done, and taken from Sir W. Coventry the
minutes of a letter to my Lord Treasurer, Wayth and I back again to the
office, and thence back down to the water with my wife and landed him in
Southwarke, and my wife and I for pleasure to Fox-hall, and there eat and
drank, and so back home, and I to the office till midnight drawing the
letter we are to send with our accounts to my Lord Treasurer, and that
being done to my mind, I home to bed.

24th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, and there
with Sir W. Coventry read and all approved of my letter, and then home,
and after dinner,  Mr. Hater and Gibson dining with me, to the office, and
there very late new moulding my accounts and writing fair my letter, which
I did against the evening, and then by coach left my wife at her
brother's, and I to St. James's, and up and down to look [for] Sir W.
Coventry; and at last found him and Sir G. Carteret with the Lord
Treasurer at White Hall, consulting how to make up my Lord Treasurer's
general account, as well as that of the Navy particularly.  Here brought
the letter, but found that Sir G. Carteret had altered his account since
he did give me the abstract of it: so all my letter must be writ over
again, to put in his last abstract.  So to Sir G. Carteret's lodgings, to
speak a little about the alteration; and there looking over the book that
Sir G. Carteret intends to deliver to the Parliament of his payments since
September 1st, 1664, and there I find my name the very second for flags,
which I had bought for the Navy, of calico; once, about 500 and odd
pounds, which vexed me mightily.  At last, I concluded of scraping out my
name and putting in Mr. Tooker's, which eased me; though the price was
such as I should have had glory by.  Here I saw my Lady Carteret lately
come to towne, who, good lady! is mighty kind, and I must make much of
her, for she is a most excellent woman.  So took up my wife and away home,
and there to bed, and

25th.  Up betimes, with all my people to get the letter writ over, and
other things done, which I did, and by coach to Lord Bruncker's, and got
his hand to it; and then to the Parliament House and got it signed by the
rest, and then delivered it at the House-door to Sir Philip Warwicke; Sir
G. Carteret being gone into the House with his book of accounts under his
arme, to present to the House.  I had brought my wife to White Hall, and
leaving her with Mrs. Michell, where she sat in her shop and had burnt
wine sent for her, I walked in the Hall, and among others with Ned
Picketing, who continues still a lying, bragging coxcombe, telling me that
my Lord Sandwich may thank himself for all his misfortune; for not
suffering him and two or three good honest fellows more to take them by
the throats that spoke ill of him, and told me how basely Lionell Walden
hath carried himself towards my Lord; by speaking slightly of him, which I
shall remember.  Thence took my wife home to dinner, and then to the
office, where Mr. Hater all the day putting in order and entering in a
book all the measures that this account of the Navy hath been made up by,
and late at night to Mrs. Turner's, where she had got my wife and Lady Pen
and Pegg, and supped, and after, supper and the rest of the company by
design gone, Mrs. Turner and her husband did lay their case to me about
their lodgings, Sir J. Minnes being now gone wholly to his owne, and now,
they being empty, they doubt Sir T. Harvy or Lord Bruncker may look after
the lodgings.  I did give them the best advice, poor people, that I could,
and would do them any kindnesse, though it is strange that now they should
have ne'er a friend of Sir W. Batten or Sir W. Pen to trust to but me,
that they have disobliged.  So home to bed, and all night still mightily
troubled in my sleepe, with fire and houses pulling down.

26th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to St. James's, where every body going
to the House, I away by coach to White Hall, and after a few turns, and
hearing that our accounts come into the House but to-day, being hindered
yesterday by other business, I away by coach home, taking up my wife and
calling at Bennet's, our late mercer, who is come into Covent Garden to a
fine house looking down upon the Exchange; and I perceive many Londoners
every day come; and Mr. Pierce hath let his wife's closett, and the little
blind bed chamber, and a garret to a silke man for L50 fine, and L30 per
annum, and L40 per annum more for dieting the master and two prentices.
So home, not agreeing  for silk for a petticoat for her which she desired,
but home to dinner and then back to White Hall, leaving my wife by the way
to buy her petticoat of Bennet, and I to White Hall waiting all day on the
Duke of Yorke to move the King for getting Lanyon some money at Plymouth
out of some oyle prizes brought in thither, but could get nothing done,
but here Mr. Dugdale I hear the great loss of books in St. Paul's
Church-yarde, and at their Hall also, which they value about L150,000;
some booksellers being wholly undone, among others, they say, my poor
Kirton.  And Mr. Crumlu all his books and household stuff burned; they
trusting St. Fayth's, and the roof of the church falling, broke the arch
down into the lower church, and so all the goods burned.  A very great
loss.  His father hath lost above L1000 in books; one book newly printed,
a Discourse, it seems, of Courts.  Here I had the hap to see my Lady
Denham: and at night went into the dining-room and saw several fine
ladies; among others, Castlemayne, but chiefly Denham again; and the Duke
of Yorke taking her aside and talking to her in the sight of all the
world, all alone; which was strange, and what also I did not like.  Here I
met with good Mr. Evelyn, who cries out against it, and calls it
bitchering,--[This word was apparently of Evelyn's own making.]--for the
Duke of Yorke talks a little to her, and then she goes away, and then he
follows her again like a dog.  He observes that none of the nobility come
out of the country at all to help the King, or comfort him, or prevent
commotions at this fire; but do as if the King were nobody; nor ne'er a
priest comes to give the King and Court good council, or to comfort the
poor people that suffer; but all is dead, nothing of good in any of their
minds: he bemoans it, and says he fears more ruin hangs over our heads.
Thence away by coach, and called away my wife at Unthanke's, where she
tells me she hath bought a gowne of 15s. per yard; the same, before her
face, my Lady Castlemayne this day bought also, which I seemed vexed for,
though I do not grudge it her, but to incline her to have Mercer again,
which I believe I shall do, but the girle, I hear, has no mind to come to
us again, which vexes me.  Being come home, I to Sir W. Batten, and there
hear our business was tendered to the House to-day, and a Committee of the
whole House chosen to examine our accounts, and a great many Hotspurs
enquiring into it, and likely to give us much trouble and blame, and
perhaps (which I am afeard of) will find faults enow to demand better
officers.  This I truly fear.  Away with Sir W. Pen, who was there, and he
and I walked in the garden by moonlight, and he proposes his and my
looking out into Scotland about timber, and to use Pett there; for timber
will be a good commodity this time of building the City; and I like the
motion, and doubt not that we may do good in it. We did also discourse
about our Privateer, and hope well of that also, without much hazard, as,
if God blesses us, I hope we shall do pretty well toward getting a penny.
I was mightily pleased with our discourse, and so parted, and to the
office to finish my journall for three or four days, and so home to
supper, and to bed.  Our fleete abroad, and the Dutch too, for all we
know; the weather very bad; and under the command of an unlucky man, I
fear.  God bless him, and the fleete under him!

27th.  A very furious blowing night all the night; and my mind still
mightily perplexed with dreams, and burning the rest of the town, and
waking in much pain for the fleete.  Up, and with my wife by coach as far
as the Temple, and there she to the mercer's again, and I to look out
Penny, my tailor, to speak for a cloak and cassock for my brother, who is
coming to town; and I will have him in a canonical dress, that he may be
the fitter to go abroad with me.  I then to the Exchequer, and there,
among other things, spoke to Mr. Falconbridge about his girle I heard sing
at Nonsuch, and took him and some other 'Chequer men to the Sun Taverne,
and there spent 2s. 6d. upon them, and he sent for the girle, and she hath
a pretty way of singing, but hath almost forgot for want of practice.  She
is poor in clothes, and not bred to any carriage, but will be soon taught
all, and if Mercer do not come again, I think we may have her upon better
terms, and breed her to what we please.  Thence to Sir W. Coventry's, and
there dined with him and Sir W. Batten, the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
Mr. Thin, a pretty gentleman, going to Gottenburgh. Having dined, Sir W.
Coventry, Sir W. Batten, and I walked into his closet to consider of some
things more to be done in a list to be given to the Parliament of all our
ships, and time of entry and discharge.  Sir W. Coventry seems to think
they will soon be weary of the business, and fall quietly into the giving
the King what is fit.  This he hopes. Thence I by coach home to the
office, and there intending a meeting, but nobody being there but myself
and Sir J. Minnes, who is worse than nothing, I did not answer any body,
but kept to my business in the office till night, and then Sir W. Batten
and Sir W. Pen to me, and thence to Sir W. Batten's, and eat a barrel of
oysters I did give them, and so home, and to bed.  I have this evening
discoursed with W. Hewer about Mercer, I having a mind to have her again;
and I am vexed to hear him say that she hath no mind to come again, though
her mother hath.  No newes of the fleete yet, but that they went by Dover
on the 25th towards the Gunfleete, but whether the Dutch be yet abroad, or
no, we hear not. De Ruyter is not dead, but like to do well.  Most think
that the gross of the French fleete are gone home again.

28th.  Lay long in bed, and am come to agreement with my wife to have
Mercer again, on condition she may learn this winter two months to dance,
and she promises me she will endeavour to learn to sing, and all this I am
willing enough to.  So up, and by and by the glazier comes to finish the
windows of my house, which pleases me, and the bookbinder to gild the
backs of my books.  I got the glass of my book-presses to be done
presently, which did mightily content me, and to setting my study in a
little better order; and so to my, office to my people, busy about our
Parliament accounts; and so to dinner, and then at them again close.  At
night comes Sir W. Pen, and he and I a turn in the garden, and he broke to
me a proposition of his and my joining in a design of fetching timber and
deals from Scotland, by the help of Mr. Pett upon the place; which, while
London is building, will yield good money.  I approve it.  We judged a
third man, that is knowing, is necessary, and concluded on Sir W. Warren,
and sent for him to come to us to-morrow morning.  I full of this all
night, and the project of our man of war; but he and, I both dissatisfied
with Sir W. Batten's proposing his son to be Lieutenant, which we, neither
of us, like.  He gone, I discoursed with W. Hewer about Mercer, having a
great mind she should come to us again, and instructed him what to say to
her mother about it.  And so home, to supper, and to bed.

29th.  A little meeting at the office by Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and
myself, being the first since the fire.  We rose soon, and comes Sir W.
Warren, by our desire, and with Sir W. Pen and I talked of our Scotch
motion, which Sir W. Warren did seem to be stumbled at, and did give no
ready answer, but proposed some thing previous to it, which he knows would
find us work, or writing to Mr. Pett to be informed how matters go there
as to cost and ways of providing sawyers or saw-mills.  We were parted
without coming to any good resolution in it, I discerning plainly that Sir
W. Warren had no mind to it, but that he was surprised at our motion.  He
gone, I to some office business, and then home to dinner, and then to
office again, and then got done by night the lists that are to be
presented to the Parliament Committee of the ships, number of men, and
time employed since the war, and then I with it (leaving my wife at
Unthanke's) to St. James's, where Sir W. Coventry staid for me, and I
perused our lists, and find to our great joy that wages, victuals, wear
and tear, cast by the medium of the men, will come to above 3,000,000; and
that the extraordinaries, which all the world will allow us, will arise to
more than will justify the expence we have declared to have been at since
the war, viz., L320,000, he and I being both mightily satisfied, he saying
to me, that if God send us over this rub we must take another course for a
better Comptroller.  So parted, and I to my wife [at Unthanke's], who
staid for the finishing her new best gowne (the best that ever I made her
coloured tabby, flowered, and so took it and her home; and then I to my
people, and having cut them out a little more work than they expected,
viz., the writing over the lists in new method, I home to bed, being in
good humour, and glad of the end we have brought this matter to.

30th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where I have not been a good while:
and there the church infinitely thronged with strangers since the fire
come into our parish; but not one handsome face in all of them, as if,
indeed, there was a curse, as Bishop Fuller heretofore said, upon our
parish.  Here I saw Mercer come into the church, which I had a mind to,
but she avoided looking up, which vexed me.  A pretty good sermon, and
then home, and comes Balty and dined with us.  A good dinner; and then to
have my haire cut against winter close to my head, and then to church
again.  A sorry sermon, and away home.  [Sir] W. Pen and I to walk to talk
about several businesses, and then home; and my wife and I to read in
Fuller's Church History, and so to supper and to bed.  This month ends
with my mind full of business and concernment how this office will speed
with the Parliament, which begins to be mighty severe in the examining our
accounts, and the expence of the Navy this war.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     About my new closet, for my mind is full of nothing but that
     About the nature of sounds
     All the innocent pleasure in the world
     Angry, and so continued till bed, and did not sleep friends
     Beare-garden
     Being examined at Allgate, whether we were husbands and wives
     Did dig another, and put our wine in it; and I my Parmazan cheese
     Do bury still of the plague seven or eight in a day
     Durst not ask any body how it was with us
     Evelyn, who cries out against it, and calls it bitchering
     Fire grow; and, as it grew darker, appeared more and more
     Good sport of the bull's tossing of the dogs
     Great fire they saw in the City
     Horrid malicious bloody flame
     I never did observe so much of myself in my life
     No manner of means used to quench the fire
     Not permit her begin to do so, lest worse should follow
     Offered to stop the fire near his house for such a reward
     Pain to ride in a coach with them, for fear of being seen
     Plot in it, and that the French had done it
     Put up with too much care, that I have forgot where they are
     Removing goods from one burned house to another
     Sad sight it was: the whole City almost on fire
     Staying out late, and painting in the absence of her husband
     There did 'tout ce que je voudrais avec' her
     This unhappinesse of ours do give them heart
     Ye pulling down of houses, in ye way of ye fire


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                  1666

October 1st, 1666.   Up, and all the morning at the office, getting the
list of all the ships and vessels employed since the war, for the
Committee of Parliament.  At noon with it to Sir W. Coventry's chamber,
and there dined with him and [Sir] W. Batten, and [Sir] W. Pen, and after
dinner examined it and find it will do us much right in the number of men
rising to near the expense we delivered to the Parliament.  [Sir] W.
Coventry and I (the others going before the Committee) to Lord Bruncker's
for his hand, and find him simply mighty busy in a council of the Queen's.
He come out and took in the papers to sign, and sent them mighty wisely
out again.  Sir W. Coventry away to the Committee, and I to the Mercer's,
and there took a bill of what I owe of late, which comes to about L17.
Thence to White Hall, and there did hear Betty Michell was at this end of
the towne, and so without breach of vowe did stay to endeavour to meet
with her and carry her home; but she did not come, so I lost my whole
afternoon.  But pretty!  how I took another pretty woman for her, taking
her a clap on the breech, thinking verily it had been her.  Staid till
[Sir] W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen come out, and so away home by water with
them, and to the office to do some business, and then home, and my wife do
tell me that W. Hewer tells her that Mercer hath no mind to come.  So I
was angry at it, and resolved with her to have Falconbridge's girle, and I
think it will be better for us, and will please me better with singing.
With this resolution, to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up, and am sent for to Sir G. Carteret, and to him, and there he
tells me how our lists are referred to a Sub-committee to consider and
examine, and that I am ordered to be there this afternoon.  So I away
thence to my new bookbinder to see my books gilding in the backs, and then
to White Hall to the House, and spoke to Sir W. Coventry, where he told me
I must attend the Committee in the afternoon, and received some hints of
more work to do.  So I away to the 'Chequer, and thence to an alehouse,
and found Mr. Falconbridge, and agreed for his kinswoman to come to me.
He says she can dress my wife, and will do anything we would have her to
do, and is of a good spirit and mighty cheerful.  He is much pleased
therewith, and so we shall be.  So agreed for her coming the next week.
So away home, and eat a short dinner, and then with Sir W. Pen to White
Hall, and do give his boy my book of papers to hold while he went into the
Committee Chamber in the Inner Court of Wards, and I walked without with
Mr. Slingsby, of the Tower, who was there, and who did in walking inform
me mightily in several things; among others, that the heightening or
lowering of money is only a cheat, and do good to some particular men,
which, if I can but remember how, I am now by him fully convinced of.
Anon Sir W. Pen went away, telling me that Sir W. Coventry that was within
had told him that the fleete is all come into the buoy of the Nore, and
that he must hasten down to them, and so went away, and I into the
Committee Chamber before the Committee sat, and there heard Birch
discourse highly and understandingly about the Navy business and a
proposal made heretofore to farm the Navy; but Sir W. Coventry did
abundantly answer him, and is a most excellent person.  By and by the
Committee met, and I walked out, and anon they rose and called me in, and
appointed me to attend a Committee of them to-morrow at the office to
examine our lists.  This put me into a mighty fear and trouble; they doing
it in a very ill humour, methought.  So I away and called on my Lord
Bruncker to desire him to be there to-morrow, and so home, having taken up
my wife at Unthanke's, full of trouble in mind to think what I shall be
obliged to answer, that am neither fully fit, nor in any measure concerned
to take the shame and trouble of this office upon me, but only from the
inability and folly of the Comptroller that occasions it.  When come home
I to Sir W. Pen's, to his boy, for my book, and there find he hath it not,
but delivered it to the doorekeeper of the Committee for me. This, added
to my former disquiet, made me stark mad, considering all the nakedness of
the office lay open in papers within those covers.  I could not tell in
the world what to do, but was mad on all sides, and that which made me
worse Captain Cocke was there, and he did so swear and curse at the boy
that told me.  So Cocke, Griffin, and the boy with me, they to find the
housekeeper of the Parliament, Hughes, while I to Sir W. Coventry, but
could hear nothing of it there.  But coming to our rendezvous at the Swan
Taverne, in Ding Streete, I find they have found the housekeeper, and the
book simply locked up in the Court.  So I staid and drank, and rewarded
the doore-keeper, and away home, my heart lighter by all this, but to bed
very sad notwithstanding, in fear of what will happen to-morrow upon their
coming.

3rd.  Waked betimes, mightily troubled in mind, and in the most true
trouble that I ever was in my life, saving in the business last year of
the East India prizes.  So up, and with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer and Griffin
to consider of our business, and books and papers necessary for this
examination; and by and by, by eight o'clock, comes Birch, the first, with
the lists and books of accounts delivered in.  He calls me to work, and
there he and I begun, when, by and by, comes Garraway,

     [William Garway, elected M.P. for Chichester, March 26th, 1661, and
     in 1674 he was appointed by the House to confer with Lord
     Shaftesbury respecting the charge against Pepys being popishly
     affected.  See note to the Life, vol. i., p, xxxii, and for his
     character, October 6th, 1666]

the first time I ever saw him, and Sir W. Thompson and Mr. Boscawen. They
to it, and I did make shift to answer them better than I expected. Sir W.
Batten, Lord Bruncker, [Sir] W. Pen, come in, but presently went out; and
[Sir] J. Minnes come in, and said two or three words from the purpose, but
to do hurt; and so away he went also, and left me all the morning with
them alone to stand or fall.  At noon Sir W. Batten comes to them to
invite them (though fast day) to dinner, which they did, and good company
they were, but especially Garraway.  Here I have news brought me of my
father's coming to town, and I presently to him, glad to see him, poor
man, he being come to town unexpectedly to see us and the city. I could
not stay with him, but after dinner to work again, only the Committee and
I, till dark night, and by that time they cast up all the lists, and found
out what the medium of men was borne all the war, of all sorts, and ended
with good peace, and much seeming satisfaction; but I find them wise and
reserved, and instructed to hit all our blots, as among others, that we
reckon the ships full manned from the beginning. They gone, and my heart
eased of a great deale of fear and pain, and reckoning myself to come off
with victory, because not overcome in anything or much foiled, I away to
Sir W. Coventry's chamber, but he not within, then to White Hall, and
there among the ladies, and saw my Lady Castlemaine never looked so ill,
nor Mrs. Stewart neither, as in this plain, natural dress.  I was not
pleased with either of them.  Away, not finding [Sir] W. Coventry, and so
home, and there find my father and my brother come to towne--my father
without my expectation; but glad I am to see him.  And so to supper with
him, and to work again at the office; then home, to set up all my folio
books, which are come home gilt on the backs, very handsome to the eye,
and then at midnight to bed.  This night [Sir] W. Pen told me [Sir] W.
Batten swears he will have nothing to do with the Privateer if his son do
not go Lieutenant, which angers me and him; but we will be even with him,
one way or other.

4th.  Up, and mighty betimes, to [Sir] W. Coventry, to give him an account
of yesterday's work, which do give him good content.  He did then tell me
his speech lately to the House in his owne vindication about the report of
his selling of places, he having a small occasion offered him by chance,
which he did desire, and took, and did it to his content, and, he says, to
the House's seeming to approve of it by their hum.  He confessed how long
he had done it, and how he desired to have something else; and, since
then, he had taken nothing, and challenged all the world.  I was glad of
this also.  Thence up to the Duke of York, by appointment, with fellow
officers, to complaine, but to no purpose, of want of money, and so away.
I to Sir G. Carteret, to his lodging, and here discoursed much of the want
of money and our being designed for destruction.  How the King hath lost
his power, by submitting himself to this way of examining his accounts,
and is become but as a private man. He says the King is troubled at it,
but they talk an entry shall be made, that it is not to be brought into
example; that the King must, if they do not agree presently, make them a
courageous speech, which he says he may do, the City of London being now
burned, and himself master of an army, better than any prince before him,
and so I believe.  Thence home, about noon, to dinner.  After dinner the
book binder come, and I sent by him some more books to gild.  I to the
office all day, and spent most of it with Sir W. Warren, whom I have had
no discourse with a great while, and when all is done I do find him a
mighty wise man as any I know, and his counsel as much to be followed.
Late with Mr. Hater upon comparing the charge and husbandry of the last
Dutch war with ours now, and do find good roome to think we have done
little worse than they, whereof good use may and will be made.  So home to
supper, and to bed.

5th.  Up, and with my father talking awhile, then to the office, and there
troubled with a message from Lord Peterborough about money; but I did give
as kind answer as I could, though I hate him.  Then to Sir G. Carteret to
discourse about paying of part of the great ships come in, and so home
again to compare the comparison of the two Dutch wars' charges for [Sir]
W. Coventry, and then by water (and saw old Mr. Michell digging like a
painfull father for his son) to him, and find him at dinner.  After dinner
to look over my papers, and comparing them with some notes of his and
brought me, the sight of some good Navy notes of his which I shall get.
Then examined and liked well my notes, and away together to White Hall, in
the way discoursing the inconvenience of the King's being thus subject to
an account, but it will be remedied for the time to come, he thinks, if we
can get this over, and I find he will have the Comptroller's business
better done, swearing he will never be for a wit to be employed on
business again.  Thence I home, and back again to White Hall, and meeting
Sir H. Cholmly to White Hall; there walked till night that the Committee
come down, and there Sir W. Coventry tells me that the Subcommittee have
made their report to the Grand Committee, and in pretty kind terms, and
have agreed upon allowing us L4 per head, which I am sure will do the
business, but he had endeavoured to have got more, but this do well, and
he and I are both mighty glad it is come to this, and the heat of the
present business seems almost over.  But I have more worke cut out for me,
to prepare a list of the extraordinaries, not to be included within the
L4, against Monday.  So I away from him, and met with the
Vice-Chamberlain, and I told him when I had this evening in coming hither
met with Captain Cocke, and he told me of a wild motion made in the House
of Lords by the Duke of Buckingham for all men that had cheated the King
to be declared traitors and felons, and that my Lord Sandwich was named.
This put me into a great pain, so the Vice-Chamberlain, who had heard
nothing of it, having been all day in the City, away with me to White
Hall; and there come to me and told me that, upon Lord Ashly's asking
their direction whether, being a peere, he should bring in his accounts to
the Commons, which they did give way to, the Duke of Buckingham did move
that, for the time to come, what I have written above might be declared by
some fuller law than heretofore.  Lord Ashly answered, that it was not the
fault of the present laws, but want of proof; and so said the Lord
Chancellor.  He answered, that a better law, he thought, might be made so
the House laughing, did refer it to him to bring in a Bill to that
purpose, and this was all.  So I away with joyful heart home, calling on
Cocke and telling him the same.  So I away home to the office to clear my
Journall for five days, and so home to supper and to bed, my father who
had staid out late and troubled me thereat being come home well and gone
to bed, which pleases me also.  This day, coming home, Mr. Kirton's
kinsman, my bookseller, come in my way; and so I am told by him that Mr.
Kirton is utterly undone, and made 2 or L3000 worse than nothing, from
being worth 7 or L8,000.  That the goods laid in the Churchyarde fired
through the windows those in St. Fayth's church; and those coming to the
warehouses' doors fired them, and burned all the books and the pillars of
the church, so as the roof falling down, broke quite down, which it did
not do in the other places of the church, which is alike pillared (which I
knew not before); but being not burned, they stand still.  He do believe
there is above; L50,000 of books burned; all the great booksellers almost
undone: not only these, but their warehouses at their Hall, and under
Christchurch, and elsewhere being all burned.  A great want thereof there
will be of books, specially Latin books and foreign books; and, among
others, the Polyglottes and new Bible, which he believes will be presently
worth L40 a-piece.

6th.  Up, and having seen my brother in his cassocke, which I am not the
most satisfied in, being doubtfull at this time what course to have him
profess too soon.  To the office and there busy about a list of the
extraordinaries of the charge of the fleete this war; and was led to go to
the office of the ordnance to be satisfied in something, and find their
accounts and books kept in mighty good order, but that they can give no
light, nor will the nature of their affairs permit it to tell what the
charge of the ordnance comes to a man a month.  So home again and to
dinner, there coming Creed to me; but what with business and my hatred to
the man, I did not spend any time with him, but after dinner [my] wife and
he and I took coach and to Westminster, but he 'light about Paul's, and
set her at her tailor's, and myself to St. James's, but there missing
[Sir] W. Coventry, returned and took up my wife, and calling at the
Exchange home, whither Sir H. Cholmly come to visit me, but my business
suffered me not to stay with him.  So he gone I by water to Westminster
Hall and thence to St. James's, and there found [Sir] W. Coventry waiting
for me, and I did give him a good account to his mind of the business he
expected about extraordinaries and then fell to other talke, among others,
our sad condition contracted by want of a Comptroller;

     [As Sir John Minnes performed the duties inefficiently, it was
     considered necessary to take the office from him: See January 21st.]

and it was his words, that he believes, besides all the shame and trouble
he hath brought on the office, the King had better have given L100,000
than ever have had him there.  He did discourse about some of these
discontented Parliament-men, and says that Birch is a false rogue, but
that Garraway is a man that hath not been well used by the Court, though
very stout to death, and hath suffered all that is possible for the King
from the beginning.  But discontented as he is, yet he never knew a
Session of Parliament but he hath done some good deed for the King before
it rose.  I told him the passage Cocke told me of his having begged a
brace of bucks of the Lord Arlington for him, and when it come to him, he
sent it back again.  Sir W. Coventry told me, it is much to be pitied that
the King should lose the service of a man so able and faithfull; and that
he ought to be brought over, but that it is always observed, that by
bringing over one discontented man, you raise up three in his room; which
is a State lesson I never knew before.  But when others discover your
fear, and that discontent procures favour, they will be discontented too,
and impose on you.  Thence to White Hall and got a coach and home, and
there did business late, and so home and set up my little books of one of
my presses come home gilt, which pleases me mightily, and then to bed.
This morning my wife told me of a fine gentlewoman my Lady Pen tells her
of, for L20 per annum, that sings, dances, plays on four or five
instruments and many other fine things, which pleases me mightily: and she
sent to have her see her, which she did this afternoon; but sings basely,
and is a tawdry wench that would take L8, but [neither] my wife nor I
think her fit to come.

7th (Lord's day).  Up, and after visiting my father in his chamber, to
church, and then home to dinner.  Little Michell and his wife come to dine
with us, which they did, and then presently after dinner I with Sir J.
Minnes to White Hall, where met by Sir W. Batten and Lord Bruncker, to
attend the King and Duke of York at the Cabinet; but nobody had determined
what to speak of, but only in general to ask for money.  So I was forced
immediately to prepare in my mind a method of discoursing. And anon we
were called in to the Green Room, where the King, Duke of York, Prince
Rupert, Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Duke of Albemarle, [Sirs] G.
Carteret, W. Coventry, Morrice.  Nobody beginning, I did, and made a
current, and I thought a good speech, laying open the ill state of the
Navy: by the greatness of the debt; greatness of work to do against next
yeare; the time and materials it would take; and our incapacity, through a
total want of money.  I had no sooner done, but Prince Rupert rose up and
told the King in a heat, that whatever the gentleman had said, he had
brought home his fleete in as good a condition as ever any fleete was
brought home; that twenty boats would be as many as the fleete would want:
and all the anchors and cables left in the storm might be taken up again.
This arose from my saying, among other things we had to do, that the
fleete was come in--the greatest fleete that ever his Majesty had yet
together, and that in as bad condition as the enemy or weather could put
it; and to use Sir W. Pen's words, who is upon the place taking a survey,
he dreads the reports he is to receive from the Surveyors of its defects.
I therefore did only answer, that I was sorry for his Highness's offence,
but that what I said was but the report we received from those entrusted
in the fleete to inform us.  He muttered and repeated what he had said;
and so, after a long silence on all hands, nobody, not so much as the Duke
of Albemarle, seconding the Prince, nor taking notice of what he said, we
withdrew.  I was not a little troubled at this passage, and the more when
speaking with Jacke Fenn about it, he told me that the Prince will be
asking now who this Pepys is, and find him to be a creature of my Lord
Sandwich's, and therefore this was done only to disparage him.  Anon they
broke, up, and Sir W. Coventry come out; so I asked his advice.  He told
me he had said something to salve it, which was, that his Highnesse had,
he believed, rightly informed the King that the fleete is come in good
condition to have staid out yet longer, and have fought the enemy, but yet
that Mr. Pepys his meaning might be, that, though in so good condition, if
they should come in and lie all the winter, we shall be very loth to send
them to sea for another year's service with[out] great repairs.  He said
it would be no hurt if I went to him, and showed him the report himself
brought up from the fleete, where every ship, by the Commander's report,
do need more or less, and not to mention more of Sir W. Pen for doing him
a mischief. So I said I would, but do not think that all this will redound
to my hurt, because the truth of what I said will soon appear.  Thence,
having been informed that, after all this pains, the King hath found out
how to supply us with 5 or L6000, when L100,000 were at this time but
absolutely necessary, and we mentioned L50,000.  This is every day a
greater and greater omen of ruine.  God fit us for it!  Sir J. Minnes and
I home (it raining) by coach, calling only on Sir G. Cartefet at his
lodging (who is I find troubled at my Lord Treasurer and Sir Ph. Warwicke
bungling in his accounts), and come home to supper with my father, and
then all to bed.  I made my brother in his cassocke to say grace this day,
but I like his voice so ill that I begin to be sorry he hath taken this
order upon him.

8th.  Up and to my office, called up by Commissioner Middleton, newly come
to town, but staid not with me; so I to my office busy all the morning.
Towards noon, by water to Westminster Hall, and there by several hear that
the Parliament do resolve to do something to retrench Sir G. Carteret's
great salary; but cannot hear of any thing bad they can lay to his charge.
The House did this day order to be engrossed the Bill against importing
Irish cattle; a thing, it seems, carried on by the Western Parliament-men,
wholly against the sense of most of the rest of the House; who think if
you do this, you give the Irish again cause to rebel.  Thus plenty on both
sides makes us mad.  The Committee of the Canary Company of both factions
come to me for my Cozen Roger that is of the Committee.  Thence with [Sir]
W. Coventry when the House rose and [Sir] W. Batten to St. James's, and
there agreed of and signed our paper of extraordinaries, and there left
them, and I to Unthanke's, where Mr. Falconbridge's girle is, and by and
by comes my wife, who likes her well, though I confess I cannot (though
she be of my finding out and sings pretty well), because she will be
raised from so mean a condition to so high all of a sudden; but she will
be much to our profit, more than Mercer, less expense.  Here we bespoke
anew gowne for her, and to come to us on Friday.  She being gone, my wife
and I home by coach, and then I presently by water with Mr. Pierce to
Westminster Hall, he in the way telling me how the Duke of York and Duke
of Albemarle do not agree.  The Duke of York is wholly given up to this
bitch of Denham.  The Duke of Albemarle and Prince Rupert do less agree.
So that we are all in pieces, and nobody knows what will be done the next
year.  The King hath yesterday in Council declared his resolution of
setting a fashion for clothes, which he will never alter.

     [There are several references to this new fashion of dress
     introduced by the king, Pepys saw the Duke of York put on the vest
     on the 13th, and he says Charles II. himself put it on on the 15th.
     On November 4th Pepys dressed himself in the new vest and coat.  See
     notes, October 15th and November 22nd.]

It will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the nobility
thrift, and will do good.  By and by comes down from the Committee [Sir]
W. Coventry, and I find him troubled at several things happened this
afternoon, which vexes me also; our business looking worse and worse, and
our worke growing on our hands.  Time spending, and no money to set
anything in hand with; the end thereof must be speedy ruine.  The Dutch
insult and have taken off Bruant's head,

     [Captain Du Buat, a Frenchman in the Dutch service, plotted with two
     magistrates of Rotterdam to obtain a peace with England as the
     readiest means of pressing the elevation of the Prince of Orange to
     the office of Captain-General.  He was brought before the Supreme
     Court of Holland, condemned, and executed.  He had been one of the
     household of the Prince of Orange who were dismissed by De Witt.]

which they have not dared to do (though found guilty of the fault he did
die for, of something of the Prince of Orange's faction) till just now,
which speaks more confidence in our being worse than before.  Alderman
Maynell, I hear, is dead.  Thence returned in the darke by coach all
alone, full of thoughts of the consequences of this ill complexion of
affairs, and how to save myself and the little I have, which if I can do,
I have cause to bless God that I am so well, and shall be well contented
to retreat to Brampton, and spend the rest of my days there.  So to my
office, and did some business, and finished my Journall with resolutions,
if God bless me, to apply myself soberly to settle all matters for myself,
and expect the event of all with comfort.  So home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to the office, where we sat the first day since the fire, I
think.  At noon home, and my uncle Thomas was there, and dined with my
brother and I (my father and I were gone abroad), and then to the office
again in the afternoon, and there close all day long, and did much
business.  At night to Sir W. Batten, where Sir R. Ford did occasion some
discourse of sending a convoy to the Maderas; and this did put us upon
some new thoughts of sending our privateer thither on merchants' accounts,
which I have more mind to, the profit being certain and occasion honest
withall.  So home, and to supper with my father, and then to set my
remainder of my books gilt in order with much pleasure, and so late to
bed.

10th (Fast-day for the fire).  Up with Sir W. Batten by water to White
Hall, and anon had a meeting before the Duke of York, where pretty to see
how Sir W. Batten, that carried the surveys of all the fleete with him, to
shew their ill condition to the Duke of York, when he found the Prince
there, did not speak one word, though the meeting was of his asking--for
nothing else.  And when I asked him, he told me he knew the Prince too
well to anger him, so that he was afeard to do it.  Thence with him to
Westminster, to the parish church, where the Parliament-men, and
Stillingfleete in the pulpit.  So full, no standing there; so he and I to
eat herrings at the Dog Taverne.  And then to church again, and there was
Mr. Frampton in the pulpit, they cry up so much, a young man, and of a
mighty ready tongue.  I heard a little of his sermon, and liked it; but
the crowd so great, I could not stay.  So to the Swan, and 'baise la
fille', and drank, and then home by coach, and took father, wife, brother,
and W. Hewer to Islington, where I find mine host dead.  Here eat and
drank, and merry; and so home, and to the office a while, and then to Sir
W. Batten to talk a while, and with Captain Cocke into the office to hear
his newes, who is mighty conversant with Garraway and those people, who
tells me what they object as to the maladministration of things as to
money.  But that they mean well, and will do well; but their reckonings
are very good, and show great faults, as I will insert here.  They say the
king hath had towards this war expressly thus much

     Royal Ayde.................................... L2,450,000
     More..........................................  1,250,000
     Three months' tax given the King by a power of
          raising a month's tax of L70,000 every
          year for three years.....................  0,210,000
     Customes, out of which the King did promise
          to pay L240,000, which for two years
          comes to.................................. 0,480,000
     Prizes, which they moderately reckon at........ 0,300,000
     A debt declared by the Navy, by us............. 0,900,000
                                                    ----------
                                                     5,590,000

     The whole charge of the Navy, as we state it
          for two years and a month, hath been but.. 3,200,000

          So what is become of all this sum?........ 2,390,000

He and I did bemoan our public condition.  He tells me the Duke of
Albemarle is under a cloud, and they have a mind at Court to lay him
aside.  This I know not; but all things are not right with him, and I am
glad of it, but sorry for the time.  So home to supper, and to bed, it
being my wedding night,

     [See Life, vol. i., p. xxi., where the register of St. Margaret's
     parish, Westminster, is quoted to the effect that Pepys was married
     December 1st, 1655.  It seems incomprehensible that both husband and
     wife should have been wrong as to the date of their wedding day, but
     Mrs. Pepys was unquestionably wrong as to the number of years, for
     they had been married nearly eleven.]

but how many years I cannot tell; but my wife says ten.

11th.  Up, and discoursed with my father of my sending some money for
safety into the country, for I am in pain what to do with what I have. I
did give him money, poor man, and he overjoyed.  So left him, and to the
office, where nothing but sad evidences of ruine coming on us for want of
money.  So home to dinner, which was a very good dinner, my father,
brother, wife and I, and then to the office again, where I was all the
afternoon till very late, busy, and then home to supper and to bed.

     Memorandum.  I had taken my Journall during the fire and the
     disorders following in loose papers until this very day, and could
     not get time to enter them in my book till January 18, in the
     morning, having made my eyes sore by frequent attempts this winter
     to do it.  But now it is done, for which I thank God, and pray never
     the like occasion may happen.

12th.  Up, and after taking leave of my poor father, who is setting out
this day for Brampton by the Cambridge coach, he having taken a journey to
see the city burned, and to bring my brother to towne, I out by water; and
so coach to St. James's, the weather being foul; and there, from Sir W.
Coventry, do hear how the House have cut us off L150,000 of our wear and
tear, for that which was saved by the King while the fleete lay in harbour
in winter.  However, he seems pleased, and so am I, that they have abated
no more, and do intend to allow of 28,000 men for the next year; and this
day have appointed to declare the sum they will give the King,

     [The parliament voted this day a supply of L1,800,000 sterling.
     See below.]

and to propose the way of raising it; so that this is likely to be the
great day.  This done in his chamber, I with him to Westminster Hall, and
there took a few turns, the Hall mighty full of people, and the House
likely to be very full to-day about the money business.  Here I met with
several people, and do find that people have a mighty mind to have a fling
at the Vice-Chamberlain, if they could lay hold of anything, his place
being, indeed, too much for such, they think, or any single subject of no
greater parts and quality than he, to enjoy.  But I hope he may weather
all, though it will not be by any dexterity of his, I dare say, if he do
stand, but by his fate only, and people's being taken off by other things.
Thence home by coach, mighty dirty weather, and then to the Treasurer's
office and got a ticket paid for my little Michell, and so again by coach
to Westminster, and come presently after the House rose.  So to the Swan,
and there sent for a piece of meat and dined alone and played with Sarah,
and so to the Hall a while, and thence to Mrs. Martin's lodging and did
what I would with her.  She is very big, and resolves I must be godfather.
Thence away by water with Cropp to Deptford.  It was almost night before I
got thither.  So I did only give directions concerning a press that I have
making there to hold my turning and joyner's tooles that were lately given
me, which will be very handsome, and so away back again, it being now
dark, and so home, and there find my wife come home, and hath brought her
new girle I have helped her to, of Mr. Falconbridge's.  She is wretched
poor; and but ordinary favoured; and we fain to lay out seven or eight
pounds worth of clothes upon her back, which, methinks, do go against my
heart; and I do not think I can ever esteem her as I could have done
another that had come fine and handsome; and which is more, her voice, for
want of use, is so furred, that it do not at present please me; but her
manner of singing is such, that I shall, I think, take great pleasure in
it.  Well, she is come, and I wish us good fortune in her.  Here I met
with notice of a meeting of the Commissioners for Tangier tomorrow, and so
I must have my accounts ready for them, which caused me to confine myself
to my chamber presently and set to the making up my accounts, which I find
very clear, but with much difficulty by reason of my not doing them
sooner, things being out of my mind.

13th.  It cost me till four o'clock in the morning, and, which was pretty
to think, I was above an hour, after I had made all right, in casting up
of about twenty sums, being dozed with much work, and had for forty times
together forgot to carry the 60 which I had in my mind, in one
denomination which exceeded 60; and this did confound me for above an hour
together.  At last all even and done, and so to bed.  Up at seven, and so
to the office, after looking over my last night's work.  We sat all the
morning.  At noon by coach with my Lord Bruncker and 'light at the Temple,
and so alone I to dinner at a cooke's, and thence to my Lord Bellasses,
whom I find kind; but he had drawn some new proposal to deliver to the
Lords Commissioners to-day, wherein one was, that the garrison would not
be well paid without some goldsmith's undertaking the paying of the bills
of exchange for Tallys.  He professing so much kindness to me, and saying
that he would not be concerned in the garrison without me; and that if he
continued in the employment, no man should have to do with the money but
myself.  I did ask his Lordship's meaning of the proposition in his paper.
He told me he had not much considered it, but that he meant no harm to me.
I told him I thought it would render me useless; whereupon he did very
frankly, after my seeming denials for a good while, cause it to be writ
over again, and that clause left out, which did satisfy me abundantly.  It
being done, he and I together to White Hall, and there the Duke of York
(who is gone over to all his pleasures again, and leaves off care of
business, what with his woman, my Lady Denham, and his hunting three times
a week) was just come in from hunting.  So I stood and saw him dress
himself, and try on his vest, which is the King's new fashion, and will be
in it for good and all on Monday next, and the whole Court: it is a
fashion, the King says; he will never change.  He being ready, he and my
Lord Chancellor, and Duke of Albemarle, and Prince Rupert, Lord Bellasses,
Sir H. Cholmly, Povy, and myself, met at a Committee for Tangier.  My Lord
Bellasses's propositions were read and discoursed of, about reducing the
garrison to less charge; and indeed I am mad in love with my Lord
Chancellor, for he do comprehend and speak out well, and with the greatest
easinesse and authority that ever I saw man in my life.  I did never
observe how much easier a man do speak when he knows all the company to be
below him, than in him; for though he spoke, indeed, excellent welt, yet
his manner and freedom of doing it, as if he played with it, and was
informing only all the rest of the company, was mighty pretty.  He did
call again and again upon Mr. Povy for his accounts.  I did think fit to
make the solemn tender of my accounts that I intended.  I said something
that was liked, touching the want of money, and the bad credit of our
tallys.  My Lord Chancellor moved, that without any trouble to any of the
rest of the Lords, I might alone attend the King, when he was with his
private Council; and open the state of the garrison's want of credit; and
all that could be done, should.  Most things moved were referred to
Committees, and so we broke up.  And at the end Sir W. Coventry come; so I
away with him, and he discoursed with me something of the Parliament's
business.  They have voted giving the [King] for next year L1,800,000;
which, were it not for his debts, were a great sum.  He says, he thinks
the House may say no more to us for the present, but that we must mend our
manners against the next tryall, and mend them we will.  But he thinks it
not a fit time to be found making of trouble among ourselves, meaning
about Sir J. Minnes, who most certainly must be removed, or made a
Commissioner, and somebody else Comptroller.  But he tells me that the
House has a great envy at Sir G. Carteret, and that had he ever thought
fit in all his discourse to have touched upon the point of our want of
money and badness of payment, it would have been laid hold on to Sir G.
Carteret's hurt; but he hath avoided it, though without much reason for
it, most studiously, and in short did end thus, that he has never shewn so
much of the pigeon in all his life as in his innocence to Sir G. Carteret
at this time; which I believe, and will desire Sir G. Carteret to thank
him for it.  So we broke up and I by coach home, calling for a new pair of
shoes, and so, little being to do at the office, did go home, and after
spending a little in righting some of my books, which stood out of order,
I to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, among other things, talking of my
wife's renewing her acquaintance with Mrs. Pierce, which, by my wife's ill
using her when she was here last, hath been interrupted.  Herein we were a
little angry together, but presently friends again; and so up, and I to
church, which was mighty full, and my beauties, Mrs. Lethulier and fair
Batelier, both there.  A very foul morning, and rained; and sent for my
cloake to go out of the church with.  So dined, and after dinner (a good
discourse thereat to my brother) he and I by water to White Hall, and he
to Westminster Abbey.  Here I met with Sir Stephen Fox, who told me how
much right I had done myself, and how well it is represented by the
Committee to the House, my readinesse to give them satisfaction in
everything when they were at the office.  I was glad of this.  He did
further discourse of Sir W. Coventry's, great abilities, and how necessary
it were that I were of the House to assist him.  I did not owne it, but do
myself think it were not unnecessary if either he should die, or be
removed to the Lords, or any thing to hinder his doing the like service
the next trial, which makes me think that it were not a thing very unfit;
but I will not move in it.  He and I parted, I to Mrs. Martin's, thinking
to have met Mrs. Burrows, but she was not there, so away and took my
brother out of the Abbey and home, and there to set some accounts right,
and to the office to even my Journall, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Called up, though a very rainy morning, by Sir H. Cholmley, and he
and I most of the morning together evening of accounts, which I was very
glad of.  Then he and I out to Sir Robt. Viner's, at the African house
(where I had not been since he come thither); but he was not there; but I
did some business with his people, and then to Colvill's, who, I find,
lives now in Lyme Streete, and with the same credit as ever, this fire
having not done them any wrong that I hear of at all.  Thence he and I
together to Westminster Hall, in our way talking of matters and passages
of state, the viciousness of the Court; the contempt the King brings
himself into thereby; his minding nothing, but doing all things just as
his people about him will have it; the Duke of York becoming a slave to
this whore Denham, and wholly minds her; that there really was amours
between the Duchesse and Sidney; a that there is reason to fear that, as
soon as the Parliament have raised this money, the King will see that he
hath got all that he can get, and then make up a peace.  He tells me, what
I wonder at, but that I find it confirmed by Mr. Pierce, whom I met
by-and-by in the Hall, that Sir W. Coventry is of the caball with the Duke
of York, and Bruncker, with this Denham; which is a shame, and I am sorry
for it, and that Sir W. Coventry do make her visits; but yet I hope it is
not so.  Pierce tells me, that as little agreement as there is between the
Prince--[Rupert]--and Duke of Albemarle, yet they are likely to go to sea
again; for the first will not be trusted alone, and nobody will go with
him but this Duke of Albemarle.  He tells me much how all the commanders
of the fleete and officers that are sober men do cry out upon their bad
discipline, and the ruine that must follow it if it continue.  But that
which I wonder most at, it seems their secretaries have been the most
exorbitant in their fees to all sorts of the people, that it is not to be
believed that they durst do it, so as it is believed they have got L800
apiece by the very vacancies in the fleete.  He tells me that Lady
Castlemayne is concluded to be with child again; and that all the people
about the King do make no scruple of saying that the King do lie with Mrs.
Stewart, who, he says, is a most excellent-natured lady. This day the King
begins to put on his vest, and I did see several persons of the House of
Lords and Commons too, great courtiers, who are in it; being a long
cassocke close to the body, of black cloth, and pinked with white silke
under it, and a coat over it, and the legs ruffled with black riband like
a pigeon's leg; and, upon the whole, I wish the King may keep it, for it
is a very fine and handsome garment.

     [Evelyn describes the new fashion as "a comely dress after ye
     Persian mode" (see "Diary," October 18th, 1666).  He adds that he
     had described the "comelinesse and usefulnesse" of the Persian
     clothing in his pamphlet entitled "Tyrannus, or the Mode."  "I do
     not impute to this discourse the change which soone happen'd, but
     it was an identity I could not but take notice of."  Rugge, in his
     "Diurnal," thus describes the new Court costume "1666, Oct. 11.  In
     this month His Majestie and whole Court changed the fashion of their
     clothes-viz. a close coat of cloth, pinkt with a white taffety under
     the cutts.  This in length reached the calf of the leg, and upon
     that a sercoat cutt at the breast, which hung loose and shorter than
     the vest six inches.  The breeches the Spanish cut, and buskins some
     of cloth, some of leather, but of the same colour as the vest or
     garment; of never the like fashion since William the Conqueror."  It
     is represented in a portrait of Lord Arlington, by Sir P. Lely,
     formerly belonging to Lord de Clifford, and engraved in Lodge's
     "Portraits."  Louis XIV. ordered his servants to wear the dress.
     See November 22.]

Walking with Pierce in the Court of Wards out comes Sir W. Coventry, and
he and I talked of business.  Among others I proposed the making Sir J.
Minnes a Commissioner, and make somebody else Comptroller.  He tells me it
is the thing he hath been thinking of, and hath spoke to the Duke of York
of it.  He believes it will be done; but that which I fear is that Pen
will be Comptroller, which I shall grudge a little.  The Duke of
Buckingham called him aside and spoke a good while with him.  I did
presently fear it might be to discourse something of his design to blemish
my Lord of Sandwich, in pursuance of the wild motion he made the other day
in the House.  Sir W. Coventry, when he come to me again, told me that he
had wrought a miracle, which was, the convincing the Duke of Buckingham
that something--he did not name what--that he had intended to do was not
fit to be done, and that the Duke is gone away of that opinion.  This
makes me verily believe it was something like what I feared.  By and by
the House rose, and then we parted, and I with Sir G. Carteret, and walked
in the Exchequer Court, discoursing of businesses. Among others, I
observing to him how friendly Sir W. Coventry had carried himself to him
in these late inquiries, when, if he had borne him any spleen, he could
have had what occasion he pleased offered him, he did confess he found the
same thing, and would thanke him for it.  I did give him some other
advices, and so away with him to his lodgings at White Hall to dinner,
where my Lady Carteret is, and mighty kind, both of them, to me.  Their
son and my Lady Jemimah will be here very speedily.  She tells me the
ladies are to go into a new fashion shortly, and that is, to wear short
coats, above their ancles; which she and I do not like, but conclude this
long trayne to be mighty graceful.  But she cries out of the vices of the
Court, and how they are going to set up plays already; and how, the next
day after the late great fast, the Duchesse of York did give the King and
Queene a play.  Nay, she told me that they have heretofore had plays at
Court the very nights before the fast for the death of the late King: She
do much cry out upon these things, and that which she believes will undo
the whole nation; and I fear so too.  After dinner away home, Mr. Brisband
along with me as far as the Temple, and there looked upon a new booke, set
out by one Rycault, secretary to my Lord Winchelsea, of the policy and
customs of the Turks, which is, it seems, much cried up.  But I could not
stay, but home, where I find Balty come back, and with him some
muster-books, which I am glad of, and hope he will do me credit in his
employment.  By and by took coach again and carried him home, and my wife
to her tailor's, while I to White Hall to have found out Povy, but miss
him and so call in my wife and home again, where at Sir W. Batten's I met
Sir W. Pen, lately come from the fleete at the Nore; and here were many
good fellows, among others Sir R. Holmes, who is exceeding kind to me,
more than usual, which makes me afeard of him, though I do much wish his
friendship.  Thereupon, after a little stay, I withdrew, and to the office
and awhile, and then home to supper and to my chamber to settle a few
papers, and then to bed.  This day the great debate was in Parliament, the
manner of raising the L1,800,000 they voted [the King] on Friday; and at
last, after many proposals, one moved that the Chimney-money might be
taken from the King, and an equal revenue of something else might be found
for the King, and people be enjoyned to buy off this tax of Chimney-money
for ever at eight years' purchase, which will raise present money, as they
think, L1,600,000, and the State be eased of an ill burthen and the King
be supplied of something as food or better for his use.  The House seems
to like this, and put off the debate to to-morrow.

16th.  Up, and to the office, where sat to do little business but hear
clamours for money.  At noon home to dinner, and to the office again,
after hearing my brother play a little upon the Lyra viall, which he do so
as to show that he hath a love to musique and a spirit for it, which I am
well pleased with.  All the afternoon at the office, and at night with Sir
W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, [and Sir] J. Minnes, at [Sir] W. Pen's lodgings,
advising about business and orders fit presently to make about discharging
of ships come into the river, and which to pay first, and many things in
order thereto.  But it vexed me that, it being now past seven o'clock, and
the businesses of great weight, and I had done them by eight o'clock, and
sending them to be signed, they were all gone to bed, and Sir W. Pen,
though awake, would not, being in bed, have them brought to him to sign;
this made me quite angry.  Late at work at the office, and then home to
supper and to bed.  Not come to any resolution at the Parliament to-day
about the manner of raising this L1,800,000.

17th.  Up, and busy about public and private business all the morning at
the office.  At noon home to dinner, alone with my brother, with whom I
had now the first private talke I have had, and find he hath preached but
twice in his life.  I did give him some advice to study pronunciation; but
I do fear he will never make a good speaker, nor, I fear, any general good
scholar, for I do not see that he minds optickes or mathematiques of any
sort, nor anything else that I can find.  I know not what he may be at
divinity and ordinary school-learning.  However, he seems sober, and that
pleases me.  After dinner took him and my wife and Barker (for so is our
new woman called, and is yet but a sorry girle), and set them down at
Unthanke's, and so to White Hall, and there find some of my brethren with
the Duke of York, but so few I put off the meeting.  So staid and heard
the Duke discourse, which he did mighty scurrilously, of the French, and
with reason, that they should give Beaufort orders when he was to bring,
and did bring, his fleete hither, that his rendezvous for his fleete, and
for all sluggs to come to, should be between Calais and Dover; which did
prove the taking of La Roche[lle], who, among other sluggs behind, did, by
their instructions, make for that place, to rendezvous with the fleete;
and Beaufort, seeing them as he was returning, took them for the English
fleete, and wrote word to the King of France that he had passed by the
English fleete, and the English fleete durst not meddle with him. The
Court is all full of vests, only my Lord St. Albans not pinked but plain
black; and they say the King says the pinking upon white makes them look
too much like magpyes, and therefore hath bespoke one of plain velvet.
Thence to St. James's by coach, and spoke, at four o'clock or five, with
Sir W. Coventry, newly come from the House, where they have sat all this
day and not come to an end of the debate how the money shall be raised.
He tells me that what I proposed to him the other day was what he had
himself thought on and determined, and that he believes it will speedily
be done--the making Sir J. Minnes a Commissioner, and bringing somebody
else to be Comptroller, and that (which do not please me, I confess, for
my own particulars, so well as Sir J. Minnes) will, I fear, be Sir W. Pen,
for he is the only fit man for it.  Away from him and took up my wife, and
left her at Temple Bar to buy some lace for a petticoat, and I took coach
and away to Sir R. Viner's about a little business, and then home, and by
and by to my chamber, and there late upon making up an account for the
Board to pass to-morrow, if I can get them, for the clearing all my
imprest bills, which if I can do, will be to my very good satisfaction.
Having done this, then to supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  The waters so
high in the roads, by the late rains, that our letters come not in till
to-day, and now I understand that my father is got well home, but had a
painful journey of it.  At noon with Lord Bruncker to St. Ellen's, where
the master of the late Pope's Head Taverne is now set up again, and there
dined at Sir W. Warren's cost, a very good dinner.  Here my Lord Bruncker
proffered to carry me and my wife into a play at Court to-night, and to
lend me his coach home, which tempted me much; but I shall not do it.
Thence rose from table before dinner ended, and homewards met my wife, and
so away by coach towards Lovett's (in the way wondering at what a good
pretty wench our Barker makes, being now put into good clothes, and
fashionable, at my charge; but it becomes her, so that I do not now think
much of it, and is an example of the power of good clothes and dress),
where I stood godfather.  But it was pretty, that, being a Protestant, a
man stood by and was my Proxy to answer for me.  A priest christened it,
and the boy's name is Samuel.  The ceremonies many, and some foolish.  The
priest in a gentleman's dress, more than my owne; but is a Capuchin, one
of the Queene-mother's priests.  He did give my proxy and the woman proxy
(my Lady Bills, absent, had a proxy also) good advice to bring up the
child, and, at the end, that he ought never to marry the child nor the
godmother, nor the godmother the child or the godfather: but, which is
strange, they say that the mother of the child and the godfather may
marry.  By and by the Lady Bills come in, a well-bred but crooked woman.
The poor people of the house had good wine, and a good cake; and she a
pretty woman in her lying-in dress.  It cost me near 40s. the whole
christening: to midwife 20s., nurse 10s., mayde 2s. 6d., and the coach 5s.
I was very well satisfied with what I have done, and so home and to the
office, and thence to Sir W. Batten's, and there hear how the business of
buying off the Chimney-money is passed in the House; and so the King to be
satisfied some other way, and the King supplied with the money raised by
this purchasing off of the chimnies.  So home, mightily pleased in mind
that I have got my bills of imprest cleared by bills signed this day, to
my good satisfaction.  To supper, and to bed.

19th.  Up, and by coach to my Lord Ashly's, and thence (he being gone
out), to the Exchequer chamber, and there find him and my Lord Bellasses
about my Lord Bellasses' accounts, which was the business I went upon.
This was soon ended, and then I with Creed back home to my house, and
there he and I did even accounts for salary, and by that time dinner was
ready, and merry at dinner, and then abroad to Povy's, who continues as
much confounded in all his business as ever he was; and would have had me
paid money, as like a fool as himself, which I troubled him in refusing;
but I did persist in it.  After a little more discourse, I left them, and
to White Hall, where I met with Sir Robert Viner, who told me a little of
what, in going home, I had seen; also a little of the disorder and mutiny
among the seamen at the Treasurer's office, which did trouble me then and
all day since, considering how many more seamen will come to towne every
day, and no money for them.  A Parliament sitting, and the Exchange close
by, and an enemy to hear of, and laugh at it.

     [The King of Denmark was induced to conclude a treaty with the
     United Provinces, a secret article of which bound him to declare war
     against England.  The order in council for the printing and
     publishing a declaration of war against Denmark is dated "Whitehall,
     Sept.  19, 1666;" annexed is "A True Declaration of all
     transactions between his Majesty of Great Britain and the King of
     Denmark, with a declaration of war against the said king, and the
     motives that obliged his Majesty thereunto" ("Calendar of State
     Papers," 1666-67, p. 140).]

Viner too, and Backewell, were sent for this afternoon; and was before the
King and his Cabinet about money; they declaring they would advance no
more, it being discoursed of in the House of Parliament for the King to
issue out his privy-seals to them to command them to trust him, which
gives them reason to decline trusting.  But more money they are persuaded
to lend, but so little that (with horrour I speake it), coming after the
Council was up, with Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Coventry, Lord Bruncker, and
myself, I did lay the state of our condition before the Duke of York, that
the fleete could not go out without several things it wanted, and we could
not have without money, particularly rum and bread, which we have promised
the man Swan to helpe him to L200 of his debt, and a few other small sums
of L200 a piece to some others, and that I do foresee the Duke of York
would call us to an account why the fleete is not abroad, and we cannot
answer otherwise than our want of money; and that indeed we do not do the
King any service now, but do rather abuse and betray his service by being
there, and seeming to do something, while we do not.  Sir G. Carteret
asked me (just in these words, for in this and all the rest I set down the
very words for memory sake, if there should be occasion) whether L50 or
L60 would do us any good; and when I told him the very rum man must have
L200, he held up his eyes as if we had asked a million. Sir W. Coventry
told the Duke of York plainly he did rather desire to have his commission
called in than serve in so ill a place, where he cannot do the King
service, and I did concur in saying the same.  This was all very plain,
and the Duke of York did confess that he did not see how we could do
anything without a present supply of L20,000, and that he would speak to
the King next Council day, and I promised to wait on him to put him in
mind of it.  This I set down for my future justification, if need be, and
so we broke up, and all parted, Sir W. Coventry being not very well, but I
believe made much worse by this night's sad discourse. So I home by coach,
considering what the consequence of all this must be in a little time.
Nothing but distraction and confusion; which makes me wish with all my
heart that I were well and quietly settled with what little I have got at
Brampton, where I might live peaceably, and study, and pray for the good
of the King and my country.  Home, and to Sir W. Batten's, where I saw my
Lady, who is now come down stairs after a great sickness.  Sir W. Batten
was at the pay to-day, and tells me how rude the men were, but did go away
quietly, being promised pay on Wednesday next. God send us money for it!
So to the office, and then to supper and to bed.  Among other things
proposed in the House to-day, to give the King in lieu of chimneys, there
was the bringing up of sealed paper, such as Sir J. Minnes shewed me
to-night, at Sir W. Batten's, is used in Spayne, and brings the King a
great revenue; but it shows what shifts we are put to too much.

20th.  Up, and all the morning at the office, where none met but myself.
So I walked a good while with Mr. Gawden in the garden, who is lately come
from the fleete at the buoy of the Nore, and he do tell me how all the
sober commanders, and even Sir Thomas Allen himself, do complain of the
ill government of the fleete.  How Holmes and Jennings have commanded all
the fleete this yeare, that nothing is done upon deliberation, but if a
sober man give his opinion otherwise than the Prince would have it the
Prince would cry,  "Damn him, do you follow your orders, and that is
enough for you."  He tells me he hears of nothing but of swearing and
drinking and whoring, and all manner of profaneness, quite through the
whole fleete.  He being gone, there comes to me Commissioner Middleton,
whom I took on purpose to walk in the garden with me, and to learn what he
observed when the fleete was at Portsmouth.  He says that the fleete was
in such a condition, as to discipline, as if the Devil had commanded it;
so much wickedness of all sorts.  Enquiring how it come to pass that so
many ships miscarried this year, he tells me that he enquired; and the
pilots do say, that they dare not do nor go but as the Captains will have
them; and if they offer to do otherwise, the Captains swear they will run
them through.  He says that he heard Captain Digby (my Lord of Bristoll's
son, a young fellow that never was but one year, if that, in the fleete)
say that he did hope he should not see a tarpaulin have the command of a
ship within this twelve months.  He observed while he was on board the
Admirall, when the fleete was at Portsmouth, that there was a faction
there.  Holmes commanded all on the Prince's side, and Sir Jeremy Smith on
the Duke's, and every body that come did apply themselves to one side or
other; and when the Duke of Albemarle was gone away to come hither, then
Sir Jeremy Smith did hang his head, and walked in the Generall's ship but
like a private commander.  He says he was on board The Prince, when the
newes come of the burning of London; and all the Prince said was, that now
Shipton's prophecy was out; and he heard a young commander presently
swear, that now a citizen's wife that would not take under half a piece
before, would be occupied for half-a-crowne: and made mighty sport of it.
He says that Hubberd that commanded this year the Admiral's ship is a
proud conceited fellow (though I thought otherwise of him), and fit to
command a single ship but not a fleete, and he do wonder that there hath
not been more mischief this year than there hath.  He says the fleete come
to anchor between the Horse and the Island, so that when they came to
weigh many of the ships could not turn, but run foul of the Horse, and
there stuck, but that the weather was good.  He says that nothing can do
the King more disservice, nor please the standing officers of the ship
better than these silly commanders that now we have, for they sign to
anything that their officers desire of them, nor have judgment to
contradict them if they would.  He told me other good things, which made
me bless God that we have received no greater disasters this year than we
have, though they have been the greatest that ever was known in England
before, put all their losses of the King's ships by want of skill and
seamanship together from the beginning.  He being gone, comes Sir G.
Carteret, and he and I walked together awhile, discoursing upon the sad
condition of the times, what need we have, and how impossible it is to get
money.  He told me my Lord Chancellor the other day did ask him how it
come to pass that his friend Pepys do so much magnify all things to worst,
as I did on Sunday last, in the bad condition of the fleete.  Sir G.
Carteret tells me that he answered him, that I was but the mouth of the
rest, and spoke what they have dictated to me; which did, as he says,
presently take off his displeasure.  So that I am well at present with
him, but I must have a care not to be over busy in the office again, and
burn my fingers.  He tells me he wishes he had sold his place at some good
rate to somebody or other at the beginning of the warr, and that he would
do it now, but no body will deale with him for it.  He tells me the Duke
of Albemarle is very much discontented, and the Duke of York do not, it
seems, please him.  He tells me that our case as to money is not to be
made good at present, and therefore wishes a good and speedy peace before
it be too late, and from his discourse methinks I find that there is
something moving towards it.  Many people at the office, but having no
more of the office I did put it off till the next meeting.  Thence, with
Sir G. Carteret, home to dinner, with him, my Lady and Mr. Ashburnham, the
Cofferer.  Here they talk that the Queene hath a great mind to alter her
fashion, and to have the feet seen, which she loves mightily; and they do
believe that it [will] come into it in a little time.  Here I met with the
King's declaration about his proceedings with the King of Denmarke, and
particularly the business of Bergen; but it is so well writ, that, if it
be true, the King of Denmarke is one of the most absolute wickednesse in
the world for a person of his quality.  After dinner home, and there met
Mr. Povy by appointment, and there he and I all the afternoon, till late
at night, evening of all accounts between us, which we did to both our
satisfaction; but that which troubles me most is, that I am to refund to
the ignoble Lord Peterborough what he had given us six months ago, because
we did not supply him with money; but it is no great matter.  He gone I to
the office, and there did some business; and so home, my mind in good ease
by having done with Povy in order to the adjusting of all my accounts in a
few days.  So home to supper and to bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Up, and with my wife to church, and her new woman
Barker with her the first time.  The girle will, I think, do very well.
Here a lazy sermon, and so home to dinner, and took in my Lady Pen and Peg
(Sir William being below with the fleete), and mighty merry we were, and
then after dinner presently (it being a mighty cool day) I by coach to
White Hall, and there attended the Cabinet, and was called in before the
King and them to give an account of our want of money for Tangier, which
troubles me that it should be my place so often and so soon after one
another to come to speak there of their wants--the thing of the world that
they love least to hear of, and that which is no welcome thing to be the
solicitor for--and to see how like an image the King sat and could not
speak one word when I had delivered myself was very strange; only my Lord
Chancellor did ask me, whether I thought it was in nature at this time to
help us to anything.  So I was referred to another meeting of the Lords
Commissioners for Tangier and my Lord Treasurer, and so went away, and by
coach home, where I spent the evening in reading Stillingfleet's defence
of the Archbishopp, the part about Purgatory, a point I had never
considered before, what was said for it or against it, and though I do
believe we are in the right, yet I do not see any great matter in this
book.  So to supper; and my people being gone, most of them, to bed, my
boy and Jane and I did get two of my iron chests out of the cellar into my
closett, and the money to my great satisfaction to see it there again, and
the rather because the damp cellar spoils all my chests.  This being done,
and I weary, to bed.  This afternoon walking with Sir H. Cholmly long in
the gallery, he told me, among many other things, how Harry Killigrew is
banished the Court lately, for saying that my Lady Castlemayne was a
little lecherous girle when she was young .  .  .  . This she complained
to the King of, and he sent to the Duke of York, whose servant he is, to
turn him away.  The Duke of York hath done it, but takes it ill of my Lady
that he was not complained to first.  She attended him to excute it, but
ill blood is made by it.  He told me how Mr. Williamson stood in a little
place to have come into the House of Commons, and they would not choose
him; they said, "No courtier."  And which is worse, Bab May went down in
great state to Winchelsea with the Duke of York's letters, not doubting to
be chosen; and there the people chose a private gentleman in spite of him,
and cried out they would have no Court pimp to be their burgesse; which
are things that bode very ill. This afternoon I went to see and sat a good
while with Mrs. Martin, and there was her sister Doll, with whom, contrary
to all expectation, I did what I would, and might have done anything else.

22nd.  Up, and by coach to Westminster Hall, there thinking to have met
Betty Michell, who I heard yesterday staid all night at her father's, but
she was gone.  So I staid a little and then down to the bridge by water,
and there overtook her and her father.  So saluted her and walked over
London Bridge with them and there parted, the weather being very foul, and
so to the Tower by water, and so heme, where I find Mr. Caesar playing the
treble to my boy upon the Theorbo, the first time I heard him, which
pleases me mightily.  After dinner I carried him and my wife towards
Westminster, by coach, myself 'lighting at the Temple, and there, being a
little too soon, walked in the Temple Church, looking with pleasure on the
monuments and epitaphs, and then to my Lord Belasses, where Creed and Povy
by appointment met to discourse of some of their Tangier accounts between
my Lord and Vernatty, who will prove a very knave.  That being done I away
with Povy to White Hall, and thence I to Unthanke's, and there take up my
wife, and so home, it being very foule and darke.  Being there come, I to
the settling of some of my money matters in my chests, and evening some
accounts, which I was at late, to my extraordinary content, and especially
to see all things hit so even and right and with an apparent profit and
advantage since my last accounting, but how much I cannot particularly yet
come to adjudge.

23rd.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon Sir W. Batten told
me Sir Richard Ford would accept of one-third of my profit of our private
man-of-war, and bear one-third of the charge, and be bound in the
Admiralty, so I shall be excused being bound, which I like mightily of,
and did draw up a writing, as well as I could, to that purpose and signed
and sealed it, and so he and Sir R. Ford are to go to enter into bond this
afternoon.  Home to dinner, and after dinner, it being late, I down by
water to Shadwell, to see Betty Michell, the first time I was ever at
their new dwelling since the fire, and there find her in the house all
alone.  I find her mighty modest.  But had her lips as much as I would,
and indeed she is mighty pretty, that I love her exceedingly.  I paid her
L10 1s. that I received upon a ticket for her husband, which is a great
kindness I have done them, and having kissed her as much as I would, I
away, poor wretch, and down to Deptford to see Sir J. Minnes ordering of
the pay of some ships there, which he do most miserably, and so home.
Bagwell's wife, seeing me come the fields way, did get over her pales to
come after and talk with me, which she did for a good way, and so parted,
and I home, and to the office, very busy, and so to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there find little Michell come to
his new shop that he hath built there in the room of his house that was
burned.  I hope he will do good here.  I drank and bade him joy, for I
love him and his wife well, him for his care, and her for her person, and
so to White Hall, where we attended the Duke; and to all our complaints
for want of money, which now we are tired out with making, the Duke only
tells us that he is sorry for it, and hath spoke to the King of it, and
money we shall have as soon as it can be found; and though all the issue
of the war lies upon it, yet that is all the answer we can get, and that
is as bad or worse than nothing.  Thence to Westminster Hall, where the
term is begun, and I did take a turn or two, and so away by coach to Sir
R. Viner's, and there received some money, and then home and to dinner.
After dinner to little business, and then abroad with my wife, she to see
her brother, who is sick, and she believes is from some discontent his
wife hath given him by her loose carriage, which he is told, and he hath
found has been very suspicious in his absence, which I am sorry for.  I to
the Hall and there walked long, among others talking with Mr. Hayes,
Prince Rupert's Secretary, a very ingenious man, and one, I think, fit to
contract some friendship with.  Here I staid late, walking to and again,
hearing how the Parliament proceeds, which is mighty slowly in the
settling of the money business, and great factions growing every day among
them.  I am told also how Holmes did last Sunday deliver in his articles
to the King and Cabinet against [Sir Jeremy] Smith, and that Smith hath
given in his answer, and lays his not accompanying the fleete to his
pilot, who would not undertake to carry the ship further; which the pilot
acknowledges.  The thing is not accommodated, but only taken up, and both
sides commanded to be quiet; but no peace like to be.  The Duke of
Albemarle is Smith's friend, and hath publiquely swore that he would never
go to sea again unless Holmes's commission were taken from him.

     [In the instructions given to Sir Thomas Clifford (August 5th, 1666)
     to be communicated to Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle, we
     read: "to tell them that the complaint of Sir Jeremy Smith's
     misbehaviour in the late engagement being so universal, unless he
     have fully satisfied the generals he should be brought to trial by
     court-martial, and there purged or condemned."  The Duke of
     Albemarle answered the king (August 14th?): "Wishes to clear a
     gallant man falsely accused, Sir Jeremiah Smith, who had more men
     killed and hurt, and his ship received more shot than any in the
     fleet.  There is not a more spirited man serves in the fleet" On
     October 27th H. Muddiman wrote to Sir Edward Stradling: "Sir Jeremy
     Smith has got as much credit by his late examination as his enemies
     wished him disgrace, the King and Duke of York being fully satisfied
     of his valour in the engagement.  It appears that he had 147 men
     killed and wounded, while the most eminent of his accusers had but
     two or three."  With regard to Sir Jeremy's counter-charges, we
     read: "Nov. 3.  The King having maturely considered the charges
     brought against Sir Rob. Holmes by Sir Jeremy Smith, finds no cause
     to suspect Sir Robert of cowardice in the fight with the Dutch of
     June 25 and 26, but thinks that on the night of the 26th he yielded
     too easily to the opinion of his pilot, without consulting those of
     the other ships, muzzled his ship, and thus obliged the squadron to
     do the same, and so the enemy, which might have been driven into the
     body of the king's fleet, then returning from the pursuit, was
     allowed to escape" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp.  14,
     40, 222, 236).]

I find by Hayes that they did expect great glory in coming home in so good
condition as they did with the fleete, and therefore I the less wonder
that the Prince was distasted with my discourse the other day about the
bad state of the fleete.  But it pleases me to hear that he did expect
great thanks, and lays the fault of the want of it upon the fire, which
deadened everything, and the glory of his services.  About seven at night
home, and called my wife, and, it being moonshine, took her into the
garden, and there layed open our condition as to our estate, and the
danger of my having it [his money] all in the house at once, in case of
any disorder or troubles in the State, and therefore resolved to remove
part of it to Brampton, and part some whither else, and part in my owne
house, which is very necessary, and will tend to our safety, though I
shall not think it safe out of my owne sight.  So to the office, and then
to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up betimes and by water to White Hall, and there with Sir G.
Carteret to Sir W. Coventry, who is come to his winter lodgings at White
Hall, and there agreed upon a method of paying of tickets; and so I back
again home and to the office, where we sate all the morning, but to little
purpose but to receive clamours for money.  At noon home to dinner, where
the two Mrs. Daniels come to see us, and dined with us. After dinner I out
with my wife to Mrs. Pierces, where she hath not been a great while, from
some little unkindness of my wife's to her when she was last here, but she
received us with mighty respect and discretion, and was making herself
mighty fine to go to a great ball to-night at Court, being the Queene's
birthday; so the ladies for this one day do wear laces, but to put them
off again to-morrow.  Thence I to my Lord Bruncker's, and with him to Mrs.
Williams's where we met Knipp.  I was glad to see the jade.  Made her
sing; and she told us they begin at both houses to act on Monday next.
But I fear, after all this sorrow, their gains will be but little.  Mrs.
Williams says, the Duke's house will now be much the better of the two,
because of their women; which I am glad to hear.  Thence with Lord
Bruncker to White Hall and there spoke with Sir W. Coventry about some
office business, and then I away to Mrs. Pierces, and there saw her new
closet, which is mighty rich and fine.  Her daughter Betty grows mighty
pretty.  Thence with my wife home and to do business at the office.  Then
to Sir W. Batten's, who tells me that the House of Parliament makes mighty
little haste in settling the money, and that he knows not when it will be
done; but they fall into faction, and libells have been found in the
House.  Among others, one yesterday, wherein they reckon up divers great
sums to be given away by the King, among others, L10,000 to Sir W.
Coventry, for weare and teare (the point he stood upon to advance that sum
by, for them to give the King); Sir G. Carteret L50,000 for something
else, I think supernumerarys; and so to Matt. Wren L5000 for passing the
Canary Company's patent; and so a great many other sums to other persons.
So home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up, and all the morning and most of the afternoon within doors,
beginning to set my accounts in order from before this fire, I being
behindhand with them ever since; and this day I got most of my tradesmen
to bring in their bills and paid them.  Dined at home, and busy again
after dinner, and then abroad by water to Westminster Hall, where I walked
till the evening, and then out, the first time I ever was abroad with Doll
Lane, to the Dog tavern, and there drank with her, a bad face, but good
bodied girle.  Did nothing but salute and play with her and talk, and
thence away by coach, home, and so to do a little more in my accounts, and
then to supper and to bed.  Nothing done in the House yet as to the
finishing of the bill for money, which is a mighty sad thing, all lying at
stake for it.

27th.  Up, and there comes to see me my Lord Belasses, which was a great
honour.  He tells me great newes, yet but what I suspected, that Vernatty
is fled, and so hath cheated him and twenty more, but most of all, I
doubt, Mr. Povy.  Thence to talk about publique business; he tells me how
the two Houses begin to be troublesome; the Lords to have quarrels one
with another.  My Lord Duke of Buckingham having said to the Lord
Chancellor (who is against the passing of the Bill for prohibiting the
bringing over of Irish cattle), that whoever was against the Bill, was
there led to it by an Irish interest, or an Irish understanding, which is
as much as to say he is a Poole; this bred heat from my Lord Chancellor,
and something he [Buckingham] said did offend my Lord of Ossory (my Lord
Duke' of Ormond's son), and they two had hard words, upon which the latter
sends a challenge to the former; of which the former complains to the
House, and so the business is to be heard on Monday next.  Then as to the
Commons; some ugly knives, like poignards, to stab people with, about two
or three hundred of them were brought in yesterday to the House, found in
one of the house's rubbish that was burned, and said to be the house of a
Catholique.  This and several letters out of the country, saying how high
the Catholiques are everywhere and bold in the owning their religion, have
made the Commons mad, and they presently voted that the King be desired to
put all Catholiques out of employment, and other high things; while the
business of money hangs in the hedge.  So that upon the whole, God knows
we are in a sad condition like to be, there being the very beginnings of
the late troubles.  He gone, I at the office all the morning.  At noon
home to dinner, where Mrs. Pierce and her boy and Knipp, who sings as
well, and is the best company in the world, dined with us, and infinite
merry.  The playhouses begin to play next week. Towards evening I took
them out to the New Exchange, and there my wife bought things, and I did
give each of them a pair of Jesimy

     [Jessemin (Jasminum), the flowers of which are of a delicate sweet
     smell, and often used to perfume gloves.  Edmund Howes, Stows
     continuator, informs us that sweet or perfumed gloves were first
     brought into England by the Earl of Oxford on his return from Italy,
     in the fifteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, during whose reign, and
     long afterwards, they were very fashionable.  They are frequently
     mentioned by Shakespeare.  Autolyctis, in the "Winter's Tale," has
     among his wares--"Gloves as sweet as damask roses."--B.]

plain gloves, and another of white.  Here Knipp and I walked up and down
to see handsome faces, and did see several.  Then carried each of them
home, and with great pleasure and content, home myself, where, having writ
several letters, I home, and there, upon some serious discourse between my
wife and I upon the business, I called to us my brother, and there broke
to him our design to send him into the country with some part of our
money, and so did seriously discourse the whole thing, and then away to
supper and to bed.  I pray God give a blessing to our resolution, for I do
much fear we shall meet with speedy distractions for want of money.

28th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church with my wife, and then home, and
there is come little Michell and his wife, I sent for them, and also tomes
Captain Guy to dine with me, and he and I much talk together.  He cries
out of the discipline of the fleete, and confesses really that the true
English valour we talk of is almost spent and worn out; few of the
commanders doing what they should do, and he much fears we shall therefore
be beaten the next year.  He assures me we were beaten home the last June
fight, and that the whole fleete was ashamed to hear of our bonefires.  He
commends Smith, and cries out of Holmes for an idle, proud, conceited,
though stout fellow.  He tells me we are to owe the losse of so many ships
on the sands, not to any fault of the pilots, but to the weather; but in
this I have good authority to fear there was something more.  He says the
Dutch do fight in very good order, and we in none at all.  He says that in
the July fight, both the Prince and Holmes had their belly-fulls, and were
fain to go aside; though, if the wind had continued, we had utterly beaten
them.  He do confess the whole to be governed by a company of fools, and
fears our ruine.  After dinner he gone, I with my brother to White Hall
and he to Westminster Abbey.  I presently to Mrs. Martin's, and there met
widow Burroughes and Doll, and did tumble them all the afternoon as I
pleased, and having given them a bottle of wine I parted and home by boat
(my brother going by land), and thence with my wife to sit and sup with my
uncle and aunt Wight, and see Woolly's wife, who is a pretty woman, and
after supper, being very merry, in abusing my aunt with Dr. Venner, we
home, and I to do something in my accounts, and so to bed.  The Revenge
having her forecastle blown up with powder to the killing of some men in
the River, and the Dyamond's being overset in the careening at Sheernesse,
are further marks of the method all the King's work is now done in.  The
Foresight also and another come to disasters in the same place this week
in the cleaning; which is strange.

29th.  Up, and to the office to do business, and thither comes to me Sir
Thomas Teddiman, and he and I walked a good while in the garden together,
discoursing of the disorder and discipline of the fleete, wherein he told
me how bad every thing is; but was very wary in speaking any thing to the
dishonour of the Prince or Duke of Albemarle, but do magnify my Lord
Sandwich much before them both, for ability to serve the King, and do
heartily wish for him here.  For he fears that we shall be undone the next
year, but that he will, however, see an end of it.  To prevent the
necessity of his dining with me I was forced to pretend occasion of going
to Westminster, so away I went, and Mr. Barber, the clerk, having a
request to make to me to get him into employment, did walk along with me,
and by water to Westminster with me, he professing great love to me, and
an able clerk he is.  When I come thither I find the new Lord Mayor Bolton
a-swearing at the Exchequer, with some of the Aldermen and Livery; but,
Lord!  to see how meanely they now look, who upon this day used to be all
little lords, is a sad sight and worthy consideration.  And every body did
reflect with pity upon the poor City, to which they are now coming to
choose and swear their Lord Mayor, compared with what it heretofore was.
Thence by coach (having in the Hall bought me a velvet riding cap, cost me
20s.) to my taylor's, and there bespoke a plain vest, and so to my
goldsmith to bid him look out for some gold for me; and he tells me that
ginnys, which I bought 2,000 of not long ago, and cost me but 18 1/2d.
change, will now cost me 22d.; and but very few to be had at any price.
However, some more I will have, for they are very convenient, and of easy
disposal.  So home to dinner and to discourse with my brother upon his
translation of my Lord Bacon's "Faber Fortunae," which I gave him to do
and he has done it, but meanely; I am not pleased with it at all, having
done it only literally, but without any life at all.  About five o'clock I
took my wife (who is mighty fine, and with a new fair pair of locks, which
vex me, though like a foole I helped her the other night to buy them), and
to Mrs. Pierces, and there staying a little I away before to White Hall,
and into the new playhouse there, the first time I ever was there, and the
first play I have seen since before the great plague.  By and by Mr.
Pierce comes, bringing my wife and his, and Knipp.  By and by the King and
Queene, Duke and Duchesse, and all the great ladies of the Court; which,
indeed, was a fine sight.  But the play being "Love in a Tub," a silly
play, and though done by the Duke's people, yet having neither Betterton
nor his wife, and the whole thing done ill, and being ill also, I had no
manner of pleasure in the play. Besides, the House, though very fine, yet
bad for the voice, for hearing. The sight of the ladies, indeed, was
exceeding noble; and above all, my Lady Castlemayne.  The play done by ten
o'clock.  I carried them all home, and then home myself, and well
satisfied with the sight, but not the play, we with great content to bed.

30th.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning, and at noon home
to dinner, and then to the office again, where late, very busy, and
dispatching much business.  Mr. Hater staying most of the afternoon
abroad, he come to me, poor man, to make excuse, and it was that he had
been looking out for a little house for his family.  His wife being much
frightened in the country with the discourses of troubles and disorders
like to be, and therefore durst not be from him, and therefore he is
forced to bring her to towne that they may be together.  This is now the
general apprehension of all people; particulars I do not know, but my owne
fears are also great, and I do think it time to look out to save
something, if a storm should come.  At night home to supper, and singing
with my wife, who hath lately begun to learn, and I think will come to do
something, though her eare is not good, nor I, I confess, have patience
enough to teach her, or hear her sing now and then a note out of tune, and
am to blame that I cannot bear with that in her which is fit I should do
with her as a learner, and one that I desire much could sing, and so
should encourage her.  This I was troubled at, for I do find that I do put
her out of heart, and make her fearfull to sing before me.  So after
supper to bed.

31st.  Out with Sir W. Batten toward White Hall, being in pain in my cods
by being squeezed the other night in a little coach when I carried Pierce
and his wife and my people.  But I hope I shall be soon well again.  This
day is a great day at the House, so little to do with the Duke of York,
but soon parted.  Coming out of the Court I met Colonell Atkins, who tells
me the whole city rings to-day of Sir Jeremy Smith's killing of Holmes in
a duell, at which I was not much displeased, for I fear every day more and
more mischief from the man, if he lives; but the thing is not true, for in
my coach I did by and by meet Sir Jer. Smith going to Court.  So I by
coach to my goldsmith, there to see what gold I can get, which is but
little, and not under 22d.  So away home to dinner, and after dinner to my
closett, where I spent the whole afternoon till late at evening of all my
accounts publique and private, and to my great satisfaction I do find that
I do bring my accounts to a very near balance, notwithstanding all the
hurries and troubles I have been put to by the late fire, that I have not
been able to even my accounts since July last before; and I bless God I do
find that I am worth more than ever I yet was, which is L6,200, for which
the Holy Name of God be praised!  and my other accounts of Tangier in a
very plain and clear condition, that I am not liable to any trouble from
them; but in fear great I am, and I perceive the whole city is, of some
distractions and disorders among us, which God of his goodness prevent!
Late to supper with my wife and brother, and then to bed.  And thus ends
the month with an ill aspect, the business of the Navy standing wholly
still.  No credit, no goods sold us, nobody will trust.  All we have to do
at the office is to hear complaints for want of money.  The Duke of York
himself for now three weeks seems to rest satisfied that we can do nothing
without money, and that all must stand still till the King gets money,
which the Parliament have been a great while about; but are so
dissatisfied with the King's management, and his giving himself up to
pleasures, and not minding the calling to account any of his officers, and
they observe so much the expense of the war, and yet that after we have
made it the most we can, it do not amount to what they have given the King
for the warn that they are backward of giving any more. However,
L1,800,000 they have voted, but the way of gathering it has taken up more
time than is fit to be now lost: The seamen grow very rude, and every
thing out of order; commanders having no power over their seamen, but the
seamen do what they please.  Few stay on board, but all coming running up
hither to towne, and nobody can with justice blame them, we owing them so
much money; and their familys must starve if we do not give them money, or
they procure upon their tickets from some people that will trust them.  A
great folly is observed by all people in the King's giving leave to so
many merchantmen to go abroad this winter, and some upon voyages where it
is impossible they should be back again by the spring, and the rest will
be doubtfull, but yet we let them go; what the reason of State is nobody
can tell, but all condemn it.  The Prince and Duke of Albemarle have got
no great credit by this year's service.  Our losses both of reputation and
ships having been greater than is thought have ever been suffered in all
ages put together before; being beat home, and fleeing home the first
fight, and then losing so many ships then and since upon the sands, and
some falling into the enemy's hands, and not one taken this yeare, but the
Ruby, French prize, now at the end of the yeare, by the Frenchmen's
mistake in running upon us.  Great folly in both Houses of Parliament,
several persons falling together by the eares, among others in the House
of Lords, the Duke of Buckingham and my Lord Ossory.  Such is our case,
that every body fears an invasion the next yeare; and for my part, I do
methinks foresee great unhappiness coming upon us, and do provide for it
by laying by something against a rainy day, dividing what I have, and
laying it in several places, but with all faithfulness to the King in all
respects; my grief only being that the King do not look after his business
himself, and thereby will be undone both himself and his nation, it being
not yet, I believe, too late if he would apply himself to it, to save all,
and conquer the Dutch; but while he and the Duke of York mind their
pleasure, as they do and nothing else, we must be beaten.  So late with my
mind in good condition of quiet after the settling all my accounts, and to
bed.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Being there, and seeming to do something, while we do not
     Bill against importing Irish cattle
     Bringing over one discontented man, you raise up three
     But how many years I cannot tell; but my wife says ten
     But pretty!  how I took another pretty woman for her
     Catholiques are everywhere and bold
     Did tumble them all the afternoon as I pleased
     Discoursing upon the sad condition of the times
     Exceeding kind to me, more than usual, which makes me afeard
     Fashion, the King says; he will never change
     I did what I would, and might have done anything else
     King be desired to put all Catholiques out of employment
     King hath lost his power, by submitting himself to this way
     So home to supper, and to bed, it being my wedding night
     The very rum man must have L200
     Time spending, and no money to set anything in hand


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                NOVEMBER
                                  1666

November 1st.  Up, and was presented by Burton, one of our smith's wives,
with a very noble cake, which I presently resolved to have my wife go with
to-day, and some wine, and house-warme my Betty Michell, which she readily
resolved to do.  So I to the office and sat all the morning, where little
to do but answer people about want of money; so that there is little
service done the King by us, and great disquiet to ourselves; I am sure
there is to me very much, for I do not enjoy myself as I would and should
do in my employment if my pains could do the King better service, and with
the peace that we used to do it.  At noon to dinner, and from dinner my
wife and my brother, and W. Hewer and Barker away to Betty Michell's, to
Shadwell, and I to my office, where I took in Mrs. Bagwell and did what I
would with her, and so she went away, and I all the afternoon till almost
night there, and then, my wife being come back, I took her and set her at
her brother's, who is very sicke, and I to White Hall, and there all alone
a pretty while with Sir W. Coventry at his chamber.  I find him very
melancholy under the same considerations of the King's service that I am.
He confesses with me he expects all will be undone, and all ruined; he
complains and sees perfectly what I with grief do, and said it first
himself to me that all discipline is lost in the fleete, no order nor no
command, and concurs with me that it is necessary we do again and again
represent all things more and more plainly to the Duke of York, for a
guard to ourselves hereafter when things shall come to be worse.  He says
the House goes on slowly in finding of money, and that the discontented
party do say they have not done with us, for they will have a further bout
with us as to our accounts, and they are exceedingly well instructed where
to hit us. I left him with a thousand sad reflections upon the times, and
the state of the King's matters, and so away, and took up my wife and
home, where a little at the office, and then home to supper, and talk with
my wife (with whom I have much comfort) and my brother, and so to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes, and with Sir W. Batten to Woolwich, where first we went
on board the Ruby, French prize, the only ship of war we have taken from
any of our enemies this year.  It seems a very good ship, but with
galleries quite round the sterne to walk in as a balcone, which will be
taken down.  She had also about forty good brass guns, but will make
little amends to our loss in The Prince.  Thence to the Ropeyarde and the
other yards to do several businesses, he and I also did buy some apples
and pork; by the same token the butcher commended it as the best in
England for cloath and colour.  And for his beef, says he, "Look how fat
it is; the lean appears only here and there a speck, like beauty-spots."
Having done at Woolwich, we to Deptford (it being very cold upon the
water), and there did also a little more business, and so home, I reading
all the why to make end of the "Bondman" (which the oftener I read the
more I like), and begun "The Duchesse of Malfy;" which seems a good play.
At home to dinner, and there come Mr. Pierce, surgeon, to see me, and
after I had eat something, he and I and my wife by coach to Westminster,
she set us down at White Hall, and she to her brother's.  I up into the
House, and among other things walked a good while with the Serjeant
Trumpet, who tells me, as I wished, that the King's Italian here is about
setting three parts for trumpets, and shall teach some to sound them, and
believes they will be admirable musique.  I also walked with Sir Stephen
Fox an houre, and good discourse of publique business with him, who seems
very much satisfied with my discourse, and desired more of my
acquaintance.  Then comes out the King and Duke of York from the Council,
and so I spoke awhile to Sir W. Coventry about some office business, and
so called my wife (her brother being now a little better than he was), and
so home, and I to my chamber to do some business, and then to supper and
to bed.

3rd.  This morning comes Mr. Lovett, and brings me my print of the
Passion, varnished by him, and the frame black, which indeed is very fine,
though not so fine as I expected; however, pleases me exceedingly. This,
and the sheets of paper he prepared for me, come to L3, which I did give
him, and though it be more than is fit to lay out on pleasure, yet, it
being ingenious, I did not think much of it.  He gone, I to the office,
where all the morning to little purpose, nothing being before us but
clamours for money: So at noon home to dinner, and after dinner to hang up
my new varnished picture and set my chamber in order to be made clean, and
then to; the office again, and there all the afternoon till late at night,
and so to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Comes my taylor's man in the morning, and brings my
vest home, and coate to wear with it, and belt, and silver-hilted sword.
So I rose and dressed myself, and I like myself mightily in it, and so do
my wife.  Then, being dressed, to church; and after church pulled my Lady
Pen and Mrs. Markham into my house to dinner, and Sir J. Minnes he got
Mrs. Pegg along with him.  I had a good dinner for them, and very merry;
and after dinner to the waterside, and so, it being very cold, to White
Hall, and was mighty fearfull of an ague, my vest being new and thin, and
the coat cut not to meet before upon my breast.  Here I waited in the
gallery till the Council was up, and among others did speak with Mr.
Cooling, my Lord Chamberlain's secretary, who tells me my Lord Generall is
become mighty low in all people's opinion, and that he hath received
several slurs from the King and Duke of York.  The people at Court do see
the difference between his and the Prince's management, and my Lord
Sandwich's.  That this business which he is put upon of crying out against
the Catholiques and turning them out of all employment, will undo him,
when he comes to turn-out the officers out of the Army, and this is a
thing of his own seeking.  That he is grown a drunken sot, and drinks with
nobody but Troutbecke, whom nobody else will keep company with.  Of whom
he told me this story: That once the Duke of Albemarle in his drink taking
notice as of a wonder that Nan Hide should ever come to be Duchesse of
York, "Nay," says Troutbecke, "ne'er wonder at that; for if you will give
me another bottle of wine, I will tell you as great, if not greater, a
miracle."   And what was that, but that our dirty Besse (meaning his
Duchesse) should come to be Duchesse of Albemarle?  Here we parted, and so
by and by the Council rose, and out comes Sir G. Carteret and Sir W.
Coventry, and they and my Lord Bruncker and I went to Sir G. Carteret's
lodgings, there to discourse about some money demanded by Sir W. Warren,
and having done that broke up.  And Sir G. Carteret and I alone together a
while, where he shows a long letter, all in cipher, from my Lord Sandwich
to him.  The contents he hath not yet found out, but he tells me that my
Lord is not sent for home, as several people have enquired after of me.
He spoke something reflecting upon me in the business of pursers, that
their present bad behaviour is what he did foresee, and had convinced me
of, and yet when it come last year to be argued before the Duke of York I
turned and said as the rest did.  I answered nothing to it, but let it go,
and so to other discourse of the ill state of things, of which all people
are full of sorrow and observation, and so parted, and then by water,
landing in Southwarke, home to the Tower, and so home, and there began to
read "Potter's Discourse upon 1666," which pleases me mightily, and then
broke off and to supper and to bed.

5th (A holyday).  Lay long; then up, and to the office, where vexed to
meet with people come from the fleete at the Nore, where so many ships are
laid up and few going abroad, and yet Sir Thomas Allen hath sent up some
Lieutenants with warrants to presse men for a few ships to go out this
winter, while every day thousands appear here, to our great trouble and
affright, before our office and the ticket office, and no Captains able to
command one-man aboard.  Thence by water to Westminster, and there at the
Swan find Sarah is married to a shoemaker yesterday, so I could not see
her, but I believe I shall hereafter at good leisure. Thence by coach to
my Lady Peterborough, and there spoke with my Lady, who had sent to speak
with me.  She makes mighty moan of the badness of the times, and her
family as to money.  My Lord's passionateness for want thereof, and his
want of coming in of rents, and no wages from the Duke of York.  No money
to be had there for wages nor disbursements, and therefore prays my
assistance about his pension.  I was moved with her story, which she
largely and handsomely told me, and promised I would try what I could do
in a few days, and so took leave, being willing to keep her Lord fair with
me, both for his respect to my Lord Sandwich and for my owne sake
hereafter, when I come to pass my accounts.  Thence to my Lord Crew's, and
there dined, and mightily made of, having not, to my shame, been there in
8 months before.  Here my Lord and Sir Thomas Crew, Mr. John, and Dr.
Crew, and two strangers.  The best family in the world for goodness and
sobriety.  Here beyond my expectation I met my Lord Hinchingbroke, who is
come to towne two days since from Hinchingbroke, and brought his sister
and brother Carteret with him, who are at Sir G. Carteret's.  After dinner
I and Sir Thomas Crew went aside to discourse of public matters, and do
find by him that all the country gentlemen are publickly jealous of the
courtiers in the Parliament, and that they do doubt every thing that they
propose; and that the true reason why the country gentlemen are for a
land-tax and against a general excise, is, because they are fearful that
if the latter be granted they shall never get it down again; whereas the
land-tax will be but for so much; and when the war ceases, there will be
no ground got by the Court to keep it up. He do much cry out upon our
accounts, and that all that they have had from the King hath been but
estimates both from my Lord Treasurer and us, and from all people else, so
that the Parliament is weary of it.  He says the House would be very glad
to get something against Sir G. Carteret, and will not let their inquiries
die till they have got something.  He do, from what he hath heard at the
Committee for examining the burning of the City, conclude it as a thing
certain that it was done by plots; it being proved by many witnesses that
endeavours were made in several places to encrease the fire, and that both
in City and country it was bragged by several Papists that upon such a day
or in such a time we should find the hottest weather that ever was in
England, and words of plainer sense.  But my Lord Crew was discoursing at
table how the judges have determined in the case whether the landlords or
the tenants (who are, in their leases, all of them generally tied to
maintain and uphold their houses) shall bear the losse of the fire; and
they say that tenants should against all casualties of fire beginning
either in their owne or in their neighbour's; but, where it is done by an
enemy, they are not to do it.  And this was by an enemy, there having been
one convicted and hanged upon this very score.  This is an excellent salvo
for the tenants, and for which I am glad, because of my father's house.
After dinner and this discourse I took coach, and at the same time find my
Lord Hinchingbroke and Mr. John Crew and the Doctor going out to see the
ruins of the City; so I took the Doctor into my hackney coach (and he is a
very fine sober gentleman), and so through the City.  But, Lord!  what
pretty and sober observations he made of the City and its desolation; till
anon we come to my house, and there I took them upon Tower Hill to shew
them what houses were pulled down there since the fire; and then to my
house, where I treated them with good wine of several sorts, and they took
it mighty respectfully, and a fine company of gentlemen they are; but
above all I was glad to see my Lord Hinchingbroke drink no wine at all.
Here I got them to appoint Wednesday come se'nnight to dine here at my
house, and so we broke up and all took coach again, and I carried the
Doctor to Chancery Lane, and thence I to White Hall, where I staid walking
up and down till night, and then got almost into the play house, having
much mind to go and see the play at Court this night; but fearing how I
should get home, because of the bonefires and the lateness of the night to
get a coach, I did not stay; but having this evening seen my Lady Jemimah,
who is come to towne, and looks very well and fat, and heard how Mr. John
Pickering is to be married this week, and to a fortune with L5000, and
seen a rich necklace of pearle and two pendants of dyamonds, which Sir G.
Carteret hath presented her with since her coming to towne, I home by
coach, but met not one bonefire through the whole town in going round by
the wall, which is strange, and speaks the melancholy disposition of the
City at present, while never more was said of, and feared of, and done
against the Papists than just at this time.  Home, and there find my wife
and her people at cards, and I to my chamber, and there late, and so to
supper and to bed.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning sitting.  At noon home
to dinner, and after dinner down alone by water to Deptford, reading
"Duchesse of Malfy," the play, which is pretty good, and there did some
business, and so up again, and all the evening at the office.  At night
home, and there find Mr. Batelier, who supped with us, and good company he
is, and so after supper to bed.

7th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where we attended as usual
the Duke of York and there was by the folly of Sir W. Batten prevented in
obtaining a bargain for Captain Cocke, which would, I think have [been] at
this time (during our great want of hempe), both profitable to the King
and of good convenience to me; but I matter it not, it being done only by
the folly, not any design, of Sir W. Batten's. Thence to Westminster Hall,
and, it being fast day, there was no shops open, but meeting with Doll
Lane, did go with her to the Rose taverne, and there drank and played with
her a good while.  She went away, and I staid a good while after, and was
seen going out by one of our neighbours near the office and two of the
Hall people that I had no mind to have been seen by, but there was no hurt
in it nor can be alledged from it. Therefore I am not solicitous in it,
but took coach and called at Faythorne's, to buy some prints for my wife
to draw by this winter, and here did see my Lady Castlemayne's picture,
done by him from Lilly's, in red chalke and other colours, by which he
hath cut it in copper to be printed.  The picture in chalke is the finest
thing I ever saw in my life, I think; and did desire to buy it; but he
says he must keep it awhile to correct his copper-plate by, and when that
is done he will sell it me.  Thence home and find my wife gone out with my
brother to see her brother.  I to dinner and thence to my chamber to read,
and so to the office (it being a fast day and so a holiday), and then to
Mrs. Turner's, at her request to speake and advise about Sir Thomas
Harvy's coming to lodge there, which I think must be submitted to, and
better now than hereafter, when he gets more ground, for I perceive he
intends to stay by it, and begins to crow mightily upon his late being at
the payment of tickets; but a coxcombe he is and will never be better in
the business of the Navy.  Thence home, and there find Mr. Batelier come
to bring my wife a very fine puppy of his mother's spaniel, a very fine
one indeed, which my wife is mighty proud of.  He staid and supped with
us, and they to cards.  I to my chamber to do some business, and then out
to them to play and were a little merry, and then to bed.  By the Duke of
York his discourse to-day in his chamber, they have it at Court, as well
as we here, that a fatal day is to be expected shortly, of some great
mischiefe to the remainder of this day; whether by the Papists, or what,
they are not certain.  But the day is disputed; some say next Friday,
others a day sooner, others later, and I hope all will prove a foolery.
But it is observable how every body's fears are busy at this time.

8th.  Up, and before I went to the office I spoke with Mr. Martin for his
advice about my proceeding in the business of the private man-of-war, he
having heretofore served in one of them, and now I have it in my thoughts
to send him purser in ours.  After this discourse I to the office, where I
sat all the morning, Sir W. Coventry with us, where he hath not been a
great while, Sir W. Pen also, newly come from the Nore, where he hath been
some time fitting of the ships out.  At noon home to dinner and then to
the office awhile, and so home for my sword, and there find Mercer come to
see her mistresse.  I was glad to see her there, and my wife mighty kind
also, and for my part, much vexed that the jade is not with us still.
Left them together, designing to go abroad to-morrow night to Mrs. Pierces
to dance; and so I to Westminster Hall, and there met Mr. Grey, who tells
me the House is sitting still (and now it was six o'clock), and likely to
sit till midnight; and have proceeded fair to give the King his supply
presently; and herein have done more to-day than was hoped for.  So to
White Hall to Sir W. Coventry, and there would fain have carried Captain
Cocke's business for his bargain of hemp, but am defeated and
disappointed, and know hardly how to carry myself in it between my
interest and desire not to offend Sir W. Coventry.  Sir W. Coventry did
this night tell me how the business is about Sir J. Minnes; that he is to
be a Commissioner, and my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen are to be
Controller joyntly, which I am very glad of, and better than if they were
either of them alone; and do hope truly that the King's business will be
better done thereby, and infinitely better than now it is.  Thence by
coach home, full of thoughts of the consequence of this alteration in our
office, and I think no evil to me.  So at my office late, and then home to
supper and to bed.  Mr. Grey did assure me this night, that he was told
this day, by one of the greater Ministers of State in England, and one of
the King's Cabinet, that we had little left to agree on between the Dutch
and us towards a peace, but only the place of treaty; which do astonish me
to hear, but I am glad of it, for I fear the consequence of the war.  But
he says that the King, having all the money he is like to have, we shall
be sure of a peace in a little time.

9th.  Up and to the office, where did a good deale of business, and then
at noon to the Exchange and to my little goldsmith's, whose wife is very
pretty and modest, that ever I saw any.  Upon the 'Change, where I seldom
have of late been, I find all people mightily at a losse what to expect,
but confusion and fears in every man's head and heart.  Whether war or
peace, all fear the event will be bad.  Thence home and with my brother to
dinner, my wife being dressing herself against night; after dinner I to my
closett all the afternoon, till the porter brought my vest back from the
taylor's, and then to dress myself very fine, about 4 or 5 o'clock, and by
that time comes Mr. Batelier and Mercer, and away by coach to Mrs.
Pierces, by appointment, where we find good company: a fair lady, my Lady
Prettyman, Mrs. Corbet, Knipp; and for men, Captain Downing, Mr. Lloyd,
Sir W. Coventry's clerk, and one Mr. Tripp, who dances well.  After some
trifling discourse, we to dancing, and very good sport, and mightily
pleased I was with the company.  After our first bout of dancing, Knipp
and I to sing, and Mercer and Captain Downing (who loves and understands
musique) would by all means have my song of "Beauty, retire." which Knipp
had spread abroad; and he extols it above any thing he ever heard, and,
without flattery, I know it is good in its kind.  This being done and
going to dance again, comes news that White Hall was on fire; and
presently more particulars, that the Horse-guard was on fire;

     ["Nov. 9th.  Between seven and eight at night, there happened a fire
     in the Horse Guard House, in the Tilt Yard, over against Whitehall,
     which at first arising, it is supposed, from some snuff of a candle
     falling amongst the straw, broke out with so sudden a flame, that at
     once it seized the north-west part of that building; but being so
     close under His Majesty's own eye, it was, by the timely help His
     Majesty and His Royal Highness caused to be applied, immediately
     stopped, and by ten o'clock wholly mastered, with the loss only of
     that part of the building it had at first seized."--The London
     Gazette, No. 103.--B.]

and so we run up to the garret, and find it so; a horrid great fire; and
by and by we saw and heard part of it blown up with powder.  The ladies
begun presently to be afeard: one fell into fits.  The whole town in an
alarme.  Drums beat and trumpets, and the guards every where spread,
running up and down in the street.  And I begun to have mighty
apprehensions how things might be at home, and so was in mighty pain to
get home, and that that encreased all is that we are in expectation, from
common fame, this night, or to-morrow, to have a massacre, by the having
so many fires one after another, as that in the City, and at same time
begun in Westminster, by the Palace, but put out; and since in Southwarke,
to the burning down some houses; and now this do make all people conclude
there is something extraordinary in it; but nobody knows what.  By and by
comes news that the fire has slackened; so then we were a little cheered
up again, and to supper, and pretty merry.  But, above all, there comes in
the dumb boy that I knew in Oliver's time, who is mightily acquainted
here, and with Downing; and he made strange signs of the fire, and how the
King was abroad, and many things they understood, but I could not, which I
wondering at, and discoursing with Downing about it, "Why," says he, "it
is only a little use, and you will understand him, and make him understand
you with as much ease as may be."  So I prayed him to tell him that I was
afeard that my coach would be gone, and that he should go down and steal
one of the seats out of the coach and keep it, and that would make the
coachman to stay.  He did this, so that the dumb boy did go down, and,
like a cunning rogue, went into the coach, pretending to sleep; and, by
and by, fell to his work, but finds the seats nailed to the coach.  So he
did all he could, but could not do it; however, stayed there, and stayed
the coach till the coachman's patience was quite spent, and beat the dumb
boy by force, and so went away.  So the dumb boy come up and told him all
the story, which they below did see all that passed, and knew it to be
true.  After supper, another dance or two, and then newes that the fire is
as great as ever, which put us all to our wit's-end; and I mightily
[anxious] to go home, but the coach being gone, and it being about ten at
night, and rainy dirty weather, I knew not what to do; but to walk out
with Mr. Batelier, myself resolving to go home on foot, and leave the
women there.  And so did; but at the Savoy got a coach, and come back and
took up the women; and so, having, by people come from the fire,
understood that the fire was overcome, and all well, we merrily parted,
and home.  Stopped by several guards and constables quite through the
town, round the wall, as we went, all being in armes.  We got well home
.  .  .  . Being come home, we to cards, till two in the morning, and
drinking lamb's-wool.

     [A beverage consisting of ale mixed with sugar, nutmeg, and the pulp
     of roasted apples.  "A cupp of lamb's-wool they dranke unto him
     then."  The King and the Miller of Mansfield (Percy's "Reliques,"
     Series III., book ii., No. 20).]

So to bed.

10th.  Up and to the office, where Sir W. Coventry come to tell us that
the Parliament did fall foul of our accounts again yesterday; and we must
arme to have them examined, which I am sorry for: it will bring great
trouble to me, and shame upon the office.  My head full this morning how
to carry on Captain Cocke's bargain of hemp, which I think I shall by my
dexterity do, and to the King's advantage as well as my own.  At noon with
my Lord Bruncker and Sir Thomas Harvy, to Cocke's house, and there Mrs.
Williams and other company, and an excellent dinner.  Mr. Temple's wife;
after dinner, fell to play on the harpsicon, till she tired everybody,
that I left the house without taking leave, and no creature left standing
by her to hear her.  Thence I home and to the office, where late doing of
business, and then home.  Read an hour, to make an end of Potter's
Discourse of the Number 666, which I like all along, but his close is most
excellent; and, whether it be right or wrong, is mighty ingenious.  Then
to supper and to bed.  This is the fatal day that every body hath
discoursed for a long time to be the day that the Papists, or I know not
who, had designed to commit a massacre upon; but, however, I trust in God
we shall rise to-morrow morning as well as ever.  This afternoon Creed
comes to me, and by him, as, also my Lady Pen, I hear that my Lady Denham
is exceeding sick, even to death, and that she says, and every body else
discourses, that she is poysoned; and Creed tells me, that it is said that
there hath been a design to poison the King.  What the meaning of all
these sad signs is, the Lord knows; but every day things look worse and
worse.  God fit us for the worst!

11th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, myself and wife, where the old
dunce Meriton, brother to the known Meriton; of St. Martin's, Westminster,
did make a very good sermon, beyond my expectation.  Home to dinner, and
we carried in Pegg Pen, and there also come to us little Michell and his
wife, and dined very pleasantly.  Anon to church, my wife and I and Betty
Michell, her husband being gone to Westminster .  .  .  . Alter church
home, and I to my chamber, and there did finish the putting time to my
song of "It is decreed," and do please myself at last and think it will be
thought a good song.  By and by little Michell comes and takes away his
wife home, and my wife and brother and I to my uncle Wight's, where my
aunt is grown so ugly and their entertainment so bad that I am in pain to
be there; nor will go thither again a good while, if sent for, for we were
sent for to-night, we had not gone else. Wooly's wife, a silly woman, and
not very handsome, but no spirit in her at all; and their discourse mean,
and the fear of the troubles of the times hath made them not to bring
their plate to town, since it was carried out upon the business of the
fire, so that they drink in earth and a wooden can, which I do not like.
So home, and my people to bed. I late to finish my song, and then to bed
also, and the business of the firing of the city, and the fears we have of
new troubles and violences, and the fear of fire among ourselves, did keep
me awake a good while, considering the sad condition I and my family
should be in.  So at last to sleep.

12th.  Lay long in bed, and then up, and Mr. Carcasse brought me near 500
tickets to sign, which I did, and by discourse find him a cunning,
confident, shrewd man, but one that I do doubt hath by his discourse of
the ill will he hath got with my Lord Marquess of Dorchester (with whom he
lived), he hath had cunning practices in his time, and would not now spare
to use the same to his profit.  That done I to the office; whither by and
by comes Creed to me, and he and I walked in the garden a little, talking
of the present ill condition of things, which is the common subject of all
men's discourse and fears now-a-days, and particularly of my Lady Denham,
whom everybody says is poisoned, and he tells me she hath said it to the
Duke of York; but is upon the mending hand, though the town says she is
dead this morning.  He and I to the 'Change.  There I had several little
errands, and going to Sir R. Viner's, I did get such a splash and spots of
dirt upon my new vest, that I was out of countenance to be seen in the
street.  This day I received 450 pieces of gold more of Mr. Stokes, but
cost me 22 1/2d.  change; but I am well contented with it,--I having now
near L2800 in gold, and will not rest till I get full L3000, and then will
venture my fortune for the saving that and the rest. Home to dinner,
though Sir R. Viner would have staid us to dine with him, he being
sheriffe; but, poor man, was so out of countenance that he had no wine
ready to drink to us, his butler being out of the way, though we know him
to be a very liberal man.  And after dinner I took my wife out, intending
to have gone and have seen my Lady Jemimah, at White Hall, but so great a
stop there was at the New Exchange, that we could not pass in half an
houre, and therefore 'light and bought a little matter at the Exchange,
and then home, and then at the office awhile, and then home to my chamber,
and after my wife and all the mayds abed but Jane, whom I put confidence
in--she and I, and my brother, and Tom, and W. Hewer, did bring up all the
remainder of my money, and my plate-chest, out of the cellar, and placed
the money in my study, with the rest, and the plate in my dressing-room;
but indeed I am in great pain to think how to dispose of my money, it
being wholly unsafe to keep it all in coin in one place. 'But now I have
it all at my hand, I shall remember it better to think of disposing of it.
This done, by one in the morning to bed.  This afternoon going towards
Westminster, Creed and I did stop, the Duke of York being just going away
from seeing of it, at Paul's, and in the Convocation House Yard did there
see the body of Robert Braybrooke, Bishop of London, that died 1404:  He
fell down in his tomb out of the great church into St. Fayth's this late
fire, and is here seen his skeleton with the flesh on; but all tough and
dry like a spongy dry leather, or touchwood all upon his bones.  His head
turned aside.  A great man in his time, and Lord Chancellor; and his
skeletons now exposed to be handled and derided by some, though admired
for its duration by others.  Many flocking to see it.

13th.  At the office all the morning, at noon home to dinner, and out to
Bishopsgate Street, and there bought some drinking-glasses, a case of
knives, and other things, against tomorrow, in expectation of my Lord
Hinchingbroke's coming to dine with me.  So home, and having set some
things in the way of doing, also against to-morrow, I to my, office, there
to dispatch business, and do here receive notice from my Lord
Hinchingbroke that he is not well, and so not in condition to come to dine
with me to-morrow, which I am not in much trouble for, because of the
disorder my house is in, by the bricklayers coming to mend the chimney in
my dining-room for smoking, which they were upon almost till midnight, and
have now made it very pretty, and do carry smoke exceeding well.  This
evening come all the Houblons to me, to invite me to sup with them
to-morrow night.  I did take them home, and there we sat and talked a good
while, and a glass of wine, and then parted till to-morrow night. So at
night, well satisfied in the alteration of my chimney, to bed.

14th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence to Westminster, where I
bought several things, as a hone, ribbon, gloves, books, and then took
coach and to Knipp's lodging, whom I find not ready to go home with me. So
I away to do a little business, among others to call upon Mr. Osborne for
my Tangier warrant for the last quarter, and so to the Exchange for some
things for my wife, and then to Knipp's again, and there staid reading of
Waller's verses, while she finished dressing, her husband being by.  I had
no other pastime.  Her lodging very mean, and the condition she lives in;
yet makes a shew without doors, God bless us! I carried him along with us
into the City, and set him down in Bishopsgate Street, and then home with
her.  She tells me how Smith, of the Duke's house, hath killed a man upon
a quarrel in play; which makes every body sorry, he being a good actor,
and, they say, a good man, however this happens.  The ladies of the Court
do much bemoan him, she says.  Here she and we alone at dinner to some
good victuals, that we could not put off, that was intended for the great
dinner of my Lord Hinchingbroke's, if he had come.  After dinner I to
teach her my new recitative of "It is decreed," of which she learnt a good
part, and I do well like it and believe shall be well pleased when she
hath it all, and that it will be found an agreeable thing.  Then carried
her home, and my wife and I intended to have seen my Lady Jemimah at White
Hall, but the Exchange Streete was so full of coaches, every body, as they
say, going thither to make themselves fine against tomorrow night, that,
after half an hour's stay, we could not do any [thing], only my wife to
see her brother, and I to go speak one word with Sir G. Carteret about
office business, and talk of the general complexion of matters, which he
looks upon, as I do, with horrour, and gives us all for an undone people.
That there is no such thing as a peace in hand, nor possibility of any
without our begging it, they being as high, or higher, in their terms than
ever, and tells me that, just now, my Lord Hollis had been with him, and
wept to think in what a condition we are fallen.  He shewed me my Lord
Sandwich's letter to him, complaining of the lack of money, which Sir G.
Carteret is at a loss how in the world to get the King to supply him with,
and wishes him, for that reason, here; for that he fears he will be
brought to disgrace there, for want of supplies.  He says the House is yet
in a bad humour; and desiring to know whence it is that the King stirs
not, he says he minds it not, nor will be brought to it, and that his
servants of the House do, instead of making the Parliament better, rather
play the rogue one with another, and will put all in fire.  So that, upon
the whole, we are in a wretched condition, and I went from him in full
apprehensions of it.  So took up my wife, her brother being yet very bad,
and doubtful whether he will recover or no, and so to St. Ellen's [St.
Helen's], and there sent my wife home, and myself to the Pope's Head,
where all the Houblons were, and Dr. Croone,

     [William Croune, or Croone, of Emanuel College, Cambridge, chosen
     Rhetoric Professor at Gresham College, 1659, F.R.S. and M.D. Died
     October 12th, 1684, and was interred at St. Mildred's in the
     Poultry.  He was a prominent Fellow of the Royal Society and first
     Registrar.  In accordance with his wishes his widow (who married Sir
     Edwin Sadleir, Bart.) left by will one-fifth of the clear rent of
     the King's Head tavern in or near Old Fish Street, at the corner of
     Lambeth Hill, to the Royal Society for the support of a lecture and
     illustrative experiments for the advancement of natural knowledge on
     local motion.  The Croonian lecture is still delivered before the
     Royal Society.]

and by and by to an exceeding pretty supper, excellent discourse of all
sorts, and indeed [they] are a set of the finest gentlemen that ever I met
withal in my life.  Here Dr. Croone told me, that, at the meeting at
Gresham College to-night, which, it seems, they now have every Wednesday
again, there was a pretty experiment of the blood of one dogg let out,
till he died, into the body of another on one side, while all his own run
out on the other side.

     [At the meeting on November 14th, "the experiment of transfusing the
     blood of one dog into another was made before the Society by Mr.
     King and Mr. Thomas Coxe upon a little mastiff and a spaniel with
     very good success, the former bleeding to death, and the latter
     receiving the blood of the other, and emitting so much of his own,
     as to make him capable of receiving that of the other."  On November
     21st the spaniel "was produced and found very well" (Birch's
     "History of the Royal Society," vol.  ii., pp.  123, 125).  The
     experiment of transfusion of blood, which occupied much of the
     attention of the Royal Society in its early days, was revived within
     the last few years.]

The first died upon the place, and the other very well, and likely to do
well.  This did give occasion to many pretty wishes, as of the blood of a
Quaker to be let into an Archbishop, and such like; but, as Dr. Croone
says, may, if it takes, be of mighty use to man's health, for the amending
of bad blood by borrowing from a better body.  After supper, James Houblon
and another brother took me aside and to talk of some businesses of their
owne, where I am to serve them, and will, and then to talk of publique
matters, and I do find that they and all merchants else do give over trade
and the nation for lost, nothing being done with care or foresight, no
convoys granted, nor any thing done to satisfaction; but do think that the
Dutch and French will master us the next yeare, do what we can: and so do
I, unless necessity makes the King to mind his business, which might yet
save all.  Here we sat talking till past one in the morning, and then
home, where my people sat up for me, my wife and all, and so to bed.

15th.  This [morning] come Mr. Shepley (newly out of the country) to see
me; after a little discourse with him, I to the office, where we sat all
the morning, and at noon home, and there dined, Shepley with me, and after
dinner I did pay him L70, which he had paid my father for my use in the
country.  He being gone, I took coach and to Mrs. Pierce's, where I find
her as fine as possible, and himself going to the ball at night at Court,
it being the Queen's birth-day, and so I carried them in my coach, and
having set them into the house, and gotten Mr. Pierce to undertake the
carrying in my wife, I to Unthanke's, where she appointed to be, and there
told her, and back again about business to White Hall, while Pierce went
and fetched her and carried her in.  I, after I had met with Sir W.
Coventry and given him some account of matters, I also to the ball, and
with much ado got up to the loft, where with much trouble I could see very
well.  Anon the house grew full, and the candles light, and the King and
Queen and all the ladies set: and it was, indeed, a glorious sight to see
Mrs. Stewart in black and white lace, and her head and shoulders dressed
with dyamonds, and the like a great many great ladies more, only the Queen
none; and the King in his rich vest of some rich silke and silver
trimming, as the Duke of York and all the dancers were, some of cloth of
silver, and others of other sorts, exceeding rich.  Presently after the
King was come in, he took the Queene, and about fourteen more couple there
was, and began the Bransles.  As many of the men as I can remember
presently, were, the King, Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of Monmouth,
Duke of Buckingham, Lord Douglas,' Mr. [George] Hamilton, Colonell
Russell, Mr. Griffith, Lord Ossory, Lord Rochester; and of the ladies, the
Queene, Duchess of York, Mrs. Stewart, Duchess of Monmouth, Lady Essex
Howard, Mrs. Temples Swedes Embassadress, Lady Arlington; Lord George
Barkeley's daughter, and many others I remember not; but all most
excellently dressed in rich petticoats and gowns, and dyamonds, and
pearls.  After the Bransles, then to a Corant, and now and then a French
dance; but that so rare that the Corants grew tiresome, that I wished it
done.  Only Mrs. Stewart danced mighty finely, and many French dances,
specially one the King called the New Dance, which was very pretty; but
upon the whole matter, the business of the dancing of itself was not
extraordinary pleasing.  But the clothes and sight of the persons was
indeed very pleasing, and worth my coming, being never likely to see more
gallantry while I live, if I should come twenty times.  About twelve at
night it broke up, and I to hire a coach with much difficulty, but Pierce
had hired a chair for my wife, and so she being gone to his house, he and
I, taking up Barker at Unthanke's, to his house, whither his wife was come
home a good while ago and gone to bed. So away home with my wife, between
displeased with the dull dancing, and satisfied at the clothes and
persons.  My Lady Castlemayne, without whom all is nothing, being there,
very rich, though not dancing.  And so after supper, it being very cold,
to bed.

16th.  Up again betimes to attend the examination of Mr. Gawden's,
accounts, where we all met, but I did little but fit myself for the
drawing my great letter to the Duke of York of the state of the Navy for
want of money.  At noon to the 'Change, and thence back to the new taverne
come by us; the Three Tuns, where D. Gawden did feast us all with a chine
of beef and other good things, and an infinite dish of fowl, but all
spoiled in the dressing.  This noon I met with Mr. Hooke, and he tells me
the dog which was filled with another dog's blood, at the College the
other day, is very well, and like to be so as ever, and doubts not its
being found of great use to men; and so do Dr. Whistler, who dined with us
at the taverne.  Thence home in the evening, and I to my preparing my
letter, and did go a pretty way in it, staying late upon it, and then home
to supper and to bed, the weather being on a sudden set in to be very
cold.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, and in the afternoon shut myself in my chamber, and there till
twelve at night finishing my great letter to the Duke of York, which do
lay the ill condition of the Navy so open to him, that it is impossible if
the King and he minds any thing of their business, but it will operate
upon them to set all matters right, and get money to carry on the war,
before it be too late, or else lay out for a peace upon any termes. It was
a great convenience to-night that what I had writ foule in short hand, I
could read to W. Hewer, and he take it fair in short hand, so as I can
read it to-morrow to Sir W. Coventry, and then come home, and Hewer read
it to me while I take it in long-hand to present, which saves me much
time.  So to bed.

18th (Lord's day).  Up by candle-light and on foote to White Hall, where
by appointment I met Lord Bruncker at Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and there
I read over my great letter, and they approved it: and as I do do our
business in defence of the Board, so I think it is as good a letter in the
manner, and believe it is the worst in the matter of it, as ever come from
any office to a Prince.  Back home in my Lord Bruncker's coach, and there
W. Hewer and I to write it over fair; dined at noon, and Mercer with us,
and mighty merry, and then to finish my letter; and it being three o'clock
ere we had done, when I come to Sir W. Batten; he was in a huffe, which I
made light of, but he signed the letter, though he would not go, and liked
the letter well.  Sir W. Pen, it seems, he would not stay for it: so,
making slight of Sir W. Pen's putting so much weight upon his hand to Sir
W. Batten, I down to the Tower Wharf, and there got a sculler, and to
White Hall, and there met Lord Bruncker, and he signed it, and so I
delivered it to Mr. Cheving,

     [William Chiffinch, pimp to Charles II. and receiver of the secret
     pensions paid by the French Court.  He succeeded his brother, Thomas
     Chiffinch (who died in April, 1666), as Keeper of the King's Private
     Closet (see note, vol. v., p. 265).  He is introduced by Scott into
     his "Peveril of the Peak."]

and he to Sir W. Coventry, in the cabinet, the King and councill being
sitting, where I leave it to its fortune, and I by water home again, and
to my chamber, to even my Journall; and then comes Captain Cocke to me,
and he and I a great deal of melancholy discourse of the times, giving all
over for gone, though now the Parliament will soon finish the Bill for
money.  But we fear,  if we had it, as matters are now managed, we shall
never make the best  of it, but consume it all to no purpose or a bad one.
He being gone, I again to my Journall and finished it, and so to supper
and to bed.

19th.  Lay pretty long in bed talking with pleasure with my wife, and then
up and all the morning at my own chamber fitting some Tangier matters
against the afternoon for a meeting.  This morning also came Mr. Caesar,
and I heard him on the lute very finely, and my boy begins to play well.
After dinner I carried and set my wife down at her brother's, and then to
Barkeshire-house, where my Lord Chancellor hath been ever since the fire,
but he is not come home yet, so I to Westminster Hall, where the Lords
newly up and the Commons still sitting.  Here I met with Mr. Robinson, who
did give me a printed paper wherein he states his pretence to the post
office, and intends to petition the Parliament in it.  Thence I to the
Bull-head tavern, where I have not been since Mr. Chetwind and the time of
our club, and here had six bottles of claret filled, and I sent them to
Mrs. Martin, whom I had promised some of my owne, and, having none of my
owne, sent her this.  Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and there Mr. Creed
and Gawden, Cholmley, and Sir G. Carteret walking in the Park over against
the house.  I walked with Sir G. Carteret, who I find displeased with the
letter I have drawn and sent in yesterday, finding fault with the account
we give of the ill state of the Navy, but I said little, only will justify
the truth of it.  Here we walked to and again till one dropped away after
another, and so I took coach to White Hall, and there visited my Lady
Jemimah, at Sir G. Carteret's lodgings.  Here was Sir Thomas Crew, and he
told me how hot words grew again to-day in the House of Lords between my
Lord Ossory and Ashly, the former saying that something said by the other
was said like one of Oliver's Council.  Ashly said that he must give him
reparation, or he would take it his owne way.  The House therefore did
bring my Lord Ossory to confess his fault, and ask pardon for it, as he
was also to my Lord Buckingham, for saying that something was not truth
that my Lord Buckingham had said.  This will render my Lord Ossory very
little in a little time.  By and by away, and calling my wife went home,
and then a little at Sir W. Batten's to hear news, but nothing, and then
home to supper, whither Captain Cocke, half foxed, come and sat with us,
and so away, and then we to bed.

20th.  Called up by Mr. Sheply, who is going into the country to-day to
Hinchingbroke, I sent my service to my Lady, and in general for newes:
that the world do think well of my Lord, and do wish he were here again,
but that the publique matters of the State as to the war are in the worst
condition that is possible.  By and by Sir W. Warren, and with him half an
hour discoursing of several businesses, and some I hope will bring me a
little profit.  He gone, and Sheply, I to the office a little, and then to
church, it being thanksgiving-day for the cessation of the plague; but,
Lord! how the towne do say that it is hastened before the plague is quite
over, there dying some people still,

     [According to the Bills of Mortality seven persons died in London of
     the plague during the week November 20th to 27th; and for some weeks
     after deaths continued from this cause.]

but only to get ground for plays to be publickly acted, which the Bishops
would not suffer till the plague was over; and one would thinke so, by the
suddenness of the notice given of the day, which was last Sunday, and the
little ceremony.  The sermon being dull of Mr. Minnes, and people with
great indifferency come to hear him.  After church home, where I met Mr.
Gregory, who I did then agree with to come to teach my wife to play on the
Viall, and he being an able and sober man, I am mightily glad of it.  He
had dined, therefore went away, and I to dinner, and after dinner by coach
to Barkeshire-house, and there did get a very great meeting; the Duke of
York being there, and much business done, though not in proportion to the
greatness of the business, and my Lord Chancellor sleeping and snoring the
greater part of the time.  Among other things I declared the state of our
credit as to tallys to raise money by, and there was an order for payment
of L5000 to Mr. Gawden, out of which I hope to get something against
Christmas.  Here we sat late, and here I did hear that there are some
troubles like to be in Scotland, there being a discontented party already
risen, that have seized on the Governor of Dumfreeze and imprisoned him,

     [William Fielding, writing to Sir Phil. Musgrave from Carlisle on
     November 15th, says: "Major Baxter, who has arrived from Dumfries,
     reports that this morning a great number of horse and foot came into
     that town, with drawn swords and pistols, gallopped up to Sir Jas.
     Turner's lodgings, seized him in his bed, carried him without
     clothes to the marketplace, threatened to cut him to pieces, and
     seized and put into the Tollbooth all the foot soldiers that were
     with him; they also secured the minister of Dumfries.  Many of the
     party were lairds and county people from Galloway--200 horse well
     mounted, one minister was with them who had swords and pistols, and
     200 or 300 foot, some with clubs, others with scythes."  On November
     17th Rob. Meine wrote to Williamson: "On the 15th 120 fanatics from
     the Glenkins, Deray; and neighbouring parishes in Dumfriesshire,
     none worth L10 except two mad fellows, the lairds of Barscob and
     Corsuck, came to Dumfries early in the morning, seized Sir Jas.
     Turner, commander of a company of men in Dumfriesshire, and carried
     him, without violence to others, to a strong house in Maxwell town,
     Galloway, declaring they sought only revenge against the tyrant who
     had been severe with them for not keeping to church, and had laid
     their families waste" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp. 262,
     268).]

but the story is yet very uncertain, and therefore I set no great weight
on it.  I home by Mr. Gawden in his coach, and so with great pleasure to
spend the evening at home upon my Lyra Viall, and then to supper and to
bed.  With mighty peace of mind and a hearty desire that I had but what I
have quietly in the country, but, I fear, I do at this day see the best
that either I or the rest of our nation will ever see.

21st.  Up, with Sir W. Batten to Charing Cross, and thence I to wait on
Sir Philip Howard, whom I find dressing himself in his night-gown and
turban like a Turke, but one of the finest persons that ever I saw in my
life.  He had several gentlemen of his owne waiting on him, and one
playing finely on the gittar: he discourses as well as ever I heard man,
in few words and handsome.  He expressed all kindness to Balty, when I
told him how sick he is: he says that, before he comes to be mustered
again, he must bring a certificate of his swearing the oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and having taken the Sacrament according to the rites of
the Church of England.  This, I perceive, is imposed on all, and he will
be ready to do.  I pray God he may have his health again to be able to do
it.  Being mightily satisfied with his civility, I away to Westminster
Hall, and there walked with several people, and all the discourse is about
some trouble in Scotland I heard of yesterday, but nobody can tell the
truth of it.  Here was Betty Michell with her mother. I would have carried
her home, but her father intends to go with her, so I lost my hopes.  And
thence I to the Excise Office about some tallies, and then to the
Exchange, where I did much business, and so home to dinner, and then to
the office, where busy all the afternoon till night, and then home to
supper, and after supper an hour reading to my wife and brother something
in Chaucer with great pleasure, and so to bed.

22nd.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and my Lord
Bruncker did show me Hollar's new print of the City, with a pretty
representation of that part which is burnt, very fine indeed; and tells me
that he was yesterday sworn the King's servant, and that the King hath
commanded him to go on with his great map of the City, which he was upon
before the City was burned, like Gombout of Paris, which I am glad of. At
noon home to dinner, where my wife and I fell out, I being displeased with
her cutting away a lace handkercher sewed about the neck down to her
breasts almost, out of a belief, but without reason, that it is the
fashion.  Here we did give one another the lie too much, but were
presently friends, and then I to my office, where very late and did much
business, and then home, and there find Mr. Batelier, and did sup and play
at cards awhile.  But he tells me the newes how the King of France hath,
in defiance to the King of England, caused all his footmen to be put into
vests, and that the noblemen of France will do the like; which, if true,
is the greatest indignity ever done by one Prince to another, and would
incite a stone to be revenged; and I hope our King will, if it be so, as
he tells me it is:

     [Planche throws some doubt on this story in his "Cyclopaedia of
     Costume" (vol. ii., p. 240), and asks the question, "Was Mr.
     Batelier hoaxing the inquisitive secretary, or was it the idle
     gossip of the day, as untrustworthy as such gossip is in general?"
     But the same statement was made by the author of the "Character of a
     Trimmer," who wrote from actual knowledge of the Court: "About this
     time a general humour, in opposition to France, had made us throw
     off their fashion, and put on vests, that we might look more like a
     distinct people, and not be under the servility of imitation, which
     ever pays a greater deference to the original than is consistent
     with the equality all independent nations should pretend to.  France
     did not like this small beginning of ill humours, at least of
     emulation; and wisely considering, that it is a natural
     introduction, first to make the world their apes, that they may be
     afterwards their slaves.  It was thought, that one of the
     instructions Madame [Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans] brought along
     with her, was to laugh us out of these vests; which she performed so
     effectually, that in a moment, like so many footmen who had quitted
     their master's livery, we all took it again, and returned to our old
     service; so that the very time of doing it gave a very critical
     advantage to France, since it looked like an evidence of our
     returning to her interest, as well as to their fashion. "The
     Character of a Trimmer" ("Miscellanies by the Marquis of Halifax,"
     1704, p. 164).  Evelyn reports that when the king expressed his
     intention never to alter this fashion, "divers courtiers and
     gentlemen gave his Majesty gold by way of wager that he would not
     persist in this resolution" ("Diary," October 18th, 1666).]

being told by one that come over from Paris with my Lady Fanshaw, who is
come over with the dead body of her husband, and that saw it before he
come away.  This makes me mighty merry, it being an ingenious kind of
affront; but yet it makes me angry, to see that the King of England is
become so little as to have the affront offered him.  So I left my people
at cards, and so to my chamber to read, and then to bed.  Batelier did
bring us some oysters to-night, and some bottles of new French wine of
this year, mighty good, but I drank but little.  This noon Bagwell's wife
was with me at the office, and I did what I would, and at night comes Mrs.
Burroughs, and appointed to meet upon the next holyday and go abroad
together.

23rd.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, where we and the rest
attended the Duke of York, where, among other things, we had a complaint
of Sir William Jennings against his lieutenant, Le Neve, one that had been
long the Duke's page, and for whom the Duke of York hath great kindness.
It was a drunken quarrel, where one was as blameable as the other.  It was
referred to further examination, but the Duke of York declared, that as he
would not favour disobedience, so neither drunkenness, and therein he said
very well.  Thence with Sir W. Coventry to Westminster Hall, and there
parted, he having told me how Sir J. Minnes do disagree from the
proposition of resigning his place, and that so the whole matter is again
at a stand, at which I am sorry for the King's sake, but glad that Sir W.
Pen is again defeated, for I would not have him come to be Comptroller if
I could help it, he will be so cruel proud.  Here I spoke with Sir G.
Downing about our prisoners in Holland, and their being released; which he
is concerned in, and most of them are. Then, discoursing of matters of the
House of Parliament, he tells me that it is not the fault of the House,
but the King's own party, that have hindered the passing of the Bill for
money, by their popping in of new projects for raising it: which is a
strange thing; and mighty confident he is, that what money is raised, will
be raised and put into the same form that the last was, to come into the
Exchequer; and, for aught I see, I must confess I think it is the best
way.  Thence down to the Hall, and there walked awhile, and all the talk
is about Scotland, what news thence; but there is nothing come since the
first report, and so all is given over for nothing.  Thence home, and
after dinner to my chamber with Creed, who come and dined with me, and he
and I to reckon for his salary, and by and by comes in Colonel Atkins, and
I did the like with him, and it was Creed's design to bring him only for
his own ends, to seem to do him a courtesy, and it is no great matter.
The fellow I hate, and so I think all the world else do.  Then to talk of
my report I am to make of the state of our wants of money to the Lord
Treasurer, but our discourse come to little.  However, in the evening, to
be rid of him, I took coach and saw him to the Temple and there 'light,
and he being gone, with all the haste back again and to my chamber late to
enter all this day's matters of account, and to draw up my report to my
Lord Treasurer, and so to bed.  At the Temple I called at Playford's, and
there find that his new impression of his ketches

     [John Hilton's "Catch that catch can, or a Choice Collection of
     Catches, Rounds and Canons for 3 or 4 voyces," was first published
     by Playford in 1651 or 1652.  The book was republished "with large
     additions by John Playford" in 1658.  The edition referred to in the
     text was published in 1667 with a second title of "The Musical
     Companion."  The book was republished in 1672-73.]

are not yet out, the fire having hindered it, but his man tells me that it
will be a very fine piece, many things new being added to it.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon rose
and to my closet, and finished my report to my Lord Treasurer of our
Tangier wants, and then with Sir J. Minnes by coach to Stepney to the
Trinity House, where it is kept again now since the burning of their other
house in London.  And here a great many met at Sir Thomas Allen's feast,
of his being made an Elder Brother; but he is sick, and so could not be
there.  Here was much good company, and very merry; but the discourse of
Scotland, it seems, is confirmed, and that they are 4000 of them in armes,
and do declare for King and Covenant, which is very ill news.  I pray God
deliver us from the ill consequences we may justly fear from it.  Here was
a good venison pasty or two and other good victuals; but towards the
latter end of the dinner I rose, and without taking leave went away from
the table, and got Sir J. Minnes' coach and away home, and thence with my
report to my Lord Treasurer's, where I did deliver it to Sir Philip
Warwicke for my Lord, who was busy, my report for him to consider against
to-morrow's council.  Sir Philip Warwicke, I find, is full of trouble in
his mind to see how things go, and what our wants are; and so I have no
delight to trouble him with discourse, though I honour the man with all my
heart, and I think him to be a very able and right honest man.  So away
home again, and there to my office to write my letters very late, and then
home to supper, and then to read the late printed discourse of witches by
a member of Gresham College, and then to bed; the discourse being well
writ, in good stile, but methinks not very convincing.  This day Mr.
Martin is come to tell me his wife is brought to bed of a girle, and I
promised to christen it next Sunday.

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to White Hall, and
there coming late, I to rights to the chapel, where in my usual place I
heard one of the King's chaplains, one Mr. Floyd, preach.  He was out two
or three times in his prayer, and as many in his sermon, but yet he made a
most excellent good sermon, of our duty to imitate the lives and practice
of Christ and the saints departed, and did it very handsomely and
excellent stile; but was a little overlarge in magnifying the graces of
the nobility and prelates, that we have seen in our memorys in the world,
whom God hath taken from us.  At the end of the sermon an excellent
anthem; but it was a pleasant thing, an idle companion in our pew, a
prating, bold counsellor that hath been heretofore at the Navy Office, and
noted for a great eater and drinker, not for quantity, but of the best,
his name Tom Bales, said, "I know a fitter anthem for this sermon,"
speaking only of our duty of following the saints, and I know not what.
"Cooke should have sung, 'Come, follow, follow me.'"  I After sermon up
into the gallery, and then to Sir G. Carteret's to dinner; where much
company.  Among others, Mr. Carteret and my Lady Jemimah, and here was
also Mr. [John] Ashburnham, the great man, who is a pleasant man, and that
hath seen much of the world, and more of the Court.  After dinner Sir G.
Carteret and I to another room, and he tells me more and more of our want
of money and in how ill condition we are likely to be soon in, and that he
believes we shall not have a fleete at sea the next year.  So do I
believe; but he seems to speak it as a thing expected by the King and as
if their matters were laid accordingly.  Thence into the Court and there
delivered copies of my report to my Lord Treasurer, to the Duke of York,
Sir W. Coventry, and others, and attended there till the Council met, and
then was called in, and I read my letter.  My Lord Treasurer declared that
the King had nothing to give till the Parliament did give him some money.
So the King did of himself bid me to declare to all that would take our
tallys for payment, that he should, soon as the Parliament's money do come
in, take back their tallys, and give them money: which I giving him
occasion to repeat to me, it coming from him against the 'gre'

     [Apparently a translation of the French 'contre le gre', and
     presumably an expression in common use.  "Against the grain" is
     generally supposed to have its origin in the use of a plane against
     the grain of the wood.]

I perceive, of my Lord Treasurer, I was content therewith, and went out,
and glad that I have got so much.  Here staid till the Council rose,
walking in the gallery.  All the talke being of Scotland, where the
highest report, I perceive, runs but upon three or four hundred in armes;
but they believe that it will grow more, and do seem to apprehend it much,
as if the King of France had a hand in it.  My Lord Lauderdale do make
nothing of it, it seems, and people do censure him for it, he from the
beginning saying that there was nothing in it, whereas it do appear to be
a pure rebellion; but no persons of quality being in it, all do hope that
it cannot amount to much.  Here I saw Mrs. Stewart this afternoon,
methought the beautifullest creature that ever I saw in my life, more than
ever I thought her so, often as I have seen her; and I begin to think do
exceed my Lady Castlemayne, at least now.  This being St. Catherine's day,
the Queene was at masse by seven o'clock this morning; and.  Mr.
Ashburnham do say that he never saw any one have so much zeale in his life
as she hath: and, the question being asked by my Lady Carteret, much
beyond the bigotry that ever the old Queen-mother had.  I spoke with Mr.
Maya who tells me that the design of building the City do go on apace, and
by his description it will be mighty handsome, and to the satisfaction of
the people; but I pray God it come not out too late.  The Council up,
after speaking with Sir W. Coventry a little, away home with Captain Cocke
in his coach, discourse about the forming of his contract he made with us
lately for hempe, and so home, where we parted, and I find my uncle Wight
and Mrs. Wight and Woolly, who staid and supped, and mighty merry
together, and then I to my chamber to even my journal, and then to bed.
I will remember that Mr. Ashburnham to-day at dinner told how the rich
fortune Mrs. Mallett reports of her servants; that my Lord Herbert would
have had her; my Lord Hinchingbroke was indifferent to have her;

     [They had quarrelled (see August 26th).  She, perhaps, was piqued at
     Lord Hinchingbroke's refusal "to compass the thing without consent
     of friends" (see February 25th), whence her expression,
     "indifferent" to have her.  It is worthy of remark that their
     children intermarried; Lord Hinchingbroke's son married Lady
     Rochester's daughter.--B.]

my Lord John Butler might not have her; my Lord of Rochester would have
forced her;

     [Of the lady thus sought after, whom Pepys calls "a beauty" as well
     as a fortune, and who shortly afterwards, about the 4th February,
     1667, became the wife of the Earl of Rochester, then not twenty
     years old, no authentic portrait is known to exist.  When Mr.
     Miller, of Albemarle Street, in 1811, proposed to publish an edition
     of the "Memoires de Grammont," he sent an artist to Windsor to copy
     there the portraits which he could find of those who figure in that
     work.  In the list given to him for this purpose was the name of
     Lady Rochester.  Not finding amongst the "Beauties," or elsewhere,
     any genuine portrait of her, but seeing that by Hamilton she is
     absurdly styled "une triste heritiere," the, artist made a drawing
     from some unknown portrait at Windsor of a lady of a sorrowful
     countenance, and palmed it off upon the bookseller.  In the edition
     of "Grammont" it is not actually called Lady Rochester, but "La
     Triste Heritiere."  A similar falsification had been practised in
     Edwards's edition of 1793, but a different portrait had been copied.
     It is needless, almost, to remark how ill applied is Hamilton's
     epithet.--B.]

and Sir------Popham, who nevertheless is likely to have her, would kiss
her breach to have her.

26th.  Up, and to my chamber to do some business.  Then to speak with
several people, among others with Mrs. Burroughs, whom I appointed to meet
me at the New Exchange in the afternoon.  I by water to Westminster, and
there to enquire after my tallies, which I shall get this week. Thence to
the Swan, having sent for some burnt claret, and there by and by comes
Doll Lane, and she and I sat and drank and talked a great while, among
other things about her sister's being brought to bed, and I to be
godfather to the girle.  I did tumble Doll, and do almost what I would
with her, and so parted, and I took coach, and to the New Exchange, buying
a neat's tongue by the way, thinking to eat it out of town, but there I
find Burroughs in company of an old woman, an aunt of hers, whom she could
not leave for half an hour.  So after buying a few baubles to while away
time, I down to Westminster, and there into the House of Parliament,
where, at a great Committee, I did hear, as long as I would, the great
case against my Lord Mordaunt, for some arbitrary proceedings of his
against one Taylor, whom he imprisoned, and did all the violence to
imaginable, only to get him to give way to his abusing his daughter. Here
was Mr. Sawyer, my old chamber-fellow, a counsel against my Lord; and I am
glad to see him in so good play.  Here I met, before the committee sat,
with my cozen Roger Pepys, the first time I have spoke with him this
parliament.  He hath promised to come, and bring Madam Turner with him,
who is come to towne to see the City, but hath lost all her goods of all
kinds in Salisbury Court, Sir William Turner having not endeavoured, in
her absence, to save one penny, to dine with me on Friday next, of which I
am glad.  Roger bids me to help him to some good rich widow; for he is
resolved to go, and retire wholly, into the country; for, he says, he is
confident we shall be all ruined very speedily, by what he sees in the
State, and I am much in his mind.  Having staid as long as I thought fit
for meeting of Burroughs, I away and to the 'Change again, but there I do
not find her now, I having staid too long at the House, and therefore very
hungry, having eat nothing to-day.  Home, and there to eat presently, and
then to the office a little, and to Sir W. Batten, where Sir J. Minnes and
Captain Cocke was; but no newes from the North at all to-day; and the
newes-book makes the business nothing, but that they are all dispersed.  I
pray God it may prove so.  So home, and, after a little, to my chamber to
bed.

27th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and here I had
a letter from Mr. Brisband on another occasion, which, by the by,
intimates my Lord Hinchingbroke's intention to come and dine with me
to-morrow.  This put me into a great surprise, and therefore endeavoured
all I could to hasten over our business at the office, and so home at noon
and to dinner, and then away by coach, it being a very foul day, to White
Hall, and there at Sir G. Carteret's find my Lord Hinchingbroke, who
promises to dine with me to-morrow, and bring Mr. Carteret along with him.
Here I staid a little while talking with him and the ladies, and then away
to my Lord Crew's, and then did by the by make a visit to my Lord Crew,
and had some good discourse with him, he doubting that all will break in
pieces in the kingdom; and that the taxes now coming out, which will tax
the same man in three or four several capacities, as for lands, office,
profession, and money at interest, will be the hardest that ever come out;
and do think that we owe it, and the lateness of its being given, wholly
to the unpreparedness of the King's own party, to make their demand and
choice; for they have obstructed the giving it by land-tax, which had been
done long since.  Having ended my visit, I spoke to Sir Thomas Crew, to
invite him and his brother John to dinner tomorrow, at my house, to meet
Lord Hinchingbroke; and so homewards, calling at the cook's, who is to
dress it, to bespeak him, and then home, and there set things in order for
a very fine dinner, and then to the office, where late very busy and to
good purpose as to dispatch of business, and then home.  To bed, my people
sitting up to get things in order against to-morrow.  This evening was
brought me what Griffin had, as he says, taken this evening off of the
table in the office, a letter sealed and directed to the Principal
Officers and Commissioners of the Navy.  It is a serious and just libel
against our disorder in paying of our money, making ten times more people
wait than we have money for, and complaining by name of Sir W. Batten for
paying away great sums to particular people, which is true.  I was sorry
to see this way of reproach taken against us, but more sorry that there is
true ground for it.

28th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen to White Hall (setting his lady and
daughter down by the way at a mercer's in the Strand, where they are going
to lay out some money), where, though it blows hard and rains hard, yet
the Duke of York is gone a-hunting.  We therefore lost our labour, and so
back again, and by hackney coach to secure places to get things ready
against dinner, and then home, and did the like there, and to my great
satisfaction: and at noon comes my Lord Hinchingbroke, Sir Thomas Crew,
Mr. John Crew, Mr. Carteret, and Brisband.  I had six noble dishes for
them, dressed by a man-cook, and commended, as indeed they deserved, for
exceeding well done.  We eat with great pleasure, and I enjoyed myself in
it with reflections upon the pleasures which I at best can expect, yet not
to exceed this; eating in silver plates, and all things mighty rich and
handsome about me.  A great deal of fine discourse, sitting almost till
dark at dinner, and then broke up with great pleasure, especially to
myself; and they away, only Mr. Carteret and I to Gresham College, where
they meet now weekly again, and here they had good discourse how this late
experiment of the dog, which is in perfect good health, may be improved
for good uses to men, and other pretty things, and then broke up.  Here
was Mr. Henry Howard, that will hereafter be Duke of Norfolke, who is
admitted this day into the Society, and being a very proud man, and one
that values himself upon his family, writes his name, as he do every
where, Henry Howard of Norfolke.  Thence home and there comes my Lady Pen,
Pegg, and Mrs. Turner, and played at cards and supped with us, and were
pretty merry, and Pegg with me in my closet a good while, and did suffer
me 'a la baiser mouche et toucher ses cosas' upon her breast, wherein I
had great pleasure, and so spent the evening and then broke up, and I to
bed, my mind mightily pleased with the day's entertainment.

29th.  Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, where I find Balty come out to see us, but looks like death, and I
do fear he is in a consumption; he has not been abroad many weeks before,
and hath now a well day, and a fit day of the headake in extraordinary
torture.  After dinner left him and his wife, they having their mother
hard by and my wife, and I a wet afternoon to White Hall to have seen my
Lady Carteret and Jemimah, but as God would have it they were abroad, and
I was well contented at it.  So my wife and I to Westminster Hall, where I
left her a little, and to the Exchequer, and then presently home again,
calling at our man-cooke's for his help to-morrow, but he could not come.
So I home to the office, my people all busy to get a good dinner to-morrow
again.  I late at the office, and all the newes I hear I put into a letter
this night to my Lord Bruncker at Chatham, thus:--

     "I doubt not of your lordship's hearing of Sir Thomas Clifford's
     succeeding Sir H. Pollard' in the Comptrollership of the King's
     house; but perhaps our ill, but confirmed, tidings from the
     Barbadoes may not [have reached you] yet, it coming but yesterday;
     viz., that about eleven ships, whereof two of the King's, the Hope
     and Coventry, going thence with men to attack St. Christopher's,
     were seized by a violent hurricane, and all sunk--two only of
     thirteen escaping, and those with loss of masts, &c.  My Lord
     Willoughby  himself is involved in the disaster, and I think two
     ships thrown upon an island of the French, and so all the men, to
     500, become their prisoners.  'Tis said, too, that eighteen Dutch
     men-of-war are passed the Channell, in order to meet with our Smyrna
     ships; and some, I hear, do fright us with the King of Sweden's
     seizing our mast-ships at Gottenburgh.  But we have too much ill
     newes true, to afflict ourselves with what is uncertain.  That which
     I hear from Scotland is, the Duke of York's saying, yesterday, that
     he is confident the Lieutenant-Generall there hath driven them into
     a pound, somewhere towards the mountains."

Having writ my letter, I home to supper and to bed, the world being
mightily troubled at the ill news from Barbadoes, and the consequence of
the Scotch business, as little as we do make of it.  And to shew how mad
we are at home, here, and unfit for any troubles: my Lord St. John did, a
day or two since, openly pull a gentleman in Westminster Hall by the nose,
one Sir Andrew Henly, while the judges were upon their benches, and the
other gentleman did give him a rap over the pate with his cane, of which
fray the judges, they say, will make a great matter: men are only sorry
the gentle man did proceed to return a blow; for, otherwise, my Lord would
have been soundly fined for the affront, and may be yet for his affront to
the judges.

30th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, and there we did attend
the Duke of York, and had much business with him; and pretty to see, it
being St. Andrew's day, how some few did wear St. Andrew's crosse; but
most did make a mockery at it, and the House of Parliament, contrary to
practice, did sit also: people having no mind to observe the Scotch
saints' days till they hear better newes from Scotland.  Thence to
Westminster Hall and the Abbey, thinking as I had appointed to have met
Mrs. Burroughs there, but not meeting her I home, and just overtook my
cozen Roger Pepys, Mrs. Turner, Dicke, and Joyce Norton, coming by
invitation to dine with me.  These ladies I have not seen since before the
plague.  Mrs. Turner is come to towne to look after her things in her
house, but all is lost.  She is quite weary of the country, but cannot get
her husband to let her live here any more, which troubles her mightily.
She was mighty angry with me, that in all this time I never writ to her,
which I do think and take to myself as a fault, and which I have promised
to mend.  Here I had a noble and costly dinner for them, dressed by a
man-cooke, as that the other day was, and pretty merry we were, as I could
be with this company and so great a charge.  We sat long, and after much
talk of the plenty of her country in fish, but in nothing also that is
pleasing, we broke up with great kindness, and when it begun to be dark we
parted, they in one coach home, and I in another to Westminster Hall,
where by appointment Mrs. Burroughs and I were to meet, but did not after
I had spent the whole evening there.  Only I did go drink at the Swan, and
there did meet with Sarah, who is now newly married, and there I did lay
the beginnings of a future 'amour con elle'. .  .  .  .  Thence it being
late away called at Mrs. Burroughs' mother's door, and she come out to me,
and I did hazer whatever I would .  .  .  . and then parted, and home, and
after some playing at cards with my wife, we to supper and to bed.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Amending of bad blood by borrowing from a better body
     And for his beef, says he, "Look how fat it is"
     First their apes, that they may be afterwards their slaves
     For a land-tax and against a general excise
     I had six noble dishes for them, dressed by a man-cook
     In opposition to France, had made us throw off their fashion
     Magnifying the graces of the nobility and prelates
     Origin in the use of a plane against the grain of the wood
     Play on the harpsicon, till she tired everybody
     Reading to my wife and brother something in Chaucer
     Said that there hath been a design to poison the King
     Tax the same man in three or four several capacities
     There I did lay the beginnings of a future 'amour con elle'
     Too much ill newes true, to afflict ourselves with uncertain
     What I had writ foule in short hand


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                DECEMBER
                                  1666

December 1st.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At
home to dinner, and then abroad walking to the Old Swan, and in my way I
did see a cellar in Tower Streete in a very fresh fire, the late great
winds having blown it up.

     [The fire continued burning in some cellars of the ruins of the city
     for four months, though it rained in the month of October ten days
     without ceasing (Rugge's "Diurnal").--B.]

It seemed to be only of log-wood, that Hath kept the fire all this while
in it.  Going further, I met my late Lord Mayor Bludworth, under whom the
City was burned, and went with him by water to White Hall.  But, Lord! the
silly talk that this fellow had, only how ready he would be to part with
all his estate in these difficult times to advance the King's service, and
complaining that now, as every body did lately in the fire, every body
endeavours to save himself, and let the whole perish: but a very weak man
he seems to be.  I left him at White Hall, he giving 6d. towards the boat,
and I to Westminster Hall, where I was again defeated in my expectation of
Burroughs.  However, I was not much sorry for it, but by coach home, in
the evening, calling at Faythorne's, buying three of my Lady Castlemayne's
heads, printed this day, which indeed is, as to the head, I think, a very
fine picture, and like her.  I did this afternoon get Mrs. Michell to let
me only have a sight of a pamphlet lately printed, but suppressed and much
called after, called "The Catholique's Apology;" lamenting the severity of
the Parliament against them, and comparing it with the lenity of other
princes to Protestants; giving old and late instances of their loyalty to
their princes, whatever is objected against them; and excusing their
disquiets in Queen Elizabeth's time, for that it was impossible for them
to think her a lawfull Queen, if Queen Mary, who had been owned as such,
were so; one being the daughter of the true, and the other of a false
wife: and that of the Gunpowder Treason, by saying that it was only the
practice of some of us, if not the King, to trepan some of their religion
into it, it never being defended by the generality of their Church, nor
indeed known by them; and ends with a large Catalogue, in red letters, of
the Catholiques which have lost their lives in the quarrel of the late
King and this.  The thing is very well writ indeed.  So home to my
letters, and then to my supper and to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, and after church home to dinner,
where I met Betty Michell and her husband, very merry at dinner, and after
dinner, having borrowed Sir W. Pen's coach, we to Westminster, they two
and my wife and I to Mr. Martin's, where find the company almost all come
to the christening of Mrs. Martin's child, a girl.  A great deal of good
plain company.  After sitting long, till the church was done, the Parson
comes, and then we to christen the child.  I was Godfather, and Mrs.
Holder (her husband, a good man, I know well), and a pretty lady, that
waits, it seems, on my Lady Bath, at White Hall, her name, Mrs. Noble,
were Godmothers.  After the christening comes in the wine and the
sweetmeats, and then to prate and tattle, and then very good company they
were, and I among them.  Here was old Mrs. Michell and Howlett, and
several married women of the Hall, whom I knew mayds.  Here was also Mrs.
Burroughs and Mrs. Bales, the young widow, whom I led home, and having
staid till the moon was up, I took my pretty gossip to White Hall with us,
and I saw her in her lodging, and then my owne company again took coach,
and no sooner in the coach but something broke, that we were fain there to
stay till a smith could be fetched, which was above an hour, and then it
costing me 6s. to mend.  Away round by the wall and Cow Lane,

     [Cow Lane, West Smithfield (now named King Street), was famous for
     its coachmakers.]

for fear it should break again; and in pain about the coach all the way.
But to ease myself therein Betty Michell did sit at the same end with me .
.  .  .  Being very much pleased with this, we at last come home, and so
to supper, and then sent them by boat home, and we to bed.  When I come
home I went to Sir W. Batten's, and there I hear more ill newes still:
that all our New England fleete, which went out lately, are put back a
third time by foul weather, and dispersed, some to one port and some to
another; and their convoys also to Plymouth; and whether any of them be
lost or not, we do not know.  This, added to all the rest, do lay us flat
in our hopes and courages, every body prophesying destruction to the
nation.

3rd.  Up, and, among a great many people that come to speak with me, one
was my Lord Peterborough's gentleman, who comes to me to dun me to get
some money advanced for my Lord; and I demanding what newes, he tells me
that at Court they begin to fear the business of Scotland more and more;
and that the Duke of York intends to go to the North to raise an army, and
that the King would have some of the Nobility and others to go and assist;
but they were so served the last year, among others his Lord, in raising
forces at their own charge, for fear of the French invading us, that they
will not be got out now, without money advanced to them by the King, and
this is like to be the King's case for certain, if ever he comes to have
need of any army.  He and others gone, I by water to Westminster, and
there to the Exchequer, and put my tallys in a way of doing for the last
quarter.  But my not following it the last week has occasioned the clerks
some trouble, which I am sorry for, and they are mad at.  Thence at noon
home, and there find Kate Joyce, who dined with me: Her husband and she
are weary of their new life of being an Innkeeper, and will leave it, and
would fain get some office; but I know none the foole is fit for, but
would be glad to help them, if I could, though they have enough to live
on, God be thanked! though their loss hath been to the value of L3000 W.
Joyce now has all the trade, she says, the trade being come to that end of
the towne.  She dined with me, my wife being ill of her months in bed.  I
left her with my wife, and away myself to Westminster Hall by appointment
and there found out Burroughs, and I took her by coach as far as the Lord
Treasurer's and called at the cake house by Hales's, and there in the
coach eat and drank and then carried her home  .  .  .  .  So having set
her down in the palace I to the Swan, and there did the first time
'baiser' the little sister of Sarah that is come into her place, and so
away by coach home, where to my vyall and supper and then to bed, being
weary of the following of my pleasure and sorry for my omitting (though
with a true salvo to my vowes) the stating my last month's accounts in
time, as I should, but resolve to settle, and clear all my business before
me this month, that I may begin afresh the next yeare, and enjoy some
little pleasure freely at Christmasse.  So to bed, and with more
cheerfulness than I have done a good while, to hear that for certain the
Scott rebells are all routed; they having been so bold as to come within
three miles of Edinburgh, and there given two or three repulses to the
King's forces, but at last were mastered.  Three or four hundred killed or
taken, among which their leader, one Wallis, and seven ministers, they
having all taken the Covenant a few days before, and sworn to live and die
in it, as they did; and so all is likely to be there quiet again.  There
is also the very good newes come of four New-England ships come home safe
to Falmouth with masts for the King; which is a blessing mighty
unexpected, and without which, if for nothing else, we must have failed
the next year.  But God be praised for thus much good fortune, and send us
the continuance of his favour in other things!  So to bed.

4th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon dined
at home.  After dinner presently to my office, and there late and then
home to even my Journall and accounts, and then to supper much eased in
mind, and last night's good news, which is more and more confirmed with
particulars to very good purpose, and so to bed.

5th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, where we did much business before
the Duke of York, which being done, I away home by water again, and there
to my office till noon busy.  At noon home, and Goodgroome dined with us,
who teaches my wife to sing.  After dinner I did give him my song, "Beauty
retire," which he has often desired of me, and without flattery I think is
a very good song.  He gone, I to the office, and there late, very busy
doing much business, and then home to supper and talk, and then scold with
my wife for not reckoning well the times that her musique master hath been
with her, but setting down more than I am sure, and did convince her, they
had been with her, and in an ill humour of anger with her to bed.

6th.  Up, but very good friends with her before I rose, and so to the
office, where we sat all the forenoon, and then home to dinner, where
Harman dined with us, and great sport to hear him tell how Will Joyce
grows rich by the custom of the City coming to his end of the towne, and
how he rants over his brother and sister for their keeping an Inne, and
goes thither and tears like a prince, calling him hosteller and his sister
hostess.  Then after dinner, my wife and brother, in another habit; go out
to see a play; but I am not to take notice that I know of my brother's
going.  So I to the office, where very busy till late at night, and then
home.  My wife not pleased with the play, but thinks that it is because
she is grown more critical than she used to be, but my brother she says is
mighty taken with it.  So to supper and to bed.  This day, in the Gazette,
is the whole story of defeating the Scotch rebells, and of the creation of
the Duke of Cambridge, Knight of the Garter.

7th.  Up, and by water to the Exchequer, where I got my tallys finished
for the last quarter for Tangier, and having paid all my fees I to the
Swan, whither I sent for some oysters, and thither comes Mr. Falconbridge
and Spicer and many more clerks; and there we eat and drank, and a great
deal of their sorry discourse, and so parted, and I by coach home, meeting
Balty in the streete about Charing Crosse walking, which I am glad to see
and spoke to him about his mustering business, I being now to give an
account how the several muster-masters have behaved themselves, and so
home to dinner, where finding the cloth laid and much crumpled but clean,
I grew angry and flung the trenchers about the room, and in a mighty heat
I was: so a clean cloth was laid, and my poor wife very patient, and so to
dinner, and in comes Mrs. Barbara Sheldon, now Mrs. Wood, and dined with
us, she mighty fine, and lives, I perceive, mighty happily, which I am
glad [of] for her sake, but hate her husband for a block-head in his
choice.  So away after dinner, leaving my wife and her, and by water to
the Strand, and so to the King's playhouse, where two acts were almost
done when I come in; and there I sat with my cloak about my face, and saw
the remainder of "The Mayd's Tragedy;" a good play, and well acted,
especially by the younger Marshall, who is become a pretty good actor, and
is the first play I have seen in either of the houses since before the
great plague, they having acted now about fourteen days publickly.  But I
was in mighty pain lest I should be seen by any body to be at a play.
Soon as done I home, and then to my office awhile, and then home and spent
the night evening my Tangier accounts, much to my satisfaction, and then
to supper, and mighty good friends with my poor wife, and so to bed.

8th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, and there find Mr. Pierce and his wife and Betty, a pretty
girle, who in discourse at table told me the great Proviso passed the
House of Parliament yesterday; which makes the King and Court mad, the
King having given order to my Lord Chamberlain to send to the playhouses
and bawdy houses, to bid all the Parliament-men that were there to go to
the Parliament presently.  This is true, it seems; but it was carried
against the Court by thirty or forty voices.  It is a Proviso to the Poll
Bill, that there shall be a Committee of nine persons that shall have the
inspection upon oath, and power of giving others, of all the accounts of
the money given and spent for this warr.  This hath a most sad face, and
will breed very ill blood.  He tells me, brought in by Sir Robert Howard,
who is one of the King's servants, at least hath a great office, and hath
got, they say, L20,000 since the King come in. Mr. Pierce did also tell me
as a great truth, as being told it by Mr. Cowly, who was by, and heard it,
that Tom Killigrew should publiquely tell the King that his matters were
coming into a very ill state; but that yet there was a way to help all,
which is, says he, "There is a good, honest, able man, that I could name,
that if your Majesty would employ, and command to see all things well
executed, all things would soon be mended; and this is one Charles Stuart,
who now spends his time in employing his lips .  .  .  .  about the Court,
and hath no other employment; but if you would give him this employment,
he were the fittest man in the world to perform it."  This, he says, is
most true; but the King do not profit by any of this, but lays all aside,
and remembers nothing, but to his pleasures again; which is a sorrowful
consideration.  Very good company we were at dinner, and merry, and after
dinner, he being gone about business, my wife and I and Mrs. Pierce and
Betty and Balty, who come to see us to-day very sick, and went home not
well, together out, and our coach broke the wheel off upon Ludgate Hill.
So we were fain to part ourselves and get room in other people's coaches,
and Mrs. Pierce and I in one, and I carried her home and set her down, and
myself to the King's playhouse, which troubles me since, and hath cost me
a forfeit of 10s., which I have paid, and there did see a good part of
"The English Monsieur," which is a mighty pretty play, very witty and
pleasant.  And the women do very well; but, above all, little Nelly; that
I am mightily pleased with the play, and much with the House, more than
ever I expected, the women doing better than ever I expected, and very
fine women.  Here I was in pain to be seen, and hid myself; but, as God
would have it, Sir John Chichly come, and sat just by me.  Thence to Mrs.
Pierce's, and there took up my wife and away home, and to the office and
Sir W. Batten's, of whom I hear that this Proviso in Parliament is
mightily ill taken by all the Court party as a mortal blow, and that, that
strikes deep into the King's prerogative, which troubles me mightily.
Home, and set some papers right in my chamber, and then to supper and to
bed, we being in much fear of ill news of our colliers.  A fleete of two
hundred sail, and fourteen Dutch men-of-war between them and us and they
coming home with small convoy; and the City in great want, coals being at
L3 3s.  per chaldron, as I am told.  I saw smoke in the ruines this very
day.

9th (Lord's day).  Up, not to church, but to my chamber, and there begun
to enter into this book my journall of September, which in the fire-time I
could not enter here, but in loose papers.  At noon dined, and then to my
chamber all the afternoon and night, looking over and tearing and burning
all the unnecessary letters, which I have had upon my file for four or
five years backward, which I intend to do quite through all my papers,
that I may have nothing by me but what is worth keeping, and fit to be
seen, if I should miscarry.  At this work till midnight, and then to
supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and at my office all the morning, and several people with me,
Sir W. Warren, who I do every day more and more admire for a miracle of
cunning and forecast in his business, and then Captain Cocke, with whom I
walked in the garden, and he tells me how angry the Court is at the late
Proviso brought in by the House.  How still my Lord Chancellor is, not
daring to do or say any thing to displease the Parliament; that the
Parliament is in a very ill humour, and grows every day more and more so;
and that the unskilfulness of the Court, and their difference among one
another, is the occasion of all not agreeing in what they would have, and
so they give leisure and occasion to the other part to run away with what
the Court would not have.  Then comes Mr. Gawden, and he and I in my
chamber discoursing about his business, and to pay him some Tangier orders
which he delayed to receive till I had money instead of tallies, but do
promise me consideration for my victualling business for this year, and
also as Treasurer for Tangier, which I am glad of, but would have been
gladder to have just now received it.  He gone, I alone to dinner at home,
my wife and her people being gone down the river to-day for pleasure,
though a cold day and dark night to come up.  In the afternoon I to the
Excise Office to enter my tallies, which I did, and come presently back
again, and then to the office and did much business, and then home to
supper, my wife and people being come well and hungry home from Erith.
Then I to begin the setting of a Base to "It is Decreed," and so to bed.

11th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat, and at noon home to dinner, a
small dinner because of a good supper.  After dinner my wife and I by
coach to St. Clement's Church, to Mrs. Turner's lodgings, hard by, to take
our leaves of her.  She is returning into the North to her children,
where, I perceive, her husband hath clearly got the mastery of her, and
she is likely to spend her days there, which for her sake I am a little
sorry for, though for his it is but fit she should live where he hath a
mind.  Here were several people come to see and take leave of her, she
going to-morrow: among others, my Lady Mordant, which was Betty Turner, a
most homely widow, but young, and pretty rich, and good natured.  Thence,
having promised to write every month to her, we home, and I to my office,
while my wife to get things together for supper.  Dispatching my business
at the office.  Anon come our guests, old Mr. Batelier, and his son and
daughter, Mercer, which was all our company.  We had a good venison pasty
and other good cheer, and as merry as in so good, innocent, and
understanding company I could be.  He is much troubled that wines, laden
by him in France before the late proclamation was out, cannot now be
brought into England, which is so much to his and other merchants' loss.
We sat long at supper and then to talk, and so late parted and so to bed.
This day the Poll Bill was to be passed, and great endeavours used to take
away the Proviso.

12th.  Up, and to the office, where some accounts of Mr. Gawden's were
examined, but I home most of the morning to even some accounts with Sir H.
Cholmly, Mr. Moone, and others one after another.  Sir H. Cholmly did with
grief tell me how the Parliament hath been told plainly that the King hath
been heard to say, that he would dissolve them rather than pass this Bill
with the Proviso; but tells me, that the Proviso is removed, and now
carried that it shall be done by a Bill by itself.  He tells me how the
King hath lately paid about L30,000

     [Two thousand pounds of this sum went to Alderman Edward Bakewell
     for two diamond rings, severally charged L1000 and L900, bought
     March 14th, 1665-66 (Second addenda to Steinman's "Memoir of the
     Duchess of Cleveland," privately printed, 1878, p. 4.).]

to clear debts of my Lady Castlemayne's; and that she and her husband are
parted for ever, upon good terms, never to trouble one another more.  He
says that he hears L400,000 hath gone into the Privypurse since this warr;
and that that hath consumed so much of our money, and makes the King and
Court so mad to be brought to discover it.  He gone, and after him the
rest, I to the office, and at noon to the 'Change, where the very good
newes is just come of our four ships from Smyrna, come safe without convoy
even into the Downes, without seeing any enemy; which is the best, and
indeed only considerable good newes to our Exchange, since the burning of
the City; and it is strange to see how it do cheer up men's hearts.  Here
I saw shops now come to be in this Exchange, and met little Batelier, who
sits here but at L3 per annum, whereas he sat at the other at L100, which
he says he believes will prove of as good account to him now as the other
did at that rent.  From the 'Change to Captain Cocke's, and there, by
agreement, dined, and there was Charles Porter, Temple, Fern, Debasty,
whose bad English and pleasant discourses was exceeding good
entertainment, Matt. Wren, Major Cooper, and myself, mighty merry and
pretty discourse.  They talked for certain, that now the King do follow
Mrs. Stewart wholly, and my Lady Castlemayne not above once a week; that
the Duke of York do not haunt my Lady Denham so much; that she troubles
him with matters of State, being of my Lord Bristoll's faction, and that
he avoids; that she is ill still.  After dinner I away to the office,
where we sat late upon Mr. Gawden's accounts, Sir J. Minnes being gone
home sick.  I late at the office, and then home to supper and to bed,
being mightily troubled with a pain in the small of my back, through cold,
or (which I think most true) my straining last night to get open my plate
chest, in such pain all night I could not turn myself in my bed.  Newes
this day from Brampton, of Mr. Ensum, my sister's sweetheart, being dead:
a clowne.

13th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat.  At noon to the 'Change and
there met Captain Cocke, and had a second time his direction to bespeak
L100 of plate, which I did at Sir R. Viner's, being twelve plates more,
and something else I have to choose.  Thence home to dinner, and there W.
Hewer dined with me, and showed me a Gazette, in April last, which I
wonder should never be remembered by any body, which tells how several
persons were then tried for their lives, and were found guilty of a design
of killing the King and destroying the Government; and as a means to it,
to burn the City; and that the day intended for the plot was the 3rd of
last September.

     [The "Gazette" of April 23rd-26th, 1666, which contains the
     following remarkable passage: "At the Sessions in the Old Bailey,
     John Rathbone, an old army colonel, William Saunders, Henry Tucker,
     Thomas Flint, Thomas Evans, John Myles, Will. Westcot, and John
     Cole, officers or soldiers in the late Rebellion, were indicted for
     conspiring the death of his Majesty and the overthrow of the
     Government.  Having laid their plot and contrivance for the
     surprisal of the Tower, the killing his Grace the Lord General, Sir
     John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir Richard Brown; and
     then to have declared for an equal division of lands, &c.  The
     better to effect this hellish design, the City was to have been
     fired, and the portcullis let down to keep out all assistance; and
     the Horse Guards to have been surprised in the inns where they were
     quartered, several ostlers having been gained for that purpose.  The
     Tower was accordingly viewed, and its surprise ordered by boats over
     the moat, and from thence to scale the wall.  One Alexander, not yet
     taken, had likewise distributed money to these conspirators; and,
     for the carrying on the design more effectually, they were told of a
     Council of the great ones that sat frequently in London, from whom
     issued all orders; which Council received their directions from
     another in Holland, who sat with the States; and that the third of
     September was pitched on for the attempt, as being found by Lilly's
     Almanack, and a scheme erected for that purpose, to be a lucky day,
     a planet then ruling which prognosticated the downfall of Monarchy.
     The evidence against these persons was very full and clear, and they
     were accordingly found guilty of High Treason." See November 10th,
     1666--B.]

And the fire did indeed break out on the 2nd of September, which is very
strange, methinks, and I shall remember it.  At the office all the
afternoon late, and then home to even my accounts in my Tangier book,
which I did to great content in all respects, and joy to my heart, and so
to bed.  This afternoon Sir W. Warren and Mr. Moore, one after another,
walked with me in the garden, and they both tell me that my Lord Sandwich
is called home, and that he do grow more and more in esteem everywhere,
and is better spoken of, which I am mighty glad of, though I know well
enough his deserving the same before, and did foresee that it will come to
it.  In mighty great pain in my back still, but I perceive it changes its
place, and do not trouble me at all in making of water, and that is my
joy, so that I believe it is nothing but a strain, and for these three or
four days I perceive my overworking of my eyes by candlelight do hurt them
as it did the last winter, that by day I am well and do get them right,
but then after candlelight they begin to be sore and run, so that I intend
to get some green spectacles.

14th.  Up, and very well again of my pain in my back, it having been
nothing but cold.  By coach to White Hall, seeing many smokes of the fire
by the way yet, and took up into the coach with me a country gentleman,
who asked me room to go with me, it being dirty--one come out of the North
to see his son, after the burning his house: a merchant.  Here endeavoured
to wait on the Duke of York, but he would not stay from the Parliament.
So I to Westminster Hall, and there met my good friend Mr. Evelyn, and
walked with him a good while, lamenting our condition for want of good
council, and the King's minding of his business and servants.  I out to
the Bell Taverne, and thither comes Doll to me .  . .  ., and after an
hour's stay, away and staid in Westminster Hall till the rising of the
house, having told Mr. Evelyn, and he several others, of my Gazette which
I had about me that mentioned in April last a plot for which several were
condemned of treason at the Old Bayly for many things, and among others
for a design of burning the city on the 3rd of September.  The house sat
till three o'clock, and then up: and I home with Sir Stephen Fox to his
house to dinner, and the Cofferer with us. There I find Sir S. Fox's lady,
a fine woman, and seven the prettiest children of theirs that ever I knew
almost.  A very genteel dinner, and in great state and fashion, and
excellent discourse; and nothing like an old experienced man and a
courtier, and such is the Cofferer Ashburnham. The House have been mighty
hot to-day against the Paper Bill, showing all manner of averseness to
give the King money; which these courtiers do take mighty notice of, and
look upon the others as bad rebells as ever the last were.  But the
courtiers did carry it against those men upon a division of the House, a
great many, that it should be committed; and so it was: which they reckon
good news.  After dinner we three to the Excise Office, and there had long
discourse about our monies, but nothing to satisfaction, that is, to shew
any way of shortening the time which our tallies take up before they
become payable, which is now full two years, which is 20 per, cent. for
all the King's money for interest, and the great disservice of his Majesty
otherwise.  Thence in the evening round by coach home, where I find
Foundes his present, of a fair pair of candlesticks, and half a dozen of
plates come, which cost him full L50, and is a very good present; and here
I met with, sealed up, from Sir H. Cholmly, the lampoone, or the
Mocke-Advice to a Paynter,

     [In a broadside (1680), quoted by Mr. G. T. Drury in his edition of
     Waller's Poems, 1893, satirical reference is made to the fashionable
     form of advice to the painters

               "Each puny brother of the rhyming trade
               At every turn implores the Painter's aid,
               And fondly enamoured of own foul brat
               Cries in an ecstacy, Paint this, draw that."

     The series was continued, for we find "Advice to a Painter upon the
     Defeat of the Rebels in the West and the Execution of the late Duke
     of Monmouth" ("Poems on Affairs of State," vol. ii., p. 148);
     "Advice to a Painter, being a Satire on the French King," &c., 1692,
     and "Advice to a Painter," 1697 ("Poems on Affairs of State," vol.
     ii., p. 428).]

abusing the Duke of York and my Lord Sandwich, Pen, and every body, and
the King himself, in all the matters of the navy and warr.  I am sorry for
my Lord Sandwich's having so great a part in it.  Then to supper and
musique, and to bed.

15th.  Up and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker newly come to town,
from his being at Chatham and Harwich to spy enormities: and at noon I
with him and his lady Williams, to Captain Cocke's, where a good dinner,
and very merry.  Good news to-day upon the Exchange, that our Hamburgh
fleete is got in; and good hopes that we may soon have the like of our
Gottenburgh, and then we shall be well for this winter.  Very merry at
dinner.  And by and by comes in Matt. Wren from the Parliament-house; and
tells us that he and all his party of the House, which is the Court party,
are fools, and have been made so this day by the wise men of the other
side; for, after the Court party had carried it yesterday so powerfully
for the Paper-Bill,

     [It was called "A Bill for raising part of the supply for his
     Majesty by an imposition on Sealed Paper and Parchment"--B.]

yet now it is laid aside wholly, and to be supplied by a land-tax; which
it is true will do well, and will be the sooner finished, which was the
great argument for the doing of it.  But then it shews them fools, that
they would not permit this to have been done six weeks ago, which they
might have had.  And next, they have parted with the Paper Bill, which,
when once begun, might have proved a very good flower in the Crowne, as
any there.  So do really say that they are truly outwitted by the other
side.  Thence away to Sir R. Viner's, and there chose some plate besides
twelve plates which I purpose to have with Captain Cocke's gift of L100,
and so home and there busy late, and then home and to bed.

16th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking with my wife in bed, then up with
great content and to my chamber to set right a picture or two, Lovett
having sent me yesterday Sancta Clara's head varnished, which is very
fine, and now my closet is so full stored, and so fine, as I would never
desire to have it better.  Dined without any strangers with me, which I do
not like on Sundays.  Then after dinner by water to Westminster to see
Mrs. Martin, whom I found up in her chamber and ready to go abroad.  I sat
there with her and her husband and others a pretty while, and then away to
White Hall, and there walked up and down to the Queen's side, and there
saw my dear Lady Castlemayne, who continues admirable, methinks, and I do
not hear but that the King is the same to her still as ever. Anon to
chapel, by the King's closet, and heard a very good anthemne. Then with
Lord Bruncker to Sir W. Coventry's chamber; and there we sat with him and
talked.  He is weary of anything to do, he says, in the Navy.  He tells us
this Committee of Accounts will enquire sharply into our office.  And,
speaking of Sir J. Minnes, he says he will not bear any body's faults but
his own.  He discoursed as bad of Sir W. Batten almost, and cries out upon
the discipline of the fleete, which is lost, and that there is not in any
of the fourth rates and under scarce left one Sea Commander, but all young
gentlemen; and what troubles him, he hears that the gentlemen give out
that in two or three years a Tarpaulin shall not dare to look after being
better than a Boatswain.  Which he is troubled at, and with good reason,
and at this day Sir Robert Holmes is mighty troubled that his brother do
not command in chief, but is commanded by Captain Hannum, who, Sir W.
Coventry says, he believes to be at least of as good blood, is a longer
bred seaman, an elder officer, and an elder commander, but such is Sir R.
Holmes's pride as never to be stopt, he being greatly troubled at my Lord
Bruncker's late discharging all his men and officers but the standing
officers at Chatham, and so are all other Commanders, and a very great cry
hath been to the King from them all in my Lord's absence.  But Sir W.
Coventry do undertake to defend it, and my Lord Bruncker got ground I
believe by it, who is angry at Sir W. Batten's and Sir W. Pen's bad words
concerning it, and I have made it worse by telling him that they refuse to
sign to a paper which he and I signed on Saturday to declare the reason of
his actions, which Sir W. Coventry likes and would have it sent him and he
will sign it, which pleases me well.  So we parted, and I with Lord
Bruncker to Sir P. Neale's chamber, and there sat and talked awhile, Sir
Edward Walker being there, and telling us how he hath lost many fine
rowles of antiquity in heraldry by the late fire, but hath saved the most
of his papers.  Here was also Dr. Wallis, the famous scholar and
mathematician; but he promises little. Left them, and in the dark and cold
home by water, and so to supper and to read and so to bed, my eyes being
better to-day, and I cannot impute it to anything but by my being much in
the dark to-night, for I plainly find that it is only excess of light that
makes my eyes sore.  This after noon I walked with Lord Bruncker into the
Park and there talked of the times, and he do think that the King sees
that he cannot never have much more money or good from this Parliament,
and that therefore he may hereafter dissolve them, that as soon as he has
the money settled he believes a peace will be clapped up, and that there
are overtures of a peace, which if such as the Lord Chancellor can excuse
he will take. For it is the Chancellor's interest, he says, to bring peace
again, for in peace he can do all and command all, but in war he cannot,
because he understands not the nature of the war as to the management
thereof. He tells me he do not believe the Duke of York will go to sea
again, though there are a great many about the King that would be glad of
any occasion to take him out of the world, he standing in their ways; and
seemed to mean the Duke of Monmouth, who spends his time the most
viciously and idly of any man, nor will be fit for any thing; yet bespeaks
as if it were not impossible but the King would own him for his son, and
that there was a marriage between his mother and him; which God forbid
should be if it be not true, nor will the Duke of York easily be gulled in
it.  But this put to our other distractions makes things appear very sad,
and likely to be the occasion of much confusion in a little time, and my
Lord Bruncker seems to say that nothing can help us but the King's making
a peace soon as he hath this money; and thereby putting himself out of
debt, and so becoming a good husband, and then he will neither need this
nor any other Parliament, till he can have one to his mind: for no
Parliament can, as he says, be kept long good, but they will spoil one
another, and that therefore it hath been the practice of kings to tell
Parliaments what he hath for them to do, and give them so long time to do
it in, and no longer.  Harry Kembe, one of our messengers, is lately dead.

17th.  Up, and several people to speak with me, and then comes Mr. Caesar,
and then Goodgroome, and, what with one and the other, nothing but musique
with me this morning, to my great content; and the more, to see that God
Aimighty hath put me into condition to bear the charge of all this.  So
out to the 'Change, and did a little business, and then home, where they
two musicians and Mr. Cooke come to see me, and Mercer to go along with my
wife this afternoon to a play.  To dinner, and then our company all broke
up, and to my chamber to do several things.  Among other things, to write
a letter to my Lord Sandwich, it being one of the burdens upon my mind
that I have not writ to him since he went into Spain, but now I do intend
to give him a brief account of our whole year's actions since he went,
which will make amends.  My wife well home in the evening from the play;
which I was glad of, it being cold and dark, and she having her necklace
of pearl on, and none but Mercer with her.  Spent the evening in fitting
my books, to have the number set upon each, in order to my having an
alphabet of my whole, which will be of great ease to me.  This day Captain
Batters come from sea in his fireship and come to see me, poor man, as his
patron, and a poor painful wretch he is as can be.  After supper to bed.

18th.  Up, and to the office, where I hear the ill news that poor Batters,
that had been born and bred a seaman, and brought up his ship from sea but
yesterday, was, going down from me to his ship, drowned in the Thames,
which is a sad fortune, and do make me afeard, and will do, more than ever
I was.  At noon dined at home, and then by coach to my Lord Bellasses, but
not at home.  So to Westminster Hall, where the Lords are sitting still, I
to see Mrs. Martin, who is very well, and intends to go abroad to-morrow
after her childbed.  She do tell me that this child did come is 'meme jour
that it ought to hazer after my avoir ete con elle before her marid did
venir home  .  .  .  .  Thence to the Swan, and there I sent for Sarah,
and mighty merry we were .  .  .  .  So to Sir Robert Viner's about my
plate, and carried home another dozen of plates, which makes my stock of
plates up 2 1/2 dozen, and at home find Mr. Thomas Andrews, with whom I
staid and talked a little and invited him to dine with me at Christmas,
and then I to the office, and there late doing business, and so home and
to bed.  Sorry for poor Batters.

19th.  Up, and by water down to White Hall, and there with the .Duke of
York did our usual business, but nothing but complaints of want of money
[without] success, and Sir W. Coventry's complaint of the defects of our
office (indeed Sir J. Minnes's) without any amendment, and he tells us so
plainly of the Committee of Parliament's resolution to enquire home into
all our managements that it makes me resolve to be wary, and to do all
things betimes to be ready for them.  Thence going away met Mr. Hingston
the organist (my old acquaintance) in the Court, and I took him to the Dog
Taverne and got him to set me a bass to my "It is decreed," which I think
will go well, but he commends the song not knowing the words, but says the
ayre is good, and believes the words are plainly expressed.  He is of my
mind against having of 8ths unnecessarily in composition.  This did all
please me mightily.  Then to talk of the King's family.  He says many of
the musique are ready to starve, they being five years behindhand for
their wages; nay, Evens, the famous man upon the Harp having not his equal
in the world, did the other day die for mere want, and was fain to be
buried at the almes of the parish, and carried to his grave in the dark at
night without one linke, but that Mr. Hingston met it by chance, and did
give 12d. to buy two or three links.  He says all must come to ruin at
this rate, and I believe him.  Thence I up to the Lords' House to enquire
for Lord Bellasses; and there hear how at a conference this morning
between the two Houses about the business of the Canary Company, my Lord
Buckingham leaning rudely over my Lord Marquis Dorchester, my Lord
Dorchester removed his elbow.  Duke of Buckingham asked him whether he was
uneasy; Dorchester replied, yes, and that he durst not do this were he any
where else: Buckingham replied, yes he would, and that he was a better man
than himself; Dorchester answered that he lyed.  With this Buckingham
struck off his hat, and took him by his periwigg, and pulled it aside, and
held him.  My Lord Chamberlain and others interposed, and, upon coming
into the House, the Lords did order them both to the Tower, whither they
are to go this afternoon.  I down into the Hall, and there the Lieutenant
of the Tower took me with him, and would have me to the Tower to dinner;
where I dined at the head of his table, next his lady,' who is comely and
seeming sober and stately, but very proud and very cunning, or I am
mistaken, and wanton, too.  This day's work will bring the Lieutenant of
the Tower L350.  But a strange, conceited, vain man he is that ever I met
withal, in his own praise, as I have heretofore observed of him.  Thence
home, and upon Tower Hill saw about 3 or 400 seamen get together; and one,
standing upon a pile of bricks, made his sign, with his handkercher, upon
his stick, and called all the rest to him, and several shouts they gave.
This made me afeard; so I got home as fast as I could.  And hearing of no
present hurt did go to Sir Robert Viner's about my plate again, and coming
home do hear of 1000 seamen said in the streets to be in armes.  So in
great fear home, expecting to find a tumult about my house, and was
doubtful of my riches there.  But I thank God I found all well.  But by
and by Sir W. Batten and Sir R. Ford do tell me, that the seamen have been
at some prisons, to release some seamen, and the Duke of Albemarle is in
armes, and all the Guards at the other end of the town; and the Duke of
Albemarle is gone with some forces to Wapping, to quell the seamen; which
is a thing of infinite disgrace to us.  I sat long talking with them; and,
among other things, Sir R. Ford did make me understand how the House of
Commons is a beast not to be understood, it being impossible to know
beforehand the success almost of any small plain thing, there being so
many to think and speak to any business, and they of so uncertain minds
and interests and passions.  He did tell me, and so did Sir W. Batten, how
Sir Allen Brodericke  and Sir Allen Apsly did come drunk the other day
into the House, and did both speak for half an hour together, and could
not be either laughed, or pulled, or bid to sit down and hold their peace,
to the great contempt of the King's servants and cause; which I am grieved
at with all my heart. We were full in discourse of the sad state of our
times, and the horrid shame brought on the King's service by the just
clamours of the poor seamen, and that we must be undone in a little time.
Home full of trouble on these considerations, and, among other things, I
to my chamber, and there to ticket a good part of my books, in order to
the numbering of them for my easy finding them to read as I have occasion.
So to supper and to bed, with my heart full of trouble.

20th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and here among
other things come Captain Cocke, and I did get him to sign me a note for
the L100 to pay for the plate he do present me with, which I am very glad
of.  At noon home to dinner, where was Balty come, who is well again, and
the most recovered in his countenance that ever I did see. Here dined with
me also Mrs. Batters, poor woman! now left a sad widow by the drowning of
her husband the other day.  I pity her, and will do her what kindness I
can; yet I observe something of ill-nature in myself more than should be,
that I am colder towards her in my charity than I should be to one so
painful as he and she have been and full of kindness to their power to my
wife and I.  After dinner out with Balty, setting him down at the Maypole
in the Strand, and then I to my Lord Bellasses, and there spoke with Mr.
Moone about some business, and so away home to my business at the office,
and then home to supper and to bed, after having finished the putting of
little papers upon my books to be numbered hereafter.

21st.  Lay long, and when up find Mrs. Clerk of Greenwich and her daughter
Daniel, their business among other things was a request her daughter was
to make, so I took her into my chamber, and there it was to help her
husband to the command of a little new pleasure boat building, which I
promised to assist in.  And here I had opportunity 'para baiser elle, and
toucher ses mamailles' .  .  .  .  Then to the office, and there did a
little business, and then to the 'Change and did the like. So home to
dinner, and spent all the afternoon in putting some things, pictures
especially, in order, and pasting my Lady Castlemayne's print on a frame,
which I have made handsome, and is a fine piece.  So to the office in the
evening to marshall my papers of accounts presented to the Parliament,
against any future occasion to recur to them, which I did do to my great
content.  So home and did some Tangier work, and so to bed.

22nd.  At the office all the morning, and there come news from Hogg that
our shipp hath brought in a Lubecker to Portsmouth, likely to prove prize,
of deals, which joys us.  At noon home to dinner, and then Sir W. Pen, Sir
R. Ford, and I met at Sir W. Batten's to examine our papers, and have
great hopes to prove her prize, and Sir R. Ford I find a mighty
yare--[Quick or ready, a naval term frequently used by Shakespeare.]--man
in this business, making exceeding good observations from the papers on
our behalf.  Hereupon concluded what to write to Hogg and Middleton, which
I did, and also with Mr. Oviatt (Sir R. Ford's son, who is to be our
solicitor), to fee some counsel in the Admiralty, but none in town.  So
home again, and after writing letters by the post, I with all my clerks
and Carcasse and Whitfield to the ticket-office, there to be informed in
the method and disorder of the office, which I find infinite great, of
infinite concernment to be mended, and did spend till 12 at night to my
great satisfaction, it being a point of our office I was wholly
unacquainted in.  So with great content home and to bed.

