Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


Amos Huntingdon

By Reverend T.P. Wilson
________________________________________________________________________
This a very well written and interesting story, well up to Wilson's
best.  It deals with the various moral issues that beset a rather
well-off family.  The old father makes his two sons an allowance, which
one of them, Amos, manages well, while the other does not.  Stability in
the family is provided by an old maiden aunt, Kate, the sister of the
old man.  There was also a daughter, Julia, who had married a
ne'er-do-well, and who had been shown the door on that account by the
old father, but who was still of great concern to the two young men,
particularly to Amos, as she had small children, who were so destitute
that Amos was spending all his allowance in looking after his sister and
her children, thus making it impossible for him to lend his brother any
money.

Because there are not many people in the story, and because their
characters are so well-described, the reader is drawn into the family,
and follows their concerns with interest.  It makes a good audiobook of
about eleven hours duration. NH
________________________________________________________________________

AMOS HUNTINGDON

BY REVEREND T.P. WILSON


CHAPTER ONE.

BRAVELY DONE.

"Help! help! holloa there!  Master Walter--Mr Amos--Jim--Harry--quick--
bring us a light!--lend a hand here!"  Such were the words which
suddenly broke the stillness of a dark October night, and roused up the
household of Mr Walter Huntingdon, a country gentleman living on his
own estate in Derbyshire.  The voice was the coachman's, and came
apparently from somewhere near the drive-gate, which was about a couple
of hundred yards from the front door of the house.  The evening had been
dark and stormy; and it was in a lull of the tempest that the ominous
sounds of distress reached the ears of the inmates of Flixworth Manor.

In a few moments all was bustle and excitement--lights flashing; feet
hurrying; voices shouting; and then a rush for the scene of danger and
trouble.

Outside the grounds in which the Manor-house stood were extensive grass
lands on either side of the public road.  In the field nearest to the
drive-gate, and on the left as you entered it, was a deep and
precipitous chalk-pit, now disused.  This pit was some little distance
from the road itself, and was not noticeable by persons unacquainted
with the locality.  It had been there no one knew how long, and was a
favourite resort of adventurous children, a footpath to the village
passing not far from its edge.  Towards this chalk-pit the startled
party of rescue from the house hurried with one consent, several of them
carrying lanterns or extemporised torches.

Ten o'clock was striking in the distant church-tower as they gathered
round the spot from which the cries for help had proceeded.  A terrible
sight was dimly revealed to them in the uncertain glare cast upon it by
the lights which they carried.  Hanging over the edge of the chalk-pit
was the squire's carriage.  One horse had broken away from the traces,
but the other was struggling violently, and seemed likely, in its
plungings, to force the carriage still further over the precipitous side
of the pit.  The coachman, who had managed to spring unharmed from the
box, was doing his best to restrain the violence of the terrified
animal, but with only partial success; while the situation of Mr
Huntingdon himself and of his maiden sister, who were inside the
carriage, was perilous and distressing in the extreme.

The accident had been caused by a strange and savage dog suddenly
springing at the horses' heads as the carriage was nearing the outer
gate.  The night was very dark, and the horses, which were young and
full of spirit, being startled by the unexpected attack of the dog,
which belonged to some passing traveller, sprang violently out of the
road, and, easily crashing through the wooden fence, which happened to
be unusually weak just at that part, carried the carriage along with
them to the very edge of the chalk-pit, spite of all the efforts of the
coachman to hold them in; so that when the people of the Manor-house
came to the rescue, they found the carriage and its occupants in a most
critical position.

Not a moment was to be lost.  Jim, the stable-boy, was quickly by the
side of the coachman, who was almost exhausted with his efforts to curb
the terrified horse, the animal becoming still more excited by the flare
of the lights and the rush of the newcomers.

"Cut the traces, man! cut the traces!" cried Harry the butler, as he
gained the spot.

"Do nothing of the sort," said a voice close by him.  "Don't you see
that there may be nothing to hold the carriage up, if you cut the
traces? it may fall sheer over into the chalk-pit.--Steady, Beauty!
steady, poor Beauty!"  These last words came from a young man who
evidently had authority over the servants, and spoke calmly but firmly,
at the same time patting and soothing the terror-stricken animal, which,
though still trembling in every limb, had ceased its frantic plungings.

"William," continued the same speaker, addressing the coachman, "keep
her still, if you can, till we have got my father and aunt out."

Just at that moment a boy of about seventeen years of age sprang on to
the front wheel, which was a little tilted on one side, and with a
violent wrench opened the carriage-door.  "Father, dear father," he
cried, "are you there? are you hurt?"

For a moment no reply was made; then in a stifled voice came the words,
"Save your aunt, my dear boy, save your aunt!"

Miss Huntingdon, who was nearest the door, and had contrived to cling to
a stout strap at the side of it, was now dragged with difficulty, by the
joint efforts of her nephew and the butler, out on to the firm ground.
Walter, her young deliverer, then sprang back to extricate his father.
"Give me your hand, father," he cried, as he stooped down into the
carriage, which was now creaking and swaying rather ominously.  "A light
here, Harry--Jim!" he continued.  It was plain that there was no time
for delay, as the vehicle seemed to be settling down more and more in
the direction of the chasm over which it hung.  A light was quickly
brought, and Mr Huntingdon was released at last from his trying and
painful durance; but not without considerable difficulty, as he had been
much bruised, and almost stunned, by being dashed against the undermost
door, and by his poor sister having been thrown violently on him, when
the carriage had turned suddenly on its side.

"Hip, hip, hurrah!" shouted Walter, springing on to the hind wheel;
"`all's well that ends well.'  No bones broken I hope, dear father, dear
aunt."

"Have a care, Master Walter," cried the coachman, who had now managed,
with the elder son's help, to release the frightened horse from the
traces, and had given it in charge to the stable-boy,--"have a care, or
you'll be over into the chalk-pit, carriage and all."

"All right, William," cried the boy; "you look after Beauty, and I'll
look after myself."  So saying, he jumped down, making the carriage rock
as he sprang to the ground.

And now, while Miss Huntingdon, who had suffered nothing more serious
than a severe shaking, was being led to the house by her elder nephew
and the female servants who had joined the rescuing party, Mr
Huntingdon, having made a careful inspection of the position of his
carriage, found that it was in no danger of falling to the bottom of the
chalk-pit, as a stout tree, which sprang from the side of the pit, close
to the top, had become entangled in the undermost hind wheel, and would
form a sufficient support till the proper means of drawing the vehicle
fully on to the level ground could be used on the morrow.  All parties
then betook themselves slowly to the Manor-house.

In the kitchen, William the coachman was, of course, the great centre of
attraction to a large gathering of domestics, and of neighbours also,
who soon came flocking in, spite of the lateness of the hour, to get an
authentic version of the accident, which, snowball-like, would, ere noon
next day, get rolled up into gigantic proportions, as it made its way
through many mouths to the farther end of the parish.

In the drawing-room of the Manor-house a sympathising group gathered
round Mr Huntingdon and his sister, eager to know if either were
seriously the worse for the alarming termination to their journey.
Happily, both had escaped without damage of any consequence, so that
before they retired to rest they were able, as they drew round the
cheery fire, and heard the stormy wind raging without, to talk over the
perilous adventure with mutual congratulations at its happy termination,
and with thankfulness that the travellers were under the shelter of the
Manor roof, instead of being exposed to the rough blasts of the storm,
as they might still have been had the mishap occurred further from home.
"Walter, my boy," exclaimed Mr Huntingdon, stretching out his hand to
his younger son, "it was bravely done.  If it had not been for you, we
might have been hanging over the mouth of the chalk-pit yet--or,
perhaps, been down at the bottom.  You are a lad after your father's own
heart,--good old-fashioned English pluck and courage; there's nothing I
admire so much."  As he said these words, his eye glanced for a moment
at his eldest son Amos, who was standing at the outside of the group, as
though he felt that the older brother had no claim on his regard on the
score of courage.  The young man coloured slightly, but made no remark.
He might, had he so pleased, have put in his claim for loving notice, on
the ground of presence of mind in stilling the plunging horse,--presence
of mind, which commonly contributes more to success and deliverance in
an emergency than impulsive and impetuous courage; but he was not one to
assert himself, and the coachman and stable-boy, who knew the part he
had taken, were not present to speak a word for him.  So his younger
brother Walter got the praise, and was looked upon as the hero of the
adventure.


CHAPTER TWO.

UNDER A CLOUD.

Mr Huntingdon was a country gentleman of good fortune and popular
manners, warm in his temper, hasty in his speech, upright in his
transactions, and liberal in his dealings.  No man could make a better
speech, when he had those to address who substantially agreed with him;
while in ordinary conversation he generally succeeded in silencing an
opponent, though, perhaps, more by the vehemence of his utterances than
by the cogency of his reasonings.  He had a considerable knowledge of
field-sports and farming, rather less of literature, and less still of
character.  Naturally, he had a high opinion of his own judgment, in
which opinion his dependants agreed with him before his face, but
differed from it behind his back.  However, every one allowed that he
was a worthy man, a good landlord, a kind master, and a faithful friend.
A cloud, however, rested on his home.

He had married early, and had made, in the estimation of his friends and
of the county generally, an excellent choice of a wife in the person of
the eldest daughter of a neighbouring squire.  The marriage was
apparently a very happy one; for the bride brought her husband a fair
face, a loving heart, and a good fortune, and entertained his friends
with due courtesy and cordiality.  Moreover, she neither thwarted his
tastes nor squandered his money; while he, on his part, pursued his
hunting, shooting, and fishing, and his occasional magisterial duties,
with due consideration for his wife's domestic and social engagements,
so that their married life ran its course with as little friction or
creaking as could reasonably be expected.  Then there came, in due time,
the children: first, a little girl, the object of her mother's
passionate love, and as dear to her father as the mistake of her not
having been a boy would allow her to be; then, after an interval of
three years, came a son.

Now it so happened that at the time of this son's birth there was
residing as a guest at the Manor-house a middle-aged gentleman reputed
to be very rich.  His name was Amos Sutterby.  Mr Huntingdon had met
him abroad in the second year after his marriage when taking a tour in
Switzerland with his wife.  Mr Sutterby was an old bachelor, rather
bluff in his manners, but evidently in easy circumstances.  The
Huntingdons and himself had met on the Rigi, and the squire had taken to
him at once--in a great measure, it may be, because Mr Amos was a good
listener, and was very ready to ask Mr Huntingdon's opinion and advice.
So the squire gave his new acquaintance a general invitation to
Flixworth Manor, which the other cordially accepted: and in a little
while this acquaintanceship ripened into a steady friendship, though by
no means entirely to the satisfaction of Mrs Huntingdon.  The result,
however, was that Mr Sutterby spent several weeks of every year, at the
close of the summer and beginning of the autumn, at the Manor, and was
the constant companion of the squire in his field-sports.  Mr
Huntingdon had taken care to satisfy himself that his new friend, though
somewhat of an oddity, was a man of substance.  True, he was only living
in bachelor style, and possessed no landed property; but then he was
able at all times to command ready money, and was reputed by persons who
had long known him to be the holder of a large amount in the funds, an
impression which seemed to be justified by some elegant and costly
presents of which Mr Sutterby begged his friend's acceptance, as a
token of his esteem and a mark of his appreciation of that kind
hospitality which, as he said, an eccentric old bachelor living in
lodgings in London was unable to return in kind.

Now it was, as has been said, during a visit of Mr Sutterby to
Flixworth Manor that a son and heir was given to the Huntingdons.  Of
course there were great rejoicings, and no one seemed more glad than Mr
Sutterby; and when he was asked if he would stand godfather to the
child, he declared that nothing could please him more.  So the
christening day was fixed, and now the question of a name for the child
was discussed, as father, mother, and their guest were sitting round the
fire after dinner on the first day of Mrs Huntingdon's appearing
downstairs.

"Of course he must be `Walter,' after yourself," said the lady.

"Unless you would like to call him `Amos,' after his godfather," said
the squire, laughing.

"Capital!" exclaimed Mr Sutterby, with a roar of merriment.  "In that
case, of course, I shall feel it nothing less than my duty to make him
my heir."

Now these words of their guest, though spoken just on the spur of the
moment, and probably only in jest, made an impression on the mind of Mr
Huntingdon which he could not get rid of.  Why should not his friend
have really meant what he said?  He was rich, and an old bachelor, and
had no near relations, so far as the squire knew; and though Mr
Huntingdon's estate and fortune were large, yet his open-house way of
living left him little to spare at the year's end, so that Mr
Sutterby's money would be very acceptable, should he see fit to leave it
to his godson.  He therefore represented this view of the matter to his
wife in private; but she would not hear of such a name as Amos being
given to her son.

"Better lose a thousand fortunes, and quarrel with every friend they had
or might have, rather than bring such an odious combination as `Amos
Huntingdon' into the family genealogy."  The squire's temper, however,
was roused by this opposition, and he wound up the only sharp
altercation which had occurred between himself and his wife since their
marriage by a vehement asseveration that "Amos" and nothing but "Amos"
should be the Christian name of his first-born son.

Sorely against her will, his wife was obliged to yield; for though Mr
Huntingdon had his own secret regrets that he had gone so far, yet he
was one of those who, wanting that true greatness of character which
leads its possessor to change a hastily adopted decision for one
resulting from a maturer judgment, abide by what they have said simply
because they have said it, and thus mistake obstinacy for a right-minded
firmness.  "Amos," therefore, was the name given, considerably to the
satisfaction of Mr Sutterby, who made his godson handsome presents from
time to time, and often spoke of him playfully as "my godson and heir."
His mother, however, never forgave his name, and it was clear to all
that the poor child himself had but a cold place in that mother's heart.

What wonder, then, that the boy grew up shy and reserved, dreading the
sound of his own name, and shrinking within himself; for seldom was he
gladdened by a father's or mother's smile.  Added to this, he was not
naturally of a lively temperament, and so never exhibited those
boisterous spirits which might have won for him in a measure his
father's heart.  So he was brought up with all due care, as was suitable
for an eldest son, and was sent to a public school as soon as he could
be safely trusted from home.  Indeed, all his wants were supplied but
one, and that one was what his heart craved with a painful intensity--
love.  They gave him no real love, at least none that came like sunshine
to his spirit.  Such love as they did measure out to him was rather like
the feeble sunlight on a cloudy winter day, that seems to chill as it
scarcely struggles through the mists that almost quench it.

Such was Amos Huntingdon in his early childhood.  But the cloud grew
darker over him when he had reached the age of ten.  It was then that
the news came one morning that Mr Sutterby had died, leaving no will,
for indeed he had nothing to bequeath except a few small personal
effects, which went to some distant cousin.  The fact was that, having
an eye to his own personal comfort and well-doing, he had sunk a nice
little fortune, which he had inherited from a maiden aunt, in a handsome
annuity.  Thus he was able to travel and spend his money like a man of
wealth, and was very glad of the opportunity of making Mr Huntingdon's
acquaintance, which gave him access to a house where he could spend a
portion of every year amidst bountiful hospitality and in good society.
He had no deliberate intention of deceiving Mr Huntingdon about his
son, but having once given him the impression that he would leave that
son a fortune, he did not trouble himself to undeceive his friend on the
subject; but being a man in whom self-interest spoke with a louder voice
than conscience, he was not sorry to find the conviction strongly rooted
in the squire's mind that Amos was to be his godfather's heir, as this
conviction evidently added to the warmth of the welcome with which he
was received at the Manor-house whenever he chose to take up his
quarters there.  And as he had always carefully avoided making any
definite statement of his intentions, and had only thrown out hints from
time to time, which might be either serious or playful, he was content
that a state of things should continue which brought considerable
satisfaction to himself, and could not deprive the squire or his son of
anything to which either had a legal claim.  The disgust, however, of
Mr Huntingdon, when he found out how he had, as he considered it, been
taken advantage of and imposed upon, was intense in the extreme.  No one
dared refer to Mr Sutterby in his presence, while the very name of the
poor boy Amos was scarcely ever spoken by him except in a tone of
bitterness; and even his mother looked forward to his holidays with more
of apprehension than rejoicing.

There was one, however, who felt for that desolate-hearted child, and
loved him with a mother's tenderness.  This was his aunt, Miss
Huntingdon, his father's unmarried and only sister.  Half his holidays
would be spent at her house; and oh, what happy days they were for him!
Happy, too, at last in the brightest and fullest sense; for that loving
friend was privileged to lead her nephew gently to Him who says to the
shy schoolboy, as much as to the mature man, in his sorrows, "Come unto
me, all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest."

In the meanwhile, when Amos was five years old, another son was born at
Flixworth Manor.  The baby was christened Walter, and nearly all the
love that was the share of the elder brother was poured by both father
and mother on the younger son.  Years rolled on, and when our story
opens Amos was twenty-two years of age.  He had passed creditably
through the university course at Oxford, but had not settled down to any
profession.  Walter was seventeen; his father's delight and constant
companion in his holidays; full of life, energy, and fun, with an
unlimited good opinion of himself, and a very limited good opinion of
his brother; while all around who knew him only a little were loud in
his praises, which were not, however, echoed by those who knew him more
thoroughly.  At present he was remaining at home, after completing his
school education, neither his father nor himself being able to make up
their minds as to the sphere in which his abilities would shine the
best.

And where was his sister, the eldest of the three, who was now twenty-
five years of age?  Alas! she had grievously disappointed the hopes of
both father and mother, having clandestinely married, when not yet
arrived at womanhood, a man altogether beneath her in position.  From
the day of that marriage Mr Huntingdon's heart and house were closed
against her.  Not so the heart of her mother; but that mother pleaded
with her husband in vain for a reconciliation, for permission even to
have a single meeting with her erring child.  And so the poor mother's
mind came under partial eclipse, and herself had been some years away
from home under private superintendence, when the accident above
recorded occurred to her husband and his sister.


CHAPTER THREE.

A TALK AT THE BREAKFAST-TABLE.

The morning after the accident, Miss Huntingdon, who was now keeping her
brother's house, and had been returning with him the night before after
a visit to a friend, appeared as usual at the breakfast-table, rather to
Mr Huntingdon's surprise.

"My dear Kate," he said, "I hardly expected to see you at breakfast,
after your fright, and shaking, and bruising.  Most ladies would have
spent the morning in bed; but I am delighted to see you, and take it for
granted that you are not seriously the worse for the mishap."

"Thank you, dear Walter," was her reply; "I cannot say that I feel very
brilliant this morning, but I thought it would be kinder in me to show
myself, and so relieve you from all anxiety, as I have been mercifully
preserved from anything worse than a severe shaking, the effects of
which will wear off in a day or two, I have no doubt."

"Well, Kate, I must say it's just like yourself, never thinking of your
own feelings when you can save other people's.  Why, you are almost as
brave as our hero Walter, who risked his own neck to get us out of our
trouble last night.--Ah! here he comes, and Amos after him.  Well,
that's perhaps as it should be--honour to whom honour is due."

A cloud rested on Miss Huntingdon's face as she heard these last words,
and it was deepened as she observed a smile of evident exultation on the
countenance of her younger nephew, as he glanced at the flushed face of
his elder brother.  But now all seated themselves at the table, and the
previous evening's disaster was the all-absorbing topic of conversation.

"Well," said the squire, "things might have been worse, no doubt, though
it may be some time before the horses will get over their fright, and
the carriage must go to the coachmaker's at once.--By-the-by, Harry,"
speaking to the butler, who was waiting at table, "just tell James, when
you have cleared away breakfast, to see to that fence at once.  It must
be made a good substantial job of, or we shall have broken bones, and
broken necks too, perhaps, one of these days."

"I hope, Walter," said his sister, "the horses were not seriously
injured."

"No, I think not," was his reply; "nothing very much to speak of.
Charlie has cut one of his hind legs rather badly,--that must have been
when he flung out and broke away; but Beauty hasn't got a scratch, I'm
pleased to say, and seems all right."

"And yourself, Walter?"

"Oh, I'm all safe and sound, except a few bruises and a bit of a
sprained wrist.--And now, my boy, Walter, I must thank you once more for
your courage and spirit.  But for you, your aunt and myself might have
been lying at the bottom of the chalk-pit, instead of sitting here at
the breakfast-table."

Walter laughed his thanks for the praise, declaring that he exceedingly
enjoyed getting his father and aunt on to dry land, only he was sorry
for the carriage and horses.  But here the butler--who was an old and
privileged servant in the family, and therefore considered himself at
liberty to offer occasionally a remark when anything was discussed at
table in which he was personally interested--interrupted.

"If you please, sir, I think Master Amos hasn't had his share of the
praise.  'Twas him as wouldn't let us cut the traces, and then stood by
Beauty and kept her still.  I don't know where you'd have been, sir, nor
Miss Huntingdon neither, if it hadn't been for Master Amos's presence of
mind."

"Ah, well, perhaps so," said his master, not best pleased with the
remark; while Amos turned red, and motioned to the butler to keep
silent.  "Presence of mind is a very useful thing in its way, no doubt;
but give me good manly courage,--there's nothing like that, to my
mind.--What do _you_ say, Kate?"

"Well, Walter," replied his sister slowly and gravely, "I am afraid I
can hardly quite agree with you there.  Not that I wish to take away any
of the credit which is undoubtedly due to Walter.  I am sure we are all
deeply indebted to him; and yet I cannot but feel that we are equally
indebted to Amos's presence of mind."

"Oh, give him his due, by all means," said the squire, a little nettled
at his sister's remark; "but, after all, good old English courage for
me.  But, of course, as a woman, you naturally don't value courage as we
men do."

"Do you think not, Walter?  Perhaps some of us do not admire courage
quite in the same way, or the same sort of courage most; but I think
there can be no one of right feeling, either man or woman, who does not
admire real courage."

"I don't know what you mean, Kate, about `the same sort of courage.'
Courage is courage, I suppose, pretty much the same in everybody who has
it."

"I was thinking of moral courage," replied the other quietly; "and that
often goes with presence of mind."

"Moral courage! moral courage!  I don't understand you," said her
brother impatiently.  "What do you mean by moral courage?"

"Well, dear brother, I don't want to vex you; I was only replying to
your question.  I admire natural courage, however it is shown, but I
admire moral courage most."

"Well, but you have not told me what you mean by moral courage."

"I will try and explain myself then.  Moral courage, as I understand it,
is shown when a person has the bravery and strength of character to act
from principle, when doing so may subject him, and he knows it, to
misunderstanding, misrepresentation, opposition, ridicule, or
persecution."

The squire was silent for a moment, and fidgeted on his chair.  Amos
coloured and cast down his eyes; while his brother looked up at his aunt
with an expression on his face of mingled annoyance and defiance.  Then
Mr Huntingdon asked, "Well, but what's to hinder a person having both
what I should call old-fashioned courage and your moral courage at the
same time?"

"Nothing to hinder it, necessarily," replied Miss Huntingdon.  "Very
commonly, however, they do not go together; or perhaps I ought rather to
say, that while persons who have moral courage often have natural
courage too, a great many persons who have natural courage have no moral
courage."

"You mean, aunt, I suppose," said her nephew Walter, rather
sarcastically, "that the one's all `dash' and the other all `duty.'"

"Something of the kind, Walter," replied his aunt.  "The one acts upon a
sudden impulse, or on the spur of the moment, or from natural spirit;
the other acts steadily, and from deliberate conviction."

"Can you give us an example, aunt?" asked the boy, but now with more of
respect and less of irritation in his manner.

"Yes, I can," she replied; "and I will do so if you like, and my example
shall be that of one who combined both natural and moral courage.  My
moral hero is Christopher Columbus."

"A regular brick of a man, I allow; but, dear aunt, pray go on."

"Well, then, I have always had a special admiration for Columbus because
of his noble and unwavering moral courage.  Just think of what he had to
contend with.  It was enough to daunt the stoutest heart and wear out
the most enduring patience.  Convinced that somewhere across the ocean
to the west there must be a new and undiscovered world, and that it
would be the most glorious of enterprises to find that new world and
plant the standard of the Cross among its people, he never wavered in
his one all-absorbing purpose of voyaging to those unknown shores and
winning them for Christ.  And yet, from the very first, he met with
every possible discouragement, and had obstacle upon obstacle piled up
in his path.  He was laughed to scorn as a half-mad enthusiast;
denounced as a blasphemer and gainsayer of Scripture truth; cried down
as an ignoramus, unworthy of the slightest attention from men of
science; tantalised by half promises; wearied by vexatious delays: and
yet never did his courage fail nor his purpose waver.  At last, after
years of hope deferred and anxieties which made him grey while still in
the prime of life, he was permitted to set sail on what was generally
believed to be a desperate crusade, with no probable issue but death.
And just picture him to yourself, Walter, as he set out on that voyage
amidst the sullen murmurs and tears of the people.  His ships were three
`caravels,' as they were called,--that is, something the same as our
coasting colliers, or barges,--and there was no deck in two of them.
Besides, they were crazy, leaky, and scarcely seaworthy; and the crews
numbered only one hundred and twenty men, most of them pressed, and all
hating the service.  Nevertheless, he ventured with these into an ocean
without any known shore; and on he went with one fixed, unalterable
purpose, and that was to sail westward, westward, westward till he came
to land.  Days and weeks went by, but no land was seen.  Provisions ran
short, and every day's course made return home more hopeless.  But still
his mind never changed; still he plunged on across that trackless waste
of waters.  The men mutinied--and one can hardly blame them; but he
subdued them by his force of character,--they saw in his eye that which
told them that their leader was no common man, but one who would die
rather than abandon his marvellous enterprise.  And you remember the
end?  The very day after the mutiny, a branch of thorn with berries on
it floats by them.  They are all excitement.  Then a small board
appears; then a rudely-carved stick; then at night Columbus sees a
light, and next day lands on the shores of his new world, after a voyage
of more than two months over seas hitherto unexplored by man, and in
vessels which nothing but a special providence could have kept from
foundering in the mighty waters.  The man who could carry out such a
purpose in the teeth of such overwhelming opposition, discouragement,
and difficulty, may well claim our admiration for courage of the highest
and noblest order."

No one spoke for a moment, and then Mr Huntingdon said, "Well, Kate,
Columbus was a brave man, no doubt, and deserves the best you can say of
him; and I think I see what you mean, from his case, about the greatness
and superiority of moral courage."

"I am glad, Walter, that I have satisfied you on that point," was her
reply.  "You see there was no sudden excitement to call out or sustain
his courage.  It was the bravery of principle, not of mere impulse.  It
was so grand because it stood the strain, a daily-increasing strain, of
troubles, trials, and hindrances, which kept multiplying in front of him
every day and hour as he pressed forward; and it never for a moment gave
way under that strain."

"It was grand indeed, aunt," said Walter.  You are with me, and we are
going to see dear papa. Your sorrow is ended. Oh! my darling Danusia, I
searched for you and rescued you. You are no more in the power of
the Germans.

Be not afraid. We shall soon be at Spychow. You were ill, but the Lord
Jesus had mercy upon you.
There was so much sorrow, so many tears!

Dear Danusia. Now, everything is well.

There is nothing but happiness for you.

Ah I how much did I search for you!... How far did I wander!... Oh!
Mighty God!... Oh!..."
He sighed deeply and groaned as though he had thrown off the last
heavy burden of suffering from his breast.

Danusia lay quiet trying to recall something to her mind and reflecting
upon something.

Then finally she asked:

"So, you cared for me?"
Two tears which were gathering in her eyes slowly rolled down her
cheeks upon the pillow.

"I, not care for you?"

cried Zbyszko.

There was something more powerful in that smothered exclamation than in
the most vehement protestations and oaths, because he had always loved
her with his whole soul.

And from the moment when he had recovered her she had become more dear to
him than the whole world.

Silence reigned again. The distant singing of the mowing peasant ceased
and he began to whet his scythe again.

Danusia's lips moved again, but with such a low whisper that Zbyszko
could not hear it.

He therefore bent over her and asked:

"What do you say, darling?"
But she repeated:

"Sweet smelling blossoms."
"Because we are near the meadows," he replied. "But we shall soon proceed
and go to dear papa, whom we have also rescued from captivity, and
you shall be mine even unto death.

Do you hear me well? Do you understand me?"
Then he suddenly became alarmed, for he observed that her face was gradually
paling and was thickly covered with perspiration.

"What ails you?" he asked in great alarm.

And he felt his hair bristling and frost creeping through his bones.

"What ails you, tell me," he repeated.

"It darkens," she whispered.

"It darkens? Why, the sun shines and you say: 'it darkens'?" he said
with a suppressed voice. "Up to this time you have spoken rationally.
In God's name I beseech you, speak, even if it is only one word."

She still moved her lips, but she was unable even to whisper. Zbyszko
guessed that she tried to pronounce his name and that she called
him.
Immediately afterward, her emaciated hands began to twitch and
flutter upon the rug covering her. That lasted only for a moment.
No doubt was left now that she had expired.
Horrified and in despair, Zbyszko began to beg her, as though his
entreaties could avail:
"Danuska! Oh, merciful Jesus!... Only wait till we come to Spychow!
Wait!
Wait, I beseech you! Oh, Jesus! Jesus! Jesus!"
The appeal awoke the sleeping women, and the men who were stretched
with the horses upon the lawn came running. They guessed at a glance
what had happened; they knelt down and began loudly to recite the
litany.
The breeze ceased, even the leaves upon the pear-tree did not
rustle.
Only the voices reciting the litany sounded throughout that profound
silence.
Danusia opened her eyes once more at the very end of the litany,
as though she wished to look upon Zbyszko and upon the sunlit world
for the last time. Then she lapsed into an everlasting sleep"Well, my dear boy, I hope you will be able to please me too, and,
better still, to please God."  She spoke gently and almost sadly as she
said these words, kissing at the same time Walter's fair brow.

"I'm afraid, auntie," was the boy's reply, "I don't think much about
that.  But Amos does, I know; and though I laugh at him sometimes, yet I
respect him for all that, and I believe he will turn out the true hero
after all."


CHAPTER FOUR.

THE CRIPPLED HORSE.

Nature and circumstances had produced widely differing characters in the
two brothers.  Walter, forward enough by natural temperament, and ready
to assert himself on all occasions, was brought more forward still and
encouraged in self-esteem and self-indulgence, by the injudicious
fondness of both his parents.  Handsome in person, with a merry smile
and a ripple of joyousness rarely absent from his bright face, he was
the favourite of all guests at his father's house, and a sharer in their
field-sports and pastimes.  That his father and mother loved him better
than they loved Amos it was impossible for him not to see; and, as he
grew to mature boyhood, a feeling of envy, when he heard both parents
regret that himself was not their heir, drew his heart further and
further from his elder brother, and led him to exhibit what he
considered his superiority to him as ostentatiously as possible, that
all men might see what a mistake Nature had made in the order of time in
which she had introduced the two sons into the family.  Not that Walter
really hated his brother; he would have been shocked to admit to himself
the faintest shadow of such a feeling, for he was naturally generous and
of warm affections; but he clearly looked upon his elder brother as
decidedly in his way and in the wrong place, and often made a butt of
him, considering it quite fair to play off his sarcasms and jokes on one
who had stolen a march upon him by coming into the world before him as
heir of the family estate.  And now that their mother--who had made no
secret of her preference of Walter to her elder son--was removed from
them, the cords of Mr Huntingdon's affections were wound tighter than
ever round his younger son, in whom he could scarce see a fault, however
glaringly visible it might be to others; while poor Amos's shortcomings
received the severest censure, and his weaknesses were visited on him as
sins.  No wonder, then, that, spite of the difference in their ages and
order of birth, Walter Huntingdon looked upon himself as a colossal
figure in the household, and on his poor brother as a cipher.

On the other hand, Amos, if he had been of a similar temperament to his
brother, would have been inevitably more or less cowed and driven into
himself by the circumstances which surrounded him, and the treatment
which he undeservedly received at the hands of his parents and younger
brother.  Being, however, naturally of a shy and nervous disposition, he
would have been completely crushed under the burden of heartless
neglect, and his heart frozen up by the withholding of a father's and
mother's love, had it not been for the gentle and deep affection of his
aunt, Miss Huntingdon, who was privileged to lead that poor, desolate,
craving heart to Him whose special office it is to pour a heavenly balm
into the wounded spirit.  In herself, too, he found a source of comfort
from her pitying love, which in a measure took the place of that which
his nearest ought to have given him, but did not.  And so, as boy and
young man, Amos Huntingdon learned, under the severe discipline of his
earthly home, lessons which were moulding his character to a nobility
which few suspected, who, gazing on that timid, shrinking youth, went on
their way with a glance or shrug of pity.  But so it was.

Amos had formed a mighty purpose; it was to be the one object of his
earthly life, to which everything was to bend till he had accomplished
it.  But who would have thought of such an iron resolution of will in a
breast like that poor boy's?  For to him an ordinary conversation was a
trial, and to speak in company an effort, though it was but to answer a
simple question.  If a stranger asked his opinion, a nervous blush
covered his face as he forced out a reply.  The solitude which others
found irksome had special charms for him.  With one person only in his
own home did he feel really at ease,--that person was his aunt, for he
believed that she in a measure really understood and sympathised with
him.  And yet that shy, nervous, retiring young man, down-trodden and
repulsed as he was, was possessed by one grand and all-absorbing
purpose: it was this, to bring back his sister to her father's home
forgiven, and his mother to that same home with the cloud removed from
her mind and spirit.

That both these objects _might_ be accomplished he was firmly persuaded.
At the same time, he was fully aware that to every one else who knew
his father and the circumstances which had led to the sad estrangement
of the daughter and removal of the mother, such a restoration as he
contemplated bringing about would appear absolutely hopeless.  Yet he
himself had no doubts on the subject.  The conviction that his purpose
might and would be accomplished was stamped into his soul as by an
indelible brand.  He was perfectly sure that every hindrance could be
removed, though _how_ he could not tell.  But there stood up this
conviction ever facing him, ever beckoning him on, as though a messenger
from an unseen world.  Not that he was ignorant of nor underrated the
magnitude of the obstacles in his way.  He knew and felt most
oppressively that everything almost was against him.  The very thought
of speaking to his father on the subject made a chill shudder creep over
him.  To move a single step in the direction of the attainment of his
object required an effort from which his retiring nature shrank as if
stung by a spark of white heat.  The opposition, direct or indirect, of
those nearest to him was terrible even to contemplate, and was magnified
while yet at a distance through the haze of his morbid sensitiveness.
Yet his conviction and purpose remained unshaken.  He was, moreover,
fully aware that neither mother nor sister had any deep affection for
him, and that, should he gain the end he had set before him, he might
get no nearer to their hearts than the place he now occupied.  It
mattered not; he had devoted himself to his great object as to a work of
holy self-denial and labour of love, and from the pursuit of that object
nothing should move him, but onward he would struggle towards its
attainment, with the steady determination which would crush through
hindrances and obstacles by the weight of its tremendous earnestness.

This purpose had hovered before his thoughts in dim outline while he was
yet a boy, and had at length assumed its full and clear proportions
while he was at Oxford.  There it was that he became acquainted with a
Christian young man who, pitying his loneliness and appreciating his
character, had sought and by degrees obtained his friendship, and, in a
measure, his confidence, as far as he was able to give it.  To his
surprise Amos discovered that his new friend's father was the physician
under whose charge and in whose house his own mother, Mrs Huntingdon,
had been placed.  Mr Huntingdon had kept the matter a profound secret
from his own children, and no member of his household ever ventured to
allude to the poor lady or to her place of retirement, and it was only
by an inadvertence on his young friend's part that Amos became aware of
his mother's present abode.  But this knowledge, after the first
excitement of surprise had passed away, only strengthened the purpose
which had gradually taken its settled hold upon his heart.  It was to
him a new and important link in the chain of events which would lead, he
knew, finally to the accomplishment of his one great resolve.  And so he
determined to communicate with his friend's father, the physician, and
ascertain from him in confidence his opinion of his mother's mental
condition, and whether there was any possibility of her restoration to
sanity.  The reply to his inquiries was that his mother's case was far
from hopeless; and with this he was satisfied.  Then he took the letter
which conveyed the opinion of the physician to him, and, spreading it
out before God in his chamber, solemnly and earnestly dedicated himself
to the work of restoration, asking guidance and strength from on high.

From that day forward he was gradually maturing his plans, being ever on
the watch to catch any ray of light which might show him where to place
a footstep on the road which led up to the end he had in view.  Earthly
counsellors he had none; he dared not have any--at least not at present.
Even Miss Huntingdon knew nothing of his purpose from himself, though
she had some suspicions of his having devoted himself to some special
work, gathered from her own study of his character and conduct; but
these suspicions she kept entirely to herself, prepared to advise or
assist should Amos give her his confidence in the matter, and seek her
counsel or help.  Such was the position of things when our story opens.
Amos was waiting, hoping, watching; but no onward step had been taken
since he had received the physician's letter.

A fortnight passed away after the accident, when Miss Huntingdon, who
had now completely recovered from her fright and bruises, was coming out
of a labouring man's cottage on a fine and cheery afternoon.  As she
stood on the doorstep exchanging a few parting words with the cottager's
wife, she was startled by the sound of furious galloping not far off,
and shrank back into the cottage, naturally dreading the sight of an
excited horse so soon after her perilous upset in her brother's
carriage.  Nearer and nearer came the violent clatter, and, as she
involuntarily turned her eyes towards the road with a nervous terror,
she was both alarmed and surprised to see her nephew Walter and another
young man dashing past on horseback at whirlwind speed, the animals on
which they rode being covered with foam.

In a few moments all was still again, and Miss Huntingdon continued her
rounds, but, as she turned the corner of a lane which led up to the back
of the Manor-house, she was startled at seeing her nephew Walter in
front of her on foot, covered with mud, and leading his horse, which was
limping along with difficulty, being evidently in pain.  His companion
was walking by his side, also leading his horse, and both were so
absorbed with their present trouble that they were quite unconscious of
her approach.  Something plainly was much amiss.  Walter had had a fall,
and his horse was injured; of this there could be no doubt.  Could she
be of any service?  She was just going to press forward, when she
observed Mr Huntingdon's groom coming from the direction of the house,
and, as her nephew did not walk as if he had received any serious
injury, she thought it better to leave him to put matters straight for
himself, knowing that young men are very sensitive about being
interfered with or helped when their pride has been wounded by any
humiliating catastrophe.  So she turned aside into a small copse through
which was a short cut to the house, intending to go forward and be
prepared to render any assistance should Walter desire it.

None of the party had seen her, but she passed near enough to them on
the other side of a tall hedge to overhear the words, "Won't the
governor just be mad!" and then, "Here's a sovereign, Dick, and I'll
make it all straight for you with my father."  What could have happened?
She was not long left in suspense; for her brother's voice in high
anger soon resounded through the house, and she learned from her maid,
who rushed into her room full of excitement, that Forester, Mr
Huntingdon's favourite hunter, had been lamed, and otherwise seriously
injured, and that Dick the groom, who had been the author of the
mischief, had been dismissed at a moment's notice.

Poor Miss Huntingdon's heart misgave her that all had not been quite
straightforward in the matter, and that the blame had been laid on the
wrong person.  So she went down to dinner, at the summoning of the gong,
with a heavy heart.  As she entered the drawing-room she saw her
brother, who usually advanced to give her his arm with all due courtesy,
sitting still in his easy-chair, hiding his face with the newspaper,
which a glance showed her to be turned the wrong way up.  Amos also and
Walter were seated as far apart from their father and from each other as
was possible, and for a few moments not a word was spoken.  Then,
suddenly remembering himself, the squire dismissed the paper from his
hand with an irritable jerk, and, with the words, "I suppose that means
dinner," gave his arm to his sister, and conducted her in silence to the
dining-room.

Nothing in the shape of conversation followed for a while, Mr
Huntingdon having shut up his sister by a very curt reply to a question
which she put on some commonplace subject, just for the sake of breaking
through the oppressive stillness.  At length, when the meal was half-way
through, Mr Huntingdon exclaimed abruptly,--

"I can't understand for the life of me how that fool of a Dick ever
managed to get poor Forester into such a scrape.  I always thought the
boy understood horses better than that."

"I hope, Walter," ventured his sister in a soothing tone, "that the poor
animal is not seriously, or at any rate permanently, damaged."

"Nonsense, Kate," he exclaimed peevishly;--"but, pardon me, it's no
fault of yours.  Damaged!  I should think so.  I doubt if he will ever
be fit to ride again.  But I can't make it out quite yet, it's very
vexing.  I had rather have given a hundred pounds than it should have
happened.  And Dick, too; the fellow told the queerest tale about it.  I
should have thought he was telling a lie, only he was taking the blame
to himself, and that didn't look like lying.--By-the-by, Amos, have
_you_ been out riding this afternoon?"

"Yes, father."

"What horse did you ride?"

"My own pony, Prince."

"Did you meet Dick exercising the horses?"

"No; I didn't see anything of him."

"That is strange.  Where were you riding to?"

"I was off on a little business beyond the moor."

"Beyond the moor! what can you have been wanting beyond the moor?"

Amos turned red and did not reply.

"I don't know what has come to the boy," said the squire surlily.  But
now Walter, who had not uttered a word hitherto, broke in suddenly,
"Father, you mustn't be hard upon Dick.  It's a misfortune, after all.
There isn't a better rider anywhere; only accidents will happen
sometimes, as you know they did the other night.  Forester bolted when
the little girl's red cloak blew off and flapped right on to his eyes.
Dick was not expecting it, and tried to keep the horses in; but Forester
sprang right through a hedge and staked himself before Dick could pull
him in.  It's a mercy, I think, that Dick hadn't his neck broke."

He said these last words slowly and reluctantly, for his eye had rested
on his aunt's hands, which were being laid quietly one across the other
on the table in front of her.

"Red cloak!" exclaimed the squire; "why, Dick told me it was a boy's hat
that blew off and flapped against Forester's eyes."

"Ah! well, father, it may have been a hat.  I thought he said a cloak;
but it comes pretty much to the same thing."

There was an unsteadiness about the boy's voice as he said these last
words which every one noticed except his father.  The subject, however,
was now dropped, and was not again alluded to during the evening.

Next morning after breakfast Walter knocked at his aunt's door.  When he
had entered and taken the offered chair by her side, he sat for a minute
or so with eyes cast down, and silent.

"Well, Walter," she said after a while.

"_Ill_, auntie," he replied, in a voice between a laugh and a sigh.

"What is it, dear Walter?"

"Only those two hands of yours, dear auntie."

"Was there not a cause, Walter?"

No reply.

"Shall I tell you one of the stories you asked me to tell about moral
courage?"

"Do, auntie dear," he said in a low tearful voice.

"My hero this morning, Walter, is George Washington, the great American
general and statesman, the man who had so much to do in the founding of
that great republic which is called the United States.  A braver man
never lived; but he was a brave boy too, brave with moral courage.  Not
that he wanted natural courage in his early years, for at school none
could beat him in leaping, wrestling, swimming, and other athletic
exercises.  When he was about six years old, his father gave him a new
hatchet one day.  George was highly pleased, and went about cutting and
hacking everything in his way.  Unfortunately, amongst other things he
used the hatchet with all the force of his little arm on a young English
cherry tree, which happened to be a great favourite with his father.
Without thinking of the mischief he was doing, George greatly injured
the valuable tree.  When his father saw what was done he was very angry,
and asked the servants who had dared to injure the tree.  They said they
knew nothing of it; when little George entering the room and hearing the
inquiry, though he saw that his father was very angry, went straight up
to him, his cheeks colouring crimson as he spoke, and cried, `I did it.
I cannot tell a lie.  I cut your cherry tree with my hatchet.'  `My
noble boy,' said his father, as he clasped him in his arms, `I would
rather lose a hundred cherry-trees, were their blossoms of silver and
their fruit of gold, than that a son of mine should dare to tell a
lie.'--Dear Walter, that was true noble courage; and George Washington
grew up with it.  Those are beautiful lines of one of our old poets,
George Herbert,--

  "`Dare to be true, nothing can need a lie;
  The fault that needs it most grows two thereby.'"

She paused.  Her nephew kept silent for a time, nervously twisting the
fringe of her little work-table; and then he said very slowly and
sadly,--

"So, auntie, you have found me out.  Yes, I've been a beastly coward,
and I'm heartily ashamed of myself."

"Well, dear boy," replied his aunt, "tell me all about it; happily, it
is never too late to mend."

"Yes, dear Aunt Kate, I'll tell you all.  Bob Saunders called yesterday
just after luncheon, and asked me to go out for a ride with him, and if
I could give him a mount, for his own horse was laid up with some
outlandish complaint.  I didn't like to say `No;' but my own pony,
Punch, was gone to be shod, and Bob had no time to wait.  Well, Dick was
just coming out of the yard as I got into it; he was riding Forester and
leading Bessie, to exercise them.  `That'll do,' I said.  `Here, Dick;
I'll take Forester out and give him a trot, and Mr Saunders can ride
Bessie.'  `Please, Master Walter,' says Dick, `your father's very
particular.  I don't know what he'll say to me if I let you exercise
Forester.'  `Oh, nonsense!'  I said.  `I'll make that all straight.'
Dick didn't like it; but I wouldn't be denied, so he let us mount, and
begged me to be very careful.  `Never fear,' I said; `we'll bring them
both back as cool as cucumbers.'  And I meant it, auntie.  But somehow
or other our spirits got the better of us; it was such a fine afternoon,
and the horses seemed wild for a gallop; so at last Bob Saunders said,
`What do you say, Walter, to a half-mile race just on to the top of the
common? it'll do them no harm.'  Well, I didn't say yes or no; but
somehow or other, off we were in another minute, and, do what I would, I
couldn't keep Forester back.  Down the lane we went, and right over the
common like lightning, and, when I was pulling hard to get Forester
round, he went smack through a hedge, and left me on the wrong side of
it.  Bob laughed at first, but we soon saw that it was no laughing
matter.  He caught Forester directly, for the poor beast had hurt his
foot, and limped along as he walked; and there was an ugly wound in his
chest from a pointed stick in the hedge which had struck him.  So we
crawled home, all of us in a nice pickle, you may be sure.  And then I
began to think of what father would say, and I couldn't bear to think
that he would have to blame me for it all; so I turned into a regular
sneaking coward, and gave Dick a sovereign to tell a lie and take the
blame on himself, promising him to make it all right with my father.
There, auntie, that's just the whole of it; and I'm sure I never knew
what a coward I was before.  But only let me get well through this
scrape, and my name's not Walter if I ever get into such another."

"And now, dear boy, what are you going to do about this matter?" asked
his aunt after a pause.

"Do, auntie?  I'm sure I don't know; I've done too much already.  It's a
bad business at the best, and I don't see that I can do anything about
it without making it worse."

"Then, Walter, is the burden still to rest on the wrong shoulders? and
is Dick to be punished for your fault?"

"Oh, as to that, auntie, Dick shan't be the worse for it in the end: he
has had a _sovereign_ remedy already; and I'll beg him off from being
turned away when I see my father has quite cooled down."

Miss Huntingdon said nothing in reply, but laid one of her hands across
the other on her little work-table.  Walter saw the action, but turned
his head away and fidgeted in his chair.  At last he said, "That's
rather hard, auntie, to make me a moral coward again so soon."

"Is it hard, Walter?" she replied gently.  "The next best thing to not
doing wrong is to be sorry for it when you have done it."

"Well, Aunt Kate, I _am_ sorry--terribly sorry.  I wish I'd never
touched the horses.  I wish that fellow Bob had been a hundred miles off
yesterday afternoon."

"I daresay, Walter; but is that all?  Are you not going to _show_ that
you are sorry?  Won't you imitate, as far as it is now possible, little
George Washington's moral courage?"

"What! go and tell my father the whole truth?  Do you think I ought?"

"I am sure you ought, dear boy."

Walter reflected for a while, then he said, in a sorrowful tone, "Ah,
but there's a difference.  George Washington didn't and wouldn't tell a
lie, but I would, and did; so it's too late now for me to show moral
courage."

"Not at all, Walter; on the contrary, it will take a good deal of moral
courage to confess your fault now.  Of course it would have been far
nobler had you gone straight to your father and told him just how things
were; and then, too, you would not have been Dick's tempter, leading him
to sin.  Still, there is a right and noble course open to you now, dear
boy, which is to go and undo the mischief and the wrong as far as you
can."

"Well, I suppose you are right, auntie," he said slowly, and with a
heavy sigh; "but I shan't find _my_ father throwing his arms round me as
George Washington's father did, and calling me his noble boy, and
telling me he had rather I told the truth than have a thousand gold and
silver cherry-trees."

"Perhaps not, Walter; but you will have, at any rate, the satisfaction
of doing what will have the approval of God, and of your own conscience,
and of the aunt who wants you to do the thing that is right."

"It shall be done," said her nephew, pressing his lips together and
knitting his brows by way of strengthening his resolution; and he left
the room with a reluctant step.

He found his father, who had just come from the stables, in the dining-
room.  "Well, Walter, my boy," he said cheerily, "it isn't so bad with
Forester after all.  He has got an ugly cut; but he doesn't walk but
very slightly lame.  A week's rest will set him all right; but I shall
send that Dick about his business to-morrow, or as soon as his quarter's
up.  I'd a better opinion of the boy."

"Dick's not to blame," said Walter slowly.

"Not to blame!  How do you make out that?  I'm sure, if he had had
Forester well in hand, the accident couldn't have happened."

Walter then gave his father the true version of the mishap, and
confessed his own wrong-doing in the matter.  For a few moments Mr
Huntingdon looked utterly taken aback; then he walked up and down the
room, at first with wide and excited strides, and then more calmly.  At
last he stopped, and, putting his hand on his son's shoulder, said,
"That's right, my boy.  We won't say anything more about it this time;
but you mustn't do it again."  The truth was, the squire was not sorry
to find that Dick, after all, was not the culprit; for he had a great
liking for the lad, who suited him excellently as groom, and had
received many kindnesses from him.  No doubt he had told him an untruth
on the present occasion; but then, as he had done this to screen his
master's favourite son, Mr Huntingdon did not feel disposed to take him
to task severely for the deceit; and, as Walter had now made the only
amends in his power, his father was glad to withdraw Dick's dismissal,
and to pass over the trouble without further comment.


CHAPTER FIVE.

IS HE RIDICULOUS?

Few people besides the actual sufferers can at all conceive or
appreciate the intense misery which shy and retiring characters
experience when themselves or their conduct are made the subjects of
open ridicule, especially in company.  Amos was peculiarly sensitive on
this point; and Walter knew it, and too often ungenerously availed
himself of this knowledge to wound his brother when he owed him a
grudge, or was displeased or out of temper with him.  He would watch his
opportunity to drag Amos forward, as it were, when he could present him
to his father and his friends in a ridiculous light; and then he would
clap his hands, point to his brother's flushed face, and make some
taunting or sarcastic remark about his "rosy cheeks."  Poor Amos, on
these occasions, tingling in every nerve, and ready almost to weep tears
of vexation, would shrink into himself and retreat into another room at
the earliest opportunity, followed not unfrequently by an outspoken
reproach from his brother, that "he must be a regular muff if he
couldn't bear a joke."  Sometimes Walter's unfeeling sallies would
receive a feeble rebuke from his father; but more often Mr Huntingdon
would join in the laugh, and remark to his friends that Amos had no
spirit in him, and that all the wit of the family was centred in Walter.
Not so Miss Huntingdon.  She fully understood the feelings of both her
nephews; and, while she profoundly pitied Amos, she equally grieved at
the cruel want of love and forbearance in her younger nephew towards his
elder brother.

Some weeks had passed away since the disastrous ride, and Forester being
none the worse for his mishap, Mr Huntingdon allowed Walter to exercise
him occasionally, accompanied by Dick, who had been fully restored to
favour.  It was on a lovely summer afternoon that the two had trotted
briskly along to a greater distance from home than they had at all
contemplated reaching when they started.  They had now arrived at a part
of the country quite unknown to Walter, and were just opposite a neat
little cottage with a porch in front of it covered with honeysuckle,
when Walter checked his horse, and said, "Dick, it's full time we turned
back, or my father will wonder what has become of us."  So they turned
homewards.  They had not, however, ridden more than a quarter of a mile,
when Walter found that he had dropped one of his gloves; so, telling
Dick to walk his horse, and he would join him in a few minutes, he
returned to the little cottage, and, having recovered his glove just
opposite the gate, was in the act of remounting, when he suddenly
exclaimed, "Holloa! what's that?  Well, I never!  It can't be, surely!
Yes, it is, and no mistake!"

The sight which called forth these words of surprise from Walter was one
that might naturally astonish him.  At the moment when he was about to
spring into his saddle, the cottage door had opened, and out ran a
little boy and girl about four or five years of age, followed by Amos
Huntingdon, who chased them round the little garden, crying out, "I'll
catch you, George; I'll catch you, Polly;" laughing loud as he said so,
while the children rushed forward shouting at the fun.  They had gone
thus twice round the paths, when Amos became suddenly aware that he was
being observed by some one on horseback.  In an instant he made a rush
for the house, and, as he was vanishing through the porch, a woman's
head and a portion of her dress became visible in the entrance.

Walter paused in utter bewilderment; but the next minute Amos was at his
side, and said, in a hoarse, troubled voice, "Not a word of this,
Walter, not a word of this to any one at home."  Walter's only reply to
this at first was a hearty peal of laughter; then he cried out, "All
right, Amos;" and, taking off his hat with affected ceremony, he added,
"My best respects to Mrs Amos, and love to the dear children.  Good-
bye."  Saying which, without stopping to hear another word from his
brother, whose appealing look might well have touched his heart, he
urged his horse to a canter, and was gone.

Amos did not appear among the family that evening.  He had returned home
just before dinner-time, and sent a message into the drawing-room asking
to be excused as he did not feel very well.  Miss Huntingdon went up to
his room to see what was amiss, and returned with the report that there
was nothing seriously wrong; that her nephew had a bad sick headache,
and that bed was the best thing at present for him.  Mr Huntingdon
asked no further questions, for Amos was not unfrequently kept by
similar attacks from joining the family circle.  His father sometimes
thought and called him fanciful, but for the most part left him to do as
he liked, without question or remark.  And so it was that Amos had grown
up to manhood without settling down to any profession, and was left
pretty much to follow the bent of his own inclinations.  His father knew
that there was no need to be anxious about him on the score of worldly
provision.  He had seen well to his education, having sent him to a good
school, and in due time to the university, and, till he came of age, had
made him a sufficient allowance, which was now no longer needed, since
he had come into a small fortune at his majority, left him by his
mother's father; and, as he was heir to the entailed property, there was
no need for concern as to his future prospects, so no effort was made by
Mr Huntingdon to draw him out of his natural timidity and reserve, and
induce him to enter on any regular professional employment.  Perhaps he
would take to travelling abroad some day, and that would enlarge his
mind and rouse him a bit.  At present he really would make nothing of
law, physic, or divinity.  He was sufficiently provided for, and would
turn out some day a useful and worthy man, no doubt; but he was never
meant to shine; he must leave that to Walter, who had got it naturally
in him.  So thought and so sometimes said the squire; and poor Amos
pretty much agreed with this view of his father's; and Walter did so, of
course.  The Manor-house therefore continued Amos's home till he should
choose to make another for himself.

But was he making a new home for himself?  This was Walter's bewildering
thought as he cantered back, after his strange discovery of his brother
at the cottage.  Was it really so?  Had this shy, silent brother of his
actually taken to himself a wife unknown to any one, just as his poor
sister had married clandestinely?  It might be so--and why not?  Strange
people do strange things; and not only so, but Walter's conscience told
him that his brother might well have been excused for seeking love _out_
of his home, seeing that he got but little love _in_ it.  And what about
the children?  No doubt they were hers; he must have married a widow.
But what a poky place they were living in.  She must have been poor, and
have inveigled Amos into marrying her, knowing that he was heir to
Flixworth Manor.  Eh, what a disgrace!  Such were Walter's thoughts as
he rode home from the scene of the strange encounter.  But then, again,
he felt that this was nothing but conjecture after all.  Why might not
Amos have just been doing a kind act to some poor cottager and her
children, whom he had learned to take an interest in?  And yet it was
odd that he should be so terribly upset at being found out in doing a
little act of kindness.  Walter was sure that not a shadow of moral
wrong could rest on his brother's conduct.  He might have made a fool of
himself, but it could not be anything worse.

One thing, however, Walter was resolved upon, he would have a bit of fun
out of his discovery.  So next day at luncheon, when they were seated at
table, unattended by a servant, Amos being among them, but unusually
nervous and ill at ease, Walter abruptly inquired of his brother across
the table if he could lend him a copy of the "Nursery Rhymes."  No reply
being given, Walter continued, "Oh, do give us a song, Amos,--`Ride a
Cock Horse,' or `Baby Bunting,' or `Hi, Diddle, Diddle.'  I'm sure you
must have been practising these lately to sing to those dear children."

As he said this, Amos turned his eyes on him with a gaze so imploring
that Walter was for a moment silenced.  Miss Huntingdon also noticed
that look, and, though she could not tell the cause of it, she was
deeply pained that her nephew should have called it forth from his
brother.  Walter, however, was not to be kept from his joke, though he
had noticed that his aunt looked gravely and sorrowfully at him, and had
crossed one hand upon the other.  "Ah, well," he went on, "love in a
cottage is a very romantic thing, no doubt; and I hope these darling
little ones, Amos, enjoy the best of health."

"Whatever does the boy mean?" exclaimed the squire, whose attention was
now fairly roused.

Amos looked at first, when his father put the question, as though he
would have sunk into the earth.  She lay in the midst of the afternoon
silence, her eyelids closed. It seemed to Zbyszko that she was not
asleep,--when at the other end of the meadow a man who was mowing hay
stopped and began to sharpen his scythe loudly upon the hone. Then she
trembled a little and opened her eyelids for a moment, but immediately
closed them again.

Her breast heaved as though she was deeply inspiring, and in a hardly
audible voice she whispered:

"Flowers smell sweetly...."

These were the first words, clear and free from fever, spoken since they
had left, because the breeze really wafted from the sun-warmed
meadow a strong, redolent hay and honey perfume, fragrant with the scent
of herbs.

This caused Zbyszko to think that reason had returned to her. His heart
trembled within him for joy.

He wished to throw himself at her feet at the first impulse. But fearing
lest that might frighten her, he desisted.

He only knelt in front of the litter, and bending over her, said in a
whisper:

"Dear Danusia! Danusia!"
She opened her eyes again, and looked at him for a while. Then a smile
brightened up her face, the same as when she was in the tar-burner's
shanty, but far from consciousness, but she pronounced his
name:

"Zbyszko!..."

She attempted to stretch her hands toward him, but owing to her great
weakness she was unable to do it. But he embraced her, his heart was so
full that it seemed as if he were thanking her for some great favor
he had received.

"I praise the Lord," he said, "you have awoke ... O God...." Now his voice
failed him, and they looked at each other for some time in silence.
That silence was only interrupted by the gentle wind which moved
the leaves of the pear-tree, the chirping of the grasshoppers among
the grass and the distant indistinct song of the mower."No, Walter, perhaps not; but you told me you should like to be taught
moral courage by examples, and what happened to-day suggested to me a
very striking example, so I crossed my hands."

"Well, dear auntie, please let me hear it."

"My moral hero to-day is Colonel Gardiner, Walter."

"Ah! he was a soldier then, auntie?"

"Yes, and a very brave one too; indeed, never a braver.  When he was a
young man, and had not been many years in the army, he was terribly
wounded in a battle, and lay on the field unable to raise himself to his
feet or move from his place.  Thinking that some one might come round to
plunder the dead and dying before his friends could find him--as, alas!
there were some who were heartless enough to do in those days--and not
wishing that his money should be taken from him, as he had several gold
pieces about him, he managed to get these pieces out of his pocket, and
then to glue them in his clenched hand with the clotted blood which had
collected about one of his wounds.  Then he became insensible, and
friends at last recovered his body and brought him to consciousness
again, and the money was found safe in his unrelaxed grasp.  I mention
this merely to show the cool and deliberate courage of the man; his
wonderful pluck, as you would call it."

"Very plucky, auntie, very; but please go on."

"Well, many years after, he died in battle, and showed the same
marvellous bravery then.  It was in the disastrous engagement of
Prestonpans, in the year 1745.  The Highlanders surprised the English
army, turned their position, and seized their cannon.  Colonel Gardiner
exerted himself to the utmost, but his men quickly fled, and other
regiments did the same.  He then joined a small body of English foot who
remained firm, but they were soon after overpowered by the Highlanders.
At the beginning of the onset, which in the whole lasted but a few
minutes, Colonel Gardiner received a bullet-wound in his left breast;
but he said it was only a flesh-wound, and fought on, though he
presently after received a shot in the thigh.  Then, seeing a party of
the foot bravely fighting near him, who had no officer to head them, he
rode up to them and cried aloud, `Fire on, my lads, and fear nothing!'
Just then he was cut down by a man with a scythe, and fell.  He was
dragged off his horse, and received a mortal blow on the back of his
head; and yet he managed to wave his hat as a signal to a faithful
servant to retreat, crying out at the same time, `Take care of
yourself.'"

"Bravo! auntie, that was true courage if you like; that's old-fashioned
courage such as suits my father and me."

"I know it, Walter.  But Colonel Gardiner showed a higher and nobler
courage; higher and nobler because it required far more steady self-
denial, and arose from true religious principle.  I want you to notice
the contrast, and that is why I have mentioned these instances of what I
may call his animal bravery.  I have no wish to rob him of the honour
due to him for those acts of courage; but then, after all, he was brave
in those constitutionally,--I might say, indeed, because he could not
help it.  It was very different with his moral courage.  When he was
living an utterly godless and indeed wicked life, it pleased God to
arrest him in his evil career by a wonderful vision of our Saviour
hanging on the cross for him.  It was the turning-point of his life.  He
became a truly changed man, and as devoted a Christian as he had
formerly been a slave to the world and his own sinful habits.  And now
he had to show on whose side he was and meant to be.  It is always a
difficult thing to be outspoken for religion in the army, but it was ten
times as difficult then as it is now, seeing that in our day there are
so many truly Christian officers and common soldiers in the service.
Drunkenness and swearing were dreadfully prevalent; indeed, in those
days it was quite a rare thing to find an officer who did not defile his
speech continually with profane oaths.  But Colonel Gardiner was not a
man to do things by halves: he was now enlisted under Christ's banner as
a soldier of the Cross, and he must stand up for his new Master and
never be ashamed of him anywhere.  But to do this would bring him
persecution in a shape peculiarly trying to him,--I mean in the shape of
ridicule.  He would, he tells us, at first, when the change had only
lately taken place in him, rather a thousandfold have marched up to the
mouth of a cannon just ready to be fired than stand up to bear the scorn
and jests of his ungodly companions; he winced under these, and
instinctively shrank back from them.  Nevertheless, he braved all, the
scorn, the laughter, the jokes, and made it known everywhere that he was
not ashamed of confessing his Saviour, cost what it might; and he even
managed, by a mixture of firm remonstrance and good-tempered persuasion,
to put down all profane swearing whenever he was present, by inducing
his brother officers to consent to the payment of a fine by the guilty
party for every oath uttered.  And so by his consistency he won at
length the respect of all who knew him, even of those who most widely
differed from him in faith and practice.  There, Walter, that is what I
call true and grand moral courage and heroism."

"So it was, so it was, dear auntie; but why have you brought forward
Colonel Gardiner's case for my special benefit on the present occasion?"

"I will tell you, dear boy.  You think it fine fun to play off your
jokes on Amos, and nothing seems to please you better than to raise the
laugh against him and to bring the hot flush into his cheeks.  Ah! but
you little know the pain and the misery you are inflicting; you little
know the moral courage it requires on your brother's part to stand up
under that ridicule without resenting it, and to go on with any purpose
he may have formed in spite of it.  I want you to see a reflection of
Colonel Gardiner's noblest courage, his high moral courage, in your own
dear brother, and to value him for it, and not to despise him, as I see
you now do.  You say you want to be free from moral cowardice; then,
copy moral courage wherever you can see it."

"Well, auntie," said her nephew after a minute's silence, "I daresay you
are right.  Poor Amos!  I've been very hard upon him, I believe.  It
wasn't right, and I'll try and do better.  But it's such a funny idea
taking _him_ as a copy.  Why, everybody's always telling me to mark what
Amos does, and just do the very opposite."

"Not everybody, Walter; not the aunt who wants to see you truly good and
noble.  There are a grandeur of character and true nobility in Amos
which you little suspect, but which one day you also will admire, though
you do not see nor understand them now."

Walter did not reply.  He was not best pleased with his aunt's last
remarks, and yet, at the same time, he was not satisfied with himself.
So he rose to go, and as he did so he said, "Ah, Aunt Kate, I see you
are in Amos's confidence, and that you know all about the little
children and their cottage home."

"Nay, my boy," replied his aunt, "you are mistaken; Amos has not made me
his confidante in the matter.  But I have formed my opinion of him and
his motives from little things which have presented themselves to my
observation from time to time, and I have a firm conviction that my
nephew Walter will agree with me in the end about his brother, whatever
he may think now.  At least I hope so."

"So do I, dear auntie.  Good-bye, good-bye."  And, having said these
words half playfully and half seriously, Walter vanished from the room
with a hop, skip, and jump.


CHAPTER SIX.

MISAPPREHENSION.

Miss Huntingdon was not the only person in the family at Flixworth Manor
who entertained a deep affection for Amos Huntingdon, and highly valued
him.  Harry the butler loved him as if he had been his own son.  The old
man had been inherited with the estate by its present owner, who
remembered him almost as long as he could remember anything, and had a
sincere regard for him, knowing him to be one of those old-fashioned
domestics who look upon their employer's interests as their own.
Harry's hair was now snowy-white, but he retained much of his vigour
unimpaired, the winter of his old age being "frosty, but kindly."  So he
had never gone by any other name than "Harry," nor wished to do so, with
his master and his master's friends.  However, in the kitchen he
expected to be called "_Mr_.  Frazer," and would answer to no other name
when addressed by boys and strangers of his own rank.  When the first
child was born Harry took to her with all his might.  He knew that his
master was disappointed because she was not a boy, but that made no
difference to Harry.  Nothing pleased him better than to act now and
then as nurse to Miss Julia when she was still in long clothes; and many
a peal of hearty and innocent mirth resounded from the kitchen premises
as the servants gazed, with tears of amusement running down their faces,
at _Mr_.  Frazer, by the nurse's permission, pacing up and down a sunny
walk in the kitchen garden, with steps slow and grotesquely dignified,
holding the infant warily and tenderly, affirming, when he gave her back
to the nurse, in a self-congratulatory tone, that "little miss" would be
quiet with him when she would be so with no one else; which certainly
might be cause for some wonder, seeing that he would usually accompany
his nursings with such extraordinarily guttural attempts at singing as
were far better calculated to scare any ordinary baby into temporary
convulsions than to soothe it to rest when its slumbers had once been
broken.  And how the old man did rejoice when the little thing could
toddle into his pantry!  And no wonder that she was very ready to do so,
for Harry had an inexhaustible store of plums, and bonbons, and such
like enticements, which were always forthcoming when little miss
gladdened his heart with a visit.  So they were fast friends, and
thoroughly understood each other.

When, however, a son and heir was born, and there was in consequence a
perfect delirium of bell-ringing in the village church-tower, Harry by
no means entered heart and soul into the rejoicings.  "Well," he said
with a sigh, "there's no help for it, I suppose.  It's all right, no
doubt; but Miss Julia's my pet, and so she shall be as long as my name's
Harry."  The new infant, therefore, received none of the attention at
his hands which its predecessor had enjoyed.  When pressed by the
housekeeper, with an arch smile on her good-natured face, to take "baby"
out for an airing, he shook his head very gravely and declined the
employment, affirming that his nursing days were over.  The name also of
the new baby was a sore subject to Harry.  "`Amos,' indeed!  Well, what
next?  Who ever heard of an `Amos' in the family?  You might go as far
back as Noah and you'd never find one.  Mr Sutterby might be a very
good gentleman, but his Christian name was none the better for that."
And, for a while, the old man's heart got more and more firmly closed
against the young heir; while Amos, on his part, in his boyish days,
made no advances towards being on friendly terms with the old servant,
who yet could not help being sometimes sorry for his young master, when
he marked how the sunshine of love and favour, which was poured out
abundantly on Miss Julia, came but in cold and scattered rays to her
desolate-hearted brother.

This kindly feeling was deepened in Harry's heart, and began to show
itself in many little attentions, after the death of Mr Sutterby.  He
could not avoid seeing how the father's and mother's affections were
more and more drawn away from their little son, while he keenly felt
that the poor child had done nothing to deserve it; so in a plain and
homely way he tried to draw him out of himself, and made him as free of
his pantry as his sister was.  And when Walter came, a few years before
Mr Sutterby's death, putting Amos into almost total eclipse, Harry
would have none of this third baby.  "He'd got notice enough and to
spare," he said, "and didn't want none from him."  And now a new cord
was winding itself year by year round the old butler's heart--a cord
woven by the character of the timid child he had learned to love.  He
could not but notice how Amos, while yet a boy, controlled himself when
cruelly taunted or ridiculed by his younger brother; how he returned
good for evil; and how, spite of sorrow and a wounded spirit, there was
peace on the brow and in the heart of that despised and neglected one.
For he had discovered that, in his visits to his aunt, Amos had found
the pearl of great price, and the old man's heart leapt for joy, for he
himself was a true though unpretending follower of his Saviour.

So Harry's attachment to his young master grew stronger and stronger,
and all the more so as he came to see through the more attractive but
shallower character of Walter, whose praises were being constantly
sounded in his ears by Mr Huntingdon.  And there was one thing above
all others which tended to deepen his attachment to Amos, which was
Amos's treatment of his sister, who was still the darling of Harry's
heart.  Walter loved his sister after a fashion.  He could do a generous
thing on the impulse of the moment, and would conform himself to her
wishes when it was not too much trouble.  But as for denying himself, or
putting himself out of the way to please her, it never entered into his
head.  Nevertheless, any little attention on his part, spite of his
being so much younger than herself, was specially pleasing to Julia, who
was never so happy as when she and he could carry out by themselves some
little scheme of private amusement.  Harry noticed this, and was far
from feeling satisfied, observing to the housekeeper that "Master Walter
was a nasty, stuck-up little monkey; and he only wondered how Miss Julia
could be so fond of him."  On the other hand, Amos always treated his
sister, even from his earliest boyhood, with a courtesy and
consideration which showed that she was really precious to him.  And, as
she grew up towards womanhood and he towards mature boyhood, the beauty
and depth of his respectful and unselfish love made themselves felt by
all who could value and understand them, and among these was Harry.  He
could appreciate, though he could not explain, the contrast between a
mere sentiment of affection, such as that which prompted Walter to
occasional acts of kindness to his sister which cost him nothing, and
the abiding, deep-seated principle of love in Amos which exhibited
itself in a constant thoughtful care and watchfulness to promote the
happiness of its object, his beloved sister.

So Harry's heart warmed towards his young master more and more,
especially when he could not help noticing that, while Amos never
relaxed his endeavours to make his sister happy, she on her part either
resented his kindness, or at the best took it as a matter of course,
preferring--and not caring to conceal her preference--a smile or word or
two from Walter to the most patient and self-denying study of her tastes
and wishes on the part of her elder brother.  The old man grieved over
this conduct in his darling Miss Julia, and gave her a hint on the
subject in his own simple way, which to his surprise and mortification
she resented most bitterly, and visited her displeasure also on Amos by
carefully avoiding him as much as possible, and being specially
demonstrative in her affection to Walter.  Amos of course felt it
deeply, but it made no alteration in his own watchful love to his
sister.  As for Harry, all he could do was to wait in hopes of brighter
times, and to console himself for his young mistress's coldness by
taking every opportunity of promoting the happiness and winning the
fuller confidence of the brother whom she so cruelly despised.

But then came the crash; and this well-nigh broke the faithful old
servant's heart.  She whom he still loved as though she were his own,
following her own unrestrained fancies, left her father's house to unite
herself to a heartless adventurer before she had reached full womanhood,
and thus closed the door of her old home against her.  Then followed a
frightful blank.  An allusion by the old butler to "Miss Julia," when
the squire and he were alone together, was met by a burst of violence on
his master's part, and a threat that Harry must leave if he ever again
mentioned his old favourite's name to her father.  So his lips were
closed, but not his heart; for he waited, watched, and prayed for better
times, even after a still heavier cloud had gathered over the family in
the removal of poor Mrs Huntingdon, and all the love he had to spare
was given to his poor desolate young master, whose spirit had been
crushed to the very dust by the sad withdrawal of his mother and sister
from his earthly home.

Walter too was, of course, grieved at the loss of his sister and mother,
but the blow was far lighter to him than to his brother, partly from his
being of a more lively and elastic temperament, and partly because he
did not, being so young a boy when the sad events took place, so fully
understand as did his elder brother the shame and disgrace which hung
over the family through his sister's heartless and selfish conduct.  His
aunt soon came to supply his mother's place, and completely won the
impulsive boy's heart by her untiring and thoughtful affection.  And one
lesson he was learning from her, which was at first the strangest and
hardest of lessons to one brought up as he had been, and that was, to
respect the feelings and appreciate, though by very slow degrees, the
character of his brother.  His own superiority to Amos he had hitherto
taken as a matter of course and beyond dispute.  Everybody allowed it,
except perhaps old Harry; but that, in Walter's eyes, was nothing.  Amos
was the eldest son, and heir to the family estate, and therefore the old
butler took to him naturally, and would have done so if he had been a
cow without any brains instead of a human being.  So said Walter, and
was quite content that a poor, ignorant fellow like Harry, who could
have no knowledge or understanding of character, should set his regards
on the elder son, and not notice the otherwise universally acknowledged
bodily and intellectual superiority of his more worthy self.  No wonder,
then, that pity more than love was the abiding feeling in Walter's heart
towards his less popular and less outwardly attractive brother.  And it
was a very strange discovery, and as unwelcome as strange, which his
aunt was now leading him gradually to make spite of himself, that in
real sterling excellence and beauty of character the weight, which he
had hitherto considered to lie wholly in his own scale, was in truth to
be found in the opposite scale on his brother's side of the balance.
Very slowly and reluctantly indeed was he brought to admit this at all,
and, even when he was constrained to do so, he by no means surrendered
at discretion to his aunt's view of the matter, but fought against it
most vigorously, even when his conscience reproved him most loudly.  And
thus it was that a day or two after his conversation with Miss
Huntingdon on the moral courage exhibited by Colonel Gardiner, he was
rather glad of an opportunity that presented itself of exhibiting his
brother in an unamiable light, and "trotting him out with his shabby old
horsecloth on," as he expressed it, for the amusement of himself and
friends.  It was on a summer evening, and very hot, so that Miss
Huntingdon, her two nephews, and two young men, friends of Walter, were
enjoying tea and strawberries in a large summer-house which faced a
sloping lawn enamelled with flower-beds glowing with masses of richly
tinted flowers.  Mr Huntingdon was not with them, as this was Bench
day, and he was dining after business hours with a brother magistrate.
Walter, full of life and spirits, rattled away to his heart's content,
laughing boisterously at his own jokes, which he poured forth the more
continuously because he saw that Amos was more than usually indisposed
to merriment.

"By-the-by, Tom," he said suddenly to one of his companions, "what about
the boat-race?  When is it to come off?"

"In September," replied his friend.  "But we are in a little difficulty.
You know Sir James has lent us the Park for the occasion, and a capital
thing it will be; for we can make a good two miles of it by rowing round
the ornamental water twice.  It is to be a four-oared match; four
Cambridge against four Oxford men, old or young, it doesn't matter.  It
is to be part of the fun on the coming of age of Sir James's eldest son.
I rather think he was born on the eighth.  Young James is a Cambridge
man and a capital oar, and I'm of the same college, and so is Harrison
here, as you know, and we shall have no difficulty in finding a fourth;
but we are rather puzzled about the Oxford men.  We can calculate upon
three, but don't know where to look for the fourth.  I wish, Walter,
you'd been old enough, and a member of the university."

"Ay, Tom, I wish I had been.  But, by-the-by, there's no difficulty
after all.  Here's Amos, an Oxford man, and a very good oar too--he's
just the very man you want."

It was quite true, as Walter said, that Amos had been a good rower at
the university.  Rowing was one of the few amusements in which he had
indulged himself, but he had never joined a racing boat though often
solicited to do so.

"What do you say, Amos?" asked his young companion.  "Will you join us,
and make up the Oxford four complete?  We shall be really much obliged
if you will; and I'm sure you'll enjoy it."

"Thank you," replied Amos; "it's very kind of you to ask me, I'm sure.
I should have liked it had I been able to undertake it, but I am sorry
to say that it cannot be."

"Cannot be!" exclaimed Walter.  "Why, what's to hinder you?"

"I cannot spare the time just now," said his brother quietly.

"Not spare the time!--not spare half-an-hour one fine afternoon in
September!  Dear me! you must be oppressed with business.  What is it?
It isn't farming, I know.  Is it legal business?  Have you got so many
appointments with the Lord Chancellor that he can't spare you even for
one day?"

"It will not be only for one day," replied Amos quietly.  "If the race
is to be a real trial of skill and strength we must train for it, and
have many practices, and I cannot promise to find time for these."

"Oh, nonsense!  Why not?  You've nothing to do."

"I have something to do, Walter, and something too that I cannot give up
for these practisings."

"What!  I suppose you think such vanities as these waste of precious
time."

"I never said nor thought so, Walter; but I have a work in hand which
will prevent my having the pleasure of taking a part in this race, for
it really would have been a pleasure to me."

"Ah! it must be a precious important work, no doubt," said his brother
satirically.  "Just tell us what it is, and we shall be able to judge."

Amos made no reply to these last words, but turned first very red and
then very pale.

"Humph!" said Walter; "I guess what it is.  It's a new scheme for paying
off the national debt, by turning radishes into sovereigns and cabbage-
leaves into bank-notes; and it'll take a deal of time and pains to do
it."  He laughed furiously at his own wit, but, to his mortification, he
laughed alone.  There was a rather painful silence, which was broken by
the gentle voice of Miss Huntingdon.

"I think, dear Walter," she said, "that you are a little hard on your
brother.  Surely he may have an important work on hand without being
engaged in such a hopeless task as attempting to turn radishes into
sovereigns and cabbage-leaves into bank-notes.  And does it follow that
he despises your boat-race because he prefers duty to pleasure?"

"Ah! that's just it," cried Walter, in a tone of mingled excitement and
displeasure.  "Who's to know that it _is_ duty?  I think one duty is
very plain, and I should have thought you would have agreed with me
here, and that is to give up your own way and pleasure sometimes, when
by doing so you may help to make other people happy."

"I quite agree with you in that, Walter," said his aunt.  "It may be and
often does become a duty to surrender our own pleasure, but never surely
to surrender our duty."

"True, aunt, if it's really duty; but some people's duty means merely
their own fancy, and it's very convenient to call _that_ duty when you
don't want to be obliging."

"It may be so, Walter; but, on the other hand, if we have seen cause
even to impose upon ourselves something as a duty, we are bound to carry
it out, although others may not see it to be a duty and may call it
fancy; and certainly we should at least respect those who thus follow
what they firmly believe they _ought_ to do, even though we cannot
exactly understand or agree with their views of duty.  So you must bear
with Amos; for I am certain that he would not say `No' to you about the
race if he were not persuaded that duty stands in the way of his taking
a part in it."

"Ah, well! happy Amos to have such a champion," cried Walter, laughing,
for he had now recovered his good-humour.  "I suppose you are right, and
I must allow brother Amos to have his duty and his mystery all to
himself.  But it's odd, and that's all I can say about it.  Such short-
sighted mortals as I am can't see those duties which are up in the
clouds, but only those which lie straight before our eyes."

"And yet, Walter, there may be the truest and noblest heroism in
sacrificing everything to these self-imposed duties, which _you_ call
duties up in the clouds."

"O aunt, aunt!" exclaimed Walter, laughing, "are you going to be down
upon me again about moral courage?  You have not crossed your hands this
time, and yet I daresay it will do us all good, my friends here as well
as myself, to have a lesson on moral courage from you; so listen all to
my dear aunt.  She is teaching me moral courage by examples.  Who is
your hero, dear auntie, this time?"

"Shall I go on?" said Miss Huntingdon, looking round on her hearers;
then seeing an expression of interest on every countenance, she
continued, "Well, I will, if you wish it.  My hero to-day is John
Howard."

"Not a soldier this time, Aunt Kate."

"Not in your sense, Walter, but one of the truest and bravest in mine."

"Pray, then, let us hear all about his exploits, dear aunt."

"You shall, Walter.  His exploits just consisted in this, that he
imposed a great duty on himself as the one object of his life, and never
let anything turn him from it, though obstacles met him in every
direction such as nothing but the highest sense of duty could have
nerved him to break through.  In the first place, he was of a weakly
constitution, and might therefore well have excused himself from any
unnecessary labours, and might have indulged in luxuries which might
almost have been considered as necessaries to one whose appetite was not
strong.  He could well have afforded such innocent indulgence, for he
was a man of good fortune.  He was, however, remarkable for his
abstemious habits; and having been led, when high sheriff of his county,
to look into the state of Bedford jail, he was so shocked with the
miserable condition of the prisoners and their being crowded together in
a place filthy, damp, and ill-ventilated, that he set himself to make a
tour of inspection of all the county jails in England, and soon
completed it, and was examined before the House of Commons on the state
of our prisons.  And here he had to suffer from that misrepresentation
and misunderstanding which are too often the lot of those who have set
themselves to some great and noble work.  It seemed so extraordinary to
some members of Parliament that a gentleman, out of pure benevolence,
should devote himself to such a painful work, and run the risk of
contagion, that they could hardly understand it; and one gentleman asked
`at whose expense he travelled,'--a question which Howard could scarcely
answer without some indignant emotion.  You see, they could not
appreciate such exalted heroism; and surely it required no little moral
courage to persevere.  But he did persevere, and his work grew upon him.

"From England he went abroad, and visited the prisons on the Continent,
devoting his time and fortune to the great work of discovering, and, as
far as might be, remedying, the abuses he found in these sad places of
misery and often cruelty; and though he was introduced to the noble and
the great wherever he went, he paid no visits of mere ceremony, but
spoke out most fearlessly, even to the most exalted in rank, about the
abuses he found in the prisons under their control.  He had set himself
one great work to do, and he did it.  Suffering, toil, hardship were
endured without a murmur.  Ah! was not this true heroism?

"And now I come to a point which I want you, dear Walter, specially to
notice.  Howard might have spent a portion at least of his time when
abroad in visiting the beautiful picture-galleries and other works of
art in the towns to which his great work led him, but he never suffered
himself to do so.  He would not even read a newspaper, lest it should
divert his thoughts from the one great purpose he had in view.  I am not
saying for a moment that he would have been wrong to indulge himself
with relaxation in the shape of sight-seeing and reading the news; but
surely when he made everything bend to his one grand self-imposed duty,
we are constrained to admire and not to blame, far less to ridicule, his
magnificent heroism.  Yes; he never swerved, he never drew back; and,
best of all, he did his work as a humble and earnest Christian, carrying
it on by that strength and wisdom which he sought and obtained by
prayer.

"I cannot give you a better summing up of my hero's character than in
the words of the great Edmund Burke.  I have them here."  Saying which
she opened a small manuscript book containing extracts from various
authors in her own handwriting, which she kept in her work-basket, and
read as follows:--"`He has visited all Europe, not to survey the
sumptuousness of palaces, or the stateliness of temples; not to make
accurate measurements of the remains of ancient grandeur, nor to form a
scale of the curiosities of ancient art; not to collect medals, nor to
collate manuscripts: but to dive into the depths of dungeons, and to
plunge into the infection of hospitals; to survey the mansions of sorrow
and pain; to take the gauge and dimensions of misery, depression, and
contempt; to remember the forgotten, to attend to the neglected, to
visit the forsaken, and to compare the distresses of men in all
countries.  His plan is original, and it is as full of genius as it is
of humanity.  It was a voyage of discovery--a circumnavigation, of
charity.'  Such was Burke's true estimate of my hero.  And surely never
was a nobler heroism--it was so pure, so unselfish; for when they would
have erected a monument to him in his lifetime, and had gathered large
sums for that purpose during his absence abroad, he at once put a stop
to the project on his return home.--Am I wrong, dear Walter, in taking
John Howard for one of my special moral heroes?"

"Not a bit of it, dear aunt.  I confess myself beaten; I give in; I hand
over the laurel crown to Amos: for I see that Howard's greatness of
character was shown especially in this, that he imposed upon himself a
work which he might have left undone without blame, and carried it out
through thick and thin as a matter of duty.  Bravo, Howard! and bravo,
Amos, with your duty-work!--three cheers for you both! and one cheer
more for Aunt Kate and moral courage."  So saying, with a low bow, half
in fun and half in earnest, to Miss Huntingdon and his brother, with a
request to the latter to learn the Canadian boat-song, "Row, Brothers,
Row," at his earliest convenience, he left the summer-house, taking his
two friends with him.

Amos, who had been silent during the latter part of the discussion,
lingered behind for a moment, and rising from his seat, took his aunt's
hand between his own, pressing it warmly as he said, in a voice subdued
and trembling with emotion,--"Thank you, dearest aunt; I see you partly
understand me now.  Some day, I hope, you may understand me more fully."


CHAPTER SEVEN.

HARRY IN THE SECRET.

A week or more had passed since the conversation in the summer-house,
and all the family were seated at luncheon in the dining-room of
Flixworth Manor, when a shabby and dirty-looking note was handed to Amos
by the butler.  Having hastily read it, Amos exclaimed in an agitated
voice, "Who brought this? where is he?"

"It's no one as I ever seed afore," replied Harry.  "He said there was
no answer, but I was to take it in straight; and I doubt he's gone now
far enough away, for he was nothing but a rough-looking lad, and he ran
off when he had given me the note as fast as his legs would carry him."

"Nothing amiss, I hope?" said Miss Huntingdon kindly.

"I hope not," replied her nephew.  He was evidently, however, greatly
troubled and confused, and looked nervously towards his father, whose
attention at the time was being given to a noble-looking dog which was
receiving a piece of meat from his hand.

"What's up now?" cried Walter, who, although he was learning to treat
his brother with more respect and consideration, was still rather on the
look-out for opportunities to play off his fun upon him.  "Why, surely
there's something amiss.  What's the good, Amos, of putting a spoonful
of salt into your gooseberry tart?"

Mr Huntingdon now looked round and stared at his elder son, who had by
this time partly recovered his self-possession.  "Nothing serious, my
boy, I hope?" he said.

"I hope not, dear father.  It's only about a little child that I take an
interest in; he seems to have got away from home, and his friends can't
find him."

"Is it one of my tenants' children?"

"No; it's a child that lives in a cottage on the Gavelby estate.  We
have struck up a friendship.  I ride up there sometimes, so they have
sent to me about him; and I will ride over after luncheon and see what
can be done."

Nothing more passed on the subject during the meal; but Miss
Huntingdon's watchful care of her nephew made her notice the deep lines
of anxiety which had gathered on the forehead of Amos, and her heart
ached for him, for she was sure that he was burdened with some
unexpected trouble connected with the work he had set himself to
accomplish.  Dinner-time came, but Amos did not make his appearance.
Ten o'clock struck, but he still lingered.  Never before had he been
absent for a night except when at school or college, or on a visit to
some friend; for his habits were most regular, and he always rose and
retired to rest early, his custom in this respect having been often the
subject of remark and merriment to Walter, who would say to his friends
that, "although Amos would never join in a lark, he had no objection to
rise with one; nor to lie down with a lamb, though he hadn't it in him
to skip like one."  So when the family met next morning at breakfast,
and nothing had been seen or heard of Amos, there was a shade of anxiety
on every one's face.

"Where can the boy have been?" exclaimed Mr Huntingdon; "we never knew
him go off like this before.--Hasn't he sent any message of any kind,
Harry?"

"Not a word, sir, as far as I know."

"What's best to be done, then?--What do you say, Kate?" asked the
squire.

"Perhaps Walter can make inquiries," suggested his sister.

"Well," replied her nephew, "I wouldn't mind, but really I don't know
where to look exactly.  I may be riding about all day, for he's gone
after the missing child, I suppose, so it will be no use looking for him
at the child's home.  And, besides, I've an engagement to play lawn-
tennis and go to luncheon at the Worthingtons', and I can't disappoint
them."

"Not in such a case as this?" asked his aunt reproachfully.  "Can't you
send a note of apology to the Worthingtons?  Suppose something serious
has happened to your brother!"

"Oh, nonsense, Aunt Kate," cried Walter, who was not prepared to give up
his engagement of pleasure; "don't be afraid about Amos; he'll turn up
all right.  He's on his way home, you may depend upon it; only perhaps
he has been trying to solve some wonderful problem, and has forgotten
all about such commonplace things as time and space, and has fallen
asleep under a hedge."

"I will go myself, then," said Miss Huntingdon, "and see if I can hear
anything of him from the neighbours."

"Indeed, Kate," said her brother, "you must do nothing of the sort.  Set
your mind at rest.  I will go myself and make inquiries; and if the boy
does not make his appearance by luncheon time, we must take further
steps to find him."

"Can _I_ be of any use, sir, in the matter?" asked Harry.

"Ah, that's just the thing!" cried Walter.  "If you can spare Harry,
father, Jane can wait at luncheon; and I'll just put Harry myself on
what I think will be the right scent."

"Well, my boy, it can be so, and you can do as you say," replied his
father.  "I know we can trust Harry to do his best; he can take the old
mare, and we shall do very well with Jane till he comes back."

Nothing loath, but rather gratified with the part he had to play and the
trust placed in him, the old butler set out about noon on the old mare,
accompanied by Walter, who was on his way to the Worthingtons'.  Harry
would have preferred managing matters in his own fashion, which would
have been to go on a tour of inquiry from farm to farm; but, having no
choice, he surrendered himself to the guidance and directions of Walter.
So they rode on together for some miles till they came within sight of
the cottage where Amos had been seen by his brother playing with the
little children.

"There, Harry," said Walter, "you see that cottage? just you call in
there, and you will either find my brother there, if I am not mistaken,
or, at any rate, you will find somebody who will tell you where to look
for him."  Then he turned and put spurs to his horse, and was soon out
of sight, leaving the old servant to jog along at his leisure to the
little dwelling pointed out to him, the roof of which he could just see
distinctly in the distance.

"Humph!" said Harry half out loud, as he rather reluctantly made his way
towards the cottage; "you might have gone yourself, Master Walter, I
think, and saved an old man like me such a shaking as I've had on the
old mare's back.  But I suppose that `lawn tens,' as they call it, is a
mighty taking thing to young people; it seems all the go now; all the
young gents and young ladies has gone mad after it.  Knocking them balls
back'ards and for'ards used to be called `fives' when I were a boy, but
they calls it `tens' now; I suppose 'cos they does everything in these
days twice as fast as they used to do.  Well, it don't matter; but if it
had been Master Amos, and t'other road about, he'd never have let
`tens,' or `twenties,' or `fifties' stand between him and looking arter
a lost brother.  But then people don't know Master Amos and Master
Walter as I do.  Their aunt, Miss Huntingdon, does a bit, and p'raps
master will himself some day."

By the time he had finished this soliloquy Harry had neared the cottage.
Then he quickened his pace, and having reached the little garden gate,
hung his horse's bridle over a rail, with the full knowledge that the
animal would be well content to stand at ease an unlimited time where
she was left.  Then he made his way up to the cottage door and knocked.
His summons was immediately answered by a respectably dressed middle-
aged woman, who opened the door somewhat slowly and cautiously, and then
asked him civilly what was his business with her.  "Well, if you please,
ma'am," said the butler, "I'm just come to know if you can tell me
anything about my young master, Mr Amos.  He ought to have come home
last night, and none of us has set eyes on him up to the time when I
left home, about an hour since."

The person whom he addressed was evidently in a difficulty what to
answer.  She hesitated, and looked this way and that, still holding the
door ajar, but not inviting Harry into the house.  The old man waited a
few moments, and then he said, "If you please, ma'am, am I to understand
as you don't know nothing about my young master, Mr Amos, and where
he's gone?"

Still the other made no reply, but only looked more and more uneasy.  It
was quite clear to Harry now that she could give him the information he
wanted, if only she were willing to do so.  He waited therefore another
minute, and then said, "You've no cause, ma'am, to fear as I shall get
Master Amos into trouble by anything you may tell me.  I love him too
well for that; and I can be as close as wax when I like.  You may trust
me, ma'am, and he'd tell you the same if he was here."

"And what may your name be, friend?" asked the woman.

"Well," he replied, "the quality calls me `Harry;' but every one else
calls me Mr Frazer,--at least when they behaves as they ought to do.  I
am butler at Flixworth Manor, that's Mr Amos Huntingdon's home; and
I've been in the family's service more nor fifty years come next
Christmas, so it ain't likely as I'd wish to do any on 'em any harm."

"Well, Mr Frazer," said the woman, opening the door, "come in then; the
fact is, I am almost as puzzled to know where Mr Amos is as you are.  I
have been expecting him all the morning, and he may be here any minute.
But pray come in and wait a bit."

Accepting the invitation, Harry stepped into a neat little parlour,
prettily but not expensively furnished.  Over the chimney-piece was a
large drawing in water-colours of Flixworth Manor-house, and, on either
side of this, photographs of Mr and Mrs Huntingdon.  What could it
mean?  But for Harry every other thought was swallowed up in a moment by
his attention being called to a little girl, about four years of age,
who stole into the room, and stood for a while staring at him with one
finger in her mouth, and her head drooping slightly, but not so much as
to hide a pair of lustrous hazel eyes.  A neat and beautifully white
pinafore was bound round her waist by a red belt, and a profusion of
glossy brown ringlets fell upon her shoulders.  The old man started at
the sight as if he had been shot, and then gazed at the child with open
mouth and raised eyebrows, till the little thing shrank back to the side
of the woman who had opened the door, and hid her little face in her
apron.  "It's herself, her very own self," said Harry half out loud, and
with quivering voice; "tell me, ma'am, oh, pray tell me what's this
child's name!"

"Well, Mr Frazer," replied his companion, though evidently with some
hesitation, "I understand that I may trust you.  This dear child's names
are Julia Mary, and I am her nurse, employed by Mr Amos to look after
her for him."

"I begin to see it all now," said Harry half to himself.  "Don't trouble
yourself, ma'am; I don't need to ask no more questions.  I don't want
any one to tell me who Miss Julia's mother is; there can be no doubt
about that, they're as like as two peas; and I begin to see a bit what
Mr Amos has been a-doing.  God bless his dear, unselfish heart!  Come
here to me, my child," he added with a pleasant smile.  The little Julia
looked hard at him from behind the shelter of her nurse's gown for a
moment, but soon lost all fear, for there was something attractive to
her in the old man's snow-white hair and venerable face, as, surely,
there is commonly a sweet sympathy between the guileless childhood of
infancy and the holy childhood of God--fearing old age.  So she shyly
drew towards him, and let him place her on his knee; and then she looked
up wonderingly at him, as his tears fell fast on her brown hair, and his
voice was choked with sobs.  "Yes," he said, "my precious Miss Julia,
you're the very image of what your blessed mother was at your age.  I've
had her like this on my knee scores of times.  Ah! well, perhaps a
brighter day's coming for us all."

We must now leave the old man happy over his gentle charge, and go back
to the previous day when Amos, at luncheon time, received the little
note which so greatly disturbed him.  That note was as follows:--

"Respected Sir,--About ten o'clock this morning, as Master George and
Miss Mary were playing in the garden, a strange man looked over the
hedge and called Master George by name.  He held out something to him in
his hand, which Master George went out of the gate to look at.  Then the
man took him up into his arms, whispered something into his ear, and
walked away with him.  I was in the house at the time, and was told this
by Miss Mary.  What am I to do?  Please, sir, do come over at once if
you can.--Your obedient servant, Sarah Williams."

Amos, as we have seen, left home after luncheon, and did not return.  He
made his way as quickly as he could to the little cottage, and found
Mrs Williams in great distress.  The poor little girl also was crying
for her brother, declaring that a wicked man had come and stolen him
away.  What was to be done?  The cottage where the nurse and children
dwelt together was in rather a retired situation, the nearest house to
it being a farm-house, which, though only a few hundred yards distant,
was built in a hollow, so that what was going on outside the cottage
would not be visible to persons about the farm premises.  Mrs Williams
was the wife of a respectable farm labourer, of better education and
more intelligence than the generality of his class.  They had no
children of their own, so that Mrs Williams, who was a truly godly
woman, was glad to give a home for a time and a motherly care to the two
little ones committed to her charge by Amos.  The husband was, of
course, absent from home during the working hours, so that his wife
could not call him to her help when she missed the little boy; indeed,
on the day of her loss her husband had gone with his master, the farmer,
to the neighbouring market-town, some six miles off, so that she could
have no assistance from him in the search for the missing child till
late in the evening.  As far as Amos could gather from the little girl's
description, the man who had stolen away her brother was tall, had a
long beard, and very black eyes.  He was not on horseback, and there was
no one else with him.  But this was very meagre information at the best
on which to build for tracking the fugitives.  So Amos called Mrs
Williams into the little parlour, and spread the matter out in prayer
before God, whose "eyes are in every place, beholding the evil and the
good."  Then wishing the nurse good-bye, with a heart less burdened than
before, but still anxious, he remounted his pony, and turned him in the
direction of the neighbouring farm-yard.

Having ascertained at the farm-house that no one had seen a man with a
boy in his arms or walking by him pass that way, he proceeded down a
long and not much frequented grassy lane at a jog-trot, but with small
expectation of finding any clew that might guide him to the discovery of
the lost child.  He had ridden on thus about half a mile, when he paused
at a place where another grassy lane crossed at right angles the one
down which he had been riding.  It was a lonely spot, but yet was a
thoroughfare from which the roads diverged to one or two large villages,
and led in one direction ultimately to the market-town.  Close to the
ditch opposite the road down which Amos had come was a white finger-
post, informing those who were capable of deciphering its bleared
inscriptions whither they were going or might go.  Amos hesitated; he
had never been on this exact spot before, and he therefore rode close up
to the sign-post to read the names, which were illegible at a little
distance off.  To his great surprise, and even dismay, he noticed,
dangling from one of the post's outstretched wooden arms, a silk
handkerchief of a rather marked pattern.  Could it really be?  Yes, he
could not doubt it; it belonged to little George: it was a present to
the child from himself only a few days before.  Amos's blood ran cold at
the sight.  Could any one in the shape of humanity have had the heart to
lay violent hands on the poor boy?  There was no telling.  He scarce
dared to look towards the ditch lest he should see the lifeless body
there.  But perhaps a gipsy had got hold of the child, and stripped him
for his clothes: such things used to be done formerly.  But, then, why
hang the silk handkerchief in such a conspicuous place? for it could not
have got there by accident, nor been blown there, for it had been
manifestly fastened and suspended there by human fingers.  Trembling in
every limb, Amos unfastened the handkerchief from the post.  There was
something stiff inside it.  He unfolded it slowly; an envelope disclosed
itself.  It was directed in pencil.  The direction was, "Amos
Huntingdon, Esq.  Please forward without delay."

Here, then, was a clue to the mystery.  Amos opened the envelope and
read the enclosure, which was also written in pencil, in a neat and
thoroughly legible hand.  It ran thus:--

"You are doubtless anxious to know what has become of the little boy
George.  Come _alone_ to-morrow morning to the old oak in Brendon wood,
and you shall be duly informed.  Mind, come _alone_: if you attempt to
bring one or more with you, it will be simply lost labour, for then
there will be no one to meet you.  You have nothing to fear as to any
harm to your own person, or interference with your liberty."

There was no signature to the letter, either of name or initials.  Amos
was sorely puzzled what to do when he had read this strange epistle.  Of
course it was plain that the writer could put him in the way of
recovering little George if he would; but, then, where was Brendon wood?
and how was he to get to it on the following morning?  And yet, if he
did not act upon this letter and follow its directions, the child might
be lost to him for ever, and that he could not bear to think of.  The
nearest town to the finger-post was yet some five miles distant; and
should he reach that, and make his inquiries about the wood with
success, it would be difficult for him to return home the same evening
by any reasonable hour.  Still, he could not find it in his heart to
abandon the search, and he therefore made the best of his way to the
little town of Redbury.

As he was giving up his pony to the care of the hostler at the
Wheatsheaf, the principal inn in the place, he observed a man--tall,
with long beard, and very dark eyes--stepping down into the inn-yard,
who, as soon as he saw Amos, immediately retreated into the house.  Had
Amos seen him before?  Never, as far as he knew; and yet a strange
suspicion came over him that this was the man who had enticed little
George away, and was also the writer of the pencilled letter.  Still, it
might not be so; he had no proof of it; and how was he to ascertain if
it was the case or no?  He lingered about the yard for a time, but the
stranger did not again make his appearance; so he strolled out into the
town, and ascertained that Brendon wood was about two miles from
Redbury, and had an old oak in the centre of it.  Turning matters over
in his mind, he at last came to the not very comfortable conclusion
that, as the evening was now far advanced, his best course was to put up
for the night in the little town, and betake himself to the wood at an
early hour next day.  Grieved as he was to give his friends at home
anxiety by not returning that night, he felt that, if his object was to
be attained, he had better remain where he was; and he was sure that his
aunt would believe that he would not absent himself without good reason,
and would do her best to allay in his father any undue anxiety on his
account.  Having come to this conclusion, he returned to the Wheatsheaf
and secured a bed, and then passed the rest of the evening in the
coffee-room, watching very carefully to see if he could catch anywhere
another glimpse of the mysterious stranger, but to no purpose.

After a restless and anxious night he rose early; and, after commending
himself and his cause to God in earnest prayer, set off, after a hasty
breakfast, in the direction given him as leading to the place of
appointment.  It was a glorious summer day; and as he rode briskly along
the country road, out of which he soon turned into a long lane skirted
on either side by noble trees, he could not help sighing to think how
man's sin had brought discord and deformity into a world which might
otherwise have been so full of beauty.  The wood soon appeared in sight,
and a lonely as well as lovely spot it was.  Many bridle-roads
intersected it; he chose one which seemed to lead into the centre, and
in a short time the great oak was visible.  There was no mistaking the
venerable forest giant, with its rugged fantastic limbs towering high
above the neighbouring trees.  So he made straight for it at once.  Amos
was no coward, though naturally of a timid disposition; for he had
patiently acquired habits of self-control, learned partly in the school
of chastisement, and partly in the school of self-discipline.  And yet
it was not without a feeling of shrinking and misgiving that he saw a
man approaching the oak from a path opposite to that by which he himself
had come.  Trees, mingled with thick brushwood, covered the ground on
all sides, except where the roads and bridle-paths ran, and not a
creature had he met before since he turned out of the main road.  Little
time, however, was allowed him for further reflection; in a minute more
he was joined by the other traveller.  A single glance was sufficient to
satisfy him that he had before him the same man who had attracted his
attention the evening before at the Wheatsheaf.

The stranger was, as has been said, tall, and wore a long beard.  On the
present occasion he was wrapped in an ample cloak, and had on his head a
high-crowned hat encircled with a feather.  Amos could not make him
out;--what was he?  As they came close up to one another, the stranger
saluted Amos with an air of mingled ease and affectation, and motioned
him to a seat when he had dismounted from his pony.  So Amos, still
holding Prince's bridle in his hand, placed himself on a grassy mound
near the base of the old oak, while the other seated himself a few paces
from him.  Neither spoke for a little while; then the stranger broke the
silence.  His voice was not, in its natural tones, otherwise than
pleasing; but there was an assumption in his manner of speaking and a
spice of sarcastic swagger which grated very painfully on the
sensibilities of his companion.  However, it was pretty evident that the
stranger had no particular care to spare the feelings of the person whom
he was addressing.

"I may as well explain at once, Mr Huntingdon," he began, "how I came
to communicate with you in a way somewhat uncommon.  The fact is, that I
have reasons for not wishing to make myself known more than I can help
to the good people in these parts.  Now, had I sent you my note by the
hand of any messenger, this would have drawn attention to myself, and
might have led to inquiries about me which are not just now convenient.
I was quite sure that yourself, or some one belonging to you, would be
searching up and down the lanes for the little boy, and that his silk
handkerchief, placed where I put it, would attract notice, and the note
tied up in it be conveyed to yourself without my appearing personally on
the scene.  And so it has turned out.  You have read my note, I see; and
no one has been in communication with the writer but yourself.  This is
as it should be.  And now, may I ask, do you know me? or at any rate, do
you guess who I am? for we have not seen each other, I believe, before
yesterday evening."

"I do not know your name," replied Amos sadly; "but I cannot say that I
have no suspicion as to who you are."

"Exactly so," replied the other; "I am, in fact, none other than your
brother-in-law, or, if you like it better, your sister Julia's husband."

"I have feared so," replied Amos.

"Feared!" exclaimed his companion in a tone of displeasure.  "Well, be
it so.  I am aware that our marriage was not to the taste of the
Huntingdons, so we have kept out of the way of the family as much as
possible; and, indeed, I believe that your father has never even known
the name of his daughter's husband, but simply the fact of her
marriage."

"I believe so," said Amos; "at any rate, all that has been known by the
family generally has been that she married"--here he hesitated; but the
other immediately added,--

"Beneath her, you would say.  Be it so, again.  Well, you may as well
know my name yourself, at any rate, for convenience' sake.  It is, at
your service, Orlando Vivian.  Shall I go on?"

"If you please."

"You are aware, then, of course, that I deserted your sister, as it is
called, for a time; the fact being, that we discovered after marriage
that our tastes and habits of thought were very dissimilar, and that we
should be happier apart, at least for a season.  And in the meantime you
stepped in, and have acted very nobly, I must say, in taking charge of
my two little children, for which I must tender you my best thanks."

There was a brief pause, and then Amos inquired anxiously, "Is it your
intention to take the children from me?"

"Well, not necessarily, but perhaps so; certainly not the girl, at
present, unless you yourself wish it."

"And the boy?" asked Amos.

"Ah, I have not quite made up my mind about him," was the reply.  "It
may be that I shall keep him with me, and bring him up to my own
profession."

"And what may that profession be?" asked the other.

"The stage," was the reply.

"What!" exclaimed Amos in a tone of horror, "bring up the poor child to
be an actor!  Why, it will be his ruin, body and soul!"

"And if so, Mr Huntingdon," said the other sternly and bitterly, and
with his dark eyes glaring fiercely, "I suppose I, as his father, have a
right to bring him up as I please.  The father's profession is, I
imagine, notwithstanding your disparaging remarks, good enough for the
son."

Amos leaned his head on his hand for a while without reply; then he
looked his companion steadily in the face, and said, "And is there no
other course open?"

"Why, yes.  To be frank with you, Mr Huntingdon, there is; and, without
any more beating about the bush, I will come to the point at once.  The
fact is, I want money, and--not an uncommon thing in this not over
agreeable or accommodating world--don't know where to get it.  I have,
therefore, just this to say,--if you will pledge me your word to send me
a cheque for fifty pounds as soon as you get home, I, on my part, will
at once deliver up little George to you; and will pledge my word, as a
man of honour, not again to interfere with either of the children.  You
may think what you please of me, but such is my proposal."

These words were uttered in a tone of the most imperturbable self-
possession, and perfectly staggered poor Amos by their amazing
effrontery.  But all was now plain enough to him.  This needy
adventurer, who had entangled poor Julia in his cruel meshes, and had
deserted her for a time, was hard up for money; and, having found out
that Amos had taken upon himself to provide for his children at present,
had hit upon the scheme of withdrawing one of them from the cottage, as
a way of extorting money from his brother-in-law.  It was also pretty
clear that he was afraid to show himself openly, lest the officers of
justice should lay hold of him and bring him to trial for some breach of
the law.  He had, therefore, betaken himself to the expedient of hanging
up the little boy's handkerchief on the way-post, being sure that
persons would be out immediately in all directions searching for the
child, and that some one of them would light upon the handkerchief with
the letter in it, and would forward it to Amos without delay, as the
young man would be sure to be informed of the loss as soon as the nurse
discovered it, and would lose no time in making personally search for
the missing child; and thus the writer's purpose would be answered
without his having given any clew by which himself could be discovered
and brought into trouble.  All this was now plainly unfolded to Amos.
And what was he to do?  That the man before him was utterly selfish and
unscrupulous, he had no doubt, and little good, he feared, could be done
by appealing to the conscience or better feelings of one who could act
deliberately as he had done.  Was he, then, to leave his little nephew
in his father's hands, to be brought up to the stage--or, in other
words, to certain ruin under the training of such a man?  The thought
was not to be endured.  No, he must make the sacrifice.

While these things were passing through his mind, his companion looked
about him with cool indifference, kicking the leaves and sticks at his
feet, and whistling in a low tone some operatic air.  Then he broke
silence.  "Which is it to be, Mr Huntingdon?" he asked.  "Am I to keep
little George, or do you wish to have him back again?  You know the
conditions; and you may be sure that I should not have taken the trouble
to meet you here if I had any thoughts of changing my mind."

Amos looked sadly and kindly at him, and then said, "And can you really,
Mr Vivian, justify this conduct of yours to yourself?  Can you feel
really happy in the course you are pursuing?  Oh! will you not let me
persuade you--for my poor sister's sake, for your own sake--to leave
your present mode of life, and to seek your happiness in the only path
which God can bless?  I would gladly help you in any way I could--"

But here his companion broke in, scorn on his lip, and a fierce
malignant anger glaring from his eyes.  "Stop, stop, Mr Huntingdon!
enough of that.  We are not come here for a preaching or a prayer-
meeting.  The die has long since been cast, and the Rubicon crossed.
You can take your course; I will take mine.  If you have nothing more
agreeable to say to me, we had better each go our own way, and leave
matters as they are."

"No," said Amos, firmly but sorrowfully; "it shall not be so.  I promise
that you shall have my cheque for fifty pounds when you have placed
little George in my hands, and on the understanding that you pledge your
word, as a man of honour, to leave the children with me unmolested."

"Exactly so," replied the other; "and now, as a little matter of
business, I shall be obliged by your making out the cheque to `John
Smith or Bearer,'--that, certainly, will tell no tales."

"And where shall I send it to meet you? to what address?"

"To no address at all, if you please.  I will be myself at the spot
where the four lanes meet near your house, to the north of the Manor; it
is about a quarter of a mile from you.  Of course you know the place
well.  I will be there at five o'clock to-morrow morning, before the
general world is astir.  You can either meet me there yourself, or send
some trusty person who is sure not to know me.  I need hardly say that
any attempt to surprise or lay violent hands on me on that occasion
would be fruitless, as I should be well on my guard; and, further,
should there be any foul play of any kind, you may depend upon my
removing _both_ my children from your cottage at the earliest
opportunity."

"I understand you," said Amos, "and will send my father's old butler to
take you the cheque at the hour and to the place you name.  The old man
will ask no questions; he will be satisfied to do just what I tell him,
neither more nor less.  You will easily recognise him, as he has snowy-
white hair, and he will be riding on this pony of mine."

"So far so good," said the other; "I have no doubt you will keep your
word.  And now as to the boy.  You will find him at the finger-post on
which his silk handkerchief was tied, at two o'clock this afternoon;
that is to say, if you come alone, and are there punctually."  Then he
rose, and, stretching himself to his full height, saluted Amos with a
bow of exaggerated ceremoniousness, and, turning on his heel, was soon
hidden from view by the trees of the wood.

Sadly and slowly Amos made his way back to the market-town, his
thoughts, as he rode along, being far from pleasant companions.  What
was to be the end of all this?  Could he have done differently?  No.  He
was satisfied that duty plainly called him to the sacrifice which he had
made.  He would have reproached himself bitterly had he lost the
opportunity of recovering his little nephew from such a father.  He had
no doubt, then, taken one right step; the next he must leave to the same
heavenly guidance which never had misled nor could mislead him.  So
having waited in the town till he had refreshed himself with a mid-day
meal, he made his way back along the roads he had travelled the day
before, and in due time arrived in sight of the finger-post, and of the
child who was sitting alone beneath it, his little head buried in his
lap, till, roused by the sound of the pony's feet, he looked up, and
with a joyful cry ran to meet his uncle.  Another moment, and Amos had
sprung from his saddle and was clasping the sobbing, laughing child to
his heart.

"O dear, dear Uncle Amos!" cried the little boy; "how good it is of God
to send you for me.  Oh, don't let the tall, ugly, cruel man take me
away again."

"Not if I can help it, dear child," said his uncle.  "There now, jump
up, Georgie," he added; "we shall soon be at home again."

As he was in the act of remounting, having placed the child on the front
of the saddle, he thought he heard a rustling in the hedge behind the
post, and that he saw the glancing of a dark body through the trees
beyond the hedge.  However, that mattered not; in a very little time,
having put his pony to a brisk canter, he reached the cottage, and
received a hearty welcome from the nurse, and also from old Harry, whose
presence at the house he was not surprised at, when he remembered that
his brother Walter would no doubt have directed the old man to seek for
him there.  But now he began to see that Harry had become acquainted, in
a measure, with his secret; for the nurse called him aside into another
room soon after his return, and told him of the old servant's emotion at
the sight of the little girl, and of his recognising in her the child of
his master's daughter.

Amos was at first considerably disturbed at the old man's having made
this discovery.  Then, by degrees, the conviction grew upon him that
this very discovery might be an important step in the direction of
carrying out the work he had set himself to do.  Surely it had been
permitted for that end; and here was one who would become a helper to
him in the attainment of his purpose.  So, after having pondered over
the matter, as he walked backwards and forwards in the little garden for
some half-hour or more, he called Harry out to him, and took him into
his confidence.

"Harry," he began, "can you keep a secret?"

"Well, Master Amos, that depends upon what sort of a secret it is, and
who tells it me.  Some folks give you secrets to keep which everybody
knows, so that they're gone afore you gets 'em.  But if _you've_ got a
secret for me to keep, you may depend upon it no one shall get it from
me."

"Just so, Harry.  Then I have a secret which I want you to keep for me--
or, perhaps, I had better say that I have something which I should like
to tell you, because I believe you may be able to help me in an
important matter.  And instead of binding you to keep my secret, I shall
just leave it to your own good sense to say nothing about the matter
till the right time comes; and I am sure, when you know all, you will
have no wish to make my business a subject of conversation in the
family, nor of idle gossip out of it."

"You're right there, sir," was the old butler's hearty reply; "you may
trust me.  I've too much respect for the family to go about like a
sieve, shaking such things as I've a notion you're a-going to speak to
me about all up and down the country, for every idle man, woman, and
child to be wagging their tongues about them."

"Well then, Harry," continued his young master, "I shall count upon your
discretion as to silence, and on your help, where you can be of use to
me."

"They're both at your service, Mr Amos."

"Then I shall speak openly to you, and without any reserve.  I need
hardly remind you of the sad beginning of our family troubles.  You will
remember too well how my poor sister left her home, and married secretly
a man altogether beneath her.  You know how terribly my poor father was
cut up by that marriage, and how he closed the door of our home against
Miss Julia, as I must still call her to you.  I am not blaming him nor
excusing her, but just referring to the facts themselves.  I never knew
till to-day who or what my poor sister's husband was.  I never dared
mention the subject to my father, especially after my dear mother had to
leave us; but ever since they were gone from us I have had it on my
heart to make it the great business of my life to get them back again.
I know it can be done, and I believe, with God's help, it will be done.
I have found out to-day that my poor sister's husband is an actor,
evidently a thoroughly unprincipled man.  She went about with him from
one place to another for a while; then he deserted her, before the
children were old enough to know him as their father; and about a year
ago I got a letter from her, telling me that she was left in a miserable
lodging with two little children, and must starve unless somebody helped
her.  I went to see her, and found her mixed up with a number of her
husband's stage acquaintances, from whom she seemed unable to free
herself.  So I promised to supply her with what would keep her from want
till her husband should return to her; and got her to let me have her
two children, whom she was quite unable to feed and clothe, and who
would soon be ruined, I saw, if they were left with their poor mother as
she then was, and with such people about her as friends or
acquaintances.  So I brought the children here, and have put them under
the charge of good Mrs Williams, who knows all about them; and since
then I have been just watching and waiting to see how the Lord would
guide me, and have been content to move as he directs me, one step at a
time.  But yesterday I got a sad check.  The father of the children
enticed away his little boy, and got me to meet him this morning some
miles away from here.  He cared nothing for the child, but only took him
away that he might get some money out of me.  So, when we met this
morning, he engaged to give me back the child if I would promise to send
him a sum of money which he named; and if I would not do so, then he
said he would keep the boy, and bring him up as a stage-player.  That I
would not hear of; so I promised him the money, and he has given me back
the little boy as you see, and has solemnly undertaken not to meddle
with either of the children again.  And now I want you to take the money
for me when we get home.  He is to be at the four turnings above the
Manor-house at five o'clock to-morrow morning, and I am to send him a
cheque in an envelope.  This I have promised, and I want your help in
the matter.  You understand, Harry, how things are?--they are black
enough just now, I grant, but they might be blacker."

The old man, who had listened with breathless interest, now stood still
and looked his young master steadily in the face, while two or three big
tears rolled down his cheeks.

"And so you've been a-sacrificing yourself, Master Amos, for your sister
and her dear children," he said.  "I see it all; but shouldn't I just
like to have fast hold of that rascal's neck with one hand, and a good
stout horsewhip in the other.  But I suppose it's no use wishing for
such things.  Well, I'm your man, sir, as far as I can be of any
service.  But as for him and his promises, what are they worth?  Why,
he'll be just squeezing you as dry as an old sponge as has been lying
for a month in a dust-pan.  He'll never keep his word, not he, while
there's a penny to be got out of you.  And yet, I suppose, you couldn't
have done different for the sake of the poor children, bless their
little hearts.  And I'm to take the money to him?  Yes; and a policeman
or two at the same time would be best.  But no, I suppose not, as you've
promised, and for the credit of the family.  Well, it's a shocking bad
business altogether; but when a man's been and tackled it as you've
done, Master Amos, it'll come right in the end, there's no doubt of it."

"Thank you, Harry, a thousand times," said the other; "and I am sure you
shall see the wisdom of keeping quiet on the subject for the sake of the
family."

"You're safe there with me, Master Amos," was the old man's reply.

So, when Amos and Harry returned to Flixworth Manor, the young man
explained to his father that the little child at the cottage, in whom he
was interested, had been enticed away by a stranger, and that he had
been unable to recover him till that morning, and had, in his search for
the child, been obliged to spend the previous night at the market-town.
Mr Huntingdon, who was just then very fully occupied in planning and
carrying out some improvements on his estate, was satisfied with this
explanation.  So the subject was not further discussed in the family.
On the morning after his return, Amos duly conveyed the cheque, through
Harry, to his brother-in-law.


CHAPTER EIGHT.

BEARING THE CROSS.

Walter's good intentions and resolutions respecting his treatment of his
brother, though sincere when he uttered them in the presence of his
aunt, were by no means strong enough to make him curb his wit or his
displeasure when Amos did anything to annoy or thwart him.  And not only
so; but there abode in his mind a feeling of mingled jealousy and
annoyance when he was constrained to admit to himself his brother's
superiority.  If Amos had some self-imposed duty to perform, why should
he thrust this duty into other people's faces?  Duty was a very fine
thing in its way, no doubt, but grave Mr Duty was a very sour-tempered,
troublesome old fellow when he trode on his neighbour's toes.  And why
should Amos make himself disagreeable by adopting a course of duty which
unfitted him for cordially co-operating with his younger brother in his
schemes?  There was a sort of monasticism in this conduct in Walter's
eyes.  Here was his brother living amongst them, and yet, having taken
the vows of some self-imposed duty upon him, he was looking down upon
them all as though from some higher standing-ground.  What a pity that
he did not retire into a monastery, where he could act out his vows and
his duty without troubling the noses of ordinary mortals like his
relations with this oppressive "odour of sanctity."  So thought Walter;
and he made no concealment of his feelings from Amos, whom he now began
to call "the Monk," or "Father Gengulphus."

Amos took it all very quietly, fully understanding that Walter was vexed
with him for pursuing a path alone, along which his brother neither
could nor would follow him at present.  He was content that it should be
so, and bore the cross patiently, being willing to bide his time,
thankful to notice in Walter a kindlier feeling towards himself on the
whole, and convinced that, in the end, his own motives and work would be
duly appreciated by that brother whom he sincerely loved.

Miss Huntingdon saw what was going on, and rejoiced.  She knew well that
the discipline would only tend to brighten the character of her elder
nephew, and felt sure that Walter would learn by degrees fully to
understand and value his brother.  Meanwhile, she was ever ready to
throw in a little oil when the waters were more than usually troubled.
She knew, too, the strength of Amos's religious character, and the
weakness of any higher or holier principles in Walter's heart; and she
was sure that the steady consistency of her elder nephew would gradually
win on the generous heart of his brother, spite of himself.

Nothing special had occurred to spoil the harmony of feeling between
Amos and Walter for some weeks after the unexpected absence of the
former from home; so that the hearts of the brothers were really being
drawn closer together, notwithstanding natural dissimilarity of
disposition, and the absence in Walter of that high principle and self-
discipline which were moulding his elder brother's character into daily
nearer conformity to Him who is the one only perfect pattern of
humanity.

It was while Walter was thus increasingly becoming sensible of the
superior beauty of his brother's sterling worth and consistency, and was
at the same time secretly resenting the pressure of that nobler life's
influence upon him, being unprepared to follow it out himself and submit
to its gentle restraints and self-denial, that a party of friends was
assembled at dinner one summer evening at the Manor-house.  Mr
Huntingdon did not give dinner-parties now as frequently as in happier
days, and his friends and neighbours understood and appreciated the
cause; but now and then he felt it to be his duty to entertain his
friends in the old way; so, on the present occasion, some thirty guests
sat down to table.

Among those present were an old Mrs Morse, a widow lady, and her
daughter.  The mother was a kind-hearted woman of the world, reasonably
well-to-do, and visited by all the good families in the neighbourhood.
She was very anxious to see her daughter, who was her only child, and
was now passing out of her youthful days, well married, as the world
esteems it; so she was very glad of an opportunity of drawing out Amos
Huntingdon, whom she looked upon as a worthy, weak, shy, dull young man,
rather depressed by his discouraging home surroundings, and not a likely
person to attract or seek the affections of any young lady who might be
fortunate enough to combine the allurements of wealth and beauty.  He
might, however, with a little judicious management, be led to look with
interest on her daughter, and would prove, no doubt, an excellent
husband, as he had means of his own, the prospect of inheriting the
Manor, and was exceedingly amiable, and free from habits of
extravagance.  Gladly, therefore, did she avail herself of the present
opportunity to engage Amos in conversation before dinner was announced,
expressing, at the same time, her regret that she had so seldom the
pleasure of meeting him, and how much it would gratify herself and her
daughter if he would come over now and then and spend a quiet afternoon
or evening with them.  "You know," she continued, "we are quiet people,
and, if report says true, Mr Amos, your own tastes and habits are of
the quiet sort.  We should be so glad to see you in our simple way; and
I think we could show you, in the beauties of our charming
neighbourhood, what would really be a pleasure to you and a refreshment
to your mind."

Amos thanked her, and listened with due decorum to a good deal of small
talk on the old lady's part till dinner was announced, when she so
contrived that he should take her daughter down and sit between them.

Walter was seated just opposite his brother, full of life and fun, as he
threw off his gay remarks now on this side and now on that.  Suddenly he
looked across at Amos, and something in the situation of his brother
between the old lady and her daughter struck him as so irresistibly
funny, that it was with the utmost difficulty that he restrained himself
from a violent outburst of laughter.  And, certainly, to one easily
moved to merriment there was something singularly quaint and almost
comic in the contrast between the subdued but courteous manner of Amos,
who was patiently endeavouring to make himself agreeable to his two
immediate neighbours, and the excited frivolity of Miss Morse's running
fire of worldly commonplaces, occasionally interrupted by her mother's
more staid utterances of a similar character.

Walter thoroughly comprehended the situation, and the reason why such
pains were being taken to draw out his brother; and his satisfaction and
amusement were unbounded at the manifest failure of the effort.  The old
lady caught Walter's eye, and divining somewhat of the cause of its
merry twinkle, coloured, and was silent.  Her daughter also looked
uneasily across the table, and then exclaimed,--

"Were you at Lady Gambit's garden-party last Tuesday, Mr Walter?"

"No," he replied; "I was not there."

"Then I can tell you that you missed a treat," said the other.

"Why, what was the special attraction?" he asked.

"Oh, everything that you can imagine!"

"Well, I can imagine so many things," said Walter laughing, "that I am
quite sure her ladyship's garden could never have held them all.  Pray,
tell me what you yourself thought _the_ attraction _par excellence_."

"Yes, I can do that.  You know these garden-parties are generally rather
dull affairs after all."

"What! with those numberless attractions?"

"Yes; one gets weary of them.  You know, go where you will, it's the
same thing over and over again."

"But it seems that it was not so in this case."

"No, it was not.  Her ladyship, no doubt, wished to make a little
variety, and so she was good enough to provide us with something new."

"Dear me!" cried Walter; "how I should have liked being there!  What was
the novelty?  Was it a temperance lecture, or a Band of Hope meeting for
the benefit of the old boys and girls of sixty or seventy years of age?
That must have been very lively.  Or perhaps it was a Protestant address
against nunneries and monasteries.  My brother Amos would have liked to
have had a word on that subject."

"No, no, Mr Walter; you must not be foolish."

"Well, do tell me.  I am all anxiety to know what this attractive
novelty was.  Not a conjurer? that would have been capital fun."

"No, not a conjurer exactly."

"Well, then, something of the sort?"

"Yes; Lady Gambit had engaged a celebrated mimic--a man, I mean, who can
take off other people to the life."

"Indeed," said Walter.  "Perhaps it might have been as well if he had
taken himself off.  But, excuse my nonsense; what did he mimic?"

"Oh, all sorts of funny people.  We all gathered round him under the
great sycamore tree, and he kept us in peals of laughter for an hour."

"Tell me, please, some of the characters he took off."

"I can remember two especially.  One of them was a drunkard, and the
other was a hypocrite.  In taking off the drunkard he called himself
`Mr Adolphus Swillerly.'  You never heard anything more amusing in your
life."

"And the hypocrite?" asked Walter, but with less of amusement in his
tone.

"Ah, I think that was better still!  He assumed the character of `Simon
Batter-text;' and he mimicked his preaching, and his praying, and his
sighs, and his `ahmens' in a wonderful way.  It really was perfect.  I'm
so sorry you were not there, you would have so thoroughly enjoyed it."

There was a pause, and a general silence, for the attention of the rest
of the company had been drawn to the subject and the speakers.

"Surely you don't see any harm in a little fun like that?" asked the
young lady in some dismay, as she noticed that Walter's face and manner
were troubled as he hesitated in his reply.

All eyes were on him.  What should he say?  He turned very red; and
then, having helped himself to a glass of wine, he said, carelessly, and
with a short, merry laugh, "Harm! oh, of course not!  The man meant no
harm; he didn't attack individuals.  All the better if he made
drunkenness and hypocrisy ridiculous.--Don't you think so, Amos?"

For a moment his brother hesitated, for every eye was directed towards
him.  No one spoke; not a knife nor fork clattered.

"Well, my boy," said his father, "let us have your opinion."

Thus appealed to, Amos no longer hesitated, but said calmly, and in a
low distinct voice, heard by every one at the table, "I had rather not
have given my opinion; but, when I am thus openly appealed to, I must
not shrink from expressing it.  I think it wrong, utterly wrong, to
ridicule sin in any shape or form.  To put sin in a funny light is not
the way to make us hate it as we ought to do.  Our Saviour never made
light or a jest of sin; and I believe that the man who mimicked a
drunkard and a hypocritical preacher had no love for either sobriety or
holiness."

The profoundest silence reigned while Amos uttered these words.  At
first his voice had trembled, but it immediately became perfectly firm,
and a quiet peace rested on his sweet face as he finished.  A sudden
chill seemed to have fallen on most of the party.  Some shrugged their
shoulders, some smiled, others looked annoyed.  Mrs Morse and her
daughter exchanged looks of bewilderment behind Amos's back.  Walter,
with feelings of mingled shame and vexation, glanced at the bright face
of his aunt, whose eyes swam with grateful tears.  Then he glanced down:
her hands were crossed; yes, he knew that it would be so.  And how felt
Mr Huntingdon?  To the surprise of all, and of none more than Amos
himself, he exclaimed, "That's right, Amos; you've spoken out like a
man, and I believe you are right."

For a while there was silence; then a gentleman near the squire's end of
the table asked his next neighbour, "What sort of a looking man was this
same mimic?  I believe you were at Lady Gambit's."

"Yes, I was there," replied the other.  "I can't say much in his favour.
He was not a bad-looking fellow,--black hair, if it was his own, black
piercing eyes, and a black beard.  I can't imagine where her ladyship
picked him up."

"But _I_ can," said a gentleman opposite.  "He is some strolling player.
He got, it would seem, access to Lady Gambit's ear in some underhand
way; and he has done now what our young friend Walter suggested a little
while ago that he might as well have done sooner.  Having taken other
people off, he has taken himself off also, and has contrived to carry
some twenty pounds of her ladyship's money with him, which he managed to
swindle her out of; and the police are on the look-out for him.  I heard
that only this morning from the sergeant himself."

Poor Amos! how terribly his heart sank within him when he heard these
words!  Yes; he could have little doubt about it.  This mimic and
swindler, he felt assured, was none other than his own brother-in-law.
Happily, however, he was pretty sure to be now out of the neighbourhood,
and was not likely to show himself soon again.  But what of his unhappy
wife?  Alas!  Amos dreaded to think what the unprincipled man might do
with or against her.

Glad, heartily glad, were both the brothers when the dinner was over,
and the rest of the evening, after "dragging its slow length along," had
at last come to an end.  Walter, indeed, rattled away in the drawing-
room to every one's content but his own.  Still, a chill had fallen on
more than one of the party; and as for poor Mrs Morse and her daughter,
after endeavouring to make themselves agreeable by gusts which were
followed by portentous lulls, they were glad to order their carriage and
take their departure at the earliest hour consistent with politeness.

And now, when all the guests had taken leave, and Miss Huntingdon had
retired to her room, happy in the prospect of coming rest, she heard a
sort of half scuffle at her door, followed by a knock.  Then in came
Walter, dragging in some one after him who was evidently reluctant to be
thus introduced.  "Can you, oh, can you, dear aunt, spare me--ay, spare
_us_,--that means me and Amos, or, rather, it ought to be Amos and me,--
just a few minutes?  Amos doesn't want to come, just like his unselfish
self, but I do.  No, I don't want to tire you after all your fatigues,
but I can't go to sleep till I have had a word from you.  If you don't
let me stop, if you don't say that word, I shall lie awake all night,
thinking of those hands--not _cross_, for their owner is never cross,
but _crossed_--those crossed hands.  Or if I do go to sleep, I shall do
nothing but dream of them.  So pray let me stop; and Amos must stop
too."

The permission to remain having been cheerfully granted, Walter hauled
his brother into a chair, and then, stooping over him, kissed his
forehead.  Then he flung himself on his knees and looked up wistfully
into Miss Huntingdon's face.  Oh, how entirely did she forget all
weariness, as she marked the effect that Walter's kiss had on his
brother; how it brought tears from those eyes which had long known
little of weeping except for sorrow.

"Well, dear boy," she said, "and what would you have with me now?"

"Ah! auntie, I want those hands to talk to me, and I want Amos to hear
them talk.  I want you to tell us both some of your moral courage
anecdotes; they will strengthen him and be a lesson to me; for I don't
want you to tell me this time that I was wrong.  There sits the brave
man, here kneels the coward."

"Dear, dear boy," was Miss Huntingdon's reply, with a warm embrace,
"yes; what you say is true.  It _did_ require true moral courage to
speak up as Amos did, at such a time and before so many; and we have
some noble instances on record of such a courage under somewhat similar
circumstances, and these show us that conduct like this will force
respect, let the world say and think what it pleases.  I have two or
three heroes to bring forward on this topic, but I must be brief, as the
hour is late.

"You remember Frederick the Great, as he was called.  Alas! he was great
in infidelity as well as in war; and he delighted to gather round him
those who shared in the same unbelieving views.  God and his truth were
subjects of ridicule with them; and a bold man indeed would he be who
would venture to say in their presence a word in favour of the gospel or
of respect for its divine Author.  But there was such a one amongst
those who had the privilege of sitting at the king's table; an old grey-
headed man of rank, who had fought his country's battles nobly, and
whose wise counsels in state affairs were highly prized by his
sovereign.  He was dining one day at the palace, and saw all round him
none but those who made a mock of sin and religion.  The conversation
flowed freely, and the smart jests of Frederick called forth similar
flashes of wit from his different guests.  The subject of Christianity
soon came up, and was immediately handled in the most profane and bitter
style by the king and those around him.  No wit is so cheap as profane
wit; for the devil seems to give a special facility of sarcasm to those
who attack God's truth; and, besides that, there seems nothing which
ungodly men relish so much, for giving point to their blasphemies, as
Scripture facts or words misquoted, misapplied, or parodied.  So the
gospel and its Founder were bandied from tongue to tongue as a theme for
unholy mirth.  But presently there was a pause and a dead silence; for
the grey-headed old soldier, who had sat perfectly silent and deeply
pained, as he listened to the unhallowed talk of his companions, rose to
his feet, his face flushed, and his hoary head bowed down.  What was
coming now?

"`May it please your majesty,' the old man began, while the tears ran
down his cheeks, and his voice was troubled, `I have always, as I am
sure you will acknowledge, behaved with due respect to your majesty
whenever in your majesty's presence; nor can any one here say that he
has ever heard me speak evil of your majesty behind your back.  Your
majesty knows, also, that I have endeavoured to serve you faithfully on
the field and in the council-chamber.  You must therefore bear with me
while I say that I cannot sit patiently by and hear your majesty join
with your friends in speaking evil of the dearest friend I have, one
dearer to me than my life, and whom I must hold in greater honour than
even your majesty.  I mean my Saviour and heavenly King, the Lord Jesus
Christ.  Pardon me, therefore, your majesty, if I ask leave to withdraw
at once.'

"Just imagine, dear boys, such a speech in such a company, for to such
effect were the words spoken by that noble old soldier of the Cross.
Ah! it is comparatively easy to stand up for the truth in our day and
country, because religion is now universally respected by all people of
good sense and refinement, even by those who do not follow it; and
anything like an open attack upon Christianity, in a mixed company,
would be frowned upon by society as being ungentlemanly and in bad
taste.  But it was not so in Frederick's court, where a profession of
infidel opinions was almost held to be an essential in one who would
make any pretension to intellectual acuteness.  And the old officer knew
this well.  He knew the scorn which would glare upon him from the eyes
of the other guests.  He expected nothing but sneering pity, where such
sentiments as his own could not be visited with a severer penalty.  But
he did not hang back through fear of man.  He could say, as David says
in the Psalms, `I will speak of thy testimonies even before kings, and
will not be ashamed.'  Was he not a true moral hero, dear Walter?"

"An out-and-out one, dear aunt," was his reply.  "But what did the king
say to this?"

"The king behaved on this occasion like a king and a man.  Poor king, he
was not without a heart that could, at times, feel as it ought to do.
He at once turned to the faithful old servant of the great Master, and,
checking all attempts at ridicule or retort in the other guests, assured
him that he thoroughly respected and appreciated his feelings and
motives and his present conduct, and that never again would he himself
say anything against the old man's faith nor his Saviour while he was
by, nor would he suffer any who might be with him to do so."

"Hip, hip, hurrah!" said Walter.  "The old man got the best of it after
all; and so will my brother Amos here, spite of his having such an
unworthy coward of a brother as poor Walter.  But you have another
example for us, auntie; nothing like knocking the nail on the head.  I
feel better already, and mean to be a perfect moral lion for bravery in
future; at least I hope so."

"I hope so too, Walter," said his aunt with a smile.  "I will give you,
then, one other instance of the same sort of moral courage, but taken
from quite a different country, and occurring in our own days; and then
I think we shall have had lessons enough for to-night.  My hero this
time is an American, and a young man too.

"You will have heard of the remarkable revival which took place in that
country, I mean in the United States, some few years since.  Of course,
at such seasons there will be a mixture of good and evil.  Not all who
make a profession will stand firm; while those who have been merely
carried along by the current of excitement will return at last to the
world, from which they have never really separated themselves, when the
excitement has passed away.  But, indeed, a great and lasting work for
God was accomplished in that revival, and the young man I am speaking
about was one of the fruits of it.

"He had been living a very gay and thoughtless life.  I am not sure that
he had been indulging in any openly sinful practices; but, at any rate,
he had been giving himself up wholly to the pursuit of this world.  He
was in a good social position, and possessed of abundant means.
Moreover, he had received a good education, so far as mere learning
went, and was of pleasing and popular manners.  The last thing he would
have thought of would have been turning a Christian.  But God, whose
thoughts are not as our thoughts, had better things in store for him.
The revival wave swept over the neighbourhood where he was, and carried
him along with it.  His heart, his views, his aims were all really
changed; he was, indeed and in truth, a new creature.  And now he felt
that he must not hide his colours, he must nail them to the mast, or,
rather, he must wrap them round him that, go where he might, every one
might see them.  His was that thorough-going, energetic, outspeaking
disposition which has accomplished such marvellous earthly things
through so many of his fellow-countrymen.  He was not the person to do
anything by halves.

"Before his conversion, himself and several other young men, of like
tastes and habits, used to meet weekly at one another's houses, in turn,
for card-playing and carousing; and at these meetings he used to be the
very life of the party, the gayest of the gay.  But what should he do
now?  It would be no easy matter to confess to his young associates the
change that had taken place in his heart.  What would they think and
say?  Perhaps he might let it get known by degrees, and then he could
just absent himself from the old gatherings, and merely drop out of a
society no longer congenial to him.  This would save him a great deal of
shame and reproach.  Would not this be as much as could be reasonably
expected of him, and sufficient to show his sincerity and consistency?
It might have satisfied ordinary characters, but it did not satisfy him.
He wanted to be doing something at once for the Master, and to begin
with those very young men who had been his companions in sin.  So he
sent round his printed invitations to every one of them to a gathering
in his own house.  Such had been the custom with all the members of
their fraternity.  But this time the invitation was no longer to `Tea
and Cards,' but to `Tea and Prayer.'  It was, indeed, a bold stroke, but
it was not the act of the moment from mere impulse or excitement.

"The day of meeting came.  A few of his old acquaintances arrived, some,
it may be, out of curiosity, or supposing that the `Prayer' was only a
joke.  But none were left in doubt.  Plainly, lovingly, faithfully, he
set before them how the change had been wrought in himself, and how
happy it had made him; and then he affectionately urged them all to take
the same course as he had done.  And I believe that his noble and
courageous dealing was not in vain.  Am I wrong, Walter, in classing
that young American gentleman among my moral heroes?"

"No, dear aunt, certainly not," replied her nephew thoughtfully.  "I
think he deserves a foremost place;--don't you, Amos?"

"Yes," replied his brother; "he reminds me of the greatest, perhaps, of
all moral heroes--I mean, of course, among beings like ourselves.  I am
thinking of the apostle Paul, who changed at once from the persecutor to
the preacher; gave up every earthly honour and advantage; braved the
bitter scorn of his old friends; and, without hesitation, began
immediately publicly to proclaim the gospel which he had before been mad
to destroy."

Walter held out his hand to his brother, and the clasp was a close and
mutual one; and then, hand in hand, they left their aunt, who laid her
head on her pillow that night with deep thankfulness in her heart, for
she saw that, spite of all drawbacks, there was a good work making
progress in Walter, and that the high and holy character of the true and
tried disciple of the Saviour was gaining strength and beauty in the
once despised and misunderstood Amos.


CHAPTER NINE.

IS IT GENUINE?

But though Walter was learning to understand and appreciate his
brother's character, and to acknowledge his superiority to himself in
moral courage, he was not altogether satisfied with continuing to lie
under the sense of that superiority on his brother's part.  He had
himself been so constantly made the object of his father's admiration
and outspoken praises, and had always been so popular with all friends
of the family and guests at the Manor-house, that anything like a
feeling of inferiority to his brother was one which he found it very
hard to allow a lodging in his heart and thoughts.  So, while the
generous impulse of the moment had led him to applaud and rejoice in his
brother's noble moral courage, when they were discussing the matter in
his aunt's room, he was by no means prepared, when that impulse had died
away, to allow Amos to carry off and retain the palm which he
acknowledged that he had won.  Jealousy of his brother's reputation for
moral courage with Miss Huntingdon was a meanness which he would have
thought himself incapable of, and which he would have repudiated
indignantly had he been charged with it.  Nevertheless, it was there in
his heart; it made him restless and dissatisfied, and kept him longing
for an opportunity to display a moral courage which should shine with a
light that might, even in his aunt's eyes, eclipse, or at any rate
equal, that which glowed so brightly in Amos.  He was therefore on the
watch for such an opportunity; and before long that opportunity, as he
thought, presented itself.

One morning as the squire was reading the county paper, while his sister
was superintending the preparations for breakfast, and her two nephews
were seated near her, Mr Huntingdon exclaimed suddenly, in a tone of
angry excitement, "Why, whatever is the meaning of this?  Walter, my
boy, whatever does it mean?"

"What, father?" asked his son in a voice of mingled uneasiness and
surprise.

"Why, just listen to this advertisement:--`I hereby challenge the
working-men of this neighbourhood to a trial of skill in running,
leaping, and shooting; and I promise to give a sovereign to any man who
shall beat me in a mile race, a high jump, and firing at a mark.  The
trial to come off on Marley Heath, on Tuesday, June 8th, at four o'clock
p.m.

"`Signed, Walter Huntingdon, Flixworth Manor.'--Do you know anything
about this, Walter?  Did you really put this advertisement into the
paper? or is it a disgraceful hoax?"

Poor Walter looked perfectly astounded, as did also his aunt and
brother.  Then he said, with some hesitation, "It is no advertisement of
mine."

"No, I thought not," said his father indignantly.  "It must be, then, a
most shameful hoax; and I shall speak or write to the editor about it in
pretty strong terms you may be sure."

"Father," said Walter sadly, and after a pause, "it is no hoax."

"No hoax!  What do you mean?  You said you did not put the advertisement
in; so it must be a hoax."

"I will explain it," said his son in a subdued voice.  "The other day,
young Saunders, Gregson, and myself were discussing which of us was the
best shot, and best at a race and a jump.  `Well,' said I, `we can
easily put it to the test.  Let us meet to-morrow on Marley Heath and
have it out.'  So we brought our guns with us next day; and Saunders and
Gregson brought a few other fellows with them to look on and see all
fair.  We three fired at a mark, and leapt over a rod hung across two
poles, and tried who was best runner over a hundred yards; and I won the
day in all three things.  So, as we were sitting down in the little
roadside inn, where we all had some eggs and bacon and bread and cheese
together for lunch, Gregson said to the other fellows, `Why, our friend
Walter here might challenge the whole county.'  `That he might; and win
too,' said more than one of them.  `I don't know,' I said; `but I
shouldn't mind offering a sovereign to any working-man in the
neighbourhood who would beat me.'  `Good,' said Saunders; `there's many
a working-man that would like to have a try for your sovereign; and it
would be capital fun to see the match come off.'  `What do you say to
putting an advertisement in the county paper to that effect?' said
Gregson.  `Not I,' I said; `I shall do nothing of the sort.'  `Ah, he's
backing out,' said Saunders.  `Indeed, I'm not,' I cried; `I meant what
I said.'  `Well, will you let me put the advertisement in in your name?
Don't be modest, man; you're sure to win,' said Gregson.  `You can do so
if you like,' I replied; `I have no intention to go back from my word.'
I said this half in joke and half in earnest, and no doubt we were all a
little excited with the sport and with the lunch; but I never dreamed
that Gregson was serious when he talked about putting in the
advertisement in my name, and I shall not soon forgive him for getting
me into such a fix.  So, father, that's just all about it."

Mr Huntingdon listened to this explanation with much surprise and
vexation, and then was silent.

"And what do you mean to do about it, Walter?" asked his aunt.  "You
surely won't let the matter go on."

"I don't see how I can help it," was her nephew's reply; "the challenge
has been publicly given in my name."

"It can't be--it mustn't be," exclaimed his father angrily; "it's
perfectly preposterous.  We shall be the talk and the jest of the whole
county.  It will do harm, too, to the working-classes.  Why, you'll have
all the idle vagabonds there.  Some light-fingered and light-heeled
poacher will win your sovereign--you'll be the laughing-stock of all the
country round, and so shall I too.  And such a thing, instead of
encouraging patient industry and sobriety, will be just the means of
giving heart to the idlers and the profligates.  It must not be, Walter,
my boy."

His son did not reply for some time; at last he said, "I don't see how I
can back out of it; I've pledged my word.  I'm sorry for it, and I'm
willing to take all the shame and blame to myself, and all the ridicule,
if I'm beaten.  You may depend upon it I won't be caught in this way
again, but I must go through with it now."

All this probably originated in the East, where the dog was held
in abhorrence as the common scavenger of the streets.]

[Footnote 11: Arrian's 'Cynegeticus', cap 26.]

[Footnote 12: ''New Sporting Magazine, vol. xiv. p. 97.]

[Footnote 13: Oppian's 'Cynegeticus', lib. i. v. 468-480.]

[Footnote 14:

["At contrà faciles, magnique Lycaones armis.
Sed non Hyrcanæ satis est vehementia genti."]]

[Footnote 15: Pope's 'Odyssey', xvii.]

* * * * *

CHAPTER II.

THE VARIETIES OF THE DOG.

FIRST DIVISION.

The head more or less elongated, the parietal bones widest at the base
and gradually approaching to each other as they ascend, and the
condyls of the lover jaw being on the same line with the upper molar
teeth.

To this division belong the greater number of the
WILD DOGS.

The wild dog, as existing in considerable numbers or communities,
seems to be nearly extirpated in the southern parts of Europe; but
there are several cases on record, of dogs having assumed native
independence.

A black greyhound bitch, belonging to a gentleman in Scarisbrick, in
Lancashire, though she had apparently been well broken in, and always
well used, ran away from the habitation of her master, and betook
herself to the woods.

She killed a great number of hares and made free with the sheep, and
became an intolerable nuisance to the neighbourhood.

She was occasionally seen, and the depredations that were committed were
brought home to her. Many were the attempts made to entrap or destroy
her, but in vain: for more than six months she eluded the vigilance of
her pursuers. At length she was observed to creep into a hole in an
old barn. She was caught as she came out, and the barn being searched
three whelps were found, which, very foolishly, were destroyed.

The bitch evinced the utmost ferocity, and, although well secured,
attempted to seize every one who approached her. She was, however, dragged
home and treated with kindness. By degrees her ferocity abated.
In the course of two months, she became perfectly reconciled to her
original abode, and, a twelve-month afterwards (1822), she ran
successfully several courses.

There was still a degree of wildness in her appearance; but, although
at perfect liberty, she seemed to be altogether reconciled to a domestic
life.

In 1784 a dog was left by a smuggling vessel on the coast of
Northumberland. He soon began to worry the sheep for his subsistence,
and did so much mischief that he caused very considerable alarm. He was
frequently pursued by hounds and greyhounds; but when the dogs came
up he lay upon his back as if supplicating for mercy, and in that
position they would never hurt him.

He therefore lay quietly until the hunters approached, when he made
off without being followed by the hounds until they were again
excited to the pursuit. He one day led them 30 miles in this way. It
was more than three months before he was caught and was then shot [1].

A dog with every character of the wild one has occasionally been seen
in some of the forests of Germany, and among the Pyrenean mountains;
but he has rarely been found gregarious there. In the country on
the eastern side of the Gulf of Venice wild dogs are more frequent.
They increase in the Austrian and Turkish dominions, and are found
on almost every part of the coast of the Black Sea, but even there
they rarely gather in flocks: they do not howl in concert, as the
wolf; nor are they the precursors of other and larger beasts, like
the jackal. Most of these dogs have the muzzle and head elongated,
the ears erect, triangular, and small, the body and neck large and
muscular, and the tail short, but with a brush of crisped hair. In
many parts of Arabia the wild dog--or 'dakhun'--is occasionally
found. In Persia, they are most decidedly congregated together, and
still more so in almost every part of India [2].
Mr. Hodgson has favoured the Zoological Society with an account of
THE WILD DOG OF NEPAL,
the 'búánsú', and, finding it more or less prevailing through the
whole of Northern India, and even southward of the coast of Coromandel,
he thought that he had discovered the primitive race of the dog.
This is a point that can never be decided.the bullet had struck the target, but not very near the centre.  A
second and third were equally but not more successful.  The fourth
struck the bull's-eye, the fifth the ring next it, and the sixth the
bull's-eye again.  Bravo! shouted the excited crowd; would any one beat
that?  Forward now came a sober-looking young man, and did his best, but
this was far short of what Walter had achieved.  Two others followed
with no better success.  Then came one who handled his gun very
carefully, and took his aims with great deliberation.  Three shots in
the bull's-eye! here was a winner--would any one come up to him?  Four
more came forward, and two of these again scored three shots in the
bull's-eye.  And now the rough-looking man, who had excited the general
mirth of the crowd on his arrival, took his stand opposite the target.
He gazed at it a full minute before raising his piece.  There was a
derisive titter throughout the spectators as at last he did so in an
awkward style, and with a queer twist of his mouth.  The next moment he
was rigid as a statue cut out of stone.  Flash! bang! the bull's-eye;
again the bull's-eye; two more very near it; twice again the bull's-eye.
So he has made the best score after all.  "I thought so," he cried,
with a swaggering toss of his head and a jaunty whistle, and then with a
flourish of his rifle high in air he strode back into the midst of the
onlookers.  Thus there were four of the competitors who had outdone
Walter in the firing at the mark.

But the running and jumping yet remained to be contested.  The jumping
was arranged to come next, and the four winners in the shooting prepared
to do their best against their young challenger: Walter was now
thoroughly roused, and, taking off his coat, and exchanging his boots
for a pair of light shoes, stepped forward to exert himself to his
utmost.  Higher and higher did he bound over the cross-rod as it was
raised for him by his friends peg by peg.  Jumping was a feat in which
he specially prided himself, and loud was the applause of Gregson,
Saunders, and their friends as he sprang over the rod time after time.
At last he failed to clear it, and his utmost was done.  And now the
previous winners came on in turn.  The first who made the attempt soon
gave in; he was clearly inferior to Walter in the high jump.  The next
surpassed him by one peg.  The third equalled him.  And now came forward
the strange-looking man on whom all eyes were eagerly bent.  He had
divested himself of his coat and dirty neck-tie, and having kicked off
his shoes, looked round him with a snort and a wild grimace, and then
ran forward with a light, skipping step, and cleared the first stick
without the slightest effort.  Each succeeding height was leapt over
with the same ease, till he had equalled the most successful jumper.
"And now for a topper," he cried, as the rod was raised by still another
peg.  Throwing all his energies into the effort, with a rush and a
mighty bound he cleared the stick by nearly a foot, and danced gaily
back to the starting-point amidst the vociferous applause of all
present.  Therefore Walter had now the two to contend with in the foot-
race who had surpassed him in the high jump.  The interest of the crowd
was now at boiling-point, and all sorts of conjectures, opinions, and
affirmations were circulated as to the issue of the trial, while the
three who were to run were resting a while.  At length, cheered on by
the sympathising shouts of the impatient spectators, they placed
themselves abreast, stripped of all superfluous garments, and at a
signal from Gregson the race began.  Walter commenced warily, husbanding
his strength, and not quickening his speed till he had reached the
middle of the course; the one of the remaining two did much the same.
As for the other, the wild-looking winner of the highest place in the
two previous contests, he slouched along amidst peals of laughter all
through the line.  Nevertheless, it was soon evident that, although
dropping behind a little in the first quarter of a mile, he was
gradually drawing up nearer and nearer to the front.  When Walter had
accomplished three-fourths of his task, and was now putting on extra
speed, the wild stranger, with a shout of "Victory for ever!" flung
himself forward at a tremendous speed, and kept easily ahead to the end.
The two remaining racers now pressed on abreast till within a yard of
the place from whence they started, when, by a last vehement effort,
Walter's companion came in a foot or two in advance.  All flung
themselves on the grass, and when the hubbub of cheers and shouts had
subsided, Walter rose to his feet, and holding out a hand to each of the
victors, said with a laugh, "Fairly beaten."

Gradually now the crowd began to disperse, while the little band of
competitors gathered round a cart which had been brought up by Walter's
direction carrying some refreshments for himself and his friends, and
those who had tried skill and endurance with him.  When the provisions
had been duly partaken of, Walter, taking out his purse, turned to those
about him and said: "And now, to whom am I to give the sovereign, for
two have beaten me?"

"Oh, to our friend here, of course," said Gregson, placing his hand on
the strange-looking man's shoulder, "for he has done the best right
through."

"Come forward, then, my man," said Walter; "and pray, may I ask your
name?"

"Oh," said the man addressed, with a laugh, "every one knows my name--
Jim Jarrocks they calls me."

"Well, Jim, here's your sovereign, and you've fairly won it."

"Thank'ee, sir," said Jim; "and so has Will Gittins here, if I'm not
mistaken."

"How do you mean?" asked Saunders; "the sovereign was offered to the
best man."

"Them's not the terms of the advertisement," said Jim, taking the
newspaper out of his pocket.  "Here it is: `I promise to give one
sovereign to any man who shall beat me in a mile race, a high jump, and
firing at a mark.'  Now, I've done it and won my sovereign, and Will
Gittins has done it and won his sovereign too."

It was even so.  Two had fairly won the prize.  So Walter, not with the
best grace, felt in his purse for a second sovereign, which he handed to
the other winner; and the two men walked away from the place of meeting
arm in arm.

"Walter," said Gregson earnestly and apologetically as they left the
ground, "I never meant this nor thought of it.  I can't let you be out
of pocket this second sovereign; you must allow me to give it you back."

But Walter declined it, spite of earnest remonstrance and pressure on
his friend's part.  "No," he said; "I've got myself into a nice mess by
my folly; but what I've undertaken I mean to carry out, and take my own
burdens upon myself."  And so, notwithstanding the applause and fine
speeches showered on him by his friends, Walter returned home
considerably crestfallen and out of spirits, the only thing that
comforted him being a sort of half conviction that he had shown a
considerable degree of moral courage in the way in which he had stuck to
and carried out his engagement.

As for Mr Huntingdon, his mortification was extreme when there appeared
in the next issue of the county paper a full description of the contest,
from which it appeared that his favourite son had been beaten in a
public trial of skill by Jim Jarrocks, well-known all over the county as
the most reckless poacher and unblushing profligate anywhere about, and
had thus given encouragement to a man who was constantly before the
magistrates for all sorts of minor breaches of the law.  However, he
felt that he must make the best of it, and he therefore spoke of it
among his friends as a bit of foolish practical joking on his son's
part, in which he had burned his fingers pretty severely, and which
would therefore, he had no doubt, read him a lesson to avoid anything of
the sort in the future.

As for Walter himself, he was only too glad to keep silent on the
matter, and let it die out; and so were the family generally.  There was
one, however, from whom Walter looked for sympathy, and even for a
measure of approbation--this was his aunt.  In the evening, after the
article in the county paper on his challenge and its results had been
read with severe comments by his father at the breakfast-table, he found
Miss Huntingdon sitting alone in the summer-house.  Having cut two or
three small slips off a laurel, he brought them to her, and, as he sat
down by her side, said, half mournfully, half playfully, "Auntie, I want
you to make me a laurel crown or chaplet of these."

"Indeed, Walter; what for?"

"That I may wear it as a reward from you, and a token of victory in
moral courage."

"Well, but, my dear boy, if the laurels are to be looked at as a reward
from myself, I cannot crown you till I am satisfied that you have won
them."

"Exactly so, auntie; now that is just what I am going to show you."

"Do so, dear boy, and I shall be only too rejoiced to make the chaplet,
and to place it with my own hands on your head."

"Well then, dear aunt, you have heard all about this wretched business
of the race; you may be sure that it has made me feel very small and
very foolish."

"I can quite understand that," said Miss Huntingdon; "and I have felt
very sorry for you in the matter; but I hope it may turn out for good,
and make you a little more cautious."

"I hope so too, auntie; but this is not the point with me just now.  I
want to get credit, from you at any rate, for a little bit, perhaps only
a very little bit, of moral heroism or courage."

"Well, Walter?"

"Ah, now, auntie, that `well' didn't sound well.  I'm afraid I shan't
get much credit or encouragement from you."

"Let me hear all about it, dear boy," said his aunt kindly.

"Why then, you see, I made a foolish offer, and might have backed out of
it; and if I had done so I should have pleased my father and saved my
money, and not have encouraged one of the biggest scamps going, and have
been spared a lot of chaffing and ridicule.  But you see I had given my
word, though it was only half a word after all, for I never dreamed that
Gregson would have taken me up as he did.  But rather than break my
word, I stood by what I had promised, and got all sorts of bother and
trouble by doing so.  Now, wasn't that something like moral courage?
Don't I deserve my laurels?"

"It was something _like_ it," replied his aunt gravely.

"Is that all, auntie?  Wasn't it the thing itself?  You know there has
been no dash or mere impulse here.  The men followed them in file.
Thus they walked in the sunshine among the luxuriant grass and had
the appearance of field spirits bowing now and then, and weeping,
for their hearts were filled with pity and sorrow.

Zbyszko was kneeling in the shade beside the litter, with his head
upon Danusia's knees, speechless and motionless, as if he too were
dead.

But the gatherers kept on plucking here and there, marigolds,
buttercups, bellflowers and plenty of red and white sweet-smelling
little blossoms.

They also found in the small moist hollows in the meadow, lilies
of the valley, and upon the margin near the fallow ground, they got
St.

John's wort until they had gathered their arms full. Then they sadly
surrounded the litter and began to adorn it, until they had covered
the dead with flowers and herbs; they only left the face uncovered,
which in the midst of the bellflowers and lilies looked white,
peaceful, calm, as in eternal sleep, serene, and quite angelic.

The distance to Spychow was less than three miles. Then, when they had
shed copious tears of sorrow and pain, they carried the litter
toward the forest where Jurand's domains began.

The men led the horses in front of the retinue. Zbyszko himself carried
the litter upon his head, and the women loaded with the surplus
of the bunches of flowers and herbs, sang hymns.

They moved very slowly along the herb-covered meadows and the grey fallow
fields and had the appearance of a funeral procession. Not a cloudlet
marred the blue clear sky, and the region warmed itself in the golden
rays of the sun.

The further adventures of Zbyszko will be found in a subsequent volume.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: The Benedictine Abbey at Tyniec was in Poland as important
and rich, relatively, as the Abbey of Saint-Germain des Près in
France.

Now, I will give you an illustration of what I
mean by an example.  And first, I would remind you that all my heroes
hitherto have been those who showed their moral courage about worthy
objects; for instance, Washington, Howard, Colonel Gardiner, the young
man in the American revival.  But the person whose moral courage I am
now going to mention was not on other occasions one of my heroes, but
his conduct on one particular occasion is specially to the point just
now.  For I want you to see, dear boy, that true moral courage is shown,
not in sticking to a thing just because you have said it, when you must
know that you ought not to have said it, but in giving up what you have
said, and bearing the reproach of doing so, when you have become
convinced that you have said or undertaken what was wrong.  It is duty,
in fact, that makes all the difference."

"I see it, auntie; and who's your hero now?"

"Frederick the Great of Prussia, Walter."

"What! the man who ridiculed that good officer's religion?"

"The same; but remember that, while he ridiculed religion, he was
constrained to honour that officer for his consistency.  But his moral
courage was exhibited on a very different occasion.  Now, you must
remember what sort of a man Frederick was,--he just resembled a spoiled
child, who could not brook the slightest thwarting of his will or
pleasure.  In some things he was a miser, and in others just the
reverse.  He wore his uniform till it was patched and threadbare, while
he gave two dollars each for cherries in the winter.  He would pay
enormous sums to secure a singer, and then refuse to allow the opera-
house to be lighted with wax-candles, so that the pleasure of the
evening was spoiled by the smell of tallow.  He was, unhappily, well-
known in the army for two peculiarities,--first, a temper of such iron
unforgiveness that, if he had taken offence at any one, that man's
career was closed, he was never employed again; and, second, a memory of
such tenacity that not a hope existed of entrapping him into
forgetfulness.

"Now, among his officers there was a colonel, a very brave man, and a
capital soldier, who, on one occasion, had made some slight military
slip or blunder.  This drew on him the king's displeasure, and was never
forgotten.  So his pension or half-pay allowance was made the very
lowest his rank would permit; for these allowances were regulated by the
king himself.

"The poor colonel had a wife and a large family of children; he did not
understand how to make the best of his small income, nor to improve it
by other employment, so that he was at last reduced to what was little
short of beggary and starvation.  Day after day he placed himself in the
royal ante-chamber and begged an audience; but the king would not hear
him, and one day got into a towering passion when the officer-in-waiting
ventured to utter the poor man's name in the king's presence.  At last
the colonel grew desperate.  He could not make up his mind to beg; his
wife was ill, his children starving,--what was he to do?  He hit upon
the curious idea of getting relief for his family by putting up,
unobserved, in the night time, at the corners of the streets in Berlin,
placards breathing the most venomous abuse of the king, in the hope that
a reward would be offered to the person who should disclose who was the
writer of the placard, that he might then himself claim the reward by
informing against himself, and so might relieve the immediate pressing
necessities of his wife and children, whatever might be the personal
suffering and consequences to himself.

"The plan succeeded.  The king, in a transport of rage, offered a reward
of fifty gold pieces to whoever should disclose the offender.  But you
may imagine Frederick's amazement when the poor colonel, in ragged
regimentals, and half perishing with hunger, obtained an interview, and
named himself as the guilty libeller.

"And now, how did the king act, when the unhappy officer begged that the
reward might be sent at once to his wife, that she might obtain medical
help for herself and bread for her children?  What was such a man as
Frederick likely to do?  The colonel, when he confessed his crime,
acknowledged that his life was justly forfeited, and asked no pity for
himself; and had the king acted up to his ordinary rules, he would have
at once ordered the miserable officer off to execution, or, at least,
lifelong imprisonment.  But it was not thus that he punished the crushed
and miserable culprit.  His heart was touched, his conscience was
pricked; he felt that he had acted wrongly to the colonel in times past,
and that he must now undo the wrong as far as was possible.  But then
remember the king's character and habits, especially in military
matters.  When he had once said `No,' when he had once resolved upon a
course of policy or action, he was the very last man to alter; the whole
world might go to pieces sooner than he change.  And yet, in this
instance, having become thoroughly convinced that he had been treating a
deserving man with injustice, he had the moral courage to reverse his
conduct, to unsay what he had before said, and to incur the risk of
being called fickle or changeable by doing what he now believed to be
the right thing.  So he at once laid the poor man on his own couch, for
the colonel had fainted after making his confession.  Then he gave him
food, and sent the doctor to his wife and provisions for the children;
and then, having summoned an attendant, he bade him take the colonel's
sword, and consider the officer himself as his prisoner.  After this he
sat down and wrote a letter, and, having delivered it to the attendant,
dismissed the unhappy man from his presence.

"The person who now had the colonel in charge was an old friend of his,
who had often tried to put in a kind word for him to the king, but
hitherto without any good result.  And now, as he conducted him from the
palace, he said, `You are to be taken to the fortress of Spandau, but,
believe me, you have nothing to fear.'  Spandau was a fortress near
Berlin, to which at that time all state prisoners were sent.

"On reaching Spandau, the officer gave his prisoner in charge to the
captain of the guard, while he himself carried the king's sealed order
and the prisoner's sword to the governor of the fortress, who, having
read the king's letter, told the colonel that, although he was his
prisoner, yet he was not forbidden to invite him for once to join
himself and his brother officers at the dinner-table.

"In due time the guests assembled, and with them the poor, half-starved
colonel.  But imagine the astonishment of all when, after the dinner was
over, the governor of the fortress read out to the whole company the
king's letter, which ran thus:--`Sir Commandant, I hereby nominate and
appoint the present half-pay colonel, who was this day delivered over to
you as a prisoner, to the command of my fortress of Spandau, and I look
to receive from him in his new service proofs of the same fidelity,
bravery, and attention to duty, and strict obedience, which he so often
exhibited in the late war.  The late commandant of Spandau now goes, in
reward of his faithful services, as commandant of Magdeburg.'

"Now I call this, dear Walter, real nobility of conduct, real moral
courage in such a man as Frederick, the courage of acting out his
convictions, when in so doing he was going contrary to those cherished
habits and principles which were part of his very self, and made him in
a degree what he was in the eyes of the world.  This was indeed moral
courage, and not weak changeableness or fickleness, because it had a
noble object.  To have adhered to his ordinary course in the colonel's
case, when he had become convinced that he had been wronging that
officer, would have been obstinacy and littleness."

"Ay, auntie," said Walter thoughtfully, "I am sure your view is the
right one.  So good-bye, laurels, for this time;" saying which, he threw
the boughs among the trees of the shrubbery.  As he did so, he felt the
loving arms of Miss Huntingdon drawing him closely to her, and then a
warm kiss on his fair brow.


CHAPTER TEN.

PLUCK.

"Aunt," said Walter, as he sat at her feet, where he had placed himself
after resigning his laurels, "I am afraid you are a little hard to
please--or, at any rate, that I haven't much chance of getting you to
see any moral courage in my unworthy self."

"Why not, dear boy?" she asked; "why should not you exhibit moral
courage as well as any one else?"

"Oh, I don't know exactly; but it's so hard to know precisely what moral
courage is after all, there are so many things that it is not.  Now,
what do you say to `pluck,' auntie; is `pluck' the same as moral
courage?"

"That depends upon what you mean by `pluck,' Walter."

"Oh! you must admire pluck.  Every true-born Englishman and Englishwoman
admires pluck."

"That may be, my clear nephew.  I believe I do admire pluck, as far as I
understand what it is.  But you must give me your idea of it, that I may
be able to answer your question about its being the same as moral
courage."

"Well, dear aunt, it is a thoroughly English, or perhaps I ought to say
British, thing, you know.  It isn't mere brute courage.  It will keep a
man who has it going steadily on with what he has undertaken.  There is
a great deal of self-denial, and perseverance, and steady effort about
it.  Persons of high refinement, and of very little physical strength,
often show great pluck.  It is by no means mere dash.  There are plucky
women too--plucky ladies also as well as plucky men.  Indeed I think
that, as a rule, there is more true pluck among the weak than the
strong, among the refined than the coarse-grained.  Thus you will find
high-bred officers show more pluck and sustained endurance in sieges and
fatigue parties than most of the common soldiers; and so it is with
travellers through difficult unexplored countries.  Those who have had
the least of rough training at home, but have given their mind more
thoroughly to the work, will hold out and hold on pluckily when the big
fellows with limbs and muscles like giants give in and knock up.  It's
pluck that carries them through.  Now, isn't that pretty much the same
as moral courage?"

"Hardly, I think, my dear boy."

"Well, where's the difference?"

"I think the difference lies in this, that, if I understand rightly what
you mean, and what I suppose is commonly meant by pluck, it may be
found, and often is found, where there is no moral element in it at
all."

"I don't quite see it, auntie."

"Do you not? then I must go to examples to show what I mean.  I heard
you tell a story the other day at breakfast of what you called a very
`plucky' thing on the part of your friend Saunders."

"What! the fight he had with some bargees?  Oh yes, I remember."

"Now, Walter, what were the circumstances of that fight?"

"Ah, I remember; and I think I see what you are driving at, Aunt Kate.
Saunders, who is only a slightly-built fellow, and almost as thin as a
whipping post, got into a row with some of those canal men; he wanted
them to turn out of his way, or to let him pass and go through a lock
before them, and they wouldn't."

"And did he ask them civilly?"

"Nay, Aunt Kate, not he.  No, I'm sorry to say he swore at them; for
he's a very hasty fellow with his tongue is Saunders."

"And were the bargemen unreasonably hindering him?"

"I can't say that.  They were just going into the lock when he rowed up,
and he wanted them to get out of his way and let him go into the lock
first.  I don't think myself that he was right."

"And what happened then?"

"Oh, he abused them, and they wanted to throw him into the canal; at
least they threatened to do so.  And then he challenged the biggest of
them to a stand-up fight, and a ring was made and they fought; and
certainly it was a strange thing to see Saunders, with his bare arms
looking no thicker than a hop-pole, tackling that great fellow, whose
right arm was nearly as thick as Saunders's body.  Nevertheless,
Saunders didn't shrink; he stood up to the bargee, and, being a capital
boxer, he managed to win the day, and to leave the man he was fighting
with nearly blind with two swollen black eyes.  And every one said what
`pluck' little Saunders showed."

"Had the bargeman a wife and children?" asked Miss Huntingdon quietly,
after a few moments' silence.

"What a strange question, auntie!" cried her nephew laughing.  "Oh, I'm
sure I don't know.  I daresay he had."

"But I suppose, Walter, he was a plain working-man, who got bread for
himself and his family by his work on the canal."

"Oh, of course, auntie; but what has that to do with it?"

"A very great deal, dear boy.  There may have been plenty of pluck shown
by your friend Saunders on that occasion, but certainly no moral
courage.  Indeed _I_ should call his conduct decidedly immoral and
cowardly."

"Cowardly, aunt!"

"Yes, cowardly, and mean.  What right had he to use, or rather abuse,
his superior skill as a pugilist for the purpose of carrying out an act
of wrong-doing, and so to give pain and inflict loss on a plain working-
man who had done him no harm, and had not had the same advantages of
education as himself?"

"O aunt! you _are_ severe indeed."

"Not too severe, Walter.  Saunders, you acknowledge, spoke and acted
hastily and improperly at first, and he must have known that he had done
so.  Now the true moral courage would have been shown in his confessing
that he was wrong, and expressing sorrow for it."

"What! to a bargee!"

"Yes, to a bargee, Walter.  The world might have called him mean or
cowardly for such a confession, but he would have shown true moral
courage and nobility for all that.  To do what will give pain to others
rather than incur the reproach of cowardice is really acting under the
tyranny of a mean and slavish fear of man, though it may be a plucky
thing in the eyes of the World."

"Ah, well, auntie, that is certainly a new view of things to me; and I
suppose, then, you would apply the same test to duelling,--affairs of
honour, as they used to be called?"

"Most certainly so, Walter.  The duellist is one of the worst of moral
cowards."

"Ah! but," cried the other, "to fight a duel used to be considered a
very plucky thing, and it really was so, auntie."

"I don't doubt it, Walter; but it was a very immoral thing also.
Happily, public opinion has quite changed on the subject of duelling in
our own country, and no doubt this has been owing indirectly to the
spread of a truer religious tone amongst us.  But what could be more
monstrous than the prevailing feeling about duelling a few years ago, as
I can well remember it in my young days.  Why, duelling was at that time
the highroad to a reputation for courage, and the man who refused to
fight was frowned upon in good society, and in some places scouted from
it.  And--I say it with the deepest shame--my own sex greatly helped to
keep up this feeling; for the man who had fought the most duels was,
with the ladies of his own neighbourhood, for the most part, an object
of special admiration and favour.

"And yet, what nobility or moral courage was there in the man who gave
or accepted the challenge?  Just think of what the consequences might
be, and what the ground of the quarrel often was.  A hasty word, or even
a mere thoughtless breach of etiquette, would bring a challenge; and the
person called out must not decline to meet his challenger, and give him
`satisfaction,' as it was called, in the shape of a pistol bullet, under
pain of being cut by all his friends and acquaintances as a coward.  So
a man who was a husband and father would steal away from his home early
in the morning, and go out to some lonely spot and meet the man whom he
had offended, and be murdered in cold blood, and carried back a bleeding
corpse to his miserable widow and fatherless children, just because he
could not bear to be called a coward by the world.  And to call this
`satisfaction!'  The devil never palmed upon his poor deluded slaves a
more transparent lie.

"Just think of two men, for instance, who had been friends for years,
and in some unguarded moment had used intemperate language towards each
other.  Their companions tell them that this is a matter for giving and
receiving satisfaction.  So, in perfectly cold blood, with the most
ceremonious politeness, the time and place of meeting are fixed by the
seconds, who make all arrangements for their principals; and at the time
appointed these two men stand face to face, with no malice, it may be,
in either heart, feeling rather that there were faults on both sides,
and at any rate no more wrong done or intended than a little mutual
forbearance and concession might easily set right.  And yet there they
stand; at a given signal aim each at the other's heart; and, if that aim
is true, each is murdered by his brother, and hurried in a moment red-
handed into the awful presence of his Maker and Judge.  And this used to
be called `satisfaction,' and the man who refused to give it was branded
as a coward.  And such was the tyranny of this fashion which Satan had
imposed upon thinking and immortal men, that rarely indeed was a man
found who had the true moral courage to refuse to fight a duel when
challenged to do so."

"Ah then, auntie," said her nephew, "you would give the laurels for
moral courage to the man who declined to fight."

"Certainly I would.  Yes, I should have called him a truly noble and
morally courageous man who, in those sad duelling days, should have
declined a challenge on the ground that he feared God rather than man--
that he was willing to brave any earthly scorn and loss rather than be a
cold-blooded murderer and do violence to his own conscience, and break
the laws of his Creator and Redeemer.  Such courage as this would be
worth, in my eyes, a thousandfold more than all the `pluck' in the
world."

"Indeed, dear Aunt Kate," said Walter seriously, "I believe you are
right; but can you give me any example of such moral courage?"

"Yes, dear boy, I think I can.  I call to mind the case of an excellent
Christian man; I rather think he was an officer in the army, and that
made his position more trying, because in the days when duelling was the
fashion, for an officer to refuse a challenge would have raised up the
whole of the service against him.  However, whether he was a military
man or not, he was at any rate a true soldier of the Cross.  By
something he had done, or left undone, he had grievously offended a
companion, and this friend or acquaintance of his called on him one
morning, and, being a hot-tempered man, charged him with the supposed
offence or affront, and working himself up into a violent passion,
declared that they must fight it out, and that he should send him a
formal challenge.  The other listened very quietly to this outburst of
wrath, and then said calmly and deliberately, `Fight you, must it be?
certainly, I must not decline your challenge.  Yes, we will fight, and
it shall be now; here, on this very spot, and with swords.  I have my
weapon close at hand.'  Saying which, the good man pulled a small Bible
out of his pocket, and holding it up before his companion, whose face
had turned deadly pale, said, `Here is my sword, the sword of the
Spirit, the only weapon I intend to fight you with.'  Telling a friend
about it afterwards, the Christian man remarked, `Never did poor
creature look upon a Bible with more satisfaction and relief than my
adversary did on mine.'  But at the time when the angry man was
speechless with astonishment, the other proceeded to say to him kindly,
`Friend, I have a dear wife and children.  Now, would it have been right
in me to meet you with pistols or other deadly weapons, and to have
entailed lasting misery on those so dear to me, and so dependent on me,
by either being myself your murderer or allowing you the opportunity of
being mine?'  That was true moral heroism, dear Walter, and it had its
reward there and then, for the challenger at once grasped the hand of
his companion and said, `It would not have been right on your part; you
have done just what it was your duty to do in declining my challenge,
and I honour you for it.  Let us part friends.'"

"Thank you, auntie; I admire your hero immensely.  Now, pray give me
another example, if you have one ready."

"I have read a curious story on this subject," replied Miss Huntingdon,
"but I am not sure that it is a true one.  I read it in some book years
ago, but what the book was I cannot call to mind.  However, the story
may be true, and it may be useful to repeat it, as it just illustrates
my present point about moral courage in reference to duelling.  The
story is substantially this:--

"Some years ago, when a regiment was quartered for a time in one of our
county towns, one of the officers of the regiment was challenged by a
brother officer, and refused to accept the challenge.  This refusal soon
flew abroad over all the town and neighbourhood, and the consequence was
that every one turned his back on the man who refused to fight.  He was
avoided by all of his own rank of both sexes as a craven and a coward.
Of course, he felt this very keenly.  To be shut out from houses where
he used to be welcomed; to be looked at with scorn by his brother
officers; to have not a word addressed to him by any one of them when
they met him on parade or at mess; to be the object of ill-concealed
contempt even to the common soldiers;--these things were burdens almost
intolerable to a man who had any respect for his own character as a
soldier.  However, for a time he bore it patiently.  At last he hit upon
an expedient to prove to the world that he was no coward, which was
undoubtedly original and convincing, though, certainly, by no means
justifiable.

"A large evening party was being given to the officers of the regiment
by some distinguished person in the town; a ball probably, for many
ladies were present.  While all were in the very midst and height of
their amusement, suddenly the disgraced officer made his appearance
among them in his dress uniform.  How could this be? how came he there?
Assuredly no one had invited him.  As he advanced into the middle of the
brilliantly lighted room an empty space was left for him, officers and
ladies shrinking from him, as though his near approach brought
defilement with it.  Looking quietly round, he deliberately produced and
held up a hand-grenade, as it was called--that is to say, a small
bombshell--and, before any one of the astonished spectators could stop
him, lighted a match at one of the wax-candles, and applied it to the
fusee of the shell.  A shower of sparks came rushing from the hand-
grenade, which would explode in a minute or two or even less.  The
consternation of the company was frightful, and a furious and general
rush was made to the doors.  As the guests dashed out of the room, some
just caught sight of the officer who had brought in and lighted the
shell standing calmly over it with his arms folded.  A few moments more,
all the company had vanished terror-stricken, and then a frightful
explosion was heard.  One or two of the officers hurried back with
horror on their faces.  The man who had been branded as a coward lay
outstretched on the ground.  He had thrown himself flat on the floor the
instant the room was cleared; the fragments of the shell had flown over
him, and he was almost entirely uninjured.

"His object in this extraordinary proceeding was to show his brother
officers and the world generally that a man might refuse, from
conscientious motives, to fight a duel and yet be no coward.  I am not
praising or approving of his conduct in taking such a dangerous course
to prove his point; for he was endangering the lives of many as well as
his own life, and nothing could justify that.  But, if the story be
true, it shows at least that a man may decline to do an act from a high
sense of duty, so as to bring upon himself the reproach of cowardice,
and yet may be a man of undoubted bravery after all.  But I do not at
all place this officer on my list of moral heroes.  I trust, however,
dear Walter, that our conversation on this subject will strengthen in
you the conviction that the noblest and truest courage is that high
moral courage which enables a man to endure with patience any scorn, or
loss, or blame, rather than deliberately do what he knows that his
conscience and the Word of God condemn."


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

AN EXPLOSION.

It must not be supposed that Walter was prepared to follow out his
brother Amos's moral courage at once and in everything.  He was quite
willing to admire this high-toned courage, and was learning to be
content that his brother should enjoy the praise for it which was his
due.  He also fully intended to follow in the same steps some day or
other; but then no real and radical change had taken place in his heart
and character, nor had he any deliberate desire to give up old habits
which were dear to him, and adopt new ones which would involve
considerable and sustained self-denial.  So he contented himself for the
present with being more kind to his brother, and more careful not to
wound him by rash and unfeeling remarks.

One thing, however, in Amos's conduct sadly puzzled and annoyed him.
Knowing that his brother was well provided with money of his own, he
used not unfrequently to borrow from him when his own allowance ran
short, which it very often did.  This borrowing from Amos used to be but
rarely followed by any repayment; for he had been so fully indulged by
his father when younger, that he had no idea, now that he was getting
more from under his father's hand, of denying himself, or going without
anything he might happen to fancy.  At first he used to tell the trades-
people in the neighbouring town, when he made any purchases, to put them
down to his father; but to this after a while Mr Huntingdon decidedly
objected--finding, as he did, that expense was no consideration to
Walter in the choice of an article, provided his father had to bear the
cost.  So Walter was made to understand that he must make the liberal
allowance which his father gave him _do_, and that there must be no more
running up of bills in Mr Huntingdon's name.  But such an arrangement
was very galling to Walter, who had lived all his early boyhood under
the impression that, as being his father's favourite son, he had only to
express a wish, or to ask for or to order a thing, and he would have it
as a matter of course.  However, the squire stood firm in the matter.
Walter, he said, was old enough now to understand something of the value
of money, and he must learn to cut his coat according to his cloth.
This coat, however, with Walter was usually of such exaggerated
dimensions that his ordinary allowance of material would go only a small
way towards completing it.  Consequently he used to have recourse to
Amos, who invariably helped him through with a loan--for Walter would
never receive help from his brother except as a loan--Amos at the same
time hinting now and then at the hope of a partial repayment.  To this
Walter would reply that his brother should have it all back, if he
wished it, "one of these fine days;" but when such seasons of
exceptionally fine monetary weather were likely to occur, Amos found it
difficult to conjecture.  A change, however, had now come over the elder
brother, much to the annoyance and disgust of Walter.  A decided refusal
of a loan of money was accompanied by Amos with a remonstrance with his
brother on his extravagance.

In a pet, Walter told Amos that he might keep his nasty sovereigns and
shillings to buy toffee for dirty little boys and girls.  He was much
obliged to him for his advice, but he knew his own concerns best; and as
for extravagance, it was better to put a little money into the
tradesmen's pockets than hoard it up like a stingy old miser, just to
have the pleasure of saying, "See how rich I am."

To all this Amos made no reply at the time, but afterwards sent his
brother a portion of the sum he wished to borrow, with a kind note, in
which he said that Walter was welcome to this and to all other sums
previously lent, as a free gift, but that for the future he could not
lend him money beyond a few shillings occasionally, as he had a use for
his own funds which made him unable to do for his brother what he had
done for him in times past.

Partly touched at Amos's generosity, but more vexed at his present
purpose respecting future loans, Walter was not disposed to look with a
very favourable eye on his brother's money arrangements.  What could he
be wanting with so much?  What could he be doing with it?  There was
nothing to show for it.  If he had spent it in guns, or horses, or dogs,
or travelling, or sight-seeing, Walter could have better acquiesced in
the expenditure.  But the money seemed to be wanted for something which,
as far as he could see, turned out to be nothing.  So his curiosity was
considerably roused, and he resolved to find out, if he could, where his
brother's spare cash went to.

Things were in this position, when one evening, as the whole family were
seated on the lawn under some noble elms, enjoying the shade--for the
weather had been exceedingly hot--a gentleman, well-known throughout the
county for the interest he took in plans for doing good and alleviating
the sorrows and sufferings of his poorer neighbours, called, and was
invited by Mr Huntingdon to join his family on the lawn.  "And now, my
dear sir," said the squire, "I know you are out on some errand of
benevolence.  You are a grand worker yourself, and a grand giver too, so
tell us what is your present charitable hobby, and we must try and give
you a help, so that you may ride him easily."

"Thank you, Mr Huntingdon, with all my heart," said the other; "you are
very kind.  My hobby this time is a very robust animal, and will want a
good deal of feeding if he is to keep up his strength.  But to come to
plain language, I am collecting subscriptions for a working-men's
coffee-house in Redbury--a British Workman they call it.  You know, I
dare say, that two ruinous old houses of mine in the market-place are
being pulled down.  Now, I am going to give the ground which one of them
stands on for the new coffee-house.  It is a capital situation, just in
the centre of the town.  I shall want funds, however, for the erection
of a new and suitable building, and also a few annual subscriptions to
keep the establishment going and pay the expenses of management, as I
don't suppose it will be self-supporting, at any rate not at first."

"Well," said the squire, "let me look at your subscription list, for I
see you have one with you.  Ah, good! it is very generous of you to put
down your own name for so large a sum to the building fund, besides
giving the land.  Put me down then for fifty pounds, and an annual
subscription of three guineas till the concern is self-supporting."

