PLUCK ON THE LONG TRAIL

Or

Boy Scouts in the Rockies

by

EDWIN L. SABIN


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BOY SCOUT SERIES

BOY SCOUTS IN THE MAINE WOODS
By James Otis. Illustrated by Charles Copeland.

ALONG THE MOHAWK TRAIL; OR, BOY SCOUTS ON LAKE CHAMPLAIN
By Percy K. Fitzhugh. Illustrated by Remington Schuyler.

PLUCK ON THE LONG TRAIL; OR, BOY SCOUTS IN THE ROCKIES
By Edwin L. Sabin. Illustrated by Clarence Rowe.

Each, 12mo, cloth, $1.25 postpaid.

A series of wholesome, realistic, entertaining stories for boys by
writers who have a thorough knowledge of Boy Scouts and of real scouting
in the sections of the country in which the scenes of their books are
laid.

THOMAS Y. CROWELL COMPANY
NEW YORK

-----------------------------------------------------------------------


[Illustration: See page 123. "'YOU GIT!' HE ORDERED."]


PLUCK ON THE LONG TRAIL

Or

Boy Scouts in the Rockies

by

EDWIN L. SABIN
Author of "Bar B Boys," "Range and Trail,"
"Circle K," Etc.

Illustrated by Clarence H. Rowe


It's honor Flag and Country dear, and hold them in the van;
It's keep your lungs and conscience clean, your body spick and span;
It's "shoulders squared" and "be prepared," and always "play the man";
     Shouting the Boy Scouts forev-er!


New York
Thomas Y. Crowell Company
Publishers
Copyright, 1912, by
Thomas Y. Crowell Company


TO SCOUTS

Scouts in America have a high honor to maintain, for the American scout
has always been the best in the world. He is noted as being keen, quick,
cautious, and brave. He teaches himself, and he is willing to be taught
by others. He is known and respected. Even in the recent war in South
Africa between Great Britain and the Boers, it was Major Frederick
Russell Burnham, an American, once a boy in Iowa, who was the English
Chief of Scouts. Major Burnham is said to be the greatest modern scout.

The information in this book is based upon thoroughly American
scoutcraft as practiced by Indians, trappers, and soldiers of the
old-time West, and by mountaineers, plainsmen, and woodsmen of to-day.

As the true-hearted scout should readily acknowledge favor and help, so
I will say that for the diagram of the squaw hitch and of the diamond
hitch I am indebted to an article by Mr. Stewart Edward White in
_Outing_ of 1907, and one by Mr. I. J. Bush in _Recreation_ of 1911; for
the "medicine song" and several of the star legends, to that Blackfeet
epic, "The Old North Trail," by Walter McClintock; for medical and
surgical hints, to Dr. Charles Moody's "Backwoods Surgery and Medicine"
and to the American Red Cross "First Aid" text-book; for some of the
lore, to personal experiences; and for much of it, to various old army,
hunting, and explorer scout-books, long out of print, written when good
scouting meant not only daily food, travel, and shelter, but daily life
itself.

E. L. S.


BOOK KIT

CHAPTER                                               PAGE

       I. The Long Trail                                 1
      II. The Night Attack                              11
     III. The Big Trout                                 21
      IV. The Beaver Man                                31
       V. Two Recruits                                  39
      VI. A Disastrous Doze                             54
     VII. Held by the Enemy                             69
    VIII. A New Use for a Camera                        85
      IX. Jim Bridger on the Trail                      98
       X. The Red Fox Patrol                           111
      XI. The Man at the Dug-out                       121
     XII. Foiling the Fire                             133
    XIII. Orders from the President                    146
     XIV. The Capture of the Beaver Man                161
      XV. General Ashley Drops Out                     179
     XVI. A Burro in Bed                               185
    XVII. Van Sant's Last Cartridge                    199
   XVIII. Fitz the Bad Hand's Good Throw               215
     XIX. Major Henry says "Ouch"                      230
      XX. A Forty-mile Ride                            244
     XXI. The Last Dash                                258


SCOUT NOTES

       1. On Old-Time Scouts                           277
       2. On Taking a Message to Garcia                278
       3. On Socks and Feet                            279
       4. On the Tarpaulin Bed-Sheet                   279
       5. On the Diamond Hitch                         279
       6. On the Indian Bow and Arrow                  282
       7. On the Lariat or Rope                        282
       8. On Neatness and the War-bag                  283
       9. On Tea                                       283
      10. On the Medicine Kit                          283
      11. On the Straight-foot Walk                    284
      12. On Sign Language                             284
      13. On Sign for Bird Flying                      286
      14. On Making the Tarp Bed                       286
      15. On the Reflector Oven--and a Shovel          287
      16. On a Whistle Code                            287
      17. On Brushing Teeth and Hair                   287
      18. On Snagging Fish                             287
      19. On Drying Boots                              288
      20. On Records and Maps                          288
      21. On Right or Left Footedness                  288
      22. On Weather Warnings                          289
      23. On Watching Teeth                            290
      24. On Lightning                                 290
      25. On Bedding Place                             290
      26. On Cooking                                   290
      27. On the Tarp Shelter Tent                     291
      28. On Guns                                      291
      29. On Treating Pack-Animals                     292
      30. On the Scout Camp Place                      292
      31. On Camp-Law Protection                       292
      32. On Division of Guard Duty                    292
      33. On Trailing                                  292
      34. On Marking the Trail                         293
      35. On Respecting the Enemy                      293
      36. On the Parole                                293
      37. On the Sign for Escape                       294
      38. On Tying a Prisoner                          294
      40. On Making a Fire                             296
      41. On the Clock of the Heavens                  296
      42. On Stars                                     298
      43. On Sunday                                    300
      44. On Smoke Signals                             300
      45. On Surgical Supplies                         301
      46. On Antiseptics                               302
      47. On Climbing Trees                            303
      48. On Wigwags and Other Motion Signaling        303
      49. On Sprains                                   308
      50. On Caches                                    309
      51. On Use of Medicines                          310
      52. On Forest Fires                              311
      53. On Fire Fighting                             312
      54. On Deep Wounds                               313
      55. On the Squaw Hitch                           314
      56. On Picketing and Hobbling                    315
      57. On Respecting Nature                         316
      58. On Dislocations                              316
      59. On Litters for Wounded                       317
      60. On Jerked Meat                               318
      61. On Dressing Pelts                            319
      62. On Aluminum                                  320
      63. On "Levez!"                                  320
      64. On Appendicitis                              320
      65. On the Nose of Horse and Mule                321
      66. On Being a Scout                             321

[Transcriber's note: Note 39 was not referenced in this table.]


PICTURE SIGNS


"'You git!' he ordered"                       Frontispiece

                                                  OPPOSITE
                                                      PAGE

"Bill Duane went through him"                           78
"It was our private Elk Patrol code"                   178
"Like cave-men or trappers we descended"               214


THE ROLL CALL


THE ELK PATROL OF COLORADO:

First-class Scout Roger Franklin, or General William Ashley.
First-class Scout Tom Scott, or Major Andrew Henry.
First-class Scout Harry Leonard, or Kit Carson.
First-class Scout Chris Anderson, or Thomas Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand.
Second-class Scout "Little" Dick Smith, or Jedediah Smith.
Second-class Scout Charley Brown, or Jim Bridger.

THE RED FOX PATROL OF NEW JERSEY:

First-class Scout Horace Ward.
First-class Scout Edward Van Sant.

FRIENDS AND ENEMIES:

Sally and Apache, the Elk Totem Burros.
Bill Duane and his Town Gang, Who Make the Trail Worse.
Bat and Walt, the Renegade Recruits.
The Beaver Man.
The Game Warden, the Forest Ranger, the Cow-puncher,
  the two Ranch Women, the Doctor; Pilot Peak, Creeks,
  Valleys, Hills, Timber, and Sage and Meadows; Rain
  and Fire and Flood; the Big Trout, the Mother Bear,
  the Tame Ptarmigans, etc.

THE LONG TRAIL

Afoot, One Hundred Miles through a Wild Country and over the Medicine
Range. Described by Jim Bridger, with a Few Chapters by Major Henry.


PLUCK ON THE LONG TRAIL

CHAPTER I

THE LONG TRAIL


We are the Elk Patrol, 14th Colorado Troop, Boy Scouts of America. Our
sign is [Illustration] and our colors are dark green and white, like the
pines and the snowy range. Our patrol call is the whistle of an elk,
which is an "Oooooooooooo!" high up in the head, like a locomotive
whistle. We took the Elk brand (that is the same as totem, you
know, only we say "brand," in the West), because elks are the great
trail-makers in the mountains.

About the hardest thing that we have set out to do yet has been to carry
a secret message across the mountains, one hundred miles, from our town
to another town, with our own pack outfit, and finding our own trail,
and do it in fifteen days including Sundays. That is what I want to tell
about, in this book.

There were six of us who went; and just for fun we called ourselves by
trapper or scout names. We were:

First-class Scout Roger Franklin, or General William Ashley. He is our
patrol leader. He is fifteen years old, and red-headed, and his mother
is a widow and keeps a boarding-house.

First-class Scout Tom Scott, or Major Andrew Henry. He is our corporal.
He is sixteen years old, and has snapping black eyes, and his father is
mayor.

First-class Scout Harry Leonard, or Kit Carson. He is thirteen years
old, and before he came into the Scouts we called him "Sliver" because
he's so skinny. His father is a groceryman.

First-class Scout Chris Anderson, or Thomas Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand. He
is fifteen years old, and tow-headed and all freckled, and has only half
a left arm. He got hurt working in the mine. But he's as smart as any of
us. He can use a camera and throw a rope and dress himself, and tie his
shoe-laces and other knots. He's our best trailer. His father is a
miner.

Second-class Scout Richard Smith, or Jedediah Smith. He is only twelve,
and is a "fatty," and his father is postmaster.

Second-class Scout Charley Brown, or Jim Bridger the Blanket Chief.
That's myself. I'm fourteen, and have brown eyes and big ears, and my
father is a lawyer. When we started I had just been promoted from a
tenderfoot, so I didn't know very much yet. But we're all first-class
Scouts now, and have honors besides.

For Scout work we were paired off like this: Ashley and Carson; Henry
and Smith; Fitzpatrick and Bridger. (See Note 1, in back of book.)

Our trip would have been easier (but it was all right, anyway), if a
notice hadn't got into the newspaper and put other boys up to trying to
stop us. This is what the notice said:

     The Elk Patrol of the local Boy Scouts is about to take a message
     from Mayor Scott across the range to the mayor of Green Valley.
     This message will be sealed and in cipher, and the boys will be
     granted fifteen days in which to perform the trip over, about 100
     miles, afoot; so they will have to hustle. They must not make use
     of any vehicles or animals except their pack-animals, or stop at
     ranches except through injury or illness, but must pursue their own
     trail and live off the country. The boys who will go are Roger
     Franklin, Tom Scott, Dick Smith, Harry Leonard, Chris Anderson, and
     Charley Brown.

Of course, this notice gave the whole scheme away, and some of the other
town boys who pretended to make fun of us Scouts because we were trying
to learn Scoutcraft and to use it right planned to cut us off and take
the message away from us. There always are boys mean enough to bother
and interfere, until they get to be Scouts themselves. Then they are
ashamed.

We knew that we were liable to be interfered with, because we heard some
talk, and Bill Duane (he's one of the town fellows; he doesn't do much
of anything except loaf) said to me: "Oh, you'll never get through, kid.
The bears will eat you up. Bears are awful bad in that country."

But this didn't scare _us_. Bears aren't much, if you let them alone. We
knew what he meant, though. And we got an anonymous letter. It came to
General Ashley, and showed a skull and cross-bones, and said:

    BEWARE!!! No Boy Scouts allowed on the Medicine
    Range! Keep Off!!!

That didn't scare us, either.

When we were ready to start, Mayor Scott called us into his office and
told us that this was to be a real test of how we could be of service in
time of need and of how we could take care of ourselves; and that we
were carrying a message to Garcia, and must get it through, if we could,
but that he put us on our honor as Scouts to do just as we had agreed to
do. (See Note 2.)

Then we saluted him, and he saluted us with a military salute, and we
gave our Scouts' yell, and went.

Our Scouts' yell is:

    B. S. A.! B. S. A.!
    Elk! Elk! Hoo-ray!!

and a screech all together, like the bugling of an elk.

This is how we marched. The message was done up flat, between cardboard
covered by oiled silk with the Elk totem on it, and was slung by a
buckskin thong from the general's neck, under his shirt, out of sight.

We didn't wear coats, because coats were too hot, and you can't climb
with your arms held by coat-sleeves. We had our coats in the packs, for
emergencies. We wore blue flannel shirts with the Scouts' emblem on the
sleeves, and Scouts' drab service hats, and khaki trousers tucked into
mountain-boots hob-nailed with our private pattern so that we could tell
each other's tracks, and about our necks were red bandanna handkerchiefs
knotted loose, and on our hands were gauntlet gloves. Little Jed Smith,
who is a fatty, wore two pairs of socks, to prevent his feet from
blistering. That is a good scheme. (Note 3.)

General Ashley and Major Henry led; next were our two burros, Sally (who
was a yellow burro with a white spot on her back) and Apache (who was a
black burro and was named for Kit Carson's--the real Kit
Carson's--favorite horse). Behind the burros we came: the two other
first-class Scouts, and then the second-class Scouts, who were Jed
Smith and myself.

We took along two flags: one was the Stars and Stripes and the other was
our Patrol flag--green with a white Elk totem on it. They were fastened
to a jointed staff, the Stars and Stripes on top and the Patrol flag
below; and the butt of the staff was sharpened, to stick into the
ground. The flags flew in camp. We did not have tents. We had three
tarps, which are tarpaulins or cowboy canvas bed-sheets, to sleep in, on
the ground, and some blankets and quilts for over and under, too. (Note
4.) And these and our cooking things and a change of underclothes and
stockings, etc., were packed on the burros with panniers and top-packs
lashed tight with the diamond hitch. (Note 5.)

We decided to pack along one twenty-two caliber rifle, for rabbits when
we needed meat. One gun is enough in a camp of kids. This gun was under
the general's orders (he was our leader, you know), so that there
wouldn't be any promiscuous shooting around in the timber, and somebody
getting hit. It was for business, not monkey-work. We took one of our
bows, the short and thick Indian kind, and some of our two-feathered
arrows, in case that we must get meat without making any noise. (Note
6.) And we had two lariat ropes. (Note 7.) Each pair of Scouts was
allotted a war-bag, to hold their personal duds, and each fellow put in
a little canvas kit containing tooth-brush and powder, comb and brush,
needles and thread, etc. (Note 8.)

For provisions we had flour, salt, sugar, bacon, dried apples, dried
potatoes, rice, coffee (a little), tea, chocolate, baking-powder,
condensed milk, canned butter, and half a dozen cans of beans, for short
order. (Note 9.) Canned stuff is heavy, though, and mean to pack. We
didn't fool with raw beans, in bulk. They use much space, and at 10,000
and 12,000 feet they take too long to soak and cook.

We depended on catching trout, and on getting rabbits or squirrels to
tide us over; and we were allowed to stock up at ranches, if we should
pass any. That was legitimate. Even the old trappers traded for meat
from the Indians.

We had our first-aid outfits--one for each pair of us. I carried Chris's
and mine. We were supplied with camp remedies, too. (Note 10.) Doctor
Wallace of our town, who was our Patrol surgeon, had picked them out for
us.

General Ashley and Major Henry set the pace. The trail out of town was
good, and walking fast and straight-footed (Note 11) we trailed by the
old stage road four miles, until we came to Grizzly Gulch. Here we
turned off, by a prospectors' trail, up Grizzly. The old stage road
didn't go to Green Valley. Away off to the northwest, now, was the
Medicine Range that we must cross, to get at Green Valley on the other
side. It is a high, rough range, 13,000 and 14,000 feet, and has snow on
it all the year. In the middle was Pilot Peak, where we expected to
strike a pass.

The prospect trail was fair, and we hustled. We didn't stop to eat much,
at noon; that would have taken our wind. The going was up grade and you
can't climb fast on a full stomach. We had a long march ahead of us, for
old Pilot Peak looked far and blue.

Now and then the general let us stop, to puff for a moment; and the
packs had to be tightened after Sally's and Apache's stomachs had gone
down with exercise. We followed the trail single file, and about two
o'clock, by the sun, we reached the head of the gulch and came out on
top of the mesa there.

We were hot and kind of tired (especially little Jed Smith, our
"fatty"); but we were not softies and this was no place to halt long. We
must cross and get under cover again. If anybody was spying on us we
could be seen too easy, up here. When you're pursuing, you keep to the
high ground, so as to see; but when you're pursued you keep to the low
ground, so as not to be seen. That was the trappers' way.

I'll tell you what we did. There are two ways to throw pursuers off the
scent. We might have done as the Indians used to do. They would
separate, after a raid, and would spread out in a big fan-shape, every
one making a trail of his own, so that the soldiers would not know which
to follow; and after a long while they would come together again at some
point which they had agreed on. But we weren't ready to do this. It took
time, and we did not have any meeting-spot, exactly. So we left as big a
trail as we could, to make any town gang think that we were not
suspicious. That would throw them off their guard.

Single file we traveled across the mesa, and at the other side we dipped
into a little draw. Here we found Ute Creek, which we had planned to
follow up to its headwaters in the Medicine Range. A creek makes a good
guide. A cow-trail ran beside it.

"First-class Scout Fitzpatrick (that was Chris) and Second-class Scout
Bridger (that was I) drop out and watch the trail," commanded General
Ashley (that was Patrol Leader Roger Franklin). "Report at Bob Cat
Springs. We'll camp there for the night."

Chris and I knew what to do. We gave a big leap aside, to a flat rock,
and the other Scouts continued right along; and because they were single
file the trail didn't show any difference. I don't suppose that the town
gang would have noticed, anyway; but you must never despise the enemy.

From the flat rock Fitzpatrick and I stepped lightly, so as not to leave
much mark, on some dried grass, and made off up the side of the draw,
among the bushes. These grew as high as our shoulders, and formed a fine
ambuscade. We climbed far enough so that we could see both sides of the
draw and the trail in between; and by crawling we picked a good spot and
sat down.

We knew that we must keep still, and not talk. We kept so still that
field-mice played over our feet, and a bee lit on Fitzpatrick. He didn't
brush it off.

We could talk sign language; that makes no sound. Of course, Fitz could
talk with only one hand. He made the signs to watch down the trail, and
to listen; and I replied with men on horseback and be vigilant as a
wolf. (Note 12.)

It wasn't bad, sitting here in the sunshine, amidst the brush. The draw
was very peaceful and smelled of sage. A magpie flew over, his black and
white tail sticking out behind him; and he saw us and yelled. Magpies
are awful sharp, that way. They're a good sign to watch. Everything
tells something to a Scout, when he's an expert.

Sitting there, warm and comfortable, a fellow felt like going to sleep;
but Fitzpatrick was all eyes and ears, and I tried to be the same, as a
Scout should.


CHAPTER II

THE NIGHT ATTACK


We must have been squatting for an hour and a half, and the sun was down
close to the top of the draw, behind us, when Fitzpatrick nudged me with
his foot, and nodded. He made the sign of birds flying up and pointed
down the trail, below, us; so that I knew somebody was coming, around a
turn there. (Note 13.) We scarcely breathed. We just sat and watched,
like two mountain lions waiting.

Pretty soon they came riding along--four of them on horseback; we knew
the horses. The fellows were Bill Duane, Mike Delavan, Tony Matthews,
and Bert Hawley. They were laughing and talking because the trail we
made was plain and they thought that we all were pushing right on, and
if they could read sign they would know that the tracks were not extra
fresh.

We let them get out of sight; then we went straight down upon the trail,
and followed, alongside, so as not to step on top of their tracks and
show that we had come after.

We talked only by sign, and trailed slow, because they might be
listening or looking back. We wanted to find where they stopped. At
every turn we sneaked and Fitzpatrick stuck just his head around, to see
that the trail was clear. Suddenly he made sign to me that he saw them;
there were three on horseback, waiting, and one had gone on, walking, to
reconnoiter.

So we had to back-trail until we could make a big circle and strike the
trail on ahead. This wasn't open country here; there were cedars and
pinyons and big rocks. We circuited up and around, out of sight from the
trail, and came in, bending low and walking carefully so as not to crack
sticks, to listen and examine for sign. We found strange tracks--soles
without hob-nails, pointing one way but not coming back. We hid behind a
cedar, and waited. In about fifteen minutes Bill Duane walked right past
us, back to the other fellows.

Now we hurried on, for it was getting dark; and soon we smelled smoke,
and that meant camp. Fitzpatrick (who was a first-class Scout, while I
was only a second) reported to General Ashley the whereabouts of the
enemy.

"Very well," said General Ashley. "Corporal Andrew Henry (that was Tom
Scott) and Second-class Scout Jed Smith (that was Dick Smith) will go
back a quarter of a mile and picket the trail until relieved; the rest
of us will proceed with camp duties."

Major Henry and little Jed Smith set off. We finished establishing camp.
Two holes were dug for camp refuse; that was my business. Places for the
beds were cleared of sticks and things; that was Kit Carson's business.
General Ashley chopped a cedar stump for wood (cedar burns without soot,
you know); and Fitzpatrick cooked. The burros had been unpacked and the
flags planted before Fitzpatrick and I came in. We had to picket the
burros out, to graze, at first, or they might have gone back to town. Of
course, as we were short-handed, we had to do Henry's and Smith's work,
to-night, too: spread the beds before dark and bring water and such
things. (Note 14.)

For supper we had bacon and two cans of the beans and biscuits baked in
a reflector, and coffee. (Note 15.) Major Henry and Jed Smith were not
getting any supper yet, because they were still on picket duty. But when
we were through General Ashley said, "Kit Carson, you and Jim Bridger
relieve Henry and Smith, and tell them to come in to supper."

But just as we stood, to start, Major Henry walked in amongst us. He was
excited, and puffing, and he almost forgot to salute General Ashley, who
was Patrol leader.

"They're planning to come!" he puffed. "I sneaked close to them and
heard 'em talking!"

"Is this meant for a report?" asked General Ashley. And we others
snickered. It wasn't the right way to make a report.

"Yes, sir," answered Henry. "That is, I reconnoitered the enemy's camp,
sir, and they're talking about us."

"What did you hear?"

"They're going to rush us when we're asleep, and scare us."

"Very well," said General Ashley. "But you weren't ordered to do that.
You left your post, sir."

"I thought you'd like to know. They didn't hear me," stammered Major
Henry.

"You'd no business to go, just the same. Orders are orders. Where is
Smith?"

"Watching on picket."

"Did he go, too?"

"No, sir."

"You exceeded orders, and you ought to be court-martialed," said General
Ashley. And he was right, too. "But I'll give you another chance. When
is the enemy going to attack?"

"After we're asleep."

"What is he doing now?"

"Eating and smoking and waiting, down the trail."

"You can have some coffee and beans and bread, while we hold council.
Carson and Bridger can wait a minute."

The council didn't take long. General Ashley's plan was splendid, a joke
and a counter-attack in one. Major Henry ate as much as he could, but he
wasn't filled up when he was sent out again, into the dark, with Kit
Carson. They were ordered to tell Jed Smith to come in, but they were to
go on. You'll see what happened. This double duty was Henry's
punishment.

We cleaned up the camp, and then Jed Smith arrived. While he was eating
we made the beds. We drew up the tarpaulins, over blankets and quilts
rolled so that the beds looked exactly as if we were in them, our feet
to the fire (it was a little fire, of course) and our heads in shadow.
We tied the burros short; and then we went back into the cedars and
pinyons and sat down, quiet.

It wasn't pitchy dark. When the sky is clear it never gets pitchy dark,
in the open; and there was a quarter-moon shining, too. The night was
very still. The breeze just rustled the trees, but we could hear our
hearts beat. Once, about a mile away, a coyote barked like a crazy
puppy. He was calling for company. The stars twinkled down through the
stiff branches, and I tried to see the Great Dipper, but that took too
much squirming around.

We must not say a word, nor even whisper. We must just keep quiet, and
listen and wait. Down the trail poor Major Henry and Kit Carson were
having a harder time of it--but I would have liked to be along.

All of a sudden Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand nudged me gently with his
knuckles, and I nudged Jed Smith, and Jed passed it on, and it went
around from one to the other, so we all knew. Somebody was coming! We
could hear a stick snap, and a little laugh, off in the timber; it
sounded as though somebody had run into a branch. We waited. The enemy
was stealing upon our camp. We hid our faces in our coats and our hands
in our sleeves, so that no white should show. It was exciting, sitting
this way, waiting for the attack.

The gang tiptoed up, carefully, and we could just make out two of them
peering in at the beds. Then they all gave a tremendous yell, like
Indians or mountain lions, and rushed us--or what they thought was us.
They stepped on the beds and kicked at the tinware, and expected to
scare us stiff with the noise--but you ought to have seen how quick they
quit when nothing happened! We didn't pop out of the beds, and run! It
was funny--and I almost burst, trying not to laugh out loud, when they
stood, looking about, and feeling of the beds again.

"They aren't here," said Bill Duane. At a nudge from General Ashley we
had deployed, running low and swift, right and left.

"Poke the fire, so we can see," said Bert Hawley.

One of them did, so the fire blazed up--which was just what we wanted.
Now they were inside and we were outside. They began to talk.

"We'll pile up the camp, anyway."

"They're around somewhere."

"Let's take their burros."

"Take their flags."

Then General Ashley spoke up.

"No, you don't!" he said. "You let those things alone."

That voice, coming out of the darkness around, must have made them jump,
and for a minute they didn't know what to do. Then--

"Why?" asked Bill Duane, kind of defiantly.

"Wait a moment and we'll show you," answered General Ashley.

He whistled loud, our Scouts' signal whistle; and off down the trail
Major Henry or Kit Carson whistled back, and added the whistle that
meant "All right." (Note 16.)

"Hear that?" asked General Ashley. "That means we've got your horses!"

Hurrah! So we had. You see, Major Henry and Kit Carson had been sent
back to watch the enemy's camp; and when the gang had left, on foot, to
surprise us, our two scouts had gone in and captured the horses. We
couldn't help but whoop and yell a little, in triumph. But General
Ashley ordered "Silence!" and we quit.

"Aw, we were just fooling," said Tony Matthews. They talked together,
low, for a few moments; and Bill called: "Come on in. We won't hurt
you."

"Of course you won't," said General Ashley. "But _we_ aren't fooling. We
mean business. We'll keep the horses until you've promised to clear out
and let this camp alone."

"We don't want the horses. Two of 'em are hired and the longer you keep
them the more you'll have to pay." That was a lie. They didn't hire
horses. They borrowed.

"We can sleep here very comfortably, kid," said Mike Delavan.

"You'll not get much sleep in those beds," retorted General Ashley.
"Will they, boys!"

And we all laughed and said "No!"

"And after they've walked ten miles back to town, we'll bring in the
horses and tell how we took them."

The enemy talked together low, again.

"All right," said Bill Duane. "You give us our horses and we'll let the
camp alone."

"Do you promise?" asked General Ashley.

"Yes; didn't I say so?"

"Do you, Mike?"

"Sure; if you return those horses."

"Do you, Tony and Bert?"

"Uh huh."

That was the best way--to make each promise separately; for some one of
them might have claimed that he hadn't promised with the rest.

"Then go on down the trail, and you'll find the horses where you left
them."

"How do we know?"

"On the honor of a Scout," said General Ashley. "We won't try any
tricks, and don't you, for we'll be watching you until you start for
town."

They grumbled back, and with Bill Duane in the lead stumbled for the
trail. General Ashley whistled the signal agreed upon, for Major Henry
and Kit Carson to tie the horses and to withdraw. We might have followed
the enemy; but we would have risked dividing our forces too much and
leaving the camp. We were safer here.

So we waited, quiet; and after a time somebody signaled with the whistle
of the patrol. It was Kit Carson.

I know no Business it has, unless it be to crutch a Lame Verse, and
each out a scanty Sense; for the Word that is now used is Undeserv'd.

I shou'd not take notice of such a Thing as this, but that I have
to do with a giver of Rules, and a Magisterial Corrector of other
Men; tho' upon the observing such little Niceties, does all the
Musick of Numbers defend.

But the Refinement of our Versication is a sort of Criticism, which
the +Essayer+, if we may judge of his Knowledge by his Practice,
seems yet to learn; for never was there such a Pack of Stiff ill
sounding Rhimes put together as his Essay is stuff'd with: To add
therefore to his other Collections, let him remember hereafter,
that Verses have Feet given 'em either to walk gracefully and smooth,
and sometimes with Majesty and State like +Virgils+, or to run light
and easy like +Ovid+'s, not to stand stockstill like Dr.

+Donne+'s, or to hobble like indigested Prose: That the counting
of the Syllables is the least Part of the Poets Work, in the turning
either of a soft or a Sonorous Line; that the +Ed's+ went away with
the +For to's+, and the +Until's+ in that general Rout that fell
on the whole Body of the +thereon's+, the +therein's+, and +thereby's+,
when those useful +Expletives+, the +altho's+ and the +Unto's+, and
those most convenient +Synalæpha's+ +'midst+, +'mongst+, +'gainst+,
and +'twixt+, were every one +cut off+; which dismal Slaughter was
follow'd with the utter Extirpation of the ancient House of the
+hereof's+ and the +therefrom's+, &c.

Nor is this Reformation the Arbitrary Fancy of a Few, who would
impose their own Private Opinions and Practices upon the rest of
their Countrymen, but grounded on the Authority of +Horace+, who
tells us in his Epistle +de arte Poetica+, that Present Use is the
final Judge of Language, (the Verse is too well known to need
quoting) and on the common Reason of Mankind, which forbids us those
antiquated Words and obsolete Idioms of Speech, whose worth Time
has worn out, how well soever they may seem to stop a Gap in Verse,
and suit our shapeless Immature Conceptions; for what is grown
Pedantick and unbecoming when 'tis spoke, will not have a jot the
better grace for being writ down._ This Gentleman's Opinion, and
that of others, which agrees with his, justify'd by the Example of
all the Polite Writers in King _Charles_ the Second's Reign, which
probably may be the _Augustan_ Age of _English_ Poetry, is not to
warrant the Affectation of such as are for the _Can'ts_, the _Don'ts_,
the _Won'ts_, the _Shan'ts_, &c. but to refer to the Ear the cutting
off those useless Syllables the _Ed's_ and _Eth's_ both in Verse
and Prose; and I question whether any one wou'd not be better pleas'd
to hear _disturb'd_ read than _disturbed_, and _rebuk'd_ than
_rebuked_, tho' the Doctor wonders how it can be endur'd.

How intolerable must those two Lines of _Hudibras_ be to him then,
on more Accounts than one.

_Hence 'tis that 'cause y' 'ave gain'd o' th' College_ _A quarter
Share at most of Knowledge._
Where there are almost as many Abreviations as there are Words, and
I question whether the being an _Hudibrastick_ is sufficient to
excuse it, if it is, otherwise inexcusable; perhaps the Reader may
not be displeas'd to see the Lines that follow, which are no great
Digression from our Subject.

_Y' assume a Pow'r as absolute, To judge and censure and controul, As
if you were the sole, Sir Poll; And sawcily pretend to know More
than your Dividend comes to.

You'll find the Thing will not be done With Ignorance and Face Alone:
No, tho' y' have purchas'd to your Name, In History so great a Fame,
That now your Talent's so well known For having all belief out grown That
every strange prodigious Tale Is measur'd by your +German+ Scale, By
which the +Virtuosi+ try The Magnitude of every Lye, +&c.+_
Which may very well be introduc'd as often as one has occasion to speak
of the late _Examiner_, or any one that belongs to him. Let this Learned
Doctor and his new Academy do their utmost to furnish our Language
with what the _French_ call _Chevilles_, with his _Thoroughs_,
_Althoughs_, and the whole Army of antiquated Words before-mention'd;
I can't imagine Mr.

_Dryden_'s Poetry will be in any Danger of becoming unintelligible,
tho' he has us'd Abreviations as much as any Polite Writer; and
will preserve that Character when the Doctor's is forgotten, unless
we should return to our Original Barbarity, as he says we incline
to do.

He complains the Refinement of our Language has hitherto been trusted
to _illiterate Court Fops, Half-witted Poets, and University Boys_.

He would have a thin Society, if he should exclude all such from his
own Academy: And if the Choice be in himself, as he seems to insinuate,
I believe the Reformation of our Language would have just as much success
as the Reformation of our Manners, which, 'tis said, none have
more corrupted than the very Reformers.

He gives us his Word, That _the Style of some great Ministers
very much exceed that of any other Productions_. Where I wonder are
the Instances of this Excellence? In Speeches in Parliament, for
themselves or others, or what Works of theirs has been communicated
to him, that he should know more than all Mankind?

One would think he was their Master by what he says, in the next Page,
_What I have most at Heart, is some Method for ascertaining and fixing
our Language for ever._ Now you must know, that this Reverend Author,
who is so concern'd for the Fixing our Language, has himself a Style
of a very deficient Character; in which the Reader will perceive how much
we shou'd be _improv'd_, by having his manner _ascertained and fixed_;
for doubtless he thinks his own the best, and his Friends know no
better than to be of his Mind.

_He would be more comprehensive_, says an Author of Note, _if he
would alter and correct his Style, which is too loose and diffus'd in all
Conscience. So that when I read him sometimes for a good while together,
tho' I go on very evenly and smoothly, I find it difficult to recollect
what I have been doing, and whether I have been reading or sleeping.
My present Advice to him therefore is, that he would study +Tacitus+,
and such other Politicians as say much in few Words: And if he
obstinately persists in the same Childish fondness for his Style,
I shall be obliged to shew in how small a Compass the whole Substance
of what he says, may be contained.

All this vile Drudgery will I submit to for his sake_, &c. But so little
likelihood there is of his mending his Style by reading
_Tacitus_, that he defies him and charges him with the Corruption of the
_Roman_ Tongue, by saying that in Two or Three Words, about which such a
Genius as he is might have employ'd Twenty or Thirty. This Brevity he
calls Affectation, and assures us, it brought Barbarisms into the
_Latin_ Tongue, even before the _Goths_ invaded _Italy_. However he
exposes his own Ignorance, he should have been careful not to have
discover'd his Friends: Does the _Translation_ of the _Bible_ teach
us to understand _Fairfax_? Are that and the _Common-Prayer_ the
Standard of Language?

Yet he affirms, that without them one cou'd not understand any thing
written a hundred Years ago. Whereas the _Jerusalem_ of _Fairfax_
is older than that, and whoever reads it will find the Language as new
as any can be expected from the New Academy these Fifty Years. For
our Tongue is not so variable in the best Authors as the Doctor
represents it, and the difference between the present _English_ and
the _English_ a Hundred Years ago, is not so great as between the
Old and Modern _French_ in that Term.

Of all the Parts of Learning, that is surely the least ally'd to Politeness
that deals in Old Musty Manuscripts, and affects a Knowledge in
Tongues which have not one Polite Book to recommend them. How such a
Quality can be serviceable to the Advancement of Wit and _Eloquence_,
I cannot conceive; but there are some Characters in the World, that
encroach upon all others, and some Men that for their Interest will
say any thing that comes uppermost, either for or against another.
The Knowledge of Tongues is certainly very useful; but if a Person
knows a great many Ancient and Modern, and can hardly speak
intelligibly in his own, He shou'd be no Orator for me.

I would no more value his Learning than Sir _Hudibras_'s, of which the
Doctor puts me in mind more than once by his Compliments, especially
of this Passage in the first Canto.

_We grant, altho' he had much Wit, He was very shy of using it, As being
loth to wear it out.
And therefore bore it not about, Unless on Holydays or so, As Men
their best Apparel do.

Besides, 'tis known he could speak +Greek+ As naturally as Pigs squeak.:

That +Latin+ was no more difficile Than to a Blackbird 'tis to whistle;
Being rich in both he never scanted His Bounty unto such as wanted; But
much of either wou'd afford, To many that had not one Word:
For +Hebrew+ Roots altho they're found To flourish but in barren
Ground, He had such Plenty as suffic'd To make some think him circumcis'd._

The rest of Sir _Hudibras_'s Merit in Letters is of a Piece, and set off
with a Puritanical Air, that renders the whole truly Ridiculous, and
makes a good Comment on several Pages of the Doctor's Epistle, which is
most valuable for the great Judgment and Sincerity that he has shewn
in it.

It has already been observ'd, that _Horace_ asserts _Osse_ to be the
only Rule of Language; and the Letter-Writer repeats what he says, _of
Words going off and perishing like Leaves, and new ones coming in their
Places_, which he tells us did not approve of _Horace_, notwithstanding
his own Law of paying Obedience to usage. For if that were necessary,
what, according to our Author, would become of his _Monumentum Ære
perennius_? Did not the _Roman_ Tongue even by his own confession, change
as much as ours has done.

_The Latin Three Hundred Years before Tully was as unintelligible in
his Time as the +English+ and +French+ of the same Period are now._ And
the Corruptions afterwards by the _Barbarians_ made it as different
from _Cicero_'s as _Ennius_'s; yet amidst all those variations,
_Horace_'s Works are still _Monumentum ære perennius_.

When a Tongue is come to any degree of Perfection, whoever writes well
in it will Live; there's a Thirst after Wit in all Ages, and those that
have a Taste of it will distinguish the Thought from the Diction.
_Chaucer_ will, no doubt, be admir'd as long as the _English_ Tongue
has a Being; and the Changes that have happen'd to our Language
have not hinder'd his Works out living their Contemporary Monuments
of Brass or Marble.

The Doctor may as well set up a Society to find out the _Grand Elixir_,
the _Perpetual Motion_, the _Longitude_, and other such Discoveries, as
to fix our Language beyond their own Times.

The Test of their Successors will vary with the Age, and their Rules
grow obsolete as well as their Words. He would make us believe, that
the _French_ Academy have not been able to preserve their Language from
Decay, and who are the Men in _Britain_ who pretend to greater Genius
for Eloquence than the most Polite of the Politest Nation in _Europe_.
Mr. _Waller_ Elegantly complains of the Change which necessarily happens
to Stile, and does it however in Language which shews, that the
Doctor need not be afraid of People's forgetting his Patron a Hundred
Years hence, if he can write as good _English_ upon him now, as Mr.

_Waller_ did on this Subject Threescore Years ago.

_But who can hope his Lines should long Last, in a daily changing Tongue,
While they are new, Envy prevails, And as that dies, our Language fails._

_When Architects have done their Part, The Matter may betray their Art,
Time, if we use ill Chosen Stone, Soon brings a well-built Palace
down._
_Poets that Lasting Marble seek, Must carve in +Latin+ or in +Greek+,
We write in Sand, our Language grows, And like our Tide, Ours overflows._

Our Author sees _no necessity of this Changing our Language_. What has
been the Fate of all Tongues Ancient and Modern, and for the same Reasons
will Eternally be so, he wou'd defend ours from, because the Chinese
_have Books in their Tongue above 2000 Years Old_; And a History of
30000 Years Period with a Succession of Kings, 20000 Years before
_Adam_. It wou'd be a Discovery worthy those Men who have lately been
reconciling Contradictions, and building Arguments upon Nonsence,
to find out that _certain Standard for our Tongue, to which, if it
were refin'd_, he assures us, _it might be fixt for Ever_.

This wou'd be doing what was never done before, what neither _Roman_
nor _Greek_, which lasted the longest of any in its Purity, could
pretend to. And this would not be the only strange thing that has lately
happen'd to us, which never happen'd to a Nation before. It will be
in vain to pretend to _ascertain_ Language, unless they had the Secret
of setting Rules for Thinking, and could bring Thought to a Standard
too.

For every Age, as well as every Nation, has its different manner
of Thinking, of which the Expression and Words will always have a Relish,
and be Barbarous or Polite, according as the Times take their Turn. If
from the abundance of good Sense which appears lately in every thing
we do, The Doctor can demonstrate, that we never were in a better way
towards the Perfection of Thought and Language, let him set about his
Academy as soon as he pleases.

But if the contrary is apparent, it may not be improper to wait for
some more propitious Opportunity. Besides, there will in all times be
irregular Genius's, who out of Humour will prefer Affectation to Nature,
and mistake Novelty for Beauty. _Boileau_ in his Reflections upon _Longinus_,
has several Observations of this kind, which will shew the difference
between true and false Judgment, by comparing what he writes with
several Passages in the Doctor's Letter; he is speaking of the
Famous _Ronsard_ and his Imitators, _Du-Bellai_, _Du Bartas_,
_Desportes_, and other _French_ Poets in the Reigns of _Henry_ III.
and IV. who were in great Fame for a long while, and when he wrote,
sunk into the last Contempt.

_The same among the_ +Romans+, says he, _was the Fate of_ +Nævius+,
+Livius+, _and_ +Ennius+_,
who in _Horace_'s time had a great many Admirers as that Poet informs us,
but at last they were entirely decry'd. And it must not be imagin'd that
the Fall of these Authors, as well _French_ as _Latin_, was owing to
the Change of their Languages.

The true Reason was, they did not know how to hit the Point of Solidity
and Perfection in those Languages, which is necessary to make a Work
last, and set a Value upon it for ever. In effect, the _Latin_ Tongue,
as it was written by _Cicero_ and _Virgil_, was very much chang'd in
_Quintilian_'s Time, and still more in the Time of _Aulus Gellus_.
However _Cicero_ and _Virgil_ were then more esteem'd than even
in their own Time, because they attain'd the height of Perfection,
of which I have spoken.

It is not therefore on account of the antiquated Words and Expressions
in _Ronsard_, that _Ronsard_ has lost the Reputation he once had, but
because the Beauties which were thought to be in him, appear'd all at
once to be no Beauties at all.

Thus we see, that in order to bring us to the degree of Perfection with
which the Doctor flatters us by means of his new Academy, they must teach
us first to think justly, to distinguish false Beauty from true, and
glaring from Brightness, to banish those that write by Humour, and
receive only such as aim at Solidity in their Writings. How the
Celebrated _Tale_ of a Tub will come off then with the best Judges, I can
easily guess, that excellent Treatise being much of the same nature
as _Rabelais_, of whom _La Bruyere_ says, _+Rabelais+ is incomprehensible:
His Book is an inexplicable Enigma, a meer Chimera; It has a Woman's
Face, with the Feet and Tail of a Serpent, or some Beast more
deform'd.

'Tis a Monstrous Collection of Political and Ingenious Morality, with a
Mixture of Beastliness; where 'tis bad 'tis abominable, and fit for the
Diversion of the Rabble, and where 'tis good 'tis exquisite, and may
entertain the most delicate._
People very often apply those Faults to the Expression and Words
which are originally in the thought.

The Merit of such as write by Humour, Changes with the Mode, and their
Language savouring of their Sentiments, must of course grow out
of Fashion.

_Ronsard_ the _French_ Poet was so far from writing ill _French_,
that _Pasquier_ thought the _French_ Tongue in its Perfection in
his Writings and yet upon the Appearance of _Malherb_ and _Bacan_,
he was no more read nor talk'd of; Whereas there were Authors before
him, whose Writings are now in general Esteem, as _Marot_ and St.

_Galais_, for the kind of Poetry in which they excell'd, and their
Stile is imitated for its Simplicity, by which _la Fountain_ acquir'd
his Fame.

Instances of this kind may be given in our own Tongue, which has improv'd
in Refinement as much as the _French_. Our _Shakespear_ shone on the
Stage, with all the Qualities of a Dramatick Poet, and _Diction_ in
particular, when the _French_ Stage was Barbarous. His Style has its
Beauties now, and is newer than many who have since Writ, and for
a while with Reputation.

Among all the various ways in which we of late have endeavour'd to endear
our selves to the _French_, and make 'em forgive us for beating
them so, nothing certainly will oblige 'em more than our affecting
to imitate them in our Political Style.

Of this Nature is that Novelty the Reverend Author has introduc'd
into our Language, where the Term _Prime Minister_ has no more a
Place than _Will and Pleasure_.

Pray who among the many Ministers Her Majesty is so happily serv'd
by, does she Honour with that Name, and how comes it that _Prime_
does not go with Precedence?

What Law of ours Impowers any body to order our Language to be _Inspected_,
and who is there that wou'd think himself oblig'd to obey him in it?

Is there no difference between the Ministers of a Despotick Monarchy,
and the Servants of a limited one, who have no Rule but the Law,
and are as accountable to it as the vilest of their Flatterers.

We see how our Tongue would be improv'd and enlarg'd, had the Doctor
and his Brethren the ordering of it.

He has already impos'd on us the Court Style of _France_, and their
Politicks wou'd soon come after it.

He pastes a particular Compliment on our Tongue and his Patron,
that they have not Merit enough to subsist a Hundred Years without
mending.

As bad as our _English_ is, I'll engage it will subsist in the
History of another great Man of this Nation, as long as the Names
of _Edward_ the III. or _Henry_ V. shall be remembred in _Britain_.

There being some Characters so illustrious that without the Ornaments
of Stile or the Beauties of Wit, they Shine in their Native Dress,
and make every thing look Glorious about them.

Others there are which require all the Advantages of Language and
Invention, and darken every Thing that comes near them.

The best of it is, the Contempt with which he treats the _English_ Tongue,
is not like to do it any harm, for whatever becomes of any ones History
a Hundred Years hence, the Doctor's will certainly be of much
shorter Date, unless his Censurers should preserve the Memory of
him, or he thinks fit to own at last some other of his Productions,
when 'tis probable Fortune has done her best or her worst for him.

I have several very good Reasons why, if I were to be of this Academy,
I would banish the word Dozen out of our Dictionary, and the Doctor
has no doubt his to be fond of it, and fixing it there for ever.

He scouted about and got some pictures of chipmunks real close, by
waiting, and a picture of a woodpecker feeding young ones, at a hole in
a dead pine stump. This was a good place for bear to come, after the
berries; and we were hoping that one would amble in while we were there
so that Fitz could take a picture of it, too. Bears don't hurt people
unless people try to hurt them; and a bear would sooner have raspberries
than have a man or boy, any day. Fitzpatrick thought that if he could
get a good picture of a bear, out in the open, that would bring him a
Scout's honor. Of course, chipmunk pictures help, too. But while we were
resting and fooling and taking pictures, and General Ashley was bringing
his diary and his map up to date, for record, we had another visitor.
(Note 20.)

A man came riding a dark bay horse, with white nose and white right fore
foot, along our side of the beaver pond, and halted at our camp. The
horse had left ear swallow-tailed and was branded with a Diamond Five on
the right shoulder. The man wasn't the man we had seen across the pond,
for he wore a sombrero, and was taller and had on overalls, and
cow-puncher boots.

[Illustration]

"Howdy?" he said.

"How are you?" we answered.

He sort of lazily dismounted, and yawned--but his sharp eyes were taking
us and our camp all in.

"Out fishing?" he asked.

"No, sir. Passing through," said General Ashley.

"Going far?"

"Over to Green Valley."

"Walking?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good place for beaver, isn't it?"

"A bad place."

"That so? Used to be some about here. Couldn't catch any, eh?"

"We aren't trying. But it seems a bad place for beaver because the only
one we have seen is a dead one in a trap."

The man waked up. "Whose trap?"

"We don't know." And the general went on to explain.

The man nodded. "I'm a deputy game warden," he said at last. "Somebody's
been trapping beaver in here, and it's got to stop. Haven't seen any one
pass through?"

We had. The general reported.

"Smallish man?"

"Yes, sir."

"Roan hoss branded quarter circle D on the left hip? Brass-bound
stirrups?"

"We didn't see the horse; but we think the man was left-handed," said
the general.

"Why?"

"He was left-footed, because there was a hole in the sole of the left
shoe, and that would look as though he used his left foot more than his
right. So we think he may be left-handed, too." (Note 21.)

The game warden grunted. He eyed our flag.

"You kids must be regular Boy Scouts."

"We are."

"Then I reckon you aren't catching any beaver. All right, I'll look for
a left-footed man, maybe left-handed. But it's this fellow on the roan
hoss I'm after. He's been trying to sell pelts. There's no use my
trailing him, to-day. But I'll send word ahead, and if you lads run
across him let somebody know. Where are you bound for?"

The general told him.

"By way of Pilot Peak?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I'll tell you a short cut. You see that strip of young timber
running up over the ridge? That's an old survey trail. It crosses to the
other side. Over beyond you'll strike Dixon's Park and a ruined
saw-mill. After that you can follow up Dixon's Creek."

We thanked him and he mounted and rode away.


CHAPTER V

TWO RECRUITS


When we got up in the morning, the mountains still had their night-caps
on. White mist was floating low about their tips, and lying in the
gulches like streams and lakes. Above timber-line, opposite us, was a
long layer of cloud, with the top of old Pilot Peak sticking through.

This was a weather sign, although the sun rose clear and the sky was
blue. Nightcaps are apt to mean a showery day. (Note 22.) We took our
wet rub, ate breakfast, policed the camp and killed the fire, and
General Ashley put camphor and cotton against little Jed Smith's back
tooth, to stop some aching. Maybe there was a hole in the tooth, or
maybe Jed had just caught cold in it, after being wet; but he ought to
have had his teeth looked into before he started out on the scout.
(Note 23.) Anyway, the camphor stopped the ache--and made him dance,
too.

We crossed the creek, above the beaver pond, and struck off into the old
survey trail that cut over the ridge. The brush was thick, and the trees
had sprung up again, so that really it wasn't a regular trail unless
you had known about it. The blazes on the side trees had closed over.
But all the same, by watching the scars, and by keeping in the line
where the trees always opened out, and by watching the sky as it showed
before, we followed right along.

After we had been traveling about two hours, we heard thunder and that
made us hustle the more, to get out of the thin timber, so that we would
not be struck by lightning. (Note 24.) The wind moaned through the
trees. The rain was coming, sure.

The trail was diagonally up-hill, all the way, and if we had been
cigarette smokers we wouldn't have had breath enough to hit the fast
pace that General Ashley set. The burros had to trot, and it made little
Jed Smith, who is kind of fat, wheeze; but we stuck it out and came to a
flat place of short dried grass and bushes, with no trees. Here we
stopped. We were about nine thousand feet up.

From where we were we could see the storm. It was flowing down along a
bald-top mountain back from our camp at the beaver pond, and looked like
gray smoke. The sun was just being swallowed. Well, all we could do was
to wait and take it, and see how bad it was. We tied Sally and Apache to
some bushes, but we didn't unpack them, of course. The tarps on top
would keep the grub from getting wet.

The storm made a grand sight, as it rolled toward us, over the timber.
And soon it was raining below us, down at the beaver pond--and then,
with a drizzle and a spatter, the rain reached us, too.

We sat hunched, under our hats, and took it. We might have got under
blankets--but that would have given us soaked blankets for night, unless
we had stretched the tarps, too; and if we had stretched the tarps then
the rest of our packs would have suffered. The best way is to crawl
under a spruce, where the limbs have grown close to the ground. But not
in a thunder storm. And it is better to be wet yourself and have a dry
camp for night, than to be dry yourself and have a wet camp for night.

Anyway, the rain didn't hurt us. While it thundered and lightened and
the drops pelted us well, we sang our Patrol song--which is a song like
one used by the Black feet Indians:

    "The Elk is our Medicine,
    He makes us very strong.
    The Elk is our Medicine,
    The Elk is our Medicine,
    The Elk is our Medicine,
    He makes us very strong.
    Ooooooooooooooooooooooo!"

And when the thunder boomed we sang at it:

    "The _Thunder_ is our Medicine--"

to show that we weren't afraid of it.

The squall passed on over us, and when it had about quit we untied the
burros and started on again. In just a minute we were warm and sweating
and could shed our coats; and the sun came out hot to dry us off.

We crossed the ridge, and on the other side we saw Dixon's Park. We knew
it was Dixon's Park, because the timber had been cut from it, and
Dixon's Park had had a saw-mill twenty years ago.

Once this park had been grown over with trees, like the side of the
ridge where we had been climbing; but that saw-mill had felled
everything in sight, so that now there were only old stumps and dead
logs. _Burgess_--a township at Port Sorell, in the county of Devon, on
the northern coast, 157 miles from Hobart and 60 from Launceston. It has
a resident police magistrate, a small episcopal church and school,
and a post station.

_Burghley_--a village on the Leven, near the Surrey Hills, in the
county of Devon. It is on the road through the western district, about
60 miles from Launceston. The Van Diemen's Land Company has a station
here.

_Burnham_--a village in the parish of Cambridge and county of Monmouth,
about 40 miles from Hobart.

_Cam_--a river rising in the Hampshire Hills, and falling into Bass'
Strait a few miles west of Emu Bay.

_Campbell Town_--a town in the parish of Campbelton and county of Somerset,
89 miles from Hobart, and 42 from Launceston. It is situated in a level
pastoral country, on the Elizabeth River, and the main road from Hobart
to Launceston passes through it. The town consists chiefly of one
long street, in which are four large inns, a brewery, some stores,
small shops, and an assembly room.

There are in the town an episcopal and presbyterian church (St. Luke's
and St. Andrew's), a Wesleyan Chapel, and schools. The river is crossed
by a bridge or causeway, 200 yards long, and on the southern side are
numerous fine farms. The road to Avoca, Fingal, and the eastern coast
here branches off from the main line. In the town there are also a gaol
and police and post offices. There is a resident police magistrate. The
population of the town and police district is 2,319, and the number
of houses, 255 of which are of stone or brick, is 386.

Campbell Town is also an electoral district. It is considered to be the
middle district of the colony, and the Midland Agricultural Association
originated here. R. Q.

Kermode, Esq., is the first member for Campbell Town.

_Carlton_--a village and post station on the stream of that name, in
the parish of Carlton, and county of Pembroke, about 35 miles from
Hobart.
The Carlton falls into North Bay, below Pittwater.

_Carrick_--a township and post-station on the west bank of the Liffey
and western road, in the parish of Carrick and county of Westmoreland,
113 miles from Hobart and 10 from Launceston. The Liffey is crossed
by a bridge at the township. There are a small episcopal church and
day school, a mill, a brewery, and three inns.

Annual races are held near the township.

_Catemara_--a small stream falling into Recherche Bay, in the county of
Kent.

_Circular Head_--a bold promontory, 500 feet high, forming part of a
small peninsula in the north-west corner of the island, about 30 miles
east of Cape Grim. It is seen at sea at the distance of 10 leagues. It
is 280 miles from Hobart, and 160 from Launceston, and here the
western road terminates. The town of Stanley, which stands on the
eastern side, contains an episcopal church, a Roman catholic chapel,
a post station, a custom-house, three inns, and some substantial
buildings. It has also a benevolent society, and schools. There is
a resident police magistrate.
The Van Diemen's Land Company has an extensive establishment here,
and a considerable trade is carried on between the settlers in the
neighborhood and Victoria, to which large quantities of timber,
potatoes, and other produce grown on the fertile farms on the coast,
are shipped in small vessels belonging to the port.This was a splendid time to hunt for rabbits, right after a rain. They
come out then before dark, and nibble about. And you can walk on the
wetness without much noise. Early morning and the evening are the best
rabbit hours, anyway.

I walked quick and straight-footed, looking far ahead, and right and
left, through the timber, to sight whatever moved. Yet I might be
passing close to a rabbit, without seeing him, for he would be
squatting. So I looked behind, too. And after I had walked about twenty
minutes, I did see a rabbit. He was hopping, at one side, through the
bushes; he gave only about three hops, and squatted, to let me pass. So
I stopped stock-still, and drew up my rifle. He was about thirty yards
away, and was just a bunch like a stone; but I held my breath and aimed
at where his ears joined his head, and fired quick. He just kicked a
little. That was a pretty good shot and I was glad, for I didn't want to
hurt him and we had to have meat.

I hunted quite a while before I saw another rabbit. The next one was a
big old buck rabbit, because his hind quarters around his tail were
brown; young rabbits are white there. He hopped off, without stopping,
and I whistled at him--wheet! Then he stopped, and I missed him. I shot
over him, because I was in a hurry. I went across and saw where the
bullet had hit. And he had ducked.

He hopped out of sight, through the brush; so I must figure where he
probably would go. On beyond was a hilly place, with rocks, and probably
he lived here--and rabbits usually make up-hill when they're
frightened. So I took a circle, to cut him off; and soon he hopped again
and squatted. This time I shot him through the head, where I aimed; so I
didn't hurt him, either. I picked him up and was starting back for camp,
because two rabbits were enough, when I heard somebody shouting. It
didn't sound like a Scout's shout, but I answered and waited and kept
answering, and in a few minutes a strange boy came running and walking
fast through the trees. He carried a single-barrel shotgun.

He never would have seen me if I hadn't spoken; but when he wasn't more
than ten feet from me I said: "What's the matter?"

He jumped and saw me standing. "Hello," he panted. "Was it you who was
shooting and calling?"

"Yes."

"Why didn't you come on, then?" he scolded. He was angry.

"Because you were coming," I said. "I stood still and called back, to
guide you."

"What did you shoot at?"

"Rabbits."

He hadn't seen them before, but now he saw them on the ground. "Aw,
jiminy!" he exclaimed. "We've got something better than that, but we
can't make a fire and our matches are all wet and so are our blankets,
and we don't know what to do. There's another fellow with me. We're
lost."

He was a sight; wet and dirty and sweaty from running, and scared.

"What are you doing? Camping?" I asked.

He nodded. "We started for Duck Lake, with nothing but blankets and what
grub we could carry; but we got to chasing around and we missed the
trail and now we don't know where we are. Gee, but we're wet and cold.
Where's your camp?"

"Back on the ridge."

"Got a fire?"

"Uh huh," I nodded. "Sure."

"Come on," he said. "We'll go and get the other fellow and then we'll
camp near you so as to have some fire."

"All right," I said.

He led off, and I picked up the rabbits and followed. He kept hooting,
and the other boy answered, and we went down into the gulch where the
creek flowed. Now, that was the dickens of a place to camp! Anybody
ought to know better than to camp down at the bottom of a narrow gulch,
where it is damp and nasty and dark. They did it because it was beside
the water, and because there was some soft grass that they could lie on.
(Note 25.)

The other boy was about seventeen, and was huddled in a blanket, trying
to scratch a match and light wet paper. He wore a big Colt's
six-shooter on a cartridge belt about his waist.

"Come out, Bat," called the boy with me. "Here's a kid from another
camp, where they have fire and things."

Bat grunted, and they gathered their blankets and a frying-pan and other
stuff.

"Lookee! This beats rabbit," said the first boy (his name was Walt); and
he showed me what they had killed. It was four grouse!

Now, that was mean.

"It's against the law to kill grouse yet," I told him.

"Aw, what do we care?" he answered. "Nobody knows."

"It's only a week before the season opens, anyhow," spoke Bat. "We got
the old mother and all her chickens. If we hadn't, somebody would,
later."

Fellows like that are as bad as a forest fire. Just because of them,
laws are made, and they break them and the rest of us keep them.

We climbed out of the gulch, and I was so mad I let them carry their own
things. The woods were dusky, and I laid a straight course for camp. It
was easy to find, because I knew that I had hunted with my back to it,
in sound of the water on my left. All we had to do was to follow through
the ridge with the water on our right, and listen for voices.

I tell you, that camp looked good. The boys had two fires, a big one to
dry us by and a little one to cook by. (Note 26.) One of the tarps had
been laid over a pole in crotched stakes, about four feet high, and tied
down at the ends (Note 27), for a dog-tent, and spruce trimmings and
brush had been piled behind for a wind-break and to reflect the heat.
Inside were the spruce needles that carpeted the ground and had been
kept dry by branches, and a second tarp had been laid to sleep on, with
the third tarp to cover us, on top of the blankets. The flags had been
set up. Fitzpatrick was cooking, Major Henry was dragging more wood to
burn, the fellows were drying damp stuff and stacking it safe under the
panniers, or else with their feet to the big blaze were drying
themselves, the burros were grazing close in. It was as light as day,
with the flames reflected on the trees and the flags, and it seemed just
like a trappers' bivouac.

Then we walked into the circle; and when the fellows saw the rabbits
they gave a cheer. After I reported to General Ashley and turned the two
boys over to him, I cleaned the rabbits for supper.

The two new boys, Bat and Walt, threw down their stuff and sat by the
fire to get warm. Bat still wore his big six-shooter. They dropped
their grouse in plain sight, but nobody said a word until Bat (he was
the larger one) spoke up, kind of grandly, when I was finishing the
rabbits:

"There's some birds. If you'll clean 'em we'll help you eat 'em."

"No, thanks. We don't want them," answered General Ashley.

"Why not?"

"It's against the law."

"Aw, what difference does that make now?" demanded Walt. "There aren't
any game wardens 'round. And it's only a week before the law goes out,
anyway."

"But the grouse are dead, just the same," retorted General Ashley. "They
couldn't be any deader, no matter how long it is before the law opens,
or if a game warden was right here!" He was getting angry, and when he's
angry he isn't afraid to say anything, because he's red-headed.

"You'd like to go and tell, then; wouldn't you!" they sneered.

"I'd tell if it would do any good." And he would, too; and so would any
of us. "The game laws are made to be kept. Those were our grouse and you
stole them."

"Who are you?"

"Well, we happen to be a bunch of Boy Scouts. But what I mean is, that
we fellows who keep the law let the game live on purpose so that
everybody will have an equal chance at it, and then fellows like you
come along and kill it unfairly. See?"

Humph! The two kids mumbled and kicked at the fire, as they sat; and Bat
said: "We've got to have something to eat. I suppose we can cook our own
meat, can't we?"

"I suppose you can," answered General Ashley, "if it'll taste good to
you."

So, while Fitz was cooking on the small fire, they cleaned their own
birds (I didn't touch them) and cooked over some coals of the big fire.
But Fitz made bread enough for all, and there was other stuff; and the
general told them to help themselves. We didn't want to be mean. The
camp-fire is no place to be mean at. A mean fellow doesn't last long,
out camping.

They had used bark for plates. They gave their fry-pan a hasty rub with
sticks and grass, and cleaned their knives by sticking them into the
ground; and then they squatted by the fire and lighted pipes. After our
dishes had been washed and things had been put away for the night, and
the burros picketed in fresh forage, we prepared to turn in. The clouds
were low and the sky was dark, and the air was damp and chilly; so
General Ashley said:

"You fellows can bunk in with us, under the tarps. We can make room."

But no! They just laughed. "Gwan," they said. "We're used to traveling
light. We just roll up in a blanket wherever we happen to be. We aren't
tenderfeet."

Well, we weren't, either. But we tried to be comfortable. When you are
uncomfortable and sleep cold or crampy, that takes strength fighting it;
and we were on the march to get that message through. So we crawled into
bed, out of the wind and where the spruce branches partly sheltered us,
and our tarps kept the dampness out and the wind, too. The two fellows
opened their blankets (they had one apiece!) by the fire and lay down
and rolled up like logs and seemed to think that they were the smarter.
We let them, if they liked it so.

The wind moaned through the trees; all about us the timber was dark and
lonesome. Only Apache and Sally, the burros, once in a while grunted as
they stood as far inside the circle as they could get; but snuggled in
our bed, low down, our heads on our coats, we were as warm as toast.

During the night I woke up, to turn over. Now and then a drop of rain
hit the tarp tent. The fire was going again, and I could hear the two
fellows talking. They were sitting up, feeding it, and huddled Injun
fashion with their blankets over their shoulders, smoking their old
pipes, and thinking (I guessed) that they were doing something big,
being uncomfortable. But it takes more than such foolishness--wearing a
big six-shooter when there is nothing to shoot, and sleeping out in the
rain when cover is handy--to make a veteran. Veterans and real Scouts
act sensibly. (Note 28.)

When next I woke and stretched, the sun was shining and it was time to
get up.


CHAPTER VI

A DISASTROUS DOZE


The two fellows were sound asleep when we turned out. They were lying in
the sun, rolled up and with their faces covered to keep the light away.
We didn't pay any attention to them, but had our wet rub and went ahead
attending to camp duties. After a while one of them (Walt, it was)
turned over, and wriggled, and threw the blanket off his face, and
blinked about. He was bleary-eyed and sticky-faced, as if he had slept
too hard but not long enough. And I didn't see how he had had enough air
to breathe.

But he grinned, and yawned, and said: "You kids get up awful early. What
time is it?"

"Six o'clock."

He-haw! And he yawned some more. Then he sat up and let his blanket go
and kicked Bat. "Breakfast!" he shouted.

That made Bat grunt and grumble and wriggle; and finally uncover, too.
They acted as if their mouths might taste bad, after the pipes.

We hadn't made a big fire, of course; but breakfast was about ready, on
the little fire, and Fitz our cook sang out, according to our
regulations: "Chuck!"

That was the camp's signal call.

"If you fellows want to eat with us, draw up and help yourselves,"
invited General Ashley.

"Sure," they answered; and they crawled out of their blankets, and got
their pieces of bark, and opened their knives, and without washing their
faces or combing their hair they fished into the dishes, for bacon and
bread and sorghum and beans.

That was messy; but we wanted to be hospitable, so we didn't say
anything.

"Where are you kids bound for, anyway?" asked Bat.

"Over the Divide," told General Ashley.

"Why can't we go along?"

That staggered us. They weren't our kind; and besides, we were all Boy
Scouts, and our party was big enough as it was. So for a moment nobody
answered. And then Walt spoke up.

"Aw, we won't hurt you any. What you afraid of? We aren't tenderfeet,
and we'll do our share. We'll throw in our grub and we won't use your
dishes. We've got our own outfit."

"I don't know. We'll have to vote on that," said General Ashley. "We're
a Patrol of Boy Scouts, traveling on business."

"What's that--Boy Scouts?" demanded Bat.

We explained, a little.

"Take us in, then," said Walt. "We're good scouts--ain't we, Bat?"

But they weren't. They didn't know anything about Scouts and Scouts'
work.

"We could admit you as recruits, on the march," said General Ashley.
"But we can't swear you in."

"Aw, we'll join the gang now and you can swear us in afterwards," said
Bat.

"Well," said General Ashley, doubtfully, "we'll take a vote."

We all drew off to one side, and sat in council. It seemed to me that we
might as well let them in. That would be doing them a good turn, and we
might help them to be clean and straight and obey the laws. Boys who
seem mean as dirt, to begin with, often are turned into fine Scouts.

"Now we'll all vote just as we feel about it," said General Ashley. "One
black-ball will keep them out. 'N' means 'No'; 'Y' means 'Yes.'"

The vote was taken by writing with a pencil on bits of paper, and the
bits were put into General Ashley's hat. Everything was "Y"--and the
vote was unanimous to let them join. So everybody must have felt the
same about it as I did.

General Ashley reported to them. "You can come along," he said; "but
you've got to be under discipline, the same as the rest of us. And if
you prove to be Scouts' stuff you can be sworn in later. But I'm only a
Patrol leader and I can't swear you."

"Sure!" they cried. "We'll be under discipline. Who's the boss? You?"

We had made a mistake. Here started our trouble. But we didn't know. We
thought that we were doing the right thing by giving them a chance. You
never can tell.

They volunteered to wash the dishes, and went at it; and we let them
throw their blankets and whatever else they wanted to get rid of in with
the packs. We were late; and anyway we didn't think it was best to start
in fussing and disciplining; they would see how Scouts did, and perhaps
they would catch on that way. Only--

"You'll have to cut that out," ordered General Ashley, as we were ready
to set out. He meant their pipes. They had stuck them in their mouths
and had lighted them.

"What? Can't we hit the pipe?" they both cried.

"Not with us," declared the general. "It's against the regulations."

"Aw, gee!" they complained. "That's the best part of camping--to load up
the old pipe."

"Not for a Scout. He likes fresh air," answered General Ashley. "He
needs his wind, too, and smoking takes the wind. Anyway, we're traveling
through the enemy's country, and a pipe smells, and it's against Scout
regulations to smoke."

They stuffed their pipes into their pockets.

"Who's the enemy?" they asked.

"We're carrying a message and some other boys are trying to stop us.
That's all."

"We saw some kids, on the other side of that ridge," they cried.
"They're from the same town you are. Are they the ones?"

"What did they look like?" we asked.

"One was a big kid with black eyes--" said Bat.

"Aw, he wasn't big. The big kid had blue eyes," interrupted Walt.

"How many in the party?" we asked.

"Four," said Bat.

"Five," said Walt.

"Any horses?"

"Yes."

"What were the brands?"

"We didn't notice," they said.

"Was one horse a bay with a white nose, and another a black with a bob
tail?"

"Guess so," they said.

So we didn't know much more than we did before; we could only suspect.
Of course, there were other parties of boys camping, in this country. We
weren't the only ones. If Bat and Walt had been a little smart they
might have helped us. They didn't use their eyes.

We followed the ridge we were on, as far as we could, because it was
high and free from brush. General Ashley and Major Henry led, as usual,
with the burros behind (those burros would follow now like dogs, where
there wasn't any trail for them to pick out), and then the rest of us,
the two recruits panting in the rear. Bat had belted on his big
six-shooter, and Walt carried the shotgun.

We traveled fast, as usual, when we could; that gave us more time in the
bad places. Pilot Peak stuck up, beyond some hills, ahead. We kept an
eye on him, for he was our landmark, now that we had broken loose from
trails. He didn't seem any nearer than he was the day before.

The ridge ended in a point, beyond which was a broad pasture-like
meadow, with the creek winding in a semicircle through it. On across was
a steep range of timber hills--and Pilot Peak and some other peaks rose
beyond, with snow and rocks. In the flat a few cattle were grazing, like
buffalo, and we could see an abandoned cabin which might have been a
trapper's shack. It was a great scene; so free and peaceful and wild and
gentle at the same time.

We weren't tired, but we halted by the stream in the flat to rest the
burros and to eat something. We took off the packs, and built a little
fire of dry sage, and made tea, while Sally and Apache took a good roll
and then grazed on weeds and flowers and everything. This was fine,
here in the sunshine, with the blue sky over and the timber sloping up
on all sides, and the stream singing.

After we had eaten some bread and drunk some tea we Scouts rested, to
digest; but Bat and Walt the two recruits loafed off, down the creek,
and when they got away a little we could see them smoking. On top of
that, they hadn't washed the dishes. So I washed them.

After a while they came back on the run, but they weren't smoking now.
"Say!" they cried, excited. "We found some deer-tracks. Let's camp back
on the edge of the timber, and to-night when the deer come down to drink
we'll get one!"

That was as bad as shooting grouse. It wasn't deer season. They didn't
seem to understand.

"Against the law," said General Ashley. "And we're on the march, to go
through as quick as we can. It's time to pack."

"I'll pack one of those burros. I'll show you how," offered Bat. So we
let them go ahead, because they might know more than we. They led up
Sally, while Major Henry and Jed Smith and Kit Carson began to pack
Apache. The recruits threw on the pack, all right, and passed the rope;
but Sally moved because they were so rough, and Bat swore and kicked her
in the stomach.

"Get around there!" he said.

"Here! You quit that," scolded Fitzpatrick, first. "That's no way to
treat an animal." He was angry; we all were angry. (Note 29.)

"It's the way to treat this animal," retorted Bat. "I'll kick her head
off if she doesn't stand still. See?"

"No, you won't," warned General Ashley.

"If you can pack a burro so well, pack her yourself, then," answered
Walt.

"Fitzpatrick, you and Jim Bridger help me with Sally," ordered the
general; and we did. We threw the diamond hitch in a jiffy and the pack
stuck on as if it were glued fast.

The two recruits didn't have much more to say; but when we took up the
march again they sort of sulked along, behind. We thought best to follow
up the creek, through the flat, instead of making a straight climb of
the timber beyond. That would have been hard work, and slow work, and
you can travel a mile in the open in less time than you can travel half
a mile through brush.

A cattle trail led up through the flat. This flat closed, and then
opened by a little pass into another flat. We saw plenty of tracks where
deer had come down to the creek and had drunk. There were tracks of
bucks, and of does and of fawns. Walt and Bat kept grumbling and
talking. They wanted to stop off and camp, and shoot.

Pilot Peak was still on our left; but toward evening the trail we were
following turned off from the creek and climbed through gooseberry and
thimbleberry bushes to the top of a plateau, where was a park of cedars
and flowers, and where was a spring. General Ashley dug in with his
heel, and we off-packs, to camp. It was a mighty good camping spot,
again. (Note 30.) The timber thickened, beyond, and there was no sense
in going on into it, for the night. Into the heel mark we stuck the
flagstaff.

We went right ahead with our routine. The recruits had a chance to help,
if they wanted to. But they loafed. There was plenty of time before
sunset. The sun shone here half an hour or more longer than down below.
We were up pretty high; some of the aspens had turned yellow, showing
that there had been a frost, already. So we thought that we must be up
about ten thousand feet. The stream we followed had flowed swift,
telling of a steep grade.

Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand got out his camera, to take pictures. He never
wasted any time. Not ordinary camp pictures, you know, but valuable
pictures, of animals and sunsets and things. Jays and speckled
woodpeckers were hopping about, and a pine-squirrel sat on a limb and
scolded at us until he found that we were there to fit in and be company
for him. One side of the plateau fell off into rocks and cliffs, and a
big red ground-hog was lying out on a shelf in the sunset, and
whistling his call.

Fitz was bound to have a picture of him, and sneaked around, to stalk
him and snap him, close. But just as he was started--"Bang!" I jumped
three feet; we all jumped. It was that fellow Bat. He had shot off his
forty-five Colt's, at the squirrel, and with it smoking in his hand he
was grinning, as if he had played a joke on us. He hadn't hit the
squirrel, but it had disappeared. The ground-hog disappeared, the jays
and the woodpeckers flew off, and after the report died away you
couldn't hear a sound or see an animal. The gun had given notice to the
wild life to vacate, until we were gone. And where that bullet hit,
nobody could tell.

Fitzpatrick turned around and came back. He knew it wasn't much use
trying, now. We were disgusted, but General Ashley was the one to speak,
because he was Patrol leader.

"You ought not to do that. Shooting around camp isn't allowed," he said.
"It's dangerous, and it scares things away."

"I wanted that squirrel. I almost hit him, too," answered Bat.

"Well, he was protected by camp law." (Note 31.)

"Aw, all you kids are too fresh," put in Walt, the other. "We'll shoot
as much as we please, or else we'll pull out."

"If you can't do as the rest of us do, all right: pull," answered the
general.

"Let them. We don't want them," said Major Henry. "We didn't ask them in
the first place. What's the sense in carrying a big revolver around, and
playing tough!"

"That will do, Henry," answered the general. "I'm talking for the
Patrol."

"Come on, Walt. We'll take our stuff and pull out and make our own
camp," said Bat. "We won't be bossed by any red-headed kid--or any
one-armed kid, either." He was referring to the gun and to the burro
packing, both.

Major Henry began to sputter and growl. A black-eyed boy is as spunky as
a red-headed one. And we all stood up, ready, if there was to be a
fight. But there wasn't. It wasn't necessary. General Ashley flushed
considerably, but he kept his temper.

"That's all right," he said. "If you can't obey discipline, like the
rest, you don't camp with us."

"And we don't intend to, you bet," retorted Walt. "We're as good as you
are and a little better, maybe. We're no tenderfeet!"

They gathered their blankets and their frying-pan and other outfit, and
they stalked off about a hundred yards, further into the cedars, and
dumped their things for their own camp.

Maybe they thought that we'd try to make them get out entirely, but we
didn't own the place; it was a free camp for all, and as long as they
didn't interfere with us we had no right to interfere with them. We made
our fire and they started theirs; and then I was sent out to hunt for
meat again.

I headed away from camp, and I got one rabbit and a great big
ground-hog. Some people won't eat ground-hog, but they don't know what
is good; only, he must be cleaned right away. Well, I was almost at camp
again when "Whish! Bang!" somebody had shot and had spattered all around
me, stinging my ear and rapping me on the coat and putting a couple of
holes in my hat. I dropped flat, in a hurry.

"Hey!" I yelled. "Look out there! What you doing?"

But it was "Bang!" again, and more shot whizzing by; this time none hit
me. Now I ran and sat behind a rock. And after a while I made for camp,
and I was glad to reach it.

I was still some stirred up about being peppered, and so I went straight
to the other fire. The two fellows were there cleaning a couple of
squirrels.

"Who shot them?" I asked.

"Walt."

"And he nearly filled me full of holes, too," I said. "Look at my hat."

"Who nearly filled you full of holes?" asked Walt.

"You did."

"Aw, I didn't, either. I wasn't anywhere near you."

"You were, too," I answered, hot. "You shot right down over the hill,
and when I yelled at you, you shot again."

Walt was well scared.

"'Twasn't me," he said. "I saw you start out and I went opposite."

"Well, you ought to be careful, shooting in the direction of camp," I
said.

"Didn't hurt you."

"It might have put my eyes out, just the same." And I had to go back and
clean my game and gun. We had a good supper. The other fellows kept to
their own camp and we could smell them smoking cigarettes. With them
close, and with news that another crowd was out, we were obliged to
mount night guard.

There was no use in two of us staying awake at the same time, and we
divided the night into four watches--eight to eleven, eleven to one, one
to three, three to five. The first watch was longest, because it was the
easiest watch. We drew lots for the partners who would sleep all night,
and Jed Smith and Major Henry found they wouldn't have to watch. We four
others would.

Fitz went on guard first, from eight to eleven. At eleven he would wake
Carson, and would crawl into Carson's place beside of General Ashley.
At one Carson would wake me, and would crawl into my place where I was
alone. And at three I would wake General Ashley and crawl into his place
beside Fitz again. So we would disturb each other just as little as
possible and only at long intervals. (Note 32.)

It seemed to me that I had the worst watch of all--from one to three; it
broke my night right in two. Of course a Scout takes what duty comes,
and says nothing. But jiminy, I was sleepy when Carson woke me and I had
to stagger out into the dark and the cold. He cuddled down in a hurry
into my warm nest and there I was, on guard over the sleeping camp, here
in the timber far away from lights or houses or people.

The fire was out, but I could see by star shine. Low in the west was a
half moon, just sinking behind the mountains there. Down in the flat
which we had left coyotes were barking. Maybe they smelled fawns.
Somebody was snoring. That was fatty Jed Smith. He and Major Henry were
having a fine sleep. So were all the rest, under the whity tarps which
looked ghostly and queer.

And I went to sleep, too!

That was awful, for a Scout on guard. I don't know why I couldn't keep
awake, but I couldn't. I tried every way. I rubbed my eyes, and I dipped
water out of the spring and washed my face, and I dropped the blanket I
was wearing, so that I would be cold. And I walked in a circle. Then I
thought that maybe if I sat down with the blanket about me, I would be
better off. So I sat down. If I could let my eyes close for just a
second, to rest them, I would be all right. And they did close--and when
I opened them I was sort of toppled over against the tree, and was stiff
and astonished--and it was broad morning and I hadn't wakened General
Ashley!

I staggered up as quick as I could. I looked around. Things seemed to be
O. K. and quiet and peaceful--but suddenly I missed the flags, and then
I missed the burros!

Yes, sir! The flagstaff was gone, leaving the hole where it had been
stuck. And the burros were gone, picket ropes and all! The place where
they ought to be appeared mighty vacant. And now I sure was frightened.
I hustled to the camp of the two boys, Bat and Walt, and they were gone.
That looked bad.

My duty now was to arouse our camp and give the alarm, so I must wake
General Ashley. You can imagine how I hated to. I almost was sore
because he hadn't waked up, himself, at three o'clock, instead of
waiting for me and letting me sleep.

But I shook him, and he sat up, blinking. I saluted. "It's after four
o'clock," I reported, "and I slept on guard and the flags and the burros
are gone." And then I wanted to cry, but I didn't.


CHAPTER VII

HELD BY THE ENEMY


"Oh, the dickens!" stammered General Ashley; and out he rolled, in a
hurry. He didn't stop to blame me. "Have you looked for sign?"

"The burros might have strayed, but the flags couldn't and only the hole
is there. And those two fellows of the other camp are gone, already."

General Ashley began to pull on his shoes and lace them.

"Rouse the camp," he ordered.

So I did. And to every one I said: "I slept on guard and the flags and
the burros are gone."

I was willing to be shot, or discharged, or anything; and I didn't have
a single solitary excuse. I didn't try to think one up.

The general took Fitzpatrick, who is our best trailer, and Major Henry,
and started in to work out the sign, while the rest of us hustled with
breakfast. The ground about the flag hole was trampled and not much
could be done there; and not much could be done right where the burros
had stood, because we all from both camps had been roaming around. But
the general and Fitz and Major Henry circled, wider and wider, watching
out for burro tracks pointing back down the trail, or else out into the
timber. The hoofs of the burros would cut in, where the feet of the two
fellows might not have left any mark. Pretty soon the burro tracks were
found, and boot-heels, too; and while Fitzpatrick followed the trail a
little farther the general and Major Henry came back to the camp.
Breakfast was ready.

"Fitzpatrick and Jim Bridger and I will take the trail of the burros,
and you other three stay here," said General Ashley. "If we don't come
back by morning, or if you don't see smoke-signals from us that we're
all right, you cache the stuff and come after us."

That was splendid of the general to give me a chance to make good on the
trail. It was better than if he'd ordered me close in camp, or had not
paid any attention to me.

Fitz returned, puffing. He had followed the trail a quarter of a mile
and it grew plainer as the two fellows had hurried more. We ate a big
breakfast (we three especially, I mean), and prepared for the trail. We
tied on our coats in a roll like blankets, but we took no blankets, for
we must travel light. We stuffed some bread and chocolate into our coat
pockets, and we were certain that we had matches and knife. I took the
short bow and arrows, as game getter; but we left the rifle for the
camp. We would not have used a rifle, anyway. It made noise; and we must
get the burros by Scoutcraft alone. But those burros we would have, and
the flags. The general slung one of the Patrol's ropes about him, in
case we had to rope the burros.

We set right out, Fitzpatrick leading, as chief trailer. Much depended
upon our speed, and that is why we traveled light; for you never can
follow a trail as fast as it was made, and we must overtake those
fellows by traveling longer. They were handicapped by the burros,
though, which helped us.

We planned to keep going, and eat on the march, and by night sneak on
the camp.

The trail wasn't hard to follow. Burro tracks are different from cow
tracks and horse tracks and deer tracks; they are small and
oblong--narrow like a colt's hoof squeezed together or like little mule
tracks. The two fellows used the cattle trail, and Fitzpatrick read the
sign for us.

"They had to lead the burros," he said. "The burros' tracks are on top
of the sole tracks."

We hurried. And then--

"Now they're driving 'em," he said. "They're stepping on top of the
burro tracks; and I think that they're all on the trot, too, by the way
the burros' hind hoofs overlap the front hoofs, and dig in."

We hurried more, at Scout pace, which is trotting and walking mixed. And
next--

"Now they've got on the burros," said Fitz. "There aren't any sole
tracks and the burros' hoofs dig deeper."

The fellows surely were making time. I could imagine how they kicked and
licked Sally and Apache, to hasten. And while we hastened, too, we must
watch the signs and be cautious that we didn't overrun or get ambushed.
Where the sun shone we could tell that the sign was still an hour or
more old, because the edges of the hoof-marks were baked hard; and
sticks and stones turned up had dried. And in the shade the bits of
needles and grass stepped on had straightened a little. And there were
other signs, but we chose those which we could read the quickest. (Note
33.)

We were high up among cedars and bushes, on a big mesa. There were
cattle, here, and grassy parks for them. Most of the cattle bore a Big W
brand. The trail the cattle had made kept dividing and petering out, and
we had to pick the one that the burros took. The fellows were riding,
still, but not at a trot so much. Maybe they thought that we had been
left, by this time. Pretty soon the burros had been grabbing at branches
and weeds, which showed that they were going slower, and were hungry;
and the fellows had got off and were walking. The sun was high and the
air was dry, so that the signs were not so easy to read, and we went
slower, too. The country up here grew open and rocky, and at last we
lost the trail altogether. That was bad. The general and I circled and
scouted, at the sides, and Fitz went on ahead, to pick it up beyond,
maybe. Pretty soon we heard him whistle the Elks' call.

He had come out upon a rocky point. The timber ended, and before and
right and left was a great rolling valley, of short grasses and just a
few scattered trees, with long slopes holding it like a cup. The sun was
shining down, and the air was clear and quivery.

"I see them," said Fitz. "There they are, General--in a line between us
and that other point of rocks."

Hurrah! This was great news. Sure enough, when we had bent low and
sneaked to the rocks, and were looking, we could make out two specks
creeping up the sunshine slope, among the few trees, opposite.

That was good, and it was bad. The thieves were not a mile ahead of us,
then, but now we must scout in earnest. It would not do for us to keep
to the trail across that open valley. Some fellows might have rushed
right along; and if the other fellows were sharp they would be looking
back, at such a spot, to watch for pursuers. So we must make a big
circuit, and stay out of sight, and hit the trail again on the other
side.

We crept back under cover, left a "warning" sign on the trail (Note
34), and swung around, and one at a time we crossed the valley higher
up, where it was narrower and there was brush for cover. This took time,
but it was the proper scouting; and now we hurried our best along the
other slope to pick up the trail once more.

It was after noon, by the sun, and we hadn't stopped to eat, and we were
hungry and hot and pretty tired.

As we never talked much on the trail, especially when we might be near
the enemy, Fitzpatrick made a sign that we climb straight to the top of
the slope and follow along there, to strike the trail. And if the
fellows had turned off anywhere, in gulch or to camp, we were better
fixed above them than below them.

We scouted carefully along this ridge, and came to a gulch. A path led
through, where cattle had traveled, and in the damp dirt were the burro
tracks. Hurrah! They were soft and fresh.

The sun was going to set early, in a cloud bank, and those fellows would
be camping soon. It was no use to rush them when they were traveling;
they had guns and would hang on to the burros. The way to do was to
crawl into their camp. So we traveled slower, in order to give them time
to camp.

After a while we smelled smoke. The timber was thick, and the general
and I each climbed a tree, to see where that smoke came from. I was away
at the top of a pine, and from that tree the view was grand. Pilot Peak
stood up in the wrong direction, as if we had been going around, and
mountains and timber were everywhere. I saw the smoke. And away to the
north, ten miles, it seemed to me I could see another smoke, with the
sun showing it up. It was a column smoke, and I guessed that it was a
smoke signal set by the three Scouts we had left, to show us where camp
was.

But the smoke that we were after rose in a blue haze above the trees
down in a little park about a quarter of a mile on our right. We left a
"warning" sign, and stalked the smoke.

Although Fitzpatrick has only one whole arm, he can stalk as well as any
of us. We advanced cautiously, and could smell the smoke stronger and
stronger; we began to stoop and to crawl and when we had wriggled we
must halt and listen. We could not hear anybody talking.

The general led, and Fitz and I crawled behind him, in a snake scout. I
think that maybe we might have done better if we had stalked from three
directions. Everything was very quiet, and when we could see where the
fire ought to be we made scarcely a sound. The general brushed out of
his way any twigs that would crack.

It was a fine stalk. We approached from behind a cedar, and parting the
branches the general looked through. He beckoned to us, and we wriggled
along and looked through. There was a fire, and our flags stuck beside
it, and Sally and Apache standing tied to a bush, and blankets thrown
down--but not anybody at home! The two fellows must be out fishing or
hunting, and this seemed a good chance.

The general signed. We all were to rush in, Fitz would grab the flag,
and I a burro and the general a burro, and we would skip out and travel
fast, across country.

I knew that by separating and turning and other tricks we would outwit
those two kids, if we got any kind of a start.

We listened, holding our breath. Nobody seemed near. Now was the time.
The general stood, Fitz and I stood, and in we darted. Fitz grabbed the
flag, and I was just hauling at Sally while the general slashed the
picket-ropes with his knife, when there rose a tremendous yell and laugh
and from all about people charged in on us.

Before we could escape we were seized. They were eight to our three. Two
of them were the two kids Bat and Walt, and the other six were town
fellows--Bill Duane, Tony Matthews, Bert Hawley, Mike Delavan, and a
couple more.

How they whooped! We felt cheap. The camp had been a trap. The two kids
Bat and Walt had come upon the other crowd accidentally, and had told
about us and that maybe we were trailing them, and they all had ambushed
us. We ought to have reconnoitered more, instead of thinking about
stalking. We ought to have been more suspicious, and not have
underestimated the enemy. (Note 35.) This was just a made-to-order
camp. The camp of the town gang was about three hundred yards away,
lower, in another open place, by a creek. They tied our arms and led us
down there.

"Aw, we thought you fellers were Scouts!" jeered Bat. "You're easy."

He and Walt took the credit right to themselves.

"What do you want with us?" demanded General Ashley, of Bill Duane. "We
haven't done anything to harm you."

"We'll show you," said Bill. "First we're going to skin you, and then
we're going to burn you at the stake, and then we're going to kill you."

Of course we knew that he was only fooling; but it was a bad fix, just
the same. They might keep us, for meanness; and Major Henry and Kit
Carson and Jed Smith wouldn't know exactly what to do and we'd be
wasting valuable time. That was the worst: we were delaying the message!
And I had myself to blame for this, because I went to sleep on guard. A
little mistake may lead to a lot of trouble.

And now the worst happened. When they got us to the main camp Bill Duane
walked up to General Ashley and said: "Where you got that message, Red?"

"What message?" answered General Ashley.

"Aw, get out!" laughed Bill. "If we untie you will you fork it over or
do you want me to search you?"

"'Tisn't your message, and if I had it I wouldn't give it to you. But
you'd better untie us, just the same. And we want those burros and our
flags."

"Hold him till I search him, fellows," said Bill. "He's got it, I bet.
He's the Big Scout."

Fitz and I couldn't do a thing. One of the gang put his arm under the
general's chin and held him tight, and Bill Duane went through him. He
didn't find the message in any pockets; but he saw the buckskin thong,
and hauled on it, and out came the packet from under the general's
shirt.

Bill put it in his own pocket.

"There!" he said. "Now what you going to do about it?"

The general was as red all over as his hair and looked as if he wanted
to fight or cry. Fitz was white and red in spots, and I was so mad I
shook.

"Nothing, now," said the general, huskily. "You don't give us a chance
to do anything. You're a lot of cowards--tying us up and searching us,
and taking our things."

[Illustration: "BILL DUANE WENT THROUGH HIM."]

Then they laughed at us some more, and all jeered and made fun, and said
that they would take the message through for us. I tell you, it was
humiliating, to be bound that way, as prisoners, and to think that we
had failed in our trust. As Scouts we had been no good--and I was to
blame just because I had fallen asleep at my post.

They were beginning to quit laughing at us, and were starting to get
supper, when suddenly I heard horse's hoofs, and down the bridle path
that led along an edge of the park rode a man. He heard the noise and he
saw us tied, I guess, for he came over.

"What's the matter here?" he asked.

The gang calmed down in a twinkling. They weren't so brash, now.

"Nothin'," said Bill.

"Who you got here? What's the rumpus?" he insisted.

"They've taken us prisoners and are keeping us, and they've got our
burros and flags and a message," spoke up the general.

He was a small man with a black mustache and blackish whiskers growing.
He rode a bay horse with a K Cross on its right shoulder, and the saddle
had brass-bound stirrups. He wore a black slouch hat and was in black
shirt-sleeves, and ordinary pants and shoes.

"What message?" he asked.

"A message we were carrying."

"Where?"

"Across from our town to Green Valley."

"Why?"

"Just for fun."

"Aw, that's a lie. They were to get twenty-five dollars for doing it on
time. Now we cash it in ourselves," spoke Bill. "It was a race, and they
don't make good. See?"

That was a lie, sure. We weren't to be paid a cent--and we didn't want
to be paid.

"Who's got the message now?" asked the man.

"He has," said the general, pointing at Bill.

"Let's see it."

Bill backed away.

"I ain't, either," he said. Which was another lie.

"Let's see it," repeated the man. "I might like to make that twenty-five
dollars myself."

Now Bill was sorry he had told that first lie. The first is the one that
gives the most trouble.

"Who are you?" he said, scared, and backing away some more.

"Never you mind who I am," answered the man--biting his words off short;
and he rode right for Bill. He stuck his face forward. It was hard and
dark and mean. "Hand--over--that--message. Savvy?"

Bill was nothing but a big bluff and a coward. You would have known
that he was a coward, by the lies he had told and by the way he had
attacked us. He wilted right down.

"Aw, I was just fooling," he said. "I was going to give it back to 'em.
Here 'tis. There ain't no prize offered, anyhow." And he handed it to
the man.

The man turned it over in his fingers. We watched. We hoped he'd make
them untie us and he'd pass it to us and tell us to skip. But after he
had turned it over and over, he smiled, kind of grimly, and stuck it in
his hip pocket.

"I reckon I'd like to make that twenty-five dollars myself," he said.
And then he rode to one side, and dismounted; he loosened the cinches
and made ready as if to camp. And they all let him.

Now, that was bad for us, again. The gang had our flags and our burros,
and he had our message.

"That's our message. "There is another form of impatience or
self-consciousness on the part of a customer who is more or less
acquainted with the store.

He hurries past everyone in front, headed for the part of the store
where he thinks the goods he wants are kept.

"It is bad policy to step in front of him or otherwise impede his
progress.

If there is no one to wait on him follow quietly and be on hand
when he lands at his destination.

"A clerk often wonders why customers persist in doing this.

"It is because they have an idea of the location of what they want and
blindly strike out for it with a certain nervous desire to cover the
intermediate ground as quickly as possible.

"Remember that while you feel perfectly at home in the store, few
customers do.

It is your business to put them at ease and certainly to do nothing to
make them uncomfortable.

"When a man comes in for a suit of clothes he usually has some sort of a
mental picture of the thing he desires. An idea, clearly defined
or hazy, is in his mind as to the general color and effect of the
suit he wants.

"It is something he has noticed worn by someone else--looked
at in a show window, or seen in an illustration.

"In most cases it will not be the thing he finally buys.

It may be a chalk-line stripe or a Shepherd's Plaid worn by a drummer
who boarded the 6.30 Lightning Express.

In the glow of the lamps and the bustle and excitement of the Station
platform the thing looked possible: but confronted in the store
with the very style and pattern he backs away from it, though 'it
looked good on the other man.'

"Find out what he has in mind; meet it as nearly as you can and get
it out of the way.

Otherwise he will not concentrate on other goods.

He will hold to this mental picture and measure everything you show
him by it--much to your disadvantage.

"One of the worst possible things is to ask a man about what price suit
he wants.

"Keep price in the background. Time enough to feel him out on that subject.
No man likes to have you take the measure of his pocket-book.

"You must use your judgment in gauging him as to what to show him.

"The important thing is to get at the picture he has in mind, and the price
too, if you can do so without asking him to name the figure.

"Never ask a customer how he liked the last suit you sold him.

Let by-gones be by-gones. This is a new deal.

Whether he was entirely satisfied is not the point now.

Don't raise dangerous questions.

"There are a dozen reasons why his last purchase may not be remembered
with pleasure--reasons that have nothing to do with the value he
received or the actual merit of the clothes.

"If he voluntarily mentions the last suit with praise take it as a
natural occurrence and pass it over; you will try to do even better
by him this time.

"If he complains of his last purchase don't argue. Leave the subject as
soon as possible and get down to the question in hand.

"Have confidence in your goods, in your prices and in yourself as
a salesman.

"There are more sales lost for lack of firmness and decision at the
right time than for any other cause.

"Among the clerks in the best and biggest of stores there are ten
good openers of a sale to one good closer.

"Be a closer.

"It requires judgment and decision of character, but you can learn to do
it.

"When a woman goes into a cloak and suit department, she is not satisfied
to buy until she has been made to feel that she has pretty well canvassed
the assortment, seen practically everything in the stock at the range
and along the line she is seeking.

"She has merchandise imagination and thinks of the possible garments
back there in the stock that she might have liked better.

"In this regard a man is somewhat easier to handle.

"It is a fact often demonstrated that clerks can close a sale more
quickly where the stock is kept on hangers instead of piled on
tables.

"The preliminaries are more quickly covered. Having walked down the line
the customer is better satisfied that the whole selection is placed at
his disposal.

"There is no secret about it. Nothing held back. No mysterious pile of
garments on a table that he cannot see.

"Note the tendency of the customer to investigate a pile of
coats--lifting up the corners and looking at the patterns.

"A coat in plain view, taken off the hanger, is more obviously a thoughtful
selection of a garment definitely suited for him and he is the
more ready to make it his own.

"The important thing in closing a sale is to narrow down the choice as
soon as you can to one or two strong possibilities, flanked by a
bad one--that is, a style or a pattern that you know the customer
doesn't want.

"When this point is reached it is well to move the customer away
from the rest of the stock, say to some distant corner where he can
stand on a rug and look in the mirror--
"Where his whole attention can be given to one suit, or at most a
choice between two.

"A sale must be opened easily.

The customer should never be made to feel that he is being restricted
in his selection.

But the moment you can form an idea of what he wants you can probably
think of just the thing for him.

"If you handle him right he accepts your knowledge of the assortment,
instead of demanding a complete canvass of the stock.

"It is then you may know that you have established his confidence.

"In a comparatively short time you can narrow him down to a choice where
by a tactful show of firmness you can help him decide.

"In the handling of almost every sale there is a point beyond which the
customer begins to flounder and show indecision.

"The weak salesman leads him on and on with no stopping point--no place
to close--and the prospective sale fades to a 'just looking today'
excuse.

"This is a universal fault among retail clerks.

"The test of salesmanship is in closing a sale.

"Be a closer!

"Never guy a customer or 'kid him along' for the amusement of a by-stander
or a fellow clerk. This is a common practice in some clothing stores. The
offender is usually a self-satisfied clerk who has had just enough
success as a salesman to make him egotistical.

"He thinks he is a regular dare-devil and that by making sport of his
customer he may win a reputation as the village cut-up. His favorite
victim is some half-witted fellow--tho' a customer who is partly deaf may
do and he is always ready for a yokel or a foreigner.

"There is no doubt," said Sam Lambert, "that the medal for the longest
ears and the loudest bray in the clothing business belongs to this
Smart Aleck type of clerk known as a 'kidder'.

"To say nothing of the respect he owes the customer, it is astonishing
how he can presume to work his cheap little side-play on any human
being, when even a dog is sensitive to ridicule and knows when he
is being laughed at."

CHAPTER II.

No one questioned Sam Lambert's power as a business getter, nor the
alertness of his store-keeping methods.

He was prodigal of his own energy--never spared himself. He looked
after the important things and left details to others.

As with every man who is a constructive force in the world of affairs,
Sam's friends and relatives shook their heads--said that he needed
a balance-wheel.

This was dinned into his ears so often that he finally came to believe it.
So after many Sunday afternoon business discussions, it was arranged
that he was to take into the business his wife's cousin, one Lemuel
Stucker, who had spent twenty years saving $9000 as general manager for
a flour and feed concern.

Stucker had worked out elaborate sets of figures to prove the needed
economies of management.

He was so tireless and sincere, so careful and exact, that it was with a
great sense of relief that Sam turned the store over to him.

Here, at last, was a man who could lift from his shoulders the daily
burden of management.

Sam's real interest in the change, as those who knew him might have
guessed, was a desire for new enterprise.

He had long had an eye on a fine opening for a clothing store in
the neighboring town of Bridgeville, twenty miles away, and he lost
no time in carrying out this project.

During the ensuing year he was so engrossed with the Bridgeville branch
that Medeena rarely saw him, and Lemuel Stucker's rather discouraging
reports on the state of business were attributed to Lem's conservatism
and natural depression of mind.

Lem was Sam's opposite in almost every particular.

A small, sallow man with a black shoe-string necktie and a look of
general regret.

He spent most of his time untying knots in pieces of string, picking
up bits of wrapping paper and sharpening short lead-pencils, and
he was great on buying brooms.

His effect on the store was one of immediate and prevalent blight.

You may wonder why the boys did not complain of conditions to Sam, but Lem
was manager--and there is something so virtuous and convincing
about a first-class retrencher. His wise saws and thrifty sayings are
infectious and he makes everybody so low-spirited that they are
ready to catch anything.

No more good window displays--tacks, colored cheesecloth and other
accessories cost money, and the sun was bad for the goods.

No more trim on the counters and shelves.

Stop the high-power electric light in front of the store and reduce
the lamps inside.

These things did not all occur at once, but so gradually that it
was hard to realize just what had happened to the store.

The windows got streaky and the inside of the store looked dingy and
cold.

Then the conservative spirit got into the buying. Nothing but black
cheviots with a few drab and gray worsteds.

Perhaps it was just as well, for when a customer came into the store
and saw Stucker he thought it was raining outside.

Sam Lambert had always prided himself on keeping alive what he called the
"buying spirit" in the store.

Nowadays a customer got a sense of caution. The feeling was one of
disapproval of all extravagance.

Instead of purchasing a suit, the man wondered where his next month's
rent was coming from, bought a pair of cottonade pants and hurried
home.

Trade fell off steadily. Affairs went on this way for a twelvemonth
and then something happened.

Two of Sam's principal competitors were reported to be remodeling their
stores--and what was more, they were going to put in wardrobe systems
and carry all their garments on hangers.

This aroused Sam and he made an immediate investigation.

He found that one of the stores had contracted for the old type of
wooden wall cabinets where the clothes hung behind panelled doors.

But the other was installing glass wardrobes, where the stock would
be on view.

This discovery cut Sam like a knife.

He investigated further, and was delighted to find that his wardrobe
competitor, with the temptation to save a few dollars, had ordered a
second-rate type of glass wardrobe, with pull-out rods that swing
inside the case, without a locking device to prevent them from
breaking the glass.

Without saying anything to Stucker he telegraphed the best wardrobe concern
in the country to send their representative at once.

CHAPTER III.

At eleven o'clock the following day a quiet man wearing double-lens
spectacles and a pre-occupied air came into the store, asked for Mr.

Lambert and was directed to the rear where Stucker was showing Sam the
wisdom of leaving the night covers over the black goods during the
day to protect the stock from dust.

Sam was so keyed up on the wardrobe question that he heard only about
half that Stucker was saying.

When the man with the spectacles arrived Sam guessed his mission
without waiting for a word of greeting.

"You," said Sam, "are here to talk wardrobes; let's see what you've
got."
"Before I talk wardrobes, or, if you please, the New Way system," began
the salesman, "I would prefer to get a fair idea of the amount and
kind of stock you carry and how you care for it now."

"Just as I thought," interrupted Stucker. "You're afraid our stock is too
big for your wardrobe capacity.

"Well, I don't want to discourage you, but when you count the suits
on the table, don't forget to add about 50 dozen pair of knee pants
and odd trousers stored in case-goods boxes under the tables.

"Remember too, that when you take the tables out, you must find another
place for our last years sweaters, mufflers, caps, gloves and underwear,
as well as all our advance stock of shirts, hosiery and ties which
we keep under the tables because we have no room for them on our side
shelving. You can see it is piled to the ceiling now; and all that
on top is active stock."
"That reminds me, Mr. Stucker, of a joke your friend Jones, over at
Dennisville, played on Sakes, his partner.

"Before we remodelled their store, they had a lot of money tied up in
stock piled under the tables like you have. Most of it was odds and
ends--left overs of many seasons that Jones knew even a clearance
sale would not clean up.

"He inventoried the lot and shipped 72 dozen pair of knee pants to New
York, and wrote the auctioneer to send a check for whatever amount
they brought.

"The funny part of it, Sakes never discovered that the stock was
gone until about three weeks later, when he noticed a check in the
mail and asked Jones what it was for.

"You can do the same thing, Mr.

Stucker, with your stock under the tables, and the check you will
get will help buy New Way sectional shelving that will give you
about three times the capacity your furnishing department has now;
so it will not be necessary to climb to the ceiling for your active
stock or dig under the tables for your out of season goods.

"Before we discuss detail, Mr. Lambert," continued the salesman, "I have
something to say about the practical arrangement of the inside of
the store.

"The business of a store is to sell goods. A customer may come in for one
item. You want him to buy two or three or a half a dozen.

The easier you make it for him, the less he has to cross and recross
the store to complete his purchases--the more goods you will sell
him.

"What you want--what every merchant wants--and what few have--is a
practical, natural selling arrangement of the goods.

"The invention of a practical wardrobe merely made the right plan
possible.

"Our business is to suggest the plan and fit the wardrobe arrangement
to the needs of a store.

"Every clothing store has its own individuality. Each problem must be
worked out on the ground with a full knowledge of the stock and
the business, the history of the store, the nature of its trade and
the personality of its proprietor."

Sam's interest was excited.

This point of view was new to him, but he could see the truth of it
and he was impatient to get at the heart of the matter as far as
his own store was concerned.

"You're right," he said, "about the personality and individuality of a
store; and for that reason don't tell me to put the furnishing
goods shelving down the middle of the store.

This is a clothing store and not a haberdashery."
"Mr.

Lambert," said the salesman, "you have hit the nail squarely on the
head.

This is a double room, a very different problem from that of a
single store.

I looked over the place of one of your competitors this morning. He also
has a double store with much the same arrangement as yours and I find
that he is making a mistake--adopting a plan that is about five years
behind the times.

"You see, in the earlier days of the wardrobe, there was no such
thing as a center wardrobe.

Therefore the clothing had to be hung against the wall in pull-out
cabinets.

When the clothing went to the side walls the furnishings had to
move to the center floor space.

"Such an arrangement is not practical for a double store and the
effect is bad. It kills the first impression of a big store.

The shelving will look bare if it is not trimmed, and if it is
trimmed your big double room looks like two small stores divided
by a wall.

"The center shelving will always have stock boxes piled on top and that
will throw one side of the store always in shadow. Besides, this
arrangement divides the trade and screens half of it from view.

"The stock is cut in two and looks small.

"One salesman can not wait on the furnishing goods trade without neglecting
half of it all the time.

If you have two clerks, a customer must be taken from one side to
the other for his ties or underwear, and there you are again, both
on one side at the same time.

"If another customer came along they'd have to stop in the middle of
a sale and refer him to a clerk around in the other aisle.

"A furnishing goods department should be continuous. The sale of
a shirt will lead to the purchase of a tie or a collar or hosiery.

The goods should be in sight so that they automatically suggest
themselves.

"You enter this store and the first impression you get is a big clothing
store. That is what you want. Clothing dominates the store.
Furnishing goods and hats are important and necessary side lines. No one
would mistake it for a haberdasher's. You have been known from the
beginning as the leading clothier. That's the reputation you want to
keep.

"Mr. Lambert, one of the important problems of this store is to house
your stock in new fixtures and at the same time widen your aisles.

"You can not see how that is possible. It is really the only problem I
have to solve for you, and it is easy."
The little man with the big spectacles had things moving. He was not
much of a salesman but he knew all about merchandising in a retail
store.

And he certainly was familiar with every store fixture and selling device
that had ever been invented, its good and bad points, where it was
practical and where it was not.

"Before a merchant puts money into store equipment," said the
wardrobe man, "he ought to be sure that he is getting the very latest and
most improved models. He owes this to himself as a protection for his
investment.

"There is always a temptation to save a few dollars by adopting a
poor imitation or some out-of-date device.

"The latest and best is the cheapest in the end, especially when
you consider convenience and durability.

"A pretty safe guide is to see what the biggest and best stores
everywhere are installing today.

"You will find such merchants as John Wanamaker in his Philadelphia and
New York stores equipping his clothing departments solely with New
Way Crystal Wardrobes;
"Browning, King & Company in seventeen cities;
"Schuman, Kennedy, Posner, Talbot Company, Jordan-Marsh & Company,
Leopold Morse Company, McCullough & Parker in Boston;
"George Muse Company in Atlanta;
"Mullen & Bluett of Los Angeles; 
"Becker of San Francisco;
"Burkhardt of Cincinnati;
"Lazarus, and Meyer Israel of New Orleans;
"And more than a thousand others--all the representative stores of
their localities.

"These men have selected the New Way Crystal Wardrobes after careful
comparison with every other device on the market.

"They have found the New Way Crystal Wardrobe the most sightly and
compact--having the largest capacity with the greatest ease of
operation.

"They find that they show the goods better; that the clerks can work
faster from them; that half a dozen clerks can sell from one wardrobe
at the same time; that one boy can keep the stock in good shape where
four were inadequate under any other plan.

"They find that the New Way people have basic patents on special features,
such as the New Way disappearing doors that divide in the center,
and slide into the ends of the wardrobe and do not project into the
aisle.

"The New Way revolving rack with the patent locking device, which
works loaded or unloaded with equal ease--no friction, no leverage,
no noise.

"They find the New Way low center wardrobes give an unobstructed
view all over the store and are the only wardrobes made that are
entirely practical for grouping in front of a furnishing or hat
department.

"Likewise the high double deck wall wardrobes have more than double
the capacity of tables."
The wardrobe man illustrated his talk with photographs and backed
his arguments with figures.

The upshot of it was that he made a complete ground plan of the Lambert
store with a modern selling arrangement and New Way fixtures in their
proper places.

But before Stucker would admit the wisdom of the improvement, he
argued it from every point of view.

"The farmer trade," he said, "would imagine that they would have to pay
higher prices for clothing to make up the cost of new fixtures."
This, mind you, today when the farmer is the most enlightened member of
the community--when he is using progressive methods in marketing his own
product, to reduce his costs and increase his profits!

Lem acknowledged that the clothiers who are handling the finest
merchandise are fitting up their stores with New Way Crystal Wardrobes,
and he didn't like to admit that the Lambert Store didn't sell high
grade merchandise.

He conceded that fine goods in every other line of trade are treated with
the care and respect they deserve, otherwise they would suffer in the
handling and cease to be fine merchandise.

Finally, Lem admitted that the discerning public does judge a merchant's
stock by the way he treats it, so that the store with New Way
Wardrobes as a feature is not only the most progressive store, but
in practically every instance the most prosperous in the clothing
trade of its locality.

After Sam had given the order his one thought was impatience for the
completion of the job.

"I must have that stuff all installed so that I can have my opening
a week ahead of the other people.

"Here, Stucker," called Sam to that gloomy soul, who had gone behind a
stock of work-shirts, while the order was being signed, "we'll let you
dispose of the old fixtures. That's a job that's just about your size.

"I tell you, Stucker, a natural-born retrencher has his virtues. But if
you give him rope enough he will retrench you out of business.
He never builds anything. If it wasn't for the creative man there
would be nothing to retrench.

"The retrencher is all right if you don't pay him too much. He is worth
about $10 a month, because you can find fifty of them in any old
man's home that you can hire for less money than that.

"No, Lem, I won't be unfair. You're not as bad as all that. It takes all
kinds of people to make a world and there is plenty of room for both of
us in this business--there always will be leaks to stop and work to do
for an earnest man who has the interest of the store at heart.

"The fault has been in the division of our labor.

I'll show you the way we can get the best out of ourselves."
"Sam," said Lem, "I reckon I've been looking at the world through a crack
in the fence and I'll have to widen out my view a little. You give me the
books and the sales slips to look after. In the meantime I'm going to
make the most exact inventory this store ever had and be ready to
check in the fresh stock that is to go in these New Way wardrobes.

"My talents are all right if I don't try to cover too much territory."

The two men shook hands.

All was in readiness on the day set. Everybody in Medeena County came to
the Grand Opening, and Sam Lambert's New Way Store is doing the business
of the town.
If they were blue grouse, that would be bad, too, for blue
grouse are sharp. If they were fool grouse, I ought to get one. I marked
exactly where they sailed for, and down I went, keeping my eye on the
spot. Now I must use Scoutcraft for water and food. If I couldn't manage
a fire, I could chew meat raw.

Yes, I remembered that it was against the law to kill grouse, yet. I
thought about it a minute; and decided that the law did not intend that
a starving person should not kill just enough for meat when he had
nothing else. I was willing to tell the first ranger or game warden, and
pay a fine--but I must eat. And I hoped that what I was trying to do was
all right. Motives count, in law, don't they?

Down I went, as fast as I could go. The sun was just sinking out of
sight. It was the lonesome time of day for a fellow without fire or food
or shelter, in the places where nobody lived, and I wouldn't have
objected much if I'd been home at the supper table.

I reached the bottom of the hill. It ended at the edge of some aspens.
Their white trunks were ghostly in the twilight. Across through the
aspens I hurried, straight as I could go; and I came out into a grassy,
boggy place--a basin where water from the hills around was seeping!
Hurrah! It was a regular spring, and the water ran trickling away, down
through a gulch.

Grasses grew high: wild timothy and wild oats and gama grass, mingled
with flowers. Along the trickle were willows, too. With the aspens and
the willows and the seed grasses and the water this was a fine place for
grouse. I looked for sign, on the edge of the wetness, and I saw where
birds had been scratching and taking dust baths, in a patch of sage.

Stepping slowly, and keeping sharp lookout, I reconnoitered about the
place; I was so excited that I didn't stop to drink. And
suddenly--whirr-rr-rr! With a tremendous noise up flew two grouse, and
three more, and lit in the willows right before me. I guess I was
nervous, I wanted them so bad; for I jumped back and stumbled and fell,
and broke the arrow square in two with my knee.

That made me sick. Here was my supper waiting for me, and I had spoiled
my chances. I wanted to cry.

Those acted like fool grouse. They sat with their heads and necks
stretched, watching me and everything else. I picked up the two pieces
of my arrow; and then I looked about for a straight reed or willow twig
that might do. Something rustled right before me, and there was another
grouse! It had been sitting near enough to bite me and I hadn't seen it.

By the feathers I knew it was a fool grouse. Was it going to fly, or
not? I stood perfectly still, and then I squatted gradually and gave it
time. After it had waggled its head around, it moved a little and began
to peck and cackle; and I could hear other cackles answering. If I only
could creep near enough to hit it with a stick.

I reached a dead willow stick, and squatting as I was I hitched forward,
inch by inch. Whenever the grouse raised its silly head I scarcely
breathed. The grass was clumpy, and once behind a clump I wriggled
forward faster. With the clump between me and the grouse I approached as
close as I dared. The grouse was only four or five feet away. It must be
now or never, for when once the grouse began to fly for their night's
roost mine would go, too.

Fool grouse you can knock off of limbs with a stone, or with a club when
they are low enough and when they happen to be feeling in the mood to be
knocked. Behind my clump I braced my toes, and out I sprang and swiped
hard, but the grouse fluttered up, just the same, squawking. I hit
again, hard and quick, and struck it down, and I pounced on it and had
it! Yes, sir, I had it! All around me grouse were flying and whirring
off, and those in the tree joined them; but I didn't care now.

I lay on my stomach and took a long drink of water, and back I hustled
for camp.

Down here the dark had gathered; but up on the hill the light stayed,
and of course the top of the hill, where my camp was, would be light
longest. Now if I only could manage a fire. I had an idea--a good Scout
idea.

First I picked out a place for the night. In one spot the faces of two
rocks met at an angle. The grass here was dead and softish, and the wind
blowing off the snowy range on the west didn't get in. I gathered a
bunch of the grass, and tore my handkerchief with my teeth and mixed
some ravelings of that in and tied a nest, with a handle to it. Then I
got some of the dry twigs lying about, and had them ready. Then I found
a piece of flinty rock--I think it was quartzite; and I took off a shoe
and struck the rock on the hob nails, over the nest of grass.

It worked! The sparks flew and landed in the loose knot, and I blew to
start them. After I had been trying, I saw a little smoke, and smelled
it; and so I grabbed the nest by its handle and swung it. It caught
fire, and in a jiffy I had it on the ground, with twigs across it--and I
was fixed. A fire makes a big difference. I wasn't lonesome any more.
This camp was home. (Note 40.)

I was so hungry that I didn't more than half cook the grouse by holding
pieces on a stick over the blaze, trapper style. While I gnawed I went
out around the rocks and watched the sunset. It was glorious, and the
pink and gold lasted, with the snowy range and old Pilot Peak showing
sharp and cold against it. Up here I was right in the twilight, while
below the timber and the valleys were dark.

I must collect wood while I could see, beginning with the pieces
furthest away. Down at the bottom of the hill I had marked a big branch;
and out I hiked and hauled it up. That camp looked grand when I came in
again; the bottom of the hill was gloomy, but here I had a fire.

The sunset was done; everything was dark; the stars were shining all
through the sky; from the timber below queer cries and calls floated up
to me, but there was nothing to be afraid of. I was minding my business,
and animals would be minding theirs. So I moved the fire forward a
little from the angle of the rocks, and sat in the angle myself. Wow,
but it was warm and nice! I couldn't make a big fire, because I didn't
want to run out of fuel; but the little fire was better, as long as it
was large enough to be cheerful and to warm me. I spliced my broken
arrow with string.

This was real Scout coziness. Of course, I sort of wished that Fitz or
little Jed Smith or somebody else was there, for company; but I'd done
pretty well. I tried to study the stars--but as I sat I kept nodding and
dozing off, and waking with a jerk, and so I pulled the thick part of
the branch across the fire and shoved in the scattered ends. Then I
wrapped the flags about my neck and over my head, and sitting flat with
my back against the rock I went to sleep. Indians say that they keep
warm best by covering their shoulders and head, even if they can't cover
their legs.

Something woke me with a start. I lay shivering and listening. The fire
flickered low, the sky was close above me, darkness was around about,
and behind me was a rustle, rustle, patter, patter. At first I was silly
and frightened; but with a jump I quit that and ordered, loud:

"Get out of there!"

Wild animals are especially afraid of the human voice; and whatever this
was it scampered away. Then I decided that it was only a pack-rat.
Anyhow, there would be nothing out here in these hills to attack a human
being while he slept. Even the smell of a human being will keep most
animals off. They're suspicious of him. And I thought of the hundreds of
old-time trappers and hunters, and of the prospectors and ranchers and
range-riders, who had slept right out in the timber, in a blanket, and
who never had been molested at all. So I didn't reckon that anything was
going to climb this hill to get _me_!

I stirred about and built the fire, and got warm. The Guardians of the
Pole had moved around a quarter of the clock, at least, and the moon was
away over in the west, so I knew that I must have slept quite a while.
(Note 41.)

The night was very quiet. Here on the hill I felt like a Robinson Crusoe
marooned on his island. I stood and peered about; everywhere below was
the dark timber; the moon was about to set behind the snowy range;
overhead were the stars--thousands of them in a black sky, which curved
down on all sides.

The Milky Way was plain. The Indians say that is the trail the dead
warriors take to the Happy Hunting Grounds. I could see the North Star,
of course, and I could see the Papoose on the Squaw's back, in the
handle of the Great Dipper; so I had Scout's eyesight. In the west was
the evening star--Jupiter, I guessed. Off south was the Scorpion, and
the big red star Antares. I wished that the Lost Children were dancing
in the sky, but they had not come yet. (Note 42.)

It made me calm, to get out this way and look at the stars. I'd been
lucky, so far, to have fire and supper and a good camp, and I decided
that I would get that message--or help get it. Somewhere down in that
world of timber were Major Henry and Kit Carson and little Jed Smith, on
the trail; and General Ashley and wise Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand,
planning to escape; and the man who had the message. And here was I, on
detail that seemed to have happened, and yet seemed to have been
ordered, too. And watchful and steady as the stars, above us was the
Great Commander, who knew just how things would come out, here in the
hills the same as in the cities. It's kind of comforting, when a fellow
realizes that he can't get lost entirely, and that Somebody knows where
he is and what he is doing, and what he wants to do.

In the morning I would strike off southwest, and keep going until I came
to a trail where the beaver man had traveled, or until I had some sight
of him or news of him.

By the Pointers it was midnight. So after thinking things over I fed the
fire and warmed my back; then I hunched into the angle and with the two
flags about my shoulders and over my head I started to snooze off. Some
animal kept rustling and pattering, but I let it rustle and patter.

Just as I was snoozing, I remembered that to-morrow--that _to-day_ was
Sunday! Yes; I counted, and we had left town on Monday and we had been
out six days. I supposed that I ought to rest on Sunday; but I didn't
see how I could, fixed as I was; and I hoped that if I took the trail I
would be understood. (Note 43.)


CHAPTER X

THE RED FOX PATROL


When I woke up I was safe and sound, but I had thrown off the flags and
I was stiff and cold. Now I could see all about me--see the rocks and
the grass and the ashes of the fire; so morning had come. That was good.

After I had yawned and stretched and straightened out, I gave a little
dance to start my circulation. Then I built the fire from the coals that
were left, and cooked the rest of the grouse, and had breakfast, chewing
well so as to get all the nourishment that I could. I climbed on a rock,
in the sun, like a ground-hog, to eat, and to look about at the same
time. And I saw smoke!

The smoke was lifting above the timber away off, below. This was a fine
morning; a Sunday morning, peaceful and calm, and the smoke rose in a
little curl, as if it were from a camp or a chimney. I took that as a
good omen. Down I sprang, to my own fire; and heaped on damp stuff and
dirt, and using my coat made the private smoke signal of the Elk Patrol:
one puff, three puffs, and one puff. (Note 44.) But the other smoke
didn't answer.

Then I thought of making the signal meaning "I am lost. Help"; but I
said to myself: "No, you don't. You're not calling for help, yet. You'd
be a weak kind of a Scout, to sit down and call for help. There's a sign
for you. Maybe that smoke is the beaver man. Sic him." And trampling out
my own fire, and stuffing the flags into my shirt and tying my jacket
around me, lining that other fire by a dead pine at the foot of the
hill, away I went.

When I got to the dead pine I drew another bee-line ahead as far as I
could see, with a stump as the end, and followed that. But this was an
awful rough, thick country. First I got into a mess of fallen timber,
where the dead trunks were criss-crossed like jackstraws; and they were
smooth and hard and slippery, and I had to climb over and crawl under
and straddle and slide, and turn back several times, and I lost my
bee-line. But I set my direction again by the sun on my face. Next I ran
into a stretch of those small black-jacks, so thick I could scarcely
squeeze between. And when I came out I was hot and tired, I tell you!

Now I was hungry, too, and thirsty; and I found that fire meant a whole
lot to me. If it didn't mean the man with the message, it meant food and
somebody to talk to, perhaps. The fallen timber and the black-jack
thicket had interfered with me so that I wasn't sure, any more, that I
was heading straight for the fire. Down into a deep gulch I must plunge,
and up I toiled, on the other side. It was about time that I climbed a
tree, or did something else, to locate that fire. When next I reached a
ridgy spot I chose a good pine and shinned it. Lit is each lamp, from the
stage to the porch, With Venus's naphtha, from Cupid's torch; Never a
moment, if rules can tempt ye, Never a moment my scene is empty!
Here is the babe in his loading-strings-- Here is the boy at play;
Here is the passionate youth with wings, Like a bird's on a stormy
day, To and fro, waving here and there, Down to the earth and aloft
through the air!

Now see the man, as for combat, enter-- Where is the peril he fears to
adventure?
See how the puppets speed on to the race,} Each his own fortune pursues
in the chase; } How many the rivals, how narrow the space! } But, hurry
and scurry, O mettlesome game!
The cars roll in thunder, the wheels rush in flame.

How the brave dart onward, and pant and glow!
How the craven behind them come creeping slow-- Ha! ha! see how Pride
gets a terrible fall!
See how Prudence, or Cunning, out-races them all!
See how at the goal, with her smiling eyes, Ever waits Woman to give the
prize!

THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE NEW CENTURY.

Where can Peace find a refuge?--whither, say, Can Freedom turn?--lo,
friend, before our view The CENTURY rends itself in storm away, And,
red with slaughter, dawns on earth the New.
The girdle of the lands is loosen'd;--hurl'd To dust the forms old Custom
deem'd divine,-- Safe from War's fury not the watery world;-- Safe
not the Nile-God nor the antique Rhine.

Two mighty nations make the world their field, Deaming the world is for
their heirloom given-- Against the freedom of all lands they wield
This--Neptune's trident; that--the Thund'rer's levin.
Gold to their scales each region must afford; And, as fierce Brennus
in Gaul's early tale, The Frank casts in the iron of his sword, To poise
the balance, where the right may fail-- Like some huge Polypus, with
arms that roam Outstretch'd for prey--the Briton spreads his reign;
And, as the Ocean were his household home, Locks up the chambers of the
liberal main.
Where on the Pole scarce gleams the faintest star, Onward his
restless course unbounded flies; Tracks every isle and every coast
afar, And undiscover'd leaves but--Paradise!

Alas, in vain on earth's wide chart, I ween, Thou seek'st that holy
realm beneath the sky-- Where Freedom dwells in gardens ever green--
And blooms the Youth of fair Humanity!
O'er shores where sail ne'er rustled to the wind, O'er the vast universe,
may rove thy ken; But in the universe thou canst not find A space sufficing
for ten happy men!
In the heart's holy stillness only beams The shrine of refuge from life's
stormy throng; Freedom is only in the land of Dreams; And only blooms
the Beautiful in Song!

THE MINSTRELS OF OLD.

Where now the minstrel of the large renown, Rapturing with living words
the heark'ning throng?

Charming the Man to heaven, and earthward down Charming the God?--who
wing'd the soul with song?
Yet lives the minstrel, not the deeds--the lyre Of old demands ears that
of old believed it-- Bards of bless'd time--how flew your living fire
From lip to lip! how race from race received it!
As if a God, men hallow'd with devotion-- What Genius, speaking,
shaping, wrought below, The glow of song inflamed the ear's emotion,
The ear's emotion gave the song the glow; Each nurturing each--back
on his soul--its tone Whole nations echoed with a rapture-peal;
Then all around the heavenly splendour shone Which now the heart,
and scarce the heart can feel.

FAREWELL TO THE READER.

The Muse is silent; with a virgin cheek, Bow'd with the blush of shame,
she ventures near-- She waits the judgment that thy lips may speak,
And feels the def'rence, but disowns the fear.

Such praise as Virtue gives, 'tis hers to seek-- Bright Truth, not tinsel
Folly to revere; He only for her wreath the flowers should cull Whose
heart, with hers, beats for the Beautiful.

Nor longer yet these days of mine would live, Than to one genial heart,
not idly stealing, There some sweet dreams and fancies fair to
give, Some hallowing whispers of a loftier feeling.

Not for the far posterity they strive, Doom'd with the time, its impulse
but revealing, Born to record the Moment's smile or sigh, And with
the light dance of the Hours to fly.

Spring wakes--and life, in all its youngest hues, Shoots through the
mellowing meads delightedly; Air the fresh herbage scents with
nectar-dews; Livelier the choral music fills the sky; Youth grows
more young, and Age its youth renews, In that field-banquet of the
ear and eye; Spring flies--lo, seeds where once the flowers have
blush'd And the last bloom's gone, and the last muse hush'd.

A READING PARTY IN THE LONG VACATION.

Every one who knows Oxford, and a good many besides, must have heard
of certain periodical migrations of the younger members of that
learned university into distant and retired parts of her Majesty's
dominions, which (on the _"lucus à non lucendo"_ principle) are
called and known by the name of Reading Parties.

Some half dozen under-graduates, in peril of the coming examination,
form themselves into a joint-stock cramming company; take L.30 or
L.40 shares in a private tutor; pitch their camp in some Dan or
Beersheba which has a reputation for dulness; and, like other
joint-stock companies, humbug the public, and sometimes themselves,
into the belief that they are "doing business."

For these classical bubbles, the long vacation is the usual season,
and Wales one of the favourite localities; and certainly, putting
"Reading" out of the question, three fine summer months might be
worse spent, than in climbing the mountains, and whipping the
trout-streams, of that romantic land.

Many a quiet sea-side town, or picturesque fishing-village, might
be mentioned, which owes no little of its summer gayety, and perhaps
something of its prosperity, to the annual visit of "the Oxonians:"
many a fair girl has been indebted for the most piquant flirtation
of the season to the "gens togata," who were reading at the little
watering-place to which fate and papa had carried her for the
race-week, or the hunt ball: and whatever the effect of these
voluntary rustications upon the class lists in Oxford, they certainly
have procured for the parties occasionally a very high "provincial
celebrity."

I know that when we beat our retreat from summer quarters at Glyndewi in
18--, the sighs of our late partners were positively heart-rending,
and the blank faces of the deserted billiard-marker and solitary
livery-stable 'groom' haunt me to this day.

I had been endeavouring by hard reading, for the last three months,
to work up the arrears of three years of college idleness, when my evil
genius himself, in the likeness of George Gordon of Trinity, persuaded
me to put the finishing touch to my education, by joining a party
who were going down to Glyndewi in ----shire, "really to read."

In an unguarded moment, I consented; packed up books enough to last
me for five years, reading at the rate of twenty-four hours per
day, wrote to the governor announcing my virtuous intention, and
was formally introduced to the Rev.

Mr Hanmer, Gordon's tutor, as one of his "cubs" for the long vacation.

Six of us there were to be; a very mixed party, and not well mixed--a
social chaos. We had an exquisite from St Mary Hall, a pea-coated
Brazenose boatman, a philosophical water-drinker and union-debater
from Balliol, and a two bottle man from Christ Church.

When we first met, it was like oil and water; it seemed as if we
might be churned together for a century, and never coalesce: but
in time, like punch-making, it turned out that the very heterogeneousness
of the ingredients was the zest of the compound.

I had never heard of such a place as Glyndewi, nor had I an idea
how to get there.

Gordon and Hanmer were gone already; so I packed myself on the top
of the Shrewsbury mail, as the direct communication between Oxford
and North Wales, and there became acquainted with No. 2 of my fellows
in transportation; (for, except Gordon and myself, we were all utter
strangers to each other.)

"I say, Hawkins; let's feel those ribbons a bit, will you?"

quoth the occupant of the box-seat to our respectable Jehu.

"Can't indeed, sir, with these hosses; it's as much as ever I can
do to hold this here near leader."

This was satisfactory; risking one's neck in a tandem was all very
well--a part of the regular course of an Oxford education; but
amateur drivers of stage coaches I had always a prejudice against:
let gentlemen keep their own four-in-hands, and upset themselves
and families, as they have an undeniable right to do--but not the
public.

I looked at the first speaker: at his pea-jacket, that is, which was
all I could see of him:
Oxford decidedly. His cigar was Oxford too, by the villanous smell
of it. He took the coachman's implied distrust of his professional
experience good-humouredly enough, proffered him his cigar-case,
and entered into a discussion on the near-leader's moral and physical
qualities.

"I'll trouble you for a light, if you please," said I; he turned round,
we stuck the ends of our cigars together, and puffed into each other's
faces for about a minute, (my cigars were damp-ish,) as grave as North
American Indians. "Thank you," said I, as the interesting ceremony was
concluded, and our acquaintance begun. We got into conversation, when
it appeared that he, too, was bound for the undiscovered shores
of Glyndewi, and that we were therefore likely to be companions for
the next three months.

He was an off-hand, good-humoured fellow; drank brandy and water, treated
the coachman, and professed an acquaintance with bar-maids in general,
and pretty ones in particular, on our line of road.

He was going up for a class, he supposed, he said; the governor had taken
a "second below the line" himself, and insisted upon his emulating
the paternal distinction; d----d nonsense, he said, in his opinion;
except that the governor had a couple of harriers with Greek names, he
did not see that his classics were of any use to him:
and no doubt but that Hylax and Phryne would run just as well if
they had been called Stormer and Merry Lass.

However, he must rub up all his old Eton books this 'long,' and get old
Hanmer to lay it on thick. Such was Mr Branling of Brazenose.

At Shrewsbury, we were saluted with the intelligence, "Coach dines
here, gentlemen." We found a couple of fowls that the coach might probably
have dined upon, and digested with other articles--in the hind
boot; to human stomachs they seemed impracticable.

We employed the allotted ten minutes upon a leg of mutton, and ascended
again to our stations on the roof: and here was an addition to our party.
Externally, it consisted of a mackintosh and a fur cap: in the very
short interval between the turned-down flap of the one and the
turned-up collar of the other, were a pair of grey-glass spectacles,
and part of a nose.

So far we had no very sufficient premises from which to draw
conclusions, whether or not he were "one of us." But there were
internal evidences; an odour of Bouquet de Roi or some such villanous
compound nearly overpowering the fragrance of some genuine weed which
I had supplied my pea-coated friend with in the place of his Oxford
"Havannahs"--a short cough occasionally, as though the smoke of
the said weed were not altogether "the perfume of the lip he
loved;"--and a resolute taciturnity.

What was he? It is a lamentable fact that an Oxford under-graduate does
not invariably look the gentleman. He vibrates between the fashionable
assurance of a London swindler, and the modest diffidence of an
overgrown schoolboy. There is usually a degree of unfinishedness
about him.

He seems to be assuming a character unlike the glorious Burschenschaf
of Germany, he has no character of his own.

However, for want of more profitable occupation, we set to work in
earnest to discover who our fellow traveller really was: and by a
series of somewhat American conversational enquiries, we at last
fished out that he was going into ----shire like ourselves--nay,
in answer to a direct question on the subject, that he hopes to
meet Hanmer of Trinity at Glyndewi.

But no further information could we get:
our new friend was reserved. Mr Branling and I had commenced intimacy
already. "My name is Branling of Brazenose;" "and mine Hawthorne of ----;"
was our concise introduction.

But our companion was the pink of Oxford correctness on this point. He
thanked the porter for putting his luggage up called me "Sir" till he
found I was an Oxford man; and had we travelled for a month together,
would rather have requested the coachman to introduce us, than be
guilty of any such barbarism as to introduce himself.

So by degrees our intimacy, instead of warming, waxed cold. As night drew
on, and the fire of cigars from Branling, self, and coachman, became
more deadly, the fur cap was drawn still closer over the ears, the
mackintosh crept up higher, and we lost sight of all but the outline
of the spectacles.

The abominable twitter of the sparrows in the hedgerows gave notice of
the break of day--to travellers the most dismal of all hours, in
my opinion--when I awoke from the comfortable nap into which I had
fallen since the last change of horses.

For some time we alternately dozed, tumbled against each other, begged
pardon, and awoke; till at last the sun broke out gloriously as we
drove into the cheerful little town of B----.

A good breakfast set us all to rights, and made even our friend in the
mackintosh talkative. He came out most in the character of
tea-maker:
(an office, by the way, which he filled to the general satisfaction
of his constituents during our stay in North Wales.)

We found out that he was a St Mary Hall man, with a duplicate name:
Mr Sydney Dawson, as the cards on his multifarious luggage set
forth: that he was an aspirant for "any thing he could get" in the
way of honours: (humble aspiration as it seemed, it was not destined
to be gratified, for he got nothing.)

He thought he might find some shooting and fishing in Wales, so had
brought with him a gun-case and a setter; though his pretensions
to sportsmanship proved to be rather of the cockney order.

For three months he was the happily unconscious butt of our party,
and yet never but once was our good-humour seriously interrupted.

From B---- to Glyndewi we had been told we must make our way as we
could: and a council of war, which included boots and the waiter,
ended in the arrival of the owner of one of the herring-boats, of
which there were several under "the terrace."

"Was you wish to go to Glyndewi, gentlemen?

I shall take you so quick as any way; she is capital wind, and you shall
have fine sail." A man who could speak such undeniable English was in
himself a treasure; for an ineffectual attempt at a bargain for
some lobsters (even with a "Welsh interpreter" in our hands) had
warned us that there were in this Christian country unknown tongues
which would have puzzled even the Rev.

Edward Irving. So the bargain was struck: in half-an-hour ourselves and
traps were alongside the boat: and after waiting ten minutes for
the embarkation of Mr Sydney Dawson and his dog Sholto, who seemed
to have an abhorrence of sea-voyages, Branling at last hauled in
the latter in the last agonies of strangulation, and his master
having tumbled in over him, to the detriment of a pair of clean
whites and a cerulean waistcoat, we--_i.e._ the rest of us--set
sail for Glyndewi in high spirits.

Our boatmen were intelligent fellows, and very anxious to display their
little stock of English. They knew Mr Hanmer well, they said--he had
been at Glyndewi the summer before; he was "nice free gentleman;"
and they guessed immediately the object of our pilgrimage: Glyndewi
was "very much for learning;" did not gentlemen from Oxford College,
and gentlemen from Cambridge College, all come there?

We warned him not on any account to couple us in his mind with "Cambridge
gentlemen:" we were quite a distinct species, we assured him. (They had
beaten us that year in the eight-oar match on the Thames.) But there
seemed no sufficient reason for disabusing their minds of the notion,
that this influx of students was owing to something classical in the
air of Glyndewi:
indeed, supposing this theory to be wrong, it was no easy matter
to substitute a sounder one.

In what did the superiority of Mrs Jenkins's smoky parlour at Glyndewi
consist, for the purposes of reading for a degree, compared with my
pleasant rooms looking into ---- Gardens at Oxford, or the governor's
snug library at home?

It is an abstruse question.

Parents and guardians, indeed, whose part upon the stage of life, as upon
the theatrical stage, consists principally in submitting to be more
or less humbugged, attribute surprising effects to a fancied absence
of all amusements, with a mill-horse round of Greek, Latin, and
logic, early rising, and walks in the country with a pocket Horace.

From my own experience of reading parties, I should select as their
peculiar characteristics, a tendency to hats and caps of such
remarkable shapes, as, if once sported in the college quadrangle,
would be the subject of a common-room _instanter_; and, among some
individuals (whom we may call the peripatetic philosophers of the
party) a predilection for seedy shooting-coats and short pipes,
with which they perambulate the neighbourhood to the marvel of the
aboriginal inhabitants; while those whom we may class with the
stoics, display a preference for dressing-gowns and meerschaums,
and confine themselves principally to the doorways and open windows
of their respective lodgings.

How far these "helps to knowledge"--for which Oxford certainly does not
afford equal facilities--conduce to the required first or second class,
is a question I do not feel competent to decide; but _if_
reading-parties _do_ succeed, the secret of their success may at
least as probably lie in these hitherto unregarded phenomena.

Five hours of a fair wind brought us to Glyndewi. Here we found Hanmer
and Gordon, who had taken a house for the party, and seemed already
domesticated.

I cannot say that we were royally lodged; the rooms were low, and the
terms high; but as no one thought of taking lodgings at Glyndewi
in the winter, and the rats consequently lived in them rent-free
for six months, it was but fair somebody should pay: and we did.

"Attendance" we had into the bargain. Now, attendance at a lodging-house
has been defined to be, the privilege of ringing your bell as often
as you please, provided you do not expect any one to answer it.

But the bell-ropes in Mrs.

Jenkins's parlours being only ornamental appendages, our privilege was
confined to calling upon the landing-place for a red-headed female,
who, when she did come, which was seldom, was terrible to look upon,
and could only be conversed with by pantomime.

To do Mrs.

Jenkins and "Gwenny" justice, they were scrupulously clean in every
thing but their own persons, which, the latter's especially, seemed
to have monopolised the dirt of the whole establishment.

College bedrooms are not luxurious affairs, so we were not inclined
to be captious on that head; and we slept soundly, and awoke with a
determination to make out first voyage of discovery in a charitable
spirit.

The result of our morning's stroll was the unanimous conclusion,
that Glyndewi was a rising place.

"Will we make it?" puffed Ward.

"Sure," I said. But I was mighty anxious. It seemed to me that the
distance lengthened and lengthened and that I could feel the air getting
warm in puffs. This was imagination.

"Look!" cried Van Sant. "What's that?" He stopped and panted and
pointed.

"Bunch of deer!" cried Ward.

It was. Not a bunch, exactly, but two does and three fawns, scampering
through the timber below, fleeing from the fire. They were bounding over
brush and over logs, their tails lifted showing the white--and next they
were out of sight in a hollow. They made a pretty sight, but--

"Frightened by the fire, aren't they?" asked Scout Van Sant, quietly, as
we jogged on.

"Yes," I had to say.

This looked serious. The fire might not be coming, and again it might.
Animals are wise.

The smoke certainly was worse. The air certainly was warmer. The breeze
was changing, or else we were down into another breeze. Next I saw a
black, shaggy creature lumbering past, before, and I pointed without
stopping. They nodded.

"Bear?" panted Ward.

I nodded. The bear was getting out of the way, too.

"Will we make it?" again asked Ward.

"Sure," I answered. We _had_ to.

On we plowed. We were almost at the bottom of the slope and we ought to
be reaching those willows and aspens. The brush was not so bad, now; but
the brush does not figure much in a forest fire when the flames leap
from tree-top to tree-top and make a crown fire. That is the worst of
all. This was hot enough to be a crown fire, if a breeze helped it.

We saw lots of animals--rabbits and squirrels and porcupines and more
deer, and the birds were calling and fluttering. The smoke rasped our
throats; the air was thick with it and with the smell of burning pine.
And how we sweat.

Then, hurrah! We were into the aspens. I tell you, their white trunks
and their green leaves looked good to me; but ahead of us was that other
slope to climb, before we were into the bareness.

"Shall we go on?" asked Scout Van Sant.

He coughed; we all coughed, as we wheezed. That had been a hard hike.
The air was hot, we could _feel_ the fire as the wind came in strong
puffs; everywhere animals were running and flying, and the aspens were
full of wild things, panicky. We had to decide quickly, for the fire was
much closer.

"Are you good for another pull?" I asked.

They grinned, out of streaming faces and white lips.

"We'll make it if you can."

But I didn't believe that we could. Up I went into an aspen, to
reconnoiter.

"Be looking for wetness, or willows," I called down. They dropped their
packs and scurried.


CHAPTER XII

FOILING THE FIRE


I don't know what a record I made in climbing that tree--an aspen's bark
is slick--but in a jiffy I was at the top and could peer out. (Note
47.) All the sky was smoke, veiling the upper end of the valley and of
the ridge. The ridge must be afire; the fire was spreading along our
side; and if we tried for the opposite slope and the bare spot we might
be caught halfway! Something whisked through the trees under me. It was
a coyote. And as I slid down like lightning, thinking hard as to what we
must do and do at once, I heard a calling and Van Sant and Ward came
rushing back.

"We've found a place!" they cried huskily. "A boggy place, with willows.
Let's get in it."

We grabbed the packs. I carried one, at last. Scout Ward led straight
for the place. Willows began to appear, clustering thick. That was a
good sign. The ground grew wet and soft, and slushed about our feet. I
tell you, it felt fine!

"Will it do?" gasped Scout Ward, back.

"Great!" I said.

"It's occupied, but I guess we can squeeze in," added Van Sant.

And sure enough. Animals had got here first; all kinds--coyotes,
rabbits, squirrels, skunks, porcupines, a big gray wolf, and a brown
bear, and one or two things whose names I didn't know. But we didn't
care. We forced right in, to the very middle; nothing paid much
attention to us, except to step aside and give us room. Of course the
coyotes snarled and so did the wolf; but the bear simply lay panting, he
was so fat. And we lay panting, too.

We weren't any too soon. The air was gusty hot and gusty coolish, and
the smoke came driving down. We dug holes, so that the water would
collect, and so that we could dash it over each other if necessary. I
could reach with my hand and pet a rabbit, but I didn't. Nothing
bothered anything else. Even the coyotes and the wolf let the rabbits
alone. This was a sanctuary. There was a tremendous crashing, and a big
doe elk bolted into the midst of us. She was thin and quivery, and her
tongue was hanging out and her eyes staring. But she didn't stay; with
another great bound she was off, outrunning the fire. She probably knew
where she was going.

We others lay around, flat, waiting.

"Wish we were on her back," gasped Van Sant.

"We're all right," I said.

"Think so?"

"Sure," I answered.

They were game, those Red Fox Scouts. They never whimpered. We had done
the best we could, and after you've done the best you can there is
nothing left except to take what comes. And take it without kicking. As
for me, I was full of thought. I never had been in a forest fire,
before, but it seemed to me our chances were good. Only, I wondered
about General Ashley and Fitzpatrick, in the hands of that careless
gang; and about Major Henry and Jed Smith and Kit Carson, and about the
beaver man with the wounded leg. He'd have the hardest time of all.

Now the smoke was so heavy and sharp that we coughed and choked. The air
was scorching. We could hear a great crackling and snapping and the
breeze withered the leaves about us. We burrowed. The animals around us
cringed and burrowed. The fire was upon us--and a forest fire in the
evergreen country is terrible.

There was a constant dull roar; our willows swayed and writhed; the
rabbit crept right against me and lay shivering, and the coyotes
whimpered. I flattened myself, and so did the Red Fox Scouts; and with
my face in the ooze I tried to find cool air.

The roaring was steady; and the crackling and snapping was worse than
any Fourth of July. Sparks came whisking down through the willows and
sizzled in the wetness. One lit on a coyote and I smelled burning hair;
and then one lit on me and I had to turn over and wallow on my back to
put it out. "Ouch!" exclaimed Van Sant; and one must have lit on him,
too.

But that was not bad. If we could stand the heat, and not swallow it and
burn our lungs, we needn't mind the sparks; and maybe in ten or fifteen
minutes the worst would be over, when the branches and the brush had
burned.

Of course the first few moments were the ticklish ones. We didn't know
what might happen. But we never said a word. Like the animals we just
waited, and hoped for the best. When I found that we weren't being
burned, and that the roaring and the crackling weren't harming us, I
lifted my head. I sat up; and the Red Fox Scouts sat up, cautiously. We
were still all right. The air was smoky, but the _fire_ hadn't got at
us--and now it probably wouldn't. But this was not at all like Sunday!

The Red Fox Scouts were pale, under their mud; and so was I, I suppose.
I felt pale, and I felt weak and shaky--and I felt thankful. That had
been a mighty narrow escape for us. If we had not found the willows and
the wet, we would have died, it seemed to me.

"How about it?" asked Scout Ward, huskily, and his voice trembled, but
I didn't blame him for that. "It's gone past, hasn't it?"

"Yes," said I. And--

"We're still here," said Scout Van Sant.

"Well," said Ward, soberly--and smiling, too, with cracked lips, "I know
how I feel, and I guess you fellows feel the same way. God was good to
us, and I want to thank Him."

And we kept silent a moment, and did.

The roaring had about quit and the crackling was not nearly so bad. The
air was not fiery hot, any more; it was merely warm. The attack had
passed, and we were safe. The rabbit beside me hopped a few feet and
squatted again, and the fat bear sat up and blinked about him with his
piggish eyes. It seemed to me that the animals were growing uneasy and
that perhaps the truce was over with. In that case, unpleasant things
were likely to happen, so we had better move out.

"Shall we try it?" asked Van Sant.

We picked up the packs and sticking close together moved on--dodging
another gray wolf and a coyote, and an animal that looked like a
carcajou or wolverine, which snarled at us and wouldn't budge.

Of course, it was a little doubtful whether we could travel through
burned timber so soon after the fire had swept it. The ground would be
thick with coals and hot ashes, and trees would still be blazing. But
when we came out at the opposite edge of the willows and could see
through the aspens, the timber beyond did not look bad, after all. There
were a few burned places, but the fire had skirted the aspens on this
side only in spots, where cinders had lodged.

So if we had kept going instead of having stopped in the willows we
might have reached the place beyond all right; but it would have been
taking an awful risk, and we decided that we had done the correct thing.

Smoke still hung heavy and the smell of burning pine was strong, as we
threaded our way among the hot spots, making for the ridge beyond. That
bare place would be a good lookout, and we rather hankered for it,
anyway. We had crossed the valley, and as we climbed the slope we could
look back. The fire had covered both sides of the first ridge, and the
top, and if we had stayed there we would have been goners, sure, the way
matters turned out. It was a dismal sight, and ought to make anybody
feel sorry. Thousands of acres of fine timber had been killed--just
wasted.

"What do you suppose started it?" asked Scout Ward.

A camp-fire, probably. Lots of people, camping in the timber, either
don't know anything or else are out-and-out careless, like that gang
from town, or those two recruits who had not made good. And I more than
half believed that the fire might have started from their camps.

All of a sudden we found that we were hungry. I had been hungry before
the fire, because I hadn't had much to eat for twenty-four hours; but
during the fire I had forgotten about it; and now we all were hungry.
However, after that fire we were nervous, in the timber, and we knew
that if we camped there we wouldn't sleep. So we pushed on through, to
camp on top, in the bare region, where we would be out of danger and
could see around. The Red Fox canteens would give us water enough.

We came out on the bare spot. Away off to the right, along the side of
the ridge, figures were moving. They were human figures, not more wild
animals: two men and a pack burro. They were moving toward us, so we
obliqued toward them, with our shadows cast long by the low sun. The
grass was short and the footing was hard gravel, so that we could hurry;
and soon I was certain that I knew who those three figures were. One was
riding.

The side of the ridge was cut by a deep gulch, like a canyon, with rocky
walls and stream rolling through along the bottom. We halted on our
edge, and the three figures came on and halted on their edge. They were
General Ashley and Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand, and Apache the black burro.
The general was riding Apache. I was glad to see them.

"They're the two Elk Scouts who were captured," I said, to the Red Fox
Scouts; and I waved and grinned, and they waved back, and we all
exchanged the Scout sign.

But that gorge lay between, and the water made such a noise that we
couldn't exchange a word.

"Can they read Army and Navy wigwags?" asked Scout Ward.

"Sure," I said. "Can you?"

"Pretty good," he answered. "Shall I make a talk, or will you?"

But I wasn't very well practiced in wigwags, yet; I was only a
Second-class Scout.

"You," I said. "Do you want a flag?"

But he said he'd use his hat. (Note 48.)

He made the "attention" signal; and Fitzpatrick answered. Then he went
ahead, while Scout Van Sant spelled it out for me:

"R--e--d F--o--x."

And Fitz answered, like lightning:

"E--l--k."

"What shall I say?" asked Scout Ward of me, over his shoulder.

"Say we're all right, and ask them how they are."

He did. Scout Van Sant spelled the answer:

"O. K. B--u--t c--a--n--t c--r--o--s--s. C--a--m--p t--i--l--l
m--o--r--n--i--n--g. A--s--h h--u--r--t."

When we learned that General Ashley was hurt, and knew that he and
Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand were going to camp on the other side for the
night, the two Red Fox Scouts, packs and all, and I got through that
gulch somehow and up and out, where they were. It would have been a
shame to let a one-armed boy tend to the camp and to a wounded
companion, and do everything, if we could possibly help. Of course, Fitz
would have managed. He was that kind. He didn't ask for help.

They were waiting; Fitz had unpacked the burro and was making camp.
General Ashley was sitting with his back against a rock. He looked pale
and worn. He had sprained his ankle, back there when we had all tried to
escape, yesterday, and it was swollen horribly because he had had to
step on it some and hadn't been able to give it the proper treatment.
(Note 49.) Fitz looked worn, too, and of course we three others
(especially I) showed travel, ourselves.

After I had introduced the Red Fox Scouts to him and Fitz, then before
anything else was told I must report. So I did. But I hated to say it. I
saluted, and blurted it out:

"I followed the beaver man and sighted him, sir, but he got away again,
with the message."

The general did not frown, or show that he was disappointed or vexed. He
tried to smile, and he said: "Did he? That surely was hard luck then,
Jim. Where did he go?"

"We were with Bridger, and it seems to us that he did the best he could.
The fire interrupted," put in Red Fox Scout Van Sant, hesitatingly.

He spoke as if he knew that he had not been asked for an opinion, but as
a friend and as a First-class Scout he felt as though he ought to say
something.

"The best is all that any Scout can do," agreed the general. "Go ahead,
Jim, and tell what happened."

So I did. The general nodded. I hadn't made any excuses; I tried to tell
just the plain facts, and ended with our escape in the willows, from
that fire.

"The report is approved," he said. "We'll get that beaver man yet. We
must have that message. Now Fitz can tell what happened to us. But we'd
better be sending up smoke signals to call in the other squad, in case
they're where they can see. Make the council signal, Bridger."

Fitz had a fire almost ready; the Red Fox Scouts helped me, and gathered
smudge stuff while I proceeded to send up the council signal in the Elks
code. Fitz talked while he worked. The general looked on and winced as
his ankle throbbed. But he was busy, too, fighting pain.

Fitz told what had happened to them, after I had escaped. He and the
general had been taken back by the gang, and tied again, and camp was
broken in a hurry because the gang feared that now I would lead a
rescue. They were mean enough to make the general limp along, without
bandaging his foot, until he was so lame that he must be put on a horse.
The camp-fire was left burning and the bacon was forgotten. They climbed
a plateau and dropped into a flat, and following up very fast had curved
into the timber to cross another ridge into Lost Park and on for the
Divide by way of Glacier Lake. That is what the general and Fitz
guessed. That night they all camped on the other side of the timber
ridge, at the edge of Lost Park. They were in a hurry, still, and they
made their fire in the midst of trees where they had no business to make
it. They slept late, as they always did, and not having policed the camp
or put out their fire, scarcely had they plunged into Lost Park, the
next morning, when one of them looking back saw the trees afire where
they had been.

Lost Park is a mean place; the brush makes a regular jungle of it, and
fire would go through it as through a hayfield. That fact and their
guilty conscience made them panicky. It's a pretty serious thing, to
start a forest fire. So they didn't know what to do; some wanted to go
one way, and some another; the fire grew bigger and bigger, and the
cattle and game trails wound and twisted and divided so that the gang
were separated, in the brush, and it was every man for himself. The
general was riding Mike Delavan's horse, and Mike ordered him down and
climbed on himself and made off; and the first thing the general and
Fitz knew they were abandoned. That is what they would have maneuvered
for, from the beginning, and it would have been easy, as Scouts, to work
it, among those blind trails, but the general couldn't walk. Perhaps it
was by a mistake that they were abandoned; everybody may have thought
that somebody else was tending to them, and Mike didn't know what he was
doing, he was so excited. But there they were.

The general tried to hobble, and Fitz was bound that he would carry
him--good old Fitz, with the one arm! The bushes were high, the smoke
where the fire was mounted more and more and spread as if the park was
doomed, and the crashing and shouting and swearing of the gang faded and
died away in the distance. Then the general and Fitz heard something
coming, and down the trail they were on trotted Apache the burro! He
must have turned back or have entered by a cross trail. Whew, but they
were glad to see Apache! Fitz grabbed him by the neck rope. He had a
flat pack tied on with our rope, did Apache, and Fitz hoisted the
general aboard, and away they hiked, with the general hanging on and his
foot dangling.

Now that they could travel and head as they pleased, they worked right
back, out of the park, and by a big circuit so as not to run into the
gang they circled the fire and tried to strike the back trail somewhere
so as to meet Major Henry and Carson and Smith, who might be on it. But
they came out upon this plateau, and sighted us, and then we all met at
the edge of the gulch.

That was the report of Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand. He and the general
certainly had been through a great deal.

During the story the Red Fox Scouts and I had been making the smoke
signal over and over again. "Come to council," I sent up, while they
helped to keep the smudge thick. "Come to council," "Come to council,"
for Major Henry and Kit and Jed, wherever they might be. But we were so
interested in Fitz's story, how he and the general got away from the
gang and from the fire, that sometimes we omitted to scan the horizon.
The general didn't, though. He is a fine Scout.

"There's the answer!" he said suddenly. "They've seen! The fire didn't
get them. Hurrah!"

And "Hurrah!" we cheered.


CHAPTER XIII

ORDERS FROM THE PRESIDENT

(THE ADVENTURES OF THE MAJOR HENRY PARTY)


I am Tom Scott, or Major Andrew Henry, second in command of the Elk
Patrol Scouts which set out to take that message over the range. So now
I will make a report upon what happened to our detail after General
Ashley and Fitzpatrick and Bridger left, upon the trail of the two boys
who had stolen our flags and burros.

We waited as directed all day and all night, and as they did not come
back or make any signal, in the morning we prepared to follow them.
First we sent up another smoke for half an hour, and watched for an
answer; but nothing happened. Then we cached the camp stuff by rolling
in the bedding, with the tarpaulins on the outside, what we couldn't
carry, and stowing it under a red spruce. The branches came down clear
to the ground, in a circle around, and when we had crawled in and had
covered the bundle with other boughs and needles, it couldn't be seen
unless you looked mighty close.

We erased our tracks to the tree, and made two blazes, on other trees,
so that our cache was in the middle of a line from blaze to blaze. Then
we took sights, and wrote them down on paper, so that none of us would
forget how to find the place. (Note 50.)

We each had a blanket, rolled and slung in army style, with a string run
through and tied at the ends. I carried the twenty-two rifle, and we
stuffed away in our clothes what rations we could. In my blanket I
carried the other of our lariat ropes. We might need it.

So the time was about ten o'clock before we started. The trail was more
than twenty-four hours old, but our Scouts had made it plain on purpose,
and we followed right along. Of course, I am sixteen and Kit Carson is
thirteen and little Jed Smith is only twelve, so I set my pace to
theirs. A blanket roll weighs heavy after you have carried it a few
miles.

But we stopped only twice before we reached a sign marked in the ground:
"Look out!" The trail faltered, and an arrow showed which way to go, and
we came to the spot where the Scouts had peeped over into the draw and
had seen the enemy. Here another arrow pointed back, and we understood
exactly what had happened.

We took the new direction. The three Scouts had left as plain a trail as
they could by breaking branches and disturbing pebbles, and treading in
single file. Jed Smith was awful tired, by this time, for the sun was
hot and we hadn't halted to eat. But picking the trail we made the
circuit around the upper end of the draw and climbed the opposite ridge.
The trail was harder to read, here, among the grass and rocks.

By the sun it was the middle of the afternoon, now, and we must have
been on the trail five hours. We waited, and listened, and looked and
smelled, feeling for danger. We must not run into any ambuscade. A
little gulch, with timber, lay just ahead, and a haze of smoke floated
over it.

This spelled danger. It was not Scouts' smoke, because Scouts would not
be having a fire, at this time of day, smoking so as to betray their
position. When we made a smoke, we made it for a purpose. The place must
be reconnoitered.

We spread. I took the right, Kit Carson the left, and Jed Smith was put
in the middle because he was the littlest. It would have been good if we
could have left our blanket rolls, but we did not dare to. Of course, if
we were chased, we might have to drop them and let them be captured.

We crossed a cow-path, leading into the gulch. It held burro tracks,
pointing down; and it seemed to me that if there was any ambuscade down
there it would be along this trail. Naturally, the enemy would expect us
to follow the trail. Maybe the other Scouts had followed it and had
been surrounded. So we crossed the trail, and I signed to Carson and to
Smith to move out across the gulch and around by the other side.

We did. Cedars and spruces were scattered about, and gooseberry bushes
and other brush were screen enough; we swung down along the opposite
side, and the smoke grew stronger. But still we could not hear a sound.
We closed in, peering and listening--and then suddenly I wasn't afraid,
or at least, I didn't care. Through the stems of the trees was an open
park, at the foot of the gulch, and if there was a camp nobody was at
home, for the park was afire!

"Come on!" I shouted. "Fire!" and down I rushed. So did Carson and Jed
Smith.

We were just in time. The flames had spread from an old camp-fire and
had eaten along across the grass and pine needles and were among the
brush, getting a good start. Already a dry stump was blazing; and in
fifteen minutes more a tree somewhere would have caught. And then--whew!

But we sailed into it, stamping and kicking and driving it back from the
brush.

"Wet your blanket, Jed," I ordered, "while we fight."

A creek was near, luckily; Jed wet his blanket, and we each in turn wet
our blankets; and swiping with the rolls we smashed the line of fire
right and left, and had it out in just a few minutes.

Now a big blackened space was left, like a blot; and the burning and our
trampling about had destroyed most of the sign. But we must learn what
had happened. We got busy again.

We picked up the cow-path, back in the gulch, and found that the burros
had followed it this far. We found where the burros had been grazing and
standing, in the brush, near the burned area, and we found where horses
had been standing, too! We found fish-bones, and coffee-grounds dumped
from the little bag they had been boiled in, and a path had been worn to
the creek. We found in the timber and brush near by other sign, but we
missed the second warning sign. However, where the fire had not reached,
on the edge of the park, we found several pieces of rope, cut, lying
together, and in a soft spot of the turf here we found the hob-nail
prints of the Elk Patrol! By ashes we found where the main camp-fire had
been, and we found where a second smaller camp-fire had been, at the
edge of the park, and prints of shoes worn through in the left sole--the
shoes of the beaver man! We found a tin plate and fork, by the big
camp-fire, and wrapped in a piece of canvas in a spruce was a hunk of
bacon. By circling we found an out-going trail of horses and burros. We
found the out-going trail of the beaver man--or of a single horse,
anyway, but no shoe prints with it. But looking hard we found Scout
sole prints in the horse and burro trail.

By this time it was growing dusk, and Jed Smith was sick because he had
drunk too much water out of the creek, when he was tired and hot and
hungry. So we decided to stay here for the night. From the signs we
figured out what might have happened:

According to the tracks, the burro thieves had joined with this camp.
Our fellows had sighted the burro thieves, back where the "Look out"
sign had been made, and had circuited the draw so as to keep out of
sight themselves, and had taken the trail again on the ridge. They had
followed along that cow-path, and had been ambushed. The cut ropes
showed that they had been tied. This camp had been here for two or three
days, because of the path worn to the creek and because of the coffee
grounds and the fish bones and the other sign. It was a dirty camp, too,
and with its unsanitary arrangements and cigarette butts and tobacco
juice was such a camp as would be made by that town gang. The sign of
the cut ropes looked like the town gang, too. The camp must have broken
up in a hurry, and moved out quick, by the things that were forgotten.
Campers don't forget bacon, very often. The cut ropes would show haste,
and we might have thought that the Scout prisoners had escaped, if we
hadn't found their sole prints with the out-going trail. These prints
had been stepped on by burros, showing that the burros followed behind.
What the beaver man was doing here we could not tell.

So we guessed pretty near, I think.

Little Jed Smith had a splitting headache, from heat and work and
water-drinking. His tongue looked all right, so I decided it was just
tiredness and stomach. One of the blankets was dry; we wrapped him up
and let him lie quiet, with a wet handkerchief on his eyes, and I gave
him a dose of aconite, for fever. (Note 51.)

At this time, we know now, General Ashley and Thomas Fitzpatrick were
being hustled along one trail, captives to the gang; the beaver man was
on a second trail, with our message; and Jim Bridger was on his lone
scout in another direction, and just about to make a camp-fire with his
hob-nails and a flint.

The dusk was deepening, and Kit Carson and I went ahead settling camp
for the night. We built a fire, and spread the blankets, and were making
tea in a tin can when we heard hoof thuds on the cow-path. A man rode in
on us. He was a young man, with a short red mustache and a peaked hat,
and a greenish-shade Norfolk jacket with a badge on the left breast. A
Forest Ranger! Under his leg was a rifle in scabbard.

"Howdy?" he said, stopping and eying us.

Kit Carson and I saluted him, military way, because he represented the
Government, and answered: "Howdy, sir?"

He was cross, as he gazed about.

"What are you lads trying to do? Set the timber afire?" he scolded. He
saw the burned place, you know.

"We didn't do that," I answered. "It was afire when we came in and we
put it out."

He grunted.

"How did it start?"

"A camp-fire, we think."

He fairly snorted. He was pretty well disgusted and angered, we could
see.

"Of course. There are more blamed fools and down-right criminals loose
in these hills this summer than ever before. I've done nothing except
chase fires for a month, now. Who are you fellows?"

"We're a detail of the Elk Patrol, 14th Colorado Troop, Boy Scouts of
America."

"Well, I suppose you've been taught about the danger from camp-fires,
then?"

"Yes, sir," I answered.

"Bueno," he grunted. "Wish there were plenty more like you. Every person
who leaves a live camp-fire behind him, anywhere, ought to be made to
stay in a city all the rest of his life." (Note 52.)

He straightened in his saddle and lifted the lines to ride on. But his
horse looked mighty tired and so did he; and as a Scout it was up to me
to say: "Stop off and have supper. We're traveling light, but we can set
out bread and tea."

"Sure," added Kit Carson and Jed Smith.

"No, thanks," he replied. "I've got a few miles yet to ride, before I
quit. And to-morrow's Sunday, when I don't ride much if I can help it.
So long."

"So long," we called; and he passed on at a trot.

We had supper of bread and bacon and tea. The bread sopped in bacon
grease was fine. Jed felt better and drank some tea, himself, and ate a
little. It was partly a hunger headache. We pulled dead grass and cut
off spruce and pine tips, and spread a blanket on it all. The two other
blankets we used for covering. Our coats rolled up were pillows. We
didn't undress, except to take off our shoes. Then stretched out
together, on the one-blanket bed and under the two blankets, we slept
first-rate. Jed had the warm middle place, because he was the littlest.

As I was commander of the detail I woke up first in the morning, and
turned out. After a rub-off at the creek I took the twenty-two and went
hunting for breakfast. I saw a rabbit; but just as I drew a bead on him
I suddenly remembered that this was _Sunday morning_--and I quit.
Sunday ought to be different from other days. So I left him hopping and
happy, and I went back to camp. Jed and Kit had the fire going and the
water boiling; and we breakfasted on tea and bread and bacon.

Then we policed the camp, put out the fire, every spark, and took the
burro and horse trail, to the rescue again. We must pretend that this
was only a little Sunday walk, for exercise.

After a while the trail crossed the creek at a shallow place, and by a
cow-path climbed the side of a hill. Before exposing ourselves on top of
the hill we crawled and stuck just our heads up, Indian scouts fashion,
to reconnoiter. The top was clear of enemy. Sitting a minute, to look,
we could see old Pilot Peak and the snowy range where we Scouts ought to
be crossing, bearing the message. We believed that now the gang with
prisoners were traveling to cross the range, too. They had the message,
of course, and that was bad, unless we could head them off. So we sort
of hitched our belts another notch and traveled as fast as we could.

The hill we were on spread into a plateau of low cedars and scrubby
pines; the snowy range, with Pilot Peak sticking up, was before. After
we had been hiking for two or three hours, off diagonally to the left we
saw a forest fire. This was thick timber country, and the fire made a
tremendous smoke. It was likely to be a big fire, and we wondered if the
ranger was fighting it. As for us, we were on the trail and must hurry.

We watched the fire, but we were not afraid of it, yet. The plateau was
too bare for it, if it came our way. The smoke grew worse--a black,
rolling smoke; and we could almost see the great sheets of flame
leaping. We were glad we weren't in it, and that we didn't know of
anybody else who was in it. But whoever had set it had done a dreadful
thing.

The trail of the burros and of the horses, mixed, continued on, and left
the plateau and dipped down into a wide flat, getting nearer to the
timber on the slope opposite. Then out from our left, or on the fire
side, a man came riding hard. He shouted and waved at us, so we stopped.

He was the Ranger. I tell you, but he looked tired and angry. His eyes
were red-rimmed and his face was streaked with sweat and dirt, and holes
were burned in his clothes and his horse's hide.

"I want you boys," he panted, as soon as he drew up. "We've got to stop
that fire. See it?"

Of course we'd seen it. But--it wasn't any of our business, was it?

"I want you to hurry over there to a fire line and keep the fire from
crossing. Quick! Savvy?"

"I don't believe we can, sir," I said. "We're on the trail."

"What difference does that make?"

"We're after a gang who have three of our men and we want to stop them
before they cross the range."

"You follow me."

"I'm sorry," I said; "but we're trailing. We're obeying orders."

"Whose orders?"

"Our Patrol leader's."

"Who's he?"

"General Ashley--I mean, Roger Franklin. He's another boy. But he's been
captured and two of our partners. We're to follow and rescue them. We've
got to go."

"No, you haven't," answered the Ranger. "Not until after this fire is
under control. You'll be paid for your time."

"We don't care anything about the pay," said Kit Carson. "We've got to
go on."

"Well, I'm giving you higher orders from a higher officer, then,"
retorted the Ranger. "I'm giving you orders from the President of the
United States. This is Government work, and I'm representing the
Government. I reckon you Boy Scouts want to support the Government,
don't you?"

Sure we did.

"If that fire goes it will burn millions of dollars' worth of timber,
and may destroy ranches and people, too. It's your duty now to help the
Government and to put it out. Your duty to Uncle Sam is bigger than any
duty to private Scouts' affairs. And it is the law that anybody seeing a
forest fire near him shall report it or aid in extinguishing it. Now,
are you coming, or will you sneak off with an excuse?"

"Why--coming!" we all cried at once. We hated to leave the trail--to
leave the general and Fitz and Jim Bridger and the message to their
fate; but the Government was calling, here, and the first duty of good
Scouts is to be good citizens.

"Pass up your blanket rolls," ordered the Ranger. "You smallest kid
climb behind me. Each of you two others catch hold of a stirrup. Then we
can make time across."

In a second away we all went at a trot, heading for the timber and the
fire.

"I rode right through that fire to get you," said the Ranger. "I saw
you. I've got two or three guards working up over the ridge. Your job is
to watch a fire line that runs along this side of the base of that point
yonder. One end of the fire line is a boggy place with willows and
aspens; and if we can keep the fire from jumping those willows and
starting across, down the valley, and those fellows on the other side of
the ridge can head it off, in their direction, then we'll stop it by
back-firing at the edge of Brazito canyon."

He talked as rapidly as we moved--and that was good fast Scouts' trot,
for us. The hold on the stirrups and latigos helped a lot. It lifted us
over the ground. We all crossed the flat diagonally and struck into a
draw or valley full of timber and with a creek in it, at right angles to
the flat. Up this we scooted, hard as we could pelt.

"Tired? Want to rest a second?" he asked.

We grunted "No," for we had our second wind and little Jed Smith was
hanging on tight, behind the saddle. Besides, the fire was right ahead,
toward the left, belching up its great rolls of black-and-white smoke.
And at the same time (although we didn't know it) the gang who had
started it were fleeing in one direction, from it, and the general and
Fitzpatrick were loose and fleeing in another direction, and Jim Bridger
was smelling it and with the Red Fox Patrol was drawing near to it and
not knowing, and the beaver man was tying up his leg and about to run
right into it.

But we were to help stop it.

"Here!" spoke the Ranger. "Here's the fire line, this cleared space like
a trail. It runs to those willows a quarter of a mile below. When the
fire comes along this ridge you watch this line and beat out and stamp
out every flame. See? You can do it. It won't travel fast, down-hill;
but if ever it crosses the line and reaches the bottom of the valley
where the brush is thick, there's no knowing where it will stop. It will
burn willows and everything else. One of you drop off here; I'll take
the others further. Then I must make tracks for the front."

We left Kit Carson here. Jed Smith climbed down and was left next, in
the middle, and I was hustled to the upper end.

"So long," said the Ranger. "Don't let it get past you. It won't. Work
hard, and if you're really in danger run for the creek. But Boy Scouts
of America don't run till they have to. You can save lives and a heap of
timber, by licking the fire at this point. I'll see you later." And off
he spurred, through the timber, across the front of the fire.

He wasn't afraid--and so we weren't, either.


CHAPTER XIV

THE CAPTURE OF THE BEAVER MAN


The fire line looked like some old wood-road, where trees had been cut
out and brush cleared away. It extended through the timber, striking the
thin places and the rocky bare places, and the highest places, and wound
on, half a mile, over a point. This point, with a long slope from the
ridge to the valley there, was open and fire-proof. The lower end of the
line was that willow bog, which lay in a basin right in a split of the
timber. Away across from our ridge was another gravelly ridge, and
beyond that was the snowy range. (Note 53.)

The smoke was growing thick and strong, so that we could smell it plain.
The fire was coming right along, making for us. There were the three of
us to cover a half-mile or more of fire line, so we got busy. We divided
the line into three patrols, and set to work tramping down the brush on
the fire side of it and making ready.

Pretty soon wild animals began to pass, routed out by the fire. That was
fun, to watch deer and coyotes and rabbits and other things scoot by,
among the trees, as if they were moving pictures. Once I saw a wolf,
and little Jed Smith called that he had seen a bear. Kit Carson reported
that some of the animals seemed to be heading into the willow bog beyond
his end of the line.

It was kind of nervous work, getting ready and waiting for the fire. It
was worse than actual fighting, and we'd rather meet the fire halfway
than wait for it to come to us. But we were here to wait.

The fire did not arrive all at once, with a jump. Not where I was. A
thin blue smoke, lazy and harmless, drifted through among the trees, and
a crackling sounded louder and louder. Then there were breaths of hot
air, as if a dragon was foraging about. Birds flew over, calling and
excited, and squirrels raced along, and porcupines and skunks, and even
worms and ants crawled and ran, trying to escape the dragon. A wind
blew, and the timber moaned as if hurt and frightened. I felt sorry for
the pines and spruces and cedars. They could not run away, and they were
doomed to be burnt alive.

The birds all had gone, worms and ants and bugs were still hurrying, and
the timber was quiet except for the crackling. Now I glimpsed the dragon
himself. He was digging around, up the slope a little way, extending his
claws further and further like a cat as he explored new ground and
gathered in every morsel.

This is the way the fire came--not roaring and leaping, but sneaking
along the ground and among the bushes, with little advance squads like
dragon's claws or like the scouts of an army, reconnoitering. The
crackling increased, the hot gusts blew oftener, I could see back into
the dragon's great mouth where bushes and trees were flaming and
disappearing--and suddenly he gave a roar and leaped for our fire line,
and ate a bush near it.

Then I leaped for him and struck a paw down with my stick. So we began
to fight.

It wasn't a crown fire, where the flames travel through the tops of the
timber; it traveled along the ground, and climbed the low trees and then
reached for the big ones. But when it came near the fire line, it
stopped and felt about sort of blindly, and that was our chance to jump
on it and stamp it out and beat it out and kill it.

The smoke was awful, and so was the heat, but the wind helped me and
carried most of it past. And now the old dragon was right in front of
me, raging and snapping. The fore part of him must be approaching Jed
Smith, further along the line. I whistled the Scout whistle, loud, and
gave the Scout halloo--and from Jed echoed back the signal to show that
all was well.

This was hot work, for Sunday or any day. The smoke choked and blinded,
and the air fairly scorched. Pine makes a bad blaze. What I had to do
was to run back and forth along the fire line, crushing the dragon's
claws. My shoes felt burned through and my face felt blistered, and
jiminy, how I sweat! But that dragon never got across my part of the
fire line.

The space inside my part was burnt out and smoldering, and I could join
with Jed. There were two of us to lick the fire, here; but the dragon
was raging worse and the two of us were needed. He kept us busy. I
suppose that there was more brush. And when we would follow him down,
and help Kit, he was worse than ever. How he roared!

He was determined to get across and go around that willow bog. Once he
did get across, and we chased him and fought him back with feet and
hands and even rolled on him. A bad wind had sprung up, and we didn't
know but that we were to have a crown fire. The heat would have baked
bread; the cinders were flying and we must watch those, to catch them
when they landed. We had to be everywhere at once--in the smoke and the
cinders and the flames, and if I hadn't been a Scout, stationed with
orders, I for one would have been willing to sit and rest, just for a
minute, and let the blamed fire go. But I didn't, and Kit and Jed
didn't; all of a sudden the dragon quit, and with roar and crackle went
plunging on, along the ridge inside the willow bog. We had held the fire
line--and we didn't know that Jim Bridger and the Red Fox Scouts were
in those willows which we had saved because we had been ordered to!

Then, when just a few little blazes remained to be trampled and beaten
out, but while the timber further in was still aflame, Jed cried:
"Look!" and we saw a man coming, staggering and coughing, down through a
rocky little canyon which cut the black, smoking slope.

He fell, and we rushed to get him.

Blazing branches were falling, all about; the air was two hundred in the
shade; and in that little canyon the rocks seemed red-hot. But the fire
hadn't got into the canyon, much, because it was narrow and bare; and
the man must have been following it and have made it save his life. He
was in bad shape, though. Before we reached him he had stood up and
tumbled several times, trying to feel his way along.

"Wait! We're coming," I called. He heard, and tried to see.

"All right," he answered hoarsely. "Come ahead."

We reached him. Kit Carson and I held him up by putting his arms over
our shoulders, and with Jed walking behind we helped him through the
canyon and out to the fire line. He groaned and grunted. His eyebrows
were crisped and his hair was singed and his shoes were cinders and his
hands and face were scarred, and his eyes were all bloodshot, and he had
holes through his clothes.

"Fire out?" he asked. "I can't see."

"It isn't out, but it's past," said Jed.

"Well, it mighty near got _me_," he groaned. "It corralled me on that
ridge. If I hadn't cached myself in that little canyon, I'd have been
burned to a crisp. It burned my hoss, I reckon. He jerked loose from me
and left me to go it alone with my wounded leg. Water! Ain't there a
creek ahead? Gimme some water."

While he was mumbling we set him down, beyond the fire line. It didn't
seem as though we could get him any further. Kit hustled for water, Jed
skipped to get first-aid stuff from a blanket-roll, and I made an
examination.

His face and hands were blistered--maybe his eyes were scorched--there
was a bloody place wrapped about with a dirty red handkerchief, on the
calf of his left leg. But I couldn't do much until I had scissors or a
sharp knife, and water.

"Who are you kids?" he asked. "Fishin'?" He was lying with his eyes
closed.

"No. We're some Boy Scouts."

He didn't seem to like this. "Great Scott!" he complained. "Ain't there
nobody but Boy Scouts in these mountains?"

Just then Kit came back with a hat of water from a boggy place. It was
muddy water, but it looked wet and good, and the man gulped it down,
except what I used to soak our handkerchiefs in. Kit went for more. Jed
arrived with first-aid stuff, and I set to work, Jed helping.

We let the man wipe his own face, while we cut open his shirt where it
had stuck to the flesh.

"Here!" he said suddenly. "Quit that. What's the matter with you?"

But he was too late. When I got inside his undershirt, there on a
buckskin cord was hanging something that we had seen before. At least,
it either was the message of the Elk Patrol or else a package exactly
like it.

"Is that yours?" I asked.

"Maybe yes, and maybe no. Why?" he growled.

"Because if it isn't, we'd like to know where you got it."

"And if you don't tell, we'll go on and let you be," snapped little Jed.

"Shut up," I ordered--which wasn't the right way, but I said it before I
thought. Jed had made me angry. "No, we won't." And we wouldn't. Our
duty was to fix him the best we could. "But that looks like something
belonging to us Scouts, and it has our private mark on it. We'd like to
have you explain where you got it."

"He's _got_ to explain, too," said little Jed, excited.

"Have I?" grinned the man, hurting his face. "Why so?"

"There are three of us kids. We can keep sight of you till that Ranger
comes back. He'll make you."

"Who?"

"That Forest Ranger. He's a Government officer."

Kit Carson arrived, staring, with more water.

"I know you!" he panted. He signed to us, pointing at the man's feet.
"You were at that other camp!" And Jed and I looked and saw the hole in
the left sole--although both soles were badly burned, now. By that mark
he was the beaver man! He wriggled uneasily as if he had a notion to sit
up.

"Well, if you want it so bad, and it's yours, take it." And in a jiffy I
had cut it loose with my knife. "It's been a hoodoo to me. How did you
know I was at any other camp? Are you those three kids?"

"We saw your tracks," I answered. "What three kids?"

"The three kids those other fellows had corralled."

"No, but we're their partners. We're looking for them."

He'd had another drink of water and his face squinted at us, as we
fussed about him. Kit took off one of the shoes and I the other, to get
at the blistered feet.

"Never saw you before, did I?"

"Maybe not."

"Well, I'll tell you some news. One of your partners got away."

That was good.

"How do you know?" we all three asked.

"I met him, back on the trail, with two new kids."

"Which one was he? What did he look like?"

"A young lad, dressed like you. Carried a bow and arrow."

"Brown eyes and big ears?"

"Brown eyes, I reckon. Didn't notice his ears."

That must have been Jim Bridger.

"Who were the two fellows?"

"More of you Scouts, I reckon. Carried packs on their backs. Dressed in
khaki and leggins, like soldiers."

They weren't any of us Elks, then. But we were tremendously excited.

"When?"

"This noon."

That sure was news. Hurrah for Jim Bridger!

"Did you see a one-armed boy?"

"Saw him in that camp, where the three of 'em were corralled."

"What kind of a crowd had they? Was one wearing a big revolver?"

"Yes. 'Bout as big as he was. They looked like some tough town bunch."

"How many?"

"Eight or ten."

Oho!

"Did you hear anybody called Bill?"

"Yes; also Bat and Mike and Walt and et cetery."

We'd fired these questions at him as fast as we could get them in
edgewise, and now we knew a heap. The signs had told us true. Those two
recruits had joined with the town gang, and our Scouts had been
captured; but escape had been attempted and Jim Bridger had got away.

"How did you get that packet?" asked Kit.

"Found it."

He spoke short as if he was done talking. It seemed that he had told us
the truth, so far; but if we kept questioning him much more he might get
tired or cross, and lie. We might ask foolish questions, too; and
foolish questions are worse than no questions.

We had done a good job on this man, as appeared to us. We had bathed his
face, and had exposed the worst burns on his body and arms and legs and
had covered them with carbolized vaseline and gauze held on with
adhesive plaster, and had cleaned the wound in his leg. It was a
regular hole, but we didn't ask him how he got it. 'Twas in mighty bad
shape, for it hadn't been attended to right and was dirty and swollen.
Cold clear water dripped into it to flush it and clean it and reduce the
inflammation would have been fine, but we didn't have that kind of water
handy; so we sifted some boric powder into it and over it and bound on
it a pad of dry sterilized gauze, but not too tight. I asked him if
there was a bullet or anything else in it, and he said no. He had run
against a stick. This was about all that we could do to it, and play
safe by not poking into it too much. (Note 54.)

He seemed to feel pretty good, now, and sat up.

"Well," he said, "now I've given you boys your message and told you what
I know, and you've fixed me up, so I'll be movin' on. Where are those
things I used to call shoes?"

We exchanged glances. He was the beaver man.

"We aren't through yet," I said.

"Oh, I reckon you are," he answered. "I'm much obliged. Pass me the
shoes, will you?"

"No; wait," said Kit Carson.

"What for?" He was beginning to growl.

"Till you're all fixed."

"I'm fixed enough."

"We'll dress some of those wounds over again."

"No, you won't. Pass me those shoes."

They were hidden behind a tree.

"Can't you wait a little?"

"No, I can't wait a little." He was growling in earnest. "Will you pass
me those shoes?"

"No, we won't," announced Kit. He was getting angry, too.

"You pass me those shoes or something is liable to happen to you mighty
sudden. I'll break you in two."

"I'll get the rifle," said Jed, and started; but I called him back. We
didn't need a rifle.

"He can't do anything in bare feet like that," I said. And he couldn't.
His feet were too soft and burned. That is why we kept the shoes, of
course.

"I can't, eh?"

"No. We aren't afraid."

He started to stand, and then he sat back again.

"I'll put a hole in some of you," he muttered; and felt at the side of
his chest. But if he had carried a gun in a Texas holster there, it was
gone. "Say, you, what's the matter with you?" he queried. "What do you
want to keep me here for?"

"You'd better wait. We'll stay, too."

He glared at us. Then he began to wheedle.

"Say, what'd I ever do to you? Didn't I give you back that message, and
tell you all I knew? Didn't I help you out as much as I could?"

"Sure," we said.

"Then what have you got it in for me for?"

"We'd rather you'd wait till the Ranger or somebody comes along," I
explained.

He fumbled in a pants pocket.

"Lookee here," he offered. And he held it out. "Here's a twenty-dollar
gold piece. Take it and divvy it among you; and I'll go along and
nobody'll be the wiser."

"No, thanks," we said.

"I'll make it twenty apiece for each," he insisted. "Here they are. See?
Give me those shoes, and take these yellow bucks and go and have a good
time."

But we shook our heads, and had to laugh. He couldn't bluff us Scouts,
and he couldn't bribe us, either. He twisted and stood up, and we jumped
away, and Kit was ready to grab up the shoes and carry them across into
the burned timber where the ground was still hot.

The man swore and threatened frightfully.

"I'd like to get my fingers on one of you, once," he stormed. "You'd
sing a different tune."

So we would. But we had the advantage now and we didn't propose to lose
it. He couldn't travel far in bare, blistered feet. I wished that he'd
sit down again. We didn't want to torment him or nag him, just because
we had him. He did sit down.

"What do you think I am, anyhow?" he asked.

"Well, you've been killing beaver," I told him.

"Who said so?"

"We saw you at the beaver-pond, when we were camping opposite. And just
after you left the game warden came along, looking for you."

"You saw some other man."

"No, we didn't. We know your tracks. And if you aren't the man, then
you'll be let go."

"You kids make me tired," he grumbled, and tried to laugh it off.
"Supposin' a man does trap a beaver or two. They're made to be trapped.
They have to be trapped or else they dam up streams and overflow good
land. Nobody misses a few beaver, anyhow, in the timber. This is a free
land, ain't it?"

"Killing beaver is against the law, just the same," said Jed.

"You kids didn't make the law, did you? You aren't judge of the law, are
you?"

"No," I said. "But we know what it is and we don't think it ought to be
broken. If people go ahead breaking the game laws, then there won't be
any game left for the people who keep the laws to see or hunt. And the
less game there is, the more laws there'll be." I knew that by heart. It
was what Scouts are taught.

This sounded like preaching. But it was true. And while he was fuming
and growling and figuring on what to do, we were mighty glad to hear a
horse's hoofs. The Ranger came galloping down the fire line.

"Hello," he said. He was streaked with ashes and soot and sweat, and so
was his horse, and they both looked worn to a frazzle. "Well, we've
licked the fire. Who's that? Somebody hurt?" Then he gave another quick
look. "Why, how are you, Jack? You must have run against something
unexpected."

The beaver man only growled, as if mad and disgusted.

I saluted.

"We have held the fire line, sir," I reported.

"You bet!" answered the Ranger. "You did well. And now you're holding
Jack, are you? You needn't explain. I know all about him. Since that
fire drove him out along with other animals, we'll hang on to him. The
game warden spoke to me about him a long time ago."

"You fellows think you're mighty smart. Do I get my shoes, or not?"
growled the beaver man.

"Not," answered the Ranger, cheerfully. "We'll wrap your feet up with a
few handkerchiefs and let you ride this horse." He got down. "What's the
matter? Burns? Bad leg? Say! These kids are some class on first-aid,
aren't they! You're lucky. Did you thank them? Now you can ride nicely
and the game warden will sure be glad to see you." Then he spoke to us.
"I'm going over to my cabin, boys, where there's a telephone. Better
come along and spend the night."

We hustled for our blanket-rolls. The beaver man gruntingly climbed
aboard the Ranger's horse, and we all set out. The Ranger led the horse,
and carried his rifle.

"Is the fire out?" asked Kit Carson.

"Not out, but it's under control. It'll burn itself out, where it's
confined. I've left a squad to guard it and I'll telephone in to
headquarters and report. But if it had got across this fire line and
around those willows, we'd have been fighting it for a week."

"How did it start?"

"Somebody's camp-fire."

The trail we were making led through the timber and on, across a little
creek and up the opposite slope. The sun was just setting as we came out
beyond the timber, and made diagonally up a bare ridge. On top it looked
like one end of that plateau we had crossed when we were trailing the
gang and we had first seen the fire.

The Ranger had come up here because traveling was better and he could
take a good look around. We halted, puffing, while he looked. Off to the
west was the snowy range, and old Pilot Peak again, with the sun setting
right beside him, in a crack. The range didn't seem far, but it seemed
cold and bleak--and over it we were bound. Only, although now we had the
message, we didn't have the other Scouts. If they were burned--oh,
jiminy!

"Great Cæsar! More smoke!" groaned the Ranger. "If that's another fire
started--!"

His words made us jump and gaze about. Yes, there was smoke, plenty of
it, over where the forest fire we had fought was still alive. But he was
looking in another direction, down along the top of the plateau.

"See it?" he asked.

Yes, we saw it. But--! And then our hearts gave a great leap.

"That's not a forest fire!" we cried. "That's a smoke signal!"

"A what?"

"A smoke signal! And--"

"Wait a second. We'll read it, if we can. Scouts must be over there," I
exclaimed.

"More Scouts!" grunted the beaver man. "These here hills are plumb full
of 'em."

The air was quiet, and the smoke rose straight up, with the sun tinting
the top. It was a pretty sight, to us. Then we saw two puffs and a
pause, and two puffs and a pause, and two puffs and a pause. It was our
private Elk Patrol code, and it was beautiful. We cheered.

"It's from our partners, and it says 'Come to council,'" I reported.
"They're hunting for us. We'll have to go over there."

"Think they're in trouble?"

"They don't say so, but we ought to signal back and go right over."

"I'll go, too, for luck, and see you through, then," said the Ranger.

"Do I have to make that extra ride?" complained the beaver man, angry
again.

"Sure," answered the Ranger. "That's only a mile or so and then it's
only a few more miles to the cabin, and we aren't afraid of the dark."

They watched us curiously while we hustled and scraped a pile of dead
sage and grass and rubbish, and set it to smoking and made the Elks' "O.
K." signal. The other Scouts must have been sweeping the horizon and
hoping, for back came the "O. K." signal from them.

And traveling our fastest, with the beaver man grumbling, we all headed
across the plateau for the place of the smoke. Sunday was turning out
good, after all.

[Illustration: "IT WAS OUR PRIVATE ELK PATROL CODE."]


CHAPTER XV

GENERAL ASHLEY DROPS OUT

(JIM BRIDGER RESUMES THE TALE)


I tell you, we were glad to have that smoke of ours answered, and to see
Major Henry and Kit Carson and Jed Smith coming, in the twilight, with
the Ranger and the beaver man. We guessed that the three boys must be
our three partners--and when they waved with the Elk Patrol sign we
knew; but of course we didn't know who the two strangers were.

While they were approaching, Major Henry wigwagged: "All there?" with
his cap; and Fitzpatrick wigwagged back: "Sure!" They arrived opposite
us, and then headed by the man with the rifle, who was leading the
horse, they obliqued up along the gulch as if they knew of a crossing;
so we decided that one of the strangers must be acquainted with the
country. They made a fine sight, against the horizon.

Pretty soon into the gulch they plunged, and after a few minutes out
they scrambled, man and horse first, on our side, and came back toward
us. And in a minute more we Elk Scouts were dancing and hugging each
other, and calling each other by our regular ordinary names, "Fat" and
"Sliver" and "Red" and all, and discipline didn't cut much figure. That
was a joyful reunion. The Ranger and his prisoner, the beaver man,
looked on.

Then when Major Henry hauled out the message packet, and saluting and
grinning passed it to the general, our cup was full. I was as glad as if
I had passed it, myself. "One for all, and all for one," is the way we
Scouts work.

"If you hadn't trailed him (the beaver man) and headed him and fixed him
so he couldn't travel fast, he'd have got away from the fire and
wouldn't have run into _us_," claimed Major Henry.

"And if you fellows hadn't held that fire line you wouldn't have seen
him and we might have been burnt or suffocated in the willows," I
claimed back.

So what seems a failure or a bother, when you're trying your best, often
is the most important thing of all, or helps make the chain complete.

But now we didn't take much time to explain to each other or to swap
yarns; for the twilight was gone and the dark was closing in, and we
weren't in the best of shape. The burro Apache was packed with bedding,
mostly, which was a good thing, of course; the Red Fox Scouts had their
outfit; but we Elks were short on grub. That piece of bacon and just
the little other stuff carried by the Major Henry party were our
provisions. Fitz and the poor general were making a hungry camp, when we
had discovered them. And then there was the general, laid up.

"What's the matter with you, kid?" queried the Ranger.

"Sprained ankle, I think."

"That's sure bad," sympathized the Ranger.

And it sure was.

"Boys, I'll have to be traveling for that cabin of mine, to report about
the fire and this man," said the Ranger, after listening to our talk for
a minute. "If you're grub-shy, some of you had better come along and
I'll send back enough to help you out."

That was mighty nice of him. And the general spoke up, weakly. "How far
is the cabin, please?"

"About three miles, straight across."

"If I could make it, could I stay there a little while?"

"Stay a year, if you want to. We'll pack you over, if you'll go. Can you
ride?"

"All right," said the general. "I'll do it. Now, you fellows, listen.
Major Henry, I turn the command and the message over to you. I'm no
good; I can't travel and we've spent a lot of time already, and I'd be
only a drag. So I'll drop out and go over to that cabin, and you other
Scouts take the message."

Oh, we didn't want to do that! Leave the general? Never!

"No, sir, we'll take you along if we have to carry you on our backs," we
said; and we started in, all to talk at once. But he made us quit.

"Say, do I have to sit here all night while you chew the rag?" grumbled
the beaver man. But we didn't pay attention to _him_.

"It doesn't matter about me, whether I go or not, as long as we get that
message through," answered the general, to us. "I can't travel, and I'd
only hold you back and delay things. I'll quit, and the rest of you
hustle and make up for lost time."

"I'll stay with you. This is Scout custom: two by two," spoke up little
Jed Smith. He was the general's mate.

"Nobody stays with me. You all go right on under Corporal Henry."

"It'll be plumb dark before we get to that cabin," grumbled the beaver
man. "This ain't any way to treat a fellow who's been stuck and then
burnt. I'm tired o' sittin' on this hoss with my toes out."

"Well, you can get off and let this other man ride. I'll hobble you and
he can lead you," said the Ranger.

"What's the matter with the burro?" growled the beaver man. He wasn't
so anxious to walk, after all.

Sure! We knew that the Ranger was waiting, so while some of us led up
Apache, others bandaged the general's ankle tighter, to make it ride
easier and not hurt so much if it dangled. Then we lifted the general,
Scout fashion, on our hands, and set him on Apache.

Now something else happened. Red Fox Scout Ward stepped forward and took
the lead rope.

"I'm going," he announced quietly. "I'm feeling fine and you other
fellows are tired. Somebody must bring the burro back, and the general
may need a hand."

"No, I won't," corrected the general.

"But the burro must come back."

"It's up to us Elk Scouts to do that," protested Major Henry. "Some of
us will go. You stay. It's dark."

"No, sir. You Elk men have been traveling on short rations and Van Sant
and I have been fed up. It's either Van or I, and I'll go." And he did.
He was bound to. But it was a long extra tramp.

We shook hands with the general, and gave him the Scouts' cheer; and a
cheer for the Ranger.

"Ain't we ever goin' to move on?" grumbled the beaver man.

"I may stay all night and be back early in the morning," called Ward.

"Of course."

They trailed away, in the dimness--the Ranger ahead leading the beaver
man, Red Fox Scout Ward leading Apache. And we were sorry to see them
go. We should miss the plucky Ashley, our captain.


CHAPTER XVI

A BURRO IN BED


When I woke in the morning Fitz was already up, building the fire,
according to routine, and Red Fox Scout Van Sant was helping him. Their
condition improves more rapidly by diffusion, and their villages are
rather asylums than homes.

As might be expected the prevailing spirit of the colonies is democratic:
the democracy of the middle classes, not of the mob. There are no
permanent springs of crime:
the instinct of order, everywhere powerful, cannot but be strong
where society is prosperous.

The social prospects of the colonists, though not without omens of
ill, will not discourage the political philosopher.

The various races are not sufficiently distinct to prevent an easy
amalgamation. Nationality, whether of Germans, Irish, Scotch, or English,
insensibly loses its political character. Hostile traditions cannot be
naturalised in a new land: all respectable men condemn the revival of
ancient feuds, and they will soon disappear for ever.

More fortunate in this respect than America, in these regions no
African slavery exists--the brother will not sell his sister, or
the father his son.

The temporary inconvenience of transportation will leave no deep indent
on colonial society; but the black brand of slavery is indelible.

The liberality and generosity of the Australians has been remarked by
every stranger.

In prosperous times money is at command for every project which
professes to do good, and suffering is instantly relieved by bounty
which is sometimes extravagant.

The loss of a vessel a few years ago afforded an instance of this.

The utmost latitude of beneficence could not exhaust the immense sum
(£1,200) contributed to make good the personal losses of a few
passengers and seamen. The liberality of the hand is here unrestrained
by religious antipathies.

Bigotry assumes the character of ill temper and puffing. Two parrots
in Philadelphia trained to polemics were set over against each
other, one crying all day, "there can be no church without a prelate;"
the other, "there can be a church without a prelate;" the passengers
were divided in opinion, but laughing walked on.

Such is colonial life.

No believer in the glorious destinies of the Anglo-Saxon race can look
upon the events of the last three years without wonder and hope. The
American and British empires are seated on all waters; the old and
new worlds are filled with the name and fame of England and her
children.

The lands conquered by Cæsar, those discovered by Columbus, and those
explored by Cook, are now joined together in one destiny. There are
indeed peculiarities in the various branches of the Anglo-Saxon race; but
they are only the varieties of the same family, conscious of eternal
unities.

How awfully grand are their prospects. America attracted by gold has
pushed forward her commercial pioneers, not only to the extremity of
her territories, but to all the islands of the Pacific. The discovery
of gold in California was scarcely less momentous to the Australasian
than to the American continent. They are now our nearest neighbours:
their markets are affected by our own; their territory offers the
quickest transit to Europe; every hour will develop the immense
importance of this contiguity--that passage across the isthmus of
Panama, once represented as the last achievement reserved for
commerce and science in their highest maturity, has already been
assured.

The common interest of trading nations will strengthen the securities
of peace, diffuse civilisation among the thousand islands of the
Pacific, and facilitate the extension of Christian knowledge in
the remotest portions of the earth. England, the parent--no longer
the exclusive centre of Anglo-Saxon civilisation--will find
auxiliaries only less powerful than herself in a work once entirely
her own.

An impetus has been given to the Australian colonies by the discovery
of still richer gold fields than those of California. In six months,
more than two millions in value has been taken from the surface of the
earth by laborers unskilled in the process, and who have perhaps wasted
more than they have secured. The riches which remain scattered
over many hundred miles can only be appropriated by the state as they
flow through the coffers of commerce.

A period cannot be imagined when the precious metal will be exhausted.

The interest excited in Europe by the discovery of new mineral wealth,
is chiefly important from its tendency to change the current of emigration
to these regions--certainly unsurpassed and scarcely equalled in the
world. Here, under a tropical sun, no fever rages; here indigenous
diseases are unknown; even those so fatal in Europe rarely visit
this hemisphere.

The small pox, the measles, and various other disorders fatal to infancy
are only occasionally seen, and are scarcely ever mortal. No miasma
arises from the marshes: no decaying vegetation poisons the virgin
soil. The clement skies and light atmosphere stimulate and confirm the
health. Whether long life is the gift of this quarter of the globe is
hardly yet determined. Those of middle age who land here find their
constitutions recruited; but the country-born come more quickly to
maturity.

It is probable, however, that the highest average of human life will be
attained: fewer will die in infancy, perhaps a smaller proportionate
number reach old age.

If the productions of these countries are considered, they will be
still more attractive than other unoccupied regions.

Nature has multiplied her gifts with a liberal hand.

It were more easy to enumerate those that are wanting than those
that exist.

Gold, silver, iron, copper, coal, and every variety of stone are included
in our geological wealth.

All the fruits of the tropics and of the most temperate lands may
be easily brought to the same table.

Taking Tasmania and Port Phillip as the central regions; on the
right and on the left the fertile earth yields every variety of
European fruits, until the meridian is reached where the sugar cane
and cotton tree flourish.

It is true, that some other lands present more comparative fertility,
but the Australias contain sufficient alluvial soils to satisfy the
wants of millions.

Washington raised but twenty bushels of wheat per acre in his paternal
lands of Virginia.

The intelligent Australian farmer often far exceeds that quantity even
with imperfect cultivation.

Nor is there a season of the year when he cannot toil, or one when the
garden is wholly unproductive.

But if the position of Australia in relation to the rest of the
world be surveyed, the prospect is still more brilliant.

An Englishman measures distance from his native land, and thus his
pardonable vanity fixes the Australias at the extremity of the
earth.

But such is not the real position of New Holland. In reference to the
most populous and fertile, or the most ancient and opulent,[283] it
has been compared to the frog or soft part of a horse's foot in
relation to the outline of the hoof.

With the face turning to the north, America is on the right, Asia and
Africa on the left. Great Britain, the parent land, is far more
distant from most of those mighty regions which feed her commerce
and sustain her strength than her Australian colonies.

They will soon meet her vessels on every shore. Steam navigation will
flourish on the Pacific ocean not less than on the rivers of America. The
eye that scans the future, guided by calculation rather than fancy,
sees the ports of Australia thronged with steamers, or follows them
traversing every sea and ocean, and bringing from every city of
the civilised world both merchandise and men.

Thus the progress of the next quarter of a century will be multiplied
by its years.

When North America separated from Great Britain, she exported not
much more than four millions in value per annum. Australia already
exports not less.[284] The commerce of England with her Australian
colonies is without parallel. History affords no example of such rapid
advancement; and this not as the result of protective laws, or of
remarkable intelligence or enterprise, but as the fruit of that
boundless opulence scattered by the hand of nature and gathered
with unexampled facility.

The merchant laments the paucity of navigable streams. Yet there are
rivers of many hundred miles extent, which will ultimately be available
to commerce. The engineer of Europe would laugh at difficulties opposed
by stones, and trees, and marshes.

Population will one day justify the improvement by art of what nature has
only partially accomplished. But in the level plains of the Australias
there is a compensation for this deficiency. Hundreds of miles are
almost prepared for the rail road; and as the cheap methods adopted in
America become known, the inland communication will be rapidly enlarged.

The late date of the discovery of gold in Australasia has created much
astonishment. It seems to have been concealed by Providence, or
rather the signs of its existence were not permitted to arrest
attention, until the colonies could endure the shock.

A shepherd publicly sold at Sydney several ounces of gold in 1844. Years
after a still larger quantity was exposed in Victoria (1849). These facts
were recorded in the journals of the time; in the first instance scarcely
awakening the slightest interest, and the last producing little
but distrust and derision.

The delay has probably upon the whole benefited both the colonies and
the human race. Had gold been discovered before the era of free immigration
it must have led to frightful disorders.

California has added another to those warnings presented in the history
of gold mining, that the absorbing pursuit, for a time, suspends the voice
of reason and morality. The multitudes who have precipitated themselves
on the gold fields of Victoria indicate the uniform direction of
similar passions; yet how superior are our present resources to
those of former times or of other countries.

The governments organised and intelligent, and sustained by the strong
moral support of four hundred Christian congregations. The social interests
of perhaps not less than fifty thousand families will be able to check,
and probably to master, the spirit of anarchy and violence. That any
lives should be sacrificed is of course a matter of regret; but
the politician and the philanthropist may pronounce in favor of a
dispensation which though permitting the sacrifice of a few, will
rapidly cover the regions around us with villages, towns, and
homesteads.

Though rich beyond example, the mines will be abandoned by the many for
whom the pleasures and the rest of home, the calm and even pursuits
of industry, and the intercourse of civil and religious life have permanent
attractions. Yet the unexampled profusion of the precious metal must
rapidly augment our commerce and supply the means of mercantile
enterprise. The capital we have so often coveted is now within our
reach. The farmer desired a market; he has it in his neighbourhood, at
his very door. The demand for foreign articles will give employment
to shipping directly trading from the Australian to the producing
market.

The increase of commerce will thus lead to its independence. The
Australian merchant will acquire the same relation to the general trade
of the world as the American possesses. The ships of America carry her
passengers and convey her produce. She divides the profits equally with
her customer.[285]
The happiness and prosperity of the people is by Divine Providence
placed within their power.

If they grasp at wealth to the neglect of their social and political
duties; if, for the sake of selfish ease, they resign to ignorant and
violent men the business of legislation; if they tolerate systematic
debauchery, gambling and sharping; if they countenance the press
when sporting with religion, or rendering private reputation worthless;
if they neglect the education of the rising generation, and the
instruction of the working classes; if the rich attempt to secure
the privileges of rank by restricting the franchises of the less
powerful; if worldly pleasure invade the seasons of devotion; and
the worship of God be neglected by the masses of the people,--then
will they become unfit for liberty; base and sensual, they will be
loathed and despised; the moral Governor of the world will assert
his sovereignty, and will visit a worthless and ungrateful race
with the yoke of bondage, the scourge of anarchy, or the besom of
destruction.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 281: A more venal and almost more desirable fault can scarcely
be ascribed to a governor than a strong attachment to the people whom
he is sent to govern.--_Coleridge's friend_, vol. 3, p. 325.]
[Footnote 282: It is very difficult to make the mass of mankind believe
that the state of things is ever to be otherwise than they
have been accustomed to see it.

I have very often heard old persons describe the impossibility of making
any one believe that the American colonies could ever be separated
from this country. It was always considered as an idle dream of
discontented politicians, good enough to fill up the periods of a speech,
but which no practical man, devoid of the spirit of party, considered
to be within the limits of possibility.

There was a period when the slightest concession would have satisfied
the Americans; but all the world was in heroics; one set of gentlemen met
at the Lamb, and another at the Lion: blood and treasure men, breathing
war, vengeance, and contempt; and in eight years afterwards, an
awkward looking gentleman in plain clothes walked up to the
drawing-room of St.

James's, in the midst of the gentlemen of the Lion and Lamb, and was
introduced as the _ambassador from the United States of America_.

--_Works of Sidney Smith, Vol. III., p. 336._
"If you are told of the existence of discontent in any of your colonial
possessions, do not believe it; and if any application be made to you
for the redress of the grievances of any of your colonial possessions,
reject the prayer at once; for if you grant that, you may be asked
for something more.

Redress no grievance, lest it should lead to a petition for the removal
of another cause of complaint. Believe only the accounts which reach
you from governors, and others officially connected with your colonies;
and treat any statements in opposition to their accounts as the
invention of demagogues, whom you should hang if you could catch
them, and thus tranquillize the colony."

--_Franklin._]

[Footnote 283: "Just before I embarked at Plymouth, I visited my
grandmother, in order to take leave of her for ever.

Poor old soul!

she was already dead to the concerns of this life: my departure could
make but little difference in the time of our separation; and it was
of no importance to her which of us should quit the other. My resolution,
however, revived for a day all her woman's feelings: she shed abundance
of tears, and then became extremely curious to know every particular
about the place to which I was going.

I rubbed her spectacles whilst she wiped her eyes, and, having
placed before her a common English chart of the world, pointed out
the situation of New Holland.

She shook her head.
'What displeases, you, my dear Madam P' said I. 'Why,' she answered, 'it
is terribly out of the way; down in the very right-hand corner of
the world.'

The chart being mine, I cut it in two through the meridian of Iceland,
transposed the parts laterally, and turned them upside down.

'Now,' asked I, 'where is England P' 'Ah, boy,' she replied, 'you
may do what you like with the map; but you can't twist the world about
in that manner, though they _are_ making sad changes in it.'"

--_A Letter from Sydney; the principal town of Australia. Edited by
Robert Gouger_, 1829.]
[Footnote 284: United States Returns, 1791. Population. 3,921,352; revenue,
$4,771 000; exports, $19,000,000; imports, $20,000,000.

--_Tomlins' History of America._]
[Footnote 285: At the close of the first year of our existence as a
gold producing country, the mind naturally pauses and contemplates
the past, the present, and the future--to those who look upon this
land as their home and the scene upon which their children and
children's children are to play their part, the year 1851 will ever
be one of deep and solemn interest; the events have been of the
most startling character, and its results no human intellect can
fathom.

The first hour of the present year was ushered in by a brilliant sun which
rose above the horizon in all its majesty, shedding its gladsome
rays over a happy and a prosperous people--every heart was gay--every
industrious hand was employed, and our future prospects were as
cheering as the most ardent mind could have desired.

Our great staple was rapidly increasing, and had even then become an
export which commanded the attention of the British nation.

Our tallow was of considerable value--our copper mines were presenting
indications of richness--our pastoral and agricultural interests were
flourishing, and it was evident to all, that we must at no very distant
period become a great and prosperous colony. In fact it could have
been almost impossible to suggest a discovery that could add to
our importance; but before this memorable year had half sped its
course, a colonist returned from San Francisco, impressed with the
similarity that existed between the geological formation of this
land and that in which he had been sojourning, and determined to
bring it to light if possible.

No sooner was he on shore than he set boldly out on his great expedition,
notwithstanding the ridicule of his friends, who promised him disappointment
for his reward.

What wonderful events have frequently sprung from simple causes! Our
mountains and glens had been visited by scientific men of several
nations, but they had failed to trace anything beyond mere indications.
Such, however, was not the case with Edward Hammond Hargraves,
who, after spending a few weeks in the bush, announced to his brother
colonists that their hills and valleys contained in rich abundance
the precious metal by which the commerce of the world is carried on.

All honor be to the man whose keen observation has brought into practical
operation so vast a gold field for the employment of British labour and
British capital.

May he enjoy not only the reward which conscience yields to those
who perform a good action, but may his merits be duly appreciated
by an Australian public, and that appreciation assume a form that
shall descend from father to son, as long as the name of Hargraves
exists!

Such an addition to our already developed colonial resources cannot
fail to add materially to our position, and raise us, in an
incredibly short space of time, from a small colony into a noble
and powerful nation.

Our vast interior will be speedily populated; Britain will be relieved
of her starving thousands; and Australia will stand prominently
forward as the brightest jewel in Her Majesty's Crown.

--_Lloyd's Gold Circular._] 

HISTORY OF TASMANIA.

ALPHABETICAL ACCOUNT OF CHIEF PLACES.

LIST OF CHIEF PLACES.

The island of Tasmania is situated between the 40th and 44th parallels
of south latitude, and between the 144th and 149th degrees of east
longitude.

Its greatest length is 190 miles, and its breadth, 170. It contains 24,000
square miles, or 15,000,000 acres, having a surface nearly equal
to that of Ireland.

Its general character is mountainous, with numerous beautiful valleys,
rendered fertile by numberless streams descending from the hills,
and watering, in their course to the sea, large tracts of country.

The south-western coast, washed by the Southern Ocean, is high and
cold, but the climate of the northern and inland districts is one
of the finest in the temperate zone, and produces in abundance and
variety all the fruits which are found under the same latitude in
Europe.

The harbor of Hobart is one of the finest in the world. The principal
rivers are the Derwent, Ouse, Clyde, Jordan, Coal, Huon, and Dee, in
the south; and the Tamar, North and South Esk, Macquarie, Lake, Mersey,
Leven, Arthur, Blyth, Forth, and Meander, in the north.

The chief bays are Adventure Bay, in Bruni Island, so named after Captain
Furneaux's discovery ship, and where Cook anchored in his third voyage;
Fortescue, Port Arthur, Fredrick Hendrick's (so named by Tasman),
Prosser's, Spring, Oyster, and George's Bays, and the Bay of Fires, on
the eastern coast; Storm Bay (so named from the weather which Tasman
experienced there), Bad Bay (in Bruni Island), Recherche (named
after the ship in which D'Entrecasteaux sailed in search of La
Perouse), Esperance (after the ship which accompanied the admiral),
and Port Davey, on the southern coast; Macquarie Harbor, on the
western; Port Sorell, Port Frederic, Emu Bay, and East and West
Bay, at Circular Head, on the northern coast.

The principal capes are Cape Grim, the north-western and most northern
extremity of the island, in lat. 40° 47' S., and long. 144° 50'
E.; Cape Portland, the north-eastern point; St.

Helen's Head, the most easterly point, in long. 148° 25' E.; South
Cape, in lat. 43° 35' S.; and West Cape, in long. 144° 40' E.; St.

The pass itself was so low that we could scarcely make it out.

To cross that bowlder moraine was a terrific job. We climbed and
sprawled, and were now up, now down. It was a go-as-you-please.
Everywhere among the bowlders were whistling rock-rabbits, or conies.
They were about the size of small guinea-pigs, and had short tails and
round, flat bat ears plastered close to their heads. They had their
mouths crammed full of dried grass, which they carried into their nests
through crannies--putting away hay for the winter! It was mighty
cheerful to have them so busy and greeting us, away up in these lonely
heights, and Fitz got some more good animal pictures.

Apache was in great distress. He couldn't navigate those bowlders. We
could hear him "hee-hawing" on the lower edge, and could see him staring
after us and racing frantically back and forth. But we must go on; we
would pick him up on our way down.

Well, we got over the bowlder field--Fitz as spryly as any of us. Having
only one good arm made no difference to him, and he never would accept
help. He was independent, and we only kept an eye on him and let him
alone. The bowlders petered out; and now ahead was another slope, with
more snow patches, and short dead grass in little bunches; and it ended
in a bare outcrop: the top!

Our feet weighed twenty-five pounds each, our knees were wobbly, we
could hear each other pant, and my heart thumped so that the beats all
ran together. But with a cheer we toiled hard for the summit, before
resting. We didn't race--not at fourteen thousand feet; we weren't so
foolish--and I don't know who reached it first. Anyway, soon we all were
there.

We had climbed old Pilot Peak! The top was flat and warm and dry, so we
could sit. The sky was close above; around about was nothing but the
clear air. East, west, north and south, below us, were hills and valleys
and timber and parks and streams, with the cloud-shadows drifting
across. We didn't say one word. The right words didn't exist, somehow,
and what was the use in exclaiming when we all felt alike, and could
look and see for ourselves? You don't seem to amount to much when you
are up, like this, on a mountain, near the sky, with the world spread
out below and not missing you; and a boy's voice, or a man's, is about
the size of a cricket's chirp. The silence is one of the best things you
find. So we sat and looked and thought.

But on a sudden we did hear a noise--a rattling and "Hee-haw!" And here,
from a different side, came Apache again. He had got past those
bowlders, somehow. With another "Hee-haw!" he trotted right up on top,
in amidst us, where he stood, with a big sigh, looking around, too.

This was the chance for us to map out the country ahead, on the other
side of the pass. So we took a good long survey. It was a rough country,
as bad as that which we had left; with much timber and many hills and
valleys. Down in some of the valleys were yellow patches, like hay
ranches, and forty or fifty miles away seemed to be a little haze of
smoke, which must be a town: Green Valley, where we were bound! Hurrah!
But we hadn't got there, yet.

Major Henry made a rough sketch of the country, with Pilot Peak as base
point and a jagged, reddish tip, over toward the smoke, as another
landmark. Our course ought to be due west from Pilot, keeping to the
south of that reddish tip.

We had a little lunch, and after cleaning up after ourselves we saluted
the old peak with the Scouts' cheer, saying good-by to it; and then we
started down. We discovered that we could go around the bowlder-field,
as Apache had done. When we struck the snow-patch slope we obliqued over
to our trail up, and began to back track. Back-tracking was the safe
way, because we knew that this would bring us out. Down we went, with
long steps, almost flying, and leaving behind us the busy conies and the
tame ptarmigans, to inhabit the peak until we should come again. We
even tried not to tramp on the flowers. (Note 57.)

Through the maze of rock masses we threaded, and along the grassy ledge,
and entered the bush draw. By the sun it was noon, but we had plenty of
time, and we spread out in the draw, taking things easy and picking
berries. We didn't know but what we might come upon some grouse, in
here, too, for the trickle from that snow-bank drained through and there
was a bunch of aspens toward the bottom. But instead we came upon a
bear!

I heard Red Fox Scout Ward call, sharp and excited: "Look out, fellows!
Here's another bear!"

That stopped us short.

"Where?"

"Right in front of me! He's eating berries. And I see another,
too--sitting, looking at me."

"Wait!" called back Fitz, excited. "Let 'em alone. I'll get a picture."

That was just like Fitzpatrick. He wanted to take pictures of everything
alive.

"Yes; let 'em alone," warned Major Henry, shouting.

For that's all a bear in a berry-patch asks; to be let alone. He's
satisfied with the berries. In fact, all a bear asks, anyway, is to be
let alone, and up here on the mountain these bears weren't doing any
harm.

"Where are you?" called Fitz.

"On this rock."

Now we could see Scout Ward, with hand up; and over hustled Fitz, and
over we all hustled, from different directions.

They were not large bears. They looked like the little brown or black
bears, it was hard to tell which; but the small kind isn't dangerous.
They were across on the edge of a clearing, and were stripping the
bushes. Once in a while they would sit up and eye us, while slobbering
down the berries; then they would go to eating again.

Fitz had his camera unslung and taken down. He walked right out, toward
them, and snapped, but it wouldn't be a very good picture. They were too
far to show up plainly.

"I'll sneak around behind and drive them out," volunteered little Jed
Smith; and without waiting for orders he and Kit started, and we all
except Fitz spread out to help in the surround. Fitz made ready to take
them on the run. Nobody is afraid of the little brown or black bear.

Jed and Kit were just entering the bushes to make the circuit on their
side, when we heard Apache snorting and galloping, and a roar and a
"Whoof!" and out from the brush over there burst the burro, with another
bear chasing him. This was no little bear. It was a great big bear--an
old she cinnamon, and these others weren't the small brown or black
bears, either: they were half-grown cinnamon cubs!

How she came! Kit Carson and Jed Smith were right in her path.

"Look out!" we yelled.

Kit and little Jed leaped to dodge. She struck like a cat as she passed,
and head over heels went poor little Jed, sprawling in the brush, and
she passed on, straight to her cubs. They met her, and she smelled them
for a moment. She lifted her broad, short head, and snarled.

"Don't do a thing," ordered Major Henry. "She'll leave."

So we stood stock-still. That was all we _could_ do. We knew that poor
little Jed was lying perhaps badly wounded, off there in the brush, but
it wouldn't help to call the old bear's attention to him again. In the
open place Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand stood; he was right in front of the
old bear, and he was _taking pictures_!

The old bear saw him, and he and the camera seemed to make her mad.
Maybe she took it for a weapon. She lowered her head, swung it to and
fro, her bristles rose still higher, and across the open space she
started.

"Fitz!" we shrieked. And I said to myself, sort of crying: "Oh, jiminy!"

We all set up a tremendous yell, but that didn't turn her. Major Henry
jumped forward, and tugged to pull loose a stone. I looked for a stone
to throw. Of course I couldn't find one. Then out of the corner of my
eye, while I was watching Fitz, too, I glimpsed Red Fox Scout Van Sant
coming running, and shooting with his twenty-two. The bullets spatted
into the bear's hide, and stung her.

"Run, Fitz!" called Van Sant. "I'll stop her."

But he didn't, yet. Hardly! That Fitz had just been winding his film. He
took the camera from between his knees, where he had held it while he
used his one hand, and he leveled it like lightning, on the old
bear--and took her picture again. That picture won a prize, after we got
back to civilization. But the old bear kept coming.

We all were shouting, in vain,--shouting all kinds of things. 
_Ilfracombe_--a village on the west bank of the Tamar, 25 miles from
Launceston.

_Invermay_--a village near Launceston, on the road to George Town.

_Isis_--a beautiful river in Somerset, falling into the Macquarie, about
6 miles north of the village of Lincoln, which, with Auburn, stands on
its banks.

_Jericho_--a township and post station on the Jordan, in the parish
of Spring Hill and county of Monmouth, 43 miles from Hobart, and
78 from Launceston.

On the southern side is the district called Lovely Banks.

_Jerusalem_--a township in the parish of Ormaig and county of Monmouth,
28 miles from Hobart, near the source of the Coal River.

A police magistrate's court is held here once in a week, and there
is a post station.

An episcopalian clergyman is stationed at this place, and ministers of
other denominations occasionally officiate in the district.

_Jordan_--a river flowing from a lagoon near Oatlands, and falling into
the Derwent at Herdsman's Cove. It passes by Brighton.

_Kangaroo Point_--a village on the eastern side of the Derwent,
opposite Hobart.

A police magistrate's court is held there twice in a week, and there is a
post station, a chapel, and a school. After crossing the Derwent, the
road from Hobart to Richmond and Sorell begins at this place.

_Kelso Bay_--a small bay on the western side of the Tamar, opposite
George Town. There are several marine residences on its shores.

_King_--a small river rising near Mount Sorell, on the western side of
the island, and falling into Macquarie Harbor.

_Kingston_--a town at the entrance of Brown's River, about 10 miles south
of Hobart, and 130 from Launceston. It has an episcopal church and
school, and a post station.

_Lakes_--In the south-eastern part of the county of Westmoreland lay
several large lakes,--Great Lake, Crescent Lake, Arthur's Lake,
Lake Sorell, and Lake Echo.

The first has a circumference of about 90 miles; the others vary from
10 to 30 miles round. They are situated on high land, amidst magnificent
and picturesque scenery. They are frequented by innumerable quantities
of black swans, and game of every kind, and large flocks of kangaroos
and emus are found in their vicinity.

_Lake River_--a considerable stream which rises among the lakes in
the south-eastern part of Westmoreland, and joins the South Esk
at Longford.

_Launceston_--in the parish of Launceston and county of Cornwall, is
the second town of the colony, and is in lat. 41°. 24'. S., and lon.
147°.

10'. E. It stands at the confluence of the North and South Esk rivers,
which here discharge their waters into the Tamar. It is 121 miles
from Hobart, and 40 from the sea at Port Dalrymple. On the east and west
it is bounded by hills, and on the north stretches the valley of
the Tamar.
The town is well laid out, and viewed from the hills which overlook
it, or from the Tamar, it has a picturesque appearance. The wharves,
which afford accommodation to vessels of large tonnage, extend along the
river which forms the northern boundary. Farther up are numerous
spacious stores and other commercial buildings.

There are two large episcopalian churches, a handsome presbyterian church,
a Roman catholic church (all built in the Gothic style), a Wesleyan
chapel, two congregational chapels, a free church, a baptist
chapel, and a synagogue, all neat and commodious buildings.

The court house, the gaol, the house of correction, female factory,
and several other government establishments, are large and well-built.

Many of the shops, offices, inns, and private buildings are of
considerable size and respectable appearance.

On the hill which bounds the town on the eastern side, and commands
a splendid view of the town and river, are many private residences
and gardens.

There are four banks, four insurance offices, three printing establishments,
and two bi-weekly newspapers. The principal public offices are the
police office, the custom-house, the post office, and the port
office.

The population of the town is 10,855, the number of houses, 2,181; 798
of which are of stone or brick. There are an episcopal grammar school,
a Wesleyan day school, an infant school, three episcopal day schools,
a catholic school, seven Sunday schools, and numerous private schools.
The public institutions, besides the banks and insurance offices,
are a mechanics' institute and reading room, a library society,
several circulating libraries, two horticultural societies, a
benevolent society, auxiliary bible society, two masonic lodges,
odd fellows society, rechabite society, and a teetotal society.

There are 70 vessels belonging to the port, their collective tonnage being
8,564 tons. There is also a floating dock.

Richard Dry, Esq., the hon. the speaker of the Legislative Council, is
the first member for the electoral district of Launceston.

_Leipsic_--a township in Cornwall, at the St. Paul's River.

_Leven_--a river which rises near Mount Gipps in the county of Devon,
and falls into Bass' Strait, about 10 miles east of Emu Bay.

_Liffey_--a small stream in Westmoreland which falls into the Meander
or Western river, a short distance north of Carrick, which stands
on its banks.

_Lincoln_--a village in Somerset at the junction of the rivers Macquarie
and Isis, about 95 miles from Hobart, and 30 from Launceston.

It contains an inn and a few houses.

_Little Swan Port_--a boat harbor at Oyster Bay, on the eastern coast. A
stream of the same name falls into it.

_Llewellyn_--a small village in Somerset, on the road from Campbell Town
to the eastern coast, near the South Esk.

_Longford_--a town prettily situated at the junction of the rivers Lake
and South Esk, in the parish of Longford and county of Westmoreland,
115 miles from Hobart, and 14 from Launceston. The population of the
town and district is 3,829, and the number of houses 595, half of which
are of stone or brick. It has a resident police magistrate, (who is
also deputy chairman of quarter sessions and the court of requests,) a
postmaster, and other officers.

It contains a neat episcopal church, built in the Gothic style, several
schools, a Wesleyan chapel, a court house and gaol, several large
inns, a brewery, a mill, and many substantial buildings. Longford is
also an electoral district, for which Joseph Archer, Esq., is the first
member.

_Macquarie_--a river which rises in the northern part of the county
of Monmouth, and flowing through Somerset, by Ross and Lincoln, joins
the Lake after receiving the waters of the Elizabeth, Blackman's, and
Isis.

The district through which the Macquarie flows, is one of the finest in
the island, and on its banks are the residences of numerous settlers.
On the eastern bank, about five miles from Campbell Town, there is a
presbyterian church, having a resident minister.

There is also a post station.

_Macquarie Harbor_--a large bay on the western coast, into which
fall the rivers King and Gordon.

There was once a penal settlement here, but it has long been
abandoned.

The country along this part of the coast, and to a considerable
distance inland, has not yet been opened up, and is little known.

It is high, and in some places rocky and mountainous.
Pine of good quality is procured in the neighbourhood.

_Macquarie Plains_--a district in Cumberland, on the northern side of
the Derwent. It contains several sheep and agricultural farms, and the
village of Macquarie, 39 miles from Hobart, which contains a church
and post station.

_Maitland_--a township on the Isis.

_Maria Island_--(so named by Tasman), an island off the eastern
coast of the county of Pembroke, about 7 miles from the main land.

A narrow sandy isthmus connects the northern and southern parts of the
island, and has on its western side Oyster Bay, and on the eastern
Reidle Bay. The scenery is romantic and picturesque. The northern and
southern coasts are high and rocky. In the northern part there is a
remarkable mountain, 3,000 feet high, on the summit of which are two
rocks projecting one above the other, called the Bishop and Clerk.

The base is composed of petrified shells. Near here on a small stream is
the penal settlement of Darlington, at which are several government
buildings, the residences of a commandant, magistrate, religious instructors,
and other officers, and a post station.

_Marlborough_--a village in Cumberland, near the Ouse. The assistant
police magistrate of Hamilton holds a court here, and at the bridge on
the Ouse once in a week.

_Meander_--a small stream which rises in the western mountains, and,
passing Deloraine, falls into the South Esk at Hadspen. The Dairy, Quamby,
and Liffey rivulets fall into it.

_Mersey_--a considerable river in Westmoreland, which rises in the
western mountains, and falls into Bass' Strait, about 10 miles west
of Port Sorell.

Its mouth forms a small harbour, called Port Frederic.
There is a village called Frogmore at this place, where timber is cut and
exported. Coal has been found in the neighbourhood.

_Montague_--a small stream falling into Bass' Strait, in the north west
corner of the island.

_Morven_--a northern electoral district. It consists of agricultural farms,
and Evandale is the chief town.

The town and district contain 2,311 inhabitants, and 372 houses. James
Cox, Esq., is the first member for the district.

_Mountains_--The principal mountains are the western range in Westmoreland,
of which the highest point is Quamby's or Dry's Bluff, 4,590 feet above
the sea; a high rocky range in Cornwall, of which Ben Lomond and Ben
Nevis are the highest points, and the Eldon range. A range
extends along the western coast, and another farther inland, of
which the highest points are the Frenchman's Cap, 3,800 feet above
the sea; Mount Arrowsmith, east of the former, 4,075 feet high;
Mount Humboldt, 5,520 feet; Cradle Mountain, 4,700 feet.

St. Valentine's Peak, on the Van Diemen's Land Company's estate, is
4,000 feet high; Mount Wellington, near Hobart Town, 4,195 feet.

_Neville_--a township in the parish of Abergavenny and county of Cumberland,
on the Clyde.

_New Norfolk_--a town in the parish of New Norfolk and county of
Buckingham, on the Derwent and Lachlan rivulet, 21 miles from Hobart,
and 119 from Launceston.

It has a resident police magistrate and post master, and contains an
episcopal church (St. Matthew's) and school, a Wesleyan chapel, and
another place of worship, a police office, a government house, an asylum
for insane persons, and several inns. The population of the town and
district is 2,226, and the number of houses, 389.

The district contains several fine farms. Coaches run daily to New
Norfolk from Hobart, and communication between the two places is also
carried on by means of boats on the Derwent. New Norfolk is also an
electoral district, for which M. Fenton, Esq., is the first member.

_Newtown_--a town in the parish of Hobart and county of Buckingham, 2
miles north of Hobart, and 119 from Launceston.

It contains an episcopal church (St.

John's) and school, a handsome congregational chapel, the Queen's
orphan schools, two inns, a post station, and several handsome private
residences.

_Nile_--a small river which rises near Ben Lomond and falls into the South
Esk, about 10 miles south of Evandale.

_Nive_--a river which forms the western boundary of the county of
Cumberland, and falls into the Derwent.

_Norfolk Plains_--a fine district in the north-eastern part of Westmoreland,
between the rivers Lake, South Esk, and Liffey. It consists chiefly
of small agricultural farms, and contains the towns of Longford and
Carrick, and the villages of Bishopsbourne and Cressy.
Cressy is on the estate of the Van Diemen's Land Establishment, and has
a small episcopal church, a Wesleyan chapel, and an inn.

_North Esk_--a river which rises in the Ben Lomond range, in the
eastern part of the county of Cornwall, and falls into the Tamar
at Launceston.

The St. Patrick's river, a small stream, falls into it.

_Oatlands_--a considerable town in the parish of Oatlands and county
of Monmouth, 51 miles from Hobart, and 70 from Launceston. It contains
an episcopal (St. Matthew's) and Roman catholic church, a Wesleyan chapel,
several schools, a gaol, police and post offices, a military
station, several inns, and other large buildings.

It has a resident police magistrate, and courts of request and quarter
sessions are held in the town. The supreme court sits twice in a year.
The population of the town and police district is 1,873, and the
number of houses 279. Oatlands is also an electoral district, for which
H. F. Anstey, Esq., is the first member.

_Orielton_--a village in the parish of Sorell, and county of Pembroke,
on the eastern side of Pittwater Bay.

_Ouse_--a considerable river which rises in the western side of the county
of Westmoreland, and falls into the Derwent in the southern part
of Cumberland.

At the bridge on the upper part of the river, there is a village,
containing a church and school house, and a post and police station.
The assistant police magistrate of Hamilton holds a court here once
in a week.

_Oyster Bay_--a harbor on the eastern coast. The rivers Swan and
Little Swan Port and other streams fall into it. The road from Prossor's
to St.
Paul's Plains is along its western side, and on the eastern side
is Shouten's Island, where coal of good quality is procured.

The bay has several boat harbors. There are several farms on the western
side. There is a bay of the same name on the western side of Maria
Island.

_Patterson's Plains_--a district in Cornwall, lying south-west of
Launceston.

It is watered by the North Esk, on which are two flour mills, and
a bridge.

The district has a small episcopal church and school, and a Wesleyan
chapel.

_Pedder_--a lake and river on the western side of the island, named after
the Chief Justice.

_Perth_--a town on the northern bank of the South Esk, in the parish
of Perth and county of Cornwall, 110 miles from Hobart, and 11 from
Launceston.

It has an episcopal church and school, a Wesleyan chapel, three inns,
and a police and post station. The South Esk is crossed at this place
by one of the best stone bridges in the island.

_Picton_--a township in the parish of Dysart and county of Monmouth.

_Piper's_--a small river in Dorset, which falls into Bass' Strait,
near Stony Head.

_Plenty_--a small stream in Buckingham, falling into the Derwent above
New Norfolk.

_Port Arthur_--one of the penal settlements on Tasman's Peninsula.

_Port Dalrymple_--the entrance of the Tamar, so called by Captain
Flinders, in honor of the hydrographer to the admiralty.

_Port Davey_--a large harbor, lying on the south-western coast.

_Ramsgate_--a village on the shore of D'Entrecasteaux's channel, in
Kent.

_Richmond_--a town at the mouth of the Coal River, in the parish of Ulva
and county of Monmouth, 15 miles from Hobart, and 100 from
Launceston.

It contains an episcopal and a catholic church, a congregational chapel,
a police office, post station, a gaol, and court house, and several inns.
It has a resident police magistrate, and the population of the town and
district, which consists of farms, is 3,144, and the number of
houses 545, nearly half of which are of stone or brick.

The Coal River, which here falls into the bay of Pittwater, is crossed
at the town by an excellent stone bridge of six arches. Richmond is
an electoral district, for which T. G. Gregson, Esq., is the first
member.

_Risdon_--a village at Clarence Plains, nearly opposite Hobart. There is
a ferry at this place, which was the site of the first settlement
in the colony.

_Rochford_--a township in Cumberland.

_Ross_--a township on the Macquarie, in the parish of Ross and
county of Somerset, 73 miles from Hobart, 47 from Launceston, and
6 from Campbell Town.

It contains an episcopal church and school, a chapel, a police and post
station, and two inns. The police magistrate of Campbell Town holds
a court here once in a week.

There is a bridge across the Macquarie at this township. The district
is chiefly agricultural.

_Rugby_--a township on the Derwent, in the parish of Sutherland and county
of Buckingham.

_Shannon_--a river which rises at the Great Lake in Westmoreland, and
falls into the Ouse.

_Shepton Montacute_--a township in Monmouth.

_Sidmouth_--a village on the west bank of the Tamar, about 20 miles
from Launceston. There is a presbyterian church here, and a resident
minister.

_Sorell_--a town in the parish of Sorell and county of Pembroke,
23 miles from Hobart, and 144 from Launceston. It has an episcopal
church (St. George's) and school, a presbyterian church, a police
and post office, and other public buildings. There is a resident
police magistrate. The population of the town and district is 3,354,
and the number of houses 370. A small stream falls into the bay of
Pittwater, close to the town. The district is electoral; Askin
Morrison, Esq., is the first member.
_South Esk_--a considerable river which rises in the eastern part
of the county of Dorset, and after a circuitous course, in which
it passes the towns of Fingal, Avoca, Evandale, Perth, and Longford,
falls into the Tamar at Launceston. About half a mile from the place
where it joins the Tamar, the river forms a considerable basin,
surrounded by lofty hills, and having a water-fall at the upper
part. A few yards lower down, there is another cataract--one of the
most magnificent in the island--and the river continues its course
to the Tamar between two high and almost perpendicular hills. Along
one of these hills a wooden aqueduct is carried, which conveys water
to turn a mill and supply the town. The river is crossed here by a
ferry, which leads to the road down the western side of the Tamar.
The view up the Esk at this place is one of the most picturesque
in the colony.
_South Port_--a harbor on the western side of D'Entrecasteaux
Channel.

_Styx_--a branch of the river Derwent in Buckingham.
_Summerleas_--a township in the parish of Kingborough and county
of Buckingham.
_Swansea_--a township in Glamorgan on the western side of Oyster
Bay, 74 miles from Hobart, and 194 from Launceston. It has a police
and post station.
_Tamar_--a fine river in Cornwall, at the head of which stands the
town of Launceston.The burro
tracks were plain before us, in the trail that led down the valley. The
trail inclined off to the left, or to the south of west; but we
concluded to follow it because we could make better time and we believed
that the railroad lay in that direction. The Red Fox Scouts ought to be
taken as near to the railroad as possible, before we left them. They had
been mighty good to us.

The moon sank, soon the sun would be up; the birds were moving as well
as chirping, the east was brightening, and already the tip of Pilot
Peak, far away behind us with Kit and Jed sleeping at his base, was
touched with pink, when we came upon a camp.

Red Fox Scout Van Sant, who was leading, suddenly stopped short and
lifted his hand in warning. Before, in a bend of the stream that we were
skirting, among the pines and spruces beside it was a lean-to, with a
blackened fire, and two figures rolled in blankets; and back from the
stream a little way, across in an open grassy spot, was a burro. It had
been grazing, but now it was eying us with head and ears up. Red Fox
Scout Van had sighted the burro first and next, of course, the lean-to
camp.

We stood stock-still, surveying.

"Cache!" whispered Major Henry (which means "Hide"); and we stepped
softly aside into the brush. For that burro looked very much like Sally,
who had been taken from us by the two recruits when they had stolen
Apache also--and by the way that the figures were lying, under a
lean-to, they might be the renegade recruits themselves. It was a
hostile camp!

"What is it?" whispered Red Fox Scout Ward, his eyes sparkling. "Enemy?"

"I think so," murmured Major Henry.

"We can pass."

"Sure. But if that's our burro we ought to take her." And the major
explained.

The Red Foxes nodded.

"But if she isn't, then we don't want her. One of us ought to
reconnoiter." And the major hesitated. "Fitz, you go," he said. And this
rather surprised me, because naturally the major ought to have gone
himself, he being the leader. "I've got a side-ache, somehow," he added,
apologizing. "It isn't much--but it might interfere with my crawling."

Fitz was only too ready to do the stalking. He left his pack, and with a
détour began sneaking upon the lean-to. We watched, breathless. But the
figures never stirred. Fitz came out, opposite, and from bush to bush
and tree to tree he crept nearer and nearer, with little darts from
cover to cover; and at last very cautiously, on his hands and knees; and
finally wriggling on his belly like a snake.

'Twas fine stalking, and we were glad that the Red Fox Scouts were here
to see. But it seemed to us that Fitz was getting too near. However, the
figures did not move, and did not know--and now Fitz was almost upon
them. From behind a tree only a yard away from them he stretched his
neck and peered, for half a minute. Then he crawled backward, and
disappeared. Presently he was with us again.

"It's they, sir," he reported. "Bat and Walt. They're asleep. And that
is Sally, I'm certain. I know her by the white spot on her back."

"We must have her," said the major. "She's ours. We'll get her and pack
her, so we can travel better."

"Can we catch her, all right?" queried Red Fox Scout Van Sant. "We're
liable to wake those two fellows up, aren't we?"

"What if we do?" put in his partner, Scout Ward. "Three of us can guard
them, and the other two can chase the burro."

"No," said Major Henry. "I think we can rope her and be off before those
renegades know anything about it. Can you, Fitz?"

Fitz nodded, eager.

"Then take the rope, and go after her."

Fitz did. He was a boss roper, too. You wouldn't believe it, of a
one-armed boy, but it was so. All we Elk Scouts could throw a rope some.
A rope comes in pretty handy, at times. Most range horses have to be
caught in the corral with a rope, and knowing how to throw a rope will
pull a man out of a stream or out of a hole and will perhaps save his
life. But Fitz was our prize roper, because he had practiced harder than
any of us, to make up for having only one arm.

The way he did was to carry the coil on his stump, and the lash end in
his teeth; and when he had cast, quick as lightning he took the end
from between his teeth ready to haul on it.

Major Henry might have gone, himself, to get the credit and to show what
he could do; but he showed his sense by resigning in favor of Fitz.

So now at the command Fitz took the rope from him and shook it out and
re-coiled it nicely. Then, carrying it, he sneaked through the trees,
and crossed the creek, farther up, wading to his ankles, and advanced
upon Sally.

Sally divided her attention between him and us, and finally pricked her
ears at him alone. She knew what was being tried.

Coming out into the open space Fitz advanced slower and slower, step by
step. He had his rope ready--the coil was on his stump, and the lash end
was in his teeth, and the noose trailed by his side, from his good hand.
We glanced from him and Sally to the lean-to, and back again, for the
campers were sleeping peacefully. If only they would not wake and spoil
matters.

Sally held her head high, suspicious and interested. Fitz did not dare
to speak to her; he must trust that she would give him a chance at her
before she escaped into the trees where roping would be a great deal
harder.

We watched. My heart beat so that it hurt. Having that burro meant a lot
to us, for those packs were heavy--and it was a point of honor, too,
that we recapture our own. Here was our chance.

Fitz continued to trail his noose. He didn't swing it. Sally watched
him, and we watched them both. He was almost close enough, was Fitz, to
throw. A few steps more, and something would happen. But Sally concluded
not to wait. She tossed her head, and with a snort turned to trot away.
And suddenly Fitz, in a little run and a jerk, threw with all his might.

Straight and swift the noose sailed out, opening into an "O," and
dragging the rope like a tail behind it. Fitz had grabbed the lash end
from between his teeth, and was running forward, to make the cast cover
more ground. It was a beautiful noose and well aimed. Before it landed
we saw that it was going to land right. Just as it fell Sally trotted
square into it, and it dropped over her head. She stopped short and
cringed, but she was too late. Fitz had sprung back and had hauled hard.
It drew tight about her neck, and she was caught. She knew it, and she
stood still, with an inquiring gaze around. She knew better than to run
on the rope and risk being thrown or choked. Hurrah! We would have
cheered--but we didn't dare. We only shook hands all round and grinned;
and in a minute came Fitz, leading her to us. She was meek enough, but
she didn't seem particularly glad to see us. We patted Fitz on the back
and let him know that we appreciated him.

He had only the one throw, but that had been enough. It was like Van's
last cartridge.


CHAPTER XIX

MAJOR HENRY SAYS "OUCH"


The sun was just peeping above the Medicine Range that we had crossed,
when we led Sally away, back through the brush and around to strike the
trail beyond the lean-to camp. After we had gone about half a mile Major
Henry posted me as a rear-guard sentry, to watch the trail, and he and
the other Scouts continued on until it was safe to stop and pack the
burro.

The two renegade recruits did not appear. Probably they were still
sleeping, with the blankets over their faces to keep out the light! In
about half an hour I was signaled to come on, and when I joined the
party Sally had been packed with the squaw hitch and now we could travel
light again. I tell you, it was a big relief to get those loads
transferred to Sally. Even the Red Foxes were glad to be rid of theirs.

Things looked bright. We were over the range; we had this stroke of
luck, in running right upon Sally; the trail was fair; and the way
seemed open. It wouldn't be many hours now before the Red Fox Scouts
could branch off for the railroad, and get aboard a train so as to make
Salt Lake in time to connect with their party for the grand trip, and we
Elks had three days yet in which to deliver the message to the Mayor of
Green Valley.

For two or three hours we traveled as fast as we could, driving Sally
and stepping on her tracks so as to cover them. We felt so good over our
prospects--over being upon the open way and winning out at last--that we
struck up songs:

    "Oh, the Elk is our Medicine;
    He makes us very strong--"

for us; and:

    "Oh, the Red fox is our Medicine--"

for the Red Fox Scouts.

And we sang:

        "It's honor Flag and Country dear,
            and hold them in the van;
        It's keep your lungs and conscience clean,
            your body spick and span;
        It's 'shoulders squared,' and 'be prepared,'
            and always 'play the man':
          Shouting the Boy Scouts forev-er!
      Hurrah! Hurrah! For we're the B. S. A.!
      Hurrah! Hurrah! We're ready, night and day!
    You'll find us in the city street and on the open way!
          Shouting the Boy Scouts forev-er!"

But at the beginning of the second verse Major Henry suddenly quit and
sat down upon a log, where the trail wound through some timber. "I've
got to stop a minute, boys," he gasped. "Go ahead. I'll catch up with
you."

But of course we didn't. His face was white and wet, his lips were
pressed tight as he breathed hard through his nose, and he doubled
forward.

"What's the matter?"

"I seem to have a regular dickens of a stomach-ache," he grunted.
"Almost makes me sick."

That was serious, when Major Henry gave in this way. We remembered that
back on the trail when we had sighted Sally he had spoken of a
"side-ache" and had sent Fitzpatrick to do the reconnoitering; but he
had not spoken of it again and here we had been traveling fast with
never a whimper from him. We had supposed that his side-ache was done.
Instead, it had been getting worse.

"Maybe you'd better lie flat," suggested Red Fox Scout Ward. "Or try
lying on your side."

"I'll be all right in a minute," insisted the major.

"We can all move off the trail, and have breakfast," proposed Fitz.
"That will give him a chance to rest. We ought to have something to eat,
anyway."

So we moved back from the trail, around a bend of the creek. The major
could scarcely walk, he was so doubled over with cramps; Scout Ward and
I stayed by to help him. But there was not much that we could do, in
such a case. He leaned on us some, and that was all.

He tried lying on his side, while we unpacked Sally; and then we got him
upon a blanket, with a roll for a pillow. Red Fox Scout Van Sant hustled
to the creek with a cup, and fixed up a dose.

"Here," he said to the major, "swallow this."

"What is it?"

"Ginger. It ought to fix you out."

So it ought. The major swallowed it--and it was so hot it made the tears
come into his eyes. In a moment he thought that he did feel better, and
we were glad. We went ahead with breakfast, but he didn't eat anything,
which was wise. A crampy stomach won't digest food and then you are
worse.

We didn't hurry him, after breakfast. We knew that as soon as he could
travel, he would. But we found that his feeling better wasn't lasting.
Now that the burning of the ginger had worn off, he was as bad as ever.
We were mighty sorry for him, as he turned and twisted, trying to find
an easier position. A stomach-ache like that must have been is surely
hard to stand.

Fitz got busy. Fitzpatrick is pretty good at doctoring. He wants to be a
doctor, some day. And the Red Fox Scouts knew considerable about
first-aids and simple Scouts' remedies.

"What kind of an ache is it, Tom?" queried Fitz. We were too bothered to
call him "Major." "Sharp? Or steady?"

"It's a throbby ache. Keeps right at the job, though," grunted the
major.

"Where?"

"Here." And the major pointed to the pit of his stomach, below the
breast-bone. "It's a funny ache, too. I can't seem to strike any
position that it likes."

"It isn't sour and burning, is it?" asked Red Fox Scout Ward.

"Uh uh. It's a green-apple ache, or as if I'd swallowed a corner of a
brick."

We had to laugh. Still, that ache wasn't any laughing matter.

"Do you feel sick?"

"Just from the pain."

"We all ate the same, and we didn't drink out of that tin can, so it
can't be poison, and it doesn't sound like just indigestion," mused Fitz
to us. "Maybe we ought to give him an emetic. Shall we, Tom?"

"I don't think I need any emetic. There's nothing there," groaned the
major. "Maybe I've caught cold. I guess the cramps will quit. Wish I had
a hot-water bag or a hot brick."

"We'll heat water and lay a hot compress on. That will help," spoke Red
Fox Scout Van Sant. "Ought to have thought of it before."

"Wait a minute, boys," bade Fitz. "Lie still as long as you can, Tom,
while I feel you."

He unbuttoned the major's shirt (the major had taken off his belt and
loosened his waist-band, already) and began to explore about with his
fingers.

"The ache's up here," explained the major. "Up in the middle of my
stomach."

"But is it sore anywhere else?" asked Fitz, pressing about. "Say ouch."

The major said ouch.

"Sore right under there?" queried Fitz.

The major nodded.

We noted where Fitz was pressing with his fingers--and suddenly it
flashed across me what he was finding out. The _ache_ was in the pit of
the stomach, but the _sore spot_ was lower and down toward the right
hip.

Fitz experimented here and there, not pressing very hard; and he always
could make the major say ouch, for the one spot.

"I believe he's got appendicitis," announced Fitz, gazing up at us.

"It looks that way, sure," agreed Red Fox Scout Van Sant. "My brother
had appendicitis, and that's how they went to work on him."

"My father had it, is how I knew about it," explained Fitz.

"Aw, thunder!" grunted the major. "It's just a stomach-ache." He hated
to be fussed with. "I'll get over it. A hot-water bag is all I need."

"No, you don't," spoke Fitz, quickly--as Red Fox Scout Ward was stirring
the fire. "Hot water would be dangerous, and if it's appendicitis we
shan't take any risks. They use an ice-pack in appendicitis. We'll put
on cold water instead of hot, and I'm going to give him a good stiff
dose of Epsom salts. I'm afraid to give him anything else."

That sounded like sense, except that the cold water instead of the hot
was something new. And it was queer that if the major's appendix was
what caused the trouble the ache should be off in the middle of his
stomach. But Fitz was certain that he was right, and so we went ahead.
The treatment wasn't the kind to do any harm, even if we were wrong in
the theory. The Epsom salts would clean out most disturbances, and help
reduce any inflammation. (Note 64.)

The major was suffering badly. To help relieve him, we discussed which
was worse, tooth-ache or stomach-ache. The Red Foxes took the tooth-ache
side and we Elks the stomach-ache side; and we won, because the major
put in his grunts for the stomach-ache. We piled a wet pack of
handkerchiefs and gauze on his stomach, over the right lower angle,
where the appendix ought to be; and we changed it before it got warmed.
The water from the creek was icy cold. We kept at it, and after a while
the major was feeling much better.

And now he began to chafe because he was delaying the march. It was
almost noon. The two renegade recruits had not come along yet. They
might not come at all; they might be looking around for Sally, without
sense enough to read the sign. But the major was anxious to be pushing
on again.

"I don't think you ought to," objected Fitz.

"But I'm all right."

"You may not be, if you stir around much," said Red Fox Scout Ward.

"What do you want me to do? Lie here for the rest of my life?" The major
was cross.

"No; but you ought to be carried some place where you can have a doctor,
if it's appendicitis."

"I don't believe it is. It's just a sort of colic. I'm all right now, if
we go slowly."

"But don't you think that we'd better find some place where we can take
you?" asked Fitz.

"You fellows leave me, then, and go on. Somebody will come along, or
I'll follow slow. Those Red Foxes must get to their train, and you two
Elks must carry the message through on time."

"Not much!" exclaimed both the Red Foxes, indignant. "What kind of
Scouts do you think we are? You'll need more than two men, if there's
much carrying to be done. We stick."

"So do we," chimed in Fitz and I. "We'll get the message through, and
get you through, too."

The major flushed and stood up.

"If that's the way you talk," he snapped (he was the black-eyed, quick
kind, you know), "then I order that this march be resumed. Pack the
burro. I order it."

"You'd better ride."

"I'll walk."

Well, he was our leader. We should obey, as long as he seemed capable.
He was awfully stubborn, the major was, when he had his back up. But we
exchanged glances, and we must all have thought the same: that if he was
taken seriously again soon, and was laid out, we would try to persuade
him to let us manage for him. Fitz only said quietly:

"But if you have to quit, you'll quit, won't you, Tom? You won't keep
going, just to spite yourself. Real appendicitis can't be fooled with."

"I'll quit," he answered.

We packed Sally again, and started on. The major seemed to want to hike
at the regulation fast Scouts' pace, but we held him in the best that we
could. Anyway, after we had gone three or four miles, he was beginning
to pant and double over; his pain had come back.

"I think I'll have to rest a minute," he said; and he sat down. "Go
ahead. I'll catch up. You'd better take the message, Fitz. Here."

"No, sir," retorted Fitz. "If you think that we're going on and leave
you alone, sick, you're off your base. This is a serious matter, Tom. It
wouldn't be decent, and it wouldn't be Scout-like. The Red Foxes ought
to go--"

"But we won't," they interrupted--

"--and we'll get you to some place where you can be attended to. Then
we'll take the message, if you can't. There's plenty of time."

The major flushed and fidgeted, and fingered the package.

"Maybe I can ride, then," he offered. "We can cache more stuff and I'll
ride Sally." He grunted and twisted as the pain cut him. He looked
ghastly.

"He ought to lie quiet till we can take him some place and find a
doctor," said Red Fox Scout Van Sant, emphatically. "There must be a
ranch or a town around here."

"We'll ask this man coming," said Fitz.

The stream had met another, here, and so had the trail; and down the
left-hand trail was riding at a little cow-pony trot a horseman. He was
a cow-puncher. He wore leather chaps and spurs and calico shirt and
flapping-brimmed drab slouch hat. When he reached us he reined in and
halted. He was a middle-aged man, with freckles and sandy mustache.

"Howdy?" he said.

"Howdy?" we answered.

"Ain't seen any Big W cattle, back along the trail, have you?"

No, we hadn't--until suddenly I remembered.

"We saw some about ten days ago, on the other side of the Divide."

"Whereabouts?"

"On a mesa, northwest across the ridge from Dixon Park."

"Good eye," he grinned. "I heard some of our strays had got over into
that country, but I wasn't sure."

We weren't here to talk cattle, though; and Fitz spoke up:

"Where's the nearest ranch, or town?"

"The nearest town is Shenandoah. That's on the railroad about eight
miles yonder. Follow the right-hand trail and you'll come out on a
wagon-road that takes you to it. But there's a ranch three miles up the
valley by this other trail. Sick man?" The cow-puncher had good eyes,
too.

"Yes. We want a doctor."

"Ain't any doctor at Shenandoah. That's nothing but a station and a
store and a couple of houses. I expect the nearest doctor is the one at
the mines."

"Where's that?"

"Fifteen miles into the hills, from the ranch."

"How far is Green Valley?" asked the major, weakly.

"Twenty-three or four miles, by this trail I come along. Same trail you
take to the ranch. No doctor now at Green Valley, though. The one they
had went back East."

"Then you let the Red Fox Scouts take me to the station and put me on
the train for somewhere, and they can catch their own train; and you two
fellows go ahead to Green Valley," proposed the major to Fitz.

"Ain't another train either way till to-morrow morning," said the
cow-puncher. "They meet at Shenandoah, usually--when they ain't late. If
you need a doctor, quickest way would be to make the ranch and ride to
the mines and get him. What's the matter?"

"We don't know, for sure. Appendicitis, we think."

"Wouldn't monkey with it," advised the cow-puncher.

"Then the Red Foxes can hit for the railroad and Fitz and Jim and I'll
make the ranch," insisted the major.

"We won't," spoke up Red Fox Scout Ward, flatly.

"We'll go with you to the ranch. We'll see this thing through. The
railroad can wait."

"Well," said the cow-puncher, "you can't miss it. So long, and good
luck."

"So long," we answered. He rode on, and we looked at the major.

"I suppose we ought to get you there as quick as we can," said Fitz,
slowly. "Do you want to ride, or try walking again, or shall we carry
you?"

"I'm better now," declared our plucky corporal. He stood up. "I'll walk,
I guess. It isn't far."

So we set out, cautiously. No, it wasn't far--but it seemed _mighty_
far. The major would walk a couple of hundred yards, and then he must
rest. The pain doubled him right over. We took some of the stuff off
Sally, and lifted him on top, but he couldn't stand that, either, very
long. We tried a chair of our hands, but that didn't suit.

"I'll skip ahead and see if I can bring back a wagon, from the ranch,"
volunteered Red Fox Scout Van Sant; and away he ran. "You wait," he
called back, over his shoulder.

We waited, and kept a cold pack on the major.

In about an hour and a half Van came panting back.

"There isn't any wagon," he gasped. "Nobody at the ranch except two
women. Men folks have gone and taken the wagon with them."

That was hard. We skirmished about, and made a litter out of one of our
blankets and two pieces of driftwood that we fished from the creek; and
carrying the major, with Sally following, we struck the best pace that
we could down the trail. He was heavy, and we must stop often to rest
ourselves and him; and we changed the cold packs.

At evening we toiled at last into the ranch yard. It had not been three
miles: it had been a good long four miles.


CHAPTER XX

A FORTY-MILE RIDE


The ranch was only a small log shack, of two rooms, with corral and
sheds and hay-land around it; it wasn't much of a place, but we were
glad to get there. Smoke was rising from the stove-pipe chimney. As we
drew up, one of the women looked out of the kitchen door, and the other
stood in a shed with a milk-pail in her hand. The woman in the doorway
was the mother; the other was the daughter. They were regular ranch
women, hard workers and quick to be kind in an emergency. This was an
emergency, for Major Henry was about worn out.

"Fetch him right in here," called the mother; and the daughter came
hurrying.

We carried him into a sleeping room, and laid him upon the bed there. He
had been all grit, up till now; but he quit and let down and lay there
with eyes closed, panting.

"What is it?" they asked anxiously.

"He's sick. We think it's appendicitis."

"Oh, goodness!" they exclaimed. "What can we give him?"

"Nothing. Where can we get a doctor?"

"The mines is the nearest place, if he's there. That's twenty miles."

"But a man we met said it was fifteen."

"You can't follow that trail. It's been washed out. You'll have to take
the other trail, around by the head of Cooper Creek."

"Can we get a saddle-horse here?"

"There are two in the corral; but I don't know as you can catch 'em.
They're used to being roped."

"We'll rope them."

The major groaned. He couldn't help it.

"It's all right, old boy," soothed Fitz. "We'll have the doctor in a
jiffy."

"Don't bother about me," gasped the major, without opening his eyes. "Go
on through."

"You hush," we all retorted. "We'll do both: have you fixed up and get
through, too."

The major fidgeted and complained weakly.

"One of us had better be catching the horses, hadn't we?" suggested Red
Fox Scout Ward. "Van and I'll go for the doctor."

"No, you won't," said I. "I'll go. Fitz ought to stay. I know trails
pretty well."

"Then either Van or I'll go with you. Two would be better than one."

"I'm going," declared Van Sant. "You stay here with Fitz, Hal."

That was settled. We didn't delay to dispute over the matter. There was
work and duty for all.

"You be learning the trail, then," directed Fitz. "I'll be catching the
horses."

"You'll find a rope on one of the saddles in the shed," called the
daughter.

Fitz made for it; that was quicker than unpacking Sally and getting our
own rope. Scout Ward went along to help. We tried to ease the major.

"You should have something to eat," exclaimed the women.

We said "no"; but they bustled about, hurrying up their own supper,
which was under way when we arrived. While they bustled they fired
questions at us; who we were, and where we had come from, and where we
were going, and all.

The major seemed kind of light-headed. He groaned and wriggled and
mumbled. The message was on his mind, and the Red Fox Scouts, and the
fear that neither would get through in time. He kept trying to pass the
message on to us; so finally I took it.

"All right. I've got it, major," I told him. "We'll carry it on. We can
make Green Valley easy, from here. We'll start as soon as we can.
To-morrow's Sunday, anyway. You go to sleep."

That half-satisfied him.

We found that we couldn't eat much. We drank some milk, and stuffed down
some bread and butter; and by that time Fitz and Scout Ward had the
horses led out. We heard the hoofs, and in came Ward, to tell us.

"Horses are ready," he announced.

Out we went. No time was to be lost. They even had saddled them--Fitz
working with his one hand! So all we must do was to climb on. The women
had told us the trail, and they had given us an old heavy coat apiece.
Nights are cold, in the mountains.

"You know how, do you?" queried Fitz of me.

"Yes."

"That gray horse is the easiest," called one of the women, from the
door.

"Let Jim take it, then," spoke Van.

But I had got ahead of him by grabbing the bay.

"Jim is used to riding," explained Fitz.

"So am I," answered Van.

"Not these saddles, Van," put in Ward. "They're different. The stirrups
of the gray are longer, a little. They'll fit you better than they'll
fit Jim."

Van had to keep the gray. It didn't matter to me which horse I rode, and
it might to him from the East; so I was glad if the gray was the easier.

We were ready.

"We'll take care of Tom till you bring the doctor," said Fitz.

"We'll bring him."

"So long. Be Scouts."

"So long."

A quick grip of the hand from Fitz and Ward, and we were off, out of the
light from the opened door where stood the two women, watching, and into
the dimness of the light. Now for a forty-mile night ride, over a
strange trail--twenty miles to the mines and twenty miles back. We would
do our part and we knew that Fitz and Ward would do theirs in keeping
the major safe.

That appeared a long ride. Twenty miles is a big stretch, at night, and
when you are so anxious.

We were to follow on the main trail for half a mile until we came to a
bridge. But before crossing the bridge there was a gate on the right,
and a hay road through a field. After we had crossed the field we would
pass out by another gate, and would take a trail that led up on top of
the mesa. Then it was nineteen miles across the mesa, to the mines. The
mines would have a light. They were running night and day.

We did not say much, at first. We went at fast walk and little trots, so
as not to wind the horses in the very beginning. We didn't dash away,
headlong, as you sometimes read about, or see in pictures. I knew
better. Scouts must understand how to treat a horse, as well as how to
treat themselves, on the march.

This was a dark night, because it was cloudy. There were no stars, and
the moon had not come up yet. So we must trust to the horses to keep the
trail. By looking close we could barely see it, in spots. Of course, the
darkness was not a deep black darkness. Except in a storm, the night of
the open always is thinnish, so you can see after your eyes are used to
it.

I had the lead. Up on the mesa we struck into a trot. A lope is easier
to ride, but the trot is the natural gait of a horse, and he can keep up
a trot longer than he can a lope. Horses prefer trotting to galloping.

Trot, trot, trot, we went.

"How you coming?" I asked, to encourage Van.

"All right," he grunted. "These stirrups are too long, though. I can't
get any purchase."

"Doesn't your instep touch, when you stand up in them?"

"If I straighten out my legs. I'm riding on my toes. That's the way I
was taught. I like to have my knees crooked so I can grip with them.
Don't you, yours?"

"Just to change off to, as a rest. But cowboys and other people who ride
all day stick their feet through the stirrup to the heel, and ride on
their instep. A crooked leg gives a fellow a cramp in the knee, after a
while. Out here we ride straight up and down, so we are almost standing
in the stirrups all the time. That's the cowboy way, and it's about the
cavalry way, too. Those men know."

"How do you grip, then?"

"With the thigh. Try it. But when you're trotting you'd better stand in
the stirrups and you can lean forward on the horn, for a rest."

Van grunted. He was experimenting.

"Should think it would make your back ache," he said.

"What?"

"To ride with such long stirrups."

"Uh uh," I answered. "Not when you sit up and balance in the saddle and
hold your spine straight. It always makes my back ache to hunch over. We
Elk Scouts try to ride with heel and shoulders in line. We can ride all
day."

"Humph!" grunted Van. "Let's lope."

"All right."

So we did lope, a little way. Then we walked another little way, and
then I pushed into the same old trot. That was hard on Van, but it was
what would cover the ground and get us through quickest to the doctor.
So we must keep at it.

Sometimes I stood in the stirrups and leaned on the horn; sometimes I
sat square and "took it."

It would be useless even to examine the plan, which was based on a valuation
of crown lands at that time entirely erroneous, and a fallacious estimate
of mere labor, in any form whatever.

Late changes, effected by a more intelligent superintendence, and the
vigilant censorship of the public, may be readily confessed. The decrease
of numbers in the gangs, and the greatly improved resources of the
convict department, have ameliorated several evils which formerly
elicited great complaint.(Note 65.)

"Will we get through?" called Van, anxiously. "Think we're still on the
trail?"

"Sure," I answered.

Just then my horse snorted, and raised his head and snorted more, and
stood stock-still, trembling. I could feel that his ears were pricked.
He acted as if he was seeing something, in the trail.

"Gwan!" I said, digging him with my heels.

"What's the matter?" called Van.

His horse had stopped and was snorting.

"Don't know."

It was pitchy dark. I strained to see, but I couldn't. That is a creepy
thing, to have your horse act so, when you don't know why. Of course you
think bear and cougar. But we were not to be held up by any foolishness,
and I was not a bit afraid.

"Gwan!" I ordered again.

"Gwan!" repeated Van.

I heard a crackling in the brush, and my horse proceeded, sidling and
snorting past the spot. Van's gray followed, acting the same way. It
might have been a bear; we never knew.

On we went, winding through the black timber again. We were on the
trail, all right; for by looking at the tree-tops against the sky we
could just see them and could see that they were always opening out,
ahead. The trail on the ground was kind of reproduced on the sky.

It was a long way, through that dark gulch. But nothing hurt us and we
kept going.

The gulch widened; we rode through a park, and the horses turned sharply
and began to climb a hill--zigzagging back and forth. We couldn't see a
trail, and I got off and felt with my hands.

A trail was there.

We came out on top. Here it was lighter. The moon had risen, and some
light leaked through the clouds.

"Do you think we're on the right trail, still?" asked Van, dubiously.
"They didn't say anything about this other hill."

That was so. But they hadn't said anything about there being two trails,
either. They had said that when we struck the trail over the mesa, to
follow it to the mines.

"It must be the right trail," I said, back. "All we can do is to keep
following it."

Seemed to me that we had gone the twenty miles already. But of course we
hadn't.

"Maybe we've branched off, on to another trail," persisted Van. "The
horses turned, you remember. Maybe we ought to go back and find out."

"No, it's the right trail," I insisted, again. "There's only the one,
they said."

We must stick to that thought. We had been told by persons who knew. If
once we began to fuss and not believe, and experiment, then we both
would get muddled and we might lose ourselves completely. I remembered
what old Jerry the prospector once had said: "When you're on a trail,
and you've been told that it goes somewhere, keep it till you get there.
Nobody can describe a trail by inches."

We went on and on and on. It was down-hill and up-hill and across and
through; but we pegged along. Van was about discouraged; and it was a
horrible sensation, to suspect that after all we might have got upon a
wrong trail, and that we were not heading for the doctor but away from
him, while Fitz and Ward were doing their best to save Tom, thinking
that we would come back bringing the doctor.

We didn't talk much. Van was dubious, and I was afraid to discuss with
him, or I might be discouraged, too. CHAPTER I.

Sam Lambert had the best clothing store in Medeena County--a corner
store on the main street of Medeena opposite the Court House Square.

Medeena had four clothing stores, not counting The Blue Front, down
by the Depot, with its collection of cheap watches in the window,
a yellow guitar, two large accordions and a fiddle with a broken E
string.

Everybody in the County knew Sam Lambert.

As a merchant and a citizen he was a whole bunch of live wires.

A big-boned, free-hearted fellow--lucky enough to just escape being
run for sheriff, as some thought he was too good natured, the "gang"
was afraid he was not pliant enough, and Sam didn't want to be away
from the store.

Sam took great pride in his clothing business and kept pace with the most
advanced ideas in the trade.

He was awake to the marvelous development of the ready-to-wear
business.

He carried the best and took a positive delight in each season's new
models.

He recalled the old days of "hand-me-downs," and he had lived to
see the two best tailors in Medeena take to bushelling "ready"
garments, with less and less of that to be done--principally changing
a button or shortening a trouser's length.

Sam was broad-gauge in everything he did.

He sold his goods at the marked price, for cash only--got a decent
profit and told you so.

Why shouldn't he?

He had a sense of style.

He was keenly alive to the artistry of clothes and his enthusiasm
was contagious.

Sam was firmly convinced that a man has to spend money to make money
in the clothing business.

He said that a part of the value you deliver to a customer consists
in giving him a better opinion of himself: making him feel like a
king for a day and that the best is none too good for him.

"A store," he would tell the boys, "cannot be run on the low gear. You
must keep her keyed up.

Relax when the store is empty, but when you go to meet a customer
put on the tension--take a brace--get spring into your step--learn
to bunch your vitality and get it across.

But keep your energy inside.

"Don't bounce and don't talk too much.

Keep yourself in hand. Be quiet but alert.

"Concentrate!

For the time being there is but one person in the world and that
is the customer, and the most interesting thing in life is the thing
he came in to see.

Do you want to go back with me? I'll start right over. Expect
you're pretty tired."

"We'll go," we both exclaimed. We should say so! We wanted to be there,
on the spot.

"I'll just get my case, and saddle-up." And he disappeared.

He was a young doctor, smooth-faced; I guess he hadn't been out of
college very long; but he was prompt and ready. He came down in a moment
with a lantern, and put his case on the porch. He handed us a paper of
stuff.

"There's some lump sugar," he said. "Eat it. I always carry some about
with me, on long rides. It's fine for keeping up the strength."

He swung the lantern to get a look at us, then he went back toward the
stables, and saddled his horse. He was in the store a moment, too.

"I've got some cheese," he announced, when he came out again. "Cheese
and sugar don't sound good as a mixture, but they'll see us through. We
must keep our nerve, you know. All aboard?"

"All aboard," we answered.

That was another long ride, back; but it did not seem so long as the
ride in, because we knew that we were on the right trail. The doctor
talked and asked us all about our trip as Scouts, and told experiences
that he had had on trips, himself; and we tried to meet him at least
halfway. But all the time I was wondering about the major, and whether
we would reach him in time, and whether he would get well, and what was
happening now, there. But there was no use in saying this, or in asking
the doctor a lot of questions. He would know and he would do his best,
and so would we all.

Just at daylight we again entered the ranch yard. Fitz waved his one arm
from the ranch door. He came to meet us. His eyes were sticky and
swollen and his face pale and set, but he smiled just the same.

"Here's the doctor," we reported. "How is he?"

"Not so bad, as long as we keep the cold compress on. He's slept."

"Good," said the doctor. "We'll fix him up now, all right."

He swung off, with his case, and Fitz took him right in. Van and I sort
of tumbled off, and stumbled along after. Those forty miles at trot and
fast walk had put a crimp in our legs. But I tell you, we were thankful
that we had done it!

And here was our second Sunday.


CHAPTER XXI

THE LAST DASH


That young doctor was fine. He took things right into his own hands, and
Major Henry said all right. The major was weak but game. He was gamer
than any of us. Fitz and Red Fox Scout Ward had slept some by turns, and
the two women were ready to help, too; but the doctor gave Red Fox Scout
Van Sant and me the choice of going to sleep or going fishing.

It was Sunday and we didn't need the fish. We didn't intend to go to
sleep; we just let them show us a place, in the bunk-house, and we lay
down, for a minute. For we were ready to help, as well as the rest of
them. A Scout must not be afraid of blood or wounds. We only lay down
with a blanket over us, instead of going fishing--and when I opened my
eyes again the sun was bright and Fitz and Ward were peeking in on us.

They were pale, but they looked happy.

Van and I tried to sit up.

"Is it over with?" we asked.

"Sure."

"Did he take it out? Was that what was the matter?"

"Yes. Want to see it?"

No, we didn't. I didn't, anyway.

"How is he? Can we see him?"

"The doctor says he'll be all right. Maybe you can see him. He's out
from under. It's one o'clock."

One o'clock! Phew! We were regular deserters--but we hadn't intended to
be.

We tumbled out, now, and hurried to wash and fix up, so that we would
look good to the major. Sick people are finicky. The daughter was in the
kitchen, but the mother and the doctor were eating. There was a funny
sweetish smell, still; smell of chloroform. It is a serious smell, too.

The doctor smiled at us. "I ought to have taken yours out, while you
were asleep," he joked. "I've been thinking of it."

"Is he all right?" we asked; Fitz and Ward behind us, ready to hear
again.

"Bully, so far."

"Indeed he is," added the mother.

"Can we see him?"

"You can stand on the threshold and say one word: 'Hello.'"

We tiptoed through. The bed was clean and white, with a sheet outside
instead of the colored spread; and the major was in it. The Elks' flag
was spread out, draped over the dresser, where he could see it. His eyes
opened at us. He didn't look so very terrible, and he tried to grin.

"How?" he said.

"Hello," said we; and we gave him the Scouts' sign.

"Didn't even make me sick," he croaked. "But I can't get up. Don't you
fellows wait. You go ahead."

"We will," we said, to soothe him. Then we gave him the Scouts' sign
again, and the silence sign, and the wolf sign (for bravery) (Note
66), and we drew back. The doctor had told us that we could say one
word, and we had been made to say three!

We had seen that the major was alive and up and coming (not really up;
only going to be, you know); but this was another anxious day, I tell
you! Having an appendix cut out is no light matter, ever--and besides,
here was the fourteenth day on the trail! The major would not be able to
stir for a week and a half, maybe; yet Green Valley, our goal, was only
twenty-one miles away!

"It's all a question of the nursing that he has now, boys," said the
doctor, in council with us. "I'm going to trust that to you Scouts;
these women have all they can do, anyway. We got the appendix out just
in time--but if it hadn't been for your first-aid treatment in the
beginning we might have been too late. That old appendix was swollen
and ready to burst if given half a chance. His pure Scout's blood and
his Scout's vitality will pull him through O. K. That's what he gets,
from living right, following out Scouts' rules. But he must have
attention night and day according to hygiene. We don't want any microbes
monkeying with that wound I made."

"No, you bet," we said.

"I'll leave you complete directions and then I'm going back to the
mines; but I'll ride over again to-morrow morning. Can't you keep him
from fussing about that message?"

"We'll try," we said.

"If you can't, then one of you can jump on a horse and take it over, so
as to satisfy him. You can make the round trip in five hours."

Well, we were pledged not to do _that_; horse or other help was
forbidden. But we did not say so. What was the use? And it didn't seem
now as though either Fitz or I could stand it to leave the major even
for five hours. The Red Fox Scouts of course must skip on, to the
railroad, or they'd miss their big Yellowstone trip, and we two Elks
would be on night and day duty, with the major. The doctor said that he
would be out of danger in five days. By that time the message would be
long overdue. It was too bad. We had tried so hard.

The doctor left us written directions, until he should come back; and
he rode off for the mines.

Fitz and I took over the nursing, and let the two women go on about
their ranch work. They were mighty nice to us, and we didn't mean to
bother them any more than was absolutely necessary. The two Red Foxes
stayed a while longer. They said that they would light out early in the
morning, if the major had a good night, in time to catch the train all
right. But they didn't; we might have smelled a mouse, if we hadn't been
so anxious about the major. They were good as gold, those two Red Foxes.

You see, the major kept fussing. He was worried over the failure of the
message. He had it on his mind all the time. To-morrow was the fifteenth
day--and here we were, laid up because of him. We told him no matter; we
all had done our Scouts' best, and no fellows could have done more. But
we would stick by him. That was our Scouts' duty, now.

He kept fussing. When we took his temperature, as the doctor had
ordered, it had gone up two degrees. That was bad. We could not find any
other special symptoms. His cut didn't hurt him, and he had not a thing
to complain of--except that we wouldn't carry the message through in
time.

"You'll have to do it," said Red Fox Scout Van Sant to Fitz and me.

"But we can't."

"Why not?"

That was a silly question for a Scout to ask.

"We can't leave Tom."

"Yes, you can. Hal and I are here."

"You've got to make that train, right away."

"No, we haven't."

"But you'll miss the Yellowstone trip!"

"We can take it later."

When asked by the judge what prevented the men from going further if
they pleased? he replied, nothing, provided they returned at a certain
hour.'

His honor shook his head in silence."

--_Examiner_, 1846.

"During the trial of John Burdett in the supreme court, on the 2nd instant,
for robbery, the prosecutor, an old man between 60 and 70, swore that
he had been robbed (his property taken) seven times since last
Christmas; that his bed, rug, and blanket had been taken from his
hut; that he lived a mile and a-half from Oyster Cove probation
station; that he was reduced to such straits that he now depends
on his neighbours for a little bread to eat; that the superintendent's
lady had given him a rug and a blanket, but he had nothing but straw
to sleep upon.

There is only an open four-rail fence outside the station to confine
the prisoners after they are let out of their sleeping cells.

Mr. Justice Montagu commented, with indignation, upon the total want of
restraint upon the probationers, and of protection to the poor settlers
in the neighbourhood of the station; and expressed, in feeling terms,
his sympathy for the prosecutor's distress and losses, and kindly declared
that, if the old man would prepare a petition, and forward it to
him, he would take care that the clerk of the court should give the
jurors an opportunity to join in it, and would use his best endeavours
with his excellency the lieutenant-governor, who, he was sure, would
feel happiness in extending compensation, if it were in his power.

In passing sentence of transportation for fifteen years (the lightest
which the law permits in cases of robbery), his honor protested
that, considering the position of the prisoner, placed in a probation
station but having no restraint laid upon him to prevent from going
in quest of luxuries and comforts, he would be fain to pass a lighter
sentence.

He felt the inefficiency of the sentence that he was about to pronounce,
but he had no alternative. Accordingly he passed the mitigated sentence
of fifteen years transportation".--_Courier, September_, 1846.]
[Footnote 273: Despatch to Earl Grey, 1847.]

SECTION XXV.

The notices of the treatment of female prisoners in this work have been
few.

Until recently, the attention of the English government has been almost
entirely confined to the management of male convicts; and the
impression has been always too general, that the unhappy women are
beyond recovery.

In the local discussion of the convict question the deliberate opinion
of Captain Forster has been usually adopted, by all who have seen
the conduct of the women.

"I have not," said that distinguished officer, "entered upon the
topic of discipline for female convicts, not considering them
available subjects for prison discipline." (1837) Colonial experience,
before and since, would hardly authorise any other conclusion.

The first female transports were left to the casualties of a convict
colony.

Some, who were adopted by the officers, became the mothers of
respectable families: some wholly emerged from their degradation,
and became respectable wives; but, for the most part, they merely
exhibited the depth to which vice can depress.

Nearly 20,000 have been transported; of these, a considerable proportion
have fallen victims to intemperance, and sunk into a premature
grave.

The description of the conduct of female prisoners is so uniform,
that any date and any account might be joined at random.

Those who read the works of Collins, of Read, of Henderson, and of Lang,
and compare them with each other, and with works of the present
time, will find little variety of incident.

They represent woman deprived of the graces of her own sex, and more than
invested with the vices of man.

The transportation of women has been a great social evil to the colonies.
At first it seemed unavoidable: it was afterwards deemed highly expedient,
for reasons it is not necessary to describe.

Yet it is not too much to attribute the chief vexations of domestic
life to their character and conduct.

It would have been better for the nation, for the male convicts, and
for the women themselves, had they been detained at home, or banished
to countries where they would have avoided the double degradation of
moral and social infamy.[274] Such were the views of many most
enlightened men. The extreme difficulty of finding them employment
as servants, and their perpetual relapses, have induced the
government usually to encourage, at first concubinage, and, in more
scrupulous times--marriage: in some instances with great success.

It is the last expedient in the administration of penal laws; when
it fails, the case is considered hopeless.

The number of females transported, until within twelve years, were
about 1 to 10 men; since then, they have been about 1 to 7.

The penalty has been inflicted for the lighter crimes; and in many instances
the Irish courts must have been influenced rather by a vague notion
of humanity than of punishing offenders.

Such are often young creatures: not a few could be scarcely considered
depraved.

The accumulation on the hands of the government has been usually very
great, and curious expedients have been devised to dispose of the
burden.

The factory at Parramatta, in former times, was a mart of women.
Thither the laboring man went in search of a wife, and often, after a
general survey, selected one on the spot.

These marriages were not always a failure, but far the greater
number ended in intemperance and prostitution.

To overcome the reluctance of the settlers to employ them, Sir
George Murray, when secretary for the colonies, directed the governor
to compel the settlers to receive one woman with three or four men
(1829).

The effect of this stipulation was probably never considered. The condition
of the better disposed has been one of great hazard and temptation.

The last state of female degradation was often their inevitable lot.

They were surrendered to solicitations and even violence: a convict
constable conducted them to the houses of their master; they lodged
on the road, wherever they could obtain shelter; convict servants
were usually their companions,--or when their manners were superior
to their class, corrupters of a higher rank were always at hand to
betray or destroy them.

Reformation has been commonly deemed unattainable, and precautions
useless.

The influence of such persons on the tone of society, the temper of masters,
the morals of children, and even the conduct of the convict men, has
proved everywhere disastrous, unless checked by incessant vigilance.
Smoking, drinking, swearing, and prostitution, have very commonly
formed the character ever present to the tender mind.

The stranger entered perhaps a splendid dwelling, and found all the
advantages of opulence, except what money could not procure--a comely and
honest-hearted woman servant. The eye at length became more familiar
with lineaments bloated or rigid with passion and debauch, and the ear
accustomed to the endless vicissitudes of the servants' hall, which
discharged and received an endless succession of the same debased,
despised, and unhappily despicable beings.

The writer has not forgotten, for a moment, that under the protection
of a virtuous mistress, some unfortunate but not depraved females
have escaped the terrible ordeal, and have found in the land of
their exile the comforts of a home.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 274: Letter from Chief Justice Forbes, 1836.]

SECTION XXVI.

Lord Stanley devoted commendable and humane attention to the
management of female prisoners.

They were comprehended in his scheme of probation.

He resolved to establish a penitentiary, on a large scale, within
twenty miles of Hobart Town.

The women were to be carefully classified and separated, and trained
for the duties of domestic life.

The discipline intended rather to restore than to punish: those
remitted in disgrace to the government, were not to re-enter this
place of reform.

Instructions were forwarded to prepare the ground and collect the
material (1843); but the local officers were averse to the plan.

They complained that the contemplated site was remote and inconvenient,
and they succeeded in postponing and finally defeating the project.

Mrs. Bowden, a lady of majestic presence and enlightened mind, who had
acquired considerable experience in the management of the insane,
was appointed matron.

Her fertility of resource, courage, and zeal, had been greatly
admired at Hanwell, where many hundreds of the unfortunate were
relieved from the greatest of human calamities.

The reputation of this lady recommended her to the confidence of
government:[275] with her husband, Dr.

Bowden, the medical officer, and a chosen staff of assistants--several
only inferior to herself--she arrived in this colony with high
expectations of success.

As a temporary expedient, the _Anson_, a ship of war, was appropriated
to the project.

The decorum of the ship, and the healthy and cleanly appearance of
the women, were striking to a stranger; but the early lack of
employment ruined the enterprise.

The government, with its usual negligence, failed in details, and
thus failed altogether.

Towards the close of the experiment, the making of clothing for the
prisoners was more successfully attempted; but the local authorities
were always hostile to the institution.

It was protected by Lord Stanley and Mr. Gladstone, but Earl Grey
consented to its extinction. The results were certainly not encouraging.
The women, discharged from the ship ignorant of the colony, were at
once thrown into every temptation of convict associations. They
had been instructed in the principles of religion, reading and
needlework, and the fruit of these labors will hereafter perhaps,
appear; but whoever expects much from mere dogmatic knowledge, will
be doomed to disappointment.

On the death of her husband Mrs. Bowden returned to England, convinced
that moral insanity is far more hopeless than the diseases of Hanwell.
This lady and her friends and coadjutors, the Misses Holdich, found
the women generally submissive and docile:
they were haunted with all kinds of terrors, and had less than the
ordinary courage of women.

Mere children in understanding; some, such only in years; but their actual
reformation, for the most part, only remained an object of confident
expectation, while their true tendencies were repressed. The lady
officers, who expected to reap a harvest in this field of mercy, began
by blaming the colonists for scepticism, and after 3,000 women had passed
through their hands, they, alas! ended in becoming sceptical.

A great number of these prisoners are married. During the probation
system, the local government of the colony became far less scrupulous in
reference to their character, previous engagements, and means of
living.

As a choice of evils this course was the least; but many of these
marriages were a disguise for licentiousness, and of a very temporary
character.

The freed man united to a convict woman could not be detained in the
colony; indeed, he was often compelled to leave it, and his wife
was not permitted to accompany him.

From this cause alone, infinite vice and misery has arisen; and a
total disregard of ties so modified by a police regulation; which,
while encouraging women to marry, subjects them to lasting
desertion.

Before the introduction of Lord Stanley's probation system, several pious
ladies established a committee of visitation.

They entered the factories and cells, and conversed with the female
prisoners. Official teachers superseded these efforts of private benevolence;
and lessons, however excellent in themselves, lost the attraction
of spontaneous sympathy and disinterested toil.

It is with deep regret these observations are recorded. It is not intended
to assume that the reform of female prisoners is impossible. A
considerable minority are probably not inferior to the lower classes
of poor and uneducated women in the cities, or more uncivilised
provinces.
Re-convictions are not numerous; though, of course, many are deeply
implicated with colonial crime.

The law which consigns all to one penal fate, devotes all to one common
ruin.

Were it possible to escape the contamination of a gaol, what could be
hoped, where the male population is contributed chiefly by prisons?

What can be done to obviate these evils?

Such is the enquiry of the philanthropist: would to God it could
be successfully answered.'

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 275: _Report of Hanwell Institutions_, 1842.]

SECTION XXVII.

Whatever details are omitted from the foregoing pages, nothing has
been withheld necessary to complete a colonial view of transportation.
Errors may doubtless be detected; but as they have not resulted
from carelessness or haste, it is hoped they will be found both
unimportant and rare.

The views expressed by various parties on the subject of transportation
are modified, or even wholly suggested by their interests.

The English peer rejoices that sixteen thousand miles of ocean divide
him from the "wretch" who entered on his preserves, or dragged his
rivers, and is at rest; the citizen is glad that one burglar less lives
in his neighbourhood, and considers that transportation is indispensible
to the safety of plate. The colonist farmer regards convictism as a
labor power; the working emigrant as a rival labor market; while
the officers in charge naturally cloak its evils and exalt its
efficacy.

It is nearly impossible for a stranger to estimate the weight of
testimony, so prejudiced throughout, and nearly as impossible for
a writer, interested in the issue of its discussion, to preserve
the unclouded judgment required to arrive at truth.

But little reliance can be placed on official statistics: they give
imperfect views of moral or industrial results. They have often been
compiled by government for specific purposes, or by agents unworthy of
confidence.

It may be proper to point out the chief difficulties which beset this
branch of penal jurisprudence. Some of these have been long noticed
by authorities on political philosophy. From Paley, to the latest
speculators on transportation, all have noticed its inequality.

They have dwelt on the uncertainty of its details--from the differing
habits and original condition of those subject to its infliction;
and from the absence of supervision, only to be expected where those
who direct the sentence secure its observance.

The convict is condemned to a penalty which may subject him to predial
slavery, to capricious punishments; to brutal taskmasters, and to
the antipathies of a caste; or he may be regarded with compassion,
good-will, and even preference: the sting of the law may be taken
away, and what was a penalty may constitute a brotherhood.

Thus it happens that no uniform description is a true one.

What may correctly delineate the aspect of transportation on one
class, may be false in reference to another; what may be facts one
year, may be an exaggeration in the year following.

This inequality has been partly the result of the law. The relation
of the convict to the free has been constantly changing.

He was a bond servant; he was permitted to compound his servitude
by a daily payment; he was allowed to work partly for himself and
partly for the crown, at the same moment.

He has been restrained in government gangs; he has lodged in barracks,
and worn the coarsest dress, or he has lived in his own hired house.

Sometimes treated as a public enemy, chained, flogged, and over-worked;
at others, petted as a favorite or soothed like a child.

The public policy has depended on causes which have had little
relation to the individual character of convicts.

A mild or severe governor, or secretary of state; a great increase or
decrease of numbers; the book of some literary idler, or of an
angry colonist; instances of extraordinary good fortune, or an
insurrection against tyranny; the fluctuations of feeling at home,
sometimes wrath against crime, sometimes compassion for the criminal.

Such are the causes, traced in the incessant agitation of penal
transportation.

Two incompatible objects have been always professedly embraced--intimidation
and reform; but while they have both animated the scheme, they have
struggled for the ascendancy, and the one or the other has seemed
to be the chief, if not sole, motive of government.

The Australian seal expressed the design of mercy: it was to oxen
ploughing--to bales of merchandise, and the various attributes of industry,
that Hope pointed the landing convict, when she broke off his bonds.
Fifty years after, Lord Stanley deemed many years spent in chains, a
just punishment for crimes against property, or others of no deep
dye.

The changes of systems have been usually based on facts and opinions,
elicited during those paroxysms of reform which occur generally
once in ten years.
He it was who
fairly broke the famous Oregon and California emigrant trail across the
Rocky Mountains by hauling a six-pounder cannon, on wheels, to his fort
in Utah; his men were the first to explore the Great Salt Lake; he was
the first brigadier-general of the Missouri State militia, and after his
fur days he went to Congress.

Major Andrew Henry was General Ashley's partner in fur. But before
joining with Ashley, in 1810 he had built, in Idaho, the first American
trading post or fort west of the mountains.

Kit Carson was a real "boy scout," for he took the scout trail in 1826,
when he was only sixteen. Because of his modesty, his bravery, his
shrewdness, and his kindliness, his help to army and other Government
expeditions, and his advice in Indian matters, he is the best-known of
all Western frontiersmen.

Thomas Fitzpatrick the Bad Hand was an Ashley trapper, and was a captain
of trappers. He afterwards served as a valuable guide for emigrants and
the Government, and was a Government agent over Indians. He was called
by the Indians "Bad Hand," because one hand had been crippled through a
rifle explosion. He was called "White Head," too, because in a terrible
chase by Indians his hair turned white.

Jedediah S. Smith is known as the Knight in Buckskin. He also was an
Ashley scout or trapper, and he was the first American trapper to lead a
party across to California. Jedediah Smith was a true Christian, and
during all his wanderings the Bible was his best companion.

Jim Bridger was another Ashley scout. He became a scout when he was
nineteen, before Kit Carson, and is almost as well known as Kit Carson.
He was the Ashley man who discovered the Great Salt Lake, in 1825; he
was the first to tell about the Yellowstone Park; and it was by his
trail that the Union Pacific Railroad found its way over the Rocky
Mountains.

Note 2, page 4: Boy Scouts know that "taking a message to Garcia" means
"there and back and no breath wasted." When the war with Spain broke
out, in 1898, Captain Andrew Summers Rowan, of the United States Army,
was directed by the President to convey a message from the Government to
General Garcia of the Cuban Army. Nobody seemed to know the exact
whereabouts of General Garcia, who was concealed in the depths of the
island. But Captain Rowan did not wait to ask "when" or "how." Not he.
He pocketed the message, he made for Cuba, he plunged into the jungle,
he found General Garcia, and he brought back the desired report. That
was genuine Scouts' work, without frills or foolishness.

Note 3, page 5: Two pairs of thin socks are better for the feet than one
pair of thick socks. They rub on each other, and this saves the skin
from rubbing on the inside of the boot. Soldiers sometimes soap the
heels and soles of their stockings, on the inside.

Note 4, page 6: The "tarp" or tarpaulin, or cowboy bed-sheet, is a strip
of sixteen- or eighteen-ounce canvas duck six to eight feet wide and ten
to twenty feet long. Fifteen feet is long for Boy Scouts. But it should
be plenty wide enough to tuck in well and not draw open when _humped_ by
the body, and plenty long enough to cover, with room for the feet, and
plenty heavy enough to shed wind and water. It is used on the outside,
under and over; and in between, in his blankets, the Scout is snug. The
tarp is simple and cheap and is easily accommodated to circumstances. If
a few brass eyes are run along the edges, and in the corners, then it
can be stretched for a shelter-tent, too. It is much used on the plains
and in the mountains.

Note 5, page 6: The diamond hitch is the favorite tie by which packs and
other loads are fastened upon burros and horses. It has been used from
very early days in the West, and is called the "diamond" hitch because
when taut the rope forms a diamond on top of the pack. There are several
styles of the diamond hitch, but they all are classified as the single
or the double diamond. Some require only one person to tie them; some
require two persons. They bind the load very flat, they may be loosened
or tightened quickly from the free end of the lash rope, and they do not
stick or jam. Nobody has time to fuss with hard knots, when the pack
must come off in a hurry.

The simplest form of the diamond hitch is tied as shown here. Scouts may
practice it with a cushion laid upon a porch rail, a cord for a lash
rope, a strip of cloth for the band or cincha, and a bent nail for the
cincha hook.

The Elk Scouts had under their top-packs a "sawbuck" pack-saddle, which
is a pair of wooden X's; and to the horns of the X's they hung on each
side a canvas case or pannier, in which were stowed cooking utensils,
etc. The blankets, etc., were folded and laid on top, with the
tarpaulins covering, and the whole was then "laired up" (which is the
army and packing term for tucking and squaring and making all
shipshape), so that it would ride securely. The panniers must balance
each other, even if rocks have to be put in on one side to even up; or
else the burro's back will be made sore. Top-packs must not ride wobbly
or aslant.

A splendid little book for Boy Scouts is the pamphlet "Pack
Transportation," issued by the Quartermaster's Department of the United
States Army, and for sale at a small price by the Government Printing
Office, Washington. It tells about all the pack hitches, with pictures,
and how to care for the animals on the march. This latter is very
important.

Before Number 3 is formed, the cinch or cincha (the belly-band) must be
drawn very tight, so that the double-twist which makes the loop in
Number 3 will stick. But the rope and cincha are apt to slip and loosen,
unless the Scout takes a jam-hitch or Blackwall hitch around the hook of
the cincha. The rope should be kept taut throughout; and at the last
should be heaved tauter still, so that the diamond bites into the pack
well; and the end of the rope should be doubled back and tucked under so
that it will not drag, and yet can be easily got at.

[Illustration: THE SIMPLEST SINGLE DIAMOND]

The lash rope, or pack-rope, in the Army is one-half inch in size and is
fifty feet long; but a forty-foot rope is plenty long enough for Scouts.
A lair rope also is useful in packing. This is a three-eighths inch
rope, twenty-five or thirty feet long, by which the packs may first be
laired or tied up securely so that nothing shall shake out.

A pack for a burro may weigh from 200 to 250 pounds; but on a long,
rough trip 150 pounds is better. A pack is harder on a mule or a horse
than a rider is, because it never lets up.

Note 6, page 6: The Indian bow was only two and one-half to four feet
long, so that it could be carried easily when stalking or when on
horseback. The Sioux bow, four feet long, was an inch and a half wide at
the middle and an inch thick, and tapered to half an inch thick and half
an inch wide, at the ends. The Indian bow was made of wood, and of
mountain-goat horns, or of solid bones, glued together. The wooden bow
frequently was strengthened by having hide or sinew glued along the
back. Until they learned the knack of it, few white men could bend an
Indian bow.

The arrows were of different lengths, but each warrior used the one
length, if he could, so that he would shoot alike, every time. Each
warrior knew his own arrows, by a private mark--by length or by pattern
of stem or of feathers. Some tribes used two feathers, some three.
Scouts can mark their arrows, in the same way.

The bow and arrow are good Scout weapons. They give no noise. They do
not frighten animals or warn the enemy. They are not expensive. They can
be made on the spot. And it takes Scoutcraft to make them and to use
them successfully. As long as the Indians had only bows and arrows,
there was plenty of game for all.

Note 7, page 6: The lariat rope, or simply "rope," in the West, is
thirty-five or forty feet long. Usually it is five-eighths, four-ply
manilla, but the best are of braided rawhide. Those bought at stores
have a metal knot or honda through which the slipnoose runs; but cowboys
and Boy Scouts do not need this. They tie their own honda, which should
be a small fixed loop with space enough for the rope to pass freely. The
inside of the loop, against which the rope slips back and forth, may be
wrapped with leather. In throwing the rope, the noose or slipknot should
be opened to four or five feet in diameter, and the free part of the
rope outside the noose should be grasped together with the noose for
about one third along the noose from the honda knot. The remainder of
the rope is held in a coil in the other hand, ready to release when the
noose is cast. The noose (with the part of the free rope) is whirled in
thumb and fingers around the head, until it has a good start; and then
it is jerked straight forward by the wrist and forearm. As it sails, the
honda knot swings to the front and acts as a weight to open the noose
wide. That is why part of the rope is taken up, with the noose, and the
noose is grasped one third along from the knot itself.

The rope, or lariat, or lasso, is a handy implement for the Scout. The
Western Indians and the old-time scouts or trappers used it a great
deal, for catching animals and even enemies; and when the United States
fought with Mexico, in 1846, some of the Mexican cavalry were armed with
lassos.

Note 8, page 7: Anybody on the march always feels better and can travel
better when he keeps himself as clean and as neat as possible. Each pair
of Scouts in a Patrol should share a war-bag, which is a canvas sack
about four feet long, with a round bottom and with a top puckered by a
rope. This war-bag is for personal stuff, so that there is no need to
paw around in the general baggage, and no chance of losing things.

Note 9, page 7: Coffee is popular, but tea is better, in the long run,
and Scouts should not neglect it on the trail. It is lighter than
coffee, is more quickly made, and is a food, a strength-giver, and a
thirst-quencher in one. All explorers favor it.

Note 10, page 7: Scout Troops would do well to have an official
physician who will make out a list of remedies to be used in camp or on
the march. When Scouts know how to clean out the stomach and the
intestines and how to reduce fever and to subdue chills, and what to
give in case of poisoning, then they can prevent many illnesses and
perhaps save life. The remedies should be in shape to be easily carried,
and should be simple to handle.

Note 11, page 7: The Indian walk and the old scout walk was the
straight-foot walk, because it covers the ground with the least
resistance. When the foot is turned so that it is pushed sideways, there
is waste motion. The toes should push backward, not quartering, to get
the most out of the leg muscles. George Catlin, the famous Indian
painter, who lived among the Indians of the West before any of us were
born, says that he could not walk in moccasins until he walked
straight-foot. The Indians turned their toes in a little.

Note 12, page 10: All the Indian tribes of the Western plains and
mountains, and most of the old-time scouts, knew sign language. This was
a language by means of motions of the hands, helped by the body and
face; so that persons could sit and talk together for hours and not
utter a word! In time of danger, when silence is desired, Scouts of
to-day will find the sign language valuable; and by it the Scout of one
country can talk with the Scout of a foreign country.

A book on the "Indian Sign Language" was written in 1884 by Captain W.
P. Clark of the United States Army, and it gives all the signs for
things from A to Z.

Fitzpatrick's sign for "Watch!" was to bring his right hand with back
up, in front of lower part of the face, the first two fingers extended
and separated a little and pointing down the trail. The thumb and other
fingers are closed. The tips of the two fingers represent the two eyes
looking! When he meant "Listen!" he put his hand, palm front, to his
ear, with thumb and first finger open, so that the ear set in the angle
of them; and he wriggled his hands slowly.

Jim Bridger's sign for "Horseback!" was two fingers of one hand placed
astride the edge of the other hand, and the sign for "Wolf!" is the hand
(or both hands) with palm to the front, before the shoulder, and the
first two fingers pricked up, separated like two ears. Then the hand was
moved forward and upward, just a little, like a wolf reconnoitering over
a crest.

Occasionally the sign for something was not precisely the same among all
the Indian tribes. The Pawnee sign for "wolf" was the first finger of
each hand stuck up alongside the head, like ears pricking. But it was a
sign easily read. All the signs were sensible and initiative. When the
"future" was meant, the finger was thrust ahead with a screwing motion,
as if boring; when the "past" was meant, the hand and finger were
extended in front and drawn back with the screwing motion. When he was
full of food the Indian drew his thumb and finger along his body from
his stomach to his throat. When he was hungry he drew the edge of his
hand back and forth across his stomach, as sign that he was being cut in
two. The sign "talk" is to draw the words out of the mouth with thumb
and finger; while to "stop talking" is the same motion half made and
then slashed by the edge of the same hand being brought down through it.
This means "All right," "That's enough," "I understand," and also "Cut
it out!" "Chop it off!"

Years were reckoned as winters, and "winter" is signed by the two
clenched hands shivering in front of the body. Days were "sleeps," and
"sleep" is signed by inclining the head sideways, to rest upon the palm
of the hand. "Man" is the first finger thrust upright, before, because
man walks erect. The "question" sign is the right hand bent up, before,
at the wrist, fingers apart, and turned from side to side. To ask "How
old are you?" the Indian would sign: "You," "winter," "number," "what?"

So Scouts will not find it hard to pick up the sign language; the
motions represent the thing itself. When a sign requires several
motions, a good sign talker will make them all as rapidly as we
pronounce syllables, and he will tell a long story using one hand or
two, as most convenient.


CHAPTER II

Note 13, page 11: The sign for "Bird flying" is the sign for wings. The
two hands are raised opposite the shoulders, palms to the front, fingers
extended and together. Then the hands are waved forward and back, like
wings--slowly for large birds, fast for little birds, to imitate the
bird itself.

Note 14, page 13: A good way to spread the Scout or cowboy tarpaulin bed
is to lay the tarpaulin out at full length, on the smooth place chosen,
and to lay the blankets and quilts, open, full length on top. Both ends
of the tarp are left bare, of course, for the bedding is shorter than
the tarp. Then the whole is turned back upon itself at the middle; one
edge of the tarp is tucked under, and part of the other edge, making a
bag, with leeway enough so that the sleeper can crawl in. Now there is
as much bedding under as over, which is the proper condition when
sleeping out upon the ground. The bare end of the tarp, under, will keep
the pillow off the dirt; the bare end which comes over will cover the
face in case of storm. The Scout has a low, flat bed, which will shed
wind and rain.

Note 15, page 13: A reflector is a handy baker. It is a bright-lined box
like half of a pyramid or half of an oven. The dough is put into it, and
it is set upon its base, open to the fire. The heat strikes it and
reflects upon the dough and the dough bakes. It is simple, and can be
made to fold together, so that it packs easily. Another trapper and
scout method is to smear dough upon a shovel or even a flat, smooth
board, and set it up against the fire. The Mexicans bake their
tortillas, or thin flour cakes, by smearing them upon smooth stones.

Note 16, page 17: Scouts can readily invent a whistle code of their own.
The Western Indians used whistles of bone, in war, and the United States
Army can drill by whistle signals.


CHAPTER III

Note 17, page 21: The teeth are a very important item in Scout service.
If Scouts will notice the soldiers of the United States Army, and the
sailors of the United States Navy, they will notice also that their
teeth are always kept clean and sound. Scouts, no matter where they are,
should brush their teeth well with tooth powder every morning at least;
and should keep them free from particles of food, and should wash their
mouths with a dental antiseptic to kill microbes. Brushed teeth and
combed and brushed hair after the wet rub make the Scout fit for the
day's work. He feels decent.

Note 18, page 25: Scouts who are in camp or on the trail without
fish-hooks and are hard-put to catch fish, may try an old Indian and
scout method. A bent pin sometimes does not work, with large fish; but
the Indians tied a cord or sinew to the end of a small, slender bone,
and again, with a loop, to the middle of the bone.

When the fish swallowed the bait impaled upon the bone, the cord or
sinew hauled the bone by the middle so that it usually snagged in the
fish's throat or gills. A sharp, tough splinter or a small nail will do
the same. Thus:

[Illustration]


CHAPTER IV

Note 19, page 33: Newspaper stuffed into wet boots or shoes helps them
to dry by holding them open and by absorbing the moisture. Of course,
the newspaper should be changed frequently. Warm pebbles poured into wet
boots or shoes dry them quickly, too. A stuffing of dead grass is
another Scouty scheme.

Note 20, page 36: For a leader of a Scouts' party to write up the chief
events of each day's march in a notebook, and to sketch the country
traversed, teaches order and disciplines the memory, and oftentimes will
prove a valuable record.

Note 21, page 38: The right-handed or the left-handed person usually is
right-sided or left-sided, all the way down, but not always. So because
a person is right-handed or left-handed he _probably_ is right-footed or
left-footed, but not _necessarily_ so. Some persons use their left hands
to write with, but throw with their right hands, and are likely to use
either foot. And some may be left-handed but right-footed. A Scout
should learn to use both hands and both feet alike. And he also will
learn not to be cocksure and jump at conclusions. All rules have
exceptions.


CHAPTER V

Note 22, page 39: Scouts will find that weather-signs among the high
mountains are very different from those of the low or the flatter
country. The easiest sign of storm is the night-caps. For when in the
morning the mountains still have their night-caps on, and the clouds
rest like shattered fog in the draws and hollows, the day will surely
have rain, by noon. But among the Rockies there usually is a
thunder-storm in the middle of every day during the summer.

No one wind for all localities brings rain. The weather is interfered
with by the peaks and the valleys. However, here are a few signs to be
noted:

When by day the air is extra clear, so that very distant ridges stand
out sharply, a storm is apt to be brewing.

When the camp-fire smoke bends down, in the still air of midday or
afternoon, a storm is apt to be brewing.

When by night the stars are extra sharp and twinkle less than usual,
overhead, but are dim around the horizon, a storm is apt to be brewing.

When there is a halo or ring around the moon, a storm is apt to be
brewing; and it is claimed that the larger the circle, the nearer the
storm.

When the canvas of the tent stays tight or damp, showing a gathering
dampness, a storm is apt to be brewing.

When ants are noted dragging leaves or twigs across the entrance to
their nest, a storm is near.

The change of the moon is claimed to change the weather also. And an old
maxim says that the third day before the new moon is the sign of the
weather for that moon month. If the new moon comes upon the 10th, then
the weather of the 8th is to be the general weather of the next thirty
days.

Of course, in winter time, or in the late fall or early spring, when the
sun-dogs appear, that is a pretty sure sign of cold weather. The Indians
say that the "sun is painting both cheeks," or that the "sun has built
fires to warm himself."

But Scouts will have difficulty in predicting mountain weather, because
storms are diverted by the peaks, and swing off or are broken up; and
besides, many mountain trails and mountain camps are one mile and two
miles high--above ordinary conditions. The saying is that only fools and
Indians predict weather, in the mountains!

Note 23, page 39: Scouts as well as anybody else should have their teeth
approved of by a dentist, before starting out on the long trail. The
tooth-ache saps the strength, and a cavity might result in a serious
abscess, far from proper treatment.

Note 24, page 40: In the thick timber where there are many trees the
chance of course is less that the tree which you are under will be
struck by the lightning. But to seek refuge under any tree, in a field
or other open place, is dangerous. Many persons are killed, every
summer, by seeking some lone tree or small clump of trees, or a
high-standing tree, in a thunder-storm.

Note 25, page 47: The low soft spot is not so good as the high hard
spot, to sleep on. Green grass is damp, and softness gathers dampness.
Cowboys and rangers always spread their beds on a little elevation,
where the ground is drier and where there is a breeze for ventilation
and to keep the insects away.

Note 26, page 49: Nobody can cook by a big fire, without cooking himself
too! The smaller the fire the better, as long as it is enough. Just a
handful of twigs at a time will cook coffee or roast a chunk of meat. It
is an old scout saying that "Little wood feeds the fire, much wood puts
it out." Cook by coals rather than by flame. In the West cedar makes the
best coals, the cleanest flame; sage makes a very hot fire, and burns to
ashes which hold the fire, but it does not give hard coals. Anything
pitchy smokes the camp.

In the mountains meat wrapped in a gunnysack or a tarpaulin, to protect
from the flies, and hung in the shade and particularly in a tree where
the air circulates, will keep a long, long time.

Note 27, page 49: The brass eyes in the edges of the Elk Scouts' tarps
here would come into good use for stretching the tarp as a low "A"
shelter-tent or dog-tent. The small shelter-tents of the United States
Army are called by the soldiers "pup" tents.

Note 28, page 53: The notion that many persons have, of taking guns with
them into the mountains or the hills, for protection from wild animals,
is a foolish notion. In this day and age the wild animals have been so
disciplined by man that they are afraid of him. They would rather run
than fight; and throughout the greater part of the United States in
North America the animals who _could_ be dangerous are scarce. Guns do
much more harm than the animals themselves; and it is the wounded animal
which _is_ dangerous. To pack a big gun on the ordinary trail through
the wilderness country West or East is the mark of a tenderfoot, unless
the gun is needed for meat. Many and many a seasoned wilderness
dweller--ranger, cowboy, rancher, prospector--travels afoot or horseback
day after day, night after night, and never carries a gun, never needs a
gun.


CHAPTER VI

Note 29, page 61: One of the regulations of the United States Army Pack
Transportation Department says that packers must treat all the mules
kindly, for a mule remembers kindness and never forgets injury. Packers
must not even throw stones, to drive a mule into line. Of course, Boy
Scouts know that kindness with animals always wins out over harshness,
and that there is no greater cowardliness than the abuse of a helpless
beast.

Note 30, page 62: Highness and dryness, wood and water, and grazing for
the animals are the requirements of the Scouts' camp on the pack trail.

Note 31, page 63: By camp law bird or four-foot or other harmless
animals within say two hundred yards of camp is safe from injury by man.
This also prevents reckless shooting about camp. The wild life near camp
is one of the chief charms of camping in the wilderness. No Scout wishes
to leave a trail of blood and murder and suffering, to mark his progress
through meadow and timber.

Note 32, page 67: This division of watches or guards should be noted by
Scouts. Bed-mates or bunkies should not follow one another on guard; for
A wakes B when he crawls out; and after he has changed with B, and has
slept two or three hours, he is waked again by B crawling in. But each
Scout listed for guard duty should so be listed that he is not disturbed
through at least two of the watches.


CHAPTER VII

Note 33, page 72: A "trail" is made up of "sign" or marks which show
that something has passed that way. The overturning of pebbles and
sticks, dryness and wetness of the spots where they were, dryness and
hardness of the edges of footprints, grass pressed down, twigs of bushes
broken, dew disturbed, water muddied, ant-hills crushed--all tell a tale
to the Scout. He must be able to figure out what was the condition of
the trail when the person or animal passed--and that will tell him how
long ago the marks or sign were made. And the shape of the sign, and the
way in which it is laid, tell what manner of person or animal passed,
and how fast. Steps vary in size, and in pressure and in distance apart.
A man at a very hurried walk is apt to leave a deeper toe-print, and a
loaded horse sinks deeper than a light one. A good trailer is a good
guesser, but he is a good guesser because he puts two and two together
and knows that they make four.

Note 34, page 74: A portion of a patrol on a scout should think to leave
private signs, by marks in the dirt or on trees or by twigs bent or by
little heaps of stones, which will tell their comrades what has been
occurring. This the Indians were accustomed to do, especially in a
strange country. To this day little stone-heaps are seen, in the plains
and mountains of the West, marking where Indians had laid a trail.

Note 35, page 77: Great generals and captains make it a point not to do
what the enemy wants them to do or expects them to do, and never to
think that the enemy is less smart than they are themselves. To despise
the enemy is to give him an advantage.


CHAPTER VIII

Note 36, page 88: "Parole" means word of honor not to attempt escape;
and in war when a prisoner of rank gives this promise he is permitted
his freedom within certain limits. Sometimes he is released entirely
upon his promise or parole not to fight again during the war. Paroles
are deemed serious matters, and few men are so reckless and deceitful as
to break them. But of course there are two sides to a parole; and if it
is not accepted as honestly as it is given, then there is no bargain.
But if there is the slightest doubt or argument, then the Scout ought to
stay a prisoner, rather than escape with dishonor, charged with breaking
his word. That the other fellow is dishonest is no excuse for the Scout
being dishonest, too.

Note 37, page 89: The sign for escape is this: Bridger crossed his
wrists, with his fists doubled, and wrenched them apart, upward, as if
breaking a cord binding them. At length their lips parted, when, in a
low, solemn voice, that thrilled through the dark, deserted, and silent
hall, they poured forth alternately the following vaticinal strain,
each starting and trembling as he concluded:--
"From Bank, Change, Mansion-house, Guildhall, Throgmorton, and
Threadneedle, From London-stone, and London wall, When City housewife's
wheedle To Brunswick, Russell, Bedford Squares, And Portland-place,
their spouses, Anxious to give themselves great airs Of fashion in
great houses, Then Gog shall start, and Magog shall Tremble upon
his pedestal."

"When merchant, banker, broker, shake In Crockford's club their elbow,
And for St. James's clock forsake The chiming of thy bell, Bow:
When Batson's, Garraway's, and John's, At night show empty boxes, While
cits are playing dice with dons, Or ogling opera doxies; Then Gog
shall start, and Magog shall Tremble upon his pedestal."
"When city dames give routs and reels, And ape high-titled prancers,
When City misses dance quadrilles, Or waltz with whisker'd Lancers;
When City gold is quickly spent In trinkets, feasts, and raiment,
And none suspend their merriment Until they all stop payment, Then
Gog shall start, and Magog shall Tremble upon his pedestal."

I was reflecting what dire calamities would fall upon the doomed
City, since the era of luxury, corruption, and desertion, thus
denounced, had now manifestly arrived, and Gog and Magog were
actually starting and trembling upon their pedestals, when the
hall-keeper, shaking me by the shoulder, exclaimed--"Come, Sir, you
musn't be sleeping here all night!

Bundle out, if you please, for I am just going to shut the great gates!"--_New
Monthly Mag._
* * * * *

THE GATHERER.

A snapper up of unconsidered trifles.--SHAKSPEARE.

MODERN SALAMANDER.

An experiment to ascertain the degree of heat it is possible for a
man to bear, was made a few days ago at the New Tivoli, at Paris, in the
presence of a company of about 200 persons. The man on whom this
experiment was made is a Spaniard of Andalusia, named Martenez, aged
43.
A cylindrical oven, constructed in the shape of a dome, had been
heated for four hours, by a very powerful fire.

At ten minutes past eight, the Spaniard, having on large pantaloons of
red flannel, a thick cloak also of flannel, and a large felt, after the
fashion of straw hats, went into the oven, where he remained, seated
on a foot-stool, during fourteen minutes, exposed to a heat of from
45 to 50 degrees, of a metallic thermometer, the gradation of which did
not go higher than 50.
But there is the chance that he will
not come out where he expects to come out, and that he will be in a
worse fix than before. When a course is once decided upon, the Scout
should follow it through, taking it as easy as possible.

Note 40, page 106: Old-time scouts had to make all their fires by flint
and steel; and it is well for modern Scouts to practice this. When the
ground is too wet, and would be apt to put out the little blaze, the
fire can be started in a frying-pan. Matches are very convenient, but
they must be warded from dampness. They can be carried in a corked
bottle; they can be dipped, before leaving home, in melted paraffin,
which will coat them water-proof; and dampness can be rubbed out of them
by friction by rolling them rapidly between the palms of the hands and
scratching them quick. When every object is soaked through, matches (if
dry) may be lighted upon a stone which has been rubbed violently against
another stone.

If the Scout has a rifle or pistol or gun, then he can make a fire by
shooting powder into a bunch of tinder--raveled handkerchief or coat
lining, or frazzled cedar bark. The bullet or the shot should be drawn
out of the cartridge, and the powder made loose, and the tinder should
be fastened so that it will not be blown away.

In the rain a blanket or coat or hat should be held over the little
blaze, until the flames are strong.

It was the old-time scouts who taught even the Indians to make fire by
flint and steel, or by two flints. Two chunks of granite, especially
when iron is contained, will answer. The Indians previously had used
fire-sticks and were very careful to save coals. But they saw that
"knocking fire out of rocks" was much easier.

Note 41, page 108: Scouts of course know the Big Dipper or the Great
Bear, and the Little Dipper or the Little Bear, in the sky. The Big
Dipper points to the North Star or Pole Star, and the North Star or
Pole Star is the star in the end of the handle of the Little Dipper.
These two formations up above are the Clock of the Heavens.

The "Guardians of the Pole" are the two stars which make the bottom of
the cup of the Big Dipper. They are supposed to be sentinels marching
around and around the tent of the North Star, as they are carried along
by the Big Dipper. For the stars of the Big and the Little Dipper, like
all the other stars, circuit the North Star once in about every
twenty-four hours.

But the old-time scouts of plains and mountains told time by the
"Pointers," which are the two bright stars forming the end of the cup of
the Big Dipper. These point to the Pole Star, and they move just as the
"Guardians of the Pole" move. They are easier to watch than the
"Guardians of the Pole," and are more like an hour-hand. With every hour
they, and the "Guardians of the Pole," and all the Dipper stars move in
the same direction as the sun one and one-half the distance between the
stars forming the top of the Big Dipper's cup. The Scout with a good
memory and a good eye for distance can guess pretty nearly how time
passes.

He has another method, too. The circuit of the stars is not quite the
same as the circuit of the sun; for the stars swing about from
starting-place to starting-place in about four minutes less than
twenty-four hours, so that every month they gain 120 minutes, or two
hours. On May 1, at nine in the evening, the "Pointers" of the Big
Dipper are straight overhead, and point downward at the Pole Star, and
if we could see them twelve hours later, or at nine in the morning, we
should find them opposite, below the Pole Star, and pointing up at it.
On June 1, they would arrive overhead two hours earlier, or at seven in
the evening, and by nine o'clock would be west of overhead, while at
seven and nine in the morning they would be opposite, or halfway around.
Suppose he only wants a pair of 15c. socks; if he does, there is a test
of your ability that you may not realize.

"Many a clerk who can close a Twenty dollar transaction with tact and
dispatch never seems able to handle a Ten cent sale so that the
customer goes out feeling pleased with himself.

"Nine men out of ten who come into the store are self-conscious.

The thing to do is to make your man feel that his requirement is important
simply because it is his requirement.

"A good salesman keeps his own personality in the background: he
keeps the store and the sale in the background. He puts all the
emphasis on service to the customer, and to do this he must mentally
put himself in the customer's place.The Blackfeet Indians call the Big Dipper the Seven Brothers, and they,
and also other plains people such as sheep-herders and cowboys, tell the
time by the "Last Brother," which is the star in the end of the handle.
"The Last Brother is pointing to the east," or "The Last Brother is
pointing downwards to the prairie," say the Indians. And by that they
mean the hour is so and so.

Note 42, page 109: The "Papoose on the old Squaw's Back" is a tiny star,
Alcor, very close to the star Mizar which forms the bend in the handle
of the Big Dipper. To see this tiny star is a test for eyesight. The
Sioux Indians say that the Big Dipper is four warriors carrying a
funeral bier, followed by a train of mourners. The second star in the
train (or the star in the bend) is the widow of the slain brave, with
her little child, or the Little Sister, weeping beside her!

The Blackfeet and other Indians say that the Pole Star (which does not
move) is a hole in the sky, through which streams the light from the
magical country beyond. They call it "the star that stands still."

By the "Lost Children" Jim Bridger meant the Pleiades. These stars,
forming a cluster or nebula, sink below the western horizon in the
spring and do not appear in the sky again until autumn; and the
following is the reason why. They were once six children in a Blackfeet
camp. The Blackfeet hunters had killed many buffalo, and among them some
buffalo calves. The little yellow hides of the buffalo calves were given
to the children of the camp to play with, but six of the children were
poor and did not get any. The other children made much fun of the six,
and plagued them so that they drove them out of the camp. After
wandering ashamed and afraid on the prairie, the six finally were taken
up into the sky. So they are not seen in the spring and summer, when the
buffalo calves are yellow; but in the autumn and winter, when the
buffalo calves are black, they come out.

Nearly everybody can see the six stars of the Pleiades, and good
eyesight can make out seven. By turning the head and gazing sideways the
seven are made plainer. An English girl has eyesight so remarkable that
she has counted twelve.

The Western Indians have had names for many of the stars and the planets
and the constellations, and the night sky has been of much company and
use to them and to the old plainsmen and mountaineers, just as it was to
Jim Bridger at this time.

Mars is "Big-Fire-Star"; Jupiter is "Morning Star," or when evening star
is "The Lance"; Venus is "Day Star," because sometimes it is so bright
that it can be seen in the day. Scouts should know by the almanac what
is the morning star, and then when it rises over the camp or the trail
they are told that morning is at hand.

Note 43, page 110: Sunday comes to the trail, to the mountains and
plains and field and forest, just as often as to the town and the farm.
The Scout will feel much better, mentally and physically, when he
observes Sunday. This one day in the seven can be made different by a
change from the ordinary routine: by a good cleaning up; by only a short
march, just enough for exercise; by a whole day in camp, if possible; by
an avoidance of harm to bird or beast; by some _especial_ arrangement,
which will say, "This is Sunday." The real Jedediah Smith, fur-hunter
and explorer, found as much profit in his Bible as in his rifle, amidst
the wilderness; and the Scout of to-day should include the Bible in the
outfit. It reads well out in the great open, it is full of nature lore
of sky and water and earth, and it is a great comforter and sweetener of
trail and camp.


CHAPTER X

Note 44, page 112: The smoke signal has been in use for many, many
years. The Indians of the West used it much, and whenever an army
detachment or other strangers traversed the plains and the hills their
course was marked by the smoke signals of Indian scouts. To make smoke
signals, first a moderate blaze is started; then damp or green stuff is
piled on, for a smudge; and the column of smoke is cut into puffs by a
blanket or coat held over like a cup and suddenly jerked off. A high
place should be selected for the smoke signal, so as to distinguish it
from the ordinary camp-fire, which is not as a rule made on a high
place,--that is, in hostile country. A still day is necessary for
accurate smoke signaling. This signaling is being recommended for the
United States Forestry Service, so that Rangers and Guards can
telegraph warnings and news by the Morse or the Army and Navy alphabet.
A short puff would be the dot, a long puff the dash; or one short puff
would be "1," two short puffs close together "2," and a long puff "3."
This Army and Navy code is explained under Note 48.

The Indians had secret codes, for the smoke signals; and used dense
smokes and thin smokes, both. Green pine and spruce and fire boughs
raise a thick black smoke.

In army scouting on the plains the following signals were customary:

"Wish to communicate." Three smokes side by side.

"Enemy discovered." Two puffs, repeated at fifteen-minute intervals. Boy
Scouts need not have the intervals so long. One minute is enough, for a
standard.

"Many enemy discovered." Three puffs, at intervals.

"Come to council," or "Join forces." Four puffs, repeated.

"March to the north." Two smokes, of two puffs each.

"March to the south." Two smokes, of three puffs each.

"March to the east." Three smokes, of two puffs each.

"March to the west." Three smokes, of three puffs each.

Plainsmen and woodsmen understand the following signals also:

"Camp is here." One smoke, one puff at intervals.

"Help. I am lost." Two fires, occasional single puffs.

"Good news." Three steady smokes.

Scouts' patrols can invent their own code of smokes, by number of
smokes, by puffs, and by intervals between puffs. Of course, the single
fire is much more easily managed by one person.

Note 45, page 116: The Red Fox Scouts probably carried with them a
liquid carbolic and antiseptic soap, which comes put up in small
bottles with patent shaker stoppers. A few drops of this in some water
makes a splendid wash for wounds, and is harmless. Druggists and
surgical supply stores can furnish Scouts with this soap. Being
non-poisonous, good for a gargle as well as for external use, it is
superior to many other antiseptic washes. A spool of surgeons' adhesive
tape, say three-quarter inch wide, a roll of sterilized absorbent
cotton, and a roll of sterilized gauze will of course be included in the
Scouts' first-aid kit.


EARL BRITTON, _University of Michigan_ 
_ADVISORY EDITORS_ 
EMMETT L.

AVERY, _State College of Washington_ BENJAMIN BOYCE, _University of
Nebraska_ LOUIS I. BREDVOLD, _University of Michigan_ CLEANTH BROOKS,
Yale University JAMES L. CLIFFORD, _Columbia University_ ARTHUR FRIEDMAN,
_University of Chicago_ SAMUEL H. MONK, _University of Minnesota_
ERNEST MOSSNER, _University of Texas_ JAMES SUTHERLAND, _Queen Mary
College, London_

Lithoprinted from copy supplied by author by Edwards Brothers,
Inc.
Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A.
1948

_INTRODUCTION_

The two tracts reprinted here, as well as Swift's _Proposal for
correcting, improving and ascertaining the English tongue_, which
occasioned them, may be viewed in the context of the many seventeenth-
and eighteenth-century suggestions for the formation of a British
Academy.

They are in part a result of the founding of the French Academy in
1635, although the feeling in England that language needed regulating
to prevent its corruption and decline was not purely derivative.

By the close of the seventeenth century an informed Englishman might
have been familiar with a series of native proposals, ranging from those
of Carew of Antony and Edmund Bolton early in the century to that of
Defoe at the close. Among the familiar figures who urged the advantages
of an Academy were Evelyn, the Earl of Roscommon, and Dryden. Of these
Dryden was particularly vocal; but Evelyn's suggestion, associated
as it was with the Royal Society, was rather more spectacular.

In 1665 he set forth for the Society's Committee for Improving the Language
an exhaustive catalogue of the forces tending to the corruption of the
English tongue.
Those, he declared, are "victories, plantations, frontiers, staples of
commerce, pedantry of schools, affectation of travellers, translations,
fancy and style of court, vernility and mincing of citizens, pulpits,
political remonstrances, theatres, shops, &c." There follows Evelyn's
careful formulation of the problems facing those who would refine the
language and fix its standards.

This sense of the corruption of the language and of the urgent need
for regulation was communicated to the eighteenth century, in which
a number of powerful voices called for action.

Early in the period Addison advocated "something like an Academy
that by the best Authorities and Rules ... shall settle all Controversies
between Grammar and Idiom" (_The Spectator_, No. 135). He was followed
by Swift, who in turn was followed by such diverse persons as Orator
Henlay, the Earl of Orrery, and the Earl of Chesterfield.

Curiously, Johnson's appears to be the only weighty voice in opposition:
"the edicts of an English Academy," he insisted, "would probably be
read by many, only that they might be sure to disobey them."
But if the two tracts reprinted here may be viewed in this context,
they may also be seen from another vantage--as part of the interminable
wrangling in the period between Whigs and Tories, even over a matter
so apparently non-political as the founding of an Academy. Since
it was Swift's "petty treatise on the English Language"--the epithet
is Johnson's--which provoked these two replies, we must look briefly
at his handiwork.

Swift was undoubtedly guilty of pride of authorship with respect to his
_Proposal_, which appeared on May 17, 1712, in the form of a _Letter
to the Earl of Oxford_.

He had
touched
on the
problem
earlier
in the
_Tatler_
(No.
230),
but this
is a more
considered
effort.

In June,
1711, he
first
broached
to Harley
the
idea of
"a society
or academy
for
correcting
and settling our language," and with Harley's approval he began
to compose the _Letter_.

Yet it was eight months before the document reached Harley and
another two months, during which it circulated among friends, before
Swift retrieved it for the printer.

Thus, and
this fact
has
significance,
the
_Proposal_
had its
inception
and its
first consideration in the Tory circles attached to the Harley
ministry.

A few days before its publication Swift wrote to Stella:
"I suffer my name to be put at the End of it, wch I nevr did before
in my Life."

Now this willingness
to publish under
his own name
also has a
special
significance.
It is not
merely, as is
often assumed,
that he cherished
the project,
though very
likely that played a part.

He was motivated, I am convinced, by a desire to flaunt the _Proposal_
as a party document.

This Army and Navy alphabet is easier to read, because it does away with
the pausing or lengthening of the motions, to make the spaces which help
to form some of the Morse letters. Every letter is reeled straight off
without a break.

Two flags are used in wigwagging. A white flag with a red square in the
center is used against a dark background; a red flag with a white square
in the center is used against the sky or against a mixed background. But
of course in emergency anything must be tried, and for a short distance
the Scout can use his hat or cap, or handkerchief, or even his arm
alone. The motions should be sharp and quick and distinct, with a
perpendicular between each motion and a "front" between words. The Army
rate with the large service flag is five or six words a minute.

The beam of a searchlight is used just as a flag is used, to sweep
upward for "perpendicular," downward for "front," and to right and to
left. Another system of night signaling is by lantern or torch; but it
should be swung from the knees up and out, for right or 1, up and out in
opposite direction for left, or 2, and raised straight up for "front" or
3. Four electric lamps in a row, which flash red and white in various
combinations, colored fires, bombs and rockets, also make night signals.

For daytime signaling the United States Army favors the mirror or
heliograph (sun-writing) system. The 1 is a short flash, the 2 is two
short flashes, the 3 is a long, steady flash. This system can be read
through 100 and 150 miles.

The United States Navy employs a two-arm or a two-flag system, which by
different slants and angles of the arms or flags signals by the Army and
Navy code. It is called the Semaphore system--like the semaphore block
signals of railroads. It is more convenient for windy weather, because
the flags are shorter and smaller than the flags of the three-motion
wigwag.

Scouts should have in their library a copy of the United States Signal
Corps booklet, "Manual of Visual Signaling," which can be had at a small
price from the Government Printing Office at Washington. This tells all
about the different systems of day and night signaling, and shows
alphabets, signal flags, codes, ciphers, and so forth.

The Indians of the plains and mountains have had systems of signaling as
perfect as those of the Army and Navy. In early days of the Army on the
plains, the Indians passed news along among themselves over long
distances faster than it was passed by the military telegraph. They used
a smoke code; and they used also mirror-flashes, blanket-waving,
pony-running, foot-running, and hand gestures.

Their secret signals were never told; no threats or bribes could make an
Indian divulge his tribal or his band code. Not even the white men who
lived with the Indians could learn it. Once some Army officers watched a
Sioux chief, posted on a little knoll, drill his red cavalry for an
hour, without a word or a gesture; all he used was a little
looking-glass held in the palm of his hand.

However, some of the signs were general. A tremulous motion or flash
meant game or enemy. Several quick flashes, close together, meant "Come
on." A beam to the left meant "By the left"; to the right meant "By the
right."

When looking for buffalo, the number of flashes would tell how many
bands of buffalo were sighted, and a quivering motion would bid the
hunters to "Come on."

Scouts will find some blanket signs handy. If the blanket is too large
to manage, fold it once.

"Who are you?" Hold the blanket by the two upper corners, in front, and
bend with it far to the right and to the left.

"We want peace." Hold the blanket by the two upper corners, in front,
and bending forward lay it flat upon the ground.

"Keep away," or "No." Hold up the blanket, grasping the two upper
corners. Cross the arms, still with hands grasping the corners. Bring
right arm back to front and right, almost opening the blanket again.
Repeat.

"Go back" or "Hide." Hold up blanket by two corners opposite right
shoulder, and swing it to right and down, several times.

"Alarm!" Toss the blanket several times, as high as possible.

"Something (or somebody) in sight." Hold up blanket by the two corners
opposite right shoulder. Then swing the right corner around to left and
to right. Repeat.

"Come on" or "Approach." Hold blanket up by two upper corners in front
of the body. Swing the right arm and corner to the left. Repeat.

Pony-running signals are usually in a circle, or forward and backward,
on the side of a hill or the crest. If the movements are fast, then the
news is exciting and important. If they are made in full view of the
surrounding country, then the danger is not close. If they are made
under cover, then the danger is near. If they are made under cover and
the rider suddenly stops and hides, then everybody must hide, or
retreat, for the enemy is too strong. The bigger the movements, the
more the enemy or the more the game. A dodging zigzag course shows that
the scout is pursued or apt to be pursued. A furious riding back and
forth along a crest means that a war party is returning successful. Boy
Scouts can make the motions on foot, and by a code of circles and figure
eights, etc., can signal many things.

Signals by the hand and arm alone are convenient to know.

"Who are you?" is made by waving the right hand to right and to left in
quick succession.

"We are friends" is made by raising both hands and grasping the left
with the right, as if shaking hands.

"We are enemies" is made by placing the right fist against the forehead,
and turning it from side to side.

"Halt" or "Keep away" is made by raising the right hand, palm to the
front, and moving it forward and back.

"Come" is made by raising right hand, back to front, and beckoning with
a wide sweep forward and in again, repeating.

For distance two-arm signals are better than one-arm; and Scouts should
have a short code in two-arms. Both arms stretched wide may mean "Go
back" or "Halt"; both arms partly dropped may mean "No," partly raised
may mean "Yes." And so on. These were plain signals.

Note 49, page 141: A sprain, such as a sprained wrist or ankle, for
instance, is a serious injury, and must not be made light of or
neglected. If not properly and promptly treated, it is likely to leave
the cords or ligaments permanently weak. When treatment may begin at
once, the injured joint should be laid bare, even if by cutting the shoe
instead of unlacing it and pulling it off, and the coldest water should
be applied lavishly. The joint may well be plunged into an icy spring or
stream, or held under a running faucet. If the joint can be kept
elevated, so that the blood will not flow into it so readily, so much
the better.

If some distance has to be covered before the injured person arrives in
reach of treatment, the shoe might as well remain on, to act as a
bandage and a support--although it probably will have to be cut off
later. If the joint is not the ankle joint, a tight, stout bandage
should be fastened around. Nobody should try to step upon his sprained
ankle or use his sprained wrist, or whatever joint it may be.

After swelling has set in very hot water is said to be superior to very
cold water; the very hot and the very cold have much the same effect,
anyway. The Foreign News, which sometimes tells us more Truth of
our doings here than our own, has the very Names of the Members of the
+Academy+ which the Doctor speaks of. I do not find that it is come to
any thing more yet than meeting over a Bottle once a Week, and
being Merry.

At which Times People mind talking much, more than talking well.

I shou'd have taken what is printed in the +Amsterdam+ Gazette to
have been only a dull +Dutch+ Jest upon those Men, if this +Letter+
had not been written, and some broad Hints given, that we are to
be happier than we thought of, and to be surpriz'd with a Society
that shall make us as Polite as that of +Reformation+ has made us
+Godly+; and I wish it may answer the Ends of it with all my Heart.

But the more I reflected upon this +Project+ and the +Projectors+, the
more I was diffident of it, for the Reasons mention'd in the following
Pages._
_I know very well the Epistle has but a sorry Reputation, even with
the Writer's own +Party+, that it is looked upon as a silly superficial
Performance, and to be design'd only for an Opportunity to shew what
a +Nack+ he has at +Panegyrick+. Be that as it will, after I had consider'd
the Subject he writes more leisurely than I was won't to do, I was
loth to lose those Considerations; and having put 'em into this Form,
I flatter'd my self the Publick would not receive them ill; at least
all those whom Faction and Prejudice have not render'd Insensible of
Truth and Reason, and to such, a Man must be well set to work that
writes a Task suitable to the Integrity and Ability of +Abel+ and
his Brethren, among whom I am very unwilling to reckon our Author._
REFLECTIONS 
on 
Dr.

_Swift_'s Letter,
about
Refining the ENGLISH TONGUE.

I should be guilty of the greatest Folly in the World, if I should go
about to give a Character of Persons of whom I have no manner of Knowledge.
To speak well or ill of 'em wou'd be equally Ridiculous and Dangerous:
For it must be all Invention, and I might then abuse a Man both
in my Praise and Dispraise. It is thus with me with Respect to the
Author of the Letter lately publish'd about our Language, and to
his Patron.

I know neither of them, and if I say a Word more than themselves, or
the World have said of them, I must have recourse to Fiction, which I
cannot think of without abhorrence, where Reputation is concern'd.

That good old Church Martyr the Earl of _Strafford_ was of Opinion,
_Common Fame_ was enough to hang a Man, as in the Case of the Duke of
_Buckingham_, when he was impeach'd by the Commons for Male Practices
in his Ministry; and there were no better Grounds for accusing him, than
that every Body said so.
It is much better to know exactly how to use a few simple standard
remedies, than to experiment with a lot of powerful drugs and very
likely make terrible mistakes. To give a medicine without being certain
just why and just what it will do is as bad as pointing a gun at
somebody without knowing whether or not it is loaded. Doctors study hard
for years, before they begin to practice; and Scouts cannot expect to
make doctors of themselves in a few months. Head cool, feet warm, bowels
open, moderate eating--these are United States Army rules, and Scouts'
rules too. "An ounce of prevention is better than a pound of cure"!
Scouts who take care of their bodies properly will rarely need medicine,
and should be proud of the fact.

Note 52, page 153: In 1909, in California alone, out of 388 forest fires
243, or almost two thirds, were caused by human beings' carelessness;
and 119, or almost one third, were caused by camp-fires! The money loss
to the state was $1,000,000; but this was not all the damage. I trust it
will not be considered disloyal to say, that the original sponsors--the
geese and the herrings--seen to me to have been somewhat hardly
used; having done more for their namesakes, than, as far as I can
learn, their royal successors even promised.

Some of these rules
are:

1. Never throw aside matches, or lighted or smoldering stuff, where
anything can possibly catch from it.

2. Camp-fires should be as small as will serve. (Most campers build
fires too large, and against trees or logs whence they will be sure to
spread.)

3. Don't build fires in leaves, rotten wood or sawdust, or pine needles.

4. Don't build fires against large or hollow logs where it is hard to
see that they are not put out. They eat in.

5. Don't build fires under low evergreens, or where a flame may leap to
a branch, or sparks light upon a branch.

6. In windy weather and in dangerous places camp-fires should be
confined in trenches, or an open spot be chosen and the ground first
cleared of all vegetable matter.

7. Never leave a fire, even for a short time, until you are certain that
it is out. Wet it thoroughly, to the bottom, or else stamp it out and
pile on sand or dirt.

8. Never pass by a fire in grass, brush, or timber, which is unguarded
and which you can see is likely to spread. Within a few hours' sail of
Port Phillip and South Australia, their timber will find an
increasing market, and enable their settlers to turn to good account
what often elsewhere proves an incumbrance.

The population of the district, which is called Horton, is about 900,
and the number of houses 137.

_Clarence Plains_--a cultivated and fertile district on the east
bank of the Derwent, nearly opposite Hobart.

It contains the villages of Rokeby, Kangaroo Point, and Bellerive.

_Cleveland_--a village in the parish of Cleveland and county of
Somerset, on the main road, 91 miles from Hobart, and 30 from Launceston.
There are a small chapel, two inns, a post and police station, with
a district constable. The police magistrate of Campbell Town holds a
court here once in a week. A branch road to the eastern coast breaks
off at the township, and Epping Forest is a short distance on the
Launceston side of it.

The country near Cleveland consists chiefly of grazing farms.

_Clyde_--a river which divides the county of Monmouth from Cumberland,
and falls into the Derwent above the township of Macquarie, about 40 miles
from Hobart. It waters, together with the Dee, Ouse, Shannon, and
Jordan, a fine district of the same name.

_Coal River_--a stream rising in the northern part of the county of
Monmouth, and falling into the bay of Pittwater, at Richmond. The Wallaby
and Kangaroo rivers fall into it.
_Cocked Hat Hill_--a name given to a hill on the side of the main
road, 8 miles from Launceston.The duty of Scouts is to jump upon a surface fire and kill it before it
becomes a sly ground fire or a raving crown fire.

Note 54, page 171: Even the best surgeons nowadays "fuss" with deep
wounds as little as possible. They clean the deep wound, by washing it
as well as they can, to remove dirt and other loose foreign particles;
then they cover gently with a sterilized pad, and bandage, to keep
microbes away, and Nature does the rest. In the days when our fathers
were boys, salves and arnica and all kinds of messy stuff were used; but
the world has found that all Nature asks is a chance to go ahead,
herself, without interference.

Unless a bullet, even, is lodged where it irritates a nerve or a muscle
or disturbs the workings of some organ of the body, the surgeon is apt
to let it stay, until Nature has tried to throw a wall about it and
enclose it out of the way.

So the less a Scout pokes at a deep wound, the better. He can wash it
out with hot water, and maybe can pick out particles of visible dirt or
splinters with forceps which have been boiled for ten minutes. Then he
can bandage it loosely, and wait for Nature or a surgeon.


CHAPTER XVI

Note 55, page 186: The Elks by this time had lost their pack-saddles and
panniers, which had been cached with other stuff after the two burros
were stolen by the renegades. They had lost also their lash ropes with
the cinchas; so that it was necessary to throw some pack-hitch that did
not require a cincha and hook. One of the easiest of such hitches is the
squaw-hitch. The tarps were spread out and the camp stuff was folded in
so that the result was a large, soft pad, with nothing to hurt Apache's
back. Then the hitch was thrown with one of the ropes, as follows:

[Illustration: Fig. I.]

[Illustration: Fig. II.]

[Illustration: Fig. III.]

Figure I is a double bight, which is laid over the top of the pack, so
that the two loops hang, well down, half on each side. "X"-"Y" is the
animal's back. Take the end of the rope, "c," and pass it under the
animal's belly, and through loop "a" on the other side; pass rope end
"d" under and through loop "b," the same way. Next bring them back to
the first side again, and through the middle place "e," as shown by
dotted lines of Figure II. Keep all the ropes well separated, where they
bite into the pack and into the animal's stomach, and draw taut, and
fasten with a hitch at "e." The result will look like Figure III.

[In preparation as "An Essay on True and Apparent Beauty in Which from
Settled Principles is Rendered the Grounds for Choosing and Rejecting
Epigrams"] Andre Dacier, Essay on Lyric Poetry.

[Published in year 13 as "The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry"]
Issues will appear, as usual, in May, July, September, November, January,
and March. In spite of rising costs, membership fees will be kept at
the present annual rate of $2.50 in the United States and Canada; $2.75
in Great Britain and the continent.
When bought, they are broad, flexible
strips of leather about eighteen inches long, with cuffs which buckle
around each fore leg above the hoof. Hobbles can be made on the spot by
twisting soft rope from fore leg to fore leg and tying the ends by
lapping in the middle.

It is safer to picket a horse by a rope upon the neck rather than upon
the leg. He is not so apt to injure himself by pulling or running. A
picket rope is forty feet long. To loop it securely about the neck,
measure with the end about the neck, and at the proper place along the
rope tie a single knot; knot the end of the rope, and passing it about
the neck thrust the knotted end through the single knot. Here is a loop
that cannot slip and choke the horse, and can easily be untied.

Sometimes the loose end of the picket rope may be fastened to a tree, or
to a bush. A horse should be picketed out from trees, or in the center
of an open space, so that he cannot wind the rope about a tree and hold
himself too short to graze. Sometimes the free end is fastened to a
stake or picket-pin driven into the ground. But if there is no pin, and
no tree or bush is handy, then a "dead-man" may be used. This is an old
scout scheme. The rope is tied to a stick eighteen inches long, or to a
bunch of sticks, or to a bunch of brush, or to a stone; and this buried
a foot and a half or two feet, and the earth or sand tamped upon it.
Thus it is wedged fast against any ordinary pull. By this scheme a horse
may be picketed out on the bare desert.

When an animal is allowed to graze free, a good plan is to have a loose
rope twenty or thirty feet in length trail from his neck as he grazes.
This is another scout scheme, used by Indians, trappers, and cowboys.
When the animal declines to be bridled or grasped by the mane, the
trailing rope usually can be caught up. Indians and trappers when riding
depended much upon this trailing rope, so that when thrown they could
grab it instantly, and mount again.


CHAPTER XVII

Note 57, page 206: Flowers as well as animals have their place and their
rights; and they as well as the animals help to make the great
out-of-doors different from the in-doors. A Scout never destroys
anything uselessly or "for fun."

Note 58, page 211: Scouts should learn how to repair dislocations of the
jaw, the finger, and the shoulder, as these are the least difficult and
the most frequent. A dislocation can be told from a fracture of the bone
by a twisting of the hand or the foot, and by a shortening or a
lengthening of the arm or leg, according to whether the head of the bone
has slipped _up_ from the socket, or _down_. And there is neither
feeling nor sound of the broken bones grating against each other. In
delineating the character of an exile population, a broad line
must be drawn between the accidental offender and the hereditary
robber.

To the first no special description will be applicable: they are often
not inferior to the ranks from which they sprung. Though a small section
of the whole, they present not the least affecting picture among the
many sad sights of a penal land. In the folly and recklessness of youth
they lost at once their fame, their honor, and their freedom.

The statesman may behold only a mass of outcasts; but among them are
many whose names are the burden of a father's prayer, or are traced
in deep lines of sorrow on a mother's breaking heart.

Transportation confounds men of entirely distinct character in one common
penalty. Thus every variety of disposition, and every grade in life
may be discovered. A proportion, certainly not considerable, obtain the
respect and influence due to benevolence, integrity, successful
toil: a much larger number exhibit only the common faults of
uneducated men, and acquire the common confidence suited to their
original station.

The character of convicts cannot be safely inferred from their sentence.

Thus highway robbers were not unfrequently the best conducted men: they
exhibited a courage and resolution which, directed aright, became
useful to society and to themselves.

The petty thief, often detected in his least offence, proved incapable
of shame or gratitude. To an English reader, preference expressed
by masters for persons under heavy sentences, would appear inexplicable;
but it was founded, not on length of servitude alone, but a not
uncommon superiority of disposition.

Those transported for agrarian offences and political crimes, were
often honest men.

The rustic insurgents of 1832, were considered valuable servants. The
Canadian prisoners conducted themselves with exemplary decorum.

Among those who belong to the class of habitual offenders, a large
proportion are intellectually deficient.

In smooth country, and when the sick or wounded person is not too badly
off, the Indian and trapper "travois" or horse litter may be employed.
Two elastic poles about fifteen feet long are united by cross-pieces,
ladder style; and with two ends slung one upon either side of the horse,
and the other two ends dragging, are trailed along behind the horse. The
poles should be springy, so as to lessen the jar from rough places.

If there is another steady horse, the rear ends of the litter can be
slung upon it, instead of resting on the ground. This is another old
scout and Indian method.


CHAPTER XVIII

Note 60, page 216: "Jerked" meat is another genuinely scout institution,
and has been well known to Indians and trappers and hunters in the West
since early times. The air of the Western plains and mountains is very
dry and pure. Venison or bear-meat or beef, when raw may be cut into
strips two fingers wide, a half or three quarters of an inch thick, and
six or seven inches long, and hung up in the sun. In about three days it
is hard and leathery, and may be carried about until eaten. It may be
eaten by chewing at it as it is, or it may be fried. Scouts will find
that, while traveling, a couple of slices of this jerked meat, chewed
and swallowed, keeps up the strength finely.

When a camp is in a hurry, the meat may be strung over a slow fire, to
make it dry faster; and it may be cured faster yet by smoking, as the
Elks cured it. Some persons use salt; and if they have time they
sprinkle the pile of strips, when fresh, with salt, and fold them in the
animal's green hide, to pickle and sweat for twenty-four hours. But salt
is not needed; and of course the Indians and the old-time scout trappers
never had salt. Trappers sometimes used a sprinkle of gunpowder for
salt; and that is an army makeshift, too.

After a buffalo hunt the Indian villages were all festooned with jerked
meat, strung on scaffolds and among the teepees. Traders and emigrants
jerked the meat by stringing it along the outside of their wagons and
drying it while on the move.

Note 61, page 217: This is the Indian and trapper method of dressing
skins, and is easy for any Scout of to-day. The skin is stretched, hair
side down, between pegs, or over a smooth bowlder or log, while it is
fresh or green, and with a knife or bone, not too sharp, is scraped
until the mucus-like thin inner coating is scraped away. This is called
"graining." In the old-time scout's lodge or camp there always was a
"graining block"--a smooth stump or log set up for the pelts to fit over
while being scraped. Do not scrape so deep as to cut the roots of the
hair. Next the pelt is dried. Then it is covered with a mixture of the
brains and pure water, and soaked, and it is rubbed and worked with both
hands until the brains have been rubbed in and until the skin is rubbed
dry and soft. Next it is laid over a willow frame, or hung up, open, and
smoked for twelve hours or so. Now it is soft and unchangeable,
forever.

When white clay or gypsum was near, the Indians would mix that with
water until the fluid was the color of milk and four times as thick.
Before the skin was smoked it was smeared plentifully with this, and
allowed to dry. Then it was rubbed a long time, until it was soft and
flexible and the clay had all been rubbed away. This took out the stains
and made the skin white.

The _French_ King says _he has given about half a dozen Pensions to
Learned Men in several Parts of +Europe+, and perhaps a dozen in
his own Kingdom_; which, he said, purely out of Affection to the Word
Dozen, because he knew full well the _French_ King bestows Pensions
on a Hundred Men in several Parts of _Europe_; and on a Thousand
in his own Kingdom, who excel in Arts and Literature, _which,
including the whole, do not amount to half the Income of many a
Private Commoner in +England+_.

Whereas I will engage to name Him a Hundred Pensions in _France_ that
have been given to Men of Letters, every one of which shall amount
to more than half the Income of a dozen Lords, let me have the naming of
them too.

The History of his Reign, which has been so long Writing, has cost
him near threescore Thousand Pounds Sterling.

_Boileau_ himself, after he had liv'd a Life of Affluence and Pleasure,
keeping a Country-House and City-House, dy'd worth above Five or Six
Thousand Pounds, which he had wholly from the King. Not to mention the
Rewards _Racine_, _Valincourt_, and other Poets and Historians had,
who were imployed about his History; Nor those to all Academies of Sciences
founded by him, and the great Pensions he allow'd the Professors. The
prodigious Expences he has been at in Printing only at the _Louvre_,
would perhaps amount to a Sum equal to the whole Income of several
Dozens that might be thought of above the Rank of Commoners.

In the camps of emigrants and trappers and other overland
travelers, of the old days, the mules would smell approaching Indians
and give the alarm.


CHAPTER XXI

Note 66, page 260: Among the Western Indians their scouts were
especially selected young men, and these were likened to wolves. They
were instructed "to be wise as well as brave; to look not only to the
front, but to the right and left, behind them, and at the ground; to
watch carefully the movements of all wild animals, from buffalo to
birds; to wind through ravines and the beds of streams; to walk on hard
ground or where there is grass, so as to leave no trail; to move with
great care so as not to disturb any wild animals; and to return with
much speed should they discover anything to report." When the scout
returned with news of a war-party, he howled like a wolf.

"To scout" was the wolf sign, with the hand turning to right and to left
and downward, like wolf ears pricking in all directions.