"So, you've come?" said he, by way of greeting, and turning his keen
eyes upon them alternately, as Wilkins named them, "which of you is it
that's been in the business before?"

"I, sir," said Arthur, stepping forward.

"What do you know about it? what have you been accustomed to
doing--anything more than sweeping out and cleaning the lamps?"

"I never swept out, or cleaned a lamp, in my life, sir. I have sold
goods, and sometimes taken charge of the books in the book-keeper's
absence."

"No airs, young man--don't want any exhibitions of pride here; you'll
have to do whatever you're set at in my service, if it's washing
windows. Can you make out, a bill?"

Arthur's face was very red, and angry words were on his lips, but Guly's
hand that moment touched his arm, and pressed it gently. He remembered
all, and answered calmly that he could.

"Step up here, then, and let me see you do it," said Mr. Delancey,
making room for him to use the large desk.

Arthur obeyed, and in a clear, bold hand, drew up the bill properly, and
handed it to him.

He ran it over with his eyes quickly and eagerly, as if certain of
finding a flaw; and there was something like disappointment in the tone
of his voice as he said, briefly, "Right, sir," and laid it down.

There was a moment's pause, during which Mr. Delancey busied himself in
writing down a great many figures on a piece of paper. When he had
finished he handed it to Arthur, with a look of triumph in his face, and
said, "Let's see you solve this problem correctly, if you can."

That sneering "if you can," to Arthur's mind seemed to imply so much
doubt of his capacity, that he felt stung to the quick; and it was with
a gesture of pride and impatience, which he could not repress, that he
took the paper. He returned it to the desk in a few minutes, and again
those cold gray eyes ran over his work, and again they showed
disappointment when it proved to be right.

"Wilkins," said Mr. Delancey, turning to that individual, who had
remained standing near, "Give this young man the vacancy in the bleached
goods department, which Jones left."

Mr. Wilkins moved away to fulfill the order, and Arthur was about to
follow him, when his employer called him back.

"It is my custom," said he, "to give young clerks the first year a
merely nominal salary, but as you seem to be pretty well acquainted with
the business, and have a face that may win custom, you will get liberal
pay. I will give you five hundred a year. Five hundred--but mark me,
sir, you've got to earn it!--every picayune of it, sir, you've got to
work for. When any clerk is caught idling or dawdling about these
premises, he's turned out, neck and heels, with only just what he can
scrape together on the shortest possible notice. I hope we understand
each other. Go, now."

Arthur bowed, and moved away with Wilkins, who pointed out his place to
him, and having introduced him to the young men on either side of him,
returned to his position near the big desk.

After dismissing Arthur, Mr. Delancey seemed entirely to have forgotten
Gulian, and leaned stiffly back in his chair, regarding the lines of
clerks and the customers, who now began to flock in, without taking any
notice of him. When Wilkins approached, however, and cast a meaning
glance toward him, he seemed suddenly to remember Gulian, and turning
round, said, bluntly:

"Come here, sir."

Guly's face had lost every vestige of color, and his heart beat so
violently that it seemed to make him tremble all over, and he came
forward hesitatingly, with his eyes cast upon the floor.

"So, you know nothing at all about a store, eh?"

"No, sir."

"Well, I think, for my part, such a white-livered, baby-faced chap as
you are would have been better off at your mother's apron strings, than
coming so far from home to get initiated."

No answer, but the pale face and golden head drooped a trifle lower.

"Do you know your multiplication-table?"

"Yes, sir."

"Step up here, and repeat it."

Without lifting his eyes Guly obeyed; and stepping forward, commenced in
a low tone to repeat the table.

"Louder, sir!" exclaimed Mr. Delancey, angrily; "how do you suppose I
can hear such a muttering as that?"

The throbbing in his breast increased to such a degree, that Guly felt
as if he could not breathe. He reached up and laid one white delicate
hand upon the desk tightly, for support, then summoning all his courage,
he elevated his voice, and went on, mechanically, to repeat what, in
calm moments, he knew as well as A B C, but which now seemed to be a
sort of dead memory, which would desert him every moment.

"Louder, sir!" again shouted his tormentor, as his voice unconsciously
lulled again. "What do you want to play the fool in this way for? If you
know it, speak up."

There was a sudden turning of heads by the clerks nearest the desk
towards the spot, attracted by the unusually loud tone of the
proprietor. Guly felt, rather than saw, that he had become the object of
attention, and with a last effort raised his voice, and commenced
another number, but suddenly he ceased altogether, the white hand slid
from the desk, and he fell fainting at Delancey's feet.

Wilkins sprang quickly forward, with a hot flush burning on either
cheek, and lifted the boy like a baby in his arms. As he did so he cast
a look full of deep and mysterious meaning upon Delancey. It was a look
difficult for a mere observer to interpret, but the merchant quailed
visibly beneath it, and turned aside his head.

Wilkins bore the quiet figure in his arms farther back into the shadow
of the staircase, and placing him in a large chair which stood there,
bathed his temples with camphor water, and held it to his nostrils,
gazing upon him meanwhile with an intense and anxious gaze. At length
the snowy lids, with their curve of golden lashes, trembled slightly,
then opened wide, and the blue eyes were raised an instant, appealingly,
to the face which bent kindly over him.

"A drop of water, Mr. Wilkins, if you please."

It was brought, and he drank eagerly.

"Are you better?"

"Yes, Wilkins, almost well."

He dropped his head upon his hand a moment, and those to whom he was
visible saw his lips move earnestly for a moment or two.

"I can go on without any trouble, I think," he said, in a voice of
gentle earnestness, referring to his unsaid table.

"You needn't say any more unless you would like to," returned Wilkins;
"I am sure you know it."

"I would rather," said Guly, firmly.

He rose, and, with Wilkins at his side, again approached the desk where
Mr. Delancey had resumed his stiff position, leaning back in his chair.

"He will finish, if you please, sir," said Wilkins, with the respectful
bow of an inferior, but at the same time fixing his eyes sternly on the
merchant's face.

Mr. Delancey assumed an air of attention, and Guly, taking his old
station in front of him, commenced in a clear, distinct voice, and
repeated the table unfalteringly, from beginning to end.

"There! why couldn't you have done that in the first place, without
acting such a namby-pamby farce, I'd like to know?"

"I had not the power, sir."

"Well, what do you s'pose you're good for in a dry goods store, anyway,
eh? Look at that!" and he lifted one of the boy's small white hands by
the tips of the fingers, and held it towards the light, as if he would
look through it, then dropped it with a contemptuous "Umph!"

"What shall we do with him, Wilkins?"

"Give him the embroidery department. His hands are just fit for such
delicate work, and besides it will just put him under my eye."

"Poh! he'll make such ruinous mistakes, that I'll never be able to stand
it, sir. Give him Harper's place in the thread and tape, up here, then
he'll be under my eye."

Guly shuddered.

"He'll do well, sir, in the place I propose," Wilkins returned quietly,
but firmly. "With a little instruction, I'll answer for him; and there's
a freer circulation of air down there, something he needs."

"Well, take him along, and see what you can do with him. I expect
nothing more than that he'll die on my hands, before he's earned enough
to pay his funeral expenses."

Wilkins turned, and beckoned the boy to follow him.


CHAPTER IV.

_The First Sunday at Church._


Wilkins was head clerk in the establishment, and although he had all the
books to keep, his work was lighter than that of any of the rest. He
went to work later in the morning, and left it earlier at night. Besides
being book-keeper, he was a sort of a superintendent of the whole
concern; and the clerks looked up to him as second only to the
proprietor himself. To win Wilkins' favor was to propitiate Mr.
Delancey: a fact well known, and acted upon.

Guly's beauty, or gentle disposition, had evidently gained for him,
through Wilkins, the best stand in the store. His work was light and
agreeable, he had no heavy lifting to do, and the Beautiful, which in
any form was delightful to him, was constantly before his eyes. In
addition to this, the clerk who stood next to him, on his right hand,
was a most estimable and kind young man, of the name of Hull; who used
every effort to assist his young neighbor, in learning to correctly
perform his work, and by his own example, taught him patiently to
endure its tediousness. This, together with the frequent and
kindly-tendered instructions of Wilkins, enabled Guly, who was naturally
very quick, to readily acquire the knowledge requisite for his
situation; and with his brother, nearly opposite, to speak to
occasionally, and to see all the time, he felt that he was highly
favored.

As Mr. Delancey had never shown any interest in the matter of their
board, they still continued to "victual," as Wilkins called it, at the
restaurant, and sleep at the store. By dint of working a little before
going to bed every night, the brothers, without reminding Wilkins of his
promise to "see to it," had managed to make their sleeping apartment
present a very habitable appearance.

As every moment of their time, since their arrival, had been taken up
with business, they remained in their room the first Sunday, without
going to church; feeling that for each of them to pour into the fond
breast of their distant mother all the thoughts, feelings, and events,
which they had experienced since they had left her side, would be as
acceptable to Him whose day it was, as to attend church, leaving her to
mourn in anxious uncertainty as to their safety or happiness. The
succeeding Sabbath, however, they rose early, and, after performing
their devotional exercises, prepared themselves to attend public
worship.

While waiting for the bell to ring, they sought Wilkins, for the
purpose of inquiring what church Mr. Delancey attended. Wilkins had
taken possession of the merchant's seat at the high desk when they found
him, and, as usual had his coat off, reading.

He looked up, apparently a good deal surprised, as they put the question
to him, and exclaimed, rather dryly:

"Why, you don't say you're going to church!"

"Certainly, Mr. Wilkins. Won't you go with us?"

"Ah! not I."

"Do you never go?"

"I used to, but it was a long time ago. You forget that I have been in
New-Orleans five years."

"No, we don't forget that. Mr. Hull said, the other day, that Mr.
Delancey would never get as good a clerk as you again, or one that would
be as faithful, and remain with him so long. But does being here a few
years make any difference about going to church?"

"I'm afraid you'll find so."

"How can you spend so much unoccupied time without church, Wilkins?"
said Guly, earnestly, stepping up on the chair round, and seating
himself quietly on the head clerk's knee.

Wilkins flung down the novel he had been reading, and, reaching out his
strong arms, clasped both hands round the slender figure sitting there,
and, throwing back his head, looked thoughtfully into the boy's blue
eyes.

"I spend it," said he, at length, speaking in a suppressed voice, and
more as if talking to himself than another, "in racing on the Shell
Road, in betting on fast horses, in excursions out of town, and in
visiting"--he stopped short, then added, through his shut teeth, after
an instant's pause--"places which I hope to God you'll never know more
about than you do now."

"Are you going to the race-course to-day?" asked Guly, suddenly lifting
his head.

"I don't feel quite well. No, I reckon not," returned Wilkins,
disjointedly, and moving uneasily in his chair.

"I weary you," said the boy, gently essaying to leave his seat on the
head clerk's knee.

"No! no! you don't!" cried the other, eagerly; and suddenly drawing the
bright head down upon his bosom, he added, in a voice of deep emotion,
"Oh, that I had you always thus to lie upon my heart, and keep the evil
out!"

The church bell at this moment began to ring, and, having ascertained
where the Episcopal Church was, the brothers started forth, and,
arm-in-arm, walked briskly forward. Whenever Guly looked back at the
tall store, towering up above its brick-and-mortar neighbors so proudly,
he thought of Wilkins sitting in there in the gloom, all alone, and
wishing for some one to lay upon his heart, and keep the evil out.

When they reached the church, Arthur asked the sexton if Mr. Delancey's
pew was full, and, on being informed there was no one in it but himself
and wife, he desired to be shown to it. It was situated quite at the
head of the aisle, near the pulpit; and the sexton's hand was on the
door, before the merchant, who was sitting in his usual position, bolt
upright, in the pew, noticed their approach.

When his eyes fell upon his two new clerks, the frown between his eyes
deepened very visibly, while his whole face wore a look of angry
astonishment. Holding the door shut, as the sexton, with his best bow,
attempted to open it, Mr. Delancey leaned out, and, in a harsh whisper
to Arthur, which was loud enough to reach Guly's ear, exclaimed:

"What the devil do you want? I hope you don't expect to sit with me? Up
gallery with you! There's seats enough for your class there."

So saying, the merchant jerked himself back, and, resuming his stiff
position in the pew, looked straight ahead with his stony eyes, as if
utterly unconscious of any one else.

With burning cheeks the brothers took their way down the carpeted aisle,
and reached the pillared porch.

"I'm not going up there to sit," said the elder brother, proudly; "if
there is no place for me below, there is no place for me in the
gallery;" and flinging off the gentle hand that would have detained
him, he sprang down the granite steps, and started at a rapid pace down
the street.

Guly stood for a moment, gazing anxiously after him, half-tempted to
follow, but seeing his brother took the direction towards the store, he
decided to remain, and mounting the winding stairs, found himself in the
spacious but scantily peopled gallery.

Guly's was a pure mind, unaccustomed to drawing sarcastic comparisons,
or indulging in bitter fancies; but, as he looked down into the body of
the church, he could not help wondering to himself which were the most
acceptable in God's sight: the mass of life, bowing and swaying in their
costly array of silks and laces, and fine cloth, kneeling on their
velvet cushions, and bending their brows upon their jeweled hands, or
the few earnest and devout, seated in the unornamented gallery, kneeling
upon bare floors, seated on uncushioned benches, bending their hearts in
simple worship to Him whose Word they came to hear.


CHAPTER V.

_The Broken Sabbath._


As soon as Arthur's rapid walking had taken him out of sight of the
church, he slackened his pace, and walked moodily on along the almost
deserted banquette, towards the Levee. Still smarting from the wound his
pride had received, his cheeks burning with the flush of anger, and his
heart heavy at the remembrance of his unkind words to Guly, the youth
looked anxiously about for something to divert his thoughts, and while
away the hours till church was out, when he hoped to rejoin his brother,
and with him return to their apartment.

At this moment, however, he received a hearty slap upon his shoulder;
and turning quickly, saw one of the clerks of the store, well known to
be of low and dissolute habits, but who managed to retain his place by
steady application to business during business hours.

Hitherto, Arthur had never had anything to say to him, beyond what was
necessary in the store, having intuitively shunned him as an unfit
associate. Now, however, he felt that any companion was better than
solitude, for the unoccupied Sabbath hours; and although a sense of
shame filled his breast, that he should ever have given the opportunity
to such a man to approach him thus familiarly, he crushed it with an
effort, and extending his hand, exclaimed, in a hearty tone:

"Glad to see you, Quirk; whither bound?"

"Anywhere that I can get company," returned the other, giving Arthur's
hand a close grasp. "This is the only day, you know, that a clerk has to
himself, and I always make it a point to have a deuce of a time to begin
the week with."

And the fellow burst into a loud laugh.

Arthur withdrew his hand hastily, and an expression of disgust swept
over his fine features. The quick eye of the other did not fail to
detect it, and, eager to retain the vantage he had gained, he said:

"You musn't mind my easy expressions, Pratt; they come to me somehow
like second nature, and I can't help them; just let 'em pass; and tell
me what you'd like to visit to-day, and what you'd like to see, and I'll
show it to you; for there's no sight in this city that I ain't as used
to as measuring tape."

"I've never been accustomed to go sight-seeing on Sunday," said Arthur,
in a hesitating tone.

"That was because you were never accustomed to working every week-day
before."

"No, it was because I was strictly taught to 'Remember the Sabbath-day,
and keep it holy.'"

"Fiddlesticks! all that'll do in the North, where folks put on their
long faces every Sunday, and go to church, rain or shine, and don't cook
any dinners, and don't read anything but pious books, but such things
ain't expected here of anybody. Why, this is always a holiday here--the
military companies are always drilled on Sunday, the best races are
reserved for Sunday, the best plays at the theatre are on Sunday nights,
and so are the best balls. Ha! ha! to talk of keeping this day holy
here."

"You shock me!" said Arthur, with a shudder.

"Just what every young prig from the North is sure to say at first, but
they get to be one of the 'fast ones' at last. I was quite sober myself
when I first came here. I was from the land of steady habits, ye
see--the only son of my mother, and she was a widder; but she died, and
nobody cared for me here, so I just joined the b'hoys, and learned how
to enjoy myself."

"I'll tell you what we'll do!" exclaimed Quirk, after another short
pause, "we'll just take the cars, and go to Carrolton. That's a fine
place, and it can't hurt your conscience any to visit it. Even the
ministers ride up there on Sundays sometimes."

"How soon could we return? By the time church is out?"

"Oh, we can come back any minute we like. Hurrah! Now hop in, or we'll
be left."

The cars were just on the point of leaving, and they were obliged to run
in order to catch their chance. The moment of reflection did not come to
Arthur till he had taken his seat, and was rapidly moving away. If there
came any pangs of conscience then, they were, from a dread of ridicule,
studiously concealed from his companion, and consoling himself with the
thought that it now was too late to repent, he gave himself up to the
full enjoyment of his ride.

After leaving the city, as the charming suburban retreats, one by one,
came out upon his view, Arthur eagerly regarded each one, appreciating
its brightness and freshness all the more from his recent confinement in
the city. The clear sloping meadows, the rural cottages, the fresh air,
all served to enliven and cheer him; and, as the cars were crowded with
pleasure-seekers, like himself, he forgot it was Sunday, and was happy
in his forgetfulness.

Near Carrolton a beautiful wood burst upon his sight, skirting either
side of the track, and casting soft deep shadows on the bright green
sward beneath the branches. The trees were of noble growth, and from
every limb hung pendant the tattered sheets of long gray moss, so common
in the South, and so solemn and sombre in their effect.

"Was there ever anything more beautiful, even on the banks of my own
Hudson!" exclaimed Arthur, enraptured at the scene. "Can we not persuade
the conductor to stop, and let us down? I would enjoy a stroll there."

"Nonsense!" returned his companion. "I can't go with you if you go
there. I have a horror of that swinging moss, and can't bear to be near
it. Those trees always make me think of ghosts, with rotten shrouds on
'em."

"That's a fine comparison, Charley," said a clear, sarcastic voice near
them; and a young man, bearing the unmistakable stamp of the genteel
loafer about him, stretched out a small white hand, with a large diamond
glittering on the little finger, and shook Charley's over the back of
the seat.

He was quite a youth, apparently not over twenty years of age; but there
was an expression in his eye which would lead one to believe him older.
It was an eye old in cunning, old in craft, and old in sin. It was
small, deep-set, and of piercing blackness. His hair was of a soft
chestnut, and curled slightly at the ends. His lips were thin, and his
complexion sallow. His dress, in every article, was of the finest
material, but arranged with a decidedly foppish taste; and, somehow or
other, his whole appearance reminded one of those large bills, stuck up
in depots, with "Beware of Pickpockets" on them.

Charley leaned back, after shaking hands with him, and whispered
something in his ear; then, nodding to Arthur, said:

"Mr. Pratt, I'll make you acquainted with Mr. Clinton. Mr. Clinton, Mr.
Pratt."

Arthur bowed, and accepted the hand cordially extended to him, and
politely expressed his pleasure at the acquaintance.

"Well, just consider me one of you from this hour," said Clinton,
rising, and turning his seat so that he might face his friends. "Just
confide to me your intentions for to-day, and you'll find I'm with you,
heart and hand."

Charley tipped a sly wink at him, unperceived by Arthur, and answered:

"We're only going to Carrolton, to stroll through the gardens; that's
all."

"Ah, yes; going to contemplate the beauties of nature. I understand.
Just so. Glad to hear it; for, of all things in the world, it's just
what will suit me best. Just consider me one of you."

Arthur eyed his new friend with considerable curiosity, as he let off
these little explosive sentences, and withdrew his eyes with an
unsatisfied look, as the other ceased speaking.

"He evidently," thought he, "wants to seem a gentleman, and don't know
how."

"Here we are!" cried Clinton, as the train stopped. "Now, my dear
friends, let's hasten to leave these clattering cars, where I scarcely
can breathe. Ah! you perceive this beautiful scenery has already
inspired me. I s'pose, Mr. Pratt, you didn't know I was a poet before,
did you?"

"I was certainly not previously aware of your poetical talents, Mr.
Clinton," returned Arthur, laughing, "but I shall never doubt it again."

"That's right, my boy. Like your candor. You're excusable for not
noticing before that I was a genius. It was no doubt merely because you
didn't look closely in my face. Any one can see it who does. There's the
pretty Miss Julia Tippet, she declares she'd know me for one through a
pair of green spectacles."

So saying, Mr. Clinton sprang to the ground, and being a little taller
than the other two, he familiarly passed an arm over their shoulders as
he stepped between them, and so passed on through the garden gate.

As they trod the neat shell walks, and inhaled the fragrance of the many
blooming flowers, Arthur enthusiastically expressed his delight; and Mr.
Clinton, suddenly drew in a long breath through his nostrils, and
exclaimed, at the same time striking an attitude:--

    "Delightful spot! I know not what could e'er draw hence my willing feet,
    Unless it be a chance I see, for some kind friend to stand a treat."

"There!" bringing down his right hand, with a hearty whack upon his
knee, "if I haven't been off again into one of my spontaneous bursts of
poetical effusion! Who ever saw that beat?"

"Ha! ha! ha!" roared Charley. "I take the hint; what'll you have;
mint-juleps for three, or three for old Cogniac?"

"Thank you," said Arthur, as he met Charley's inquiring glance. "Nothing
for me. I never indulge."

"Oh, you must have something, if it's nothing more than lemonade with a
stick in it," returned Charley.

"Hurry up your pegs there, Charley!" cried Clinton, at the top of his
voice. "Pratt's getting faint, and wants something to strengthen him!"

This was said in such a good humored hope-I-don't-offend manner, that
Arthur could not repress a smile; and while the smile was on his lips
the drinks arrived, and he received his with a bow. That he considered
it good, was very evident from the manner in which he drank it, an act
which Quirk and Clinton watched narrowly, over the brims of their
glasses.

Arthur experienced no more pangs of conscience that day; neither did he
recall his intended return by the time church was out. After drinking,
his companions used every effort to make themselves agreeable, and
showed him over the extensive grounds, strolled through the shady avenue
on the Levee with him, and then, as the day was warm, declared
themselves thirsty, and proposed that Arthur should treat them.

He eagerly assented, and for the first time in his life marched boldly
into the bar-room, and ordered three strong drinks, all of the same
description.

Then a military company arrived, and the excitement of the drill, the
sound of the martial music, and the fresh uniform of the soldiers,
combined with the noise and bustle of railroad travel, and the crowd of
lookers on, seemed to dispel all remembrance of Sunday, and the whole
afternoon passed in this way, in what then seemed real enjoyment.

It was eleven o'clock in the evening when, heated and dizzy from the
wine they had drunk, Arthur and Charley took their seats in the cars for
home; with Mr. Clinton heavily reclining between them. They were a noisy
trio, though an experienced eye might have detected readily that Clinton
pretended to be much more intoxicated than he really was. When the cars
arrived at St. Joseph-street he alighted, bidding his two friends a
hearty good night, and saying, as he shook Arthur's hand:

"Hope to see you soon again, Pratt, [hic]--from this day for [hic] ward,
consider me one of you."

And, with a stagger which threatened a fall, he left the cars, and
disappeared round the corner. As he did so, he drew a ponderous key from
his pocket, and holding it up between his eye and an adjacent lamp,
regarded it closely, then burst into a laugh: "I'll have some fun with
this yet, I reckon; I'll teach the governor to forbid my having any of
the keys. By the gods! I'll bring him round with this, or die in the
attempt," soliloquized Mr. Clinton, swinging the key between his thumb
and finger.

"By-the-by," he added, suddenly thrusting it deep into a side-pocket,
"I'll just stroll down Chartres-street, and see what the boys'll do when
they find it out."

Mr. Clinton was evidently perfectly sober.

Whistling a tune thoughtfully, as he went, he reached Camp-street; when,
taking the shady side, he struck into a run, which pace he kept up until
he had crossed Canal, then he assumed a slow, careless walk; and as the
moon had now risen, the lamps had been put out, and one side of
Chartres-street lay in deep shadow.

To this side he kept, and when he had arrived nearly opposite Delancey's
store, he stepped back into an archway, and remained quiet.

In a few moments he heard the voices of his late companions, and saw
them coming down the other side of the street, leaning upon each other,
and both evidently fully affected by the liquor they had imbibed.

As Charley gained the door, he sustained himself by holding with his
left hand upon the door-post, while with the right he applied a small
steel key to the key-hole.

"Why the devil don't it fit? Lend a hand here, Pratt, and see what you
can do."

Arthur had seated himself upon the step, and sat with his head leaning
on his hand, but he rose at Charley's bidding, and took the key.

"Why don't it fit?" said he, after looking at it a moment, intently.
"Well, the reason is my trunk key don't fit this door, and I'd like to
know how you came by it."

"Your trunk key! well, where's the other? _Your_ trunk key! _I_ guess
so! Well, here's one that will fit," and he drew out a brass house-door
key, and shufflingly applied it to the lock.

"Devil! wrong again. Pratt, stand up here, and help me."

"We'll never get in at this rate, Charley."

"I'll give you a lodging, if that's what you're after," said a voice
near them, and a hand fell heavily on a shoulder of each.

"Nabbed, by gripes!" cried Quirk, suddenly turning round.

"But just look here, old feller, I'd like to know [hic] what for you
arrest a couple--of gen'l'men for--as is decently [hic] to go home to
bed."

"Breaking into a store is a new way of going to bed. You're my
prisoners; so march along with you."

"Do you take us for thieves," said Arthur, startled into soberness; "we
belong there, and were trying to use our pass-key."

"Let's see your pass-key, then."

"It's lost! I can find it neither in my own nor my companion's pockets."

"Good story, but won't go down, so trot along."

And the watchman, stepping between them, seized an arm of each, and
hurried them off to the guard-house.

"Phew! that's more than I bargained for," said Clinton, stepping out of
the archway, and looking after the retreating figures. "However, that's
Grey that's got 'em, and I can make it straight by morning." So saying,
he pressed his hand hard upon the ponderous key he held, and muttering,
"Ah, a good time's coming," turned his steps toward the First
Municipality.


CHAPTER VI.


Since noonday, Guly had sat in the darkened store alone. He could not go
out in search of his brother, being ignorant of the streets; and
besides, where in that great city could he have looked with any hope of
finding him? When he returned from church, and found Arthur absent, he
was not only surprised, but deeply troubled. Knowing what a stranger he
was in that vast metropolis, the thought crossed his mind that in the
proud and angry mood that was upon him, he might have wandered off, and
lost himself. But an instant's reflection told him that any one would be
able to give the direction of Mr. Delancey's store, and that Arthur, in
such a case, would not be slow to make inquiry.

He could but wait patiently, as there was no one near, either to
accompany him in a search, or to give him advice. He seated himself to
write to his mother, deeming that his time could not be more dutifully
passed.

The letter was finished and sealed, and still no news of Arthur. Guly
had seized his hat with the intent of going forth at all hazards, when
the door of his room slowly opened, and Jeff's shining face was thrust
in.

"Please, young massar, may I come in?"

"Certainly. Close the door."

The negro entered with a shuffling gait, holding a tattered straw hat in
his hands, and with a bow and sheepish look stopped directly in front of
Guly.

"Anything I can do for you, Jeff?"

"Well, I hopes you'll 'scuse my 'trusion, young massar, but I thought as
dis was Sunday, mebbe you'd be reading dat big book yourself, and would
let me hear you."

"To be sure, Jeff, to be sure. Whenever that big book is read you will
always be a welcome listener, and whenever I have time I shall always be
ready to read it to you."

"Oh, young massar, you is so good to de poor nigger--sometimes when I
look at you, I can't help tinking you'se just some angel as has lost his
wings, and a-waiting on dis airth till they grow agin."

"Hush, Jeff."

"Yes, massar; if you'se ready to read, I'se ready to listen."

Guly smiled at this misconstruction of his words, but opening the Bible
he read aloud the fourteenth chapter of John; while Jeff sat with his
elbows on his knees, and his chin in his palms, his large eyes fixed
attentively on the reader.

When the chapter was finished, Guly took the different paragraphs, and
in a simple but concise manner endeavored to explain all which was
difficult for his listener to understand.

"Thar!" said Jeff, flinging his old hat emphatically upon the floor, as
Guly ceased, "If that ain't as good as a minister, dis child guv it up,
dat's all! Oh, young massar, if you'd just call a meetin' ob de clerks
in dis store, and read and 'spound to 'em sometime in dis way, dar'd be
a better set in old massar's bizness, to say the least."

"Your master's clerks all seem to be well-disposed young men, I'm sure,
Jeff--I never see them commit a wrong."

"You'se too good yousef to see evil, sah; but mebbe de clerks _is_ good
when de Boss's sharp eye is on 'em."

"Oh!" exclaimed Guly, starting to his feet, and rapidly pacing the
floor, "What a place of sin for a young inexperienced boy to be in, and
under the influence of evil companions. Oh! my brother! my brother!"

"He'll be home by night-time, Massar Gulian, in my 'pinion. I'se jus
sorry I told you, sah, since you take on so, but it just slipped out o'
me like, an' I couldn't help it."

Guly drew a chair near one of the windows, and though he could see
neither sky above or brightness below, he gazed out upon the brick walls
before him, and his thoughts flew backward to the past. From that hour
of reflection Guly rose up wiser and older. He felt how much depended on
himself, and decided that henceforth his watchful eye should ever be
upon the brother, who, though so much older than himself, required so
much of tender counsel and care.

The sun was down when he again approached the table where Jeff still
sat, turning over the leaves of the "Big Book."

"Massar Gulian, you look in your eyes as though you was gwine to pray.
May I hear you 'fore I go?"

Guly bowed, and knelt beside his dusky friend; and as he prayed, the
great white tears rolled over Jeff's cheeks, and fell down on the box by
which he was kneeling.

The prayer was ended and Jeff rose to go.

"Good night, Jeff," said Guly, holding out his hand.

"Good night, young Massar; God forever bress your heart."

Left alone, Guly sat down to patiently await the termination of what he
could not possibly avert; but the loneliness was so oppressive, the
silence and darkness lay like such a weight upon his troubled heart,
that he determined to descend to Wilkins' room, and if he were there to
remain with him.

Having no light in his chamber, he opened the door, and slowly groped
his way down the winding stairs. When he had nearly reached the foot he
fancied he heard voices, and, surprised at such a sound coming from the
direction of the head-clerk's room, he paused to listen; but the step on
which he stood creaked loudly, and the voices ceased.

Going cautiously on in the darkness, he reached the big desk, and
further back saw a stream of light glimmering through the crevice of
Wilkins' door. He evidently was at home, but unless his ears had very
much deceived him, Guly felt certain he was not alone.

Not wishing to play the spy, the boy went forward, and was about to
knock, when through the crevice of the door his eye fell upon a scene
which again arrested his attention, and held him speechless.

Wilkins was seated at a low table, writing, apparently answering a
letter, which lay open before him, written in a peculiarly beautiful and
delicate female hand. The light of the lamp fell full upon his face,
which was very pale; and his teeth were pressed hard into his under lip.

Behind him, with one hand clasped upon the back of his chair, stood a
young girl; and though her features were of exquisite proportions and
beautiful moulding, she displayed in the slight tinge of duskiness upon
her skin, and the peculiar blackness of her large eyes, unmistakable
proofs, to an experienced judge, of the quadroon blood in her veins.

Her hair was long, and of midnight blackness; and fell in thick, close
curls over the graceful scarf which covered her shoulders. Her forehead
was high and fine, her eyebrows arched and delicately traced--her nose
free from all trace of her negro origin, and her lashes long and curving
upon her round cheek. Her mouth was small, and the lips parted over
teeth of the most perfect regularity; but in this feature, more than in
any other, as she stood watching Wilkins, as he wrote, there was an
expression of proud bitterness, which came and went over those exquisite
features, like gleams of lightning.

As Wilkins finished writing, he carefully folded and sealed his letter,
and handed it to the girl, without adding any superscription.

"There, Minny, give her that; but, remember how much depends upon your
secresy. There's a day coming when you shall meet your full reward for
all you are doing for us now."

"Yes, Mr. Bernard," she replied, addressing him by his first name, and
speaking earnestly, "I think of that myself sometimes, and tremble."

"And tremble! What do you mean?"

"Nothing, nothing; no matter now. Give me a pass, and let me be gone!
The great gun has fired two hours ago!"

"You are too white to need a pass, Minny."

"Ay! but I am a slave."

The bitter emphasis with which she uttered these last words sank deep
into Guly's young heart, and was the first intimation to him that she
was not of unmixed origin. She looked so purely beautiful, as she stood
there with that shade of scornful sadness on her face, that the boy
forgot the part he was acting in standing there, and remained with his
large eyes riveted upon her.

"Here's your pass, Minny; but, mark me, it will not be claimed of you."

As he spoke Wilkins rose, and handed her the paper. She concealed the
letter he had given her in her dress, then folded the pass between her
fingers, and prepared to leave.

The head clerk had stood still until how, watching her with a strange,
eager expression on his face; but as he saw her about to leave him he
sprang suddenly forward, and throwing one of his huge arms about her
waist, drew back her head with the other, and imprinted kiss after kiss
upon her lips.

She struggled wildly, but silently; and at last, with an almost
superhuman effort, freed herself from his grasp. She turned, as she did
so, and lifting her small hand closely clenched, struck him furiously
full in the mouth.

The blood gushed over his lips; and never, to the latest day of his
existence, not even when he saw her lie cold and still in her coffin,
did Guly forget the fearful expression in her pallid face, and the
almost demoniacal glare in her black eye, as she marked the effect of
her blow, and darted by him like some frightened bird, escaped from the
spoiler's net.

He shrank further into the darkness as she passed him, and saw her rush
toward the back part of the building, where the large windows descended
to the floor. She flung one up hastily, and leaped through it to the
ground.

The next moment he heard the swift pattering of small feet in the alley,
and the rustling of a woman's dress, as if some one were running.

The head clerk had thrown himself upon a couch, face downwards, after he
received the blow, and Guly seeing he had been unobserved, thought best
not to intrude upon him at this moment; and with a quiet, cat-like
tread, and trembling violently with the excitement of the scene he had
witnessed, he groped his way back to his own chamber.

An hour passed before he ventured to descend the stairs again; and then
he found Wilkins sitting as he had seen him in the morning, at the big
desk, with his coat off, reading.

"This is a late hour for you to be down stairs, my boy! What has
happened to make you so pale? Are you sick?"

"No, sir, but I am troubled."

And Guly stepped toward him, and laid one hand upon the desk, while he
related to Wilkins all that he had felt with regard to his brother,
since he parted from him in the morning.

"Tut, tut!" said he, shaking his head as the boy finished, "this is a
bad business. If I had not thought you were together somewhere, I would
have been with you. I'm afraid your brother has got into bad company,
which I should be sorry enough for, I promise you."

Wilkins spoke this in a tone of such kindly sympathy, at the same time
laying one hand gently upon the golden head beside him, that Guly's
overwrought feelings could no longer be restrained; and the tears gushed
thickly from his eyes.

"Don't," said Wilkins, tenderly, "don't! This will doubtless be the last
time he will wander off in this way--he is impulsive and yielding, and
you, who are less so, must guard him in future."

Cheered, though not convinced, by Wilkins' words, Guly once more sought
his own room. He had never pressed that pillow alone before, and with a
desolate and heavy heart, the golden lashes were allowed to droop, and
the boy fell into a troubled slumber.

Through a narrow chink in the roof above, a moonbeam stole, and nestled
down beside him. It lay there in Arthur's vacant place like the gleam of
an angel's smile; and all it fell upon was purity and beauty. The night
wore on. The boy slept, the moonbeam faded, and troubled dreams and
desolate darkness alone remained behind.


CHAPTER VII.

_Della._


The city clocks were tolling midnight, and the moon rode high in the
heavens. In one of the most elegant houses Apollo-street could boast,
sat a young girl. The room in which she was sitting presented a scene of
almost oriental ease and luxury. There was the rich carpet, giving back
no echo to the tread, the gorgeous divans, into which the form sank as
into down, the glittering chandeliers, the rare and exquisite vases,
statuary, birds, books, and all that the capricious, self-willed spirit,
which presided there, could wish to draw around her. The lights in the
chandeliers had been extinguished; and save that which crept in from the
moon, and that emitted from a small night-lamp, burning behind its
alabaster shade, the room lay in soft shadow.

The long windows descended to the floor, and opened upon a balcony, from
whence was wafted by the slight night-breeze, the delicate fragrance of
the jasmine, mingled with that of rare roses, and other choice flowers.
At the lower end of the balcony, a flight of steps descended to the
garden, where the music of a tinkling fountain fell refreshingly on the
ear. This part of the grounds was protected by a high brick wall,
thickly overrun with luxuriant vines, which entirely concealed a small
door, long left forgotten and unused by the proprietor of these princely
domains.

This door opened into an adjacent court, little used save by the
domestics, and thence egress was easy to the street. Seated upon a
velvet cushion, the fair occupant of the apartment gazed eagerly out
upon the garden-door. One slipper of small size and delicate hue lay a
little distance from her, as if it had been cast impatiently from the
unshod foot. Her brow was pressed against the window-sash, and every
rustle of the vine-leaves, every whisper of the night-wind, had caused
her to start violently, and called forth some low ejaculation of
impatience or vexation.

"Past twelve, and not here yet!" she exclaimed, drawing from her belt a
small French watch, glittering with jewels, and glancing at the hour
with a frown.

"Ah! Dieu! what can have happened now? I shall be asleep before many
minutes, unless--"

At this moment there came up from the garden a harsh grating sound, as
of some one cautiously turning a key in a rusty lock. The listener
started to her feet, and laid one hand upon her heart. There were light
steps upon the stairs--a cautious tread upon the balcony--and Minny, the
Quadroon, sank at her mistress's feet.

"So, child, you've come at last! Where have you lingered this long, long
time? I am most distracted with watching for you, and my head aches
terribly."

Minny lifted up her pale face, with the black hair falling in strong
contrast around it, and the angry glitter not yet gone from her
brilliant eye.

"Lady, I have lingered nowhere unnecessarily. You bade me be cautious,
and it takes time to take stealthy steps. Besides, I was obliged to wait
before I could approach him, and then--"

"Enough, Minny! and then he gave you a letter for me. Give it me, girl,
quick!"

Minny drew the note from her bosom, and her mistress, approaching the
lamp, put aside the shade which obscured it, and bent eagerly over the
closely-written page she held. She read it again and again, and a smile
of delight lit up the listless features, as she refolded it, and flung
to the girl beside her to place in its delicate envelope.

"Oh! it is such a sweet note, Minny; such a charming, delightful note!
How did he look, Min, when he was writing it? Did he frown, and bite his
lips, and grow pale, in that frightful way he has sometimes, or did he
look handsome and happy?"

"His back was toward me, Miss. I could not see how he looked."

"Stupid Minny! Another time get where you can look straight into those
black eyes of his, and read what they say all the while."

"Another time I will, Miss."

"What's the matter, Min? Come here, child. How you frighten me. You are
as pale as a ghost! Tired with your long walk, that's it, puss! Kneel
down here by me, and I'll play nurse for you."

The girl knelt, and her young mistress drew toward her a bottle of
lavender water, and poured it upon the bowed head before her; putting it
on with her own soft hands till the long black curls glittered with the
bright drops, as if decked with diamonds.

"There, Minny, you are better now. Wipe my hands and undress me."

With gentle, but trembling fingers, the girl proceeded to obey; and as
her mistress lay listlessly back in her large fauteuil, proceeded to
remove each article of dress, without the slightest assistance from the
languid form before her.

The jewels were laid away in their velvet cases--the ribbons folded and
laid aside--the rich robe placed in the armoire, and the frilled and
embroidered _robe de nuit_ placed upon her, and fastened with its gold
buttons about her neck and wrists, with no more motion on the part of
that passive figure, than if it had been a doll in the hands of a
child.

Finding herself ready for bed, the young lady arose, and followed her
maid into an adjoining apartment. The lace bar was held up, while she
laid herself upon the luxurious couch, and Minny arranged the scented
pillow beneath the fair young head.

"Anything more, Miss?"

"No, Minny; yet stay! That dear little note, hand it to me; and the
bottle of ottar of roses."

The white fingers of the heiress clasped the exquisitely cut bottle
containing the precious perfume, and one clear drop was suffered to fall
upon the snowy envelope of the note. She then pressed the paper to her
lips, and laid it away beneath her pillow.

"Anything more, my lady?"

"Yes, Minny. Did you ever have a lover? Some one, Minny, to love you
with all his heart, and swear he'd die for you--and to write you such
tender letters--and to--and to--"

Della Delancey slept with the love-letter of Bernard Wilkins beneath her
pillow.

Minny had stood with every vestige of color faded from her cheek as her
young mistress spoke, and her whole frame quivering with emotion, which
she tried in vain to conceal. An expression of relief crossed her
features, as her questioner fell away into slumber, and, hastening from
the bedside, she sought the outer-room, and flung herself down into the
large chair Della had so recently vacated.

"Some one to love me," she murmured, brokenly. "Ah! yes, yes! One who
swore to love me; one who vowed to cherish me, only to forget his oath.
Fool! idiot! that I was, to thus yield up my passionate love, forgetful
of my birth! But did he not promise all? Were we not wed? God of the
just--who sees me--yes! yes! yes!"

Springing to her feet, Minny paced the floor wildly. Her white closed
teeth glittered through the portals of her parted lips--her black eyes
flashed and sparkled, and rained down the tears among the curls upon her
bosom, while her white hands were clutched together, or wrung fiercely.

She looked not unlike a personified tigress, lashed into fury by the
torment of an enemy.

Suddenly her whole aspect changed. The clutched hands unclasped, the
tears ceased to fall, the knotted brow relaxed--and, choking down her
sobs, Minny approached the bedside of her young mistress. Softly she
raised the rose-hued netting, and slid her hand beneath the pillow. It
rested there a moment quietly, and then was gently withdrawn, holding
the note tightly.

Gliding away with her treasure, she seated herself by the lamp, and
perused its contents. Every word, every line, every expression of
endearment, and every sentence of fondness, she drank eagerly in, and
seemed to write upon her heart.

Again and again she read it; but there were no more signs of emotion,
save that now and then her teeth were pressed tight into her lip, or her
hand laid hard against her heart.


CHAPTER VIII.

_The Prisoners._


What pen can describe the anguish of Arthur, when he found himself the
inmate of a watch-house! His arrest had completely sobered him, and his
intoxication was succeeded by a deathly and overpowering sickness, which
he found it impossible to overcome.

His companion treated the whole affair with the utmost indifference, and
when the key was turned upon them had thrown himself heavily upon a
bench, and immediately gone off into a drunken slumber. There were a few
other prisoners besides themselves, bearing such a villainous,
cut-throat appearance that Arthur shuddered as he looked at them.

As his sickness in a measure subsided, he threw himself face downwards
upon the hard, unyielding bench, and to escape the jeers of his
companions, drew himself close up in a corner near the door, and
pretended to be asleep. But alas! no sleep came to those burning
eyeballs through those long--long hours, and though racked with a
torturing headache and feverish thirst, he knew no way to relieve
himself, and dared not move lest he should again encounter the ridicule
of the brutes around him.

He thought of himself as he was a few short hours before, wending his
way to church at his brother's side, happy in the consciousness of duty
well performed, and proud in the love and esteem which he felt were but
his due. He contrasted the morning with the night; and saw himself the
inmate of a guard-house, herding with men whose very breath seemed crime
and profanation, and whose every word was blackened with oaths or
curses. He felt that the stain of guilt was on his hitherto pure brow,
traced there by the finger of a justly angry God, whose laws he had
violated, whose commands he had broken, and whose day he had abused.

He thought of the coming morning, with the public trial, when he would
be turned forth with the stamp of a thief or drunkard upon him, and the
finger of scorn pointing derisively at him. He thought of his blue-eyed,
pure-minded brother, mourning his absence, and weeping over his shame.
He remembered his mother--and the hot tears, so long pent up, gushed
like raindrops through his trembling fingers, and bathed the hands which
held that stricken head.

A sense of weight and oppression came over him--it seemed as if he could
not breathe--and gasping, he sprang from his recumbent position. A glow
of relief crossed his features as he saw that all the men around him
were asleep, and glancing through the barred window he saw the streaks
of light in the east, announcing the approach of day. At this moment he
heard the key turned in the lock, and thinking that other prisoners were
about being admitted, and not caring either to see or be seen by them,
he again threw himself full length upon the bench. An instant more and a
gush of cool air swept, over him, and a hand fell cautiously on his
shoulder.

He raised his head, and met the twinkling eyes of Mr. Clinton fixed upon
him.

"Hush!" whispered Clinton, laying his finger on his lips, as he saw
Arthur about to speak. "Not a word; pick yourself up as noiselessly as
you can, and get out of this hole. You are free."

Arthur glanced towards the door, and saw there the watchman who had
arrested them, standing with a dogged expression of countenance in the
gray light, and shaking nervously in his hand a gold coin.

He comprehended in a moment, as it were instinctively, that Clinton had
procured his release by a bribe; and though he felt to rejoice in his
freedom, he shrunk at feeling that he must be under obligations to such
a man for it.

He drew his hat over his eyes, and went out softly. As he gained the
open air, Quirk joined him, leaning on the arm of Mr. Clinton, and
evidently not yet wholly recovered from what he was pleased to
denominate a "dem fine spree."

"See what it is to have a friend, _mon cher_!" exclaimed Clinton,
slapping Arthur upon the shoulder. "But for our acquaintance to-day, you
might have come up for trial this morning, and been sent down for thirty
days. 'Oh! my boy, always consider me one of you.'"

"Had I not so far forgotten myself as to be one of _you_ to-day, I would
probably have never seen the inside of such a place as this. Whatever
expense you may have encountered in my behalf, this night, Mr. Clinton,
consider me accountable for, and ready to refund at any moment."

Arthur spoke proudly, and experienced a sentiment of utter disgust, as
he looked upon the two beings who had led him into sin, and been
witnesses to his weakness. He felt that, in a measure, his good name lay
in their hands, but he could not bend that proud spirit--humbled and
chastened though it then was--to treat them in the slightest degree as
his equals, or to accept, unrequited, any favor from such a source.

"Don't be huffy, boy," said Clinton, again; "and don't insult me by
offering _pay_ for what I've done! It's what I'd expect you to do for me
in such a case, and I reckon I'd be a little grateful for it, too."

"Don't parley with him," chimed in Quirk, bending to the spout of a
public hydrant at the same moment, and drinking a long draught. "You
see, Clint, he's a fresh hand at this kind of life, and don't know the
ropes yet. Let him alone."

Arthur deigned not the slightest reply to this, and hastily turning into
a side-street, left Mr. Clinton considerably in the rear, to bring up
his "dear friend Quirk."

Free from the companionship of beings whom he detested, Arthur removed
his hat, and lifted his brow to receive the breath of heaven. The sun
was not yet risen, and save the occasional clatter of a market-cart, as
it went jostling by, or the sluggish step of some sleepy servant, on his
way to procure the breakfast for his fastidious owners, there was no
signs of life or business in the streets.

Arthur was glad of this, and he thought of the alley-way between the
store and the adjoining building, and the steep stairs which led from
the back of this alley to his own room, and as he happened to have the
key of this door about him, he hoped to effect an entrance by this way,
and, if possible, to conceal from his brother the fact of his having
been absent all night.

Elated by this prospect, he struck into a brisk pace toward
Charles-street, and, having gained it, hurried rapidly onward in the
direction of the store. He was within two blocks of his destination when
two figures suddenly turned the corner ahead, and advanced towards him.
There was no mistaking the slender form of the one with golden ringlets
floating from his brow, and the tall, stalwart figure of the other was
instantly recognized by Arthur, though part of the face was concealed by
a handkerchief, tied over the mouth, as if the wearer was suffering from
tooth-ache.

There was no way of retreat, save to turn short round, and go back,
which was something that pride would not permit him to do; so assuming
as bold an air as he could, with that heavy heart in his bosom, he
walked on and met Guly and Wilkins, face to face.

"Ah! Arthur, good morning," said the latter, indifferently, as if
nothing had happened; "I see you are enjoying a stroll, as well as
ourselves, this fine morning."

"Mr. Wilkins has been showing me about the city," said Guly, taking his
brother's hand, "and giving me such directions about the streets as will
enable me to go round alone."

"If your walk is not finished allow me to join you," returned Arthur,
slipping his hand through his brother's arm, and turning back with them.

He was evidently surprised at the cool manner in which his absence was
treated, and had been very far from expecting such a reception. From
Guly, at least, he had thought to hear some exclamations of joy at his
return, some questions and many reproofs.

But this was the course which Wilkins had advised to be pursued before
they started out, and Guly obeyed him to the letter. It was,
undoubtedly, the best mode they could have hit upon--for, to have
questioned him, to have rebuked him, would have been to again arouse
that fierce pride, and call forth some false excuse for his behavior. As
it was, he was left to believe that Wilkins was unaware of what had
passed, and that Guly only guessed half the truth, or, if he did, was
kind enough to conceal his thoughts. This roused a glow of generous
feeling, and he felt that he could only be happy in confessing all to
his brother.

The three walked on, chatting carelessly about indifferent matters,
until Wilkins declared it to be breakfast time; when they turned back
toward their restaurant.

As usual, the head clerk ordered his bottle of claret, and, as it was
brought on, he offered it to Arthur. An expression of ineffable disgust
crossed the youth's face as he refused it, which Wilkins remarked with a
quiet, half-concealed smile.

It was with a racking headache and a fevered frame, that Arthur took his
place in the store that morning. He could not plead illness as a pretext
for absence, for there was one who he knew would be there that knew his
secret all too well, and he could not trust him with it. As there were
but few customers in that morning, however, he drew a stool behind the
counter, and seated himself; an act which placed at defiance one of the
strictest rules of the establishment.

He had scarcely done so when Mr. Delancey entered the door, and passed
up between the lines of clerks, with his cold eyes, as usual, turning
rapidly hither and thither, never looking for the right, but always for
the wrong.

As his glance fell upon Arthur he stopped short, and, in a tone loud
enough to be heard all over the store, exclaimed:--

"Haven't you been here long enough, young man, to know better than to
sit down during business hours?"

Arthur rose and put away his stool with a flushed cheek, stammering out
something about not feeling quite well that morning.

"It's very evident," returned the merchant, running his practised eye
over the wan lines of Arthur's face, "that you've been having a Sunday
night spree, in order, I s'pose, to have a Monday morning benefit. But
it won't do here; stick to your post, and if I catch you in that
lounging position again, you lose your place."

Without another word the merchant walked to the big desk, holding the
head of his walking stick against his lips as he went.

Arthur raised his eyes, and although he had striven all the morning to
avoid it, he caught the gaze of Charley Quirk fixed upon him, and
received a quick, sly wink from his left eye.

That wink affected him like a blast of winter wind, and he felt chilled
all over. The thought rushed upon him, too, that Charley had been
keeping up an artillery of winks like that, to the other clerks, while
Mr. Delancey was speaking, and he was assured that his case was
understood throughout the house.

Wilkins, who had been regarding him steadily from behind the open door,
stepped down from his place, and, sauntering towards the proprietor,
addressed a few words to him in an under tone.

The merchant nodded in reply, impatiently, and waved his hand.

The head clerk came back again, and laying his hand on Arthur's
shoulder, said, quietly:--

"I overheard you, I think, saying to Mr. Delancey you were not quite
well. You are unacclimated, remember, and must take care of yourself. Go
up stairs, and see if lying down awhile will not restore you."

Although Arthur felt certain now, that Wilkins knew all, he felt
inexpressibly grateful for his apparent ignorance of it, and his
kindness towards him, and showed as much in his manner.

"You hesitate--would you rather not go?"

"To tell the truth, Wilkins, I dislike to pass Mr. Delancey on my way
to bed. He will see, too, that my place is vacant, and perhaps discharge
me."

"No! You have his permission to go; your place will be taken care of by
the next clerk."

"You are very kind."

"No--not a bit of it."

With a smile upon his pale lips, Arthur stepped out of the front-door,
and turned into the narrow alley, which lay between the store and the
adjoining building, and which was arched overhead, damp under foot, and
hung with dirt and cobwebs. He reached a small door at the further end,
which led to the right into a narrow paved court, where was a hydrant,
which the clerks used for washing and drink.

He stopped here for a moment, to bathe his burning brow and quench his
parching thirst. As he bent down to place his lips to the faucet, a dark
figure sprang out from beneath the staircase behind, and darted through
the alley door, and out of sight.

Startled and surprised, Arthur ran down the alley swiftly, in pursuit,
and gaining the street, looked anxiously up and down, in a vain hope of
seeing some one who would satisfy his curiosity as to who or what it
was; for it had passed him so fleetly and lightly, that he could almost
believe it had been a shadow. He could see nothing, however; but
catching a glimpse of Mr. Clinton, leisurely sauntering down the other
side of the street, smoking a cigar, he hurried back, lest he should be
seen by him, and locked the alley door behind him, saying, as he did
so--"It was a careless trick in whoever left that open; I'll see to it
myself in future;" and then walked back to inspect the hiding-place of
the shadow, or whatever it was.

It was the niche formed by the steep flight of stairs; and, as there was
a number of old barrels there, and other rubbish, it afforded a fine
place for concealment, especially on a dark night. As it was directly in
front of the hydrant, and Arthur's back had in the first place been
toward it, whoever was there had evidently feared detection, when he
should turn round, and so fled.

Into this court the long windows of the back part of the store opened,
and it was this way that Minny had found egress on the night of her
visit to Wilkins; and it was this way that Jeff, whose invariable
honesty rendered him a privileged character about the place, always
found egress on Sundays, and other hours when the store was closed.

Musing upon the circumstances which had just occurred, Arthur took the
way to his room, and flung himself upon his bed.

It was easy to see what had been Guly's occupation during the previous
day of loneliness. There lay the Bible open, on the little rough stand;
there was the strip of carpet rumpled before the chair, where he had
been kneeling--and there was the folded letter, sealed and directed to
his mother.

Arthur turned upon his pillow with a moan. How differently had his
Sabbath been spent, and how different, in consequence, were his Monday
morning reflections! But his sorrow was not a repentant sorrow. It had
been in the morning, when he first met Guly and Wilkins, but he was
changed now. Had he not been rebuked harshly by his employer, in the
presence of all the clerks? Had he not been openly accused of the error
he had committed, read through and through by those cold, staring eyes?
Had not the attention of all the clerks been turned towards him, and his
secret been laid bare to them by the merchant's reproof, and quick,
malicious glances?

There was no longer any need of further concealment, with the resolution
of future improvement--it was all known--and to draw back henceforth,
would be but to be reminded that he had already fallen once, and could
never retake the step he had made. Such was the view Arthur took of the
case, however false a light his pride may have cast upon it; and he
buried his face, with the glow of shame upon it, deep in the pillow,
while, with bitter resentment, his young heart traced it all back to the
primal cause--the contemptuous repulse he had met with at Delancey's pew
door.

It is not a question for reflection, where the punishment for Arthur's
first real sin should rest? Was it for that young heart, till now free
from all taint or corruption, save the corruption of pride, to suffer
alone? or was it for the older and stronger spirit--the spirit stronger
still in pride, and so much older in firmness, and power, and
discipline, to bear its share?


CHAPTER IX.

_Contrition._


At noontime Guly told Wilkins that if he would bring him a trifle of
fruit from the Restaurant, or something of that kind, he would spend the
time allowed him for dinner with his brother, and would much prefer it.

Wilkins very cordially assented, and Guly mounted the winding stairs
slowly and thoughtfully, pushed open the old door at the head of the
staircase, which was covered with the big-lettered advertisements, and
stood before his sleeping brother.

The bar was drawn back; and, fully dressed, Arthur lay upon the humble
bed. Perhaps the first plunge into dissipation leaves a deeper
impression on youthful beauty, than the continued practice begun in
older years.

Guly was startled at the change in his brother's features, which one
night of excitement had wrought. He could see it now, as he lay there
sleeping, more perfectly than when he had been with him in the morning,
with his face full of ever-varying expression. There was a wasting upon
the skin; deep black marks beneath the eyes; the lips were pale, and the
nose seemed pinched; and his whole appearance was that of one
convalescing after a severe fit of sickness.

Guly approached, and taking a low seat by the bedside, laid his face
softly down beside his brother's on the pillow, and reaching over,
clasped his fingers gently round one burning hand. He lay quite still,
with his eyes fixed upon the sleeper's face. Who could tell, save He who
knoweth all things, what thoughts were rushing through that throbbing
heart, as it nestled there closer and closer, to all it held dear in
that distant land?

The blue eyes filled suddenly full of tears, bright and pure, even as
that boy's path of life had ever been, and dropped down, one by one,
upon the pillow. There was no visible cause for them, but they kept
falling, those pure bright tears, till the fair cheeks over which they
fell were bathed, and the pillow damped.

Was there a shadow-like presentiment creeping over that young spirit
then, telling him to nestle close, close, for the time was coming when
those two hearts would throb no more beside each other, and that the
waves of life's ocean would some day cast one upon the shore, and bear
the other far out to sea? Even so! It was dim, ghost-like, and
undefined; but still the shadow flitted there darkly!

The sleeper turned restlessly, and uttered a plaintive moan. It was not
a moan of pain, but one of sympathy; as if the grief in the heart beside
him had crept into his own. He lifted one arm wearily, and it fell back
upon the pillow, and the unconscious fingers lifted the rings of jetty
hair from the fevered brow.

That bright brow! that pale, proud brow! how it gleamed out in contrast
with those glossy curls. Guly gazed upon it, then lifted his head and
kissed it; and the tears, still quivering on his lashes, fell upon
it--that brother's brow!

Arthur opened his eyes, and gazed up steadily at the face bent over him.
There was something in the expression of that face which went over his
heart like a strain of touching music. He could not bear that it should
be turned away from him, or that he should lose it, and he raised both
hands, and, laying them among the silken curls, held it there.

"Oh, Guly! Guly! do you know all?"

"Dear Arthur! don't speak of this."

"Yet you have sorrowed for me; you have grieved, and been silent, and
unreproachful. Oh, Guly! what a wretch I am!"

"Hush, Arthur! oh, don't, don't!"

The tears fell down again, unrestrainedly, upon that pale brow, gleaming
up from the jetty locks, and for a moment neither spoke.

"I feel, Guly, as though I had taken a long leap into sin--such a long
one, that I shall never get back; and everything seems at work to keep
me in it. What shall I ever, ever do--I am so weak--so--so--"

"Oh, Arthur, look up--look ever up. God's finger points out the way to
you from the sky; trust yourself to its holy guidance, and be strong."

"Guly, I can't. It seems a long while since I prayed at all--since
yesterday I seem to have lived an age, and it is black, all black!"

"Nay, Arthur, you have wandered a few hours from the fold, and your
sight is darkened; but the Great Shepherd calls to you with His gentle
voice to return. Listen, and obey."

"I should only fall again."

"Trust, and you shall be strengthened."

"Oh, Guly, I have not your mind nor heart. I cannot be patient, and
meek, and charitable, through all things, as you can; I have so much
pride that I _cannot_ calmly bear reproof, and here I am fretted, and
crushed, and ridiculed into sin all the time, and am too weak to make
resistance."

"Try, and remember in your heart _how_ we are here. Bear in your mind
that we no longer have the wealth or influence that we once had; and
that if we ever are to have them again, depends upon the way we acquit
ourselves here. Learn to bear and forbear; and in the end, Arthur, you
will come out so brightly, with your pride perhaps subdued, but not
conquered, and we shall once more be happy."

Arthur sighed.

"And oh, Arthur! oh, my brother! think, we two are all to each other
here. We have nought to lean upon save each other's love and _Him_. Dear
Arthur, if you should--if one of us should be led into temptation, and
should fall, and should go down into the pit of sin, what a blank would
be the existence of the other! Oh! let us pray that our hearts may be
bound together, and that no shadow may be allowed to fall upon or divide
us."

"Oh, Guly, Guly!"

Arthur started up, and throwing his arms about his brother's form, as he
crept up closer to his side, drew the bright head down upon his bosom,
and held it there, rocking backwards and forwards where he sat.

"Pray God, indeed!" he murmured, earnestly, lifting his swimming eyes to
Heaven, "that I may sin no more. That I may ever keep bright the links
of this dear love, which is to us as the thread of life; and oh! may He
whose ways are the ways of righteousness, take us by the hand, like
little children, and guide our steps aright."

"Amen! Amen!"


CHAPTER X.

_The Merchant at Home._


It was late when Della awoke, and Minny lay with her cheek on her hand,
just fallen into her first sleep.

"Minny! Minny!"

"Bernard!" murmured the girl, in her half-disturbed sleep.

"Minny, I say!"

"Yes, Miss."

"Bring me my watch, Min, and show me the hour. Didn't I hear you say
'Bernard,' just now, in your sleep? You haven't any Bernard; that's for
me to say."

"No, Miss, I haven't any Bernard."

"Well, then, you shouldn't talk so in your sleep."

"True enough."

"Well, no matter, Minny; it wasn't my Bernard you mean't, I am quite
sure. May be you were talking about those priests on that great snowy
mountain, somewhere in the world, which you made me so sleepy reading
about the other evening?"

"The Monks of St. Bernard, Miss."

"Yes; how droll!"

"Will you get up, Miss Della?"

"Yes; how late, Min? I forgot to look, after all."

"A quarter past nine."

"Papa must have gone."

"He never goes down street before seeing you."

"Dear papa! Minny, wheel my little chair in front of the dressing-glass.
I'll be with you in a second."

"It is ready, Miss."

"There, Min, I left my note under my pillow! Bring it, and let me read
it again while you dress my hair."

Minny obeyed.

"Minny, I wonder if it's as delightful to be a wife as it is to have a
lover?"

"It seems strange to hear you talking about either, Miss."

"Why, Minny, I am old enough, I am sure."

"Yes, but you seem so very young; no one thinks about your being married
yet."

"Mother does."

"Not to this man, Miss Della. For worlds I wouldn't dictate; but, Miss,
if all this secresy and deceit ends as it seems it will, isn't it going
to break your mother's heart?"

"I expect so, Minny; every mother's heart is broken when her daughter
gets married; but it heals up always, and is as good as ever."

Oh! Della, Della!

"But, Miss, when she finds how deceitful you have been, after all her
doting kindness, and love, and--"

"Don't be tiresome, Minny. Deceitful! oh, that's awful--you know I never
was deceitful."

"No, no! There, don't cry! Call it secresy or anything; but when it is
discovered, I say, think what a house of misery this will be."

"Well, Minny, if there's misery it won't be my fault, I'm sure. You know
very well that papa wouldn't have me notice Bernard, much more than I
would Black Voltaire. If he would, don't you suppose I would be very
glad to show him all my letters, and to tell him how we love each other,
and all that? But now, if I did, he'd rave, and go into a furious
passion, shut me up, maybe, and send Bernard to Europe, or some other
horrid place. Oh, I should be frightened to death."

"That's the very thing, Miss; he looks so high for you."

"Bernard is just as high as papa was when he first came here,--but
there's another thing; don't you know I'm not allowed to see any one an
instant alone, that wears pantaloons? The very instant that a gentleman
calls, and says he'd like to see Miss Della, doesn't papa or mamma, or
that provoking old governess, march straight into the parlor, and
receive them before me? And isn't it very provoking? Why, even little
Charley Devans, a boy three years younger than I, called to tell me a
little innocent secret his sister had sent by him, and wasn't there
mamma, as straight as a marshal, in one chair, and my governess, stiff
as my new parasol-top, in the other, and he couldn't say a word? But you
know he met me in the street that day you walked out with me, and told
me all about it."

"Yes, Miss, but this is all for your good."

"No, Minny, it is all for my hurt. Though, maybe, they don't know it.
Now, don't you see that if young Mr. Devans could have seen me alone but
one little minute that day, he wouldn't have planned a clandestine
meeting, and so make me do a very naughty thing, by walking alone with
him, after having been charged never to walk alone with any gentleman?"

"Yes, Miss."

"Well, Minny, I don't often reflect, you know--but the other day, after
I had received a note from Bernard, I sat down and reflected a long
time. And it was on this subject. And I came to the conclusion, that all
this watching--just raise that bandeau a trifle higher--and spying, for
it is nothing else, on the part of mammas and governesses, has a very
bad tendency, indeed. Don't you see that it throws a kind of mystery
about the men, and, right away, young girls--and it's natural for young
girls to be curious--want to find out what there is so very awful about
them, and go to work to do it?"

Minny looked up surprised; she had never heard her mistress talk so fast
and so long before.

"And then, Minny, see how many very young girls get married to men
almost old enough to be their grandfathers, here. Can't you see the
reason? It's so that they can be their own mistresses, and say and do
what they like. I've had them tell me so after marriage; and then
they're almost always sure to begin to flirt a little, and enjoy
themselves in this happy way they ought to have been left to do when
single; and then their old curmudgeons of husbands get jealous, and
angry, and then there are dreadful times! Oh, dear! I think it is a
terrible state of society!

"Now, Minny, I'll tell you just how I feel when a gentleman calls here.
There's mamma, and maybe the governess, in the parlor (now I would
rather have them there than not, if I didn't know just what they were
there for;) well, the governess fixes her eyes on me when I go in, and
seems to say, 'Don't forget your Grecian bend;' and mamma looks down at
my feet, and seems to say, 'Be sure and turn out your toes'--and the
consequence is, I forget both, and feel red all over, and know that I'm
acting like a very silly little fool. I sit down, and both pairs of
those eyes are on me; and both pairs of those ears are wide open, and
I'm as ungraceful as a giraffe; when I know, if left to act naturally,
and wasn't watched all the time, I could appear very well. Then a young
man here, no matter of how high family he is, or how good or how
worthy, if he happens to be ever so poor, and feels as if he'd like to
take some young lady to a play or concert, or anything, he's not only
got to take her, but two or three duennas to keep himself and her
straight; and it's such a tax on him, that if he does it often he's
always poor; and then mothers turn up their noses at him, and say he's
not eligible, and all that.

"Who could have been more strict, as it is called, with any daughter
than Madame Gerot with Louise? Yet see how admirably she turned out!
_Mon Dieu!_ it was frightful! Then there's a dozen other cases I could
cite almost like her. I tell you, Minny, young people can't learn each
other's characters at all, unless they're alone by themselves a little
time. But here, a man must pay his devoirs, and make his proposals, with
a third person's eyes upon him all the time; and has almost to court the
mother as much as the daughter, if not more. Oh! these things make
courting very unpleasant, and marriage sometimes very unhappy, when both
should be the happiest seasons of one's life. Ah, me! it's very hard to
have mothers always act as if their daughters hadn't judgment enough to
be trusted alone a minute."

"Do daughters prove themselves trustworthy always, Miss, when they are
left alone?"

"If mothers would make daughters trustworthy, Minny, I tell you they
must trust them. Society is not conducted in this manner in the North,
yet I believe the young people there are better by far than they are
here. But I don't care much about it now. I used to--but I shall be
married some day to the man I want, and be happy in my own way.

"There, Minny, does that fold, just arranged, look well? Do I appear
quite elegant and pretty now?"

"Quite, Miss."

"What a long lecture I've read you, Minny. I feel quite exhausted, I
declare, and quite like going to bed again. Here's Bernard's letter--put
it with the rest, and take precious, precious care of it."

Fanning herself languidly, Della moved slowly away towards the
breakfast-room. A servant stood waiting to open the door for her, with
an obsequious bow, and she stood in the presence of her parents.

"Dear dort!" cried her mother, (making as she thought an affectionate
abbreviation of daughter,) "what is the matter that you look so flushed
and excited this morning? Your cheeks are really vulgarly red; dear me,
I hope they'll pale off a little before evening."

"Good morning, Della," said Mr. Delancey, formally, who even at home sat
in his usual position, bolt upright in his chair; "good morning; I'm
glad to see that you have acquired a graceful manner of entering a
breakfast-room."

"If I keep on improving, papa, you will give me the promised winter in
Havana I suppose?"

"I suppose so, my child. I wish to make you very happy."

There was a softness in Mr. Delancey's cold eyes, as he spoke, which one
would no sooner have expected to see there, than they would thought to
have seen a rock melt. Only his daughter could bring it there.

"Miss Della," said the governess, "your attitude is a trifle too
stiff--a little more of the bend, if you please."

Miss Della tipped a little.

"Dort, darling," said Mrs. Delancey, "pray don't display such an
appetite--it is really frightful to see you eat so much. A young lady
like you should be very delicate at table."

"And pay long visits to the cupboard between meals, eh, mamma?"

Mr. Delancey looked anxiously to note the progress his daughter had made
in the viands before her.

"Don't do anything _outré_ in public, Della, no matter what you are
obliged to do in private."

"No, papa."

"I want to see you very perfect in all things,--in all things, Della--do
you understand?"

"Yes, papa."

"Make it your aim to be everything a young lady can be. Remember you
are all the child that's left me now. All my hopes are upon you--try
never, never to disappoint me!"

Mr. Delancey rarely spoke so feelingly--it was a rare manner for him,
and the effect of his words was very strange. Della's elegantly
embroidered kerchief was clasped suddenly to her face, and she burst
into a violent fit of weeping.

"Della, how un-self-possessed! you astonish me."

"You shouldn't have made that allusion to her brother," said Mrs.
Delancey, sympathizingly.

"Dry your eyes immediately, Della; I am ready to go," said her father,
sternly.

Della choked back her tears, and rising, approached her father, and
gracefully put her lips to his forehead, and gave the usual morning
kiss.

"No more scenes to-day, Della."

"No, papa."

The door closed, and he was gone.


CHAPTER XI.

    "Then I'll look up;
    My fault is past. But oh, what form of prayer
    Can serve my turn?
    Try what repentance can: what can it not?
    Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?"

    Hamlet.


When Guly returned to his place that afternoon, Arthur was at his side;
and when both raised their eyes to Wilkins' face, as they passed him, he
read there an expression of calm tranquillity, such a trustful, happy
look of hopefulness, that he could not restrain the cheering smile of
encouragement, which came up to his lips in answer.

A great change had taken place in Arthur's face--or rather in its
expression. There was no longer the glance of proud defiance in the
eye--the flash of wounded pride upon the cheek, or curl of scorn upon
the lip. All was subdued and quiet, and seemed to whisper of a peaceful,
contrite heart. Still he studiously avoided the eye of Charley Quirk,
and also seemed to wish to appear oblivious of the presence of the
flint-eyed being sitting stiffly at the high desk.

He could not trust himself to meet the gaze of either, lest the storm of
pride and revenge, so lately banished from his breast, should return
again in full force,--sweeping away, with its ocean strength, all the
great resolves of future good, which he had piled up as a barrier
against the door of evil in his heart.

Though his sleep in a degree refreshed him, his head still ached; and
throughout his whole frame he experienced that feverish debility and
painful soreness ever attendant upon a night of dissipation and
exposure.

With a firm heart Arthur filled his place, and performed his duties
unshrinkingly, cheered and encouraged by the beaming face of his
brother, which ever and anon was turned toward him, with such a look of
happy confidence and love, that it could not fail to carry inspiration
with it.

Then night came; and after the goods, which during the day had been
pulled down, were properly replaced, Guly took his brother's arm, and
started out for a walk.

They strolled slowly along toward the Place D'Arms, which then possessed
all that natural beauty, in the shape of its green lawns and ancient
sycamores, which fashion has since seen fit to regard as an eyesore, and
to remove for ever thence.

They were silent; for the mind of each was busily occupied with its own
reflections; reflections good and effective in themselves, yet to which
neither wished at that moment to give utterance, and no allusion,
however distant, was made to the events of the previous day.

Suddenly, a trembling hand was laid on Guly's arm, and a supplicating
voice murmured humbly: "Un picayune, Monsieur; in pity, Monsieur, one
picayune to buy me bread."

By the light of a street lamp, Guly saw a pale and wrinkled face, in
which deep lines of grief or misfortune were deeply traced, raised
pleadingly toward him. The face was so old, yet so very much lower than
himself, that he at first thought the speaker must be in a sitting
posture there, beneath the lamp. But a second glance showed to his
wondering gaze the veriest dwarf his eyes had ever fallen upon. In
height, the figure was not taller than a child of four years; yet the
head was very large, the face possessed of its full growth of cunning
and experience, the shoulders broad, but painfully humped, and the whole
upper portion of the body immensely too large for the short and slender
limbs, which served for its support. And yet, as if all this wretched
deformity were not enough, one leg was shorter than the other, and the
foot was a club one. To assist him in walking, he carried a pair of
crutches, apparently much too long for him, which raised his spindle
arms in their loose sockets, and rendered the hump more horrible. When
he moved, his crutches spread out on either side of him, as he swung
along between them, taking up a vast deal of room without any apparent
necessity. His coat had apparently been the property of some great man
of the previous century, for it was braided and embroidered, and trimmed
to an extent rarely seen in the present age; and the immense holes in
the elbows, and the tatters in the skirt, laughed heartily at the rusty
trimmings which it bore. It was so long and large too, that it almost
precluded the necessity of any other clothes, for it quite enveloped his
whole person, as he swung along between his crutches, dragged on the
ground behind like the train of a lady's dress. His pantaloons had also
once belonged to some full grown specimen of humanity, but had been torn
off to suit the dimensions of the present owner--and, altogether, the
appearance of this miserable object, with his one blind eye, and the
cunning leer in the other, was calculated to excite both pity and
disgust. The brothers looked upon him for a moment in mute astonishment,
until again startled by that squeaking, supplicating voice--"Un
picayune, Monsieur--one picayune to buy me bread!"

Guly took a dime from his purse, and dropped it into the ragged cap
which the beggar extended, while he held his crutches by pressing his
arms close to his body. As the piece dropped into its ragged receptacle,
he shook it up from the greasy folds, and tipped his left eye down to
look upon it, not unlike a vulture glancing down at its prey. After
eyeing it a moment, he held the cap toward Arthur, as if expecting
something from that quarter.

Arthur had already searched every pocket for the change, which he felt
certain was there the day before; but, to his utter astonishment, it was
all gone, together with a very beautiful portemonnaie his mother had
given him when he left her, and in which, the day before, he had placed
two ten dollar bills, for the purpose of sending home when he should
write.

He knew he could not have spent it all in yesterday's rout, and the
conviction forced itself painfully upon his mind that he had been
robbed.

As the mendicant held forth his cap, he shook his head, and showed his
empty hands, at which movement the old man raised his eyebrows
inquisitively, and muttered a most disagreeable and chuckling "Hih! hih!
hih! hih!" He then picked out the dime with trembling fingers, and
slipped it quickly into some unseen deposit about his person; then, with
one more lift of his grey brows, adjusted his crutches, and swung
himself away.

The brothers gazed after the receding figure, until the mist entirely
obscured it, and the skirts of the long coat could no longer be heard
trailing on the pavement; then, again linking their arms, proceeded on
their way.

Although Guly dwelt wonderingly upon the incident they had just met
with, Arthur maintained a moody silence; nor could aught that his
brother said, direct his thoughts from the new course the recent event
had turned them upon.

The time had been, when the loss he had met with would have been
regarded as one of no importance whatever; but he felt now, and deeply
felt, that it was more than he could afford to spend foolishly, more
than even his generous impulses would have allowed him to charitably
dispose of, and more by far than he could patiently submit to be
defrauded of. As he thought thus, his good resolutions of the morning in
a measure melted away before his indignant resentment, and vague plans
were floating through his mind, as to how he might and would recover it,
the bearing he should feel called upon to assume when next he met Mr.
Clinton, &c., &c. To tell Guly of the loss he had sustained, after some
reflection, he decided was out of the question. True, he had been gentle
and forbearing with regard to all that had passed, but he would not
reveal this new discovery to him--perhaps dreading more the rebuking
silence of those loving lips, than the stormy reproaches he might have
met with from another source.

Guly had seen that nothing had been bestowed upon the beggar by his
brother; but he forbore to question him, lest it should lead them upon a
subject unpleasant to both; and thus grew up the first concealment
between those hitherto confiding hearts.

Reaching the square, they passed through the gate, and turned into a
grassy walk, to enjoy ever so small a glimpse of verdant country scenes.
Strolling on, they came suddenly upon a figure reclining at full length
upon a bench, and smoking a cigar. As they approached, there was
something in the man's appearance that seemed to startle Arthur, for he
clutched his brother's arm closer, and turned abruptly to the left; but
he was too late to pass unperceived, for, with a bound, the reclining
figure gained its feet, and in an instant more Arthur's hand received a
cordial grasp, while Mr. Clinton, as nicely dressed, as neatly curled,
and as delicately perfumed as ever, stood before him.


CHAPTER XII.

    "How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
    Makes ill deeds done!"


"My dear fellow, how glad I am to meet you!" cried Clinton, cordially
extending his hand in a manner which permitted the diamond on his finger
to catch the light, in what he thought a most bewildering glitter.

Arthur would have shunned him, as his new resolutions and good genius
prompted him to do; but there was that graceful form half-bent for his
greeting, there was that smiling face, looking its hearty "How are you?"
there was the social yet searching glance of that glittering eye, all
saying, "Shake hands with me," and Arthur did.

"Mr. Clinton, how do you do?"

"Well, my boy, well; really hope you've got over the effects of your
Carrolton ride. By-the-by, Quirk got you into that muss, not I, by Jove!
You were inclined to be a little huffy this morning; however you were
excusable--that's all forgotten. You'll do me justice now--there, give
me your hand again, and tell me you consider me one of you."

Arthur's generous heart could not withstand this merry, good-humored,
yet apparently sincere appeal, and the hand was again given. He thought,
too, that he might have been unjust in his reflections about Clinton,
for he had met him only by chance on his way to Carrolton, and in truth
he had urged him to no wrong, but had only joined him in what he was
already doing. Then, had he not kindly been the means of liberating him
from the watch-house, when he might otherwise have been left to meet the
shame and expense of a public trial? Verily, he had much for which to be
grateful to Mr. Clinton, and with one of those sudden impulses, natural
to a hasty temper and impetuous spirit, he sought instantly to make
amends for what now seemed the unjust and unkindly sentiments he had all
day been entertaining toward his new friend.

"Mr. Clinton, I fear I have blamed you most wrongfully. However, let all
this, as you say, be forgotten."

"That's it, my boy, I knew I wasn't mistaken in you. You've just the
heart there, in your bosom, that I was sure you had when I first saw
you. Believe me, I am proud to know that heart."

Arthur was but human, and, like all humanity, the gilded pill of
flattery was swallowed without the aid of sweetmeats. He could not but
remember, with a great deal of compunction, the great wrong he had, as
he felt, done Clinton in harboring towards him such unkindly thoughts.

"Oh, Mr. Clinton, pray pardon my neglect!" said he, suddenly turning
toward that young gentleman. "Allow me to make you acquainted with my
brother. Gulian--Mr. Clinton."

Guly bowed distantly. Those young eyes had seen deeper into the heart
before him, in the few minutes that he had been an observer of its
impulses, than Arthur had seen, or at least decided upon, in forty-eight
hours of mingled acquaintanceship and reflection. True, the boy knew but
little of the world; but there are some, and they are not the worldly
and suspicious, but the pure-minded and gentle, that shrink intuitively
from a polluting presence, scarce knowing from what they shrink. There
was much in Mr. Clinton which Guly saw to dread, as a companion for his
brother; and, at their first recognition, he was assured it was one of
Arthur's yesterday acquaintances, and felt a pang of disappointment at
not seeing him differently received by his brother.

"Where are you strolling?" asked Mr. Clinton, breaking a pause, which
had followed Guly's cool reception of himself.

"Merely out for a walk," returned Arthur; "it's only before and after
business hours, you know, that we have time for recreation."

"True, true," replied the other, stroking his chin, and speaking in a
commiserating tone. "Ah, that must be terribly dull business, for young
chaps like you. I always pity a clerk."

"Indeed, sir," said Guly, "we neither deserve nor need pity; we have
everything to make us contented and happy in our new situation, and
appreciate it, I assure you."

Mr. Clinton glanced for an instant keenly at the speaker, then answered,
with a light laugh:--

"Yes, yes, just so; I didn't apply my remark beyond myself; in fact,
it's something _I_ never could stand."

"We have extended our walk as far as we intended for to-night, have we
not, brother? Mr. Clinton, we bid you good evening," said Guly, as they,
for the third time, gained the gate by which they had entered the
square.

Mr. Clinton looked up in astonishment.

"No! you don't mean to leave so? Come, let's just step over to
Royal-street, and take a glass of soda-water. You will find it so
refreshing."

Poor Arthur "felt his pockets bare," and was about to refuse, when Mr.
Clinton slipped a hand through his arm, and drew him with him, saying,
as he did so:--

"You know it's _my_ treat this time, Pratt. Don't refuse a friend."

As Arthur moved away with him, Guly determined not to leave his side for
an instant, while in the presence of so dangerous a companion, and
though his heart went down as he saw Arthur thus forgeting all his
new-formed resolutions, yet he hoped for the best, and went with him
resolutely.

They entered a richly ornamented saloon, where all that could please the
palate or tickle the taste was most temptingly displayed; and Clinton,
tossing a gold half-eagle upon the marble counter, called for "a few
choice titbits and a bottle of wine."

As the last desideratum was named, Guly glanced anxiously toward his
brother, but Arthur's eye was turned another way, and when the collation
was brought he sat readily down at the table by Clinton's side. Guly did
not wish to appear ill-bred or impolite, and he accepted the hearty
invitation of his new acquaintance to "sit by," with as good a grace as
he could command. Of the wine, however, he could not be prevailed upon
to touch a drop--though he did not fail to perceive the sneer that
curled Mr. Clinton's thin lip at his refusal.

"You don't mean to say," said the last mentioned gentleman,
half-pityingly, "that you expect to remain in New-Orleans any length of
time without learning to drink wine?"

"I shall never touch a drop, sir, unless absolutely necessary in a case
of sickness."

"Bah! anybody would know you were from the North, my dear fellow, just
by that speech. Nobody hesitates to drink wine here, unless those who
are too poor to pay for it"--and the speaker glanced keenly, but slyly,
at Guly's face, then added: "Why, it's impossible here to avoid
drinking, even if you would. A young man calls upon a lady, and the
first thing she thinks of offering him after a seat is a glass of wine.
It is always there on the sideboard, and to refuse would be an act of
utter impoliteness. What could you do in such a case, my boy, eh?"

"I should, I hope, have sufficient courage to tell the young lady I
never drank, and must be excused; and if she liked me the less for it, I
would bear in mind that if such an act deprived me of her good will, her
good will certainly was not worth retaining."

"I should like to see you tried once, with a pretty girl in the case,"
returned Clinton, gulping down a second glass.

"I cannot wonder at the depraved state of society in this city," said
Guly, earnestly, "when woman, who should be the first to frown upon and
discountenance such practices, not only is the tempter, but the hearty
partaker of them. I am certain if the other sex were more strict--would
positively refuse to attend places of amusement on Sabbath evenings,
would refrain utterly from drinking wine themselves, and offering it to
others--there would be a great change here for the better. Woman little
thinks how much of man's depravity can be traced back to be laid upon
her shoulders."

"Nonsense!" said Clinton, with a short laugh. "Women, you'll find when
you've been here long enough, have less to do with it than rain-water
full of wriggle-tails, as they call those young animals that fill our
cisterns in summer time, and the no less disagreeable--to one not a
native here--muddy water from the river as a beverage. One is absolutely
forced to 'tip the goblet red,' in order to have something palatable to
rinse down his food. Woman, indeed! Poh! come, have a glass, and be
social."

"No," said Guly, firmly, drawing back; "I will not drink. However you
may scoff, Mr. Clinton, at woman's influence, it is to that I impute my
strength to withstand temptation here. My last promise to my mother, was
never to become a wine-bibber, and I shall keep it."

"Bravo!" exclaimed Clinton. "Here's a bumper to your resolution and your
mother," and touching glasses with Arthur, he swallowed the contents of
his goblet; though his companion, with conscience awakened in his breast
by his brother's words, scarcely touched the sparkling beverage to his
lips.

"You spoke of the depravity of this city, also"--continued Clinton,
shoving back from the table, and wiping his lips. "It isn't, in my
opinion, one-half, or, to say the least, any more depraved than any of
your Northern cities. The only difference is, here everything is done
open and above board; what sin there is, is before your eyes, and you
don't feel when you tread our streets, that you are walking over hidden
hells, and sunken purgatories, which is, I think, more than you can say
in behalf of your Northern cities. Now, isn't it?"

"The fact of all the dissipation and Sabbath-breaking here being openly
carried on, is the very worst argument, Mr. Clinton, you could bring
forward. It proves how much worse the tendency, when it can so harden
the heart of society as to regard it without a shudder, and to look upon
such things as right. Sunday absolutely loses its identity here, in the
manner in which it is kept; and a little more law, more rigidly
enforced, would, I am certain, elevate the standard of society into a
purer and more ennobling atmosphere. If men still persisted in sin, the
fear of punishment would force them to keep out of sight of those who
would be Christians, which, for some, must be really a hard matter now.
Yesterday, in coming from church, I met a full company of soldiers, in
complete uniform, out for a drill. I passed many stores thronged with
customers, even as on a week-day, and received an invitation to attend a
horse-race on the Metarie Course; all of which, you will admit, was in
jarring discordance with the sermon upon which I was trying to reflect,
and the Prayer-Book in my hand."

Clinton burst into a loud laugh.

"The time will come when you'll know better than to reflect upon sermons
here, and will put your Prayer-Book in your pocket, instead of carrying
it in your hand. People go to church in this place to see and be seen;
to learn the fashions and see new faces--not to remember sermons or read
prayers. I heard a minister declare, the other day, that he could preach
a sermon over every six weeks, and not one in twenty of his hearers
would remember to have heard it before. I've had serious thoughts of
turning minister myself; donning a gray wig and white cravat, and
'spounding the Bible, as the blacks say, to my deluded hearers. 'Pon
honor, it's the most lucrative situation a poor devil can have.
Preaching a short sermon, morning and night, to an inattentive but
fashionable congregation, who are sure to make a minister popular among
'em, if he don't touch their peculiar sins too closely, give him an
immense salary, let him off on full pay for four months in a year, and
pay his debts when he accepts a call in another quarter."

"A comfortable situation, I must confess," said Arthur, with a smile.
"When you take a stand in the pulpit count upon me for one of your
hearers."

"A thousand thanks for your promised patronage," returned Mr. Clinton,
with a bow of mock gravity; "but suppose we discuss the matter moving;"
and rising, he led the way into the street.

As much as Guly wished to be rid of Mr. Clinton's society, he saw the
thing was impossible, at least at present, and submitted to a farther
endurance of it with as much suavity as possible. Still keeping by his
brother's side, he walked on in silence, anxiously awaiting the moment
when their companion should see fit to leave them.

"Hallo!" cried Clinton, suddenly stopping before an illuminated window,
and peering earnestly into it, "the new numbers for the next lottery are
up; come on, let's go in, and take one jointly."

Arthur thought of his lost portemonnaie, and felt strongly tempted to
run the risk of recovering his money in that way; but he remembered that
he had nothing wherewith to buy a ticket, and hesitated.

"Don't," said Guly, earnestly, "don't be led into such folly, Arthur.
Come, let's go back to the store."

"Not till you have tried your luck once," said Clinton, persuasively;
"come, it is but a trifle if you lose it, and think of the chance you
run."

"I've left my purse at home," said Arthur, blushing at the falsehood he
stooped to utter; "I would really like to join, but can't to-night,
really."

"Pooh! if the money is all, I'll advance that; and you can pay me when
you like. Come along."

Arthur entered the shop reluctantly, it is true, yet ashamed to confess
to his social, open-hearted companion, the compunction he felt. The
ticket was purchased, and half given to Arthur.

"If you are determined to purchase a ticket, Arthur," said Guly,
gravely, "I must insist that you do not run in debt to Mr. Clinton for
it," and opening his purse, he handed to that gentleman the sum just
expended for his brother's half of the ticket.

"You are very particular," remarked Clinton, with something like a
sneer, and pocketing the change, while he glanced with a look of
impertinent curiosity at Guly's grave but beautiful features.

"Do you go our way?" inquired Arthur, turning toward him as they left
the shop.

"No; sorry to say I don't," returned Clinton, lighting a cigar, and
offering one to each of the brothers, who refused it. "I am really sorry
to part with you; but if you must go, good-night," and with a graceful
move of the hand, the young gentleman bade an adieu to his friends, and
turning down another street, was soon out of sight.

The brothers walked on for some distance in silence. Guly was the first
to speak.

"Have you enjoyed your walk, Arthur, as much as you would have done, had
we been left to enjoy ourselves in our own way?"

"Well, I must say, Guly, that I've had a pleasant time. I think young
Clinton a charming fellow, and must confess he has enlivened the last
hour exceedingly."

"And your heart and conscience are both quite as unburthened as they
would have been had you not met him?"

"I'm sure I've done nothing to burden either, Gulian," returned Arthur,
somewhat impatiently. "You must remember I am several years older than
you are, and am expected to act differently from a mere boy like
yourself."

"Did you remember that yesterday was your twenty-first birthday?"
inquired Guly, quietly.

"No!" said Arthur, with a slight start; "and your sixteenth birthday was
last Monday! How differently have they passed from what they used to do
at home, when they were always celebrated together."

"Mother must have remembered us yesterday," remarked Guly. "How she
would have loved but to look over here upon us!"

"I would not have had her seen me yesterday!" exclaimed Arthur, warmly,
"for all the wealth this city ever saw. Her heart would have broken."

"Yet you persist in recognizing your yesterday's companions, and in a
measure practising yesterday's pursuits. Mother never allowed wine to
make its appearance on our birthday-fetes, my brother."

"True, but that was in the North, and our parents were always very
strict. What would you have me do when I meet such a social companion as
Clinton? He has such a pleasant, happy way with him, that one really
can't refuse him; and for my part, a glass of wine, more or less, will
hurt nobody, I guess, materially."

"The social glass has been many a man's ruin, dear Arthur; and it is
better to resist temptation in the beginning, than to fight the
influence of liquor in the end. I wish I could coax you to promise never
to taste another drop."

"What folly," said Arthur, laughing. "Why, my little Puritan, as long as
it is the custom here, why not indulge a little? I think I can promise
you never to be intoxicated. I shall shun that. But when I'm with young
men of such habits, it would seem very odd in me to refuse, and I must
now and then take a harmless glass."

"Then, Arthur, why not choose companions of different habits? You
certainly will admit such a course is wrong for any young man. See the
influence even, which Clinton's society has had upon you this evening.
He has really induced you to think such practices here are allowable,
and even commendable. This morning, without arguing the case, you
voluntarily confessed it to be very wrong. Oh, Arthur, I already begin
to wish we were out of this dreadful place."

"You are a chicken-hearted little body," returned Arthur, playfully;
then speaking more gravely, he continued: "Well, Guly, it is not, after
all, so much my fault. I am of an age to wish to enjoy myself. I have
been accustomed to having every comfort and happiness around me; the
fond love and refined society of a mother, together with the noble
presence and good advice of our father. Look at the change! We have come
here poor, but with delicate and luxurious tastes. We have no father, no
mother, no home. One rough and dingy apartment to sleep in, is the only
spot we can look upon and call ours, and that we share in common with
the refuse lumber of the store and a colony of spiders and bedbugs.
Beyond our washer-woman, we haven't the acquaintance of a single member
of the other sex in this city; and, apart from each other, not one to
call a friend. It isn't a very pleasant state of affairs to reflect
upon, Guly; and this morning, when I lay alone up stairs on the bed, I
couldn't keep from thinking that these wealthy merchants who employ so
many clerks have much to answer for."

"How so, Arthur? You surely couldn't expect a merchant to direct and
govern the private pursuits of every young man in his employ?"

"No, surely not. Those clerks who have their homes and relatives here in
the city, are well enough off; but when, like us, they come from the
North, without even an acquaintance here, wouldn't it be better, not
only for the clerks, but for the merchant himself, if he would show a
little kindly interest in them and their welfare? Here, for instance,
are ourselves: Mr. Delancey was made acquainted by our first letter with
all the train of circumstances which forced _us_ to this course. He is
well aware that our family is as good as his own, and why then has he
not said to us that we would be welcome visitors at his house, and thus
given us one place where we might occasionally spend our leisure hours,
and call it home? Would it not at once have placed us in our own sphere,
and kept us from looking for social friends among strangers, of whose
character we know nothing? With the firm standing and position that Mr.
Delancey has here in society, to have taken this kindly notice of us
could not have lowered or affected him one particle in the social scale,
and would have placed us in that position which we have ever been
accustomed to occupy. It would have bound us more closely to him; and
instead of clerks, coldly and rigidly performing our assigned duties for
him, it would have rendered us his grateful and sincere friends, happy
to do aught in our power, either in or out of business hours, which
would oblige him or advance his interests. At least, I know this would
be the case with me, and I think that when I speak for one I do for
both."

"I must admit, Arthur, that you are right. Though I have not quite as
impulsive a heart as yourself, and am not nearly as proud-spirited, I
cannot always bear meekly the curtness and harshness with which Mr.
Delancey treats us. And with clerks, as a general thing, it is certainly
more for an employer's interest to win them as closely as possible to
himself; for, of course, if he forces them to seek companionship among
whomsoever they may meet, and they fall into low and dissipated habits,
which renders them unfit for business, then, of a necessity, that
interest suffers; and were I the employer in such a case, I am sure I
could not hold myself entirely free from blame."

"Oh, in such a case, the employer thinks no farther than to give a clerk
his walking papers, and to show him the door. They never pause to
remember that they were probably the primal cause of his downfall;
neither will they make amends, by even giving him the good name he
brought to them, for another situation. When I reflect upon these
things, Guly, sometimes there's a great deal of bitterness comes up in
my heart, which I cannot keep down, though I try ever so hard."

"Never let it rise there, Arthur. While we both live, dear brother, we
are certain of one heart that is as true as life itself. Let us cling
close to one another, and try and be happy and contented together, and
no harm, save sickness and death, can approach us. In loving one
another, we are but being true to ourselves."

They had by this time reached the store door, and as Guly ceased
speaking, Arthur stepped upon the step, and placing both hands on his
brother's shoulders, held him a little way from him, and looked
earnestly into the beautiful eyes raised up to meet his own.

"Guly, whatever happens--though I hope and am sure nothing will that is
unfortunate or sad to me or between us--try and love me all the same;
forget my faults and remember my virtues--if I have any; I want always
to think of your heart as trusting mine, and loving me."

He looked away for a moment, with his eyes bent thoughtfully upon the
ground, then parting the hair from his brother's brow, he bent down
hastily and kissed it, as if from an impulse which he could not resist.

Guly looked wonderingly up in his face for a moment, then drew him away
into the shadow of the archway adjoining, and, laying his head upon his
shoulder, wept.

"Love you, Arthur!" he exclaimed, throwing both arms about his brother,
and drawing him close to his heart; "Through all and through everything,
come what might or may, I can never love or trust you less than now.
Your happiness is my prayer and watch-word; all I ask of you, dear, is
but to be true to yourself and me."

"Bless you, Guly--there! don't shed any more tears--we shall henceforth,
I am sure, be very happy together."

"Then, what prompted you to speak so strangely and forebodingly?"

"I could not define the feeling, if I should try. It was nothing more
than a flitting shadow, cast from my restless spirit upon my heart.
Come, let's go in."


CHAPTER XIII.

    "Our early days! how often back
    We turn on life's bewildering track,
    To where, o'er hill and valley, plays
    The sunlight of our early days!"

    D. W. Gallagher.


They went in through the alley-way, and gained their bedroom by the
steep back-staircase. Guly, who was fatigued by his day's labor and
evening walk, immediately prepared for bed, and sought his pillow
eagerly. But Arthur, after rising from their devotion, walked toward one
of the windows, and stood for a long time gazing out upon the
neighboring wall of brick, as if he found there deep food for
reflection. Guly lay looking at him, wondering what he could be thinking
of, and even while he wondered his eyes gradually closed, and he fell
fast asleep.

As Arthur heard his soft but regular breathing, and felt assured his
brother slumbered, he threw off his coat, and seated himself on the
bedside, gazing fixedly down upon the innocent and happy brow before
him. There was a thoughtful softness upon the watcher's face, that came
not often there; and ever and anon he raised his hands, and pressed
them tightly upon his eyes, as if to keep back some emotion which would
fain force itself thence.

"What can have put these thoughts in my mind to-night?" he murmured,
impatiently, rising and walking the floor with bowed head and folded
arms. "I could almost believe the wine I drank was drugged with memories
of the past, and dark forebodings for the future. What form is this that
rises constantly before me, with haggard face and burning eyes, pointing
its skinny finger backward, ever backward, like an index turning ever to
the days gone by? It haunts me like a ghost; and turn I here or there,
'tis always crouching close before me, pointing that skinny finger
backward. Heavens! what does it mean?"

With a sharp shudder, Arthur again sought his brother's side, and sat
down upon the bed.

"If I should ever--if I should ever--_ever_ fall so low, _I_! Oh,
impossible! What a horrible picture! Yet, surrounded, as I am, by danger
and temptation--the beautiful habiliments in which vice here presents
itself--the constant laceration of my haughty pride--would it be, after
all, so impossible? Oh, my poor heart, be strong. Still that white
figure pointing backward. Can this be the foreshadowing of my own fate?
Oh, never, never! the wine I have taken has heated my brain. Guly! Guly!
wake up! I cannot bear to be here by myself!"

And, with a moan of anguish, Arthur buried his face in the pillow.

Guly started up quickly, and looked wildly around, like one suddenly
aroused from a nightmare; then his eye fell upon the prostrate figure
beside him.

"Dear Arthur, tell me what ails you to-night; you seem strangely at
variance with yourself. Tell me what troubles you, my brother."

"A ghost in my heart, Guly. I can't tell what brought it there--I feel
it, I see it constantly--a pale, haggard figure, pointing with its bony
finger backward."

"You have been asleep, and dreaming, Arthur; undress and come by me
here, and we will talk of something else."

"No, no, Guly, not asleep, but wide, wide awake--in my heart, in my
soul, everywhere!" exclaimed Arthur, flinging his clothes hastily off,
and creeping to his brother's side, as if flying from some horrid
phantom.

Guly threw an arm about him, and with the other hand stroked the dark
locks soothingly back from the excited brow.

"There, Arthur! brother! hush! don't sigh and shudder so, don't; it's
all fancy, all mere idle fancy. Do you remember, Arthur, how, on such a
night as this, the moon used to shine down upon the tall trees and green
lawn at home? And when all those merry friends used to visit us, how
their figures would flit in and out so brightly through the long green
avenues, and the shadows falling at their sides--do you not remember,
Arthur?"

"The shadows falling at their side? Yes, Guly, I remember."

"And how, when on such bright nights we sailed upon the Hudson, the
diamond foam broke away from the prow of our little boat, like a peal of
jewelled laughter, if such a thing could be? When we get the old home
back, Arthur, we will find that old boat out, and have it, too--eh,
brother?"

"Dear Guly, yes."

"Everything will be so like its old self, we shall almost think all our
troubles and separation one long dream. When that time comes we can have
no more of earthly happiness to ask for--our old home and our old joys."

"And our old friends, Guly, gliding through the green avenues, with
their shadows under their feet. Our old friends, with their old
shadows--"

Arthur was asleep; soothed to slumber by the gentle words and fond tones
breathed upon his ear, and he lay quietly, with his face calm, and his
cheek upon his hand.

Dreams came to him in the hours of that long night, and he was happy.
Time and distance were annihilated, and he was back upon the shores of
old Hudson, sporting with its waves, and gliding on its waters. There
was the old boat, with the sparkling foam parting from the rushing
prow, and the music of the dipping oars was falling gently on his ear.

Again he was on the green lawn, and the moon was looking down upon the
tall trees, and the soft green grass which lay before the broad door of
the olden home. There were the gayly-robed figures, flitting in and out
along the shaded avenues, their shadows falling by them always, and he
was in their midst--a child, merry-hearted, but fretted and proud--toyed
with by this one, caressed by that, and the favorite of all, commanding
but to be obeyed, frowning but to be more attended, angered but to be
coaxed to good-nature, first in his parents' hearts, and high in the
proffered love of every guest, reigning, like a boy-king, over all he
surveyed.

Then his dream for a moment grew clouded, and a tiny form, with snowy
robes and gentle blue eyes, rose up before him, and took his place upon
his mother's bosom, and he knew he had a brother. The form expanded, and
grew in height, and the hair hung in golden ringlets down to shadow the
beautiful eyes. And a tiny hand sought his, and tottering steps fell
lightly at his side. Still the form grew, till in his dream it seemed to
rise above him--not _grown_ above him; but the feet stood upon a silver
cloud, which kept rising higher and higher, till the tiny hand he
clasped in his was drawn perforce from his grasp, and still standing on
the silver cloud, the light form, the golden hair, and blue eyes, passed
from his sight; and looking up, he learned to believe it was an angel,
not a brother, which had been sent to him. And while he looked
yearningly after it, a mother's hand fell upon his shoulder, and her
sweet voice trembled as she pointed upward, and bade him follow. Then he
showed her his empty hand, from which the tiny hand had been drawn, and
stepping quickly backward, he plunged headlong over an unseen precipice,
and fell, fell far down, where all was darkness; but finding no bottom,
and shuddering with the thought that so he must go dizzily rushing
through that blackened space to all eternity! But, looking up, a
glorious light broke through the surrounding gloom, and the light form,
with the golden hair, was coming down--down with a smile of thrilling
happiness, and outstretched arms to save him. It reached him, it clasped
him to its warm bosom, and he felt a quick heart throbbing there, and
knew again it was his brother, with the sunny curls and radiant smile,
who had saved him from that bottomless pit, and mounted, holding him
upon his heart, to purer and to brighter realms.

Thus the spirits of his earlier days thronged his fancy, as he slumbered
there; but the pale ghost in his heart, pointing with its skinny finger
backward, came not to him as he lay there dreaming, with his cheek upon
his hand.


CHAPTER XIV.

    "Ah! may'st thou ever be what now thou art,
      Nor unbeseem the promise of thy spring;
    As fair in form, as warm yet pure of heart,
      Love's image upon earth without his wing,
    And guileless beyond hope's imagining."

    Byron.


A month went by, and Arthur during that time never once went out without
his brother, never tasted a drop of wine, nor met those companions whom
he had begun to deem so social-hearted, and so necessary to his
happiness. He seemed to shrink fearfully from the thought of coming in
contact with them, and invariably after business hours sought his
brother's side, passing his leisure in whatever mode Guly chanced to
propose.

His proud will was kept in constant curb, and when he received the stern
rebuke of his employer, or the taunt and sneer of those who would have
led him their way, he answered nothing, but turned away with swelling
heart and silent lips.

Guly noticed that nightly, as they prayed, Arthur's voice grew more
earnest, and his manner more humble and contrite; and he began to
censure himself for the unjust fears he had entertained on his brother's
account, while his heart rose in thankful praises to Him "who doeth all
things well," for the happy change.

None knew, save Arthur himself, the cause of it. Since the night when
the "ghost," as he called it, first entered his heart, and since the
dream of home hovered over his pillow, he had felt as if it might be
possibly a visionary counterpart of one of those events which "cast
their shadows before," and he had striven right manfully against every
impulse which might in any way tend to make himself the fulfiller of it.
Often, when the stern reproof, or the sly sneer, had awakened his
resentment and called the flush of anger to his cheek, a glimpse into
his throbbing heart placed the seal of silence on his lips; for, with a
shudder, he beheld the haggard figure, with its burning eyes, pointing
ever its skinny finger backward.

It was something which he could not understand, yet which exerted over
him an all-powerful influence. He often thought upon it, trying to
devise what it could mean, and what could have brought it there within
his heart; and the only answer his reflections ever gave him, was that
the fore-shadow had risen to warn him from the awful gulf.

Wilkins had of late kept a quiet but steady eye upon the movements and
character of the brothers, and, in spite of the usual coldness and
indifference of his great heart, he had begun to feel a deep interest
in them, and everything pertaining to them. Guly especially, he had
learned to feel towards even as a younger brother. Still, with that
unaccountable feeling, which sometimes forbids a generous sentiment to
betray itself to another, he veiled his earnest friendship under a guise
of mere clerkly companionship, rarely giving way to those bursts of
tender feeling, which rendered him, in Guly's young eyes, an absolute
enigma.

One day, as Arthur was about leaving the store for dinner, Wilkins
called him back, and gave him some money to deposit in the bank, which
he had to pass on his way to the restaurant.

"We are so busy to-day," remarked the head-clerk, as he gave it to him,
"it is just now impossible for me to leave before the bank closes, and
you can do this as well as myself."

Arthur bowed, and viewed the bills with a glow of proud pleasure in his
breast, at the trust reposed in him, and started away. Guly left his
place an instant, and stepped quickly to the door, prompted by a feeling
for which he could not account, to look after him; and stood gazing upon
his brother's receding figure until lost to sight in the stream of busy
life, which flowed through the narrow street.

As he resumed his station, a light and exquisitely beautiful female form
glided in at the door, and stopped at Guly's counter. As he bent
forward to inquire her wishes, she threw aside the veil, which concealed
her features, and revealed to the boy's bewildered gaze the most
dazzling, beautiful face he had ever beheld.

She was quite young; apparently had just entered upon her fifteenth
year, an age which in the North would be considered only as the dividing
step between childhood and girlhood, but which in the South, where woman
is much more rapidly developed, is probably the most charming season of
female beauty, when the half-burst blossom retains all the purity,
freshness, and fragrance of the tender bud. She was slight and delicate
in figure, yet beautifully rounded and proportioned; bearing, in every
movement, that charming child-like grace, which is so frequently lost
when the child merges into the woman. Her complexion was that of a
brunette--but beautifully clear; and her cheeks, with their rich color,
might well bear that exquisite comparison of somebody's--a rose-leaf
laid on ivory. Her hair was of a rich chestnut brown, and having been
cut off during severe illness, was now left to its own free grace, and
hung in short close curls about her full pure brow.

Her eyes were of the same hue as her hair, large and full, and replete
with that dewy, tender expression, when she lifted the long lashes from
them, which sends the glance into the depths of the heart. Her mouth
was small, and the full lips, like to a "cleft pomegranate," disclosed
her polished and regular teeth.

Guly's eye took in the exquisite picture before him at a glance, and the
words which were on his lips when he first bent forward remained
unspoken, while he looked the glowing admiration which filled his heart.
She seemed slightly embarrassed as she met his gaze, and, in a voice of
clear richness of tone, she remarked:--

"Mr. G---- is no longer here? I have always been accustomed to seeing
him, and have my work ready for disposal."

"I occupy Mr. G----'s place, Miss," replied Guly, with a slight blush
upon his young cheek, as he resumed his erect position. "Can I do
anything for you?"

"Ah, Miss Blanche! how do you do?" exclaimed Wilkins, getting down from
his desk before she could answer Guly's question. "It is a long, long
time since we have seen your young face here. What has been the matter?"

"Ah! Monsieur," she replied, in a tone of inexpressible sadness, and
addressing him in French, "I have had much trouble in the last two
months. I have been greatly bereaved. My poor mother, sir--" she could
go no farther, but broke down as she glanced at the black dress, and
burst into a fit of silent but bitter weeping.

A shade of sympathetic sorrow passed over Wilkins' face, and with a
delicacy of feeling which would not have been expected in him, he
stepped around to that side, where she was exposed to the view of the
customers and clerks, and stood there as if he would, by the
intervention of his huge form, screen her sorrow from the vulgar gaze.

After a few moments Blanche dried her eyes; and with a violent struggle
for self-control, seemed to swallow her grief into her heart.

"You must pardon me, Mr. Wilkins, for giving way here. I thought,
Monsieur, I could do better; but my grief lies very, very heavy here;"
and she laid her hand, with touching grace, upon her heart.

"Ah, Mademoiselle," returned Wilkins, also in French, "I feel deeply for
you, believe me. And you are alone now, and have no friends?"

"Oui, Monsieur, I have my blind grandfather, poor grandpapa; he is very
feeble and infirm." She paused, as if the subject was one too painful to
dwell upon, then drew toward her a little bundle, which she had laid
upon the counter, and said: "I have here my broderie. I hope, Monsieur,
you have not engaged any one else. I have worked day and night to finish
what I had undertaken. I hope they please you."

Wilkins took the little roll, and drew thence several specimens of
exquisite and tasteful embroidering, consisting of one or two heavily
worked _mouchoirs_, several collars, some insertion, edging, &c., &c. He
examined them with a close and critical eye, then laying them down, with
an encouraging smile, said:--

"These are more beautifully done than any we have yet had, Mademoiselle.
These, really, command the highest price."

"I am very glad, Monsieur," Blanche replied, quietly.

Wilkins drew a small reference-book from his pocket, and after glancing
over its pages a moment or two, he counted out a few pieces of gold from
a drawer at his side, and Guly saw that, under pretence of making
change, he added to the sum a little from his own purse.

"There, Mademoiselle, that is well earned."

"Here is more than I received last time, Monsieur; and you have had to
wait for the work. Are you sure this is right?"

"Quite right. As I before told you, it is better done than any you have
given us before. Take these articles, Guly, and put them in the box
marked 'French Embroidery.'"

Guly obeyed, and his fingers lingered on the fair work before him, with
an unconscious touch of admiration.

"You think you can bring your articles weekly, now, Mademoiselle?"

"I think so, Monsieur Wilkins. I have nothing to occupy my time now,
except a few little favors for poor grandpapa."

"Very well. Mr. G. has left, as you see. Henceforth Mr. Pratt will
receive your work, and pay you for the same, as he has charge of this
department. Let me make you acquainted. Guly, this is Blanche Duverne,"
said Wilkins, in his brief, peculiar manner.

Blanche held out her small hand, with an air of naïve and innocent
frankness, and Guly took the rosy finger tips, as he bent across the
counter, and pressed them to his lips.

It was an act totally unexpected by Blanche, but it was done with such a
noble grace by the boy, and with an air of such delicate refinement,
while a glow of boyish bashfulness swept over his fine face, that the
most fastidious could not have found in it just cause for resentment,
much less the guileless and innocent child-woman before him.

As Guly released her hand she looked at him more attentively than she
had done before, and said, sweetly, in pure unaccented English--

"I hope we may be very good friends, Guly."

"Amen," said the boy, with a smile.

"And you will sell my work to your choice customers, won't you?"

"Invariably."

"Adieu."

"Adieu, Miss."

She flitted out of the door so like a spirit, that she was gone almost
before Guly was aware she had left her seat. He longed to go to the door
and look after her, but a sense of timidity withheld him; and having no
customers just then he took down the box which contained her work, under
pretence of arranging it more nicely, but in reality to look upon the
delicate labor of those rosy fingers once again.

Wilkins was watching him, mischievously, from his desk, and Guly looked
up, and caught his eye, with a blush and a smile.

"Tell me, Wilkins, who she is."

"A poor girl, and very pretty."

"And friendless?"

"Only her grandpapa, you heard her say."

"Poor thing, she does this for a living."

"For a living? Yes. And it's a hard one she gets, after all."

"You know all about her! What else? Tell me more."

"She is very good and pure."

"May she always be so. Go on."

Wilkins looked at him searchingly for a moment, but the boy met his
glance steadily, and the head-clerk withdrew his eye with an air of one
who is suddenly made aware of entertaining unjust suspicions; and he
went on, with a smile, getting down from his desk, and standing near to
Guly meanwhile.

"It would not be to every one, Guly, I would give poor Blanche's
history, or what I know of it; but to you I am certain I can do so
safely. To begin then at the beginning: She was the daughter of one of
the wealthiest bankers in this city, who died several yeas ago
insolvent, and left his wife and child destitute. Of course, their
former friends cut them, all except a very few; and they took a suite of
rooms in the Third Municipality, and removed thither with their few
articles of furniture, and their blind and helpless relative. The
mother's health began to fail, and after a little while she was unable
to do anything toward their support; and all the duties of the
household, together with the labor for a livelihood for the three, fell
upon little brown-eyed Blanche. She went to work heroically, and turned
her accomplishments to profit, and is, as you see, one of the very best
_brodeurs_ that can be found. She loved her mother devotedly, and I
suppose it almost broke her little heart when she lost her. She has
sickened and died within the last two months, as you heard her say. She
had all that care upon her young shoulders, beside that of her old
grandfather, yet she has neglected neither, and finished her work with
it all. Think of it! As you perceive she has an innocent little heart,
is a stranger to guile, and is ready to believe every one is what he
professes to be. God help her, poor thing!"

"And is that all you know of her, Wilkins?"

"This is all. I know her well; for four years she has brought her work
to this spot, and sold it at this counter."

Guly's eye dropped upon that counter almost reverently.

"Where are her relatives, Wilkins?"

"North, I believe. Her father was a poor but talented man when he came
here, and his family, though highly estimable at the North, were also
poor. He met his wife in some of the high circles, to which his letters
admitted him, and they fell in love, and married, though in the face of
decided opposition from all her family. Her friends never noticed her
afterwards, though he rose, as I told you, to high station and standing;
so when he died there was no one to apply to."

"How did you learn all this, Wilkins?"

"She told it to me herself."

"But her Northern friends, they may have grown rich by this time."

"No. She told me her father's family consisted only of his parents and
one deformed brother. When he was making a fortune so rapidly here, I
believe he received a letter from this brother, stating that he was
coming on to try his fortune here, too. But Mr. Duverne, Blanche's
father, wrote back to discourage his intentions, for he seemed to think
it was too long a journey for one so helpless as he. They never heard
from the brother again; for, soon after, Mr. Duverne died, and the state
of his affairs became known, and all intercourse between the families
ceased."

"And they never knew whether he came here or not?"

"Oh, he of course never came, or they would have heard of him, you
know."

"Is Blanche French?"

"By the name, you see she is of French descent; and she speaks the
language like a native born _Francaise_; however, her mother was purely
American, and her father never spoke a word of French in all his life.
She has acquired it by mingling, no doubt, with the Creoles here."

"You speak it yourself, Mr. Wilkins?"

"Yes; and I acquired it in that way."

"You know where Blanche lives?"

"Yes."

"And visit her sometimes?"

"Occasionally."

"Can I accompany you there some evening, sir? I would like to know her
better."

"To be sure you may, Guly; especially, as you are henceforth to be
somewhat associated in the business line. As I have told you, Blanche is
a noble little girl; I respect her highly; very few know where she
lives, and I wouldn't take every one there. You understand?"

"Certainly. I shan't name her residence to any one."

"Very well, then; whenever you say--_you alone, remember_."

"Thank you, Wilkins; when I can go I will tell you."

"Just so."

Wilkins stepped back to his desk, and Guly still stood arranging the new
pieces of embroidery. There was for him a charm about them. Accustomed
as he was to seeing such things, he could not get tired of looking at
these. They were far more beautiful than any of those which were really
French, and had come from over the seas; and from every graceful twig
and twining tendril, there looked up at him a pair of soft brown eyes,
whose gentle glances went down, and made themselves a home in the boy's
pure heart.


CHAPTER XV.

        ----"He is a man,
    Setting his fate aside, of comely virtues;
    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice--
    An honor in him which buys out his faults--
    But with a noble fury and fair spirit,
    Seeing his reputation touched to death,
    He did oppose his foe."

    Shakspeare.


"Mr. Delancey, will you wait one minute, sir!" exclaimed Arthur, coming
in, apparently much excited, just as Guly replaced the box on the shelf.

The merchant stopped just as he was going out of the door, and planting
his cane firmly down upon the floor, turned round with the frown between
his eyebrows quite visibly deepened.

"Well, sir, what will you have?"

"Your attention, if you can give it, sir--one moment at your desk."

"Whatever you've got to say, say it here."

"No, sir, I must see you privately."

Wilkins and Guly both looked at Arthur in mute astonishment. His face
was flushed and heated, his breath came short, like one who had been
running, and his eyes and lips, and whole manner, evinced intense
agitation and excitement.

"Is it such particular business, young man, that you must detain me
now?" said the merchant, somewhat angered at the prospect of detention
from his usual dinner hour.

"It is very particular business to me, sir; and interests you not much
less."

Mr. Delancey waved his hand impatiently, for Arthur to precede him to
his desk; then, with hasty step, and planting his cane each tread
visibly on the floor, he followed him, and seating himself with formal
precision, took off his hat, and leant stiffly back in his chair.

"Well, sir?"

Arthur would almost have as soon undergone the terrors of the
Inquisition as to brave the tempest he expected soon to fall upon his
devoted head. He called up all his courage, however, and began.

"This afternoon, sir, I took some money from Mr. Wilkins to deposit in
the bank."

"Well? come, be quick."

"I put it, as I thought, safely in this pocket; I went from here
straight to the bank. I don't know how it happened, I'm sure I can't
imagine," said Arthur, growing confused, with those stern, strong eyes
staring straight into his, "but when I got to the bank I found, sir, I
had lost it."

"The devil you did!"

"I am sorry to say it, it is true."

"And what were you doing, on your way to the bank, that you hadn't an
eye on that money, I'd like to know?"

"The money I supposed was safe, sir, and I walked straight along without
thinking about it, till I reached the bank."

"A likely story that! Who did you talk to, or see, on your way? any of
your companions?"

"I saw only one person, sir, whom I knew at all; one whom I have not
seen before for several weeks."

"And that very one, I dare say, picked your pocket. What was his name?
who was he?"

"He is a gentleman, sir, who would not do such a thing, I'm sure, any
sooner than you would. He is a friend of mine."

"What is his name, I say?"

"Clinton, sir. No one that you know, probably."

The merchant leaned forward, and peered keenly into Arthur's face, as if
to see if there was aught of hidden meaning in his words; and his
features grew ashy pale while he asked, in a hoarse whisper:--

"_Clinton?_ Clinton what?"

"Mr. Clinton is the only name I know him by. I haven't heard his given
name," returned Arthur, surprised at the merchant's agitation.

Mr. Delancey said nothing for a moment; but sat leaning forward, with
his pale face dropped in thought upon his breast.

"Did he talk with you long?" he asked, at last.

"No, sir. He walked with me one block."

"You had the money when he left you?"

"I did not touch it from here to the bank, sir; and knew nothing of it
from the time I left this door, till I reached the bank counter."

"Hem! yes, yes, a very likely story. It couldn't have got out of your
pocket without hands, young man; and if your friend wouldn't do such a
thing, and your pocket was safe, I don't think but what you know
something about it."

"Me, sir? Mr. Delancey, you don't mean to say--"

"Tut, tut, I know about you young chaps; I might have known I would have
just such trouble when I took you, I suppose you think I don't know that
Henriquez's billiard table is between here and the bank, eh?"

"If you do, you know more than I do, sir."

"Dare you tell me that? Here, haven't you been gone a good two
hours?--and all that time going to the bank, eh?"

"I tell you the truth, Mr. Delancey; and I am sure you are aware of
it."

"Well, there's no use talking now; you will not convince me if you talk
till doomsday. That money you've got to replace out of your salary."

"Why, sir, it was three hundred dollars."

"There! there! how do you know how much it was, if you didn't look at
it, I'd like to know."

"I heard Wilkins say this morning he had such a deposit to make. Ask
him, sir, if he didn't."

"I've heard enough about it. You must make it up, that's all; and you'll
be more careful henceforth."

"And, sir, you will retract what you insinuated had become of it? I'll
willingly make it up to you, if it takes every cent I earn; but I'll not
have a blight upon my reputation, even in your opinion, sir."

His words fell upon empty air; for Mr. Delancey had already left the
high desk, and was striking his cane heavily down with each step, as he
stalked down through the store. Arthur sank upon a chair, and buried his
face in his hands.

"A hard fate," he murmured, bitterly. "First to suffer the loss, and
then to be accused, or at least suspected, of appropriating it. Heavens!
it is too much; I will not and cannot stand it."

"Be calm, Arthur," said Wilkins, in his full deep tones; "look up, and
tell us what has happened."

Arthur raised his head, and told his story unhesitatingly.

"This is a bad business, my young friend. I am extremely sorry; but the
only way for you is not to mind it. This is Mr. Delancey's way.
Intercourse with the world has rendered him suspicious, and you'll never
convince him that you don't know something about the money. No one else
that knows you will ever think so, though; and you will stand just as
high as ever. Yours isn't the first case of this kind."

"It is too outrageous, Wilkins, and I won't bear it. Do you think I'll
tamely submit to be called, or thought, a thief?"

"What can you do? It is useless to talk or feel thus; say nothing, go
steadily on, and Delancey himself will forget, after awhile, his
suspicions. As to replacing it, I feel that you have been unfortunate
through my means, and I will assist you in that."

"I don't wish you to, thank you, Wilkins. I don't care so much for my
money as I do for my good name. To be robbed of it in this manner, is
more than I can possibly endure."

"Let me beg of you to think no more about it. Follow my advice, and all
will yet be well."

Arthur sat moodily down, and gave himself up to thought. He fancied
there was no possible way to extricate himself from the difficulty, and
that it would be useless to argue with such a man as his employer. With
flushed cheek and thoughtful air he rose and took his place behind the
counter.

Wilkins watched him anxiously, and then, as though Guly were the elder,
instead of the younger brother, he sought him for a consultation. He was
busy with a customer, and Wilkins noticed that he was displaying some of
Blanche's new work, and wondered whether it was that, or interest in his
brother's behalf, which brought such a bright glow to his cheek.

"It is very beautiful," said the lady who was buying, examining one of
the collars closely, "Very beautiful; is that your lowest, Master
Pratt?"

"The very lowest, Madame. I have been gratified in being able to show
these articles to you _first_. They are quite new, and I know how well
you like the first choice."

"No one else, then, has bought from these before?"

"No, Madame."

"It is high, but I'll take it."

"Yes, Madame."

As the lady left the store, Guly turned to Wilkins, with a bright smile:

"You see I have kept my promise to Blanche, and have sold her work to a
'choice customer.'"

"I see," said Wilkins. "A word with you, Guly."

Guly stepped toward him.

"Arthur has--"

"Poor Arthur! true enough! how could I forget him; what was the matter,
Wilkins? I have been so busy, you know."

"He has got into sad trouble; I feel very sorry for him; but I can't
help him an iota, that I see; it's too bad, I declare."

Wilkins then gave Guly the details, as far as he knew them, of Arthur's
misfortune.

"Well, Mr. Wilkins, this is outrageous!" exclaimed Guly, with a
vehemence unusual to him. "It would require the virtue and forbearance
of a saint to bear up under such things. It isn't the money so much,
though I'm very sorry he lost it, but it is his good name; to have that
sullied, even in thought! It is enough to drive any one to desperation."

"Don't tell Arthur so, for the world," said Wilkins, very earnestly.

"No, no, I'll not--can I go to him?"

"Of course."

"Dear Arthur," said Guly, beckoning his brother a little one side, "I
know all. You know how I sympathize with you, my brother; but cheer up,
we can live through it all; and you will be, in the end, thoroughly
acquitted of what Mr. Delancey suspects you of, even in his own heart.
The only way to convince him of his error, is to show him by your
future course how much such an act would be beneath you."

"Oh, there's no use, Guly; I never could convince such a flint-hearted
man in the world, of my innocence, if he chose to think me guilty. I was
horrified at first, but I've thought of it, and thought of it, till I
don't care much. It's my fate, I suppose."

"Don't give up in this way, Arthur; think of your own proud self, of how
much depends upon you, of our dear mother, and all that. Don't allow
yourself to be crushed."

"Guly, just think of it--a _thief_!"

"Only so in the opinion of one who will not reflect upon it long enough
to see its utter impossibility."

"And all this year's labor lost, Guly; and nothing to send home now to
mother."

"We'll try what we can do with _my_ salary, Arthur."

"Pooh! the whole of it just covers the amount lost; and how are you
going to live?"

"Don't give it up so, don't! There is One who will never desert those
who trust Him. Remember that, Arthur, and look up."

"It is my fate to be forced to look down. It is useless for me to try to
struggle against it. I can't be otherwise."

"You are too desponding, Arthur; many a man, now rich and happy, if he
could tell his experience in getting so, would no doubt relate a harder
life than yours can ever be. This should only serve to make you
stronger."

"If Mr. Delancey was only a different-tempered man, perhaps I could do
better. If he had sympathized with me, and assured me kindly of his
belief that it was all an accident, oh, I would have felt so
differently, so happy in comparison! There is no pleasure in serving
such a man; it is only rigid duty, rigidly performed, for one you cannot
but hate. He is never so happy as when mixing gall with the honey of
one's happiness. I am miserable, Guly, miserable! and I can't rouse
myself. I wish I was as meek and forbearing as you are, I could be
happier; my pride, my strong unbending pride, has been, and ever will
be, my curse."

Arthur's tones seemed to struggle up so heavily in his sorrow, from his
heart's depths, that Guly felt strongly inclined to tell him there were
very few, however meek and charitable, who would submit to an insult of
this kind quietly; but he remembered his promise to Wilkins, and
refrained.

"If I could reason with Mr. Delancey, if he would talk with me as it is
his duty to talk with me, I am sure he would think differently upon the
matter; but for me to stay here for the ensuing year, as I now am forced
to do, whether or no; and for me to feel that every time those cold eyes
are turned upon me, they believe themselves to be looking on a thief!
Oh, my God! Guly, it is too much!"

Arthur was intensely excited, and the veins in his forehead stood out
like cords, so swollen were they, and his face was deeply flushed.

Guly's heart ached for him, and he was trying to think of something
which he could say to comfort him, when he was called away by a
customer, and, with a kindly pressure upon his brother's hand, he left
his side.

Arthur also stepped back to his place; but every attitude he assumed,
every changing expression of his handsome face, told the restless misery
of that young heart, and the crushing weight upon that lofty spirit.

Guly waited anxiously for night to come, that he might talk to, and try
to encourage, Arthur. When the lamps were lighted, and the customers had
gradually thinned out, he was about to cross over and speak to him. To
his surprise he saw that his place was vacant, and he was nowhere to be
seen. A sharp pang went through the boy's heart, succeeded by a
sickening faintness; and he leaned against the counter for support,
filled with undefined fears of sorrow, and danger, and unhappiness.

With a blush at his apparently causeless emotion, he stepped to the
clerk who always stood next to Arthur, and inquired if he knew where he
had gone.

"No," the young man said; "he went out about half an hour ago, and Mr.
Quirk was with him."

"Quirk!" ejaculated Guly, involuntarily, while the pang went through his
breast again; and seizing his cap, he started forth, in the hope of
discovering Arthur's where-abouts.


CHAPTER XVI.

      "Press me not, I beseech you, so;
    There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,
    So soon as yours could win me; so it should now,
    Were there necessity in your request, although
    'Twere needful I denied it."

    Winter's Tale.


Through the damp streets, where shone mistily through the heavy fog the
lamps on the corners, Guly, with anxious heart and hurried step,
wandered alone. He sought every place of which he believed his brother
to have any knowledge, and left no spot unvisited where they had ever
been together. All in vain. None of whom he inquired had seen Arthur,
and of many he could not bring himself to inquire, blushing at the
thought of his brother being known to them. Still, as he turned to
retrace his steps, he found himself involuntarily looking into the
richly furnished saloons, where the show of luxury, and display of
wealth, lead so many, through their very love of gorgeousness, to drink,
to distress, to death! Each time, as his eyes turned thitherward, a sigh
of relief rose from his heart to find that Arthur was not an inmate
there. Thus seeking, thus hoping, he found himself again before the
door of No. --, Chartres-street. Having no pass-key, he rapped for
admittance, for the store was closed, and all around it dark. Wilkins'
voice bade him enter. Trying the door, he found it unlocked, and going
in, saw Wilkins sitting by the coal fire--which the chill air of
November now rendered necessary--alone, and apparently in deep thought.
With as cheerful an air as he could assume, he approached him, and
laying a hand upon each shoulder, as he stood behind his chair, bent
forward, and looked up in the thoughtful eyes gazing on the fire.

"What can be the subject of your meditations, Mr. Wilkins? your face
looks sad enough to be the index of a sorrowful heart?"

Mr. Wilkins made no reply, but lifting his arm, drew the golden head
upon his bosom, and held it there, stroking back with listless fingers
the soft bright curls.

"Has anything unpleasant happened since I went out, Wilkins?"

"No, Guly; nothing has happened. I was alone here--the fire was bright,
the arm-chair empty, so I sat down, and fell to thinking, that's all.
Have you been to see Blanche?"

"Blanche! I don't suppose I could have found her, had I thought of
trying."

"True enough. We are going there together. What of your brother, Guly?"

Guly told him of his ineffectual search; the fact of his not having seen
him in any of the saloons, and the hope he entertained of seeing him
walk in, by and by, feeling happier for his walk, and seating himself
there by the fire.

Wilkins shook his head, doubtingly.

"Your brother's spirit is one which needs to be peculiarly dealt with,
until he grows a little older, and less impetuous. I'm sorry to say it,
but he has more pride than principle just at this age; and he ought to
have the blessing of a home and a mother's love, till the principle
could be made to predominate. Get a chair, Guly, and sit close by me,
here."

Guly brought the chair, and placed it close to his companion, and seated
himself. Wilkins drew his head again upon his bosom.

"It is about _him_," continued Wilkins, "that I have been thinking this
evening. I really take a deep interest in his welfare, and wish I knew
how to guide him. For his sake I wish my own heart was more disciplined,
that I was not so utterly incapable."

"Don't let such thoughts as these prevent you from using your influence
with my poor brother, Wilkins. I am too young, too weak, too
inexperienced, to control him. He would naturally scorn the advice of
one so much younger; but _you_, oh! don't let too lowly an opinion of
yourself deprive Arthur of the counsel and guidance he so much needs."

"Ah! Guly, you don't know me. I might tell him how he should do; but my
example, if he should ever chance to see it, would disgust him with my
advice. Had it been different when I first came here, I might now be a
better man. I was an orphan, came here from the North, had no soul in
this vast city to love or care for me, and for five years I have lived
here loveless and lonely, save when with those companions which a
friendless being is almost sure to fall in with here; and I can turn to
no one, feeling that they care for me."

"Wilkins, I love you; indeed, I love you as a brother."

"I believe you, Guly; though we are so different; though my cherishing
you is like the lion mating with the lamb, still I believe in my heart
the honest love I feel for you, God has blest me by causing you to
reciprocate. I have been a better man since I first held you here on my
heart. A better man, Heaven knows!"

"Wilkins, in all the five years you have been here, do you mean to say
Mr. Delancey has never asked you to his house, or noticed you any more
than he does now?"

"I have never been asked to enter his door, Guly, any more than you
have. He would as soon, I suppose, turn a herd of swine into his
drawing-room, as to ask his clerks there. He is very proud."

"That isn't pride, Wilkins; it is meanness. A truly proud man would
adopt the contrary course, I am sure; and so attach all his employees
to himself, and to his interests."

"Ah! he never thinks of that. His negroes get better treatment than his
clerks, by far; and there isn't a soul among them but what loves him
dearly, and would die for him, I don't doubt, at any moment. So you see
he can be kind, strange as it may seem."

"It is strange, Wilkins. Mr. Delancey is a man I cannot understand or
appreciate. I don't think I like him at all."

"He certainly has done nothing to make you, my poor boy. His pride, for
it is pride, renders him very disagreeable. If all the sin, which his
harshness and indifference has caused in others, were laid up against
him, 'twould make a mighty pile. There's a day of retribution coming for
him, though."

As Wilkins spoke he bent forward, and rested his head on his hand, with
a peculiar smile upon his lips.

"A day of retribution! What do you mean, Wilkins? Is there any trouble
brooding for him?"

"All pride must have a fall," muttered Wilkins, as if to himself, while
he gave the coals a vehement thrust. "Don't ask me anything more about
it, Guly."

"But you have roused my curiosity," said Guly, looking up in surprise.
"If it isn't a secret, I would like to know more of what you mean."

"I mean a great deal, and would tell you sooner than any one else; but
it would do you no good if I would tell you, which I can't, and so we'll
say no more about it."

"Has Mr. Delancey any children?"

"Two--a son and a daughter; at least he _had_ a son."

"And did he die?"

"Oh, no; he fell in love with a poor but worthy girl, who has no doubt
made him an excellent wife, or at least would have done so had it been
in her power. Instead of taking his daughter-in-law to his heart and
home, and making her what his wealth could have made her, with her worth
and beauty, he met the whole affair with stern opposition, and after his
son's marriage turned him from him with a curse, and disinherited him.
How the poor fellow has managed to live since, I can't imagine; for he
had no profession, nor anything to live by but his wits. I heard once he
had become reckless and dissipated, and had sworn vengeance on his
unnatural father, but I've heard very little of him of late."

"This is shocking. A clerk can expect but little from such a father. Oh,
horrible!"

"He is a man you will probably never know, however long you may live
with him. Had it not been for the necessary contact my position in his
employ brought us into, I should never have known him at all."

"And you believe he really deemed Arthur guilty to-day?"

"That is more than I can answer. Mr. Delancey is close with regard to
money matters."

"My poor brother! Wilkins, promise me to do all you can for him. Oh! I
know how much danger surrounds him. What can I, so young and feeble, do?
We two are all that is left our mother. Help me--I'm sure you will--to
save him."

"I will, Guly--by my sworn love to you, I will. Sometime, my boy, when I
may greatly need a friend to help me through a trouble or sorrow that is
coming upon me--when those that know me may shun me--you, who love me,
will be that friend. May I rely upon you?"

"Depend upon me?--yes, truly, Wilkins--in anything that's right."

Guly's heart was racked with more sorrowful anxiety for his brother than
he could, or cared to, express; but in spite of his efforts to restrain
them, the bright tears fell down his cheeks at Wilkins' kind words, and
dropped upon the broad breast which supported him. Wilkins raised his
hand, and wiped them away.

"Don't cry, Guly; your grief unmans me."

"Oh, Wilkins, how can I help it?"

Wilkins answered nothing, but drew the slight form closer in silent
sympathy. The hours went on, and midnight still saw them sitting there
together--the golden head upon the broad, kind breast, and the eyes of
both looking thoughtfully into the coals.


CHAPTER XVII.

    "She's beautiful, and therefore to be woo'd;
    She is a woman, therefore to be won."

     Henry VI.


                             ----"Bright
    The lamps shone o'er fair women and brave men;
    A thousand hearts beat happily; and when
      Music arose, with its voluptuous swell,
    Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again,
      And all went merry as a marriage bell."

    Childe Harold.


Della sat in her large chair, before the dressing-glass, with her
delicate feet buried in the rich softness of a velvet cushion; her hands
were folded in her lap, and her eyes fixed upon Minny's face, which was
clearly reflected in the mirror, as she stood behind her mistress,
arranging the shining bands of long fair hair.

"Minny, how very, _very_ white you are! How came you to be so white,
when your mother is the blackest slave papa owns?"

A scarlet flush rose to the quadroon's cheek.

"My father, Miss, was as white as your own."

"Were you born here, Minn?"

"My mother was in your father's service when she gave me birth, Miss
Della. Will you have your bandeaux single or double for this evening?"

"Double, Minn, so the wreath can lie nicely in between; and make those
braids as rich as possible. I wish to look my best to-night. You have
always lived here since you were born, Minn?--was a baby when I was a
baby?"

"Yes, my dear Miss, and my mother was your nurse; your own mother not
liking to spoil her figure by nursing her child, you were put to my
mother's breast. So mother tells me."

"Well, if you had been a white child, that would have made us
foster-sisters, wouldn't it? That's the reason old Mag loves me so well.
I never knew of this before."

"It's something very common here, you know, Miss, for white children to
have their foster-mothers among the slaves. Fashionable ladies always
think it ruins their forms to have a child at the breast."

"Yes, I know, Minn; and I think it a very shameful practice, too. I
never want to be a fashionable woman, if it is going to deprive me of
performing a mother's holiest offices for my children. I'm sure after a
child of mine had been reared at a black mother's breast I should feel
they were black children, had black blood in their veins, and I never
could feel right toward them again."

"You are one in a thousand, dear Miss Della; and such feelings are
right, and good, and noble. But if you ever wish to be truly a mother to
your children, don't marry a fashionable man, whose pride will be to
show you off all the time in gay company, and who will be always
fretting to keep your beauty good. It is such husbands that make bad
mothers. A woman can't be a votary of fashion and a good mother."

"I never shall marry a fashionable man, Minny--you _know_ that; but when
I _do_ marry I shall try and be a good, and true, and dutiful wife,
nothing more. I haven't a taste for high life--that is, gay life, which
has no heart in it. But, Minny, let's go back to you; I commenced about
you; what made you change the subject, child?"

"Did I, Miss?"

"Yes. Who was your father, Minny?"

Minny's cheek lost it's flush, and became pale as death.

"I cannot tell you, Miss."

"But you _know_."

Minny made no answer, but her hands shook violently, and the braids she
had just fastened fell loose again from her trembling fingers.

"What ails you, Minn? why don't you answer me?" said Della, looking up
earnestly at Minny, in the glass.

"I never told you a lie in the world, Miss Della; and I don't answer you
because I can't tell the truth now."

"You _must_ tell me if you know, Minny; and you must tell the truth,
too."

"Oh, Miss Della," said the girl, sinking at her mistress's feet in a fit
of wild weeping, "don't, don't ask me this. I never knew it myself till
yesterday, and then I wrung it from my mother, who charged me, if I
valued her life, never to lisp it again. It made me wretched. Oh, Miss
Della, it would kill you."

"Kill me? How can it affect me, silly child? What nonsense."

Della lifted up the beautiful head which was bowed before her, and
turned the pallid face toward her own.

"Tell me, you foolish one," she persisted, her curiosity fully aroused.
"I must and will know about it now;" and she stamped her little foot
with an air of command, which, toward her favorite, was very rarely
assumed.

Minny pressed her hands, clasped one upon the other, hard against her
heart, as if its throbbing was painful, and raised her eyes, full of a
strange, wild light, to her mistress's face.

"I would sooner die than tell you, Miss."

There might have been something in that agonized look that called forth
emotion, or there might have been something in that cold, fixed gaze,
which stamped for the instant the father on that upturned, ashy face;
for as she met the glance, Della suddenly clasped her hands to her face,
and, with an exclamation of horror, fell back fainting.

Minny sprang wildly to her feet--"Oh, Miss Della!" she exclaimed, as
she bent over the senseless form before her, pouring out her passionate
accents as if there was an ear to hear them. "Oh, Miss Della, how could
you crave this knowledge to-day, of all other days? Had it been
yesterday morning, or ever before in all our life here together, I would
not have known, and you would have never known. To-day, of all days! Oh,
I have broken this poor, sensitive heart; woe is me, woe is me! Oh, if I
had only died before I learned this dreadful secret, only died! only
died!"

With trembling hands, and eyes raining down their gushing tears, Minny
bathed the pale brow, and brought rare perfumes, and chafed the little
hands.

"Miss Della! Miss Della! I knew it would kill you--and you only guessed;
I never told you--oh, no, never, never, never!"

Slowly Della returned to consciousness, and as her eyes unclosed, they
fell upon the agonized face of her weeping attendant. She closed them
quickly, and raised her hand so as to wave her from her sight, but it
dropped listlessly back into her lap, and she lay still in the large
chair, apparently as weak and helpless as an infant.

"Oh, Miss Della! God forgive me for what I have done, though I never
meant to do it--never thought to do it. What could have turned your
thoughts on this to-day?"

"Go away," murmured Della, faintly; "go away, so that I may open my eyes
and not see you."

Minny moved a few paces back.

"I can see you in the glass yet; go away so that I can't see you
anywhere, Minn."

Weeping bitterly, Minny retired to the other apartment; and Della, with
folded hands, sat quite still with downcast eyes and pallid cheeks,
looking like a statue of meditation.

A little French clock upon the mantle-piece struck the hour, and went on
with its monotonous tick, tick--that unobtrusive voice of warning and
admonition--until the half hour was sweetly chimed, and still Della sat
there, pale, and still thinking. At length she rose, and with an energy
unusual with her, walked hastily back and forth across the room. It had
a soothing effect, and her brow was calm and resolute, yet shadowed as
if with some new lesson of life, harshly forced upon her. She seated
herself once more before the mirror.

"Minny, I am ready for you now."

Minny came, with her face calm and corpse-like, and once more essayed to
bind up the rich bands of hair.

"Place my wreath a little more front. My cheek needs the shade of that
bright rose to relieve its pallor--so--that effect is charming."

"Your hair is dressed, Miss."

Della sprang to her feet like one who resolutely tossed some load from
the heart, and taking the hand-mirror from the table, surveyed the
arrangement of her hair altogether.

"Beautiful! Minny, you have excelled yourself to-night."

"Thank you, Miss. What dress?"

"My India mull, and the rose-colored ribbons."

The dress was brought, and Della stood before the full-length mirror
while Minny fastened it.

"Tie my shoulder-knots in your prettiest manner, Minny."

"Yes, Miss; and my reward shall be a rehearsal of the list of
conquests?"

"I suppose so," smiled Della; "Minn, I pet you a great deal too much."

"I know it, Miss; and make me love you a great deal too well."

Della sighed.

At this moment there was a tap at the door, and Mrs. Delancey, in full
evening costume, entered the room.

"Most ready, dort, darling?"

"Yes, mamma, I will be down in a few minutes."

"You look very sweetly in that simple dress; what prompted you to choose
that to-night, treasure?"

"An instinctive knowledge, I presume, mamma, that I would look very
sweetly in it," replied Della, archly.

Mrs. Delancey was a fine-looking woman--very fussy and very French. She
smiled, and displayed her brilliant teeth at her daughter's answer, then
stooped, and kissed her brow. Mrs. Delancey loved her child, with all
the strength of affection she was capable of feeling. She was even first
in her heart in some moments of pride and ambition, and second never,
save to her love of fashion and display.

"Clasp this string of pearls about your throat, it will relieve the
plainness of your attire."

"I'd rather not have it relieved, mamma."

"What a strange whim," returned the lady, proceeding to fasten on the
necklace.

As the toilet was declared finished, Mrs. Delancey stepped back to
observe the effect.

"_Charmante, ma chere!_" she exclaimed. "Remember, love, your father and
I wish you to be particularly agreeable to General Delville this
evening. He is a splendid match, rich as a Jew, and of such fine
family!"

"He is the gentleman who was of age when papa was born, isn't he,
mamma?"

"Hush, child; what of that! He may be a little old, but all the
better--you'll be left a charming young widow the sooner."

Della lifted a bracelet from the table, and fell to examining it with
the closest inspection, while her little satin-slippered foot kept up an
unconscious, nervous tapping upon the carpet.

Mrs. Delancey looked at her watch--"Nine o'clock, Della; the guests will
begin to arrive, shortly. You need not come down till your father comes
for you. Remember, _ma chere_, General Delville, particularly."

So saying, the proud mother swept from the apartment.

As the door closed upon her, Della stepped through the open window, and
passed out upon the balcony. Minny busied herself with putting aside the
jewels which had not been wanted, and other unnecessary articles of
dress, which the capricious fancy of her mistress had drawn from their
proper places during the process of preparation.

A half hour passed before Mr. Delancey sought his daughter's apartment;
when he entered, Della was seated gracefully on an ottoman, arranging a
bouquet of orange flowers and mignonnette. It was a sweet picture, and
the father stopped to look upon it.

Della looked up, and her eye went quickly from her father's to Minny's
face, then dropped again upon her flowers.

"Are you ready, Della?"

"One minute, papa."

"You are looking very lovely to-night, my daughter. Be careful and have
your manners to correspond with your looks. My choicest friends are here
this evening, and I wish to see you Queen of Hearts."

"Especially to General Delville?"

"Especially to General Delville, Della. I shall be very happy to see you
his wife, and it is in your power to become so if you choose."

"I should like to know how many wives he has already, before I take that
step, so that I may know how strong a fortification my eyes need against
finger-nails."

"Fie, Della! the General has never been married, and you will no doubt
occupy the first place in his heart."

"I have always hoped that when I married such might be my lot, but it
cannot be in this case, I know. If General Delville has lived in
New-Orleans till he has grown old enough to be my grandfather, he can't
have much of a heart left."

"Della, you astonish me!" said her father, with the frown deepening.
"One would think you had no ambition whatever to make a good match."

"Papa, do you love me at all?"

Mr. Delancey started at the abrupt question, and gazed upon his daughter
in surprise.

"Love you, Della? the whole of my heart is centred in you."

Della sighed, as if the answer did not quite please her, and taking her
father's proffered arm, went down the broad staircase, and into the
magnificent drawing-room.

Wealth, and beauty, and state, and grandeur, all were there; yet first,
and fairest, and brightest, shone the merchant's daughter. The happy
father and proud mother watched her, as with a light step she flitted
through the thronged rooms, the "observed of all observers," and there
was a light in her eye, an animation in her tread, and a glow on her
cheek, which was all the more beautiful for being rare.

She leant upon Mr. Delville's arm, the envied object of many a young
heart there; and when seated at the harp, her clear, unaffected voice
rose in strains of thrilling melody. General Delville was at her side,
listening with earnest attention, and turning the leaves of her music
with all the grace of a more youthful courtier.

Aware, as he was, of the sanction of the father and the eagerness of the
mother, it was no wonder that the General strove to win to his withered
heart so fair a flower. He had been a great traveler, and had feasted
his eyes on the beautiful women of the East, and the more frigid
beauties of northern climes. He had been courted rather than courting,
and had gone through life dreading to take to his heart a wife, lest,
when too late, he should find his wealth had been the talisman that drew
her there.

But in Della, he thought he saw a sweet and guileless girl; and put
forth all his attractive powers of conversation and graces of person
(which, old as he was, became him well,) to interest her in himself. Her
father watched the progress of their acquaintance with a delight which
manifested itself, even in _his_ cold eyes, and Della received the
assiduous attentions of her white-haired admirer with a triumph for
which she was excusable; yet with no desire to win him closer than now.

The evening wore away, the splendid supper was over, and the guests, one
by one, took their departure. Many a youthful suitor made his adieus to
Della that night with a jealous pang, as Delville's apparent success
arose to his mind. When the rooms were cleared, Mr. Delancey called his
daughter to his side.

"I cannot let you retire, Della, without telling you how much you have
pleased and gratified a father's heart this night. I am more than ever
proud of you; you will well adorn the station in which Delville can
place you. Bless you, Della. Good night."

"Good night, papa."

Della moved gracefully away, and slowly mounted the broad staircase
leading to her chamber.

"No blessing of love--no blessing of affection," she murmured softly, as
she went on, step by step--"only a blessing through his pride--cold,
hollow, empty pride, with nothing noble, nothing lofty in it; having for
foundation only an eligible match for me, or my station, or my
appearance. What a life, what a life!"

Della expected to find Minny asleep, as the hour was late; but when she
entered her apartment, Minny was there, walking the floor with her
hands clasped thoughtfully before her.

"Undress me, Minn. I am weary--weary."

"Haven't you been happy, Miss?" asked the girl, as she knelt to unfasten
the slender slipper from the pretty foot.

"Yes--and no, Minn. If triumph could make me happy, I must have been, so
far as that is concerned; but in thinking of you I have been unhappy;
and I have thought of you all the evening."

"Of me, Miss, in the midst of all that gaiety!"

"Of you. Would you like to be free, Minny?"

"Free, Miss Della? to have my freedom, and leave you?"

"Yes, Minny, if you would like your freedom, you shall have it this very
night; papa will do anything I say with regard to it, and you may go,
dear Minn, whenever you choose. You shall have money to carry you where
you like. In the North you might do well; marry some rich abolitionist,
perhaps, and be very happy. I am in earnest, Minn; you have but to
speak."

"Miss Della, if I have offended you in any way, if I have hurt your
heart by any means, if I have spoken, acted, or looked anything that
displeased you, do anything to punish me save sending me from you. What
would my freedom be to me away from you? Miss Della, you will never know
how poor Minn loves you."

The girl had spoken in such a subdued voice, uttering her short
sentences between the sobs that were trying to struggle up, that, as she
paused in her task, and looked in her mistress's face with an expression
of such tearful, doubtful anxiety on her features, Della was deeply
touched, and sat a moment with her handkerchief pressed to her eyes. She
took it down at last, and went on very calmly and thoughtfully.

"Minny, it is very painful for me to talk of this, but you must
understand me: I'm afraid I can never be quite happy again, with you
performing such offices as this for me. The discovery I made this
afternoon--that unfortunate discovery for both of us--was terrible--very
terrible!"

"Oh, Miss, that of all things you should have asked me that! I will
never, never remember it, if you will only forget it, and let me be to
you what I have ever been."

"I was right in what I suspected--I am sure I guessed the truth--you
must tell me now, Minny," said Della, taking one of Minny's hands in
hers, and speaking in a tone half doubtful that she might be wrong. "My
father was your father, _n'est ce pas_, dear Minny?"

Heedless of the kindness with which the words were spoken, Minny threw
up her hands with a gesture of despair, then flung herself full length
upon the floor, in a burst of passionate grief.

"Get up, Minny; get up, and come by me here; come!"

With the deep sobs still bursting from her lips, the girl rose, and sat,
with bowed head and falling tears, at her young mistress's feet.

"Minny, you understand me now, don't you? Think of it, Minny: you are my
sister!"

"Oh! none the less your slave, Miss."

"My father's child must never be a slave to me."

"Miss Della! Oh that this knowledge should have ever come to either of
us; don't for the love of mercy talk so; don't put me from you; what am
I but a negro's child, the fruit of the white man's sin?"

"I know, Minny, I know the world would never look upon this as I do; but
you are in my sight as much my sister as if my father had lost a first
wife and wedded again, and we were the fruits of the two marriages. The
same blood is in your veins that is in mine. He who gave you being, to
me is 'father,' to you is 'master.' You are more beautiful than I, as
well as better fitted for the society into which I am forced to move,
yet you are a slave!"

Della leaned back in her chair a moment; and again held her handkerchief
to her eyes; she controlled herself quickly however, and continued:

"I set the case before you just as it is, Minny; I want you to view it
in its true light--then choose between what I offer you, and what you
must otherwise be. Don't tremble so, Minny; I never have felt towards
you as a mistress would to a slave. When I look back, I remember you
were the only playmate I ever had, the closest and best companion of my
wayward girlhood; and I feel that I have always loved you, always
respected you, and, Minny, I always shall. I am certain, Minn, that
though there may be black blood circling round it, there never was a
purer heart, a nobler soul, than yours. Were it not for my father's sake
your position should be different in this house, but in honor to him I
can only do you good by sending you where your birth and parentage will
ever be a mystery. Minny, dear, will you go?"

The girl had sat during all this time quiet as a statue, at her
mistress's feet. As she heard her stop speaking, she raised herself upon
her knees before her, and clasping her small hands above her,
exclaimed:--

"As God hears me, Miss Della, I would rather stay by you, rather be the
veriest slave that ever breathed, a mere thing to answer to your beck
and call, so that I may be near you, and love you, and do for you, than
to be the wife of the richest white man that ever lived--to be looked
upon as white myself--or to move in those circles which you would fain
believe me fitted for. As God hears me this is true!"

"Heaven bless you, Minny! Then we will never part."

With an exclamation of joy, Minny clasped her young mistress to her
heart, and poured forth, with passionate vehemence, her prayers and
tears and blessings. It seemed as if she could never cease, and Della
twined her fair arms, jeweled, and white, and beautiful, beneath the
thick black curls, which covered Minny's neck, and gave her kiss for
kiss, and tear for tear.

"When I am Bernard's wife, Minn, then I can make you happier. You have
all those dear letters safe, quite safe?"

"I keep them as the apple of my eye, Miss. You can never make me
happier, dear Miss, than I am now. I can never wish to be more blest
than I am this minute."

"Dear Minny, you have a woman's heart, and that must know a woman's
longings. When I have it in my power I shall at least try to make you
happier, though it may be in a different way. You have always been more
a friend and a fond companion than a slave to me, and now, now--" Della
paused, as if it were impossible for her to speak the words she would,
then added, after a moment's pause, "Minny, never let this dreadful
secret go farther, place a seal upon your lips, and let it die with you
for my sake. And, if you will stay, Minny, rather than to go and be free
and happy in your own way, I will do everything for you, love you, care
for you, all--only never, never let this dreadful truth be known."

"Never, Miss, so help me Heaven! Only let me stay with you, and be what
I have ever been to you, and I will be content. Try, dear Miss, to
forget all that's passed to-day, and let us stand together in the old
light."

"No, Minny, I can never forget it. The old light can never shine on me
again; but I will try always to remember it as I should; and now, Minn,
finish, undressing me; or rather, teach me to undress myself."

"I claim this as my privilege, Miss, and never want you to learn how."

Della smiled, and patted Minny's cheek. There had a change come over her
in the last few hours, such as she never thought to experience. It
seemed as if she had become more of a woman in that short space than she
had ever thought she would become. Her judgment and heart, too, seemed
suddenly to have expanded; and she felt more respect for herself than
she had ever done before. She had always been one who thought for
herself, notwithstanding there were so many to think for her; and, with
a spirit above all affectation, she looked at things in a plain,
common-sense, and true light. When the first shock was over in regard to
her relationship to Minny, she had struggled with her natural feelings
of wounded pride, till the matter stood before her as it was. Her father
was not one to win his child's affections, and Della had always feared
more than loved him; but of one so cold and stern she had never in all
her life thought this. But now that she knew it, she almost wondered how
it was she had never suspected as much before. Few girls, in Della's
position, would have talked with a slave as she talked to Minny--would
ever have thought of placing matters in so strong a light before her;
but Della was guileless and innocent at heart, with a child-spirit in
some things, yet more than woman's strength in others. She never thought
Minny could take advantage of the new aspect of affairs she painted for
her; she only felt that Minny was enduring a life of wrong, and longed
to give her redress. And Minny's was a great, and noble, and truthful
heart. From earliest childhood she had been taught to regard Miss Della
as her mistress, and was never absent from her side. Della had been
educated at home; and Minny, with her quick mind, and an occasional
lesson from her young mistress, together with her earnest desire to
learn, had acquired more real knowledge than Della herself, though
lacking some of the light accomplishments in which her mistress
excelled. Thus had they grown up together, and they were not to be
parted now.


CHAPTER XVIII.

    "Alas! the heart that inly bleeds
    Has naught to fear from outward blow;
    Who falls from all he knows of bliss,
    Cares little into what abyss."

    Byron.


When Arthur left the store, the evening after the unfortunate affair of
the bank deposit, he had gone forth with no definite purpose, no chosen
course for his footsteps, only with a longing desire to feel the breath
of Heaven upon his hot brow once again, and to look up at the stars,
which he felt glad would gaze on him always the same, from the deep blue
sky above; no matter what changes came o'er the heart of man, or how
black the frown adversity might bend upon him. Perhaps had the youth,
that night, been left to commune with his own rebel thoughts, and to the
companionship of those holy stars, and the still voice of the night, he
would have become himself again, and sought his pillow with a heart
refreshed from the storm that had swept over it. But his evil genius
pursued him; and before he reached the first corner, he heard a quick
step behind him, and turning, stood face to face with the last person
he at that moment wished to meet--Quirk, his fellow-clerk.

Since the Sabbath which they had spent so disgracefully together, he had
shunned Quirk in every way. He had avoided his glances, shunned his
presence, and turned a deaf ear to his sneers and gibes. But now there
was no way to avoid him, and Arthur greeted him with as good a grace as
possible.

"What the devil's the matter with you, Pratt?" he exclaimed, after the
first words of recognition. "I can see plainly there's been a muss
between you and old D., someway, but I'll be hanged if I could find out
what 'twas about. He hasn't found out we lost that pass-key, has he?"

"D----n the key," said Arthur, uttering his first oath with cool
nonchalance; "I don't know whether he's found it out or not, and care
less."

"You'd have to care, I reckon, if he did find it out, though," returned
the other. "Don't you see the store is liable to be entered any night,
if a clever fellow happened to find that key? You see the number of the
store and all is on it."

Arthur walked on for a moment in silence, then replied:

"If a 'clever fellow,' as you say, had found it, and wanted to use it
for such a purpose, he'd have been in, I guess, before now--that key
has been gone a month or more."

"Aye, but the nights have been too fine; starlight or moonlight all the
while; and may be he is waiting for the new stock of goods, who knows?"

"Well, if that's going to happen," said Arthur, earnestly, "I only hope
it will not come just yet; I've got trouble enough for one season."

"Trouble! what have you got to trouble you, I'd like to know? But I
forgot, you haven't told me what occurred to-day; and that's just what I
come after you for, to find out."

"Well, I may as well tell you, I suppose, if you are so anxious to know.
Delancey, I don't believe, will keep it to himself, and you may as well
know it from me as him."

"Never hope for him to keep anything secret that could hurt a body; I
never knew him to screen a clerk's faults yet. He is of the opinion that
to make the matter public, is the best way to ensure better luck next
time. Let's step in here, and take something refreshing; and you can
tell me the story over our glasses."

Arthur complied, and entering one of those gorgeous saloons, which can
be found in almost every block of the Crescent City, Quirk stepped to
the counter, and ordered a bottle of wine, and, in an under-tone,
added:--"A private apartment, also, if you have one empty."

The clerk, who was a portly, sensual-faced, red-haired man, raised his
brows, and, tipping a sly wink at Quirk, said:--"Up stairs or down?"

"Both, perhaps," returned the other, with a laugh; "but if we want an
upper one, we'll let you know. Down stairs for the present."

The man had by this time lighted a lamp, at the wick of which he had
been working for some time, and taking the bottle of wine, he led the
way into the back part of the saloon, where was a door partially
concealed by red moreen hangings. He shoved aside the curtain, and
passed into a long vestibule, elegantly furnished, with doors opening on
each side, not unlike the state-rooms of a steamboat. These doors led
into small apartments, carpeted, lighted, and containing four chairs and
a card-table, with a pack of cards.

"You are perfectly private here, gentlemen."

"Yes," replied Quirk, seating himself with the air of a man who has
bought his comfort, and means to enjoy it. "Ah, Quibbles, what shall we
do for cigars? I forgot them."

"We have some prime Havanas, sir; how many did you order?"

"Oh, bring me half a dozen; that's enough after wine."

Quibbles departed on his mission.

"This is a nice place, Pratt, to tell secrets in; don't you think so?"

"I do, indeed," said Arthur, looking around with a knowing air, and
thrumming on the table with his fingers.

The clerk at this moment returned with cigars and wine glasses, and drew
the cork of the wine bottle.

"Quibbles."

"Yes, sir."

"Has Clinton been here to-night?"

"Not yet."

"When he comes tell him we are here, and send him in, will you?"

Quibbles bowed, and retired.

"Is that the proprietor of this establishment, Quirk?" asked Arthur,
helping himself to a glass of wine.

"Ho, ho, bless your heart, no. The proprietor is one of the pillars of
an up-town church, and would feel his reputation ruined, and himself
disgraced, if seen behind the counter of such a concern. He hires this
man to play proprietor, and keeps the place open for the benefit of
those who prefer bar-rooms to churches. You see, Christians go into
anything that pays well, here."

Arthur bent over his glass with something like a frown on his young
brow; then holding his wine up between his eye and the light, he shook
it slowly, and watched the ruddy reflection playing on his hand.

"Didn't I hear you ask if Clinton had been here, Quirk?"

"Aye, just so."

"Does he frequent this place?"

"Well, between you and me, he does."

"Does he use these?" said Arthur, lifting a few of the cards, and
letting them fall slowly through his fingers.

"Well, sometimes he does one thing, sometimes another; you see this is a
very extensive establishment, and sometimes he drinks in the saloon,
sometimes gambles in here, and sometimes passes the evening up stairs
with the ladies, and occasionally does all in the course of an evening.
He's a fine fellow, I tell you; a fast un, though."

"What ladies are in the house, the family of the man out yonder?"

"Ha! ha! ha!" roared Quirk, uproariously; "what a prime innocent it is,
though. Why, my boy, this is one of the fashionable establishments of
the city."

A glow of shame crossed Arthur's cheek, as the truth flashed upon his
mind, and dashing his glass angrily down, blushing at the thought of
being led into such a place, he was about to pass out of the door.

"Why, hold on, Pratt; have you forgotten what you came here for? You
haven't told me a word of what you were going to."

"Nor shall I in this hole," returned Arthur, laying his hand upon the
door-key; "if you want to hear it you must get out of here."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Quirk, trying to detain him; "hold on till we
finish this bottle."

"Not I," replied Arthur, "I've had enough;" and dashing open the door,
he rushed against the trim figure of Clinton, who was just about to
enter.


CHAPTER XIX.

    "Fate is above us all;
    We struggle, but what matters our endeavor?
    Our doom is gone beyond our own recall;
    May we deny or mitigate it? Never!"

    Miss Landon.


"Whither so fast, whither so fast!" cried Clinton, so cheerfully, as he
laid both hands on Arthur's shoulders, and playfully detained him, that
he could not answer the speaker with a frown; so, holding out his hand,
he shook that of the new comer heartily, and suffered himself to be led
back into the card-room.

"If you hadn't have come just as you did, Clin, this chap would have
been off like a shot from a shovel, his young modesty was so shocked
just by my telling him the state of affairs in the house here," said
Quirk, tipping back in his chair against the wall, while a sneer mingled
in the smile upon his lips.

"Well, if he isn't used to such things, I don't wonder," returned
Clinton, drawing Arthur to a seat by his side, and squeezing cordially
the hand he still held.

"You're a pretty one to side that way," said Quirk, half angry at
Clinton's remark. "If he ain't used to such things, it's time he was
initiated, if he ever expects to be a man."

"Time enough, time enough," replied Clinton, good-naturedly, shaking the
bottle to see if there was anything left in it, then touching a
table-bell at his side, he summoned Quibbles.

"A couple of bottles of champagne here, and clean glasses."

They were brought instantly.

"How came you to drop in here, boys, to-night? I declare it is an
unexpected pleasure."

"Pratt had something on his mind, and came in here to tell me of it; but
he got so d----d huffy, I don't suppose I shall hear it now."

"Something on your mind, eh, Pratt?" said Clinton, in a commiserating
tone, as he filled Arthur's glass, and shoved the bottle to Quirk; "if
so, here's to the end of it."

They touched glasses, and drank off the sparkling draught.

"Now for the story, whatever it is!" cried Clinton.

"It is no story, only a little affair that happened after I left you
this afternoon," returned Arthur.

"Indeed! after you left me! I am all impatience, my dear fellow, let's
hear."

In as few words as possible, dwelling as lightly as he could on what Mr.
Delancey had said to him, Arthur told it all as it had happened, his
companions listening attentively meanwhile.

"Why, my dear soul!" cried Clinton, clapping his hand on Arthur's
shoulder, as he finished speaking, "your pocket must have been picked.
There's always a crowd in the street at that time of day, and somebody
has just been cute enough to rob you."

"So Mr. Delancey thought, and he said probably you did it," returned
Arthur, though in the tone of one who tells what he feels assured is
false.

"The deuce he did!" exclaimed Clinton, filling the glasses again, and
holding up his own to conceal the flush upon his face.

"Well, it's too bad anyhow," said Quirk, with returning good nature.
"You don't get any credit for honesty, and have to bear the loss
besides--outrageous!"

"How did the old man know anything about me?" said Clinton, with an
indifferent air; "I'll have to call him out, if he touches upon my
character in this style."

Quirk laughed, and Arthur hastened to explain to Clinton how the remark
had been made, and how light a bearing, after all, it had upon himself.

Clinton received it with a careless bow, as if, at best, he considered
it a matter of no consequence.

"And so he actually insinuated that you had it, eh, in the end?"

"Yes--and that's the most I care for; if he had believed me honest, I
could have borne the rest unmurmuringly; but to be thought a thief!"

"It seems hard enough, don't it?" said Clinton, in a tone of sympathetic
kindness, well-calculated to win on the trusting heart beside him, and
laying one hand familiarly on Arthur's knee.

"It's a deuced piece of business, that's all about it!" cried Quirk,
growing excited with the wine he had swallowed; "it's an insult I
wouldn't take from any man--old or young, or little or big; I'll be
dem'd if I would."

An insult! that was a light in which he had not exactly placed it
before, and Arthur's blood rose at the thought. Clinton remarked it,
with a twinkle of gratification in his keen eye, which he strove to
conceal from Arthur's observation.

"It's enough to drive one desperate! I scarcely know what I should do
under such circumstances," said he, suddenly, with his eyes fixed keenly
upon Arthur's flushed face.

"There's no way for me to do but to put up with it," returned Arthur,
doggedly; "I've got to stay there, and make it up; and I may as well do
it quietly as to make a disturbance about it, because it's got to be
done."

"It's enough to tempt one to try the strength of the old adage----,"
continued Clinton, thoughtfully, and pausing in the midst of his
sentence.

"What's that?" asked Arthur, without looking up.

"Why, to take the game as well as the name," said the other, with a
short laugh, and without taking his eyes from Arthur's face.

"True enough," cried Quirk, "you might as well be a thief as to be
called one, according to my opinion."

Arthur placed his elbow on the table, and looked into the lamp-blaze
thoughtfully, with his head on his hand.

"You are both ready to advise," said he, after a moment's silence, "but
I doubt if either of you know what you'd do in my case, after all."

"I'd be avenged," said Clinton, resolutely; "but you are not me, and I
don't ask you to do as I would."

"That's just the thing!" cried Quirk; "and if you can hit upon a plan,
carry it out; there'll be some satisfaction in that."

"Revenge!" said Arthur, bitterly; "how can I be revenged? It would be a
sparrow struggling against a vulture."

"You admit you have been wronged?"

"Most unjustly so."

"And you would be avenged, if you could?"

"Yes, if I spilled my heart's blood."

Arthur had drank deeply of the wine, and his blood was heated with it,
and his worst passions aroused. He had been goaded into the belief that
he had been grossly insulted and had taken it submissively, and that
revenge was his only resource. He threw aside his chair, and strode back
and forth across the narrow room, with the excited tread of the caged
lion.

Clinton watched him furtively from beneath his brows for a moment, then
rising, linked arms, and leaned toward him in a confidential manner.

"My poor friend, I pity you from the bottom of my heart; count upon me
whenever you are in want of a friend, will you?"

"Always, Clinton; thank you."

"And if I should try to think upon some good plan, lay some good plot,
by which you could gain retribution for this great wrong, would you then
be courageous, and carry it out handsomely?"

"Would I? Never fear me there. I'll show you that I'm not one to bow my
neck to the insults of a money-holder. I'll carry out anything you say."

"Bravo! my boy; you've got the right kind of spirit in you; that's what
I like to see--you're a man of pluck."

"About when do you think you'll have this grand plot ready for me, eh?"

"The first dark night."

"You'll consult the clerk of the we-weather as to when that is c-coming,
eh?"

"I suppose so," said Clinton, laughing. "Meanwhile, come down to my
house the last of the week, say Friday night, and I'll have all things
in cap-a-pie order for you."

"How do I know where to find you, my more than brother," said Arthur,
clasping Clinton's hand closely.

"Quirk knows the way. You'll come?"

"Depend upon it."

"Good! that's settled; now for a bumper on it."

"Well, I don't know, Clinton; I--I--declare I'm afr-afraid I'll be (hic)
drunk if I drink any more."

"Nonsense! down with it; let's finish the last bottle."

The wine was swallowed, and Clinton, taking Arthur's hand in his, shook
it heartily.

"Ah! my boy, you've proved yourself 'one of us' to-night; glad to claim
you as a b-hoy. Whenever you're in want or trouble, signal the b-hoys,
and you'll be helped out of it. It's a better society than any of the
Odd Fellows or Free Masons can ever be, and costs you nothing besides.
What say you now for a stroll?"

"Agreed! for my part, I am ready for anything."

"Then hurrah, boys!" cried Clinton, beginning to sing a lively air; and
lighting their cigars, they passed out into the saloon.

"Put all this in my bill, Quibbles," said Clinton, as he passed that
gentleman, on his way to the door.

"That'll do, sir--all right."

With noise and laughter, and rude jest, the drunken trio went down the
street. It needed but a glance to show that the younger of the three, he
with the bright complexion and jetty hair, was but a novice in
dissipation, and more than one felt a glow of pity, as he jostled past
them in the light of the bright windows of Royal-street. Alas! alas!
Arthur; where was the ghost in your heart now? that haggard figure,
pointing ever with its skinny finger backward!

They kept on until they reached St. Ann-street, into which they turned;
as they did so, their attention was attracted by the appearance of a
slight female figure, with a short cloak about her shoulders, and the
hood drawn over her head. The moment she heard the unsteady steps behind
her she hurried her pace, which was already rapid, and sped along with
feet winged with fear.

"By Jove! that's a graceful little minx!" exclaimed Clinton.

"She's inclined to lead us a chase, too," said Quirk.

"Let's after her."

"Agreed."

And with a shout, the three started in pursuit, scarce conscious, in
their excitement, of the object they had in view.

With a scream, the light form bounded onward, and fled away like the
wind. Strong limbs followed; but her feet were fleet, and lightly clad,
and with the hood falling from her head, and hands clasped upon a parcel
she carefully carried, she seemed almost to fly before her pursuers.
With a cry of delight, she saw the gleam of a lamp come through an open
door, a little beyond, when, as she attempted to spring an intervening
gutter, her foot struck the curb-stone, and she fell to the earth.

In an instant she was lifted in the arms of Quirk and Clinton.

"Oh, grandpapa! grandpapa!" she shrieked, in thrilling accents, "what
will become of your poor, poor Blanche? Help! help!"

Her cries were unheeded by her merciless captors, and they bore her down
an adjacent street.


CHAPTER XX.

    "Oh! Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!"
          King Henry VI.


"Villains!" cried a deep, powerful voice, as a huge form met them, in
full career, staggering through the darkness; "villains! unhand this
girl, or, by Heavens, you'll rue the hour you ever placed a finger on
her."

"Help! help!"

"And who are you, I'd like to know, that dares to put his finger in our
p-p-pie?" returned Quirk, trying to dash past the tall figure with his
burden.

"I am one that dares to protect defenceless virtue, whenever I see it
thus assailed. This girl is not what you take her for, or she would
never cry for help; and I tell you to put her down, or I will make you,"
returned the other, lifting his strong arm, and still preventing them
from passing.

The girl struggled in the grasp of her captors, and moaned.

The new comer sprang forward with a bound, and clasping his arms about
her, strove to draw her from their hold.

"Not so fast, not so fast," said Clinton, placing one hand over the
girl's mouth; "remember we're three to one here, and if you don't want
your head broke, you'd better keep away."

"That's the kind," said Arthur, coming forward; "hold on to her, Clin--"

The words were no sooner spoken, than the speaker fell to the pavement,
leveled by a heavy blow from the arm of the intruder, and a second blow
sent Quirk, staggering, into the gutter, while at the same moment the
girl was snatched from the now yielding arms of Clinton.

As she gained her feet, she flung back her hair from her eyes, and
looked up in the face of her rescuer.

"Monsieur Wilkins!"

"Good Heavens! is this Blanche?"

At the mention of Wilkins' name, Arthur and Quirk sprang to their feet,
and started on a run down the street, followed by Clinton.

"A devilish muss this," cried Quirk, as they paused on a corner, a few
blocks from the scene of their discomfiture.

"It was too dark for him to recognize a soul of us," returned Clinton;
"if it hadn't been for the lamp gleam coming suddenly through that
window, she would not have known him."

"I hope he didn't know me," said Arthur, rubbing his forehead, which had
struck the pavement as he fell, and feeling considerably sobered by his
fall, and the recent flight. "I don't want this scrape to go back to
Guly."

"Who's that? your young milk-and-water brother! Pshaw! what does he know
about the fun of such things? If you want to enjoy yourself, I advise
you to keep your sprees a secret from him; he has no soul to appreciate
such affairs."

"You are more than half right there."

"He's the kind of character I can't bear to be near," said Quirk,
emphatically.

"You couldn't pay him a higher compliment than to say that," returned
Arthur, warmly.

"Well, well, don't get into a miff about a trifle now. Clint, where
shall we go to?"

"I shall go home, I reckon; my head aches," said Arthur.

"No, you won't go home either," replied Clinton, pulling him along with
him, good-naturedly. "Let's make a night of it, now we have begun. What
do you say for the Globe ball-room? There's a high affair there
to-night, and

    'We'll dance all night till broad daylight,
    And go home with the gals in the morning.'"

"Agreed," said Quirk; "come along, Pratt. Your foot's in, and it'll be
dirty, whether you pull it out first or last; you may as well have the
good of it."

With a heart responding to this idea, Arthur suffered his companions
each to take an arm, and went on with them to the Globe ball-room. The
haggard ghost, the pale figure of warning and remorse, was gone for ever
from Arthur's heart.

Wilkins, the moment he discovered who it was he had rescued, gave scarce
a thought to the flight of those who had opposed him; but, with a gush
of thankfulness in his heart, he drew Blanche's arm within his, and led
her back toward her own house.

"How came you to be in the street at this hour, Miss? Do you know it is
after midnight, and young girls like you are never safe in these streets
at such hours?"

"Oh, sir," said Blanche, bursting into tears, "my grandpapa was taken
very ill. I had no one to send, you know, and of course I had to go for
assistance myself. I looked all up and down the street, and saw nobody,
not even a watch-man; so I put on my cloak, and ran for the doctor. He
wasn't home; so I went a little further to see old Elise, who always
gives me medicine that helps grandpapa, and she detained me a little
while preparing it; and when I came out, _they_ came behind me; I tried
my very best to run away, but I fell down, and they caught me. Oh, Mon
Dieu! Monsieur! what if you hadn't come just as you did!"

"You would have been a most miserable little girl, without doubt, Miss
Blanche."

"I can never thank you enough, Monsieur."

"You can repay me by never going out at such a time again."

"And when another case comes just as extreme, Mr. Wilkins, what can I
do? I couldn't let poor grandpapa die, could I?"

There was such an earnest intonation of voice in these words, and such a
simple innocence of manner, that Wilkins couldn't repress a smile.

"If I furnish you with a tidy little black girl, will you take good care
of her, Miss Blanche, and let _her_ do your errands?"

"Oh, Monsieur, that would be too much for you to do."

"No; I own a number of slaves, and the daughter of one of them is too
young to be put out to a place, and is just old enough to work for you."

"You are so very kind!"

By this time they had reached Blanche's home, and as she tripped up the
steps, she said:--

"Come and see grandpapa to-morrow, Mr. Wilkins; and let him thank you
for his kindness to his little house-keeper."

"I will come, Miss Blanche."

"And, Monsieur," she added, coming out again after she had passed into
the door, "bring Guly with you, won't you?"

"Oui, Mademoiselle."

The door closed, and Wilkins passed on, thoughtfully, towards
Royal-street. In the excitement of the recent adventure, he had almost
forgotten what had called him forth at that time of night, and now
walked on, like one who wanders forth purposeless, into darkness and
solitude. But suddenly, in passing a brilliantly lighted café, the
thought of Arthur crossed his mind; and, for the first time, the idea
flashed upon him, that he might have been one of those concerned in the
capture of little Blanche.

He stopped short, and was about to turn back, to endeavor to trace the
fugitives, when he remembered that Arthur had as yet but just commenced
the downward path, and that he could not already have become so fallen
as to commit so base an act as that which he had just witnessed. It had
been too dark to recognize faces, and his own excitement had prevented
him from thinking to notice the voices; and the more he thought of it,
the more convinced was he that Arthur was not among them. He had sat
with Guly by the fire until the midnight hour had passed, waiting for
Arthur's return; but when the fire died out, and the lamp faded, and he
still was absent, he persuaded Guly to go to bed, promising that he
would seek his brother before he slept. Guly would fain have accompanied
him, but Wilkins induced him to remain, not wishing to familiarize the
pure heart of his boy-friend with the scenes in which he felt convinced
he must look for the wanderer.

Wilkins faithfully kept his word, and left no place unsearched wherein
he thought it possible to find Arthur. He believed he would find him in
some one of the popular places of resort, standing ever open, with their
false glitter and dangerous splendor, to lure their victims to
destruction. But 'the wee small hour ayont the twal' found him still
searching, and still unsuccessful.

Disappointed, with lingering steps he turned toward the store, but, as
he stepped upon the sill, a slender figure darted from the alley-way,
and laid a chill and trembling hand upon his arm.

"Bernard!"

"Heavens, Minny! what brings you here?"

"Hopes and fears, and memories, and sorrows, which _will not_ die."

"Pshaw, girl! harping on the old string yet! What of your mistress?"

"She is well, and by this time happy in her dreams."

"And did she send you to me? how came you here?"

"I came here with the pass, which gives any negro a right to the
highway; and though I forged it, it served me well."

Minny stepped back into the shadow of the archway, and Wilkins, obeying
the convulsive grasp of that delicate hand, followed her.

"Bernard," said she, dropping her voice almost into a whisper, which
echoed deep and clear through the dark and narrow alley, "I have come to
you to-night, for the last time in my life, to stand before you for a
moment in the light of other days."

She paused, as if some smothered emotion overcame her; and the trembling
hand upon his arm slipped down, and was clasped an instant in Wilkins'
grasp. It lingered there but a moment, one wild sad moment to Minny, and
was withdrawn hastily, with a gush of tears.

"I cannot tell you," she proceeded to say, in a tone of touching
sadness, and speaking every word with impressive distinctness, "I cannot
tell you what came over me to-night, as I sat by the tall window,
looking up at the pale stars, and listening to the night-wind, but it
seemed to me like some vivid dream, or some shadowy vision of the past,
and as my mistress fell asleep, I sat there still, looking up at the
stars, with my vision between me and them. Listen, Bernard, and let me
tell you what it was."

Wilkins' heart was touched by the soul-reaching sadness of the girl's
manner, and he folded his arms patiently upon his breast, and leaned
back against the brick wall of the archway, with his head bent forward
to listen.

"I saw myself, Bernard, at first, as I was when first you came here. I
knew none of the sorrows of my situation then, if there were any; at
least I did not think it was anything to be a slave, and I was
light-hearted and innocent, and very happy. I saw myself tripping along
with my basket in my hand, as I so often used to do in my frequent
errands to the store, and I met you, and at last, one moonlight night,
you started with me from the store, and talked with me kindly and
gently, and left me only at the gate of the great house where I lived.
Bernard, do you remember?"

"Yes, Minny, I do remember."

"And the next night, and the next--and still the next--they all came
before me to-night so clearly. You were by my side, and talking sweetly,
gently, lovingly. Yes, you told your love to me, Bernard; I saw you in
my vision to-night as plainly as I saw you in reality then. On your
knees before me, me the quadroon, clasping my hand, kissing it, blessing
it, praying, imploring, beseeching me to be your wife. You were younger
then, and less ambitious. I loved you so passionately, so wildly--Oh! my
God! with what intenseness--and I told you so. To-night, looking up at
those stars above me, I seemed to hear the old cathedral bell, I saw the
doors swing slowly open, I heard the solemn service, you clasped me to
your heart--your own."

"Girl! girl!" cried Wilkins, striking his hand upon his brow
passionately, "why do you come to call all this up now?"

"Hear me, Bernard," said Minny, laying her hand again upon his arm. "You
must hear me out. My lips shall never call the past to your mind again,
never; but hear me now. I kept my place, and you kept yours. We met
clandestinely, when we could, and where we could; and when I found that
bondage kept me from your side, and that you had neither the gold to buy
me, nor the courage to have it said you bought your wife, then, then I
learned the bitter lot the quadroon has to bear. I was as white as you,
as free in heart and motion, with high and good impulses, and a
cultivated mind; and yet I had no liberty to go abroad, and make my home
with him I loved, and, for the first time in my life, I cursed the fate
which rendered me a slave! A little time went on, and what a change! Oh!
Heaven! that I should e'er have lived to see it! you grew cold and
distant as you rose in life, and when you gained the position you now
have here, I saw, because my very love made me see, that an ambitious
heart had turned your thoughts higher than the poor quadroon, the
beautiful but wretched slave. You loved my mistress! my master's
daughter! She whom he would rather this day bury in the Potter's field
than see your wife--and you know it! Oh! what agony then was mine! It
was my turn then to weep, and pray, and plead; was I not your lawful
wife, your own? Ha! what answer did you give me then? That our marriage
was a mere form, that it was illegal, and I was--what? No marriage could
be performed lawfully, you said, between a white man and a woman with
the blood of my race in her veins. I wonder that I did not go mad then;
I was taken terribly ill, but it was my fate to live on in misery. I
lived to see you and Miss Della meet often, after that first meeting at
the masked ball, and I lived to see her love you. When I found her
secret out, I gave you up for ever; and from that moment my love froze
up, and has hung in my heart like an unthawing icicle ever since."

"Have done, girl!" cried Wilkins, suddenly laying his heavy hands on her
shoulders, as she stood before him with the starlight she so loved, just
making her pale face and glittering eyes visible; "have done, I say, or
I will curse you. Hence! I have heard enough of this; why do you come
prating here, to tell me what I already know too well?--out upon you!"

In his impatient anger, Wilkins threw her from him, and strode
hurriedly, up and down through the narrow alley, where they stood. Minny
waited until his excitement had in a measure subsided, and he stood once
more with folded arms before her, and his dark eyes looking into hers.

"Now," said he, speaking half in mockery, half in awe of the
firm-hearted girl beside him, "now, my sin, my concentrated lightning,
my beautiful passion, my quintessence of gall and bitterness, go on.
I'll stand and listen now till doomsday, if you will it, though your
lips drop burning coals into my bare bosom, and scorch my soul. Go on,
I say, I'll listen."

Minnie drew herself up proudly before him, as she heard his words, and
stood with her beautiful head erect, and her keen eye fixed upon him,
unwaveringly.

"Had you possessed a soul to burn over a woman's woes, and a woman's
wrongs, it would have been scorched out long ago, Bernard; but let that
pass. I came to you this night, not only to tell over my own
wretchedness, a reviewal of which had risen up so forcibly before me,
but I came to you anew as the spirit of the past, to call up in your
breast the memory of what you have been, and to ask you if the future
brings a change. And now, Bernard, on all your hopes of happiness, here
or hereafter, answer me truly. Do you sincerely love this girl, whose
guileless heart you've won?"

"And whether I do or not, girl, is it you I must make my confessor? No,
never. It is a matter which concerns you not at all. Whether my heart be
black as hate, or pure as an angel's pinion, I lay it bare to no one.
Whatever my feelings or intent in this matter, they are my own."

"Not so, Bernard. If ambition has prompted you to gain her affections,
if love of wealth has sent you a wooer at that shrine, having in your
breast no faithful heart to bestow in return for hers, let me beg, let
me implore you, to stop where you are. Be merciful, compare the home
which you can give, to the home from whence you take her. Compare the
happiness which you can bestow to that of which you rob her, and feel,
that if you take her, with all this, to a loveless breast, you take her
to misery, to desolation, and death!"

"Do you deem me a villain, woman?"

"What you have been, you may be again."

Wilkins mused a moment; then, in a softer and more subdued tone, said:--

"No, no; oh no! God only knows--but never that to her, oh never!"

"Bernard! my mistress is dear to me; her happiness more sacred to me
than my own. If I believed that you would ever play her false, if I
believed that a sinister motive led you to accomplish this end, as I
stand before you here, I would expose you as you are. I would lay bare
to her the secrets of the past. I would warn her to recall the love
which she has lavished on you, though the next hour should be my last,
in consequence. Her happiness shall never be wrecked while I have the
slightest power to guide it clear from danger."

With his impetuous spirit growing calm, as Minny became more excited,
Wilkins looked upon her, as she confronted him, with her soul in her
face, and his eyes kindled with the admiration his impulsive but
generous heart could not but feel.

"Most nobly spoken, Minny!" he exclaimed, earnestly, "and now, as Heaven
hears, let me speak what I feel is truth. Minny, there is a first love,
a wavering, flickering, effervescing sentiment of youthful hearts,
faithful and enduring in some instances, but not in mine, and this, God
forgive me, I gave to you. True, I believed then I could never change;
but the change came, with the exhalation of my heart's first passion,
and though I never hated, I found I could no longer love you. Our
marriage was illegal; I did not know it when it took place, but I
learned it afterwards, when my love had chilled, and with perhaps a
cruel, but a just hand, Minny, just to us both, I severed the cord which
had bound us so sweetly, and our parted hearts drifted out of each
other's sight, on the billows of life's ocean."

"Aye, Bernard, the one, a torn and shattered wreck, cast helpless on the
desolate shores of sorrow and despair; the other, strong and uninjured,
floating away to new and pleasant places, with only the shadow of a sad
memory following it."

"Too true, Minny, too true! alas for the restless impulses of my
misguided spirit. Alas for the trusting hopefulness of thine. But,
Minny, as I stand before you now, with my whole heart open to your
sight, I can most truly declare, that my love for Della is all that you
would have it. She is trusting and innocent. I will never blight the
one, or betray the other. I will hold her to my strong heart as some
tender flower, which needs protection from a wintry blast, and from the
world's cold breath; I will shield and guard, and cherish her with my
life. God help me so to do!"

"Amen, Bernard, amen!"

"Minny, are you satisfied?"

"Yes! my heart trusts you once again. Even more hopeful for its trust
for another, than even for itself."

"Bless you, Minny; and now 'tis time your anxious heart found rest. I
will see you safe to your own gate, and then good-night."

Minny suffered Wilkins to draw her hand within his arm, and lead her
forth once more beneath the starry skies. They walked on silently, each
engrossed with their own reflections, with only the occasional
interruption of the watchman, or the rattle of some noisy vehicle,
hastening along the stony streets. Minny at last stopped at the entrance
of the vacant court, leading to the secret garden door. As she was about
to withdraw her hand from his arm, Wilkins retained it, firmly, yet
respectfully, in his own.

"I have been thinking, Minny, more deeply than I ever thought before, of
the great wrong which I have done you. The time may never come again
when we shall meet as to-night we've met, and before we part, I must
hear your lips pronounce my forgiveness."

"From the bottom of my heart, Bernard, I forgive you all that you may
ever have done to me; either in word, or thought, or deed."

"I have been a wretch, Minny."

"But," continued the girl, without heeding the interruption, and
speaking in an earnest, thrilling tone, "by the Heaven that is above us
both, Bernard, I here swear, that if you are ever cold or cruel to the
new bride you are winning, as true as there's a heart in my bosom, I
will be her avenger--mark my words; though I should have to follow you
to the ends of the earth, that revenge shall be mine."

A moment of silence ensued, and Minny stood like a breathing statue of
retribution, with her glittering eyes fixed upon the face before her.

