Philip was in hopes of being able to speak to Laura after dinner,
but his uncle wanted him to come and look over the plans of an estate
adjoining Redclyffe, which there was some idea of purchasing. Such an
employment would in general have been congenial; but on this occasion,
it was only by a strong force that he could chain his attention, for
Guy was pacing the terrace with Laura and Amabel, and as they passed and
repassed the window, he now and then caught sounds of repeating poetry.

In this Guy excelled. He did not read aloud well; he was too rapid, and
eyes and thoughts were apt to travel still faster than the lips, thus
producing a confusion; but no one could recite better when a passage had
taken strong hold of his imagination, and he gave it the full effect
of the modulations of his fine voice, conveying in its inflections the
impressions which stirred him profoundly. He was just now enchanted
with his first reading of 'Thalaba,' where he found all manner of deep
meanings, to which the sisters listened with wonder and delight. He
repeated, in a low, awful, thrilling tone, that made Amy shudder, the
lines in the seventh book, ending with--

          "Who comes from the bridal chamber!
           It is Azrael, angel of death."'

'You have not been so taken up with any book since Sintram.' said Laura.

'It is like Sintram,' he replied.

'Like it?'

'So it seems to me. A strife with the powers of darkness; the victory,
forgiveness, resignation, death.

          "Thou know'st the secret wishes of my heart,
           Do with me as thou wilt, thy will is best."'

'I wish you would not speak as if you were Thalaba yourself,' said Amy,
'you bring the whole Domdaniel round us.'

'I am afraid he is going to believe himself Thalaba as well as Sintram,'
said Laura. 'But you know Southey did not see all this himself, and did
not understand it when it was pointed out.'

'Don't tell us that,' said Amy.

'Nay; I think there is something striking in it,' said Guy then, with a
sudden transition, 'but is not this ball famous?'

And their talk was of balls and reviews till nine o'clock, when they
were summoned to tea.

On the whole, Philip returned to Broadstone by no means comforted.

Never had he known so much difficulty in attending with patience to his
duties as in the course of the next fortnight. They became a greater
durance, as he at length looked his feelings full in the face, and
became aware of their true nature.

He perceived that the loss of Laura would darken his whole existence;
yet he thought that, were he only secure of her happiness, he could have
resigned her in silence. Guy was, however, one of the last men in the
world whom he could bear to see in possession of her; and probably
she was allowing herself to be entangled, if not in heart, at least in
manner. If so, she should not be unwarned. He had been her guide from
childhood, and he would not fail her now.

Three days before the review, he succeeded in finding time for a walk to
Hollywell, not fully decided on the part he should act, though resolved
on making some remonstrance. He was crossing a stile, about a mile and a
half from Hollywell, when he saw a lady sitting on the stump of a tree,
sketching, and found that fate had been so propitious as to send Laura
thither alone. The rest had gone to gather mushrooms on a down, and had
left her sketching the view of the spires of Broadstone, in the cleft
between the high green hills. She was very glad to see him, and held up
her purple and olive washes to be criticised; but he did not pay much
attention to them. He was almost confused at the sudden manner in which
the opportunity for speaking had presented itself.

'It is a long time since I have seen you,' said he, at last.

'An unheard-of time.'

'Still longer since we have had any conversation.'

'I was just thinking so. Not since that hot hay-making, when Guy came
home. Indeed, we have had so much amusement lately that I have hardly
had time for thought. Guy says we are all growing dissipated.'

'Ah! your German, and dancing, and music, do not agree with thought.'

'Poor music!' said Laura, smiling. 'But I am ready for a lecture; I have
been feeling more like a butterfly than I like.'

'I know you think me unjust about music, and I freely confess that I
cannot estimate the pleasure it affords, but I doubt whether it is a
safe pleasure. It forms common ground for persons who would otherwise
have little in common, and leads to intimacies which occasion results
never looked for.'

'Yes,' said Laura, receiving it as a general maxim.

'Laura, you complain of feeling like a butterfly. Is not that a sign
that you were made for better things?'

'But what can I do? I try to read early and at night, but I can't
prevent the fun and gaiety; and, indeed, I don't think I would. It is
innocent, and we never had such a pleasant summer. Charlie is so--so
much more equable, and mamma is more easy about him, and I can't help
thinking it does them all good, though I do feel idle.'

'It is innocent, it is right for a little while,' said Philip; 'but your
dissatisfaction proves that you are superior to such things. Laura, what
I fear is, that this summer holiday may entangle you, and so fix your
fate as to render your life no holiday. O Laura take care; know what you
are doing!'

'What am I doing?' asked Laura, with an alarmed look of ingenuous
surprise.

Never had it been so hard to maintain his composure as now, when her
simplicity forced him to come to plainer terms. 'I must speak,' he
continued, 'because no one else will. Have you reflected whither this
may tend? This music, this versifying, this admitting a stranger so
unreservedly into your pursuits?'

She understood now, and hung her head. He would have given worlds to
judge of the face hidden by her bonnet; but as she did not reply,
he spoke on, his agitation becoming so strong, that the struggle was
perceptible in the forced calmness of his tone. 'I would not say a word
if he were worthy, but Laura--Laura, I have seen Locksley Hall acted
once; do not let me see it again in a way which--which would give me
infinitely more pain.'

The faltering of his voice, so resolutely subdued, touched, her
extremely, and a thrill of exquisite pleasure glanced through her, on
hearing confirmed what she had long felt, that she had taken Margaret's
place--nay, as she now learnt, that she was even more precious to him.
She only thought of reassuring him.

'No, you need never fear _that_. He has no such thought, I am sure.'
She blushed deeply, but looked in his face. 'He treats us both alike,
besides, he is so young.'

'The mischief is not done,' said Philip, trying to resume his usual
tone; 'I only meant to speak in time. You might let your manner go too
far; you might even allow your affections to be involved without knowing
it, if you were not on your guard.'

'Never!' said Laura. 'Oh, no; I could never dream of that with Guy. I
like Guy very much; I think better of him than you do; but oh no; he
could never be my first and best; I could never care for him in _that_
way. How could you think so, Philip?'

'Laura, I cannot but look on you with what may seem over-solicitude.
Since I lost Fanny, and worse than lost Margaret, you have been my
home; my first, my most precious interest. O Laura!' and he did not even
attempt to conceal the trembling and tenderness of his voice, 'could I
bear to lose you, to see you thrown away or changed--you, dearest, best
of all?'

Laura did not turn away her head this time, but raising her beautiful
face, glowing with such a look as had never beamed there before, while
tears rose to her eyes, she said, 'Don't speak of my changing towards
you. I never could; for if there is anything to care for in me, it is
you that have taught it to me.'

If ever face plainly told another that he was her first and best,
Laura's did so now. Away went misgivings, and he looked at her in
happiness too great for speech, at least, he could not speak till he
had mastered his emotion, but his countenance was sufficient reply. Even
then, in the midst of this flood of ecstasy, came the thought, 'What
have I done?'

He had gone further than he had ever intended. It was a positive avowal
of love; and what would ensue? Cessation of intercourse with her,
endless vexations, the displeasure of her family, loss of influence,
contempt, and from Mr. Edmonstone, for the pretensions of a penniless
soldier. His joy was too great to be damped, but it was rendered
cautious. 'Laura, my own!' (what delight the words gave her,) 'you have
made me very happy. We know each other now, and trust each other for
ever.'

'O yes, yes; nothing can alter what has grown up with us.'

'It is for ever!' repeated Philip. 'But, Laura, let us be content with
our own knowledge of what we are to each other. Do not let us call in
others to see our happiness.'

Laura looked surprised, for she always considered any communication
about his private feelings too sacred to be repeated, and wondered he
should think the injunction necessary. 'I never can bear to talk about
the best kinds of happiness,' said she; 'but oh!' and she sprang up,
'here they come.'

Poor Mrs. Edmonstone, as she walked back from her mushroom-field, she
little guessed that words had been spoken which would give the colouring
to her daughter's whole life--she little guessed that her much-loved and
esteemed nephew had betrayed her confidence! As she and the girls came
up, Philip advanced to meet them, that Laura might have a few moments to
recover, while with an effort he kept himself from appearing absent in
the conversation that ensued. It was brief, for having answered some
questions with regard to the doings on the important day, he said, that
since he had met them he would not come on to Hollywell, and bade them
farewell, giving Laura a pressure of the hand which renewed the glow on
her face.

He walked back, trying to look through the dazzling haze of joy so as
to see his situation clearly. It was impossible for him not to perceive
that there had been an absolute declaration of affection, and that he
had established a private understanding with his cousin. It was not,
however, an engagement, nor did he at present desire to make it so.
It was impossible for him as yet to marry, and he was content to wait
without a promise, since that could not add to his entire reliance on
Laura. He could not bear to be rejected by her parents: he knew his
poverty would be the sole ground of objection, and he was not asking her
to share it. He believed sincerely that a long, lingering attachment to
himself would be more for her good than a marriage with one who would
have been a high prize for worldly aims, and was satisfied that by
winning her heart he had taken the only sure means of securing her from
becoming attached to Guy, while secrecy was the only way of preserving
his intercourse with her on the same footing, and exerting his influence
over the family.

It was calmly reflected, for Philip's love was tranquil, though deep and
steady, and the rather sought to preserve Laura as she was than to
make her anything more; and this very calmness contributed to his
self-deception on this first occasion that he had ever actually swerved
from the path of right.

With an uncomfortable sensation, he met Guy riding home from his tutor,
entirely unsuspicious. He stopped and talked of the preparations at
Broadstone, where he had been over the ground with Maurice de Courcy,
and had heard the band.

'What did you think of it? said Philip, absently.

'They _should_ keep better time! Really, Philip, there is one fellow
with a bugle that ought to be flogged every day of his life!' said Guy,
making a droll, excruciated face.

How a few words can change the whole current of ideas. The band was
connected with Philip, therefore he could not bear to hear it found
fault with, and adduced some one's opinion that the man in question was
one of the best of their musicians.

Guy could not help shrugging his shoulders, as he laughed, and
said,--'Then I shall be obliged to take to my heels if I meet the rest.
Good-bye.'

'How conceited they have made that boy about his fine ear,' thought
Philip. 'I wonder he is not ashamed to parade his music, considering
whence it is derived.'


CHAPTER 9

      Ah! county Guy, the hour is nigh,
      The sun has left the lea,
      The orange flower perfumes the bower,
      The breeze is on the sea.
      The lark, his lay, who thrilled all day,
      Sits hushed, his partner nigh,
      Breeze, bird, and flower, confess the hour,
      But where is county Guy?
                                --SCOTT


How was it meantime with Laura? The others were laughing and talking
round her, but all seemed lost in the transcendent beam that had shone
out on her. To be told by Philip that she was all to him that he had
always been to her! This one idea pervaded her--too glorious, too happy
for utterance, almost for distinct thought. The softening of his voice,
and the look with which he had regarded her, recurred again and again,
startling her with a sudden surprise of joy almost as at the first
moment. Of the future Laura thought not. Never had a promise of love
been made with less knowledge of what it amounted to: it seemed merely
an expression of sentiments that she had never been without; for had she
not always looked up to Philip more than any other living creature,
and gloried in being his favourite cousin? Ever since the time when
he explained to her the plates in the Encyclopaedia, and made her read
'Joyce's Scientific Dialogues,' when Amy took fright at the first page.
That this might lead further did not occur to her; she was eighteen,
she had no experience, not even in novels, she did not know what she
had done; and above all, she had so leant to surrender her opinions
to Philip, and to believe him always right, that she would never have
dreamt of questioning wherever he might choose to lead her. Even the
caution of secrecy did not alarm her, though she wondered that he
thought it required, safe as his confidence always was with her. Mrs.
Edmonstone had been so much occupied by Charles's illness, as to have
been unable to attend to her daughters in their girlish days; and in
the governess's time the habit had been disused of flying at once to her
with every joy or grief. Laura's thoughts were not easy of access, and
Philip had long been all in all to her. She was too ignorant of life to
perceive that it was her duty to make this conversation known; or, more
truly, she did not awaken her mind to consider that anything could be
wrong that Philip desired.

On coming home, she ran up to her own room, and sitting by the open
window, gave herself up to that delicious dream of new-found joy.

There she still sat when Amy came in, opening the door softly, and
treading lightly and airily as she entered, bringing two or three roses
of different tints.

'Laura! not begun to dress?'

'Is it time?'

'Shall I answer you according to what Philip calls my note of time, and
tell you the pimpernels are closed, and the tigridias dropping their
leaves? It would be a proper answer for you; you look as if you were in
Fairy Land.'

'Is papa come home?'

'Long ago! and Guy too. Why, where could you have been, not to have
heard Guy and Eveleen singing the Irish melodies?'

'In a trance,' said Laura, starting up, and laughing, with a slight
degree of constraint, which caused Amy, who was helping her to dress, to
exclaim, 'Has anything happened, Laura?'

'What should have happened?'

'I can't guess, unless the fairies in the great ring on Ashendown came
to visit you when we were gone. But seriously, dear Laura, are you sure
you are not tired? Is nothing the matter?'

'Nothing at all, thank you. I was only thinking over the talk I had with
Philip.'

'Oh!'

Amy never thought of entering into Philip's talks with Laura, and was
perfectly satisfied.

By this time Laura was herself again, come back to common life, and
resolved to watch over her intercourse with Guy; since, though she was
convinced that all was safe at present, she had Philip's word for it
that there might be danger in continuing the pleasant freedom of their
behaviour.

Nothing could be more reassuring than Guy's demeanour. His head seemed
entirely full of the Thursday, and of a plan of his own for enabling
Charles to go to the review. It had darted into his head while he was
going over the ground with Maurice. It was so long since Charles had
thought it possible to attempt any amusement away from home, and former
experiments had been so unsuccessful, that it had never even occurred
to him to think of it; but he caught at the idea with great delight and
eagerness. Mrs. Edmonstone seemed not to know what to say; she had much
rather that it had not been proposed; yet it was very kind of Guy, and
Charles was so anxious about it that she knew not how to oppose him.

She could not bear to have Charles in a crowd, helpless as he was; and
she had an unpleasing remembrance of the last occasion when they had
taken him to a flower-show, where they had lost, first Mr. Edmonstone,
next the carriage, and lastly, Amy and Charlotte--all had been
frightened, and Charles laid up for three days from the fatigue.

Answers, however, met each objection. Charles was much stronger; Guy's
arm would be ready for him; Guy would find the carriage. Philip would
be there to help, besides Maurice; and whenever Charles was tired, Guy
would take him home at once, without spoiling any one's pleasure.

'Except your own,' said Mrs. Edmonstone.

'Thank you; but this would be so delightful.'

'Ah!' said Charles, 'it would be as great a triumph as the dog's that
caught the hare with the clog round his neck--the dog's, I mean.'

'If you will but trust me with him,' said Guy, turning on her all the
pleading eloquence of his eyes, 'you know he can get in and out of the
pony-carriage quite easily.'

'As well as walk across the room,' said Charles.

'I would drive him in it, and tell William to ride in and be at hand to
hold the pony or take it out; and the tent is so near, that you could
get to the breakfast, unless the review had been enough for you. I
paced the distance to make sure, and it is no further than from the
garden-door to the cherry-tree.'

'That is nothing,' said Charles.

'And William shall be in waiting to bring the pony the instant you are
ready, and we can go home independently of every one else.'

'I thought,' interposed Mrs. Edmonstone, 'that you were to go to the
mess-dinner--what is to become of that?'

'O,' said Charles, 'that will be simply a bore, and he may rejoice to be
excused from going the whole hog.'

'To be sure, I had rather dine in peace at home.'

Mrs. Edmonstone was not happy, but she had great confidence in Guy; and
her only real scruple was, that she did not think it fair to occupy him
entirely with attendance on her son. She referred it to papa, which, as
every one knew, was the same as yielding the point, and consoled herself
by the certainty that to prevent it would be a great disappointment to
both the youths. Laura was convinced that to achieve the adventure of
Charles at the review, was at present at least a matter of far more
prominence with Guy than anything relating to herself.

All but Laura and her mother were wild about the weather, especially
on Wednesday, when there was an attempt at a thunder storm. Nothing was
studied but the sky; and the conversation consisted of prognostications,
reports of rises and falls of the glass, of the way weather-cocks were
turning, or about to turn, of swallows flying high or low, red sunsets,
and halos round the moon, until at last Guy, bursting into a merry
laugh, begged Mrs. Edmonstone's pardon for being such a nuisance, and
made a vow, and kept it, that be the weather what it might, he would say
not another word about it that evening; it deserved to be neglected, for
he had not been able to settle to anything all day.

He might have said for many days before; for since the last ball, and
still more since Lady Eveleen had been at Hollywell, it had been one
round of merriment and amusement. Scrambling walks, tea-drinkings out
of doors, dances among themselves, or with the addition of the Harpers,
were the order of the day. Amy, Eveleen, and Guy, could hardly come into
the room without dancing, and the piano was said to acknowledge nothing
but waltzes, polkas, and now and then an Irish jig, for the special
benefit of Mr. Edmonstone's ears. The morning was almost as much spent
in mirth as the afternoon, for the dawdlings after breakfast, and before
luncheon, had a great tendency to spread out and meet, there was new
music and singing to be practised, or preparations made for evening's
diversion, or councils to be held, which Laura's absence could not break
up, though it often made Amy feel how much less idle and frivolous Laura
was than herself. Eveleen said the same, but she was visiting, and
it was a time to be idle; and Mr. Lascelles seemed to be of the same
opinion with regard to his pupil; for, when Guy was vexed at not having
done as much work as usual, he only laughed at him for expecting to be
able to go to balls, and spend a summer of gaiety, while he studied as
much as at Oxford.

Thursday morning was all that heart could wish, the air cooled by the
thunder, and the clouds looking as if raining was foreign to their
nature. Mr. and Mrs. Edmonstone, their daughters, and Lady Eveleen,
were packed inside and outside the great carriage, while Guy, carefully
settling Charles in the low phaeton, putting in all that any one
recommended, from an air-cushion to an umbrella, flourished his whip,
and drove off with an air of exultation and delight.

Everything went off to admiration. No one was more amused than Charles.
The scene was so perfectly new and delightful to one accustomed to such
a monotonous life, that the very sight of people was a novelty. Nowhere
was there so much laughing and talking as in that little carriage, and
whenever Mrs. Edmonstone's anxious eye fell upon it, she always saw
Charles sitting upright, with a face so full of eager interest as to
banish all thought of fatigue. Happy, indeed, he was. He enjoyed the
surprise of his acquaintance at meeting him; he enjoyed Dr. Mayerne's
laugh and congratulation; he enjoyed seeing how foolish Philip thought
him, nodding to his mother and sisters, laughing at the dreadful faces
Guy could not help making at any particularly discordant note of the
offensive bugle; and his capabilities rising with his spirits, he did
all that the others did, walked further than he had done for years, was
lifted up steps without knowing how, sat out the whole breakfast, talked
to all the world, and well earned the being thoroughly tired, as he
certainly was when Guy put him into the carriage and drove him home, and
still more so when Guy all but carried him up stairs, and laid him on
the sofa in the dressing-room.

However, his mother announced that it would have been so unnatural if
he had not been fatigued, that she should have been more anxious, and
leaving him to repose, they all, except Mr. Edmonstone, who had stayed
to dine at the mess, sat down to dinner.

Amy came down dressed just as the carriage had been announced, and found
Laura and Eveleen standing by the table, arranging their bouquets, while
Guy, in the dark, behind the piano, was playing--not, as usual, in such
cases, the Harmonious Blacksmith, but a chant.

'Is mamma ready?' asked Laura.

'Nearly,' said Amy, 'but I wish she was not obliged to go! I am sure she
cannot bear to leave Charlie.'

'I hope she is not going on my account,' said Eveleen.

'No, said Laura, 'we must go; it would so frighten papa if we did not
come. Besides, there is nothing to be uneasy about with Charles.'

'O no,' said Amy; 'she says so, only she is always anxious, and she is
afraid he is too restless to go to sleep.'

'We must get home as fast as we can; if you don't mind, Eva,' said
Laura, remembering how her last dance with Guy had delayed them.

'Can I do any good to Charlie?' said Guy, ceasing his music. I don't
mean to go.'

'Not go!' cried the girls in consternation.

'He is joking!' said Eveleen. 'But, I declare!' added she, advancing
towards him, 'he is not dressed! Come, nonsense, this is carrying it too
far; you'll make us all too late, and then I'll set Maurice at you.'

'I am afraid it is no joke,' said Guy, smiling.

'You must go. It will never do for you to stay away,' said Laura,
decidedly.

'Are you tired? Aren't you well?' asked Amy.

'Quite well, thank you, but I am sure I had better not.'

Laura thought she had better not seem anxious to take him, so she left
the task of persuasion, to the others, and Amy went on.

'Neither Mamma nor Charlie could bear to think you stayed because of
him.'

'I don't, I assure you, Amy. I meant it before. I have been gradually
finding out that it must come to this.'

'Oh, you think it a matter of right and wrong! But you don't think balls
wrong?'

'Oh no; only they won't do for such an absurd person as I am. The last
turned my head for a week, and I am much too unsteady for this.'

'Well, if you think it a matter of duty, it can't be helped,' said Amy
sorrowfully; 'but I am very sorry.'

'Thank you,' said Guy, thinking it compassion, not regret; 'but I shall
do very well. I shall be all the happier to-morrow for a quiet hour at
my Greek, and you'll tell me all the fun.'

'You liked it so much!' said Amy; 'but you have made up your mind and I
ought not to tease you.'

'That's right Amy; he does it on purpose to be teased,' said Eveleen,
'and I never knew anybody so provoking. Mind, Sir Guy, if you make us
all too late, you shan't have the ghost of a quadrille with me.'

'I shall console myself by quadrilling with Andromache,' said Guy.

'Come, no nonsense--off to dress directly! How can you have the
conscience to stand there when the carriage is at the door?'

'I shall have great pleasure in handing you in when you are ready.'

'Laura--Amy! Does he really mean it?'

'I am afraid he does,' said Amy.

Eveleen let herself fall on the sofa as if fainting. 'Oh,' she said,
'take him away! Let me never see the face of him again! I'm perfectly
overcome! All my teaching thrown away!'

'I am sorry for you,' said Guy, laughing.

'And how do you mean to face Maurice?'

'Tell him his first bugle has so distracted me that I can't answer for
the consequences if I come to-night.

'Mrs. Edmonstone came in, saying,--

'Come, I have kept you waiting shamefully, but I have been consoling
myself by thinking you must be well entertained, as I heard no
Harmonious Blacksmith. Papa will be wondering where we are.'

'Oh, mamma! Guy won't go.'

'Guy! is anything the matter?'

'Nothing, thank you, only idleness.'

'This will never do. You really must go, Guy.'

'Indeed! I think not. Pray don't order me, Mrs. Edmonstone.'

'What o'clock is it, Amy? Past ten! Papa will be in despair! What is to
be done? How long do you take to dress, Guy?'

'Not under an hour,' said Guy, smiling.

'Nonsense! But if there was time I should certainly send you.
Self-discipline may be carried too far, Guy. But now it can't be
helped--I don't know how to keep papa waiting any longer. Laura, what
shall I do?'

'Let me go to Charles,' answered Guy. 'Perhaps I can read him to sleep.'

'Thank you; but don't talk, or he will be too excited. Reading would be
the very thing! It will be a pretty story to tell every one who asks for
you that I have left you to nurse my son!'

'No, for no such good reason,' said Guy; 'only because I am a great
fool.'

'Well, Sir Guy, I am glad you can say one sensible word,' said Lady
Eveleen.

'Too true, I assure you,' he answered, as he handed her in. 'Good night!
You will keep the quadrille for me till I am rational.'

He handed the others in, and shut the door. Mrs. Edmonstone, ruffled out
of her composure, exclaimed,--

'Well, this is provoking!'

'Every one will be vexed,' said Laura.

'It will be so stupid,' said Amy.

'I give him up,' said Eveleen. 'I once had hopes of him.'

'If it was not for papa, I really would turn back this moment and fetch
him,' cried Mrs. Edmonstone, starting forward. 'I'm sure it will give
offence. I wish I had not consented.'

'He can't be made to see that his presence is of importance to any
living creature,' said Laura.

'What is the reason of this whim?' said Eveleen.

'No, Eveleen, it is not whim,' said Laura; 'it is because he thinks
dissipation makes him idle.'

'Then if he is idle I wonder what the rest of the world is!' said
Eveleen. 'I am sure we all ought to stay at home too.'

'I think so,' said Amy. 'I know I shall feel all night as if I was wrong
to be there.'

'I am angry,' said Mrs. Edmonstone; 'and yet I believe it is a great
sacrifice.'

'Yes, mamma; after all our looking forward to it,' said Amy. 'Oh! yes,'
and her voice lost its piteous tone, 'it is a real sacrifice.'

'If he was not a mere boy, I should say a lover's quarrel was at the
bottom of it,' said Eveleen. 'Depend upon it, Laura, it is all your
fault. You only danced once with him at our ball, and all this week you
have played for us, as if it was on purpose to cut him.'

Laura was glad of the darkness, and her mother, who had a particular
dislike to jokes of this sort, went on,--'If it were only ourselves I
should not care, but there are so many who will fancy it caprice, or
worse.'

'The only comfort is,' said Amy, 'that it is Charlie's gain.'

'I hope they will not talk,' said Mrs. Edmonstone. 'But Charlie will
never hold his tongue. He will grow excited, and not sleep all night.'

Poor Mrs. Edmonstone! her trials did not end here, for when she replied
to her husband's inquiry for Guy, Mr. Edmonstone said offence had
already been taken at his absence from the dinner; he would not have had
this happen for fifty pounds; she ought not to have suffered it; but it
was all her nonsense about Charles, and as to not being late, she should
have waited till midnight rather than not have brought him. In short,
he said as much more than he meant, as a man in a pet is apt to say, and
nevertheless Mrs. Edmonstone had to look as amiable and smiling as if
nothing was the matter.

The least untruthful answer she could frame to the inquiries for Sir Guy
Morville was, that young men were apt to be lazy about balls, and
this sufficed for good-natured Mrs. Deane, but Maurice poured out many
exclamations about his ill-behaviour, and Philip contented himself with
the mere fact of his not being there, and made no remark.

Laura turned her eyes anxiously on Philip. They had not met since the
important conversation on Ashen-down, and she found herself looking with
more pride than ever at his tall, noble figure, as if he was more her
own; but the calmness of feeling was gone. She could not meet his eye,
nor see him turn towards her without a start and tremor for which she
could not render herself a reason, and her heart beat so much that it
was at once a relief and a disappointment that she was obliged to accept
her other cousin as her first partner. Philip had already asked Lady
Eveleen, for he neither wished to appear too eager in claiming Laura,
nor to let his friend think he had any dislike to the Irish girl.

Eveleen was much pleased to have him for her partner, and told herself
she would be on her good behaviour. It was a polka, and there was not
much talk, which, perhaps, was all the better for her. She admired the
review, and the luncheon, and spoke of Charles without any sauciness,
and Philip was condescending and agreeable.

'I must indulge myself in abusing that stupid cousin of yours!' said
she. Did you ever know a man of such wonderful crotchets?'

'This is a very unexpected one,' said Philip.

'It came like a thunder clap. I thought till the last moment he was
joking, for he likes dancing so much; he was the life of our ball, and
how could any one suppose he would fly off at the last moment?'

'He seems rather to enjoy doing things suddenly.'

'I tell Laura she has affronted him,' said Eveleen, laughing. 'She has
been always busy of late when we have wanted her; and I assure her his
pride has been piqued. Don't you think that is an explanation, Captain
Morville?'

It was Captain Morvilles belief, but he would not say so.

'Isn't Laura looking lovely?' Eveleen went on. 'I am sure she is
the beauty of the night!' She was pleased to see Captain Morville's
attention gained. 'She is even better dressed than at our ball--those
Venetian pins suit the form of her head so well. Her beauty is better
than almost any one's, because she has so much countenance.'

'True,' said Philip.

'How proud Maurice looks of having her on his arm. Does not he? Poor
Maurice! he is desperately in love with her!'

'As is shown by his pining melancholy.'

Eveleen laughed with her clear hearty laugh. 'I see you know what we
mean by being desperately in love! No,' she added more gravely, 'I am
very glad it is only _that_ kind of desperation. One could not think of
Maurice and Laura together. He does not know the best part of Laura.'

Eveleen was highly flattered by Captain Morville conducting her a second
time round the room, instead of at once restoring her to her aunt.

He secured Laura next, and leading her away from her own party, said,
'Laura, have you been overdoing it?'

'It is not that,' said Laura, wishing she could keep from blushing.

'It is the only motive that could excuse his extraordinary behaviour.'

'Surely you know he says that he is growing unsettled. It is part of his
rule of self discipline.'

'Absurd!--exaggerated!--incredible! This is the same story as there was
about the horse. It is either caprice or temper, and I am convinced
that some change in your manner--nay, I say unconscious, and am far from
blaming you--is the cause. Why else did he devote himself to Charles,
and leave you all on my uncle's hands in the crowd?'

'We could shift for ourselves much better than Charlie.'

'This confirms my belief that my warning was not mistimed. I wish it
could have been done without decidedly mortifying him and rousing his
temper, because I am sorry others should be slighted; but if he takes
your drawing back so much to heart, it shows that it was time you should
do so.'

'If I thought I had!'

'It was visible to others--to another, I should say.'

'O, that is only Eveleen's nonsense! The only difference I am conscious
of having made, was keeping more up-stairs, and not trying to persuade
him to come here to-night.'

'I have no doubt it was this that turned the scale, He only waited for
persuasion, and you acted very wisely in not flattering his self-love.'

'Did I?--I did not know it.'

'A woman's instinct is often better than reasoning, Laura; to do the
right thing without knowing why. But come, I suppose we must play our
part in the pageant of the night.'

For that evening Laura, contrary to the evidence of her senses, was
persuaded by her own lover that Guy was falling in love with her; and
after musing all through the dance, she said, 'What do you think of the
scheme that has been started for my going to Ireland with papa?'

'Your going to Ireland?'

'Yes; you know none of us, except papa, have seen grandmamma since
Charles began to be ill, and there is some talk of his taking me with
him when he goes this summer.'

'I knew he was going, but I thought it was not to be till later in the
year--not till after the long vacation.'

'So he intended, but he finds he must be at home before the end of
October, and it would suit him best to go in August.'

'Then what becomes of Guy?'

'He stays at Hollywell. It will be much better for Charles to have him
there while papa is away. I thought when the plan was first mentioned I
should be sorry, except that it is quite right to go to grandmamma; but
if it is so, about Guy, this absence would be a good thing--it would
make a break, and I could begin again on different terms.'

'Wisely judged, Laura. Yes, on that account it would be very desirable,
though it will be a great loss to me, and I can hardly hope to be so
near you on your return.'

'Ah! yes, so I feared!' sighed Laura.

'But we must give up something; and for Guy's own sake, poor fellow, it
will be better to make a break, as you say. It will save him pain by and
by.'

'I dare say papa will consult you about when his journey is to be. His
only doubt was whether it would do to leave Guy so long alone, and if
you say it would be safe, it would decide him at once.'

'I see little chance of mischief. Guy has few temptations here, and a
strong sense of honour; besides, I shall be at hand. Taking all things
into consideration, Laura, I think that, whatever the sacrifice to
ourselves, it is expedient to recommend his going at once, and your
accompanying him.'

All the remainder of the evening Philip was occupied with attentions
to the rest of the world, but Laura's eyes followed him everywhere, and
though she neither expected nor desired him to bestow more time on her,
she underwent a strange restlessness and impatience of feeling. Her
numerous partners teased her by hindering her from watching him moving
about the room, catching his tones, and guessing what he was talking
of;--not that she wanted to meet his eye, for she did not like to blush,
nor did she think it pleased him to see her do so, for he either looked
away immediately or conveyed a glance which she understood as monitory.
She kept better note of his countenance than of her own partner's.

Mr. Thorndale, meanwhile, kept aloof from Lady Eveleen de Courcy, but
Captain Morville perceived that his eyes were often turned towards her,
and well knew it was principle, and not inclination, that held him at a
distance. He did indeed once ask her to dance, but she was engaged,
and he did not ask her to reserve a future dance for him, but contented
himself with little Amy.

Amy was doing her best to enjoy herself, because she thought it
ungrateful not to receive pleasure from those who wished to give it,
but to her it wanted the zest and animation of Lady Kilcoran's ball.
Besides, she knew she had been as idle as Guy, or still more so, and she
thought it wrong she should have pleasure while he was doing penance.
It was on her mind, and damped her spirits, and though she smiled, and
talked, and admired, and danced lightly and gaily, there was a sensation
of weariness throughout, and no one but Eveleen was sorry when Mrs.
Edmonstone sent Maurice to see for the carriage.

Philip was one of the gentlemen who came to shawl them. As he put
Laura's cloak round her shoulders he was able to whisper, 'Take care;
you must be cautious--self-command.'

Laura, though blushing and shrinking the moment before was braced by his
words and tone to attempt all he wished. She looked up in what she meant
to be an indifferent manner, and made some observation in a careless
tone--anything rather than let Philip think her silly. After what he had
said, was she not bound more than ever to exert herself to the utmost,
that he might not be disappointed in her? She loved him only the better
for what others might have deemed a stern coldness of manner, for it
made the contrast of his real warmth of affection more precious. She
mused over it, as much as her companions' conversation would allow, on
the road home. They arrived, Mrs. Edmonstone peeped into Charles's room,
announced that he was quietly asleep, and they all bade each other good
night, or good morning, and parted.


CHAPTER 10

      Leonora. Yet often with respect he speaks of thee.
      Tasso.   Thou meanest with forbearance, prudent, subtle,
               'Tis that annoys me, for he knows to use
               Language so smooth and so conditional,
               That seeming praise from him is actual blame.
                                            --GOETHE'S Tasso


When the Hollywell party met at breakfast, Charles showed himself by no
means the worse for his yesterday's experiment. He said he had gone to
sleep in reasonable time, lulled by some poetry, he knew not what, of
which Guy's voice had made very pretty music, and he was now full of
talk about the amusement he had enjoyed yesterday, which seemed likely
to afford food for conversation for many a week to come. After all the
care Guy had taken of him, Mrs. Edmonstone could not find it in her
heart to scold, and her husband, having spent his vexation upon her, had
none left to bestow on the real culprit. So when Guy, with his bright
morning face, and his hair hanging shining and wet round it, opened
the dining-room door, on his return from bathing in the river, Mr.
Edmonstone's salutation only conveyed that humorous anger that no one
cares for.

'Good morning to you, Sir Guy Morville! I wonder what you have to say
for yourself.'

'Nothing,' said Guy, smiling; then, as he took his place by Mrs.
Edmonstone, 'I hope you are not tired after your hard day's work?'

'Not at all, thank you.'

'Amy, can you tell me the name of this flower?'

'Oh! have you really found the arrow-head? How beautiful! Where did you
get it? I didn't know it grew in our river.'

'There is plenty of it in that reedy place beyond the turn. I thought it
looked like something out of the common way.'

'Yes! What a purple eye it has! I must draw it. O, thank you.'

'And, Charlotte, Bustle has found you a moorhen's nest.'

'How delightful! Is it where I can go and see the dear little things?'

'It is rather a swamp; but I have been putting down stepping-stones for
you, and I dare say I can jump you across. It was that which made me
so late, for which I ought to have asked pardon,' said he to Mrs.
Edmonstone, with his look of courtesy.

Never did man look less like an offended lover, or like a morose
self-tormentor.

'There are others later,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, looking at Lady
Eveleen's empty chair.

'So you think that is all you have to ask pardon for,' said Mr.
Edmonstone. 'I advise you to study your apologies, for you are in pretty
tolerable disgrace.'

'Indeed, I am very sorry,' said Guy, with such a change of countenance
that Mr. Edmonstone's good nature could not bear to see it.

'Oh, 'tis no concern of mine! It would be going rather the wrong way,
indeed, for you to be begging my pardon for all the care you've been
taking of Charlie; but you had better consider what you have to say for
yourself before you show your face at Broadstone.'

'No?' said Guy, puzzled for a moment, but quickly looking relieved, and
laughing, 'What! Broadstone in despair for want of me?'

'And we perfectly exhausted with answering questions as to what was
become of Sir Guy.'

'Dreadful,' said Guy, now laughing heartily, in the persuasion that it
was all a joke.

'O, Lady Eveleen, good morning; you are come in good time to give me the
story of the ball, for no one else tells me one word about it.'

'Because you don't deserve it,' said she. 'I hope you have repented by
this time.'

'If you want to make me repent, you should give me a very alluring
description.'

'I shan't say one word about it; I shall send you to Coventry, as
Maurice and all the regiment mean to do,' said Eveleen, turning away
from him with a very droll arch manner of offended dignity.

'Hear, hear! Eveleen send any one to Coventry!' cried Charles. 'See what
the regiment say to you.'

'Ay, when I am sent to Coventry?'

'O, Paddy, Paddy!' cried Charles, and there was a general laugh.

'Laura seems to be doing it in good earnest without announcing it,'
added Charles, when the laugh was over, 'which is the worst sign of
all.'

'Nonsense, Charles,' said Laura, hastily; then afraid she had owned to
annoyance, she blushed and was angry with herself for blushing.

'Well, Laura, _do_ tell me who your partners were?'

Very provoking, thought Laura, that I cannot say what is so perfectly
natural and ordinary, without my foolish cheeks tingling. He may think
it is because he is speaking to me. So she hurried on: 'Maurice first,
then Philip,' and then showed, what Amy and Eveleen thought, strange
oblivion of the rest of her partners.

They proceeded into the history of the ball; and Guy thought no more of
his offences till the following day, when he went to Broadstone. Coming
back, he found the drawing-room full of visitors, and was obliged to
sit down and join in the conversation; but Mrs. Edmonstone saw he was
inwardly chafing, as he betrayed by his inability to remain still, the
twitchings of his forehead and lip, and a tripping and stumbling of the
words on his tongue. She was sure he wanted to talk to her, and longed
to get rid of Mrs. Brownlow; but the door was no sooner shut on the
visitors, than Mr. Edmonstone came in, with a long letter for her
to read and comment upon. Guy took himself out of the way of the
consultation, and began to hurry up and down the terrace, until, seeing
Amabel crossing the field towards the little gate into the garden, he
went to open it for her.

She looked up at him, and exclaimed--'Is anything the matter?'

'Nothing to signify,' he said; 'I was only waiting for your mother. I
have got into a mess, that is all.'

'I am sorry,' began Amy, there resting in the doubt whether she might
inquire further, and intending not to burthen him with her company, any
longer than till she reached the house door; but Guy went on,--

'No, you have no occasion to be sorry; it is all my own fault; at least,
if I was clear how it is my fault, I should not mind it so much. It
is that ball. I am sure I had not the least notion any one would care
whether I was there or not.'

'I am sure we missed you very much.'

'You are all so kind; beside, I belong in a manner you; but what could
it signify to any one else? And here I find that I have vexed every
one.'

'Ah!' said Amy, 'mamma said she was afraid it would give offence.'

'I ought to have attended to her. It was a fit of self-will in managing
myself,' said Guy, murmuring low, as if trying to find the real
indictment; 'yet I thought it a positive duty; wrong every way.'

'What has happened?' said Amy, turning back with him, though she had
reached the door.

'Why, the first person I met was Mr. Gordon; and he spoke like your
father, half in joke, and I thought entirely so; he said something about
all the world being in such a rage, that I was a bold man to venture
into Broadstone. Then, while I was at Mr. Lascelles', in came Dr.
Mayerne. 'We missed you at the dinner,' he said; 'and I hear you shirked
the ball, too.' I told him how it was, and he said he was glad that
was all, and advised me to go and call on Colonel Deane and explain. I
thought that the best way--indeed, I meant it before, and was walking
to his lodgings when Maurice de Courcy met me. 'Ha!' he cries out,
'Morville! I thought at least you would have been laid up for a month
with the typhus fever! As a friend, I advise you to go home and catch
something, for it is the only excuse that will serve you. I am not quite
sure that it will not be high treason for me to be seen speaking to
you.' I tried to get at the rights of it, but he is such a harum-scarum
fellow there was no succeeding. Next I met Thorndale, who only bowed
and passed on the other side of the street--sign enough how it was with
Philip; so I thought it best to go at once to the Captain, and get a
rational account of what was the matter.'

'Did you?' said Amy, who, though concerned and rather alarmed, had been
smiling at the humorous and expressive tones with which he could not
help giving effect to his narration.

'Yes. Philip was at home, and very--very--'

'Gracious?' suggested Amy, as he hesitated for a word.

'Just so. Only the vexatious thing was, that we never could succeed in
coming to an understanding. He was ready to forgive; but I could not
disabuse him of an idea--where he picked it up I cannot guess--that I
had stayed away out of pique. He would not even tell me what he thought
had affronted me, though I asked him over and over again to be only
straightforward; he declared I knew.'

'How excessively provoking!' cried Amy. 'You cannot guess what he
meant?'

'Not the least in the world. I have not the most distant suspicion. It
was of no use to declare I was not offended with any one; he only looked
in that way of his, as if he knew much better than I did myself, and
told me he could make allowances.'

'Worse than all! How horrid of him.'

'No, don't spoil me. No doubt he thinks he has grounds, and my
irritation was unjustifiable. Yes, I got into my old way. He cautioned
me, and nearly made me mad! I never was nearer coming to a regular
outbreak. Always the same! Fool that I am.'

'Now, Guy, that is always your way; when other people are provoking,
you abuse yourself. I am sure Philip was so, with his calm assertion of
being right.'

'The more provoking, the more trial for me.'

'But you endured it. You say it was only _nearly_ an outbreak. You
parted friends? I am sure of that.'

'Yes, it would have been rather too bad not to do that.'

'Then why do you scold yourself, when you really had the victory?'

'The victory will be if the inward feeling as well as the outward token
is ever subdued.'

'O, that must be in time, of course. Only let me hear how you got on
with Colonel Deane.'

'He was very good-natured, and would have laughed it off, but Philip
went with me, and looked grand, and begged in a solemn way that no more
might be said. I could have got on better alone; but Philip was very
kind, or, as you say, gracious.'

'And provoking,' added Amy, 'only I believe you do not like me to say
so.'

'It is more agreeable to hear you call him so at this moment than is
good for me. I have no right to complain, since I gave the offence.'

'The offence?'

'The absenting myself.'

'Oh! that you did because you thought it right.'

'I want to be clear that it was right.'

'What do you mean?' cried she, astonished. 'It was a great piece of
self-denial, and I only felt it wrong not to be doing the same.'

'Nay, how should such creatures as you need the same discipline as I?'

She exclaimed to herself how far from his equal she was--how weak, idle,
and self-pleasing she felt herself to be; but she could not say so--the
words would not come; and she only drooped her little head, humbled by
his treating her as better than himself.

He proceeded:--

'Something wrong I have done, and I want the clue. Was it self-will in
choosing discipline contrary to your mother's judgment? Yet she could
not know all. I thought it her kindness in not liking me to lose the
pleasure. Besides, one must act for oneself, and this was only my own
personal amusement.'

'Yes,' said Amy, timidly hesitating.

'Well?' said he, with the gentle, deferential tone that contrasted with
his hasty, vehement self-accusations. 'Well?' and he waited, though not
so as to hurry or frighten her, but to encourage, by showing her words
had weight.

'I was thinking of one thing,' said Amy; 'is it not sometimes right
to consider whether we ought to disappoint people who want us to be
pleased?'

'There it is, I believe,' said Guy, stopping and considering, then going
on with a better satisfied air, 'that is a real rule. Not to be so bent
on myself as to sacrifice other people's feelings to what seems best for
me. But I don't see whose pleasure I interfered with.'

Amy could have answered, 'Mine;' but the maidenly feeling checked her
again, and she said, 'We all thought you would like it.'

'And I had no right to sacrifice your pleasure! I see, I see. The
pleasure of giving pleasure to others is so much the best there is on
earth, that one ought to be passive rather than interfere with it.'

'Yes,' said Amy, 'just as I have seen Mary Ross let herself be swung
till she was giddy, rather than disappoint Charlotte and Helen, who
thought she liked it.'

'If one could get to look at everything with as much indifference as
the swinging! But it is all selfishness. It is as easy to be selfish for
one's own good as for one's own pleasure; and I dare say, the first is
as bad as the other.'

'I was thinking of something else,' said Amy. 'I should think it more
like the holly tree in Southey. Don't you know it? The young leaves are
sharp and prickly, because they have so much to defend themselves from,
but as the tree grows older, it leaves off the spears, after it has won
the victory.'

'Very kind of you, and very pretty, Amy,' said he, smiling; 'but, in the
meantime, it is surely wrong to be more prickly than is unavoidable, and
there is the perplexity. Selfish! selfish! selfish! Oneself the first
object. That is the root.'

'Guy, if it is not impertinent to ask, I do wish you would tell me
one thing. Why did you think it wrong to go to that ball?' said Amy,
timidly.

'I don't know that I thought it wrong to go to that individual ball,'
said Guy; 'but my notion was, that altogether I was getting into a
rattling idle way, never doing my proper quantity of work, or doing
it properly, and talking a lot of nonsense sometimes. I thought, last
Sunday, it was time to make a short turn somewhere and bring myself up.
I could not, or did not get out of the pleasant talks as Laura does, so
I thought giving up this ball would punish me at once, and set me on a
new tack of behaving like a reasonable creature.'

'Don't call yourself too many names, or you won't be civil to us. We
all, except Laura, have been quite as bad.'

'Yes; but you had not so much to do.'

'We ought,' said Amy; 'but I meant to be reasonable when Eveleen is
gone.'

Perhaps I ought to have waited till then, but I don't know. Lady Eveleen
is so amusing that it leads to farther dawdling, and it would not do to
wait to resist the temptation till it is out of the way.'

As he spoke, they saw Mrs. Edmonstone coming out, and went to meet her.
Guy told her his trouble, detailing it more calmly than before he
had found out his mistake. She agreed with him that this had been in
forgetting that his attending the ball did not concern only himself, but
he then returned to say that he could not see what difference it made,
except to their own immediate circle.

'If it was not you, Guy, who made that speech, I should call it fishing
for a compliment. You forget that rank and station make people sought
after.'

'I suppose there is something in that,' said Guy, thoughtfully; 'at any
rate, it is no bad thing to think so, it is so humiliating.'

'That is not the way most people would take it.'

'No? Does not it prevent one from taking any attention as paid to one's
real self? The real flattering thing would be to be made as much of as
Philip is, for one's own merits, and not for the handle to one's name.'

'Yes, I think so,' said Amy.

'Well, then,' as if he wished to gather the whole conversation into
one resolve, the point is to consider whether abstaining from innocent
things that may be dangerous to oneself mortifies other people. If so,
the vexing them is a certain wrong, whereas the mischief of taking the
pleasure is only a possible contingency. But then one must take it out
of oneself some other way, or it becomes an excuse for self-indulgence.'

'Hardly with you,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, smiling.

'Because I had rather go at it at once, and forget all about other
people. You must teach me consideration, Mrs. Edmonstone, and in the
meantime will you tell me what you think I had better do about this
scrape?'

'Let it alone,' said Mrs. Edmonstone. 'You have begged every one's
pardon, and it had better be forgotten as fast as possible. They have
made more fuss already than it is worth. Don't torment yourself about it
any more; for, if you have made a mistake, it is on the right side; and
on the first opportunity, I'll go and call on Mrs. Deane, and see if she
is very implacable.'

The dressing-bell rang, and Amy ran up-stairs, stopping at Laura's door,
to ask how she prospered in the drive she had been taking with Charles
and Eveleen.

Amy told her of Guy's trouble, and oh! awkward question, inquired if
she could guess what it could be that Philip imagined that Guy had been
offended at.

'Can't he guess?' said poor Laura, to gain time, and brushing her hair
over her face.

'No, he has no idea, though Philip protested that he knew, and would not
tell him. Philip must have been most tiresome.'

'What? Has Guy been complaining?'

'No, only angry with himself for being vexed. I can't think how Philip
can go on so!'

'Hush! hush, Amy, you know nothing about it. He has reasons--'

'I know,' said Amy, indignantly; 'but what right has he to go on
mistrusting? If people are to be judged by their deeds, no one is
so good as Guy, and it is too bad to reckon up against him all his
ancestors have done. It is wolf and lamb, indeed.'

'He does not!' cried Laura. 'He never is unjust! How can you say so,
Amy?'

'Then why does he impute motives, and not straightforwardly tell what he
means?'

'It is impossible in this case,' said Laura.

'Do you know what it is?'

'Yes,' said Laura, perfectly truthful, and feeling herself in a dreadful
predicament.

'And you can't tell me?'

'I don't think I can.'

'Nor Guy?'

'Not for worlds,' cried Laura, in horror.

'Can't you get Philip to tell him?'

'Oh no, no! I can't explain it, Amy; and all that can be done is to let
it die away as fast as possible. It is only the rout about it that is of
consequence.'

'It is very odd,' said Amy, 'but I must dress,' and away she ran, much
puzzled, but with no desire to look into Philip's secrets.

Laura rested her head on her hand, sighed, and wondered why it was so
hard to answer. She almost wished she had said Philip had been advising
her to discourage any attachment on Guy's part; but then Amy might have
laughed, and asked why. No! no! Philip's confidence was in her keeping,
and cost her what it might, she would be faithful to the trust.

There was now a change. The evenings were merry, but the mornings were
occupied. Guy went off to his room, as he used to do last winter; Laura
commenced some complicated perspective, or read a German book with a
great deal of dictionary; Amy had a book of history, and practised her
music diligently; even Charles read more to himself, and resumed the
study with Guy and Amy; Lady Eveleen joined in every one's pursuits,
enjoyed them, and lamented to Laura that it was impossible to be
rational at her own home.

Laura tried to persuade her that there was no need that she should be on
the level of the society round her, and it ended in her spending an hour
in diligent study every morning, promising to continue it when she went
home, while Laura made such sensible comments that Eveleen admired her
more than ever; and she, knowing that some were second-hand from Philip,
others arising from his suggestions, gave him all the homage paid to
herself, as a tribute to him who reigned over her whole being.

Yet she was far from happy. Her reserve towards Guy made her feel stiff
and guarded; she had a craving for Philip's presence, with a dread of
showing it, which made her uncomfortable. She wondered he had not been
at Hollywell since the bail, for he must know that she was going to
Ireland in a fortnight, and was not likely to return till his regiment
had left Broadstone.

An interval passed long enough for her not to be alone in her surprise
at his absenting himself before he at length made his appearance, just
before luncheon, so as to miss the unconstrained morning hours he used
so much to enjoy. He found Guy, Charles, and Amy, deep in Butler's
Analogy.

'Are you making poor little Amy read that?' said he.

'Bravo!' cried Charles; 'he is so disappointed that it is not Pickwick
that he does not know what else to say.'

'I don't suppose I take much in,' said Amy; 'but I like to be told what
it means.'

'Don't imagine I can do that,' said Guy.

'I never spent much time over it,' said Philip; 'but I should think you
were out of your depth.'

'Very well,' said Charles; 'we will return to Dickens to oblige you.'

'It is your pleasure to wrest my words,' replied Philip, in his own calm
manner, though he actually felt hurt, which he had never done before.
His complacency was less secure, so that there was more need for
self-assertion.

'Where are the rest?' he asked.

'Laura and Eveleen are making a dictation lesson agreeable to
Charlotte,' said Amy; 'I found Eva making mistakes on purpose.'

'How much longer does she stay?'

'Till Tuesday. Lord Kilcoran is coming to fetch her.'

Charlotte entered, and immediately ran up-stairs to announce her
cousin's arrival. Laura was glad of this previous notice, and hoped her
blush and tremor were not observed. It was a struggle, through luncheon
time, to keep her colour and confusion within bounds; but she succeeded
better than she fancied she did, and Philip gave her as much help as he
could, by not looking at her. Seeing that he dreaded nothing so much as
her exciting suspicion, she was at once braced and alarmed.

Her father was very glad to see him, and reproached him for making
himself a stranger, while her sisters counted up the days of his
absence.

'There was the time, to be sure, when we met you on Ashen-down, but that
was a regular cheat. Laura had you all to herself.'

Laura bent down to feed Bustle, and Philip felt _his_ colour deepening.

Mr. Edmonstone went on to ask him to come and stay at Hollywell for a
week, vowing he would take no refusal. 'A week was out of the question,
said Philip; 'but he could come for two nights.' Amabel hinted that
there was to be a dinner-party on Thursday, thinking it fair to give
him warning of what he disliked, but he immediately chose that very day.
Again he disconcerted all expectations, when it was time to go out. Mrs.
Edmonstone and Charles were going to drive, the young ladies and Guy to
walk, but Philip disposed himself to accompany his uncle in a survey of
the wheat.

Laura perceived that he would not risk taking another walk with her when
they might be observed. It showed implicit trust to leave her to his
rival; but she was sorry to find that caution must put an end to the
freedom of their intercourse, and would have stayed at home, but that
Eveleen was so wild and unguarded that Mrs. Edmonstone did not like her
to be without Laura as a check on her, especially when Guy was of the
party. There was some comfort in that warm pressure of her hand when she
bade Philip good-bye, and on that she lived for a long time. He stood at
the window watching them till they were out of sight, then moved
towards his aunt, who with her bonnet on, was writing an invitation for
Thursday, to Mr. Thorndale.

'I was thinking,' said he, in a low voice, 'if it would not be as well,
if you liked, to ask Thorndale here for those two days.'

'If _you_ think so,' returned Mrs. Edmonstone, looking at him more
inquiringly than he could well bear.

'You know how he enjoys being here, and I owe them all so much
kindness.'

'Certainly; I will speak to your uncle,' said she, going in search of
him. She presently returned, saying they should be very glad to see Mr.
Thorndale, asking him at the same time, in her kind tones of interest,
after an old servant for whom he had been spending much thought and
pains. The kindness cut him to the heart, for it evidently arose from
a perception that he was ill at ease, and his conscience smote him. He
answered shortly, and was glad when the carriage came; he lifted Charles
into it, and stood with folded arms as they drove away.

'The air is stormy,' said Charles, looking back at him.'

'You thought so, too?' said Mrs. Edmonstone, eagerly.

'You did!'

'I have wondered for some time past.'

'It was very decided to-day--that long absence--and there was no
provoking him to be sententious. His bringing his young man might be
only to keep him in due subjection; but his choosing the day of the
party, and above all, not walking with the young ladies.'

'It not like himself,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, in a leading tone.

'Either the sweet youth is in love, or in the course of some strange
transformation.'

'In love!' she exclaimed. 'Have you any reason for thinking so?'

'Only as a solution of phenomena; but you look as if I had hit on the
truth.'

'I hope it is no such thing; yet--'

'Yet?' repeated Charles, seriously. 'I think he has discovered the
danger.'

'The danger of falling in love with Laura? Well, it would be odd if he
was not satisfied with his own work. But he must know how preposterous
that would be.'

'And you think that would prevent it?' said his mother, smiling. 'He
is just the man to plume himself on making his judgment conquer his
inclination, setting novels at defiance. How magnanimously he would
resolve to stifle a hopeless attachment!'

'That is exactly what I think he is doing. I think he has found out the
state of his feelings, and is doing all in his power to check them by
avoiding her, especially in tete-a-tetes, and an unconstrained family
party. I am nearly convinced that is his reason for bringing Mr.
Thorndale, and fixing on the day of the dinner. Poor fellow, it must
cost him a great deal, and I long to tell him how I thank him.'

'Hm! I don't think it unlikely,' said Charles. 'It agrees with what
happened the evening of the Kilcoran ball, when he was ready to eat me
up for saying something he fancied was a hint of a liking of Guy's
for Laura. It was a wild mistake, for something I said about Petrarch,
forgetting that Petrarch suggested Laura; but it put him out to a
degree, and he made all manner of denunciations on the horror of Guy's
falling in love with her. Now, as far as I see, Guy is much more in
love with you, or with Deloraine, and the idea argues far more that the
Captain himself is touched.'

'Depend upon it, Charlie, it was this that led to his detecting the true
state of the case. Ever since that he has kept away. It is noble!'

'And what do you think about Laura?'

'Poor child! I doubt if it was well to allow so much intimacy; yet I
don't see how it could have been helped.'

'So you think she is in for it? I hope not; but she has not been herself
of late.'

'I think she misses what she has been used to from him, and thinks him
estranged, but I trust it goes no further. I see she is out of spirits;
I wish I could help her, dear girl, but the worst of all would be to let
her guess the real name and meaning of all this, so I can't venture to
say a word.'

'She is very innocent of novels,' said Charles, 'and that is well. It
would be an unlucky business to have our poor beauty either sitting
'like Patience on a monument', or 'cockit up on a baggage-waggon.' But
that will never be. Philip is not the man to have a wife in barracks. He
would have her like his books, in morocco, or not at all.'

'He would never involve her in discomforts. He may be entirely trusted,
and as long as he goes on as he has begun, there is no harm done; Laura
will cheer up, will only consider him as her cousin and friend, and
never know he has felt more for her.'

'Her going to Ireland is very fortunate.'

'It has made me still more glad that the plan should take place at
once.'

'And you say "nothing to nobody"?'

'Of course not. We must not let him guess we have observed anything;
there is no need to make your father uncomfortable, and such things need
not dawn on Amy's imagination.'

It may be wondered at that Mrs. Edmonstone should confide such a subject
to her son, but she knew that in a case really affecting his sister,
and thus introduced, his silence was secure. In fact, confidence was the
only way to prevent the shrewd, unscrupulous raillery which would have
caused great distress, and perhaps led to the very disclosure to be
deprecated. Of late, too, there had been such a decrease of petulance
in Charles, as justified her in trusting him, and lastly, it must be
observed that she was one of those open-hearted people who cannot make a
discovery nor endure an anxiety without imparting it. Her tact, indeed,
led her to make a prudent choice of confidants, and in this case her son
was by far the best, though she had spoken without premeditation. Her
nature would never have allowed her to act as her daughter was doing;
she would have been without the strength to conceal her feelings,
especially when deprived of the safety-valve of free intercourse with
their object.

The visit took place as arranged, and very uncomfortable it was to all
who looked deeper than the surface. In the first place, Philip found
there the last person he wished his friend to meet--Lady Eveleen, who
had been persuaded to stay for the dinner-party; but Mr. Thorndale was,
as Charles would have said, on his good behaviour, and, ashamed of the
fascination her manners exercised over him, was resolved to resist it,
answered her gay remarks with brief sentences and stiff smiles, and
consorted chiefly with the gentlemen.

Laura was grave and silent, trying to appear unconscious, and only
succeeding in being visibly constrained. Philip was anxious and stern in
his attempts to appear unconcerned, and even Guy was not quite as bright
and free as usual, being puzzled as to how far he was forgiven about the
ball.

Amabel could not think what had come to every one, and tried in vain to
make them sociable. In the evening they had recourse to a game, said
to be for Charlotte's amusement, but in reality to obviate some of the
stiffness and constraint; yet even this led to awkward situations. Each
person was to set down his or her favourite character in history and
fiction, flower, virtue, and time at which to have lived, and these were
all to be appropriated to the writers. The first read was--

'Lily of the valley--truth--Joan of Arc--Padre Cristoforo--the present
time.'

'Amy!' exclaimed Guy.

'I see you are right,' said Charles; 'but tell me your grounds!'

'Padre Cristoforo,' was the answer.

'Fancy little Amy choosing Joan of Arc,' said Eveleen, 'she who is
afraid of a tolerable sized grasshopper.'

'I should like to have been Joan's sister, and heard her tell about her
visions,' said Amy.

'You would have taught her to believe them,' said Philip.

'Taught her!' cried Guy. 'Surely you take the high view of her.'

'I think,' said Philip, 'that she is a much injured person, as much
by her friends as her enemies; but I don't pretend to enter either
enthusiastically or philosophically into her character.'

What was it that made Guy's brow contract, as he began to strip the
feather of a pen, till, recollecting himself, he threw it from him with
a dash, betraying some irritation, and folded his hands.

'Lavender,' read Charlotte.

'What should make any one choose that?' cried Eveleen.

'I know!' said Mrs. Edmonstone, looking up. 'I shall never forget the
tufts of lavender round the kitchen garden at Stylehurst.'

Philip smiled. Charlotte proceeded, and Charles saw Laura's colour
deepening as she bent over her work.

'"Lavender--steadfastness--Strafford--Cordelia in 'King Lear'--the
late war." How funny!' cried Charlotte. 'For hear the next:
"Honeysuckle--steadfastness--Lord Strafford--Cordelia--the present
time." Why, Laura, you must have copied it from Philip's.'

Laura neither looked nor spoke. Philip could hardly command his
countenance as Eveleen laughed, and told him he was much flattered by
those becoming blushes. But here Charles broke in,--'Come, make haste,
Charlotte, don't be all night about it;' and as Charlotte paused, as if
to make some dangerous remark, he caught the paper, and read the next
himself. Nothing so startled Philip as this desire to cover their
confusion. Laura was only sensible of the relief of having attention
drawn from her by the laugh that followed.

'A shamrock--Captain Rock--the tailor that was "blue moulded for want of
a bating"--Pat Riotism--the time of Malachy with the collar of gold.'

'Eva!' cried Charlotte.

'Nonsense,' said Eveleen; 'I am glad I know your tastes, Charles. They
do you honour.'

'More than yours do, if these are yours,' said Charles, reading them
contemptuously; 'Rose--generosity--Charles Edward--Catherine Seyton--the
civil wars.'

'You had better not have disowned Charlie's, Lady Eveleen,' said Guy.

'Nay do you think I would put up with such a set as these?' retorted
Charles; 'I am not fallen so low as the essence of young ladyism.'

'What can you find to say against them?' said Eveleen.

'Nothing,' said Charles, 'No one ever can find anything to say for or
against young ladies' tastes.'

'You seem to be rather in the case of the tailor yourself,' said Guy,
'ready to do battle, if you could but get any opposition.'

'Only tell me,' said Amy, 'how you could wish to live in the civil
wars?'

'O, because they would be so entertaining.'

'There's Paddy, genuine Paddy at last!' exclaimed Charles. 'Depend upon
it, the conventional young lady won't do, Eva.'

After much more discussion, and one or two more papers, came Guy's--the
last. 'Heather--Truth--King Charles--Sir Galahad--the present time.'

'Sir how much? exclaimed Charles.

'Don't you know him?' said Guy. 'Sir Galahad--the Knight of the Siege
Perilous--who won the Saint Greal.'

'What language is that?' said Charles.

'What! Don't you know the Morte d'Arthur! I thought every one did! Don't
you, Philip!'

'I once looked into it. It is very curious, in classical English; but it
is a book no one could read through.'

'Oh!' cried Guy, indignantly; then, 'but you only looked into it. If you
had lived with its two fat volumes, you could not help delighting in it.
It was my boating-book for at least three summers.'

'That accounts for it,' said Philip; 'a book so studied in boyhood
acquires a charm apart from its actual merits.'

'But it has actual merits. The depth, the mystery, the allegory--the
beautiful characters of some of the knights.'

'You look through the medium of your imagination,' said Philip; but
you must pardon others for seeing a great sameness of character and
adventure, and for disapproving of the strange mixture of religion and
romance.'

'You've never read it,' said Guy, striving to speak patiently.

'A cursory view is sufficient to show whether a book will repay the time
spent in reading it.'

'A cursory view enable one to judge better than making it your study?
Eh, Philip?' said Charles.

'It is no paradox. The actual merits are better seen by an unprejudiced
stranger than by an old friend who lends them graces of his own
devising.'

Charles laughed: Guy pushed back his chair, and went to look out at the
window. Perhaps Philip enjoyed thus chafing his temper; for after all he
had said to Laura, it was satisfactory to see his opinion justified, so
that he might not feel himself unfair. It relieved his uneasiness lest
his understanding with Laura should be observed. It had been in great
peril that evening, for as the girls went up to bed, Eveleen gaily said,
'Why, Laura, have you quarrelled with Captain Morville?'

'How can you say such things, Eva? Good night.' And Laura escaped into
her own room.

'What's the meaning of it, Amy?' pursued Eveleen.

'Only a stranger makes us more formal,' said Amy.

'What an innocent you are! It is of no use to talk to you!' said
Eveleen, running away.

'No; but Eva,' said Amy, pursuing her, 'don't go off with a wrong fancy.
Charles has teased Laura so much about Philip, that of course it makes
her shy of him before strangers; and it would never have done to laugh
about their choosing the same things when Mr. Thorndale was there.'

'I must be satisfied, I suppose. I know that is what you think, for you
could not say any other.'

'But what do you think?' said Amy, puzzled.

'I won't tell you, little innocence--it would only shock you.'

'Nothing you _really_ _thought_ about Laura could shock me,' said Amy;
'I don't mean what you might say in play.'

'Well, then, shall you think me in play or earnest when I say that I
think Laura likes Philip very much?'

'In play' said Amy; 'for you know that if we had not got our own Charlie
to show us what a brother is, we should think of Philip as just the same
as a brother.'

'A brother! You are pretending to be more simple than you really are,
Amy! Don't you know what I mean?'

'O,' said Amy, her cheeks lighting up, 'that must be only play, for he
has never asked her.'

'Ah, but suppose she was in the state just ready to be asked?'

'No, that could never be, for he could never ask her,'

'Why not, little Amy?'

'Because we are cousins, and everything,' said Amy, confused. 'Don't
talk any more about it, Eva; for though I know it is all play, I don't
like it, and mamma, would not wish me to talk of such things. And
don't you laugh about it, dear Eva, pray; for it only makes every one
uncomfortable. Pray!'

Amy had a very persuasive way of saying 'pray,' and Eveleen thought she
must yield to it. Besides, she respected Laura and Captain Morville too
much to resolve to laugh at them, whatever she might do when her fear of
the Captain made her saucy.

Mrs. Edmonstone thought it best on all accounts to sit in the
drawing-room the next morning; but she need not have taken so much pains
to chaperon her young ladies, for the gentlemen did not come near them.

Laura was more at ease in manner, though very far from happy, for she
was restlessly eager for a talk with Philip; while he was resolved not
to seek a private interview, sure that it would excite suspicion, and
willing to lose the consciousness of his underhand proceedings.

This was the day of the dinner-party, and Laura's heart leaped as she
calculated that it must fall to Philip's lot to hand her in to dinner.
She was not mistaken, he did give her his arm; and they found themselves
most favourably placed, for Philip's other neighbour was Mrs. Brownlow,
talking at a great rate to Mr. de Courcy, and on Laura's side was the
rather deaf Mr. Hayley, who had quite enough to do to talk to Miss
Brownlow. Charles was not at table, and not one suspicious eye could
rest on them, yet it was not till the second course was in progress that
he said anything which the whole world might not have heard. Something
had passed about Canterbury, and its distance from Hollywell.

'I can be here often,' said Philip.

'I am glad.'

'If you can only be guarded,--and I think you are becoming so.'

'Is this a time to speak of--? Oh, don't!'

'It is the only time. No one is attending, and I have something to say
to you.'

Overpowering her dire confusion, in obedience to him, she looked at the
epergne, and listened.

'You have acted prudently. You have checked--' and he indicated
Guy--'without producing more than moderate annoyance. You have only to
guard your self-possession.'

'It is very foolish,' she murmured.

'Ordinary women say so, and rest contented with the folly. You can do
better things.'

There was a thrill of joy at finding him conversing with her as his
'own;' it overcame her embarrassment and alarm, and wishes he would not
choose such a time for speaking.'

'How shall I?' said she.

'Employ yourself. Employ and strengthen your mind!'

'How shall I, and without you?'

'Find something to prevent you from dwelling on the future. That drawing
is dreamy work, employing the fingers and leaving the mind free.'

'I have been trying to read, but I cannot fix my mind.'

'Suppose you take what will demand attention. Mathematics, algebra. I
will send you my first book of algebra, and it will help you to work
down many useless dreams and anxieties.'

'Thank you; pray do; I shall be very glad of it.'

'You will find it give a power and stability to your mind, and no longer
have to complain of frivolous occupation.'

'I don't feel frivolous now,' said Laura, sadly; 'I don't know why it is
that everything is so altered, I am really happier, but my light heart
is gone.'

'You have but now learnt the full powers of your soul, Laura, you have
left the world of childhood, with the gay feelings which have no depth.'

'I have what is better,' she whispered.

'You have, indeed. But those feelings must be regulated, and
strengthening the intellect strengthens the governing power.'

Philip, with all his sense, was mystifying himself, because he was
departing from right, the only true 'good sense.' His right judgment
in all things was becoming obscured, so he talked metaphysical jargon,
instead of plain practical truth, and thought he was teaching Laura to
strengthen her powers of mind, instead of giving way to dreams, when
he was only leading her to stifle meditation, and thus securing her
complete submission to himself.

She was happier after this conversation, and better able to pay
attention to the guests, nor did she feel guilty when obliged to play
and sing in the evening--for she knew he must own that she could do no
otherwise.

Lady Eveleen gave, however, its brilliancy to the party. She had
something wonderfully winning and fascinating about her, and Philip
owned to himself that it took no small resolution on the part of Mr.
Thorndale to keep so steadily aloof from the party in the bay window,
where she was reigning like a queen, and inspiring gaiety like a fairy.
She made Guy sing with her; it was the first time he had ever sung,
except among themselves, as Mrs. Edmonstone had never known whether he
would like to be asked; but Eveleen refused to sing some of the Irish
melodies unless he would join her, and without making any difficulty he
did so. Mrs. Brownlow professed to be electrified, and Eveleen declaring
that she knew she sung like a peacock, told Mrs. Brownlow that the thing
to hear was Sir Guy singing glees with Laura and Amy. Of course, they
were obliged to sing. Mrs. Brownlow was delighted; and as she had
considerable knowledge of music, they all grew eager and Philip thought
it very foolish of Guy to allow so much of his talent and enthusiasm to
display themselves.

When all the people were gone, and the home party had wished each other
good-night, Philip lingered in the drawing-room to finish a letter. Guy,
after helping Charles up-stairs, came down a few moments after, to fetch
something which he had forgotten. Philip looked up,--'You contributed
greatly to the entertainment this evening,' he said.

Guy coloured, not quite sure that this was not said sarcastically, and
provoked with himself for being vexed.

'You think one devoid of the sixth sense has no right to speak,' said
Philip.

'I can't expect all to think it, as I do, one of the best things in this
world or out of it,' said Guy, speaking quickly.

'I know it is so felt by those who understand its secrets,' said Philip.
'I would not depreciate it; so you may hear me patiently, Guy. I only
meant to warn you, that it is often the means of bringing persons into
undesirable intimacies, from which they cannot disentangle themselves as
easily as they enter them.'

A flush crossed Guy's cheek, but it passed, and he simply said--'I
suppose it may. Good-night.'

Philip looked after him, and pondered on what it was that had annoyed
him--manner, words, or advice. He ascribed it to Guy's unwillingness to
be advised, since he had observed that his counsel was apt to irritate
him, though his good sense often led him to follow it. In the present
case, Philip thought Mrs. Brownlow and her society by no means desirable
for a youth like Guy; and he was quite right.

Philip and his friend went the next morning; and in the afternoon Laura
received the book of algebra--a very original first gift from a lover.
It came openly, with a full understanding that she was to use it by his
recommendation; her mother and brother both thought they understood the
motive, which one thought very wise, and the other very characteristic.

Lord Kilcoran and Lady Eveleen also departed. Eveleen very sorry to go,
though a little comforted by the prospect of seeing Laura so soon
in Ireland, where she would set her going in all kinds of
'rationalities--reading, and school teaching, and everything else.'

'Ay,' said Charles, when all were out of hearing but his mother; 'and
I shrewdly suspect the comfort would be still greater if it was Sir Guy
Morville who was coming.'

'It would be no bad thing,' said his mother: 'Eveleen is a nice creature
with great capabilities.'

'Capabilities! but will they ever come to anything?'

'In a few years,' said Mrs. Edmonstone; 'and he is a mere boy at
present, so there is plenty of time for both to develop themselves.'

'Most true, madame mere; but it remains to be proved whether the liking
for Sir Guy, which has taken hold of my lady Eveleen, is strong enough
to withstand all the coquetting with young Irishmen, and all the idling
at Kilcoran.'

'I hope she has something better to be relied on than the liking for Sir
Guy.'

'You may well do so, for I think he has no notion of throwing off his
allegiance to you--his first and only love. He liked very well to make
fun with Eva; but he regarded her rather as a siren, who drew him off
from his Latin and Greek.'

'Yes; I am ashamed of myself for such a fit of match-making! Forget it,
Charlie, as fast as you can.'


CHAPTER 11

     This warld's wealth, when I think o't,
     Its pride, and a' the lave o't,
     Fie, fie on silly coward man,
     That he should be the slave o't.
                             --BURNS


In another week Mr. Edmonstone and his eldest daughter were to depart
on their Irish journey. Laura, besides the natural pain in leaving home,
was sorry to be no longer near Philip, especially as it was not likely
that he would be still at Broadstone on their return; yet she was so
restless and dissatisfied, that any change was welcome, and the fear of
betraying herself almost took away the pleasure of his presence.

He met them at the railway station at Broadstone, where Mr. Edmonstone,
finding himself much too early, recollected something he had forgotten
in the town, and left his daughter to walk up and down the platform
under Philip's charge. They felt it a precious interval, but both were
out of spirits, and could hardly profit by it.

'You will be gone long before we come back,' said Laura.

'In a fortnight or three weeks, probably.'

'But you will still be able to come to Hollywell now and then?'

'I hope so. It is all the pleasure I can look for. We shall never see
such a summer again.'

'Oh, it has been a memorable one!'

'Memorable! Yes. It has given me an assurance that compensates for all
I have lost; yet it has made me feel, more than ever before, how poverty
withers a man's hopes.'

'O Philip, I always thought your poverty a great, noble thing!'

'You thought like a generous-tempered girl who has known nothing of its
effects.'

'And do you know that Guy says the thing to be proud of is of holding
the place you do, without the aid of rank or riches.'

'I would not have it otherwise--I would not for worlds that my father
had acted otherwise,' said Philip. 'You understand that, Laura.'

'Of course I do.'

'But when you speak--when Guy speaks of my holding the place I do, you
little know what it is to feel that powers of usefulness are wasted--to
know I have the means of working my way to honour and distinction, such
as you would rejoice in Laura, to have it all within, yet feel it thrown
away. Locksley Hall, again--"every door is barred with gold, and opens
but to golden keys.'"

'I wish there was anything to be done,' said Laura.

'It is my profession that is the bar to everything. I have sold the best
years of my life, and for what? To see my sister degrade herself by that
marriage.'

'That is the real grief,' said Laura.

'But for that, I should never have cast a look back on what I
relinquished. However, why do I talk of these things, these vain
regrets? They only occurred because my welfare does not concern myself
alone--and here's your father.'

Mr. Edmonstone returned, out of breath, in too much bustle remark his
daughter's blushes. Even when the train was moving off, he still had
his head out at the window, calling to Philip that they should expect
a visit from him as soon as ever they returned. Such cordiality gave
Philip a pang; and in bitterness of spirit he walked back to the
barracks. On the way he met Mrs. Deane who wanted to consult him about
inviting his cousin, Sir Guy to a dinner-party she intended to give next
week. 'Such an agreeable, sensible youth, and we feel we owe him some
attention, he took so much pains to make apologies about the ball.'

'I dare say he will be very happy to come.'

'We will write at once. He is a very fine young man, without a shade of
vanity or nonsense.'

'Yes; he has very pleasant, unaffected manners.'

'I am sure he will do credit to his estate. It is a very handsome
fortune, is it not?'

'It is a very large property.'

'I am glad of it; I have no doubt we shall see him one of the first men
of his time.'

These words brought into contrast in Philip's mind the difference
between Guy's position and his own. The mere possession of wealth was
winning for Guy, at an age when his merits could only be negative, that
estimation which his own tried character had scarcely achieved, placing
him not merely on a level with himself, but in a situation where
happiness and influence came unbidden. His own talents, attainments, and
equal, if not superior claims, to gentle blood, could not procure him
what seemed to lie at Guy's feet. His own ability and Laura's heart
alone were what wealth could not affect; yet when he thought how the
want of it wasted the one, and injured the hopes of the other, he
recurred to certain visions of his sister Margaret's, in days gone
by, of what he was to do as Sir Philip, lord of Redclyffe. He was
speculating on what would have happened had Guy died in his sickly
infancy, when, suddenly recollecting himself, he turned his mind to
other objects.

Guy was not much charmed with Mrs. Deane's invitation. He said he knew
he must go to make up for his rudeness about the ball; but he grumbled
enough to make Mrs. Edmonstone laugh at him for being so stupid as
to want to stay hum-drum in the chimney corner. No doubt it was very
pleasant there. There was that peculiar snugness which belongs to a
remnant of a large party, when each member of it feels bound to prevent
the rest from being dull. Guy devoted himself to Charles more than
ever, and in the fear that he might miss the late variety of amusement,
exerted even more of his powers of entertainment than Lady Eveleen had
called forth.

There were grave readings in the mornings, and long walks in the
afternoons, when he dragged Charles, in his chair, into many a place he
had never expected to see again, and enabled him to accompany his mother
and sisters in many a delightful expedition. In the evening there was
music, or light reading, especially poetry, as this was encouraged by
Mrs. Edmonstone, in the idea that it was better that so excitable and
enthusiastic a person as Guy should have his objects of admiration
tested by Charles's love of ridicule.

Mr. Edmonstone had left to Guy the office of keeping the 1st of
September, one which he greatly relished. Indeed, when he thought of his
own deserted manors, he was heard to exclaim, in commiseration for the
neglect, 'Poor partridges!' The Hollywell shooting was certainly not
like that at Redclyffe, where he could hardly walk out of his own
grounds, whereas here he had to bear in mind so many boundaries, that
Philip was expecting to have to help him out of some direful scrape. He
had generally walked over the whole extent, and assured himself that the
birds were very wild, and Bustle the best of dogs, before breakfast, so
as to be ready for all the occupations of the day. He could scarcely be
grateful when the neighbours, thinking it must be very dull for him to
be left alone with Mrs. Edmonstone and her crippled son, used to ask
him to shoot or dine. He always lamented at first, and ended by enjoying
himself.

One night, he came home, in such a state of eagerness, that he must
needs tell his good news; and, finding no one in the drawing-room, he
ran up-stairs, opened Charles's door, and exclaimed--'There's to be a
concert at Broadstone!' Then perceiving that Charles was fast asleep,
he retreated noiselessly, reserving his rejoicings till morning, when it
appeared that Charles had heard, but had woven the announcement into a
dream.

This concert filled Guy's head. His only grief was that it was to be in
the evening, so that Charles could not go to it; and his wonder was
not repressed at finding that Philip did not mean to favour it with his
presence, since Guy would suffice for squire to Mrs. Edmonstone and her
daughters.

In fact, Philip was somewhat annoyed by the perpetual conversation about
the concert, and on the day on which it was to take place resolved on
making a long expedition to visit the ruins of an old abbey, far out of
all reports of it. As he was setting out, he was greeted, in a very loud
voice, by Mr. Gordon.

'Hollo, Morville! how are you? So you have great doings to-night, I
hear!' and he had only just forced himself from him, when he was again
accosted, this time in a hasty, embarrassed manner,--

'I beg your pardon, sir, but the ties of relationship--'

He drew himself up as if he was on parade, faced round, and replied
with an emphatic 'Sir!' as he behold a thin, foreign-looking man, in
a somewhat flashy style of dress, who, bowing low, repeated
breathlessly,--

'I beg your pardon--Sir Guy Morville, I believe!'

'Captain Morville, sir!'

'I beg your pardon--I mistook. A thousand pardons,' and he retreated;
while Philip, after a moment's wonder, pursued his walk.

The Hollywell party entered Broadstone in a very different temper, and
greatly did they enjoy the concert, both for themselves and for each
other. In the midst of it, while Amy was intent on the Italian words of
a song, Guy touched her hand, and pointed to a line in the programme--


          Solo on the violin.... MR. S. B. DIXON.


She looked up in his face with an expression full of inquiry; but it
was no time for speaking, and she only saw how the colour mantled on his
cheek when the violinist appeared, and how he looked down the whole time
of the performance, only now and then venturing a furtive though earnest
glance.

He did not say anything till they were seated in the carriage, and then
astonished Mrs. Edmonstone by exclaiming--

'It must be my uncle!--I am sure it must. I'll ride to Broadstone the
first thing to-morrow, and find him out.'

'Your uncle!' exclaimed Mrs. Edmonstone. 'I never thought of that.'

S. B. Dixon,' said Guy. 'I know his name is Sebastian. It cannot be
any one else. You know he went to America. How curious it is! I suppose
there is no fear of his being gone before I can come in to-morrow.'

'I should think not. Those musical people keep late hours.'

'I would go before breakfast. Perhaps it would be best to go to old
Redford, he will know all about him; or to the music-shop. I am so glad!
It is the very thing I always wished.'

'Did you?' said Mrs. Edmonstone to herself. 'I can't say every one would
be of your mind; but I can't help liking you the better for it. I wish
the man had kept further off. I wish Mr. Edmonstone was at home. I hope
no harm will come of it. I wonder what I ought to do. Shall I caution
him? No; I don't think I can spoil his happiness--and perhaps the man
may be improved. He is his nearest relation, and I have no right
to interfere. His own good sense will protect him--but I wish Mr.
Edmonstone was at home.'

She therefore did not check his expressions of delight, nor object to
his going to Broadstone early the next morning. He had just dismounted
before the inn-yard, when a boy put a note into his hand, and he was so
absorbed in its contents, that he did not perceive Philip till after
two greetings had passed unheard. When at length he was recalled,
he started, and exclaimed, rapturously, as he put the note into his
cousin's hand,

'See here--it is himself!'

'Who?'

'My uncle. My poor mother's own brother.'

'Sebastian Bach Dixon,' read Philip. 'Ha! it was he who took me for you
yesterday.'

'I saw him at the concert--I was sure it could be no other. I came in
on purpose to find him, and here he is waiting for me. Is not it a happy
chance?'

'Happy!' echoed Philip, in a far different tone.

'How I have longed for this--for any one who could remember and tell me
of her--of my mother--my poor, dear young mother! And her own brother!
I have been thinking of it all night, and he knows I am here, and is as
eager as myself. He is waiting for me,' ended Guy, hurrying off.

'Stop!' said Philip, gravely. 'Think before acting. I seriously advise
you to have nothing to do with this man, at least personally. Let me see
him, and learn what he wants.'

'He wants me,' impatiently answered Guy. 'You are not his nephew.'

'Thank heaven!' thought Philip. 'Do you imagine your relationship is the
sole cause of his seeking you?'

'I don't know--I don't care!' cried Guy, with vehemence. 'I will not
listen to suspicions of my mother's brother.'

'It is more than suspicion. Hear me calmly. I speak for your good. I
know this man's influence was fatal to your father. I know he did all in
his power to widen the breach with your grandfather.'

'That was eighteen years ago,' said Guy, walking on, biting his lip in a
fiery fit of impatience.

'You will not hear. Remember, that his position and associates render
him no fit companion for you. Nay, listen patiently. You cannot help the
relationship. I would not have you do otherwise than assist him. Let him
not complain of neglect, but be on your guard. He will either seriously
injure you, or be a burden for life.'

'I have heard you so far--I can hear no more,' said Guy, no longer
restraining his impetuosity. 'He is my uncle, that I know, I care for
nothing else. Position--nonsense! what has that to do with it? I will
not be set against him.'

He strode off; but in a few moments turned back, overtook Philip, said--
'Thank you for your advice. I beg your pardon for my hastiness. You mean
kindly, but I must see my uncle.' And, without waiting for an answer, he
was gone.

In short space he was in the little parlour of the music-shop, shaking
hands with his uncle, and exclaiming,--

'I am so glad! I hoped it was you!'

'It is very noble-hearted! I might have known it would be so with the
son of my dearest sister and of my generous friend!' cried Mr. Dixon,
with eagerness that had a theatrical air, though it was genuine feeling
that filled his eyes with tears.

'I saw your name last night' continued Guy. 'I would have tried to speak
to you at once, but I was obliged to stay with Mrs. Edmonstone, as I was
the only gentleman with her.'

'Ah! I thought it possible you might not be able to follow the dictate
of your own heart; but this is a fortunate conjuncture, in the absence
of your guardian.'

Guy recollected Philip's remonstrance, and it crossed him whether his
guardian might be of the same mind; but he felt confident in having told
all to Mrs. Edmonstone.

'How did you know I was here?' he asked.

'I learnt it in a most gratifying way. Mr. Redford, without knowing
our connection--for on that I will always be silent--mentioned that the
finest tenor he had ever known, in an amateur, belonged to his pupil,
Sir Guy Morville. You can imagine my feelings at finding you so near,
and learning that you had inherited your dear mother's talent and
taste.'

The conversation was long, for there was much to hear. Mr. Dixon had
kept up a correspondence at long intervals with Markham, from whom he
heard that his sister's child survived, and was kindly treated by his
grandfather; and inquiring again on the death of old Sir Guy, learnt
that he was gone to live with his guardian, whose name, and residence
Markham had not thought fit to divulge. He had been much rejoiced to
hear his name from the music-master, and he went on to tell how he had
been misled by the name of Morville into addressing the captain, who had
a good deal of general resemblance to Guy's father, a fine tall young
man, of the same upright, proud deportment. He supposed he was the son
of the Archdeacon, and remembering how strongly his own proceedings
had been discountenanced at Stylehurst, had been much disconcerted, and
deeming the encounter a bad omen, had used more caution in his advances
to his nephew. It was from sincere affection that he sought his
acquaintance, though very doubtful as to the reception he might meet,
and was both delighted and surprised at such unembarrassed, open-hearted
affection.

The uncle and nephew were not made to understand each other. Sebastian
Dixon was a man of little education, and when, in early youth, his
talents had placed him high in his own line, he had led a careless,
extravagant life. Though an evil friend, and fatal counsellor, he had
been truly attached to Guy's father, and the secret engagement, and
runaway marriage with his beautiful sister, had been the romance of his
life, promoted by him with no selfish end. He was a proud and passionate
man, and resenting Sir Guy's refusal to receive his sister as a
daughter, almost as much as Sir Guy was incensed at the marriage, had
led his brother-in-law to act in a manner which cut off the hope of
reconciliation, and obliged Archdeacon Morville to give up his cause. He
had gloried in supporting his sister and her husband, and enabling them
to set the old baronet at defiance. But young Morville's territorial
pride could not brook that he should be maintained, and especially that
his child, the heir of Redclyffe, should be born while he was living at
the expense of a musician. This feeling, aided by a yearning for home,
and a secret love for his father, mastered his resentment; he took his
resolution, quarrelled with Dixon, and carried off his wife, bent with
desperation on forcing his father into receiving her.

Sebastian had not surmounted his anger at this step when he learnt its
fatal consequences. Ever since that time, nothing had prospered with
him: he had married and sunk himself lower, and though he had an
excellent engagement, the days were past when he was the fashion, and
his gains and his triumphs were not what they had been. He had a long
list of disappointments and jealousies with which to entertain Guy, who,
on his side, though resolved to like him, and dreading to be too refined
to be friends with his relations, could not feel as thoroughly pleased
as he intended to have been.

Music was, however, a subject on which they could meet with equal
enthusiasm, and by means of this, together with the aid of his own
imagination, Guy contrived to be very happy. He stayed with his uncle as
long as he could, and promised to spend a day with him in London, on his
way to Oxford, in October.

The next morning, when Philip knew that Guy would be with his tutor, he
walked to Hollywell, came straight up to his aunt's dressing-room, asked
her to send Charlotte down to practise, and, seating himself opposite to
her, began--

'What do you mean to do about this unfortunate rencontre?'

'Do you mean Guy and his uncle? He is very much pleased, poor boy! I
like his entire freedom from false shame.'

'A little true shame would be hardly misplaced about such a connection.'

'It is not his fault, and I hope it will not be his misfortune,' said
Mrs. Edmonstone.

'That it will certainly be,' replied Philip, 'if we are not on our
guard; and, indeed, if we are, there is little to be done with one so
wilful. I might as well have interfered with the course of a whirlwind.'

'No, no, Philip; he is too candid to be wilful.'

'I cannot be of your opinion, when I have seen him rushing into this
acquaintance in spite of the warnings he must have had here--to say
nothing of myself.'

'Nay, there I must defend him, though you will think me very unwise; I
could not feel that I ought to withhold him from taking some notice of
so near a relation.'

Philip did think her so unwise, that he could only reply, gravely--

'We must hope it may produce no evil effects.'

'How?' she exclaimed, much alarmed. 'Have you heard anything against
him?'

'You remember, of course, that Guy's father was regularly the victim of
this Dixon.'

'Yes, yes; but he has had enough to sober him. Do you know nothing
more?' said Mrs. Edmonstone, growing nervously anxious lest she had been
doing wrong in her husband's absence.

'I have been inquiring about him from old Redford, and I should judge
him to be a most dangerous companion; as, indeed, I could have told from
his whole air, which is completely that of a roué.'

'You have seen him, then?'

'Yes. He paid me the compliment of taking me for Sir Guy, and of course
made off in dismay when he discovered on whom he had fallen. I have
seldom seen a less creditable-looking individual.'

'But what did Mr. Redford say? Did he know of the connection?'

'No; I am happy to say he did not. The fellow has decency enough not
to boast of that. Well, Redford did not know much of him personally: he
said he had once been much thought of, and had considerable talent and
execution, but taste changes, or he has lost something, so that, though
he stands tolerably high in his profession, he is not a leader. So much
for his musical reputation. As to his character, he is one of those
people who are called no one's enemy but their own, exactly the
introduction Guy has hitherto happily wanted to every sort of mischief.'

'I think,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, trying to console herself, 'that Guy is
too much afraid of small faults to be invited by larger evils. While
he punishes himself for an idle word, he is not likely to go wrong in
greater matters.'

'Not at present.'

'Is the man in debt or difficulties? Guy heard nothing of that, and I
thought it a good sign.'

'I don't suppose he is. He ought not, for he has a fixed salary, besides
what he gets by playing at concerts when it is not the London season.
The wasting money on a spendthrift relation would be a far less evil
than what I apprehend.'

'I wish I knew what to do! It is very unlucky that your uncle is from
home.'

'Very.'

Mrs. Edmonstone was frightened by the sense of responsibility, and was
only anxious to catch hold of something to direct her.

'What would you have me do?' she asked, hopelessly.

'Speak seriously to Guy. He must attend to you: he cannot fly out with a
woman as he does with me. Show him the evils that must result from such
an intimacy. If Dixon was in distress, I would not say a word, for he
would be bound to assist him but as it is, the acquaintance can serve no
purpose but degrading Guy, and showing him the way to evil. Above all,
make a point of his giving up visiting him in London. That is the sure
road to evil. A youth of his age, under the conduct of a worn-out
roué, connected with the theatres! I can hardly imagine anything more
mischievous.'

'Yes, yes; I will speak to him,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, perfectly
appalled.

She promised, but she found the fulfilment difficult, in her dislike of
vexing Guy, her fear of saying what was wrong, and a doubt whether the
appearance of persecuting Mr. Dixon was not the very way to prevent
Guy's own good sense from finding out his true character, so she waited,
hoping Mr. Edmonstone might return before Guy went to Oxford, or that he
might write decisively.

Mrs. Edmonstone might have known her husband better than to expect him
to write decisively when he had neither herself nor Philip at his elbow.
The same post had brought him a letter from Guy, mentioning his meeting
with his uncle, and frankly explaining his plans for London; another
from Philip, calling on him to use all his authority to prevent this
intercourse, and a third from his wife. Bewildered between them, he took
them to his sister, who, being as puzzle-headed as himself, and only
hearing his involved history of the affair, confused him still more; so
he wrote to Philip, saying he was sorry the fellow had turned up, but he
would guard against him. He told Guy he was sorry to say that his uncle
used to be a sad scamp, and he must take care, or it would be his poor
father's story over again; and to Mrs. Edmonstone he wrote that it was
very odd that everything always did go wrong when he was away.

He thought these letters a great achievement, but his wife's perplexity
was not materially relieved.

After considering a good while, she at length spoke to Guy; but it was
not at a happy time, for Philip, despairing of her, had just taken on
himself to remonstrate, and had angered him to the verge of an outbreak.

Mrs. Edmonstone, as mildly as she could, urged on him that such
intercourse could bring him little satisfaction, and might be very
inconvenient; that his uncle was in no distress, and did not require
assistance; and that it was too probable that in seeking him out he
might meet with persons who might unsettle his principles,--in short,
that he had much better give up the visit to London.

'This is Philip's advice,' said Guy.

'It is; but--'

Guy looked impatient, and she paused.

'You must forgive me,' he said, 'if I follow my own judgment. If Mr.
Edmonstone chose to lay his commands on me, I suppose I must submit; but
I cannot see that I am bound to obey Philip.'

'Not to obey, certainly; but his advice--'

'He is prejudiced and unjust,' said Guy.

'I don't believe that my uncle would attempt to lead me into bad
company; and surely you would not have me neglect or look coldly on one
who was so much attached to my parents. If he is not a gentleman, and is
looked down on by the world, it is not for his sister's son to make him
conscious of it.'

'I like your feelings, Guy; I can say nothing against it, but that I am
much afraid your uncle is not highly principled.'

'You have only Philip's account of him.'

'You are resolved?'

'Yes. I do not like not to take your advice, but I do believe this is my
duty. I do not think my determination is made in self-will,' said Guy,
thoughtfully; 'I cannot think that I ought to neglect my uncle, because
I happen to have been born in a different station, which is all I have
heard proved against him,' he added, smiling. 'You will forgive me, will
you not, for not following your advice? for really and truly, if you
will let me say so, I think you would not have given it if Philip had
not been talking to you.'

Mrs. Edmonstone confessed, with a smile, that perhaps it was so; but
said she trusted much to Philip's knowledge of the world. Guy agreed to
this; though still declaring Philip had no right to set him against his
uncle, and there the discussion ended.

Guy went to London. Philip thought him very wilful, and his aunt very
weak; and Mr. Edmonstone, on coming home, said it could not be helped,
and he wished to hear no more about the matter.


CHAPTER 12

     Her playful smile, her buoyance wild,
     Bespeak the gentle, mirthful child;
     But in her forehead's broad expanse,
     Her chastened tones, her thoughtful glance,
     Is mingled, with the child's light glee,
     The modest maiden's dignity.


One summer's day, two years after the ball and review, Mary Ross and her
father were finishing their early dinner, when she said,--

'If you don't want me this afternoon, papa, I think I shall walk to
Hollywell. You know Eveleen de Courcy is there.'

'No, I did not. What has brought her?'

'As Charles expresses it, she has over-polked herself in London, and is
sent here for quiet and country air. I want to call on her, and to
ask Sir Guy to give me some idea as to the singing the children should
practise for the school-feast?'

'Then you think Sir Guy will come to the feast?'

'I reckon on him to conceal all the deficiencies in the children's
singing.'

'He won't desert you, as he did Mrs. Brownlow?'

'O papa! you surely did not think him to blame in that affair?'

'Honestly, Mary, if I thought about the matter at all, I thought it a
pity he should go so much to the Brownlows.'

'I believe I could tell you the history, if you thought it worth while;
and though it may be gossip, I should like you to do justice to Sir
Guy.'

'Very well; though I don't think there is much danger of my doing
otherwise. I only wondered he should become intimate there at all.'

'I believe Mrs. Edmonstone thinks it right he should see as much of the
world as possible, and not be always at home in their own set.'

'Fair and proper.'

'You know she has shown him all the people she could,--had Eveleen
staying there, and the Miss Nortons, and hunted him out to parties, when
he had rather have been at home.'

'I thought he was fond of society. I remember your telling me how amused
you were with his enjoyment of his first ball.'

'Ah! he was two years younger then, and all was new. He seems to me too
deep and sensitive not to find more pain than pleasure in commonplace
society. I have sometimes seen that he cannot speak either lightly or
harshly of what he disapproves, and people don't understand him. I was
once sitting next him, when there was some talking going on about an
elopement; he did not laugh, looked almost distressed, and at last said
in a very low voice, to me, "I wish people would not laugh about such
things."'

'He is an extraordinary mixture of gaiety of heart, and seriousness.'

'Well, when Mrs. Brownlow had her nieces with her, and was giving those
musical parties, his voice made him valuable; and Mrs. Edmonstone told
him he ought to go to them. I believe he liked it at first, but he found
there was no end to it; it took up a great deal of time, and was a style
of thing altogether that was not desirable. Mrs Edmonstone thought at
first his reluctance was only shyness and stay-at-home nonsense, that
ought to be overcome; but when she had been there, and saw how Mrs.
Brownlow beset him, and the unpleasant fuss they made about his singing,
she quite came round to his mind, and was very sorry she had exposed him
to so much that was disagreeable.'

'Well, Mary, I am glad to hear your account. My impression arose from
something Philip Morville said.'

'Captain Morville never can approve of anything Sir Guy does! It is not
like Charles.'

'How improved Charles Edmonstone is. He has lost that spirit of repining
and sarcasm, and lives as if he had an object.'

'Yes; he employs himself now, and teaches Amy to do the same. You know,
after the governess went, we were afraid little Amy would never do
anything but wait on Charles, and idle in her pretty gentle way; but
when he turned to better things so did she, and her mind has been
growing all this time. Perhaps you don't see it, for she has not lost
her likeness to a kitten, and looks all demure silence with the elders,
but she takes in what the wise say.'

'She is a very good little thing; and I dare say will not be the worse
for growing up slowly.'

'Those two sisters are specimens of fast and slow growth. Laura
has always seemed to be so much more than one year older than Amy,
especially of late. She is more like five-and-twenty than twenty. I
wonder if she overworks herself. But how we have lingered over our
dinner!'

By half-past three, Mary was entering a copse which led into Mr.
Edmonstone's field, when she heard gay tones, and a snatch of one of the
sweetest of old songs,--

           Weep no more, lady; lady, weep no more,
           Thy sorrow is in vain;
           For violets pluck'd, the sweetest showers
           Will ne'er make grow again.

A merry, clear laugh followed, and a turn in the path showed her Guy,
Amy, and Charlotte, busy over a sturdy stock of eglantine. Guy, little
changed in these two years,--not much taller, and more agile than
robust,--was lopping vigorously with his great pruning-knife, Amabel
nursing a bundle of drooping rose branches, Charlotte, her bonnet in a
garland of wild sweet-brier, holding the matting and continually getting
entangled in the long thorny wreaths.

'And here comes the "friar of orders gray," to tell you so,' exclaimed
Guy, as Mary, in her gray dress, came on them.

'Oh, that is right, dear good friar,' cried Amy.

'We are so busy,' said Charlotte; 'Guy has made Mr. Markham send all
these choice buds from Redclyffe.'

'Not from the park,' said Guy, 'we don't deal much in gardening; but
Markham is a great florist, and these are his bounties.'

'And are you cutting that beautiful wild rose to pieces?'

'Is it not a pity?' said Amy. 'We have used up all the stocks in the
garden, and this is to be transplanted in the autumn.'

'She has been consoling it all the time by telling it it is for its
good,' said Guy; 'cutting off wild shoots, and putting in better
things.'

'I never said anything so pretty; and, after all, I don't know that the
grand roses will be equal to these purple shoots and blushing buds with
long whiskers.'

'So Sir Guy was singing about the violets plucked to comfort you. But
you must not leave off, I want to see how you do it. I am gardener
enough to like to look on.'

'We have only two more to put in.'

Knife and fingers were busy, and Mary admired the dexterity with which
the slit was made in the green bark, well armed with firm red thorns,
and the tiny scarlet gem inserted, and bound with cotton and matting.
At the least critical parts of the work, she asked after the rest of
the party, and was answered that papa had driven Charles out in the pony
carriage, and that Laura and Eveleen were sitting on the lawn, reading
and working with mamma. Eveleen was better, but not strong, or equal to
much exertion in the heat. Mary went on to speak of her school feast and
ask her questions.

'O Guy, you must not go before that!' cried Charlotte.

'Are you going away?'

'He is very naughty, indeed,' said Charlotte. 'He is going, I don't know
where all, to be stupid, and read mathematics.'

'A true bill, I am sorry to say,' said Guy; 'I am to join a
reading-party for the latter part of the vacation.'

'I hope not before Thursday week, though we are not asking you to
anything worth staying for.'

'Oh, surely you need not go before that!' said Amy, 'need you?'

'No; I believe I may stay till Friday, and I should delight in the
feast, thank you, Miss Ross,--I want to study such things. A bit more
matting, Amy, if you please. There, I think that will do.'

'Excellently. Here is its name. See how neatly Charlie has printed it,
Mary. Is it not odd, that he prints so well when he writes so badly?'

'"The Seven Sisters." There, fair sisterhood, grow and thrive, till I
come to transplant you in the autumn. Are there any more?'

'No, that is the last. Now, Mary, let us come to mamma.'

Guy waited to clear the path of the numerous trailing briery branches,
and the others walked on, Amy telling how sorry they were to lose Guy's
vacation, but that he thought he could not give time enough to
his studies here, and had settled, at Oxford, to make one of a
reading-party, under the tutorship of his friend, Mr. Wellwood.

'Where do they go?'

'It is not settled. Guy wished it to be the sea-side; but Philip has
been recommending a farmhouse in Stylehurst parish, rather nearer St.
Mildred's Wells than Stylehurst, but quite out in the moor, and an
immense way from both.'

'Do you think it will be the place?'

'Yes; Guy thinks it would suit Mr. Wellwood, because he has friends at
St. Mildred's, so he gave his vote for it. He expects to hear how it is
settled to-day or to-morrow.'

Coming out on the lawn, they found the three ladies sitting under the
acacia, with their books and work. Laura did, indeed, look older than
her real age, as much above twenty as Amy looked under nineteen. She
was prettier than ever; her complexion exquisite in delicacy, her fine
figure and the perfect outline of her features more developed; but the
change from girl to woman had passed over her, and set its stamp on the
anxious blue eye, and almost oppressed brow. Mary thought it would be
hard to define where was that difference. It was not want of bloom,
for of that Laura had more than any of the others, fresh, healthy,
and bright, while Amy was always rather pale, and Lady Eveleen was
positively wan and faded by London and late hours; nor was it loss of
animation, for Laura talked and laughed with interest and eagerness; nor
was it thought, for little Amy, when at rest, wore a meditative, pensive
countenance; but there was something either added or taken away, which
made it appear that the serenity and carelessness of early youth had
fled from her, and the air of the cares of life had come over her.

Mary told her plans,--Church service at four, followed by a tea-drinking
in the fields; tea in the garden for the company, and play for the
school children and all who liked to join them. Every one likes such
festivals, which have the recommendation of permitting all to do as they
please, bringing friends together in perfect ease and freedom, with
an object that raises them above the rank of mere gatherings for the
pleasure of rich neighbours.

Mrs. Edmonstone gladly made the engagement and Lady Eveleen promised to
be quite well, and to teach the children all manner of new games, though
she greatly despised the dullness of English children, and had many
droll stories of the stupidity of Laura's pupils, communicated to
her, with perhaps a little exaggeration, by Charles, and still further
embellished by herself, for the purpose of exciting Charlotte's
indignation.

Mary proceeded to her consultation about the singing, and was
conducted by Guy and Amy to the piano, and when her ears could not be
indoctrinated by their best efforts, they more than half engaged to walk
to East-hill, and have a conversation with the new school-master, whom
Mary pitied for having fallen on people so unable to appreciate his
musical training as herself and her father. The whole party walked back
with her as far as the shade lasted; and at the end of the next field
she turned, saw them standing round the stile, thought what happy people
they were, and then resumed her wonder whither Laura's youthfulness had
flown.

The situation of Philip and Laura had not changed. His regiment had
never been at any great distance from Hollywell, and he often came,
venturing more as Laura learnt to see him with less trepidation. He
seldom or never was alone with her; but his influence was as strong as
ever, and look, word, and gesture, which she alone could understand,
told her what she was to him, and revealed his thoughts. To him she was
devoted, all her doings were with a view to please him, and deserve his
affection; he was her world, and sole object. Indeed, she was sometimes
startled by perceiving that tenderly as she loved her own family, all
were subordinate to him. She had long since known the true name of her
feelings for him; she could not tell when or how the certainty had come,
but she was conscious that it was love that they had acknowledged for
one another and that she only lived in the light of his love. Still she
did not realize the evil of concealment; it was so deep a sensation of
her innermost heart, that she never could imagine revealing it to any
living creature, and she had besides so surrendered her judgment to her
idol, that no thought could ever cross her that he had enjoined what was
wrong. Her heart and soul were his alone, and she left the future to him
without an independent desire or reflection. All the embarrassments and
discomforts which her secret occasioned her were met willingly for
his sake, and these were not a few, though time had given her more
self-command, or, perhaps, more properly speaking, had hardened her.

She always had a dread of tete-a-tetes and conversations over novels,
and these were apt to be unavoidable when Eveleen was at Hollywell.
The twilight wanderings on the terrace were a daily habit, and Eveleen
almost always paired with her. On this evening in particular, Laura was
made very uncomfortable by Eveleen's declaring that it was positively
impossible and unnatural that the good heroine of some novel should have
concealed her engagement from her parents. Laura could not help saying
that there might be many excuses; then afraid that she was exciting
suspicion, changed the subject in great haste, and tried to make Eveleen
come indoors, telling her she would tire herself to death, and vexed
by her cousin's protestations that the fresh cool air did her good.
Besides, Eveleen was looking with attentive eyes at another pair
who were slowly walking up and down the shady walk that bordered the
grass-plot, and now and then standing still to enjoy the subdued silence
of the summer evening, and the few distant sounds that marked the
perfect lull.

'How calm--how beautiful!' murmured Amabel.

'It only wants the low solemn surge and ripple of the tide, and its dash
on the rocks,' said Guy. 'If ever there was music, it is there; but it
makes one think what the ear must be that can take in the whole of those
harmonics.'

'How I should like to hear it!'

'And see it. O Amy! to show you the sunny sea,--the sense of breadth
and vastness in that pale clear horizon line, and the infinite number of
fields of light between you and it,--and the free feelings as you stand
on some high crag, the wind blowing in your face across half the globe,
and the waves dashing far below! I am growing quite thirsty for the
sea.'

'You know, papa said something about your taking your reading-party to
Redclyffe.'

'True, but I don't think Markham would like it, and it would put old
Mrs. Drew into no end of a fuss.'

'Not like to have you?'

'O yes, I should be all very well; but if they heard I was bringing
three or four men with me, they would think them regular wild beasts.
They would be in an awful fright. Besides, it is so long since I have
been at home, that I don't altogether fancy going there till I settle
there for good.'

'Ah! it will be sad going there at first.'

'And it has not been my duty yet.'

'But you will be glad when you get there?'

'Sha'n't I? I wonder if any one has been to shoot the rabbits on the
shag rock. They must have quite overrun it by this time. But I don't
like the notion of the first day. There is not only the great change,
but a stranger at the vicarage.'

'Do you know anything about the new clergyman? I believe Mrs. Ashford is
a connection of Lady Thorndale's?'

'Yes; Thorndale calls them pattern people, and I have no doubt they will
do great good in the parish. I am sure we want some enlightenment, for
we are a most primitive race, and something beyond Jenny Robinson's dame
school would do us no harm.'

Here Mr. Edmonstone called from the window that they must come in.

Mrs. Edmonstone thought deeply that night. She had not forgotten her
notion that Eveleen was attracted by Guy's manners, and had been curious
to see what would happen when Eveleen was sent to Hollywell for country
air.

She had a very good opinion of Lady Eveleen. Since the former visit,
she had shown more spirit of improvement, and laid aside many little
follies; she had put herself under Laura's guidance, and tamed down into
what gave the promise of a sensible woman, more than anything that had
hitherto been observed in her; and little addicted to match-making as
Mrs. Edmonstone was, she could not help thinking that Eva was almost
worthy of her dear Guy (she never could expect to find anyone she should
think quite worthy of him, he was too like one of her own children for
that), and on the other hand, how delighted Lord and Lady Kilcoran would
be. It was a very pretty castle in the air; but in the midst of it, the
notion suddenly darted into Mrs. Edmonstone's head, that while she was
thinking of it, it was Amy, not Eveleen, who was constantly with Guy.
Reading and music, roses, botany, and walks on the terrace! She looked
back, and it was still the same. Last Easter vacation, how they used
to study the stars in the evening, to linger in the greenhouse in
the morning nursing the geraniums, and to practise singing over the
school-room piano; how, in a long walk, they always paired together; and
how they seemed to share every pursuit or pleasure.

Now Mrs. Edmonstone was extremely fond of Guy, and trusted him entirely;
but she thought she ought to consider how far this should be allowed.
Feeling that he ought to see more of the world, she had sent him as
much as she could into society, but it had only made him cling closer to
home. Still he was but twenty, it was only a country neighbourhood, and
there was much more for him to see before he could fairly be supposed
to know his own mind. She knew he would act honourably; but she had a
horror of letting him entangle himself with her daughter before he was
fairly able to judge of his own feelings. Or, if this was only behaving
with a brother's freedom and confidence, Mrs. Edmonstone felt it was not
safe for her poor little Amy, who might learn so to depend on him as
to miss him grievously when this intimacy ceased, as it must when he
settled at his own home. It would be right, while it was still time, to
make her remember that they were not brother and sister, and by checking
their present happy, careless, confidential intercourse, to save her
from the chill which seemed to have been cast on Laura. Mrs. Edmonstone
was the more anxious, because she deeply regretted not having been
sufficiently watchful in Laura's case, and perhaps she felt an
unacknowledged conviction that if there was real love on Guy's part, it
would not be hurt by a little reserve on Amy's. Yet to have to speak
to her little innocent daughter on such a matter disturbed her so much,
that she could hardly have set about it, if Amy had not, at that very
moment, knocked at her door.

'My dear, what has kept you up so late?'

'We have been sitting in Eveleen's room, mamma, hearing about her London
life; and then we began to settle our plans for to-morrow, and I came to
ask what you think of them. You know Guy has promised to go and hear
the East-hill singing, and we were proposing, if you did not mind it,
to take the pony-carriage and the donkey, and go in the morning to
East-hill, have luncheon, and get Mary to go with us to the top of the
great down, where we have never been. Guy has been wanting us, for a
long time past, to go and see the view, and saying there is a track
quite smooth enough to drive Charlie to the top.'

Amy wondered at her mother's look of hesitation. In fact, the scheme was
so accordant with their usual habits that it was impossible to find any
objection; yet it all hinged on Guy, and the appointment at East-hill
might lead to a great many more.

'Do you wish us to do anything else, mamma? We don't care about it.'

'No, my dear,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, 'I see no reason against it.
But--' and she felt as if she was making a desperate plunge, 'there is
something I want to say to you.'

Amy stood ready to hear, but Mrs. Edmonstone paused. Another effort, and
she spoke:--

'Amy, my dear, I don't wish to find fault, but I thought of advising you
to take care. About Guy--'

The very brilliant pink which instantly overspread Amy's face made her
mother think her warning more expedient.

'You have been spending a great deal of time with him of late, very
sensibly and pleasantly, I know; I don't blame you at all, my dear, so
you need not look distressed. I only want you to be careful. You know,
though we call him cousin, he is scarcely a relation at all.'

'O mamma, don't go on,' said poor little Amy, hurriedly; 'indeed I am
very sorry!'

For Amy understood that it was imputed to her that she had been forward
and unmaidenly. Mrs. Edmonstone saw her extreme distress, and, grieved
at the pain she had inflicted, tried to reassure her as much as might be
safe.

'Indeed, my dear, you have done nothing amiss. I only intended to tell
you to be cautious for fear you should get into a way of going on which
might not look well. Don't make any great difference, I only meant that
there should not be quite so much singing and gardening alone with him,
or walking in the garden in the evening. You can manage to draw back a
little, so as to keep more with me or with Laura, and I think that will
be the best way.'

Every word, no matter what, increased the burning of poor Amy's cheeks.
A broad accusation of flirting would have been less distressing to many
girls than this mild and delicate warning was to one of such shrinking
modesty and maidenly feeling. She had a sort of consciousness that she
enjoyed partaking in his pursuits, and this made her sense of confusion
and shame overwhelming. What had she been thoughtlessly doing? She could
not speak, she could not look. Her mother put her arm round her, and Amy
hid her head on her shoulder, and held her fast. Mrs. Edmonstone kissed
and caressed the little fluttering bird, then saying, 'Good night, my
own dear child,' unloosed her embrace.

'Good night, dear mamma,' whispered Amy. 'I am very sorry.'

'You need not be sorry, my dear, only be careful. Good night.' And it
would be hard to say whether the mother or the daughter had the hottest
cheeks.

Poor little Amy! what was her dismay as she asked herself, again and
again, what she had been doing and what she was to do? The last was
plain,--she knew what was right, and do it she must. There would be an
end of much that was pleasant, and a fresh glow came over her as she
owned how very, very pleasant; but if it was not quite the thing,--if
mamma did not approve, so it must be. True, all her doings received
their zest from Guy,--her heart bounded at the very sound of his
whistle, she always heard his words through all the din of a whole
party,--nothing was complete without him, nothing good without his
without his approval,--but so much the more shame for her. It was a
kind of seeking him which was of all things the most shocking. So there
should be an end of it,--never mind the rest! Amy knelt down, and prayed
that she might keep her resolution.

She did not know how much of her severity towards herself was learned
from the example that had been two years before her. Nor did she think
whether the seeking had been mutual; she imagined it all her own doing,
and did not guess that she would give pain to Guy by withdrawing herself
from him.

The morning gave vigour to her resolution, and when Laura came to ask
what mamma thought of their project, Amy looked confused--said she
did not know--she believed it would not do. But just then in came her
mother, to say she had been considering of the expedition, and meant to
join it herself. Amy understood, blushed, and was silently grateful.

When Laura wanted to alter her demeanour towards Guy, being perfectly
cool, and not in the least conscious, she had acted with great judgment,
seen exactly what to do, and what to leave undone, so as to keep up
appearances. But it was not so with Amy. She was afraid of herself,
and was in extremes. She would not come down till the last moment,
that there might be no talking in the window. She hardly spoke at
breakfast-time, and adhered closely to Laura and Eveleen when
they wandered in the garden. Presently Charles looked out from the
dressing-room window, calling,--

'Amy, Guy is ready to read.'

'I can't come. Read without me,' she answered, hoping Charlie would not
be vexed, and feeling her face light up again.

The hour for the expedition came, and Amy set off walking with Laura,
because Guy was with Mrs. Edmonstone; but presently, after holding open
a gate for Charlotte, who was on the donkey, he came up to the sisters,
and joined in the conversation. Amy saw something in the hedge--a
foxglove, she believed--it would have done as well if it had been a
nettle--she stopped to gather it, hoping to fall behind them, but they
waited for her. She grew silent, but Guy appealed to her. She ran on to
Charlotte and her donkey, but at the next gate Guy had joined company
again. At last she put herself under her mother's wing, and by keeping
with her did pretty well all the time she was at East-hill. But when
they went on, she was riding the donkey, and it, as donkeys always are,
was resolved on keeping a-head of the walkers, so that as Guy kept by
her side, it was a more absolute tete-a-tete than ever.

At the top of the hill they found a fine view, rich and extensive, broad
woods, fields waving with silvery barley, trim meadows, fair hazy blue
distance, and a dim line of sea beyond. This, as Amy knew, was Guy's
delight, and further, what she would not tell herself, was that he
chiefly cared for showing it to her. It was so natural to call him to
admire everything beautiful, and ask if it was equal to Redclyffe, that
she found herself already turning to him to participate in his pleasure,
as he pointed out all that was to be seen; but she recollected, blushed,
and left her mother to speak. He had much to show. There was a hanging
wood on one side of the hill, whence he had brought her more than one
botanical prize, and she must now visit their native haunts. It was too
great a scramble for Mrs. Edmonstone, with all her good will; Eveleen
was to be kept still, and not to tire herself; Laura did not care for
botany, nor love brambles, and Amy was obliged to stand and look into
the wood, saying, 'No, thank you, I don't think I can,' and then run
back to Mary and Charles; while Charlotte was loudly calling out that it
was delightful fun, and that she was very stupid. In another minute Guy
had overtaken her, and in his gentle, persuasive voice, was telling her
it was very easy, and she must come and see the bird's-nest orchises.
She would have liked it above all things, but she thought it very kind
of Guy not to seem angry when she said, 'No, thank you.'

Mary, after what she had seen yesterday, could not guess at the real
reason, or she would have come with her; but she thought Amy was tired,
and would rather not. Poor Amy was tired, very tired, before the walk
was over, but her weary looks made it worse, for Guy offered her his
arm. 'No thank you,' she said, 'I am getting on very well;' and she
trudged on resolutely, for her mother was in the carriage, and to lag
behind the others would surely make him keep with her.

Mrs. Edmonstone was very sorry for her fatigue, but Amy found it a good
excuse for not wandering in the garden, or joining in the music. It
had been a very uncomfortable day; she hoped she had done right; at any
rate, she had the peaceful conviction of having tried to do so.

The next day, Amy was steady to her resolution. No reading with the two
youths, though Charles scolded her; sitting in her room till Guy was
gone out, going indoors as soon as she heard him return, and in the
evening staying with Charles when her sisters and cousins went out; but
this did not answer, for Guy came and sat by them. She moved away as
soon as possible, but the more inclined she was to linger, the more she
thought she ought to go; so murmuring something about looking for Laura,
she threw on her scarf, and sprung to the window. Her muslin caught on
the bolt, she turned, Guy was already disentangling it, and she met
his eye. It was full of anxious, pleading inquiry, which to her seemed
upbraiding, and, not knowing what to do, she exclaimed, hurriedly,
'Thank you; no harm done!' and darted into the garden, frightened
to feel her face glowing and her heart throbbing. She could not help
looking back to see if he was following. No, he was not attempting it;
he was leaning against the window, and on she hastened, the perception
dawning on her that she was hurting him; he might think her rude,
unkind, capricious, he who had always been so kind to her, and when he
was going away so soon. 'But it is right; it must be done,' said little
Amy to herself, standing still, now that she was out of sight. 'If I
was wrong before, I must bear it now, and he will see the rights of it
sooner or later. The worst of all would be my not doing the very _most_
_right_ to please any body. Besides he can't really care for missing
silly little Amy when he has mamma and Charlie. And he is going away, so
it will be easier to begin right when he comes back. Be that as it may,
it must be done. I'll get Charlie to tell me what he was saying about
the painted glass.'


CHAPTER 13

     Oh, thou child of many prayers!
     Life hath quicksands--life hath snares--
     Care and age come unawares.

     Like the swell of some sweet tune,
     Morning rises into noon,
     May glides onward into June.
                              --Longfellow


'What is the matter with Amy? What makes her so odd?' asked Charles, as
his mother came to wish him good night.

'Poor little dear! don't take any notice,' was all the answer he
received; and seeing that he was to be told no more, he held his peace.

Laura understood without being told. She, too, had thought Guy and Amy
were a great deal together, and combining various observations, she
perceived that her mother must have given Amy a caution. She therefore
set herself, like a good sister, to shelter Amy as much as she could,
save her from awkward situations, and, above all, to prevent her altered
manner from being remarked. This was the less difficult, as Eveleen was
subdued and languid, and more inclined to lie on the sofa and read than
to look out for mirth.

As to poor little Amy, her task was in one way become less hard, for Guy
had ceased to haunt her, and seemed to make it his business to avoid all
that could cause her embarrassment; but in another way it hurt her
much more, for she now saw the pain she was causing. If obliged to do
anything for her, he would give a look as if to ask pardon, and then
her rebellious heart would so throb with joy as to cause her dismay at
having let herself fall into so hateful a habit as wishing to attract
attention. What a struggle it was not to obey the impulse of turning
to him for the smile with which he would greet anything in conversation
that interested them both, and how wrong she thought it not to be more
consoled when she saw him talking to Eveleen, or to any of the others,
as if he was doing very well without her. This did not often happen; he
was evidently out of spirits, and thoughtful, and Amy was afraid some
storm might be gathering respecting Mr. Sebastian Dixon, about whom
there always seemed to be some uncomfortable mystery.

Mrs. Edmonstone saw everything, and said nothing. She was very sorry for
them both, but she could not interfere, and could only hope she had done
right, and protected Amy as far as she was able. She was vexed now and
then to see Eveleen give knowing smiles and significant glances, feared
that she guessed what was going on, and wondered whether to give her a
hint not to add to Amy's confusion; but her great dislike to enter on
such a subject prevailed, and she left things to take their course,
thinking that, for once, Guy's departure would be a relief.

The approach of anything in the shape of a party of pleasure was one
of the best cures for Eveleen's ailments, and the evening before Mary's
tea-drinking, she was in high spirits, laughing and talking a great
deal, and addressing herself chiefly to Guy. He exerted himself to
answer, but it did not come with life and spirit, his countenance did
not light up, and at last Eveleen said, 'Ah! I see I am a dreadful bore.
I'll go away, and leave you to repose.'

'Lady Eveleen!' he exclaimed, in consternation; 'what have I been
doing--what have I been thinking of?'

'Nay, that is best known to yourself, though I think perhaps I could
divine,' said she, with that archness and grace that always seemed
to remove the unfavourable impression that her proceedings might have
given. 'Shall I?'

'No, no,' he answered, colouring crimson, and then trying to laugh off
his confusion, and find some answer, but without success; and Eveleen,
perceiving her aunt's eyes were upon her, suddenly recollected that she
had gone quite as far as decorum allowed, and made as masterly a retreat
as the circumstances permitted.

'Well, I have always thought a "penny for your thoughts" the boldest
offer in the world, and now it is proved.'

This scene made Mrs. Edmonstone doubly annoyed, the next morning, at
waking with a disabling headache, which made it quite impossible for
her to attempt going to Mary Ross's fete. With great sincerity, Amy
entreated to be allowed to remain at home, but she thought it would
only be making the change more remarkable; she did not wish Mary to be
disappointed; among so many ladies, Amy could easily avoid getting into
difficulties; while Laura would, she trusted, be able to keep Eveleen in
order.

The day was sunny, and all went off to admiration. The gentlemen
presided over the cricket, and the ladies over 'blind man's buff' and
'thread my needle;' but perhaps Mary was a little disappointed that,
though she had Sir Guy's bodily presence, the peculiar blitheness and
animation which he usually shed around him were missing. He sung at
church, he filled tiny cups from huge pitchers of tea, he picked up
and pacified a screaming child that had tumbled off a gate--he was
as good-natured and useful as possible, but he was not his joyous and
brilliant self.

Amy devoted herself to the smallest fry, played assiduously for three
quarters of an hour with a fat, grave boy of three, who stood about a
yard-and-a-half from her, solemnly throwing a ball into her lap, and
never catching it again, took charge of many caps and bonnets, and
walked about with Louisa Harper, a companion whom no one envied her.

In conclusion, the sky clouded over, it became chilly, and a shower
began to fall. Laura pursued Eveleen, and Amy hunted up Charlotte from
the utmost parts of the field, where she was the very centre of 'winding
up the clock,' and sorely against her will, dragged her off the wet
grass. About sixty yards from the house, Guy met them with an umbrella,
which, without speaking, he gave to Charlotte. Amy said, 'Thank you,'
and again came that look. Charlotte rattled on, and hung back to talk to
Guy, so that Amy could not hasten on without leaving her shelterless.
It may be believed that she had the conversation to herself. At the
door they met Mary and her father, going to dismiss their flock, who had
taken refuge in a cart-shed at the other end of the field. Guy asked
if he could be of any use; Mr. Ross said no, and Mary begged Amy and
Charlotte to go up to her room, and change their wet shoes.

There, Amy would fain have stayed, flushed and agitated as those looks
made her; but Charlotte was in wild spirits, delighted at having been
caught in the rain, and obliged to wear shoes a mile too large, and
eager to go and share the fun in the drawing-room. There, in the
twilight, they found a mass of young ladies herded together, making a
confused sound of laughter, and giggling, while at the other end of the
room, Amy could just see Guy sitting alone in a dark corner.

Charlotte's tongue was soon the loudest in the medley, to which Amy did
not at first attend, till she heard Charlotte saying--

'Ah! you should hear Guy sing that.'

'What?' she whispered to Eveleen.

'"The Land of the Leal,"' was the answer.

'I wish he would sing it now,' said Ellen Harper.

'This darkness would be just the time for music,' said Eveleen; 'it is
quite a witching time.'

'Why don't you ask him?' said Ellen. 'Come, Charlotte, there's a good
girl, go and ask him.'

'Shall I?' said Charlotte, whispering and giggling with an affectation
of shyness.

'No, no, Charlotte,' said Laura.

'No! why not?' said Eveleen. 'Don't be afraid, Charlotte.'

'He is so grave,' said Charlotte.

Eveleen had been growing wilder and less guarded all day, and now,
partly liking to tease and surprise the others, and partly emboldened by
the darkness, she answered,--

'It will do him all manner of good. Here, Charlotte, I'll tell you how
to make him. Tell him Amy wants him to do it.'

'Ay! tell him so,' cried Ellen, and they laughed in a manner that
overpowered Amy with horror and shyness. She sprung to seize Charlotte,
and stop her; she could not speak, but Louisa Harper caught her arm, and
Laura's grave orders were drowned in a universal titter, and suppressed
exclamation,--'Go, Charlotte, go; we will never forgive you if you
don't!'

'Stop!' Amy struggled to cry, breaking from Louisa, and springing up in
a sort of agony. Guy, who had such a horror of singing anything deep in
pathos or religious feeling to mixed or unfit auditors, asked to do
so in her name! 'Stop! oh, Charlotte!' It was too late; Charlotte,
thoughtless with merriment, amused at vexing Laura, set up with
applause, and confident in Guy's good nature, had come to him, and was
saying,--'Oh, Guy! Amy wants you to come and sing us the "Land of the
Leal."'

Amy saw him start up. What, did he think of her? Oh, what! He stepped
towards them. The silly girls cowered as if they had roused a lion. His
voice was not loud--it was almost as gentle as usual; but it quivered,
as if it was hard to keep it so, and, as well as she could see, his
face was rigid and stern as iron. 'Did you wish it?' he said, addressing
himself to her, as if she was the only person present.

Her breath was almost gone. 'Oh! I beg your pardon,' she faltered. She
could not exculpate herself, she saw it looked like an idle, almost like
an indecorous trick, unkind, everything abhorrent to her and to him,
especially in the present state of things. His eyes were on her, his
head bent towards her; he waited for an answer. 'I beg your pardon,' was
all she could say.

There was--yes, there was--one of those fearful flashes of his kindling
eye. She felt as if she was shrinking to nothing; she heard him say, in
a low, hoarse tone, 'I am afraid I cannot;' then Mr. Ross, Mary, lights
came in; there was a bustle and confusion, and when next she was clearly
conscious, Laura was ordering the carriage.

When it came, there was an inquiry for Sir Guy.

'He is gone home,' said Mr. Ross. 'I met him in the passage, and wished
him good night.'

Mr. Ross did not add what he afterwards told his daughter, that Guy
seemed not to know whether it was raining or not; that he had put an
umbrella into his hand, and seen him march off at full speed, through
the pouring rain, with it under his arm.

The ladies entered the carriage. Amy leant back in her corner, Laura
forbore to scold either Eveleen or Charlotte till she could have them
separately; Eveleen was silent, because she was dismayed at the effect
she had produced, and Charlotte, because she knew there was a scolding
impending over her.

They found no one in the drawing-room but Mr. Edmonstone and Charles,
who said they had heard the door open, and Guy run up-stairs, but they
supposed he was wet through, as he had not made his appearance. It was
very inhospitable in the girls not to have made room for him in the
carriage.

Amy went to see how her mother was, longing to tell her whole trouble,
but found her asleep, and was obliged to leave it till the morrow. Poor
child, she slept very little, but she would not go to her mother before
breakfast, lest she should provoke the headache into staying another
day. Guy was going by the train at twelve o'clock, and she was resolved
that something should be done; so, as soon as her father had wished Guy
goodbye, and ridden off to his justice meeting, she entreated her mother
to come into the dressing-room, and hear what she had to say.

'Oh, mamma! the most dreadful thing has happened!' and, hiding her face,
she told her story, ending with a burst of weeping as she said how Guy
was displeased. 'And well he might be! That after all that has vexed him
this week, I should tease him with such a trick. Oh, mamma, what must he
think?'

'My dear, there was a good deal of silliness; but you need not treat it
as if it was so very shocking.'

'Oh, but it hurt him! He was angry, and now I know how it is, he is
angry with himself for being angry. Oh, how foolish I have been! What
shall I do?'

'Perhaps we can let him know it was not your fault,' said Mrs.
Edmonstone, thinking it might be very salutary for Charlotte to send her
to confess.

'Do you think so?' cried Amy, eagerly. 'Oh! that would make it all
comfortable. Only it was partly mine, for not keeping Charlotte in
better order, and we must not throw it all on her and Eveleen. You think
we may tell him?'

'I think he ought not to be allowed to fancy you let your name be so
used.'

A message came for Mrs. Edmonstone, and while she was attending to it,
Amy hastened away, fully believing that her mother had authorized her
to go and explain it to Guy, and ask his pardon. It was what she thought
the natural thing to do, and she was soon by his side, as she saw him
pacing, with folded arms, under the wall.

Much had lately been passing in Guy's mind. He had gone on floating on
the sunny stream of life at Hollywell, too happy to observe its especial
charm till the change in Amy's manner cast a sudden gloom over all. Not
till then did he understand his own feelings, and recognize in her the
being he had dreamt of. Amy was what made Hollywell precious to him.
Sternly as he was wont to treat his impulses, he did not look on his
affection as an earthborn fancy, liable to draw him from higher things,
and, therefore, to be combated; he deemed her rather a guide and guard
whose love might arm him, soothe him, and encourage him. Yet he had
little hope, for he did not do justice to his powers of inspiring
affection; no one could distrust his temper and his character as much as
he did himself, and with his ancestry and the doom he believed attached
to his race, with his own youth and untried principles, with his
undesirable connections, and the reserve he was obliged to exercise
regarding them, he considered himself as objectionable a person as could
well be found, as yet untouched by any positive crime, and he respected
the Edmonstones too much to suppose that these disadvantages could be
counterbalanced for a moment by his position; indeed, he interpreted
Amy's coolness by supposing that there was a desire to discourage his
attentions. No poor tutor or penniless cousin ever felt he was doing
a more desperate thing in confessing an attachment, than did Sir Guy
Morville when he determined that all should be told, at the risk of
losing her for ever, and closing against himself the doors of his happy
home. It was not right and fair by her parents, he thought, so to regard
their daughter, and live in the same house with his sentiments unavowed,
and as to Amy herself, if his feelings had reached such a pitch of
sensitiveness that he must needs behave like an angry lion, because her
name had been dragged into an idle joke, it was high time it should
be explained, unpropitious as the moment might be for declaring his
attachment, when he had manifested such a temper as any woman might
dread. Thus he made up his mind that, come of it what might, he would
not leave Hollywell that day till the truth was told. Just as he was
turning to find Mrs. Edmonstone and 'put his fate to the touch,' a
little figure stood beside him, and Amy's own sweet, low tones were
saying, imploringly,--

'Guy, I wanted to tell you how sorry I am you were so teased last
night.'

'Don't think of it!' said he, taken extremely by surprise

'It was our fault, I could not stop it; I should have kept Charlotte in
better order, but they would not let her hear me. I knew it was what you
dislike particularly, and I was very sorry.'

'You--I was--I was. But no matter now. Amy,' he added earnestly, 'may I
ask you to walk on with me a little way? I must say something to you.'

Was this what 'mamma' objected to? Oh no! Amy felt she must stay now,
and, in truth, she was glad it was right, though her heart beat fast,
fast, faster, as Guy, pulling down a long, trailing branch of Noisette
rose, and twisting it in his hand, paused for a few moments, then spoke
collectedly, and without hesitation, though with the tremulousness of
subdued agitation, looking the while not at her, but straight before
him.

'You ought to be told why your words and looks have such effect on me as
to make me behave as I did last night. Shame on me for such conduct!
I know its evil, and how preposterous it must make what I have to tell
you. I don't know now long it has been, but almost ever since I came
here, a feeling has been growing up in me towards you, such as I can
never have for any one else.'

The flame rushed into Amy's cheeks, and no one could have told what she
felt, as he paused again, and then went on speaking more quickly, as if
his emotion was less under control.

'If ever there is to be happiness for me on earth, it must be through
you; as you, for the last three years, have been all my brightness here.
What I feel for you is beyond all power of telling you, Amy! But I know
full well all there is against me--I know I am untried, and how can I
dare to ask one born to brightness and happiness to share the doom of my
family?'

Amy's impulse was that anything shared with him would be welcome; but
the strength of the feeling stifled the power of expression, and she
could not utter a word.

'It seems selfish even to dream of it,' he proceeded, 'yet I must,--I
cannot help it. To feel that I had your love to keep me safe, to know
that you watched for me, prayed for me, were my own, my Verena,--oh Amy!
it would be more joy than I have ever dared to hope for. But mind,' he
added, after another brief pause, 'I would not even ask you to answer me
now, far less to bind yourself, even if--if it were possible. I know
my trial is not come; and were I to render myself, by positive act,
unworthy even to think of you, it would be too dreadful to have
entangled you, and made you unhappy. No. I speak now, because I ought
not to remain here with such feelings unknown to your father and
mother.'

At that moment, close on the other side of the box-tree clump, were
heard the wheels of Charles's garden-chair, and Charlotte's voice
talking to him, as he made his morning tour round the garden. Amy flew
off, like a little bird to its nest, and never stopped till, breathless
and crimson, she darted into the dressing room, threw herself on her
knees, and with her face hidden in her mother's lap, exclaimed in
panting, half-smothered, whispers, which needed all Mrs. Edmonstone's
intuition to make them intelligible,--

'O mamma, mamma, he says--he says he loves me!'

Perhaps Mrs. Edmonstone was not so very much surprised; but she had
no time to do more than raise and kiss the burning face, and see, at
a moment's glance, how bright was the gleam of frightened joy, in the
downcast eye and troubled smile; when two knocks, given rapidly, were
heard, and almost at the same moment the door opened, and Guy stood
before her, his face no less glowing than that which Amy buried again on
her mother's knee.

'Come in, Guy,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, as he stood doubtful for a moment
at the door, and there was a sweet smile of proud, joyful affection on
her face, conveying even more encouragement than her tone. Amy raised
her head, and moved as if to leave the room.

'Don't go,' he said, earnestly, 'unless you wish it.'

Amy did not wish it, especially now that she had her mother to save
her confusion, and she sat on a footstool, holding her mother's hand,
looking up to Guy, whenever she felt bold enough, and hanging down her
head when he said what showed how much more highly he prized her than
silly little Amy could deserve.

'You know what I am come to say,' he began, standing by the
mantel-shelf, as was his wont in his conferences with Mrs. Edmonstone;
and he repeated the same in substance as he had said to Amy in the
garden, though with less calmness and coherence, and far more warmth of
expression, as if, now that she was protected by her mother's presence,
he exercised less force in self-restraint.

Never was anyone happier than was Mrs. Edmonstone; loving Guy so
heartily, seeing the beauty of his character in each word, rejoicing
that such affection should be bestowed on her little Amy, exulting
in her having won such a heart, and touched and gratified by the free
confidence with which both had at once hastened to pour out all to her,
not merely as a duty, but in the full ebullition of their warm young
love. The only difficulty was to bring herself to speak with prudence
becoming her position, whilst she was sympathizing with them as ardently
as if she was not older than both of them put together. When Guy spoke
of himself as unproved, and undeserving of trust, it was all she could
do to keep from declaring there was no one whom she thought so safe.

'While you go on as you have begun, Guy?'

'If you tell me to hope! Oh, Mrs. Edmonstone, is it wrong that an
earthly incentive to persevere should have power which sometimes seems
greater than the true one?'

'There is the best and strongest ground of all for trusting you,' said
she. 'If you spoke keeping right only for Amy's sake, then I might fear;
but when she is second, there is confidence indeed.'

'If speaking were all!' said Guy.

'There is one thing I ought to say,' she proceeded; 'you know you are
very young, and though--though I don't know that I can say so in my own
person, a prudent woman would say, that you have seen so little of the
world, that you may easily meet a person you would like better than such
a quiet little dull thing as your guardian's daughter.'

The look that he cast on Amy was worth seeing, and then, with a smile,
he answered--

'I am glad you don't say it in your own person.'

'It is very bold and presumptuous in me to say anything at all in papa's
absence' said Mrs. Edmonstone, smiling; 'but I am sure he will think in
the same way, that things ought to remain as they are, and that it is
our duty not to allow you to be, or to feel otherwise than entirely at
liberty.'

'I dare say it may be right in you,' said Guy, grudgingly. 'However,
I must not complain. It is too much that you should not reject me
altogether.'

To all three that space was as bright a gleam of sunshine as ever
embellished life, so short as to be free from a single care, a perfectly
serenely happy present, the more joyous from having been preceded by
vexations, each of the two young things learning that there was love
where it was most precious. Guy especially, isolated and lonely as he
stood in life, with his fear and mistrust of himself, was now not only
allowed to love, and assured beyond his hopes that Amy returned his
affection, but found himself thus welcomed by the mother, and gathered
into the family where his warm feelings had taken up their abode, while
he believed himself regarded only as a guest and a stranger.

They talked on, with happy silences between, Guy standing all the time
with his branch of roses in his hand, and Amy looking up to him, and
trying to realize it, and to understand why she was so very, very happy.

No one thought of time till Charlotte rushed in like a whirlwind,
crying--

'Oh, here you are! We could not think what had become of you. There has
Deloraine been at the door these ten minutes, and Charlie sent me to
find you, for he says if you are too late for Mrs. Henley's dinner, she
will write such an account of you to Philip as you will never get over.'

Very little of this was heard, there was only the instinctive
consternation of being too late. They started up, Guy threw down his
roses, caught Amy's hand and pressed it, while she bent down her head,
hiding the renewed blush; he dashed out of the room, and up to his own,
while Mrs. Edmonstone and Charlotte hurried down. In another second,
he was back again, and once more Amy felt the pressure of his hand on
hers--

'Good-bye!' he said; and she whispered another 'Good-bye!' the only
words she had spoken.

One moment more he lingered,--

'My Verena!' said he; but the hurrying sounds in the hall warned
him--he sprang down to the drawing-room. Even Charles was on the alert,
standing, leaning against the table, and looking eager; but Guy had not
time to let him speak, he only shook hands, and wished good-bye, with a
sort of vehement agitated cordiality, concealed by his haste.

'Where's Amy?' cried Charlotte. 'Amy! Is not she coming to wish him
good-bye?'

He said something, of which 'up-stairs' was the only audible word; held
Mrs. Edmonstone's hand fast, while she said, in a low voice--'You shall
hear from papa to-morrow,' then sprung on his horse, and looked up. Amy
was at the window, he saw her head bending forward, under its veil of
curls, in the midst of the roses round the lattice; their eyes met once
more, he gave one beamy smile, then rode off at full speed, with Bustle
racing after him, while Amy threw herself on her knees by her bed, and
with hands clasped over her face, prayed that she might be thankful
enough, and never be unworthy of him.

Every one wanted to get rid of every one else except Mrs. Edmonstone;
for all but Charlotte guessed at the state of the case, and even she
perceived that something was going on. Lady Eveleen was in a state of
great curiosity; but she had mercy, she knew that they must tell each
other before it came to her turn, and very good-naturedly she invited
Charlotte to come into the garden with her, and kept her out of the way
by a full account of her last fancy ball, given with so much spirit and
humour that Charlotte could not help attending.

Charles and Laura gained little by this kind manoeuvre, for their mother
was gone up again to Amy, and they could only make a few conjectures.
Charles nursed his right hand, and asked Laura how hers felt? She looked
up from her work, to which she had begun to apply herself diligently,
and gazed at him inquiringly, as if to see whether he intended anything.

'For my part,' he added, 'I certainly thought he meant to carry off the
hands of some of the family.'

'I suppose we shall soon hear it explained,' said Laura, quietly.

'Soon! If I had an many available legs as you, would I wait for other
people's soon?'

'I should think she had rather be left to mamma,' said Laura, going on
with her work.

'Then you do think there is something in it?' said Charles, peering up
in her face; but he saw he was teasing her, recollected that she
had long seemed out of spirits, and forbore to say any more. He was,
however, too impatient to remain longer quiet, and presently Laura saw
him adjusting his crutches.

'O Charlie! I am sure it will only be troublesome.'

'I am going to my own room,' said Charles, hopping off. 'I presume you
don't wish to forbid that.'

His room had a door into the dressing-room, so that it was an excellent
place for discovering all from which they did not wish to exclude him,
and he did not believe he should be unwelcome; for though he might
pretend it was all fun and curiosity, he heartily loved his little Amy.

The tap of his crutches, and the slow motion with which he raised
himself from step to step, was heard, and Amy, who was leaning against
her mother, started up, exclaiming--

'O mamma, here comes Charlie! May I tell him? I am sure I can't meet him
without.'

'I suspect he has guessed it already,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, going
to open the door, just as he reached the head of the stairs, and then
leaving them.

'Well, Amy,' said he, looking full at her carnation cheeks, 'are you
prepared to see me turn lead-coloured, and fall into convulsions, like
the sister with the spine complaint?'

'O Charlie! You know it. But how?'

Amy was helping him to the sofa, laid him down, and sat by him on the
old footstool; he put his arm round her neck, and she rested her head on
his shoulder.

'Well, Amy,' I give you joy, my small woman,' said he, talking the more
nonsense because of the fullness in his throat; 'and I hope you give me
credit for amazing self-denial in so doing.'

'O Charlie--dear Charlie!' and she kissed him, she could not blush more,
poor little thing, for she had already reached her utmost capability of
redness--'it is no such thing.'

'No such thing? What has turned you into a turkey-cock all at once or
what made him nearly squeeze off my unfortunate fingers? No such thing,
indeed!'

'I mean--I mean, it is not _that_. We are so very young, and I am so
silly.'

'Is that his reason?'

'You must make me so much better and wiser. Oh, if I could but be good
enough!'

For that matter, I don't think any one else would be good enough to take
care of such a silly little thing. But what is the that, that it is, or
is not?'

'Nothing now, only when we are older. At least, you know papa has not
heard it.'

'Provided my father gives his consent, as the Irish young lady added to
all her responses through the marriage service. But tell me all--all you
like, I mean--for you will have lovers' secrets now, Amy.'

Mrs. Edmonstone had, meantime, gone down to Laura. Poor Laura, as soon
as her brother had left the room, she allowed the fixed composure of her
face to relax into a restless, harassed, almost miserable expression,
and walked up and down with agitated steps.

'O wealth, wealth!'--her lips formed the words, without uttering
them--'what cruel differences it makes! All smooth here! Young, not
to be trusted, with strange reserves, discreditable connections,--that
family,--that fearful temper, showing itself even to her! All will be
overlooked! Papa will be delighted, I know he will! And how is it with
us? Proved, noble, superior, owned as such by all, as Philip is, yet,
for that want of hateful money, he would be spurned. And, for this--for
this--the love that has grown up with our lives must be crushed down and
hidden--our life is wearing out in wearying self-watching!'

The lock of the door turned, and Laura had resumed her ordinary
expression before it opened, and her mother came in: but there was
anything but calmness beneath, for the pang of self-reproach had
come--'Was it thus that she prepared to hear these tidings of her
sister?'

'Well, Laura,' began Mrs. Edmonstone, with the eager smile of one
bringing delightful news, and sure of sympathy.

'It is so, then?' said Laura. 'Dear, dear, little Amy! I hope--' and
her eyes filled with tears; but she had learnt to dread any outbreak of
feeling, conquered it in a minute, and said--

'What has happened? How does it stand?'

'It stands, at least as far as I can say without papa, as the dear
Guy very rightly and wisely wished it to stand. There is no positive
engagement, they are both too young; but he thought it was not right to
remain here without letting us know his sentiments towards her.'

A pang shot through Laura; but it was but for a moment. Guy might doubt
where Philip need never do so. Her mother went on,--

'Their frankness and confidence are most beautiful. We know dear little
Amy could not help it; but there was something very sweet, very noble,
in his way of telling all.'

Another pang for Laura. But no! it was only poverty that was to blame.
Philip would speak as plainly if his prospects were as fair.

'Oh, I hope it will do well,' said she.

'It must,--it will!' cried Mrs. Edmonstone, giving way to her joyful
enthusiasm of affection. 'It is nonsense to doubt, knowing him as we do.
There is not a man in the world with whom I could be so happy to trust
her.'

Laura could not hear Guy set above all men in the world, and she
remembered Philip's warning to her, two years ago.

'There is much that is very good and very delightful about him,' she
said, hesitatingly.

'You are thinking of the Morville temper,' said her mother; 'but I am
not afraid of it. A naturally hot temper, controlled like his by strong
religious principle, is far safer than a cool easy one, without the
principle.'

Laura thought this going too far, but she felt some compensation due
to Guy, and acknowledged how strongly he was actuated by principle.
However--and it was well for her--they could not talk long, for Eveleen
and Charlotte were approaching, and she hastily asked what was to be
done about telling Eva, who could not fail to guess something.

'We must tell her, and make her promise absolute secrecy,' said Mrs.
Edmonstone. 'I will speak to her myself; but I must wait till I have
seen papa. There is no doubt of what he will say, but we have been
taking quite liberties enough in his absence.'

Laura did not see her sister till luncheon, when Amy came down, with
a glow on her cheeks that made her so much prettier than usual, that
Charles wished Guy could have seen her. She said little, and ran up
again as soon as she could. Laura followed her; and the two sisters
threw their arms fondly round each other, and kissed repeatedly.

'Mamma has told you? said Amy. 'Oh, it has made me so very happy; and
every one is so kind.'

'Dear, dear Amy!'

'I'm only afraid--'

'He has begun so well--'

'Oh, nonsense! You cannot think I could be so foolish as to be afraid
for him! Oh no! But if he should take me for more than I am worth. O
Laura, Laura! What shall I do to be as good and sensible as you! I must
not be silly little Amy any more.'

'Perhaps he likes you best as you are?'

'I don't mean cleverness: I can't help that,--and he knows how stupid
I am,--but I am afraid he thinks there is more worth in me. Don't you
know, he has a sort of sunshine in his eyes and mind, that makes all
he cares about seem to him brighter and better than it really is. I am
afraid he is only dressing me up with that sunshine.'

'It must be strange sunshine that you want to make you better and
brighter than you are,' said Laura, kissing her.

'I'll tell you what it is,' said Amy folding her hands, and standing
with her face raised, 'it won't do now, as you told me once, to have no
bones in my character. I must learn to be steady and strong, if I can;
for if this is to be, he will depend on me, I don't mean, to advise him,
for he knows better than anybody, but to be--you know what--if vexation,
or trouble was to come! And Laura, think if he was to depend on me, and
I was to fail! Oh, do help me to have firmness and self-command, like
you!'

'It was a long time ago that we talked of your wanting bones.'

'Yes, before he came; but I never forget it.'

Laura was obliged to go out with Eveleen. All went their different ways;
and Amy had the garden to herself to cool her cheeks in. But this was a
vain operation, for a fresh access of burning was brought on while
Laura was helping her to dress for dinner, when her father's quick step
sounded in the passage. He knocked at her door, and as she opened it, he
kissed her on each cheek; and throwing his arm round her, exclaimed,--

'Well, Miss Amy, you have made a fine morning's work of it! A pretty
thing, for young ladies to be accepting offers while papa is out of the
way. Eh, Laura?'

Amy knew this was a manifestation of extreme delight; but it was not
very pleasant to Laura.

'So you have made a conquest!' proceeded Mr. Edmonstone; 'and I heartily
wish you joy of it, my dear. He is as amiable and good-natured a youth
as I would wish to see; and I should say the same if he had not a
shilling in the world.'

Laura's heart bounded; but she knew, whatever her father might fancy,
the reality would be very different if Guy were as poor as Philip.

'I shall write to him this very evening,' he continued, 'and tell him,
if he has the bad taste to like such a silly little white thing, I am
not the man to stand in his way. Eh, Amy? Shall I tell him so?'

'Tell him what you please, dear papa.'

'Eh? What I please? Suppose I say we can't spare our little one, and he
may go about his business?'

'I'm not afraid of you, papa.'

'Come, she's a good little thing--sha'n't be teased. Eh, Laura? what
do you think of it, our beauty, to see your younger sister impertinent
enough to set up a lover, while your pink cheeks are left in the lurch?'

Laura not being wont to make playful repartees, her silence passed
unnoticed. Her feelings were mixed; but perhaps the predominant one was
satisfaction that it was not for her pink cheeks that she was valued.

It had occurred to Mrs. Edmonstone that it was a curious thing, after
her attempt at scheming for Eveleen, to have to announce to her that Guy
was attached to her own daughter; nay, after the willingness Eveleen had
manifested to be gratified with any attention Guy showed her, it seemed
doubtful for a moment whether the intelligence would be pleasing to her.
However, Eveleen was just the girl to like men better than women, and
never to be so happy as when on the verge of flirting; it would probably
have been the same with any other youth that came in her, way, and Guy
might fully be acquitted of doing more than paying her the civilities
which were requisite from him to any young lady visitor. He had, two
years ago, when a mere boy, idled, laughed, and made fun with her, but
his fear of trifling away his time had made him draw back, before he had
involved himself in what might have led to anything further; and during
the present visit, no one could doubt that he was preoccupied with
Amy. At any rate, it was right that Eveleen should know the truth, in
confidence, if only to prevent her from talking of any surmises she
might have.

Mrs. Edmonstone was set at ease in a moment. Eveleen was enchanted,
danced round and round the room, declared they would be the most
charming couple in the world; she had seen it all along; she was so
delighted they had come to an understanding at last, poor things, they
were so miserable all last week; and she must take credit to herself for
having done it all. Was not her aunt very much obliged to her?

'My dear Eva,' exclaimed Mrs. Edmonstone, into whose mind the notion
never entered that any one could boast of such a proceeding as hers last
night; but the truth was that Eveleen, feeling slightly culpable, was
delighted that all had turned out so well, and resolved to carry it off
with a high hand.

'To be sure! Poor little Amy! when she looked ready to sink into the
earth, she little knew her obligations to me! Was not it the cleverest
thing in the world? It was just the touch they wanted--the very thing!'

'My dear, I am glad I know that you are sometimes given to talking
nonsense,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, laughing.

'And you won't believe me serious? You won't be grateful to me for my
lucky hit' said Eveleen, looking comically injured. 'Oh auntie, that is
very hard, when I shall believe to my dying day that I did it!'

'Why, Eva, if I thought it had been done by design, I should find it
very hard to forgive you for it at all, rather hard even to accept Guy,
so you had better not try to disturb my belief that it was only that
spirit of mischief that makes you now and then a little mad.'

'Oh dear! what a desperate scolding you must have given poor little
Charlotte!' exclaimed Eveleen, quaintly.

Mrs. Edmonstone could not help laughing as she confessed that she had
altogether forgotten Charlotte.

'Then you will. You'll go on forgetting her,' cried Eveleen. 'She only
did what she was told, and did not know the malice of it. There, you're
relenting! There's a good aunt! And now, if you won't be grateful, as
any other mamma in the world would have been, and as I calculated on,
when I pretended to have been a prudent, designing woman, instead of a
wild mischievous monkey at least you'll forgive me enough to invite me
to the wedding. Oh! what a beauty of a wedding it will be! I'd come from
Kilcoran all the way on my bare knees to see it. And you'll let me be
bridesmaid, and have a ball after it?'

'There is no saying what I may do, if you'll only be a good girl, and
hold your tongue. I don't want to prevent your telling anything to
your mamma, of course, but pray don't let it go any further. Don't let
Maurice hear it, I have especial reasons for wishing it should not be
known. You know it is not even an engagement, and nothing must be done
which can make Guy feel in the least bound?'

Eveleen promised, and Mrs. Edmonstone knew that she had sense and proper
feeling enough for her promise to deserve trust.


CHAPTER 14

     For falsehood now doth flow,
     And subject faith doth ebbe,
     Which would not be, if reason ruled,
     Or wisdom weav'd the webbe.

     The daughter of debate,
     That eke discord doth sowe,
     Shal reape no gaine where former rule
     Hath taught stil peace to growe.
                        --QUEEN ELIZABETH


                                'ATHENAEUM TERRACE,
                                 ST MILDRED'S,
                                 August 4th,
'MY DEAR PHILIP,--Thank you for returning the books, which were brought
safely by Sir Guy. I am sorry you do not agree in my estimate of them. I
should have thought your strong sense would have made you perceive that
reasoning upon fact, and granting nothing without tangible proof, were
the best remedy for a dreamy romantic tendency to the weakness and
credulity which are in the present day termed poetry and faith. It is
curious to observe how these vague theories reduce themselves to the
absurd when brought into practice. There are two Miss Wellwoods here,
daughters of that unfortunate man who fell in a duel with old Sir Guy
Morville, who seem to make it their business to become the general
subject of animadversion, taking pauper children into their house, where
they educate them in a way to unfit them for their station, and teach
them to observe a sort of monastic rule, preaching the poor people in
the hospital to death, visiting the poor at all sorts of strange hours.
Dr Henley actually found one of them, at twelve o'clock at night, in a
miserable lodging-house, filled with the worst description of inmates.
Quite young women, too, and with no mother or elder person to direct
them; but it is the fashion among the attendants at the new chapel to
admire them. This subject has diverted me from what I intended to say
with respect to the young baronet. Your description agrees with all I
have hitherto seen, though I own I expected a Redclyffe Morville to
have more of the "heros de roman", or rather of the grand tragic cast of
figure, as, if I remember right, was the case with this youth's
father, a much finer and handsomer young man. Sir Guy is certainly
gentlemanlike, and has that sort of agreeability which depends on high
animal spirits. I should think him clever, but superficial; and with his
mania for music, he can hardly fail to be merely an accomplished man. In
spite of all you said of the Redclyffe temper, I was hardly prepared to
find it so ready to flash forth on the most inexplicable provocations.
It is like walking on a volcano. I have seen him two or three times draw
himself up, bite his lip, and answer with an effort and a sharpness that
shows how thin a crust covers the burning lava; but I acknowledge that
he has been very civil and attentive, and speaks most properly of what
he owes to you. I only hope he will not be hurt by the possession of so
large a property so early in life, and I have an idea that our good aunt
at Hollywell has done a good deal to raise his opinion of himself. We
shall, of course, show him every civility in our power, and give him the
advantage of intellectual society at our house. His letters are directed
to this place, as you know South Moor Farm is out of the cognizance
of the post. They seem to keep up a brisk correspondence with him from
Hollywell. Few guardians' letters are, I should guess, honoured with
such deepening colour as his while reading one from my uncle. He tells
me he has been calling at Stylehurst; it is a pity, for his sake, that
Colonel Harewood is at home, for the society of those sons is by no
means advisable for him. I can hardly expect to offer him what is likely
to be as agreeable to him as the conversation and amusements of Edward
and Tom Harewood, who are sure to be at home for the St. Mildred's
races. I hear Tom has been getting into fresh scrapes at Cambridge.

                                 'Your affectionate sister,
                                          'MARGARET HENLEY.'


                                 'ATHENAEUM TERRACE.
                                  ST. MILDRED'S,
                                  Sept. 6th.
'MY DEAR PHILIP,--No one can have a greater dislike than myself to what
is called mischief-making; therefore I leave it entirely to you to make
what use you please of the following facts, which have fallen under my
notice. Sir Guy Morville has been several times at St. Mildred's, in
company with Tom Harewood, and more than once alone with some strange
questionable-looking people; and not many days ago, my maid met him
coming out of a house in one of the low streets, which it is hard to
assign a motive for his visiting. This, however, might be accident, and
I should never have thought of mentioning it, but for a circumstance
that occurred this morning. I had occasion to visit Grey's Bank, and
while waiting in conversation with Mr. Grey, a person came in whom I
knew to be a notorious gambler, and offered a cheque to be changed. As
it lay on the counter, my eye was caught by the signature. It was my
uncle's. I looked again, and could not be mistaken. It was a draft for
£30 on Drummond, dated the 12th of August, to Sir Guy Morville, signed
C. Edmonstone, and endorsed in Sir Guy's own writing, with the name of
John White. In order that I might be certain that I was doing the poor
young man no injustice, I outstayed the man, and asked who he was,
when Mr. Grey confirmed me in my belief that it was one Jack White,
a jockeying sort of man who attends all the races in the country, and
makes his livelihood by betting and gambling. And now, my dear brother,
make what use of this fact you think fit, though I fear there is
little hope of rescuing the poor youth from the fatal habits which are
hereditary in his family, and must be strong indeed not to have been
eradicated by such careful training as you say he has received. I leave
it entirely to you, trusting in your excellent judgment, and only hoping
you will not bring my name forward. Grieving much at having to be the
first to communicate such unpleasant tidings, which will occasion so
much vexation at Hollywell.'

                                 'Your affectionate sister,
                                         'MARGARET HENLEY.'


Captain Morville was alone when he received the latter of these letters.
At first, a look divided between irony and melancholy passed over his
face, as he read his sister's preface and her hearsay evidence, but,
as he went farther, his upper lip curled, and a sudden gleam, as of
exultation in a verified prophecy, lighted his eye, shading off
quickly, however, and giving place to an iron expression of rigidity
and sternness, the compressed mouth, coldly-fixed eye, and sedate
brow, composed into a grave severity that might have served for an
impersonation of stern justice. He looked through the letter a second
time, folded it up, put it in his pocket, and went about his usual
affairs; but the expression did not leave his face all day; and the next
morning he took a day-ticket by the railway to Broadstone, where, as it
was the day of the petty sessions, he had little doubt of meeting Mr.
Edmonstone. Accordingly, he had not walked far down the High Street,
before he saw his uncle standing on the step of the post-office, opening
a letter he had just received.

'Ha! Philip, what brings you here? The very man I wanted. Coming to
Hollywell?'

'No, thank you, I go back this evening,' said Philip, and, as he spoke,
he saw that the letter which Mr. Edmonstone held, and twisted with a
hasty, nervous movement, was in Guy's writing.

'Well, I am glad you are here, at any rate. Here is the most
extraordinary thing! What possesses the boy I cannot guess. Here's Guy
writing to me for--What do you think? To send him a thousand pounds!'

'Hem!' said Philip in an expressive tone; yet, as if he was not very
much amazed; 'no explanation, I suppose?'

'No, none at all. Here, see what he says yourself. No! Yes, you may,'
added Mr. Edmonstone, with a rapid glance at the end of the letter,--a
movement, first to retain it, and then following his first impulse, with
an unintelligible murmuring.

Philip read,--


                                 'SOUTH MOOR, SEPT. 7th.

'MY DEAR MR. EDMONSTONE,--You will be surprised at the request I have to
make you, after my resolution not to exceed my allowance. However, this
is not for my own expenses, and it will not occur again. I should be
much obliged to you to let me have £1OOO, in what manner you please,
only I should be glad if it were soon. I am sorry I am not at liberty to
tell you what I want it for, but I trust to your kindness. Tell Charlie
I will write to him in a day or two, but, between our work, and walking
to St. Mildred's for the letters, which we cannot help doing every
day, the time for writing is short. Another month, however, and what a
holiday it will be! Tell Amy she ought to be here to see the purple of
the hills in the early morning; it almost makes up for having no sea.
The races have been making St. Mildred's very gay; indeed, we laugh at
Wellwood for having brought us here, by way of a quiet place. I never
was in the way of so much dissipation in my life.

                                 'Yours very affectionately,
                                              'GUY MORVILLE.'

'Well, what do you think of it? What would you do in my place--eh,
Philip! What can he want of it, eh?' said Mr. Edmonstone, tormenting
his riding-whip, and looking up to study his nephew's face, which, with
stern gravity in every feature, was bent over the letter, as if to
weigh every line. 'Eh, Philip?' repeated Mr. Edmonstone, several times,
without obtaining an answer.

'This is no place for discussion,' at last said Philip, deliberately
returning the letter. 'Come into the reading-room. We shall find no one
there at this hour. Here we are.'

'Well--well--well,' began Mr. Edmonstone, fretted by his coolness to the
extreme of impatience, 'what do you think of it? He can't be after any
mischief; 'tis not in the boy; when--when he is all but--Pooh! what am I
saying? Well, what do you think?'

'I am afraid it confirms but too strongly a report which I received
yesterday.'

'From your sister? Does she know anything about it?'

'Yes, from my sister. But I was very unwilling to mention it, because
she particularly requests that her name may not be used. I came here to
see whether you had heard of Guy lately, so as to judge whether it was
needful to speak of it. This convinces me; but I must beg, in the first
instance, that you will not mention her, not even to my aunt.'

'Well, yes; very well. I promise. Only let me hear.'

'Young Harewood has, I fear, led him into bad company. There can now be
no doubt that he has been gambling.'

Philip was not prepared for the effect of these words. His uncle started
up, exclaiming--'Gambling! Impossible! Some confounded slander! I
don't believe one word of it! I won't hear such things said of him,' he
repeated, stammering with passion, and walking violently about the room.
This did not last long; there was something in the unmoved way in which
Philip waited till he had patience to listen, which gradually mastered
him; his angry manner subsided, and, sitting down, he continued the
argument, in a would-be-composed voice.

'It is utterly impossible! Remember, he thinks himself bound not so much
as to touch a billiard cue.'

'I could have thought it impossible, but for what I have seen of the
way in which promises are eluded by persons too strictly bound,' said
Philip. 'The moral force of principle is the only efficient pledge.'

'Principle! I should like to see who has better principles than Guy!'
cried Mr. Edmonstone. 'You have said so yourself, fifty times, and your
aunt has said so, and Charles. I could as soon suspect myself.' He was
growing vehement, but again Philip's imperturbability repressed his
violence, and he asked, 'Well, what evidence have you? Mind, I am not
going to believe it without the strongest. I don't know that I would
believe my own eyes against him.'

'It is very sad to find such confidence misplaced,' said Philip. 'Most
sincerely do I wish this could be proved to be a mistake; but this
extraordinary request corroborates my sister's letter too fully.'

'Let me hear,' said Mr. Edmonstone feebly. Philip produced his letter,
without reading the whole of it; for he could not bear the appearance of
gossip and prying, and would not expose his sister; so he pieced it out
with his own words, and made it sound far less discreditable to her. It
was quite enough for Mr. Edmonstone; the accuracy of the details seemed
to strike him dumb; and there was a long silence, which he broke by
saying, with a deep sigh,--

'Who could have thought it? Poor little Amy!'

'Amy?' exclaimed Philip.

'Why, ay. I did not mean to have said anything of it, I am sure; but
they did it among them,' said Mr. Edmonstone, growing ashamed, under
Philip's eye, as of a dreadful piece of imprudence. 'I was out of the
way at the time, but I could not refuse my consent, you know, as things
stood then.'

'Do you mean to say that Amy is engaged to him?'

'Why, no--not exactly engaged, only on trial, you understand, to see if
he will be steady. I was at Broadstone; 'twas mamma settled it all.
Poor little thing, she is very much in love with him, I do believe, but
there's an end of everything now.'

'It is very fortunate this has been discovered in time,' said Philip.
'Instead of pitying her, I should rejoice in her escape.'

'Yes,' said Mr. Edmonstone, ruefully. 'Who could have thought it?'

'I am afraid the mischief is of long standing,' proceeded Philip,
resolved, since he saw his uncle so grieved, to press him strongly,
thinking that to save Amy from such a marriage was an additional motive.
'He could hardly have arrived at losing as much as a thousand pounds,
all at once, in this month at St. Mildred's. Depend upon it, that
painful as it may be at present, there is great reason, on her account,
to rejoice in the discovery. You say he has never before applied, to you
for money?'

'Not a farthing beyond his allowance, except this unlucky thirty pounds,
for his additional expense of the tutor and the lodging.'

'You remember, however, that he has always seemed short of money, never
appeared able to afford himself any little extra expense. You have
noticed it, I know. You remember, too, how unsatisfactory his reserve
about his proceedings in London has been, and how he has persisted in
delaying there, in spite of all warnings. The work, no doubt, began
there, under the guidance of his uncle; and now the St. Mildred's races
and Tom Harewood have continued it.'

'I wish he had never set foot in the place!'

'Nay; for Amy's sake, the exposure is an advantage, if not for his own.
The course must have been long since begun; but he contrived to avoid
what could lead to inquiry, till he has at length involved himself in
some desperate scrape. You see, he especially desires to have the money
_soon_, and he never even attempts to say you would approve of the
object.

'Yes; he has the grace not to say that.'

'Altogether, it is worse than I could have thought possible,' said
Philip. I could have believed him unstable and thoughtless; but the
concealment, and the attempting to gain poor Amy's affections in the
midst of such a course--'

'Ay, ay!' cried Mr. Edmonstone, now fully provoked; 'there is the
monstrous part. He thought I was going to give up my poor little girl to
a gambler, did he? but he shall soon see what I think of him,--riches,
Redclyffe, title, and all!'

'I knew that would be your feeling.'

'Feel! Yes; and he shall feel it, too. So, Sir Guy, you thought you had
an old fool of a guardian, did you, whom you could blind as you pleased?
but you shall soon see the difference!'

'Better begin cautiously,' suggested Philip. 'Remember his unfortunate
temper, and write coolly.'

'Coolly? You may talk of coolness; but 'tis enough to make one's
blood boil to be served in such a way. With the face to be sending her
messages in the very same letter! That is a pass beyond me, to stand
coolly to see my daughter so treated.'

'I would only give him the opportunity of saying what he can for
himself. He may have some explanation.'

'I'll admit of no explanation! Passing himself off for steadiness
itself; daring to think of my daughter, and all the time going on in
this fashion! I hate underhand ways! I'll have no explanation. He may
give up all thoughts of her. I'll write and tell him so before I'm a day
older; nay, before I stir from this room. My little Amy, indeed!'

Philip put no obstacles in the way of this proposal, for he knew that
his uncle's displeasure, though hot at first, was apt to evaporate
in exclamations; and he thought it likely that his good nature, his
partiality for his ward, his dislike to causing pain to his daughter,
and, above all, his wife's blind confidence in Guy, would, when once at
home, so overpower his present indignation as to prevent the salutary
strictness which was the only hope of reclaiming Guy. Beside, a letter
written under Philip's inspection was likely to be more guarded, as well
as more forcible, than an unassisted composition of his own, as was,
indeed, pretty well proved by the commencement of his first attempt.

'My dear Guy,--I am more surprised than I could have expected at your
application.'

Philip read this aloud, so as to mark its absurdity, and he began again.

'I am greatly astonished, as well as concerned, at your application,
which confirms the unpleasant reports--'

'Why say anything of reports?' said Philip. 'Reports are nothing. A man
is not forced to defend himself from reports.'

'Yes,--hum--ha,--the accounts I have received. No. You say there is not
to be a word of Mrs. Henley.'

'Not a word that can lead her to be suspected.'

'Confirms--confirms--' sighed Mr. Edmonstone.

'Don't write as if you went on hearsay evidence. Speak of
proofs--irrefragable proofs--and then you convict him at once, without
power of eluding you.'

So Mr. Edmonstone proceeded to write, that the application confirmed
the irrefragable proofs, then laughed at himself, and helplessly begged
Philip to give him a start. It now stood thus:--

'Your letter of this morning has caused me more concern than surprise,
as it unhappily only adds confirmation to the intelligence already in
my possession; that either from want of resolution to withstand the
seductions of designing persons, or by the impetuosity and instability
of your own character, you have been led into the ruinous and degrading
practice of gambling; and that from hence proceed the difficulties that
occasion your application to me for money. I am deeply grieved at thus
finding that neither the principles which have hitherto seemed to guide
you, nor the pledges which you used to hold sacred, nor, I may add, the
feelings you have so recently expressed towards a member of my family,
have been sufficient to preserve you from yielding to a temptation which
could never be presented to the mind of any one whose time was properly
occupied in the business of his education.'

'Is that all I am to say about her,' exclaimed Mr. Edmonstone, 'after
the atrocious way the fellow has treated her in?'

'Since it is, happily, no engagement, I cannot see how you can, with
propriety, assume that it is one, by speaking of breaking it off.
Besides, give him no ground for complaint, or he will take refuge in
believing himself ill-used. Ask him if he can disprove it, and when he
cannot, it will be time enough to act further. But wait--wait, sir,' as
the pen was moving over the paper, impatient to dash forward. 'You have
not told him yet of what you accuse him.'

Philip meditated a few moments, then produced another sentence.

'I have no means of judging how long you have been following this
unhappy course; I had rather believe it is of recent adoption, but I do
not know how to reconcile this idea with the magnitude of your demand,
unless your downward progress has been more rapid than usual in such
beginnings. It would, I fear, be quite vain for me to urge upon you all
the arguments and reasons that ought to have been present to your mind,
and prevented you from taking the first fatal step. I can only entreat
you to pause, and consider the ruin and degradation to which this
hateful vice almost invariably conducts its victims, and consistently
with my duty as your guardian, everything in my power shall be done
to extricate you from the embarrassments in which you have involved
yourself. But, in the first place, I make it a point that you treat me
with perfect confidence, and make a full, unequivocal statement of your
proceedings; above all, that you explain the circumstances, occasioning
your request for this large sum. Remember, I say, complete candour on
your part will afford the only means of rescuing you from difficulties,
or of in any degree restoring you to my good opinion.'

So far the letter had proceeded slowly, for Philip was careful and
deliberate in composition, and while he was weighing his words, Mr.
Edmonstone rushed on with something unfit to stand, so as to have to
begin over again. At last, the town clock struck five; Philip started,
declaring that if he was not at the station in five minutes, he should
lose the train; engaged to come to Hollywell on the day an answer might
be expected, and hastened away, satisfied by having seen two sheets
nearly filled, and having said there was nothing more but to sign, seal,
and send it.

Mr. Edmonstone had, however, a page of note-paper more, and it was with
a sensation of relief that he wrote,--

'I wish, from the bottom of my heart, that you could clear yourself. If
a dozen men had sworn it till they were black in the face, I would not
have believed it of you that you could serve us in such a manner,
after the way you have been treated at home, and to dare to think of my
daughter with such things on your mind. I could never have believed it,
but for the proofs Philip has brought; and I am sure he is as sorry as
myself. Only tell the whole truth, and I will do my best to get you out
of the scrape. Though all else must be at an end between us, I am your
guardian still, and I will not be harsh with you.'

He posted his letter, climbed up his tall horse, and rode home, rather
heavy-hearted; but his wrath burning out as he left Broadstone behind
him. He saw his little Amy gay and lively, and could not bear to sadden
her; so he persuaded himself that there was no need to mention
the suspicions till he had heard what Guy had to say for himself.
Accordingly, he told no one but his wife; and she, who thought Guy as
unlikely to gamble as Amy herself, had not the least doubt that he would
be able to clear himself, and agreed that it was much better to keep
silence for the present.


CHAPTER 15

   'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
   How much I have disabled mine estate,
   By something showing a more swelling port
   Than my faint means would grant continuance.
                         --Merchant of Venice


St. Mildred's was a fashionable summer resort, which the virtues of a
mineral spring, and the reputation of Dr. Henley, had contributed
to raise to a high degree of prosperity. It stood at the foot of a
magnificent range of beautifully formed hills, where the crescents and
villas, white and smart, showed their own insignificance beneath the
purple peaks that rose high above them.

About ten miles distant, across the hills, was Stylehurst, the parish
of the late Archdeacon Morville, and the native place of Philip and his
sister Margaret. It was an extensive parish, including a wide tract of
the hilly country; and in a farm-house in the midst of the moorland,
midway between St. Mildred's and the village of Stylehurst, had Mr.
Wellwood fixed himself with his three pupils.

Guy's first visit was of course to Mrs. Henley, and she was, on her
side, prepared by her brother to patronize him as Philip would have
done in her place. Her patronage was valuable in her own circle; her
connections were good; the Archdeacon's name was greatly respected; she
had a handsome and well-regulated establishment, and this, together with
talents which, having no family, she had cultivated more than most women
have time to do, made her a person of considerable distinction at St.
Mildred's. She was, in fact, the leading lady of the place--the manager
of the book-club, in the chair at all the charitable committees, and the
principal person in society, giving literary parties, with a degree of
exclusiveness that made admission to them a privilege.

She was a very fine woman, handsomer at two-and-thirty than in her early
bloom; her height little less than that of her tall brother, and her
manner and air had something very distinguished. The first time Guy saw
her, he was strongly reminded both of Philip and of Mrs. Edmonstone,
but not pleasingly. She seemed to be her aunt, without the softness and
motherly affection, coupled with the touch of naivete that gave Mrs.
Edmonstone her freshness, and loveableness; and her likeness to her
brother included that decided, self-reliant air, which became him well
enough, but which did not sit as appropriately on a woman.

Guy soon discovered another resemblance--for the old, unaccountable
impatience of Philip's conversation, and relief in escaping from it,
haunted him before he had been a quarter of an hour in Mrs. Henley's
drawing-room. She asked after the Hollywell party; she had not seen her
cousins since her marriage, and happily for his feelings, passed over
Laura and Amy as if they were nonentities; but they were all too near
his heart for him to be able with patience to hear 'poor Charles's'
temper regretted, and still less the half-sarcastic, half-compassionate
tone in which she implied that her aunt spoilt him dreadfully, and
showed how cheap she hold both Mr. and Mrs. Edmonstone.

Two years ago, Guy could not have kept down his irritation; but now he
was master of himself sufficiently to give a calm, courteous reply,
so conveying his own respect for them, that Mrs. Henley was almost
disconcerted.

Stylehurst had great interest for Guy, both for the sake of Archdeacon
Morville's kindness, and as the home which Philip regarded with
affection, that seemed the one softening touch in his character. So Guy
visited the handsome church, studied the grave-yard, and gathered the
traditions of the place from the old sexton's wife, who rejoiced in
finding an auditor for her long stories of the good Archdeacon, Miss
Fanny, and Mr. Philip. She shook her head, saying times were changed,
and 'Miss Morville that was, never came neist the place.'

The squire, Colonel Harewood, was an old friend of his grandfather's,
and therefore was to be called on. He had never been wise, and had been
dissipated chiefly from vacancy of mind; he was now growing old, and
led a quieter life, and though Guy did not find him a very entertaining
companion, he accepted, his civilities, readily, for his grandfather's
sake. When his sons came home, Guy recognized in them the description
of men he was wont to shun at Oxford, as much from distaste as from
principle; but though he did not absolutely avoid them, he saw little
of them, being very busy, and having pleasant companions in his fellow
pupils. It was a very merry party at South Moor, and Guy's high spirits
made him the life of everything.

The first time Mr. Wellwood went to call on his cousins at St.
Mildred's, the daughters of that officer who had fallen by the hand
of old Sir Guy, he began repeating, for the twentieth time, what an
excellent fellow Morville was; then said he should not have troubled
them with any of his pupils, but Morville would esteem their receiving
him as an act of forgiveness, and besides, he wished them to know
one whom he valued so highly. Guy thus found himself admitted into an
entirely new region. There were two sisters, together in everything.
Jane, the younger, was a kind-hearted, commonplace person, who would
never have looked beyond the ordinary range of duties and charities; but
Elizabeth was one of those who rise up, from time to time, as burning
and shining lights. It was not spending a quiet, easy life, making her
charities secondary to her comforts, but devoting time, strength, and
goods; not merely giving away what she could spare, but actually sharing
all with the poor, reserving nothing for the future. She not only taught
the young, and visited the distressed, but she gathered orphans into
her house, and nursed the sick day and night. Neither the means nor the
strength of the two sisters could ever have been supposed equal to what
they were known to have achieved. It seemed as if the power grew with
the occasion, and as if they had some help which could not fail them.
Guy venerated them more and more, and many a long letter about them
was written to Mrs. Edmonstone for Amy to read. There is certainly a
'tyrannous hate' in the world for unusual goodness, which is a rebuke to
it, and there was a strong party against the sisters. At the head of it
was Mrs. Henley, who had originally been displeased at their preferring
the direction of the clergyman to that of the ladies' committee, though
the secret cause of her dislike was, perhaps, that Elizabeth Wellwood
was just what Margaret Morville might have been. So she blamed them,
not, indeed for their charity, but for slight peculiarities which might
well have been lost in the brightness of the works of mercy. She spoke
as with her father's authority, though, if she had been differently
disposed, she might have remembered that his system and principles were
the same as theirs, and that, had he been alive, he would probably have
fully approved of their proceedings. Archdeacon Morville's name was of
great weight, and justified many persons, in their own opinion, in
the opposition made to Miss Wellwood, impeding her usefulness, and
subjecting her to endless petty calumnies.

These made Guy very angry. He knew enough of the Archdeacon through Mrs.
Edmonstone, and the opinions held by Philip, to think his daughter was
ascribing to him what he had never held but, be that as it might, Guy
could not bear to hear good evil spoken of, and his indignation was
stirred as he heard these spiteful reports uttered by people who sat
at home at ease, against one whose daily life was only too exalted
for their imitation. His brow contracted, his eye kindled, his lip was
bitten, and now and then, when he trusted himself to reply, it was with
a keen, sharp power of rebuke that made people look round, astonished
to hear such forcible words from one so young. Mrs. Henley was afraid of
him, without knowing it; she thought she was sparing the Morville temper
when she avoided the subject, but as she stood in awe of no one else,
except her brother, she disliked him accordingly.

One evening Guy had been dining at Dr. Henley's, and was setting out,
enjoying his escape from Mrs. Henley and her friends, and rejoicing in
the prospect of a five miles' walk over the hills by moonlight. He had
only gone the length of two streets, when he saw a dark figure at a
little distance from him, and a voice which he had little expected to
hear, called out,--

'Sir Guy himself! No one else could whistle that Swedish air so
correctly!'

'My uncle!' exclaimed Guy. 'I did not know that you were here!'

Mr. Dixon laughed, said something about a fortunate rencontre, and began
an account about a concert somewhere or other, mixed up with something
about his wife and child, all so rambling and confused, that Guy,
beginning to suspect he had been drinking, was only anxious to get rid
of him, asked where he lodged, and talked of coming to see him in the
morning. He soon found, however, that this had not been the case, at
least not to any great extent. Dixon was only nervous and excited,
either about something he had done, or some request he had to make, and
he went on walking by his nephew's side, talking in a strange, desultory
way of open, generous-hearted fellows overlooking a little indiscretion,
and of Guy's riches, which he seemed to think inexhaustible.

'If there is anything that you want me to do for you, tell me plainly
what it is,' said Guy, at last.

Mr. Dixon began to overwhelm him with thanks, but he cut them short. 'I
promise nothing. Let me hear what you want, and I can judge whether I
can do it.'

Sebastian broke out into exclamations at the words 'if I can,' as if he
thought everything in the power of the heir of Redclyffe.

'Have I not told you,' said Guy, 'that for the present I have very
little command of money? Hush! no more of that,' he added, sternly,
cutting off an imprecation which his uncle was commencing on those who
kept him so short.

'And you are content to bear it? Did you never hear of ways and means?
If you were to say but one word of borrowing, they would go down on
their knees to you, and offer you every farthing you have to keep you in
their own hands.'

'I am quite satisfied,' said Guy, coldly.

'The greater fool are you!' was on Dixon's lips, but he did not
utter it, because he wanted to propitiate him; and after some more
circumlocution, Guy succeeded in discovering that he had been gambling,
and had lost an amount which, unless he could obtain immediate
assistance, would become known, and lead to the loss of his character
and situation. Guy stood and considered. He had an impulse, but he did
not think it a safe one, and resolved to give himself time.

'I do not say that I cannot help you,' he answered, 'but I must have
time to consider.'

'Time! would you see me ruined while you are considering?'

'I suppose this must be paid immediately. Where do you lodge?'

Mr. Dixon told him the street and number.

'You shall hear from me to-morrow morning. I cannot trust my present
thoughts. Good night!'

Mr. Dixon would fain have guessed whether the present thoughts were
favourable, but all his hope in his extremity was in his nephew; it
might be fatal to push him too far, and, with a certain trust in
his good-nature, Sebastian allowed him to walk away without further
remonstrance.

Guy knew his own impetuous nature too well to venture to act on impulse
in a doubtful case. He had now first to consider what he was able to do,
and secondly what he would do; and this was not as clear to his mind as
in the earlier days of his acquaintance with his uncle.

Their intercourse had never been on a comfortable footing. It would
perhaps have been better if Philip's advice had been followed, and no
connection kept up. Guy had once begged for some definite rule, since
there was always vexation when he was known to have been with his uncle,
and yet Mr. Edmonstone would never absolutely say he ought not to see
him. As long as his guardian permitted it, or rather winked at it, Guy
did not think it necessary to attend to Philip's marked disapproval.
Part of it was well founded, but part was dislike to all that might
be considered as vulgar, and part was absolute injustice to Sebastian
Dixon, there was everything that could offend in his line of argument,
and in the very circumstance of his interfering; and Guy had a continual
struggle, in which he was not always successful, to avoid showing the
affront he had taken, and to reason down his subsequent indignation. The
ever-recurring irritation which Philip's conversation was apt to cause
him, made him avoid it as far as he could, and retreat in haste from the
subjects on which they were most apt to disagree, and so his manner had
assumed an air of reserve, and almost of distrust, with his cousin, that
was very unlike its usual winning openness.

This had been one unfortunate effect of his intercourse with his uncle,
and another was a certain vague, dissatisfied feeling which his silence,
and Philip's insinuations respecting the days he spent in London,
left on Mr. Edmonstone's mind, and which gained strength from their
recurrence. The days were, indeed, not many; it was only that in coming
from and going to Oxford, he slept a night at an hotel in London (for
his uncle never would take him to his lodgings, never even would tell
him where they were, but always gave his address at the place of his
engagement), was conducted by him to some concert in the evening, and
had him to breakfast in the morning. He could not think there was any
harm in this; he explained all he had done to Mr. Edmonstone the first
time, but nothing was gained by it: his visits to London continued to be
treated as something to be excused or overlooked--as something not quite
correct.

He would almost have been ready to discontinue them, but that he saw
that his uncle regarded him with affection, and he could not bear the
thought of giving up a poor relation for the sake of the opinion of
his rich friends. These meetings were the one pure pleasure to which
Sebastian looked, recalling to him the happier days of his youth, and of
his friendship with Guy's father; and when Guy perceived how he valued
them, it would have seemed a piece of cruel neglect to gratify himself
by giving the time to Hollywell.

Early in the course of their acquaintance, the importunity of a creditor
revealed that, in spite of his handsome salary, Sebastian Dixon was
often in considerable distress for money. In process of time, Guy
discovered that at the time his uncle had been supporting his sister
and her husband in all the luxury he thought befitted their rank, he had
contracted considerable debts, and he had only been able to return to
England on condition of paying so much a-year to his creditors. This
left him very little on which to maintain his family, but still his
pride made him bent on concealing his difficulties, and it was not
without a struggle that he would at first consent to receive assistance
from his nephew.

Guy resolved that these debts, which he considered as in fact his
father's own, should be paid as soon as he had the command of his
property; but, in the meantime, he thought himself bound to send his
uncle all the help in his power, and when once the effort of accepting
it at all was over, Dixon's expectations extended far beyond his power.
His allowance was not large, and the constant requests for a few pounds
to meet some pressing occasion were more than he could well meet. They
kept him actually a great deal poorer than men without a tenth part of
his fortune, and at the end of the term he would look back with surprise
at having been able to pay his way; but still he contrived neither to
exceed his allowance, nor to get into debt. This was, indeed, only done
by a rigid self-denial of little luxuries such as most young men look
on nearly as necessaries; but he had never been brought up to think
self-indulgence a consequence of riches, he did not care what was said
of him, he had no expensive tastes, for he did not seek after society,
so that he was not ill-prepared for such a course, and only thought of
it as an assistance in abstaining from the time-wasting that might have
tempted him if he had had plenty of money to spend.

The only thing that concerned him was a growing doubt lest he might be
feeding extravagance instead of doing good; and the more he disliked
himself for the suspicion, the more it would return. There was no doubt
much distress, the children were sickly; several of them died; the
doctor's bills, and other expenses, pressed heavily, and Guy blamed
himself for having doubted. Yet, again, he could not conceal from
himself traces that his uncle was careless and imprudent. He had once,
indeed, in a violent fit of self-reproach, confessed as much, allowed
that what ought to have been spent in the maintenance of his family, had
gone in gambling, but immediately after, he had been seized with a fit
of terror, and implored Guy to guard the secret, since, if once it
came to the knowledge of his creditors, it would be all over with him.
Concealment of his present difficulties was therefore no less necessary
than assistance in paying the sum he owed. Indeed, as far as Guy was
able to understand his confused statement, what he wanted was at once
to pay a part of his debt, before he could go on to a place where he was
engaged to perform, and where he would earn enough to make up the rest.

Guy had intended to have sent for Deloraine, but had since given up the
idea, in order to be able to help forward some plans of Miss Wellwood's,
and resigning this project would enable him to place thirty pounds at
his uncle's disposal, leaving him just enough to pay his expenses at
South Moor, and carry him back to Hollywell. It was sorely against his
inclination that, instead of helping a charity, his savings should go
to pay gaming debts, and his five-miles walk was spent in self-debate on
the right and wrong of the matter, and questions what should be done
for the future--for he was beginning to awaken to the sense of his
responsibility, and feared lest he might be encouraging vice.

Very early next morning Guy put his head into his tutor's room,
announced that he must walk into St. Mildred's on business, but should
be back by eleven at the latest, ran down-stairs, called Bustle, and
made interest with the farmer's wife for a hunch of dry bread and a cup
of new milk.

Then rejoicing that he had made up his mind, though not light-hearted
enough to whistle, he walked across the moorland, through the white
morning mist, curling on the sides of the hills in fantastic forms, and
now and then catching his lengthened shadow, so as to make him smile by
reminding him of the spectre of the Brocken.

Not without difficulty, he found a back street, and a little shop, where
a slovenly maid was sweeping the steps, and the shutters were not yet
taken down. He asked if Mr. Dixon lodged there. 'Yes,' the woman said,
staring in amazement that such a gentleman could be there at that time
in the morning, asking for Mr. Dixon.

'Is he at home?'

'Yes, sir but he is not up yet. He was very late last night. Did you
want to speak to him? I'll tell Mrs. Dixon.'

'Is Mrs. Dixon here? Then tell her Sir Guy Morville would be glad to
speak to her.'

The maid curtseyed, hurried off, and returned with a message from Mrs.
Dixon to desire he would walk in. She conducted him through a dark
passage, and up a still darker stair, into a dingy little parlour, with
a carpet of red and green stripes, a horsehair sofa, a grate covered
with cut paper, and a general perfume of brandy and cigars. There were
some preparations for breakfast, but no one was in the room but a little
girl, about seven years old, dressed in shabby-genteel mourning.

She was pale and sickly-looking, but her eyes were of a lovely deep
blue, with a very sweet expression, and a profusion of thick flaxen
curls hung round her neck and shoulders. She said in a soft, little, shy
voice,--

'Mamma says she will be here directly, if you will excuse her a moment.'

Having made this formal speech, the little thing was creeping off on
tip-toe, so as to escape before the maid shut the door, but Guy held out
his hand, sat down so as to be on a level with her, and said,--

'Don't go, my little maid. Won't you come and speak to your cousin Guy?'

Children never failed to be attracted, whether by the winning beauty of
his smile, or the sweetness of the voice in which he spoke to anything
small or weak, and the little girl willingly came up to him, and put her
hand into his. He stroked her thick, silky curls, and asked her name.

'Marianne,' she answered.

It was his mother's name, and this little creature had more resemblance
to his tenderly-cherished vision of his young mother than any
description Dixon could have given. He drew her closer to him, took the
other small, cold hand, and asked her how she liked St. Mildred's.

'Oh! much better than London. There are flowers!' and she proudly
exhibited a cup holding some ragged robins, dead nettles, and other
common flowers which a country child would have held cheap. He admired
and gained more of her confidence, so that she had begun to chatter away
quite freely about 'the high, high hills that reached up to the sky, and
the pretty stones,' till the door opened, and Mrs. Dixon and Bustle made
their entrance.

Marianne was so much afraid of the dog, Guy so eager to console, and her
mother to scold her, and protest that it should not be turned out, that
there was nothing but confusion, until Guy had shown her that Bustle was
no dangerous wild beast, induced her to accept his offered paw, and lay
a timid finger on his smooth, black head, after which the transition was
short to dog and child sitting lovingly together on the floor, Marianne
stroking his ears, and admiring him with a sort of silent ecstasy.

Mrs. Dixon was a great, coarse, vulgar woman, and Guy perceived why his
uncle had been so averse to taking him to his home, and how he must have
felt the contrast between such a wife and his beautiful sister. She
had a sort of broad sense, and absence of pretension, but her manner of
talking was by no means pleasant, as she querulously accused her husband
of being the cause of all their misfortunes, not even restrained by the
presence of her child from entering into a full account of his offences.

Mrs. Dixon said she should not say a word, she should not care if it was
not for the child, but she could not see her wronged by her own father,
and not complain; poor little dear! she was the last, and she supposed
she should not keep her long.

It then appeared that on her husband's obtaining an engagement for a
series of concerts at the chief county town, Mrs. Dixon had insisted
on coming with him to St. Mildred's in the hope that country air might
benefit Marianne, who, in a confined lodging in London, was pining and
dwindling as her brothers and sisters had done before her. Sebastian,
who liked to escape from his wife's grumbling and rigid supervision, and
looked forward to amusement in his own way at the races, had grudgingly
allowed her to come, and, as she described it, had been reluctant to go
to even so slight an expense in the hope of saving his child's life. She
had watched him as closely as she could; but he had made his escape, and
the consequences Guy already knew.

If anything could have made it worse, it was finding that after parting
last night, he had returned, tried to retrieve his luck, had involved
himself further, had been drinking more; and at the very hour when his
nephew was getting up to see what could be done for him, had come
home in a state, which made it by no means likely that he would be
presentable, if his wife called him, as she offered to do.

Guy much preferred arranging with her what was to be done on the present
emergency. She was disappointed at finding thirty pounds was all the
help he could give; but she was an energetic woman, full of resources,
and saw her way, with this assistance, through the present difficulty.
The great point was to keep the gambling propensities out of sight of
the creditors; and as long as this was done, she had hope. Dixon would
go the next morning to the town where the musical meeting was to be
held, and there he would be with his employers, where he had a character
to preserve, so that she was in no fear of another outbreak.

It ended, therefore, in his leaving with her Mr. Edmonstone's draft,
securing its destination by endorsing it to the person who was to
receive it; and wishing her good morning, after a few more kind words to
little Marianne, who had sat playing with Bustle all the time, sidling
continually nearer and nearer to her new cousin, her eyes bent down, and
no expression on her face which could enable him to guess how far she
listened to or comprehended the conversation so unfit for her ear. When
he rose to go, and stooped to kiss her, she looked wistfully in his
face, and held up a small sparkling bit of spar, the most precious of
all her hoards, gleaned from the roadsides of St. Mildred's.

'What, child, do you want to give it to Sir Guy?' said her mother. 'He
does not want such trumpery, my dear, though you make such a work with
it.'

'Did you mean to give it to me, my dear?' said Guy, as the child hung
her head, and, crimsoned with blushes, could scarcely whisper her timid
'Yes.'

He praised it, and let her put it in his waistcoat pocket, and promised
he would always keep it; and kissed her again, and left her a happy
child, confident in his promise of always keeping it, though her mother
augured that he would throw it over the next hedge.

He was at South Moor by eleven o'clock, in time for his morning's
business, and made up for the troubles of the last few hours by a long
talk with Mr. Wellwood in the afternoon, while the other two pupils were
gone to the races, for which he was not inclined, after his two ten-mile
walks.

The conversation was chiefly on Church prospects in general, and in
particular on Miss Wellwood and her plans; how they had by degrees
enlarged and developed as the sin, and misery, and ignorance around
had forced themselves more plainly on her notice, and her means had
increased and grown under her hand in the very distribution. Other
schemes were dawning on her mind, of which the foremost was the
foundation of a sort of school and hospital united, under the charge
of herself, her sister, and several other ladies, who were desirous of
joining her, as a sisterhood. But at present it was hoping against hope,
for there were no funds with which to make a commencement. All this was
told at unawares, drawn forth by different questions and remarks, till
Guy inquired how much it would take to give them a start?'

'It is impossible to say. Anything, I suppose, between one thousand
and twenty. But, by the bye, this design of Elizabeth's is an absolute
secret. If you had not almost guessed it, I should never have said one
word to you about it. You are a particularly dangerous man, with your
connection with Mrs. Henley. You must take special good care nothing of
it reaches her.'

Guy's first impression was, that he was the last person to mention it
to Mrs. Henley; but when he remembered how often her brother was at
Hollywell, he perceived that there might be a train for carrying the
report back again to her, and recognized the absolute necessity of
silence.

He said nothing at the time, but a bright scheme came into his head,
resulting in the request for a thousand pounds, which caused so much
astonishment. He thought himself rather shabby to have named no more,
and was afraid it was an offering that cost him nothing; but he much
enjoyed devising beforehand the letter with which he would place the
money at the disposal of Miss Wellwood's hospital.


CHAPTER 16

     Yet burns the sun on high beyond the cloud;
     Each in his southern cave,
     The warm winds linger, but to be allowed
     One breathing o'er the wave,
     One flight across the unquiet sky;
     Swift as a vane may turn on high,
     The smile of heaven comes on.
     So waits the Lord behind the veil,
     His light on frenzied cheek, or pale,
     To shed when the dark hour is gone.
                              --LYRA INNOCENTIUM


On the afternoon on which Guy expected an answer from Mr. Edmonstone,
he walked with his fellow pupil, Harry Graham, to see if there were any
letters from him at Dr. Henley's.

The servant said Mrs. Henley was at home, and asked them to come in and
take their letters. These were lying on a marble table, in the hall; and
while the man looked in the drawing-room for his mistress, and sent one
of the maids up-stairs in quest of her, Guy hastily took up one, bearing
his address, in the well-known hand of Mr. Edmonstone.

Young Graham, who had taken up a newspaper, was startled by Guy's loud,
sudden exclamation,--'

'Ha! What on earth does this mean?'

And looking up, saw his face of a burning, glowing red, the features
almost convulsed, the large veins in the forehead and temples swollen
with the blood that rushed through them, and if ever his eyes flashed
with the dark lightning of Sir Hugh's, it was then.

'Morville! What's the matter?'

'Intolerable!--insulting! Me? What does he mean?' continued Guy, his
passion kindling more and more. 'Proofs? I should like to see them!
The man is crazy! I to confess! Ha!' as he came towards the end, 'I
see it,--I see it. It is Philip, is it, that I have to thank. Meddling
coxcomb! I'll make him repent it,' added he, with a grim fierceness of
determination. Slandering me to them! And that,'--looking at the words
with regard to Amy,--'that passes all. He shall see what it is to insult
me!'

'What is it? Your guardian out of humour?' asked his companion.

'My guardian is a mere weak fool. I don't blame him,--he can't help it;
but to see him made a tool of! He twists him round his finger, abuses
his weakness to insult--to accuse. But he shall give me an account!'

Guy's voice had grown lower and more husky; but though the sound sunk,
the force of passion rather increased than diminished; it was like the
low distant sweep of the tempest as it whirls away, preparing to return
with yet more tremendous might. His colour, too, had faded to paleness,
but the veins were still swollen, purple, and throbbing, and there was
a stillness about him that made his wrath more than fierce, intense,
almost appalling.

Harry Graham was dumb with astonishment; but while Guy spoke, Mrs.
Henley had come down, and was standing before them, beginning a
greeting. The blood rushed back into Guy's cheeks, and, controlling his
voice with powerful effort, he said,--

'I have had an insulting--an unpleasant letter,' he added, catching
himself up. 'You must excuse me;' and he was gone.

'What has happened?' exclaimed Mrs. Henley, though, from her brother's
letter, as well as from her observations during a long and purposely
slow progress, along a railed gallery overhanging the hall, and down a
winding staircase, she knew pretty well the whole history of his anger.

'I don't know,' said young Graham. 'Some absurd, person interfering
between him and his guardian. I should be sorry to be him to fall in his
way just now. It must be something properly bad. I never saw a man in
such a rage. I think I had better go after him, and see what he has done
with himself.'

'You don't think,' said Mrs. Henley, detaining him, 'that his guardian
could have been finding fault with him with reason?'

'Who? Morville? His guardian must have a sharp eye for picking holes, if
he can find any in Morville. Not a steadier fellow going,--only too much
so.'

'Ah!' thought Mrs. Henley, 'these young men always hang together;' and
she let him escape without further question. But, when he emerged from
the house, Guy was already out of sight, and he could not succeed in
finding him.

Guy had burst out of the house, feeling as if nothing could relieve
him but free air and rapid motion; and on he hurried, fast, faster,
conscious alone of the wild, furious tumult of rage and indignation
against the maligner of his innocence, who was knowingly ruining him
with all that was dearest to him, insulting him by reproaches on his
breaking a most sacred, unblemished word, and, what Guy felt scarcely
less keenly, forcing kind-hearted Mr. Edmonstone into a persecution so
foreign to his nature. The agony of suffering such an accusation, and
from such a quarter,--the violent storm of indignation and pride,--wild,
undefined ideas of a heavy reckoning,--above all, the dreary thought of
Amy denied to him for ever,--all these swept over him, and swayed him
by turns, with the dreadful intensity belonging to a nature formed for
violent passions, which had broken down, in the sudden shock, all the
barriers imposed on them by a long course of self-restraint.

On he rushed, reckless whither he went, or what he did, driven forward
by the wild impulse of passion, far over moor and hill, up and down,
till at last, exhausted at once by the tumult within, and by the
violent bodily exertion, a stillness--a suspension of thought and
sensation--ensued; and when this passed, he found himself seated on
a rock which crowned the summit of one of the hills, his handkerchief
loosened, his waistcoat open, his hat thrown off, his temples burning
and throbbing with a feeling of distraction, and the agitated beatings
of his heart almost stifling his panting breath.

'Yes,' he muttered to himself, 'a heavy account shall he pay me for this
crowning stroke of a long course of slander and ill-will! Have I not
seen it? Has not he hated me from the first, misconstrued every word and
deed, though I have tried, striven earnestly, to be his friend,--borne,
as not another soul would have done, with his impertinent interference
and intolerable patronizing airs! But he has seen the last of it!
anything but this might be forgiven; but sowing dissension between me
and the Edmonstones--maligning me there. Never! Knowing, too, as he
seems to do, how I stand, it is the very ecstasy of malice! Ay! this
very night it shall be exposed, and he shall be taught to beware--made
to know with whom he has to deal.'

Guy uttered this last with teeth clenched, in an excess of deep,
vengeful ire. Never had Morville of the whole line felt more deadly
fierceness than held sway over him, as he contemplated his revenge,
looked forward with a dire complacency to the punishment he would wreak,
not for this offence alone, but for a long course of enmity. He sat,
absorbed in the plan of vengeance, perfectly still, for his physical
exhaustion was complete; but as the pulsations of his heart grew
less wild, his purpose became sterner and more fixed. He devised its
execution, planned his sudden journey, saw himself bursting on Philip
early next morning, summoning him to answer for his falsehoods. The
impulse to action seemed to restore his power over his senses. He looked
round, to see where he was, raising his head from his hands.

The sun was setting opposite to him, in a flood of gold,--a ruddy ball,
surrounded with its pomp of clouds, on the dazzling sweep of horizon.
That sight recalled him not only to himself, but to his true and better
self; the good angel so close to him for the twenty years of his life,
had been driven aloof but for a moment, and now, either that, or a still
higher and holier power, made the setting sun bring to his mind, almost
to his ear, the words,--

          Let not the sun go down upon your wrath,
          Neither give place to the devil.

Guy had what some would call a vivid imagination, others a lively faith.
He shuddered, then, his elbows on his knees, and his hands clasped over
his brow, he sat, bending forward, with his eyes closed, wrought up in a
fearful struggle; while it was to him as if he saw the hereditary demon
of the Morvilles watching by his side, to take full possession of him
as a rightful prey, unless the battle was fought and won before that red
orb had passed out of sight. Yes, the besetting fiend of his family--the
spirit of defiance and resentment--that was driving him, even now, while
realizing its presence, to disregard all thoughts save of the revenge
for which he could barter everything--every hope once precious to him.

It was horror at such wickedness that first checked him, and brought him
back to the combat. His was not a temper that was satisfied with half
measures. He locked his hands more rigidly together, vowing to compel
himself, ere he left the spot, to forgive his enemy--forgive him
candidly--forgive him, so as never again to have to say, 'I forgive
him!' He did not try to think, for reflection only lashed up his sense
of the wrong: but, as if there was power in the words alone, he forced
his lips to repeat,--

'Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us.'

Coldly and hardly were they spoken at first; again he pronounced them,
again, again,--each time the tone was softer, each time they came more
from the heart. At last the remembrance of greater wrongs, and worse
revilings came upon him, his eyes filled with tears, the most subduing
and healing of all thoughts--that of the great Example--became present
to him; the foe was driven back.

Still he kept his hands over his face. The tempter was not yet defeated
without hope. It was not enough to give up his first intention (no great
sacrifice, as he perceived, now that he had time to think how Philip
would be certain to treat a challenge), it was not enough to wish no ill
to his cousin, to intend no evil measure, he must pardon from the bottom
of his heart, regard him candidly, and not magnify his injuries.

He sat long, in deep thought, his head bent down, and his countenance
stern with inward conflict. It was the hardest part of the whole battle,
for the Morville disposition was as vindictive as passionate; but, at
last, he recovered clearness of vision. His request might well appear
unreasonable, and possibly excite suspicion, and, for the rest, it was
doing a man of honour, like Philip, flagrant injustice to suspect him of
originating slanders. He was, of course, under a mistake, had acted, not
perhaps kindly, but as he thought, rightly and judiciously, in making
his suspicions known. If he had caused his uncle to write provokingly,
every one knew that was his way, he might very properly wish, under his
belief, to save Amabel; and though the manner might have been otherwise,
the proceeding itself admitted complete justification. Indeed, when Guy
recollected the frenzy of his rage, and his own murderous impulse, he
was shocked to think that he had ever sought the love of that pure
and gentle creature, as if it had been a cruel and profane linking of
innocence to evil. He was appalled at the power of his fury, he had
not known he was capable of it, for his boyish passion, even when
unrestrained, had never equalled this, in all the strength of early
manhood.

He looked up, and saw that the last remnant of the sun's disk was just
disappearing beneath the horizon. The victory was won!

But Guy's feeling was not the rejoicing of the conquest, it was more the
relief which is felt by a little child, weary of its fit of naughtiness,
when its tearful face is raised, mournful yet happy, in having won true
repentance, and it says, 'I _am_ sorry now.'

He rose, looked at his watch, wondered to find it so late; gazed round,
and considered his bearings, perceiving, with a sense of shame, how far
he had wandered; then retraced his steps slowly and wearily, and did not
reach South Moor till long after dark.


CHAPTER 17

     My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
     Unapt to stir at these indignities;
     But you have found me.
                               --KING HENRY IV


Philip, according to promise, appeared at Hollywell, and a volume of
awful justice seemed written on his brow. Charles, though ignorant of
its cause, perceived this at a glance, and greeted him thus:--

'Enter Don Philip II, the Duke of Alva, alguazils, corregidors, and
executioners.'

'Is anything the matter, Philip?' said Amy; a question which took him
by surprise, as he could not believe her in ignorance. He was sorry for
her, and answered gravely,--

'Nothing is amiss with me, thank you, Amy,'

She knew he meant that he would tell no more, and would have thought no
more about it, but that she saw her mother was very uneasy.

'Did you ask whether there were any letters at the post?' said Charles.
'Guy is using us shamefully--practising self-denial on us, I suppose. Is
there no letter from him?'

'There is,' said Philip, reluctantly.

'Well, where is it?'

'It is to your father.'

'Oh!' said Charles, with a disappointed air. 'Are you sure? Depend on
it, you overlooked my M. He has owed me a letter this fortnight. Let me
see.'

'It is for my uncle,' repeated Philip, as if to put an end to the
subject.

'Then he has been so stupid as to forget my second name. Come, give it
me. I shall have it sooner or later.'

'I assure you, Charles, it is not for you.'

'Would not any one suppose he had been reading it?' exclaimed Charles.

'Did you know Mary Ross was gone to stay with her brother John?' broke
in Mrs. Edmonstone, in a nervous, hurried manner.

'No is she?' replied Philip.

'Yes; his wife is ill.'

The universal feeling was that something was amiss, and mamma was in the
secret. Amy looked wistfully at her, but Mrs. Edmonstone only gazed
at the window, and so they continued for some minutes, while an
uninteresting exchange of question and answer was kept up between her
and her nephew until at length the dressing-bell rang, and cleared the
room. Mrs. Edmonstone lingered till her son and daughters were gone, and
said,--

'You have heard from St. Mildred's?'

'Yes,' said Philip, as if he was as little inclined to be communicative
to her as to his cousins.

'From Guy, or from Margaret?'

'From Margaret.'

'But you say there is a letter from him?'

'Yes, for my uncle.'

'Does she say nothing more satisfactory?' asked his aunt, her anxiety
tortured by his composure. 'Has she learnt no more?'

'Nothing more of his proceedings. I see Amy knows nothing of the
matter?'

'No; her papa thought there was no need to distress her till we had seen
whether he could explain.'

'Poor little thing!' said Philip; 'I am very sorry for her.

Mrs. Edmonstone did not choose to discuss her daughter's affairs with
him, and she turned the conversation to ask if Margaret said much of
Guy.

'She writes to tell the spirit in which he received my uncle's letter.
It is only the Morville temper, again, and, of course, whatever you may
think of that on Amy's account, I should never regard it, as concerns
myself, as other than his misfortune. I hope he may be able to explain
the rest.'

'Ah! there comes your uncle!' and Mr. Edmonstone entered.

'How d'ye do, Philip? Brought better news, eh?'

'Here is a letter to speak for itself.'

'Eh? From Guy? Give it me. What does he say? Let me see. Here, mamma,
read it; your eyes are best.'

Mrs. Edmonstone read as follows:--


'MY DEAR MR. EDMONSTONE,--Your letter surprised and grieved me very
much. I cannot guess what proofs Philip may think he has, of what
I never did, and, therefore, I cannot refute them otherwise than by
declaring that I never gamed in my life. Tell me what they are, and I
will answer them. As to a full confession, I could of course tell you
of much in which I have done wrongly, though not in the way which he
supposes. On that head, I have nothing to confess. I am sorry I am
prevented from satisfying you about the £1OOO, but I am bound in honour
not to mention the purpose for which I wanted it. I am sure you could
never believe I could have said what I did to Mrs. Edmonstone if I had
begun on a course which I detest from the bottom of my heart. Thank you
very much for the kindness of the latter part of your letter. I do not
know how I could have borne it, if it had ended as it began. I hope you
will soon send me these proofs of Philip's. Ever your affectionate, 'G.
M.'


Not a little surprised was Philip to find that he was known to be Guy's
accuser; but the conclusion revealed that his style had betrayed him,
and that Mr. Edmonstone had finished with some mention of him, and
he resolved that henceforth he would never leave a letter of his own
dictation till he had seen it signed and sealed.

'Well!' cried Mr. Edmonstone, joyfully beating his own hand with his
glove, 'that is all right. I knew it would be so. He can't even
guess what we are at. I am glad we did not tease poor little Amy. Eh,
mamma?--eh, Philip?' the last eh being uttered much more doubtfully, and
less triumphantly than the first.

'I wonder you think it right,' said Philip.

'What more would you have?' said Mr. Edmonstone, hastily.

'Confidence.'

'Eh? Oh, ay, he says he can't tell--bound in honour.'

'It is easy to write off-hand, and say I cannot satisfy you, I am
bound in honour; but that is not what most persons would think a full
justification, especially considering the terms on which you stand.'

'Why, yes, he might have said more. It would have been safe enough with
me.'

'It is his usual course of mystery, reserve, and defiance.'

'The fact is,' said Mr. Edmonstone, turning away, 'that it is a very
proper letter; right sense, proper feeling--and if he never gamed in his
life, what would you have more?'

'There are different ways of understanding such a denial as this,' said
Philip. 'See, he says not in the way in which I suppose.' He held up
his hand authoritatively, as his aunt was about to interpose. 'It was
against gaming that his vow was made. I never thought he had played, but
he never says he has not betted.'

'He would never be guilty of a subterfuge!' exclaimed Mr. Edmonstone,
indignantly.

'I should not have thought so, without the evidence of the payment of
the cheque, my uncle had just given him, to this gambling fellow,' said
Philip; 'yet it is only the natural consequence of the habit of eluding
inquiry into his visits to London.'

'I can't see any reason for so harsh an accusation,' said she.

'I should hardly want more reason than his own words. He refuses to
answer the question on which my uncle's good opinion depends; he owns he
has been to blame, and thus retracts his full denial. In my opinion, his
letter says nothing so plainly as, "While I can stand fair with you I do
not wish to break with you."'

'He will not find that quite so easy.' cried Mr. Edmonstone. 'I am no
fool to be hoodwinked, especially where my little Amy is concerned. I'll
see all plain and straight before he says another word of her. But you
see what comes of their settling it while I was out of the way.'

Mrs. Edmonstone was grieved to see him so hurt at this. It could not
have been helped, and if all had been smooth, he never would have
thought of it again; but it served to keep up his dignity in his own
eyes, and, as he fancied, to defend him from Philip's censure, and he
therefore made the most of it, which so pained her that she did not
venture to continue her championship of Guy.

'Well, well,' said Mr. Edmonstone, 'the question is what to do next--eh,
Philip?' I wish he would have spoken openly. I hate mysteries. I'll
write and tell him this won't do; he must be explicit--eh, Philip?'

'We will talk it over by and by,' said Philip.

His aunt understood that it was to be in her absence, and left the room,
fearing it would be impossible to prevent Amy from being distressed,
though she had no doubt that Guy would be able to prove his innocence of
the charges. She found Amy waiting for her in her room.

'Don't, ring, mamma, dear. I'll fasten your dress,' said she; then
pausing--'Oh! mamma, I don't know whether I ought to ask, but if you
would only tell me if there is nothing gone wrong.'

'I don't believe there is anything really wrong, my dear,' said Mrs.
Edmonstone, kissing her, as she saw how her colour first deepened and
then faded.

'Oh! no,' said she.

'But there is some mystery about his money-matters, which has vexed your
papa.'

'And what has Philip to do with it?'

'I cannot quite tell, my dear. I believe Margaret Henley has heard
something, but I do not know the whole.'

'Did you see his letter, mamma? said Amy, in a low, trembling voice.

'Yes, it is just like himself, and absolutely denies the accusations.'

Amy did not say 'then they are false,' but she held up her head.

'Then papa is satisfied?' she said.

'I have no doubt all will be made clear in time,' said her mother; 'but
there is still something unexplained, and I am afraid things may not
go smoothly just now. I am very sorry, my little Amy, that such a cloud
should have come over you, she added, smoothing fondly the long, soft
hair, sad at heart to see the cares and griefs of womanhood gathering
over her child's bright, young life.

'I said I must learn to bear things!' murmured Amy to herself. 'Only,'
and the tears filled her eyes, and she spoke with almost childish
simplicity of manner, 'I can't bear them to vex him. I wish Philip would
let papa settle it alone. Guy will be angry, and grieved afterwards.'

They were interrupted by the dinner-bell, but Amy ran into her own room
for one moment.

'I said I would learn to bear,' said she to herself, 'or I shall never
be fit for him. Yes, I will, even though it is the thinking he is
unhappy. He said I must be his Verena; I know what that means; I ought
not to be uneasy, for he will bear it beautifully, and say he is glad of
it afterwards. And I will try not to seem cross to Philip.'

Mr. Edmonstone was fidgety and ill at ease, found fault with the dinner,
and was pettish with his wife. Mrs. Edmonstone set Philip off
upon politics, which lasted till the ladies could escape into the
drawing-room. In another minute Philip brought in Charles, set him down,
and departed. Amy, who was standing by the window, resting her forehead
against the glass, and gazing into the darkness, turned round hastily,
and left the room, but in passing her brother, she put her hand into
his, and received a kind pressure. Her mother followed her, and the
other three all began to wonder. Charles said he had regularly been
turned out of the dining-room by Philip, who announced that he wanted to
speak to his uncle, and carried him off.

They conjectured, and were indignant at each other's conjectures, till
their mother returned, and gave them as much information as she could;
but this only made them very anxious. Charles was certain that Mrs.
Henley had laid a cockatrice egg, and Philip was hatching it; and Laura
could not trust herself to defend Philip, lest she should do it too
vehemently. They could all agree in desire to know the truth, in hope
that Guy was not culpable, and, above all, in feeling for Amy; but by
tacit consent they were silent on the three shades of opinion in their
minds. Laura was confident that Philip was acting for the best; Mrs.
Edmonstone thought he might be mistaken in his premises, but desirous of
Guy's real good; and Charles, though sure he would allege nothing which
he did not believe to be true, also thought him ready to draw the worst
conclusions from small grounds, and to take pleasure in driving Mr.
Edmonstone to the most rigorous measures.

Philip, meanwhile, was trying to practise great moderation and
forbearance, not bringing forward at first what was most likely to
incense Mr. Edmonstone, and without appearance of animosity in his cool,
guarded speech. There was no design in this, he meant only to be just;
yet anything less cool would have had far less effect.

When he shut the dining-room door, he found his uncle wavering, touched
by the sight of his little Amy, returning to his first favourable view
of Guy's letter, ready to overlook everything, accept the justification,
and receive his ward on the same footing as before, though he was at
the same time ashamed that Philip should see him relent, and desirous
of keeping up his character for firmness, little guessing how his nephew
felt his power over him, and knew that he could wield him at will.

Perceiving and pitying his feebleness, and sincerely believing strong
measures the only rescue for Amy, the only hope for Guy, Philip found
himself obliged to work on him by the production of another letter from
his sister. He would rather, if possible, have kept this back, so much
did his honourable feeling recoil from what had the air of slander and
mischief-making; but he regarded firmness on his uncle's part as the
only chance for Guy or for his cousin, and was resolved not to let him
swerve from strict justice.

Mrs. Henley had written immediately after Guy's outburst in her house,
and, taking it for granted that her brother would receive a challenge,
she wrote in the utmost alarm, urging him to remember how precious he
was to her, and not to depart from his own principles.

'You would not be so mad as to fight him, eh?' said Mr. Edmonstone,
anxiously. 'You know better--besides, for poor Amy's sake.'

'For the sake of right,' replied Philip, 'no. I have reassured my
sister. I have told her that, let the boy do what he will, he shall
never make me guilty of his death.'

'You have heard from him, then?'

'No; I suppose a night's reflection convinced him that he had no
rational grounds for violent proceedings, and he had sense enough not to
expose himself to such an answer as I should have given. What caused his
wrath to be directed towards me especially, I cannot tell, nor can my
sister,' said Philip, looking full at his uncle; 'but I seem to have
come in for a full share of it.'

He proceeded to read the description of Guy's passion, and the
expressions he had used. Violent as it had been, it did not lose in
Mrs. Henley's colouring; and what made the effect worse was that she had
omitted to say she had overheard his language, so that it appeared as
if he had been unrestrained even by gentlemanly feeling, and had thus
spoken of her brother and uncle in her presence.

Mr. Edmonstone was resentful now, really displeased, and wounded to the
quick. The point on which he was especially sensitive was his reputation
for sense and judgment; and that Guy, who had shown him so much respect
and affection, whom he had treated with invariable kindness, and
received into his family like a son, that he should thus speak of him
shocked him extremely. He was too much overcome even to break out into
exclamations at first, he only drank off his glass of wine hastily, and
said, 'I would never have thought it!'

With these words, all desire for forbearance and toleration departed. If
Guy could speak thus of him, he was ready to believe any accusation,
to think him deceitful from the first, to say he had been trifling with
Amy, to imagine him a confirmed reprobate, and cast him off entirely.
Philip had some difficulty to restrain him from being too violent;
and to keep him to the matter in hand, he defended Guy from the
exaggerations of his imagination in a manner which appeared highly
noble, considering how Guy had spoken of him. Before they parted that
night, another letter had been written, which stood thus,--


'DEAR SIR GUY,--Since you refuse the confidence which I have a right to
demand, since you elude the explanation I asked, and indulge yourself in
speaking in disrespectful terms of me and my family, I have every reason
to suppose that you have no desire to continue on the same footing as
heretofore at Hollywell. As your guardian, I repeat that I consider
myself bound to keep a vigilant watch over your conduct, and, if
possible, to recover you from the unhappy course in which you have
involved yourself: but all other intercourse between you and this family
must cease. 'Your horse shall be sent to Redclyffe to-morrow.

                                'Yours faithfully,
                                   'C. EDMONSTONE.'


This letter was more harsh than Philip wished; but Mr. Edmonstone would
hardly be prevailed on to consent to enter on no further reproaches.
He insisted on banishing Deloraine, as well as on the mention of Guy's
disrespect, both against his nephew's opinion; but it was necessary to
let him have his own way on these points, and Philip thought himself
fortunate in getting a letter written which was in any degree rational
and moderate.

They had been so busy, and Mr. Edmonstone so excited, that Philip
thought it best to accept the offer of tea being sent them in the
dining-room, and it was not till nearly midnight that their conference
broke up, when Mr. Edmonstone found his wife sitting up by the
dressing-room fire, having shut Charles's door, sorely against his will.

'There,' began Mr. Edmonstone, 'you may tell Amy she may give him up,
and a lucky escape she has had. But this is what comes of settling
matters in my absence.' So he proceeded with the narration, mixing the
facts undistinguishably with his own surmises, and overwhelming his wife
with dismay. If a quarter of this was true, defence of Guy was out of
the question; and it was still more impossible to wish Amy's attachment
to him to continue; and though much was incredible, it was no time to
say so. She could only hope morning would soften her husband's anger,
and make matters explicable.

Morning failed to bring her comfort. Mr. Edmonstone repeated that Amy
must be ordered to give up all thoughts of Guy, and she perceived that
the words ascribed to him stood on evidence which could not be doubted.
She could believe he might have spoken them in the first shock of an
unjust imputation, and she thought he might have been drawn into some
scrape to serve a friend; but she could never suppose him capable of all
Mr. Edmonstone imagined.

The first attempt to plead his cause, however, brought on her an angry
reply; for Philip, by a hint, that she never saw a fault in Guy, had put
it into his uncle's head that she would try to lead him, and made him
particularly inaccessible to her influence.

There was no help for it, then; poor little Amy must hear the worst;
and it was not long before Mrs. Edmonstone found her waiting in the
dressing-room. Between obedience to her husband, her conviction of Guy's
innocence, and her tenderness to her daughter, Mrs. Edmonstone had a
hard task, and she could scarcely check her tears as Amy nestled up for
her morning kiss.

'O mamma! what is it?'

'Dearest, I told you a cloud was coming. Try to bear it. Your papa is
not satisfied with Guy's answer, and it seems he spoke some hasty words
of papa and Philip; they have displeased papa very much, and, my dear
child, you must try to bear it, he has written to tell Guy he must not
think any more of you.'

'He has spoken hasty words of papa!' repeated Amy, as if she had not
heard the rest. 'How sorry he must be!'

As she spoke, Charles's door was pushed open, and in he came, half
dressed, scrambling on, with but one crutch, to the chair near which she
stood, with drooping head and clasped hands.

'Never mind, little Amy, he said; 'I'll lay my life 'tis only some
monstrous figment of Mrs. Henley's. Trust my word, it will right itself;
it is only a rock to keep true love from running too smooth. Come, don't
cry, as her tears began to flow fast, 'I only meant to cheer you up.'

'I am afraid, Charlie, said his mother, putting a force on her own
feeling, 'it is not the best or kindest way to do her good by telling
her to dwell on hopes of him.'

'Mamma one of Philip's faction!' exclaimed Charles.

'Of no faction at all, Charles, but I am afraid it is a bad case;' and
Mrs. Edmonstone related what she knew; glad to address herself to any
one but Amy, who stood still, meanwhile, her hands folded on the back of
her brother's chair.

Charles loudly protested that the charges were absurd and preposterous,
and would be proved so in no time. He would finish dressing instantly,
go to speak to his father, and show him the sense of the thing. Amy
heard and hoped, and his mother, who had great confidence in his clear
sight, was so cheered as almost to expect that today's post might carry
a conciliatory letter.

Meantime, Laura and Philip met in the breakfast-room, and in answer to
her anxious inquiry, he had given her an account of Guy, which, though
harsh enough, was far more comprehensible than what the rest had been
able to gather.

She was inexpressibly shocked, 'My poor dear little Amy!' she exclaimed.
'O Philip, now I see all you thought to save me from!'

'It is an unhappy business that it ever was permitted!'

'Poor little dear! She was so happy, so very happy and sweet in her
humility and her love. Do you know, Philip, I was almost jealous for a
moment that all should be so easy for them; and I blamed poverty; but
oh! there are worse things than poverty!'

