"Everything is in your hands," Peter answered.

"You'd better go down and have something to eat."

The little cry came trembling and pitiful, driving straight into Peter's
heart.

"Temperature 105--pretty bad." Mitchell, who was a stout, short man with
red cheeks, grey eyes and the air of an amiable Robin, was transformed now
into something sharp, alert, official.

Peter caught his arm--

"It's all right?... you don't think--?"

The man turned and looked at him with eyes so kind that Peter trembled.

"Look here, we've got to fight it, Westcott. I ought to have been called
hours ago. But keep your head and we'll pull the child through.... Better
go down and have something to eat. You'll need it."

Outside the door Peter faced a trembling Mrs. Kant.

"Look here, you lied just now. You never took the boy's temperature."

"Well, sir--"

"Did you or not?"

"Well, sir, Mrs. Westcott said there was no need. I'm sure I thought--"

"You leave the house now--at once. Go up and pack your things and clear
out. If I see you here in an hour's time the police shall turn you out."

The woman began to cry. Peter went downstairs. To his own surprise he found
that he could eat and drink. Of so fundamental an importance was young
Stephen in his life that the idea that he could ever lose him was of an
absurd and monstrous incredibility. No, of that there was no question--but
he was conscious nevertheless of the supreme urgency of the occasion.
That young Stephen had ever been delicate or in any way a weakling was
a monstrous suggestion. Always when one thought of him it was a baby
laughing, tumbling--or thoughtfully, with his hand rolled tightly inside
his father's, taking in the world.

Just think of all the tottering creatures who go on and on and snap their
fingers at death. The grotesque old men and women! Or think of the feeble
miserables who never know what a day's health means--crowding into Davos or
shuddering on the Riviera!

And young Stephen, the strongest, most vital thing in the world!
Nevertheless, suddenly, Peter found that he could eat and drink no more. He
put the food aside and went upstairs again.

In the darkened nursery he sat in a chair by the fire and waited for the
hours to pass. The new nurse had arrived and moved quietly about the room.
There was no sound at all save the monotonous whispering beseeching little
cries that came from the bed. One had heard that concentration of will
might do so much in the directing of such a battle, and surely great
love must help. Peter, as he sat in the half-darkness thought that he
had never before realised his love for the boy--how immense it was--how
all-pervading, so that if it were taken from him life would be instantly
broken, without colour, without any rhythm or force.

As he sat there he thought confusedly of a great number of things of his
own childhood--of his mother--of a boy at Dawson's who had asked him once
as they gazed up at a great mass of apple blossoms in bloom, "Do you think
there is anything in all that stuff about God anyway, Westcott?"--of a
night when he had gone with some loose woman of the town and of the wet
miry street that they had left behind them as she had closed the door--of
that night at the party when he had seen Cardillac again--of the things
that Maradick had said to him that night when young Stephen was born--and
so from that to his own life, his own birth, his father, Scaw House, the
struggle that it had all been.

He remembered a sentence out of a strange novel of Dostoieffsky's that
he had once read, "The Brothers Karamazoff": "It's a feature of the
Karamazoffs ... that thirst for life regardless of everything--" and the
Karamazoffs were of a sensual, debased stock--rotten at the base of them
with an old drunken buffoon of a father--yes, that was like the Westcotts.
All his life, struggle ... and young Stephen--all _his_ life, struggle...
and yet, even in the depths of degradation, if the fight were to go that
way there would still be that lust for life.

So many times he had been almost under. First Stephen Brant had saved him,
then at Brockett's Norah Monogue, then in Bucket Lane his illness, then in
Chelsea his marriage, lately young Stephen... always, always something had
been there to keep him on his feet. But if everything were taken from him,
if he were absolutely, nakedly alone--what then? Ah, what then!

He buried his head in his hands. "God, you don't know what young Stephen is
to me--or, yes, of course you do know, God--and because you do know, you
will not take him from me."

The little tearing pain at his heart held him--every now and again it
turned like some grinding key.

Mitchell entered with another doctor. Peter went over to the window, and
whilst they made their examination, stared through the glass at the
fretwork of trees, the golden haze of London beyond, two stars that now,
when the storm had spent itself, showed in a dark dim sky. Very faintly the
clanging note of trams, the clatter of a hansom cab, the imperative call of
some bell came to him.

The world could thus go on! Mitchell crossed to him and put his hand on his
shoulder--

"He's pretty bad, Westcott. An operation's out of the question I'm afraid.
But if you'd like another opinion--"

"No thanks. I trust you and Hunt." The doctor could feel the boy's body
trembling beneath his touch.

"It's all right, Westcott. Don't be frightened. We'll do all mortals can.
We'll know in the early morning how things are going to be. The child's got
a splendid constitution."

He was interrupted by the opening of the nursery door and, turning, the men
saw Clare with the light of the passage at her back, standing in the
doorway. Her cloak was trailing on the floor--around her her pink filmy
dress hung like shadows from the light behind her. Her face was white, her
eyes wide.

"What--?" she whispered in the voice of a frightened child.

Peter crossed the room, and took her with him into the passage, closing the
door behind him.

She clung to him, looking up into his face.

"Stephen's very bad, dear. No, it's something internal--"

"And I went out to a party?" her voice was trembling, she was very near to
tears. "But I was miserable, wretched all the time. I wanted to come back,
I knew I oughtn't to have gone.... Oh Peter, will he die? Oh! poor little
thing! Poor little thing!"

Even at that moment, Peter noticed, she spoke as though it were somebody
else's baby.

"No, no, dear. It'll be all right. Of course it will. Mitchell's here,
he'll pull him through. But you'd better go and lie down, dear. I promise
to come and tell you if anything's the matter. You can't do any
good--there's an excellent nurse!"

"Where's Mrs. Kant?"

"I dismissed her this evening for lying to me. Go to bed. Clare--really
it's the best thing."

She began to cry with her hands up to her face, but she went, slowly, with
her cloak still trailing after her, to her room.

She had not, he noticed, entered the nursery.


III

He went back and sat down again in the arm-chair by the fire. Poor Clare!
he felt only a great protecting pity for her--a strange feeling, compounded
of emotions that were unexpectedly confused. A feeling that was akin to
what he would have felt had she been his sister and been insulted by some
drunken blackguard in the street. Poor Clare! She was so young--simply not
up to these big grown-up troubles.

Those little cries had ceased--only every now and again an echo of a
moan--so slight was the sound that broke the silence. The hours advanced
and there settled about the house that chilly ominous sense of anticipation
that the early morning brings in its grey melancholy hands. It was a little
house but it was full, now, of expectancy. Up the stairs, through the
passages, pressing against the windows there were many presences waiting
for the moment when the issue of this struggle would be decided. The air
was filled with their chill breath. The struggle round the bed was at its
height. On one side doctors, nurses, the father, the mother--on the other
that still, ironic Figure, in His very aloofness so strong, in His
indifference so terrible.

With Peter, as the grey dawn grew nearer, confidence fled. He was suddenly
conscious of the strength and invisibility of the thing that he was
fighting. He must do something. If he were compelled to sit, silently,
quietly, with his hands folded, much longer, he would go mad. But it was
absurd--Stephen, about whom he had made so many plans, Stephen, concerning
whom there had been that struggle to bring about his very existence ...
surely all that was not now to go for nothing at all.

If he could do something--if he could do something!

There were drops of sweat on his forehead--inside his clothes his body was
hot and dry and had shrunk, it seemed, into some tiny shape, like a nut, so
that his things hung loosely all about him.

He could not bear that dark cavernous nursery, with the faint lights and
the stairs and passages beyond it so crowded with urgent silence!

He caught Mitchell on the shoulder.

"How is it?"

"Oh! we're fighting it. It's the most rapid thing I've ever known. If we
only could have operated! Look here, go and lie down for a bit--I'll let
you know if there's any change!"

He went to his dressing-room, all ghostly now with the first struggling
light of dawn. He closed the door behind him and then fell down on his
knees by the bed, pressing his face into his hands.

He prayed: "Oh! God, God, God. I have never wanted anything like this
before but Stephen is more to me, much, much more to me than anything that
I have ever had--more, far more than my own life. I haven't much to offer
but if you will let me keep Stephen you can have all the rest. You can send
me back to Bucket Lane, take my work, anything ... I want Stephen ... I
want Stephen. God, he is such a good boy. He has always been good and he
will make such a fine man. There won't be many men so fine as he. He's good
as gold. God I will die myself if he may live, I'm no use. I've made a mess
of things--but let him live and take me. Oh! God I want him, I want him!"

He broke into sobs and was bowed down there on the floor, his body
quivering, his face pressed against the bed.

He was conscious that Clare had joined him. She must have heard him from
her room. He tried as he felt her body pressed against his, to pull himself
together, but the crying now had mastered him and he could only feel her
pushing with her hand to find his--and at last he let her take his hand and
hold it.

He heard her whisper in his ear.

"Peter dear, don't--don't cry like that. I can't bear to hear you like
that. I'm so miserable, Peter. I've been so wicked--so cross and selfish.
I've hurt you so often--I'm going to be better, Peter. I am really."

At that moment they might have come together with a reality, an honesty
that no after-events could have shaken. But to Peter Clare was very far
away. He was not so conscious of her as he was of those presences that
thronged the house. What could she do for him now? Afterwards perhaps. But
now it was Stephen--Stephen--Stephen--

But he let her hold his hand and he felt her hair against his cheek, and at
last he put his arm around her and held her close to him, and she, with her
face against his, went fast asleep. He looked down at her. She looked so
young and helpless that the sight of her leaning, tired and beaten, against
him, touched him and he picked her up, carried her into her room and laid
her on her bed.

How light and tiny she was!

He was conscious of his own immense fatigue. Mitchell had told him that he
would wake him; good fellow, Mitchell! He lay down on the bed in his
dressing-room and was instantly asleep.

He was outside Scaw House. He was mother-naked and the howling wind and
rain buffeted his body and the stones cut his feet. The windows of the
house were dark and barred. He could just reach the lower windows with his
hands if he stood on tiptoe.

He tapped again and again.

He was tired, exhausted. He had come a long, long way and the rain hurt his
bare flesh. At last a candle shone dimly behind the dark window. Some one
was there, and instantly at the moment of his realising that aid had come
he was conscious also that he must, on all accounts, refuse it. He knew
that if he entered the house Stephen would die. It depended on him to save
Stephen. He turned to flee but his father had unbarred the door and was
drawing him in. He struggled, he cried out, he fought, but his father was
stronger than he. He was on the threshold--he could see through the dark
ill-smelling hall to the door beyond. His father's hand fastened on his arm
like a vice. His body was bathed in sweat, he screamed ... and woke to find
the room dim in the morning light and Mitchell shaking him by the arm.


IV

He was still dreaming. Now he was in the nursery. Clare was kneeling by
Stephen's bed. One doctor was bending down--the nurse was crying very
softly.

He looked down on his son. As he looked the little face was, for an
instant, puckered with pain. The mouth, the eyes, the throat struggled.

The tiny hands lifted for a moment, hung, and then like fluttering leaves,
fell down on to the counterpane. Then the body was suddenly quiet, the face
was peaceful and the head had fallen gently, sideways against the pillow.

At that moment of time, throughout the house, the Presences departed. The
passages, the rooms were freed, the air was no longer cold.

At that moment also Peter awoke. Mitchell said: "The boy's gone, Westcott."

Peter, turning his back upon them all, drove from him, so softly that they
could scarcely hear, but in a voice of agony that Mitchell never afterwards
forgot:--

"I wanted him so--I wanted him so."


CHAPTER XII

A WOMAN CALLED ROSE BENNETT


I

The days that followed were dead--dead in more than any ordinary sense of
the word. But perhaps it was Peter who was dead. He moved, ate, drank, even
wrote his reviews, slept--he thanked gravely all those who offered him
condolences--wrote letters in answer to kind friends.... "Dear S---- It was
just like you to write so kindly and sympathetically...." And all this time
he was without any kind of emotion. He was aware that there was something
in the back of his brain that, were it once called upon to awake, might
stir him into life again. What it would tell him he did not know, something
about love, something intensely sorrowful, something that had occurred very
probably to himself. He did not want to live--to think, to feel. Thinking
meant pain, meant a sudden penetrating into that room shrouded now by
heavy, black curtains but containing, were those curtains drawn, some
great, phantasmal horror.

He was dimly aware that the people about him were frightened. Clare, Bobby
Galleon, Cardillac. He knew that they would be glad for him to draw those
curtains aside and penetrate into that farther room. That was unkind of
them. He had no other emotion but that it was unkind of them. Beyond that
unkindness, they did not exist.

He was thinner. His shoulders seemed to pierce sharply his clothes; his
cheeks were white and hollow, there were dark lines beneath his eyes, dark,
grey patches. His legs were not so straight, nor so strong. Moreover his
eyes were as though they were covered with a film. Seeing everything they
yet saw nothing at all. They passed through the world and were confronted
by the heavy, veiling curtains....

This condition lasted for many days. Of all about him none understood him
so well as Bobby Galleon. Bobby had always understood him, and now he felt
for him with a tenderness that had both the past and the future to heighten
its poignancy. It seemed to Bobby that nothing more tragic than the death
of this child could possibly have occurred. It filled him with anxiety for
the future, it intensified to a depth that only so simple and affectionate
a character as his could feel, the love that he had always had for Peter.

He was with him during these days continually, waiting for the relief to
come.

"It's got to come soon," he said, "or the boy'll go mad."

At last it came.

One day about tea-time they were sitting in Peter's upstairs study. It had
been a day of showers and now the curtains were not drawn and a green-grey
dusk glimmered beyond the windows.

Peter was writing letters, and as Bobby watched him he seemed to him like
some automaton, something wound into life by some clever inventor. The hand
moved across the paper--the dead eyes encountered nothing in their gaze,
the shoulders were the loosely drooping shoulders of an old man.

"Can you see, Peter?"

"Yes, thanks. Switch on the light if you like."

Bobby got up and moved to the door. The dusk behind Peter's face flung it
into sharp white outline.

Another shower! The rain at first in single drops, then more swiftly, fell
with gentle, pattering fingers up and down the window. It was the only
sound, except the scraping of Peter's pen. The pen stopped. Peter raised
his head, listening.

Bobby switched on the light and as he did so Peter in a strangled
breathless mutter whispered--

"The rain! The rain! It was like that that night. Stephen! Stephen!"

His head fell on to his hands and he burst into a storm of tears.


II

And now Peter was out to be hurt, hurt more horribly than he could have
ever believed possible. It was like walking--as they did in the days of the
Ordeal--on red-hot iron, every step an agony. Always there was something to
remind him! He could go nowhere, see nobody, summon no kind of recollection
out of the past without this coming to him. There were a thousand things
that Stephen had done, that he, Peter, had never noticed at the time. He
was haunted now with regrets, he had not made enough of him whilst he was
there! Ah! had he only known that the time was to be so short! How he would
have spent those precious, precious moments! It was as though he had flung
away, wilfully, possessions of the utmost price--cast them off as though it
had been his very intention to feel, afterwards, this burning regret. The
things in the nursery were packed away, but there remained the room, the
frieze with the dragons and princesses, the fire-place, the high broad
window. Again and again he saw babies in the streets, in the parks and
fancied that Stephen had come back again.

The thing had happened to him so swiftly that, behind reason, there lurked
the thought that perhaps, with equal suddenness, Stephen would be restored.
To come back one afternoon and to find him there! To find him lying there
on his back in his cot looking up at the ceiling, to find him labouring
unsteadily on his feet, clinging to the sides of his bed and shouting--to
find him laughing at the jumping waves in the fire--to find him!... No,
never to be found again--gone, hopelessly, cruelly, for no reason, for no
one's good or benefit--simply for some one's sport.

But, strangely, more than the actual Stephen did he miss the imaginary
future Stephen at school, hero of a thousand games, winner of a thousand
prizes, the Stephen grown up, famous already at so young an age, loved by
men and women, handsome, good.... Oh! the folly of it! No human being could
carry all the glories that Peter had designed for his son--no human being,
then how much less a Westcott. It might be best after all, young Stephen
had been spared. Until every stone of Scaw House was level with the ground
no Westcott could be termed safe--perhaps not then.

Now he realised how huge a place in his heart the boy had filled dimly,
because as yet he refused to bring it to the open light he was conscious
that, during these past two years he had been save for Stephen, a very
lonely man. It was odd that Stephen the elder and Stephen the younger
should have been the only two persons in his life to find the real inside
of him--they, too, and perhaps Norah Monogue. But, otherwise, not Bobby,
nor Cards, nor Alice Galleon, nor Mr. Zanti--nor Clare.

Not Clare. He faced the fact with a sudden shudder. Now that Stephen was
gone he and Clare were face to face--face to face as they had never been
since that first happy year of their marriage. That first year of their
marriage--and now!

With an instant clenching of his teeth he pulled down the blinds upon that
desolating view.


III

With teeth still clenched he set himself to build up his house again. Clare
was very quiet and submissive during those first weeks. Her little figure
looked helpless and appealing in its deep black; she was prettier than she
had ever been in her life before. People said, "Poor Mrs. Westcott, she
feels the loss of her baby so dreadfully"--and they didn't think about
Peter. Indeed some people thought him callous. "Mr. Westcott seemed to be
so fond of the child. Now I really believe he's forgotten all about him."
Bobby was the only person in the world who knew how Peter suffered.

Clare was, indeed, after a time, reassured. Peter, after all, seemed not to
mind. Did he mind anything? He was so often glum and silent that really you
couldn't tell. Clare herself had been frightened on that night when the
baby had died. She had probably never in all her life felt a more genuine
emotion than she had known when she knelt by Peter's side and went to sleep
in his arms. She was quite ready to feel that emotion again would Peter but
allow her. But no. He showed no emotion himself and expected no one else to
show any, for he was ready to share it but in her heart of hearts she
longed to fling away from her this emotional atmosphere. She had loved the
baby--of course she had loved it. But she had always known that something
would happen to it--always. If Peter would insist on having those horrid
Cornishmen.... At heart she connected that dreadful day when those horrible
men had played about in the nursery with baby's death. Of course it was
enough to kill any baby.

So, ultimately, it all came back to Peter's fault. Clare found real
satisfaction in the thought. Meanwhile she emphatically stated her desire
to be happy again.

She stated it always in Peter's absence, feeling that he would, in no way,
understand her. "It can't help poor dear little Stephen that we should go
on being melancholy and doing nothing. That's only morbid, isn't it,
mother?"

Mrs. Rossiter entirely agreed, as indeed she always agreed with anything
that Clare suggested.

"The dear thing does look lovely in black, though," she confided to Mrs.
Galleon. "Mr. Cardillac couldn't take his eyes off her yesterday at
luncheon."

Mrs. Rossiter and Jerry Cardillac had, during the last year, become the
very best of friends. Peter was glad to see that it was so. Peter couldn't
pretend to care very deeply about his mother-in-law, but he felt that it
would do her all the good in the world to see something of old Cards. It
would broaden her understanding, give her perhaps some of that charity
towards the whole world that was one of Cards' most charming features.
Cards, in fact, had been so much in the house lately that he might be
considered one of the family. No one could have been more tender, more
sympathetic, more exactly right about young Stephen's death. He had become,
during those weeks almost a necessity. He seemed to have no particular
interest of his own in life. He dressed very perfectly, he went to a number
of parties, he had delightful little gatherings in his own flat, but, with
it all, he was something more--a great deal more--than the mere society
idler. There was a hint at possible wildness, an almost sinister suggestion
of possible lawlessness that made him infinitely attractive. He was such
good company and yet one felt that one didn't know nearly the whole of him.

To Peter he was the most wonderful thing in the world, to Clare he was
rapidly becoming so--no wonder then that the Roundabout saw him so often.


IV

It would need a very acute perception indeed to pursue precisely the train
of cause and effect in Mrs. Rossiter's mind after young Stephen's death.
Her black garments added, in the most astonishing fashion, to her placid
flatness. If she had gloried before in an armour that was so negative that
it became instantly exceedingly dangerous, her appearance now was
terrifying beyond all words. Her black silk had apparently no creases, no
folds--it almost eliminated terms and boundaries. Mrs. Rossiter could not
now be said to come into a room--she was simply there. One was sitting,
gazing it might be at the fire, a looking-glass, a picture or two, when
suddenly there came a black shadow, something that changed the colour of
things a little, something that obscured certain objects, but scarcely
anything more definite. The yellow brooch was definite, cold, stony eyes
hung a little above it, over those a high white forehead--otherwise merely
a black shadow putting out the fire.

She was in the Roundabout now all the time. How poor Dr. Rossiter fared it
was difficult to imagine, but he cared for Clare as deeply as his wife did
and was quite ready for everything to be sacrificed to her at this crisis
of her history.

Mrs. Rossiter, meanwhile, was entirely convinced that Peter was responsible
for his son's death. Had you suddenly challenged her and demanded her
reasoned argument with regard to this matter she would probably have failed
you--she did not like reasoned arguments--but she would also have been most
sincerely indignant had you called her a liar and would have sworn to her
convictions before a court of law.

"Those Cornishmen" had frightened the poor little thing into fits and it
was only to be expected. Moreover it followed from this that a man who
murdered his only child would most assuredly take to beating his wife
before very long. After that, anything might happen. Peter was on a swift
road to being a "Perfect Devil."

Indeed, allow Mrs. Rossiter two consecutive hours of peace and quiet, she,
sitting like the personification of the English climate, alone before her
fire, and she could make any one into anything--once made so they remained.

It mattered nothing to her that poor Peter was, during these weeks, the
most subdued and gently courteous of husbands--that was as it might be (a
favourite phrase of hers). She knew him ... and, so knowing, waited for the
inevitable end.

But the more certain she was of his villainous possibilities the more
placid she became. She spread her placidity over everything. It lay, like
an invisible glue, upon everything in the Roundabout--you could feel it on
the door-handles, as you feel the jammy reminiscences of incautious
servant-maids. Peter felt it but did not know what it was that he had to
deal with.

He had determined, when the sharpest shock of Stephen's death had passed,
and he was able to think of other things, that the supremely important
thing for him now to do was to get back to his old relations with Clare.
There was, he grimly reflected, "Mortimer Stant" to be finished within a
month or two and he knew, perfectly well, with the assurance of past
experience that whilst Clare held the stage, Mortimer had the poorest of
chances--nevertheless Clare was, at this moment, the thing to struggle
for.

He _must_ get her back--he _must_ get her back.

Behind his brain, all this time, was the horror of being left alone in the
world and of what he might do--then.

To get Clare back he must have the assistance of two people--Mrs. Rossiter
and Cards.

It was at this point that he perceived Mrs. Rossiter's placidity.

He could not get at her at all--he could not get near her. He tried in
every way, during these weeks, to please her. She apparently noticed
nothing. He could force no direct opinion about anything from her and yet
he was conscious of opposition. He was conscious of opposition,
increasingly, every day.

"I believe she _wants_ Clare to hate me," he suddenly revealed to himself,
and, with that, all hope of her as an ally vanished.

Then he hated her--he hated her more bitterly every day.

He wanted to tell her not to call him "Peter dear"--she loved to put him in
positions that showed him in the worst light to Clare.

At luncheon for instance: "Peter dear, it would be a nice thing for you and
Clare to go to that Private View at the Carfax this afternoon. You've
nothing to do, Clare, have you?"

Peter knew that Mrs. Rossiter had already ascertained that he was engaged.
He knew also that Clare had had no thought of Peter's company before but
that now she would very speedily feel herself injured.

"I'm afraid--" Peter would begin.

"Peter's too engaged to take you, Clare dear."

"I dare say Jerry will come--" this from Clare.

"Ah! yes, Mr. Cardillac is always ready to take any trouble, Peter."

"If you'd let me know earlier, Clare, that you wanted me."

Mrs. Rossiter. "Oh! don't put yourself out, Peter. It would never do to
break an engagement. Only it seems such a long time since you and Clare--"

Peter. "We'll go to-morrow afternoon, Clare."

Clare. "You're so gloomy when you do come, Peter. It's like going out with
a ghost."

Mrs. Rossiter. "Ah! Peter has his work, dear--so much hangs on the next
book, doesn't it, Peter? Naturally the last one didn't quite--"

Peter. "Look here, Clare, I'll chuck this engagement."

Clare. "No, thank you, Peter--Jerry and I will be all right. You can join
us if you like--"

The fact was that Peter wasn't tactful. He showed Mrs. Rossiter much too
plainly that he disliked her intensely. He had no idea that he showed it
her. He thought, indeed, that he was very skilful in his disguise of his
feelings but Mrs. Rossiter knew and soon Clare knew also.

Peter had no conception of subtlety in the matter. It was clear to him that
he had once been devoted to Clare and she to him, it was clear also that
that relationship had recently been dimmed. Now that Stephen was gone that
early intimacy must be restored and the fact that he was willing on his
side to do anything to bring it back seemed to him reason enough for its
restoration. That the whole matter was composed of the most delicate and
intricate threads never occurred to him for an instant. Clare had loved him
once. Clare would love him again--and the sooner it happened the better for
him.

Meanwhile Mrs. Rossiter being enemy rather than ally there remained Cards.

But Cards was strange. Peter could never claim to have been intimate with
him--their relationship had been founded on an inequality, on a recognition
from Peter of Cards' superiority. Cards had always laughed at Peter, always
patronised him. But now, although Cards had been in the place so much of
late, the distance seemed farther than ever before.

Cards was as kind as he could be--always in good spirits, always ready to
do anything, but Peter noticed that it was only when Clare was present that
Cards changed from jest to earnest. "He thinks Clare worth talking to
seriously.... I suppose it's because he was at Dawson's ... but after all
I'm not an imbecile."

This attitude of Cards was in fact as vague and nebulous as all the other
things that seemed now to stand between Peter and Clare.

Peter tried to talk to Cards--he was always prevented--held off with a
laughing hand.

"What's the matter with me?" thought Peter. "What have I done? It's like
being out in a fog."

At last one evening, after dinner, when Clare and Mrs. Rossiter had gone
upstairs he demanded an answer.

"Look here, Cards, what have I done? You profess to be a friend of mine.
Tell me what crime I've committed?"

Cards' eyes had been laughing. Suddenly he was serious. His dark, clean-cut
face was stern, almost accusing.

"Profess, Peter? I hope you don't doubt it?"

"No, of course not. You know you're the best friend I've got. Tell me--what
have I done?"

"Done?"

"Yes--you and Clare and her mother--all of you keep me at arms'
length--why?"

"Do you really want a straight talking?"

"Of course."

"Well, I can only speak for myself--but--to tell the truth, old boy--I
think you've been rather hard on poor little Clare."

For the first time since his marriage Peter resented Cards' words. "Poor
little Clare"--wasn't that a little too intimate?

"What do you mean?" he asked, his voice a little harder.

"Well--I don't think you understand her, Peter."

"Explain."

"She's a happy, merry person if ever there was one in this world. She wants
all the happiness you can give her--"

"Well?"

"Well, you don't seem to see that. Of course young Stephen's death--"

"Let's leave that--" Peter's voice was harder again.

"Oh, all right--just as you please. But most men would have seen what a
shock it must be to a girl, so young, who knew so little about the cruelty
of life. You didn't--you don't mind, Peter, do you?--you didn't seem to
think of that. Never tried to cheer her up, take her about, take her out of
herself. You just wrapped yourself up--"

"You don't understand," muttered Peter, his eyes lowered. "If I'd thought
that she'd really minded Stephen's death--"

"Oh! come Peter--that's grossly unfair. Why, she felt it all most horribly.
That shows how little you've understood her, how little you've appreciated
her. You've always been a gloomy, morbid devil and--"

"All right, Cards--that'll do."

Cards stood back from the table, his mouth smiling, his eyes hard and cold.

"Oh! no, it won't. You asked for it and now you're going to get it. You've
not only been gloomy and morbid all your life, you've been selfish as
well--always thinking of yourself and the books you were going to write,
and then when they did come they weren't such great shakes. You oughtn't to
have married at all--you've never considered Clare at all--your treatment
of her--"

Peter stood up, his face white, so that his eyes and the lines of his mouth
showed black in the shadow.

"Clear out--I've heard enough."

"Oh! that's just like you--ask me for my opinion and then lose your temper
over it. Really, Peter, you're like a boy of ten--you don't deserve to be
treated as a grown-up person."

Peter's voice shook. "Clear out--clear out or I'll do for you--get out of
my house--"

"Certainly."

Cards opened the door and was gone. Peter heard him hesitate for a moment
in the hall, get his hat and coat and then close the hall-door after him.

The house was suddenly silent. Peter stood, his hands clenched. Then he
went out into the hall.

He heard Mrs. Rossiter's voice from above--"Aren't you two men ever coming
up?"

"Jerry's gone."

"Gone?"

"Yes--we've had a row."

Mrs. Rossiter made no reply. He heard the drawing-room door close. Then he,
too, took his coat and hat and went out.


V

The night was cool and sweet with a great silver haze of stars above the
sharply outlined roofs and chimneys. The golden mist from the streets met
the night air and mingled with it.

Peter walked furiously, without thinking of direction. Some clock struck
half-past nine. His temper faded swiftly, leaving him cold, miserable,
regretful. There went his damnable temper again, surging up suddenly so hot
and fierce that it had control of him almost before he knew that it was
there. How like him, too! Now when things were bad enough, when he must
bend all his energies to bringing peace back into the house again, he must
needs go and quarrel with the best friend he had in the world. He had never
quarrelled with Cards before, never had there been the slightest word
between them, and now he had insulted him so that, probably, he would never
come into their house again.

And behind his immediate repentance at the quarrel there also bit into his
heart the knowledge that there was truth in the accusation that Cardillac
had flung at him. He _had_ been morbid, he _had_ been selfish. Absorbed by
his own grief at Stephen's loss he had given no thought to any one else. He
had expected Clare to be like himself, had made no allowance for
differences of temperament, had.... Poor Peter had never before known an
hour of such miserable self-condemnation. Had he known where to find him he
would have gone that very instant to beg Cards' pardon.

Now, in comparison with his own black deeds, Mrs. Rossiter seemed an angel.
He should show her in the future that he could mend his ways. Clare should
make no further complaint of him. He found himself in Leicester Square and
still wrapt in his own miserable thoughts went into the Empire. He walked
up and down the Promenade wondering that so many people could take the
world so lightly. Very far away a gentleman in evening dress was singing
a song--his mouth could be seen to open and shut, sometimes his arms
moved--no sound could be heard.

The Promenade was packed. Up and down ladies in enormous hats walked
languidly. They all wore clothes that were gorgeous and a little soiled.
They walked for the most part in couples and appeared to be absorbed in
conversation, but every now and again they smiled mechanically, recognised
a friend or saw somebody who was likely very shortly to become one.

There was a great deal of noise. There were numbers of men--old gentlemen
who were there because they had always been there, young gentlemen who were
there because they had never been there before and a few gentlemen who had
come to see the Ballet.

The lights blazed, the heat and noise steadily accumulated, corks were
popped in the bar behind, promises were broken in the Promenade in front,
and soon after eleven, when everything had become so uncomfortable that the
very lights in the building protested, the doors were opened and the whole
Bubble and Squeak was flung out into the cool and starlit improprieties of
Leicester Square.

Peter could not have told you if he had been asked, that he had been there,
felt a devouring thirst and entered a building close at hand where there
were rows of little round tables and numbers of little round waiters.

Peter sat down at the first table that occurred to him and it was not until
he looked round about him that he discovered that a lady in a huge black
hat was sitting smiling opposite him. Her cheeks were rouged, her gloves
were soiled and her hair looked as though it might fall into a thousand
pieces at the slightest provocation, but her eyes were pathetic and tired.
They didn't belong to her face.

"Hullo, dear, let's have a drink. Haven't had a drink to-night."

He asked her what she would like and she told him. She studied him
carefully for quite a long time.

"Down on your luck, old chum?" she said at last."

"Yes, I am," Peter said, "a bit depressed."

"I know. I'm often that way myself. We all catch it. Come home and have a
bit of supper. That'll cheer you up."

"No, thanks," said Peter politely. "I must get back to my own place in a
minute."

"Well," said the lady. "Please yourself, and I'll have another drink if you
don't very much mind."

It was whilst he was ordering another drink that he came out of his own
thoughts and considered her.

"That's right," she said smiling, "have a good look. My name's Rose
Bennett. Here's my card. Perhaps you'd like to come and have tea with me
one day."

She gave him a very dirty card on which was written "Miss Rose Bennett, 4
Annton Street, Portland Place."

"You're Cornish," he suddenly said, looking at her.

She moved her soiled gloves up and down the little table--"Well, what if I
am?" she said defiantly, not looking at him.

"I knew it," said Peter triumphantly, "the way you rolled your r's--"

"Well, chuck it, dear," said Miss Bennett, "and let's talk sense. What's
Cornwall got to do with us anyhow?"

"I'm Cornish too," said Peter, "it's got a good deal to do with us. You
needn't tell me of course--but what part do you come from?"

Still sullenly she said: "Almost forgotten the name of it, so long ago. You
wouldn't know it anyway, it's such a little place. They called it
Portergwarra--"

"I know," cried Peter, "near the Land's End. Of course I know it. There are
holes in the rocks that they lift the boats through. There's a post-box on
the wall. I've walked there many a time--"

"Well, stow it, old man," Miss Bennett answered decisively. "I'm not
thinking of that place any more and I don't suppose they've thought of me
since. Why, it's years--"

She broke off and began hurriedly to drink. Peter's eyes sought her
eyes--his eyes were miserable and so were hers--but her mouth was hard and
laughing.

"It's funny talking of Cornwall," she said at last. "No one's spoken of the
place since I came up here. But it's all right, I tell you--quite all
right. You take it from me, chucky. I enjoy my life--have a jolly time.
There's disadvantages in every profession, and when you've got a bit of a
cold as I have now why--"

She stopped. Her eyes sought Peter's. He saw that she was nearly crying.

"Talking of Cornwall and all that," she muttered, "silly rot! I'm
tired--I'm going home."

He paid for the drinks and got a hansom.

At that moment as he stood looking over the horse into the dimly-lit
obscurities of the Square he thought with a sudden beating of the heart
that he recognised Cardillac looking at him from the doorway of a
neighbouring restaurant. Then the figure was gone. He had got Cardillac on
the brain! Nevertheless the suggestion made him suddenly conscious of poor
Miss Bennett's enormous hat, her rouge, her soiled finery that allowed no
question as to her position in the world.

Rather hurriedly he asked her to get into the cab.

"Come that far--" she said.

He got in with her and she took off one glove and he held her hand and they
didn't speak all the way.

When the hansom stopped at last he got down, helped her out and for a
moment longer held her hand.

"We're both pretty unhappy," he said. "Things have been going wrong with me
too. But think of Cornwall sometimes and remember there's some one else
thinking of it."

"You're a funny kid," she said, looking at him, "sentimental, I _don't_
think!"

But it was her eyes--tired and regretful that said goodbye.

She let herself in and the door closed behind her.

He turned and walked the streets; it was three o'clock before he reached
his home.


CHAPTER XIII

"MORTIMER STANT"


I

Next morning Peter went round to Cardillac's flat and made his apologies.
Cardillac accepted them at once with the frankest expressions of
friendship.

"My dear old Peter, of course," he said, taking both Peter's hands in his,
"I was horribly blunt and unpleasant about the whole thing. I didn't mean
half what I said, but the fact is that you got angry and then I suppose I
got angry--and then we both said more than we meant."

"No," said Peter slowly, "for you were quite right. I have been selfish and
morbid. I see it all quite clearly. I'm going to be very different now,
Cards, old man."

Cards' flat was splendid--everything in it from its grey Ascot trouserings
kind of wall paper to its beautiful old chairs and its beautiful old china
was of the very best--and Cards himself, in a dark blue suit with a black
tie and a while pearl and white spats on his shining gleaming shoes, just
ready to go out and startle Piccadilly was of the very best. He had never,
Peter thought, looked so handsome.

At the door Cards put a hand on Peter's shoulder.

"Get in late this morning, Peter?"

"Why?" said Peter, turning round.

"Oh, nothing," Cards regarded him, smiling. "I'll see you to-night at the
Lesters. Until then, old man--"

Neither Mrs. Rossiter nor Clare made any allusion to the quarrel but it had
nevertheless, Peter felt, made reconciliation all the more difficult. Mrs.
Rossiter now seemed to imply in her additional kindnesses to Cardillac that
she felt for him deeply and was sorry that he, too, should have been made
to suffer under Peter's bear-like nature.

There was even an implied atmosphere of alliance in the attitude of the
three to Peter, an alliance fostered and cemented by Mrs. Rossiter and
spread by her, up and down, in and out about the house.

It was obvious indeed now that Mrs. Rossiter was, never again, under any
terms, to be won over. She had decided in her own slow mind that Peter was
an objectionable person, that he neglected his wife, quarrelled with his
best friends and refused to fulfil the career that he had promised to
fulfil. She saw herself now in the role of protectress of her daughter, and
that role she would play to the very end. Clare must, at all costs, be
happy and, in spite of her odious husband, happy she should be.

Peter discerned Mrs. Rossiter's state of mind on the whole clearly enough,
but with regard to Clare he was entirely in the dark. He devoted his days
now to her service. He studied her every want, was ready to abandon his
work at any moment to be with her, and was careful also to avoid too great
a pestering of her with attentions.

"I know women hate that," he said to himself, "if you go down on your knees
to them and hang around them they simply can't stand it. I won't show her
that I care."

And he cared, poor fellow, as he had never cared for her before during
their married life. The love that he had had for Stephen he would now give
to Stephen's mother would she but let him.

But it was a difficult business. When Mrs. Rossiter was present he could do
nothing right. If he were silent she would talk to Clare about people being
morose; and what a pity it was that some people didn't think of other
people a little instead of being miserable about things for which they had
nobody to thank but themselves, and if he tried to be light-hearted and
amusing Mrs. Rossiter bore with his humour in so patient and self-denying a
spirit that his efforts failed lamentably and only made the situation worse
than it had been before.

Clare seemed to be now entirely in her mother's hands; she put her mother's
large flat body between herself and Peter and, through that, they were
compelled to talk.

Peter also knew now that Clare was exceedingly uncomfortable in his
presence--it was almost as though she had something to conceal. On several
occasions he had noticed that his sudden entrance into a room had confused
her; once he had caught her hurriedly pushing a letter out of sight. She
was now strangely timid when he was there; sometimes with a sudden furious
beating of the heart he fancied that she was coming back to him again
because she would make little half movements towards him and then draw
back. Once he found her crying.

The impulse to beg her to confide in him was almost stronger than he could
resist, and yet he was terrified lest by some sudden move he should
frighten her and drive her back and so lose the little ground that he had
gained. The strangest thing of all was that Mrs. Rossiter herself did not
know what Clare's trouble was. She, of course, put it all down to Peter,
but she could accuse him of nothing specific. Clare had not confided in
her.

Did Cards know? Peter suddenly asked himself with a strange pang of
jealousy. That he should be jealous of Cards, the most splendid, most
honourable fellow in the world! That, of course, was absurd. And yet they
were together so often, and it was with Jerry Cardillac alone that Clare
seemed now at ease.

But Peter put all such thoughts at once away from him. Had it been any
other man but Cards he might have wondered... but he would trust Cards
alone with his wife in the wilderness and know that no ill could come of
it. With--other women Cards might have few scruples--Peter had heard such
stories--but with Peter's wife, no.

Peter wondered whether perhaps Clare did not miss young Stephen more than
they knew! Oh, if that were the reason how he could take her into his arms
and comfort her and love her! Poor little Clare... the time would come when
she would show him that she wanted him.

Meanwhile the months passed, the proofs of "Mortimer Stant" had been
corrected and the book was about to appear. To Peter now everything seemed
to hang upon this event. It became with him, during the weeks before its
appearance, a monomania. If this book were a success why then dare and Mrs.
Rossiter and all of them would come round to him. It was the third book
which was always so decisive, and there was ground to recover after the
comparative failure of the second novel. As he corrected the proofs he
persuaded himself that "Mortimer Stant" wasn't, after all, so bad. It had
been ambitious of him, of course, to write about the emotions and
experiences of a man of forty and there was perhaps rather an overloaded
and crude attempt at atmosphere, but there was life in the book. It had, he
thought, more swing in the telling of it than the other two.

It is possible, when one is correcting proofs to persuade oneself of
anything. The book appeared and was, from the first moment, loaded with
mishap. On the day of publication there was that terrible fire at the
Casino theatre--people talked of nothing else for a fortnight. Moreover by
an unlucky chance young Rondel's novel, "The Precipice," was published on
the very same day, and as the precipice was a novel one and there were no
less than three young ladies prepared to fall over it at the same moment,
it of course commanded instant attention. It was incidentally written with
an admirable sense of style and a keen sense of character.

But Peter was now in a fever that saw an enemy round every corner. The
English News Supplement only gave him a line:--"'Mortimer Stant.' A new
novel by the author of 'Reuben Hallard,' depicting agreeably enough the
amorous adventures of a stockbroker of middle-age." To this had all his
fine dreams, his moments of exultation, his fevered inspiration come! He
searched the London booksellers but could find no traces of "Mortimer
Stant" at any of them. His publishers told him that it was only the
libraries that bought any fiction, with the exception of volumes by certain
popular authors--and yet he saw at these booksellers novels by numbers of
people who could not lay claim to the success that "Reuben Hallard" had
secured for its writer.

The reviews came in slowly, and, excepting for the smaller provincial
papers, treated him with an indifference that was worse than neglect. "This
interesting novel by Mr. Westcott"--"A pleasant tale of country life by the
author of 'Reuben Hallard.' Will please those who like a quiet agreeable
book without too much incident."

One London weekly review--a paper of considerable importance--took him
severely to task, pointed out a number of incoherences of fact, commented
on carelessness of style and finally advised Mr. Westcott, "if he is ever
to write a book of real importance to work with greater care and to be less
easily contented with a superficial facility."

But worse than these were the opinions of his friends. Henry Galleon was
indeed gone, but there were a few--Mrs. Launce, Alfred Lester, William
Trent, Alfred Hext--who had taken a real and encouraging interest in him
from the beginning. They took him seriously enough to tell him the truth,
and tell him the truth they did. Dear Mrs. Launce, who couldn't bear to
hurt anybody and saw perhaps that he was taking the book a great deal more
hardly than he had taken the others, veiled it as well as she could:--"I do
think it's got splendid things in it, Peter dear--splendid things. That bit
about the swimming and the character of Mrs. Mumps. But it doesn't hang
together. There's a great deal of repetition. It's as though you'd written
it with your mind on something else all the time."

And so he had--oh! so he had! What cruel irony that because his mind was
set to winning Clare back to him the chief means for gaining her should be
ruined by his very care for her.

What to do when all the things of life--the bustle and hurry, the marriages
and births and deaths--came in between him and his work so that he could
scarcely see it, so many things obscured the way. Poor Mortimer! Lost
indeed behind a shifting, whirring cloud of real life--never to emerge,
poor man, into anything better than a middle-aged clothes' prop.

For six weeks the book lingered in the advertisements. A second edition,
composed for the most part of an edition for America, was announced, there
were a belated review or two ... and then the end. The end of two years'
hopes, ambitions, struggles, sweat and tears--and the end, too, of how much
else?

From the beginning, so far back as he could remember, he had believed that
he would one day write great books; had believed it from no conceit in him
but simply because he clung so tenaciously to ambition that it had become,
again and again, almost realised in the intensity of his dreams of it. He
had known that this achievement of his would take a long time, that he must
meet with many rebuffs, that he must starve and despair and be born again,
but, never at any moment, until now, had he, in his heart of hearts,
doubted that that great book was in front of him.

He had seen his work, in his dreams, derided, flouted, misunderstood. That
was the way with most good work, but what he had never seen was its
acceptance amongst the ranks of the "Pretty Good," its place given it
beside that rising and falling tide of fiction that covered every year the
greedy rocks of the circulating libraries and ebbed out again leaving no
trace behind it.

Now, after the failure of "Mortimer Stant" for the first time, this awful
question--"What if, after all, you should be an Ordinary Creature? What if
you are no better than that army who fights happily, contentedly, with
mediocrity for its daily bread and butter? That army, upon whose serried
ranks you have perhaps, unconsciously, but nevertheless with pity, looked
down?... What if you are never to write a word that will be remembered,
never even to cause a decent attention, amongst your own generation?"

What if after all this stir and fluster, this pain and agony and striving,
there should be nothing exceptional about Peter? What rock to stand on
then?

He had never, perhaps, analysed his feelings about it all. He had certainly
never thought himself an exceptional person ... but always in his heart
there had been that belief that, one day, he would write an exceptional
book.

He was very young, not yet thirty, but he had had his chance. It seemed to
him, in these weeks following the death of "Mortimer Stant," that his
career was already over. There was also the question of ways and means.
Just enough to live on with the reviewing and a column for an American
paper and Clare's income, but if the books were all of them to fail as this
one had failed--why then it was a dreary future for them both.

In fact there were now, at his feet, pits of so dismal and impenetrable a
blackness that he refused to look down, but clung rather to his
determination to make all things right with Clare again, and then things
would come round.

If that failed him--why then, old black-faced father in Scaw House with
your drunken cook and your company of ghosts, you shall have your merry
way!


II

Henry Galleon was dead. Mrs. Launce was, unfortunately, during the whole of
this period of Peter's career, away in the country, being burdened with
work, children and ill-health. He turned then once again to Bobby.

He had seen very little of Bobby and Alice Galleon lately; he was as fond
of Bobby as he had ever been, but Bobby had always been a background, some
one who was there, one liked to think, if one wanted him--but if there was
any one more exciting, then Bobby vanished. Lately--for quite a long time
now--there had been Cardillac--and somehow Cards and Bobby did not get on
together and it was impossible to have them both at the same time. But now
Peter turned to Bobby with the eagerness of a return to some comfortable
old arm-chair after the brilliant new furniture of a friend's palace. Bobby
was there waiting for him. It is not to be denied that the occasional
nature of Peter's appearances had hurt them both--wounded Bobby and made
Alice angry.

"He's given us up, Bobby, now that he's found so many new friends. I
shouldn't have expected him to do that. I'm disappointed."

But Bobby nodded his head. "The boy's all right," he said, "he's just
trying to forget young Stephen and he forgets things better in Cardillac's
company than he does in mine--I'm not lively enough for that kind of thing.
He'll come back--"

But, at the same time, Bobby was anxious. Things were wrong up there at The
Roundabout, very wrong. He knew Clare and Cards and Peter and Mrs.
Rossiter, in all probability better than any one alive knew them--and he
was no fool.

Then Peter came back to him and was received as though he had never left
him; and Alice, who had intended to tell Mr. Peter what she thought of his
disloyalty, had no word to say when she saw his white drawn face and his
tired eyes.

"There's something awfully wrong up there," said Alice to Bobby that night.
"Bobby, look after him."

But Bobby who had heard by that time what Peter had to say shut his mouth
tight. Then at last:

"Our friend Cardillac has a good deal to answer for," and left Alice to
make what she could out of it.

Meanwhile up in Bobby's dusty old room, called by courtesy "The Study" but
having little evidence of literature about it save an edition of
Whyte-Melville and a miscellaneous collection of Yellow-backs, Peter had
poured out his soul:

"Bobby, I feel as though I'd just been set up with my back against the wall
for every one to make shies at. Everything's going wrong--everything. The
ground's crumbling from under my feet. First it's young Stephen, then it's
Clare, then my book fails (don't let's humbug--you know it's an utter
failure) then I quarrel with Cards, then that damned woman--" he stopped at
the thought of Mrs. Rossiter and drove his hands together. Then he went on
more quietly. "It's like fighting in a fog, Bobby. There's the thing I want
somewhere, just beside me--I want Clare, Clare as she used to be when we
were first married--but I can't get at her and yet, through it all, I don't
know what it is that stops me.

"I know I hadn't thought of her enough--with the book and Stephen and
everything. Cards told me that pretty straight--but now I've seen all that
and I'm ready to do anything--anything if she'll only love me again."

"Go directly to her and tell her," said Bobby; "have it all out in the open
with her,"

"That's just it," Peter answered, "I never seem to get her alone. There's
always either her mother or Cards there. Cards sees her alone much more
than I do, but, of course, she likes his company better than mine just now.
I'm such a gloomy beggar--"

"Nonsense," said Bobby roughly. "You believe anything that any one tells
you. They tell you that you're gloomy and depressing and so you think you
are. They didn't find you gloomy at Brockett's did they? And Alice and I
have never found you depressing. Don't listen to that woman. Clare's always
been under her influence and it's for you to take her out of it--not to lie
down quietly and say she's too much for you--but there's another thing," he
added slowly and awkwardly, after a moment's pause.

"What's that?" asked Peter.

"Well--Cards," said Bobby at last. "Oh! I know you'll say I hate him. But I
don't. I don't hate him. I've always known him for what he was--in those
days at Dawson's when if you flattered him he was kind, and if you didn't
he was contemptuous. At Cambridge it was the same. There was only one
fellow there I ever saw him knock under to--a man called Dune--and he was
out and away exceptional anyhow, at games and work and everything. Now _he_
made Cards into a decent fellow for the time being, and if he'd had the
running of him he might have turned all that brilliance into something
worth having.

"But he vanished and Cards has never owned his master since. Everything was
there, ready in him, to be turned one way or the other, and after he left
Cambridge there was his silly mother and a sillier London waiting to finish
him--now he's nothing but Vanity and Fascination--and soon there'll be
nothing but Vanity."

"You're unjust to him, Bobby, you always have been.

"Well, perhaps I am. He's always treated me with such undisguised contempt
that it's only human that I should be a little prejudiced. But that's
neither here nor there--what is the point, Peter, is that he's too much up
at your place. Too much for his own good, too much for yours, and--too much
for--Clare's."

"Bobby!"

"Oh yes--I know I'm saying a serious thing--but you asked me for my advice
and I give it. I don't say that Cards means any harm but people will talk
and it wouldn't do you any damage in Clare's eyes either, Peter, if you
were to stand up to him a little."

Peter smiled. "Dear old Bobby! If any one else in the world had said such a
thing of course I should have been most awfully angry, but I've always
known how unfair you were about Cards. You never liked him, even in the
Dawson days. You just don't suit one another. But I tell you, Bobby, that
I'd trust Cards more than I'd trust any one in the world. Of course Clare
likes to be with him and of course he likes to be with her. They suit one
another exactly. Why, he's splendid! The other day when I'd been a perfect
beast--losing my temper like a boy of ten--you should have heard the way he
took it. One day, Bobby, you'll see how splendid he is."

Bobby said no more.

Peter went on again: "No, it's my mother-in-law's done the damage. You're
right, the thing to do is to get Clare alone and have it right out with
her. We'll clear the mists away."

Bobby said: "You know Peter, both Alice and I would do anything in the
world to make you happy--anything."

Peter gripped his hand.

"I know you would. If I could forget young Stephen," he caught his
breath--"Bobby, I see him everywhere, all the time. I lie awake hours at
night thinking about him. I see him in my sleep, see him sometimes
grown-up--splendid, famous.... Sometimes I think he comes back. I can see
him, lying on his back and looking up at the ceiling, and I say to myself,
'Now if you don't move he'll stay there' ... and then I move and he's gone.
And I haven't any one to talk about him to. I never know whether Clare
thinks of him or not. He was so splendid, Bobby, so strong. And he loved me
in the most extraordinary way. We'd have been tremendous pals if he'd
lived.

"I could have stood anything if I'd been able to see him growing up, had
him to care about.... I'm so lonely, Bobby--and if I don't make Clare come
back to me, now that the book's failed, I--I--I'll go back to Scaw House
and just drink myself to the devil there with my old father; he'll be glad
enough."

"You once told me," Bobby said, "about an old man in your place when you
were a kid, who said once, 'It isn't life that matters but the courage you
bring to it--' Well, that's what you're proving now, Peter."

"Yes, but why me? I've had a bad time all my life--always been knocked
about and cursed and kicked. Why should it go on all the time--all the
time?"

"Because They think you're worth it, I suppose," said Bobby.


III

And the result of that conversation was that, on that very night Peter made
his appeal. They had had a silent evening (Mrs. Rossiter was staying in the
house at this time), and at last they all had gone up to bed. Peter stayed
for a moment in his dressing-room, seeing his white face in the
looking-glass, hearing the beating of his heart and then with a hand that
strangely trembled, knocked on Clare's door.

Her voice sounded frightened, he thought, as she called to him to come in.
Indeed, as he entered she folded a letter that she had been reading, and
put it in a drawer in the dressing-table at which she was sitting.

It was only seldom now that he disturbed her in that room. She had turned
on the electric light over her dressing-table; the rest of the room was in
darkness. She seemed to Peter very fragile and tiny as she sat there in her
black evening frock, her breast rising and falling as though something had
suddenly frightened her, her eyes wide and startled. He felt a gross,
coarse brute as he stumbled, coming across the dark floor to her.

"My God," he cried in his heart, "put everything right now--let this make
everything right."

His big square body flung huge fantastic shadows upon the wall, but he
looked, as he faced her, like a boy who had come to his master to confess
some crime.

Apparently she was reassured now, for she took off her necklace and moved
about the things on her table as though to show him that she was on the
point of undressing.

"Well, Peter, what is it?" she said.

"I've come--Clare--just a moment--I want a talk."

"But it's late, I'm tired--won't some other time do?"

"No, I want it now."

"What is it?"

She was looking into the glass as she spoke to him.

He pulled a little chair over to her and sat forward so that his knees
nearly touched her thin black dress. He put out his big hand and caught one
of her little ones; he thought for a moment that she was going to
resist--then it lay there cold as ice.

"Clare--darling--look here, everything's been wrong with both of us--for
ages. And I've come--I've come--because I know it's been very largely my
fault. And I've come to say that everything will be different now and I
want you to let things--be--as they were before--"

For a moment he fancied that he saw a light leap into her eyes; he felt her
hand tremble for a moment in his. Then the expression was gone.

"How do you mean?" she said, still looking into the glass. "What do you
mean, Peter? I haven't noticed anything different."

"Oh yes, you have. You know that--ever since Stephen died and before that
really--you've avoided me. You'd rather be without me than with me. You've
all thought me selfish and glum and so I suppose I was. But I missed--the
kid--a lot." Again Peter felt her hand tremble. He pressed it. Then he went
on, leaning more toward her now and putting an arm out to touch her dress.

"Clare--it's been like a fog all these weeks--we've never had it out, we've
never talked about it, but you've been disappointed in me. You thought I
was going to write great books and I haven't--and then your mother--and
I--don't get on. And then I suppose I'm stupid in society--I can't talk a
lot to any one who comes along as all you people can. I've been brought up
differently and--and--I know you don't like to think about that either, and
so I'll never bring my old friends into the house and I'll see that I'm not
such a gawk at your parties--"

He paused for a moment; she was looking down now and he couldn't see her
eyes. He bent forward more closely--his arm caught her waist--his hand
crushed hers--

She tried desperately to pull herself together to say something--

"No--there's nothing. Well, if there is--Of course I suppose it happens to
all married people--"

"What happens?"

"Why, they find one another out a little. Things aren't quite as they
thought they'd be. That must happen always."

"But tell me--tell me the things in me that have disappointed you and then
I can alter--"

"Well--it's a little as you say. You have been rather rude to Mother. And
then--your quarrel--"

"What! You mean with Cards!"

"With--Jerry--yes. And then," her voice was high and sharp now--her eyes
avoided his--"I've always--been happy, until _I_ married. Things frighten
me. You don't understand me, Peter, how easily I'm frightened--you never
seemed to see that. Other people--know."

"I've been selfish--I--"

"Yes," she went on still in that high voice, "and you never consider me in
little things. And you laugh at me as though I were stupid. I don't suppose
it's all your fault. You were brought up--roughly. But you _are_ rough. You
hurt me often. I can't bear," her lip was trembling and she was nearly
crying--"I can't bear being unhappy--"

"My God!" cried Peter, "what a beast I am! What a brute I've been!"

"Yes--and you never seemed to think that I minded poor little Stephen's
death--the dear little thing--of course it hurt me dreadfully--and you
never thought of _me_--"

"It's all going to be different now. Love me, Clare--love me and it will
all come back. And then if you'll only love me I'll be able to write the
most wonderful books. I'll be famous all the world over--if you'll only
love me, Clare darling--"

He dropt on to his knees before her and looking up at her
whispered--"Clare--darling, darling--you're all that I've got
now--everything in the world. And in return I'll try to be everything to
you. I'll spend my life in making you happy. I'll care for only one thing
and that is to be your servant. Clare--Clare--"

She gave a little protesting cry--"Peter, Peter--don't--I--I--can't--" and
then in a shuddering whisper--"Peter--I'm not good enough--I don't love you
now--I--can't--"

But he had caught her, was holding her to him now, with both his arms round
her, pressing her against his shirt, hurting her--at last covering her
mouth, her eyes, her cheeks with kisses.

He had not heard those words now, in the triumph of having her back again,
his as she had been on the first day of their marriage, did not feel her
body unresponsive, her hands cold, nor did he see the appeal, wild and
desperate, in her eyes....

At last he left her, closing, softly her door between them.


CHAPTER XIV

PETER BUYS A PRESENT


I

Peter did not hesitate now. He should win Clare back with his strong right
hand and he would rule The Roundabout with a rod of iron. Ruling The
Roundabout meant ruling Mrs. Rossiter and he was surprised at the ease with
which he won his victory over that lady. Had he considered it more deeply
that easy victory might have seemed to him ominous.

At luncheon on the day after his talk with Clare they three sat
together--Mrs. Rossiter silent, Clare silent, Peter silent.

Suddenly Peter said: "Oh by the way, Clare, I telephoned for seats this
morning for the new thing at the Criterion. I got two stalls."

They had not been to the theatre together since Stephen's death.

Clare lifted a white face--"I don't think I--"

"Oh yes," said Peter, smiling across at her--"you'll enjoy it."

Mrs. Rossiter stroking her large bosom with a flat white hand said, "I
don't think Clare--"

"Oh yes," said Peter again, "it will do her good."

Mrs. Rossiter smiled. "Get another stall, Peter, and I will come too."

"I'm afraid," said Peter very politely, "that it's too late. The piece is a
thumping success. I was very lucky to get any seats at all."

And then Mrs. Rossiter subsided, absolutely subsided ... very strange.

That was not a very happy evening. Clare scarcely spoke, she answered him
with "Yes" and "No," she sat in the stalls looking like a little unhappy
ghost. She did not in any way repulse him--she let him take her hand coming
home in the cab. She shivered and he asked whether she were cold and she
said, Yes, she thought that she was. That night he came in, took her for a
moment in his hands, kissed her very gently on the lips, and said--

"Clare, you're not angry with me for last night?"

"No" she answered him. Then she added slowly, as though she were repeating
a part that she'd learnt, "Thank you for taking me to the play, Peter. I
was rather tired. But thank you for taking me."

He went to bed thanking God for this change in her. "I'll make her love me
just as she used to, those days on our honeymoon. God bless her."

Yes, Mrs. Rossiter was strangely altered. It all shows what one can do with
a woman when one tries. Her hostile placidity had given place to something
almost pathetic. One would have thought, had one not known that lady's
invariable assurance of movement, that she was perplexed, almost
distressed.

Peter was conscious that Clare was now as silent with her mother as she was
with him. He perceived that Mrs. Rossiter was disturbed at Clare's
reticence. He fancied that he sometimes interrupted little conversations
between the mother and the daughter the intention of which was, on Mrs.
Rossiter's part at any rate, that "Clare should tell her something." There
was no doubt at all, that Mrs. Rossiter was anxious. Even--although this
seemed impossible--she appeared to be ready to accept Peter as a friend and
ally now--now after these many weeks of hostility. Surely women are strange
creatures. In any case, one may observe the yellow brooch agitated now and
ill at ease.

Very soon, too, Cards came to make his farewells--he was going to Paris for
the whole of May.

"What! Won't you be back for the beginning of the Season?" cried Peter
astonished.

"No," Cards answered, laughing. "For once the Season can commence without
me."

He was especially affectionate but seemed anxious to be gone. His dark eyes
avoided Peter's gaze. He didn't look well--a little anxious: and Cards was
generally the soul of light-hearted carelessness.

What a splendid fellow he was! Peter looked him up and down taking that
same delight that he had always taken in his distinction, his good looks,
his ease. "He ought to have been born king of somewhere," Peter used to
think, "he ought really--no wonder people spoil him."

"There's another thing," Peter said, "you're forgetting Clare's birthday
next week. She'll be dreadfully disappointed at your not being here for
it."

"I'll have to remember it from Paris," Cards said.

"Well--it's an awful pity that you're going for a whole month. I don't know
what we shall do without you. And you cheer Clare up--she's rather
depressed just now. Thinks of the kid a bit, I expect."

"Well, I'll write," said Cards, and was gone.


II

Peter received at this time a letter that showed him that he had, at any
rate, one friend, in the world who believed in him. It was from James
Maradick and it was strangely encouraging--now at this period of yawning
pits from whose blackness he so resolutely turned away.

It asked him to go with Maradick as his guest to some Club dinner. Then it
went on.... "You know, Westcott, we don't meet as often as we should. Like
ships in the night, we signal every now and again and then pass. But I am
quite sure that we have plenty to say to one another. Once or twice--you
remember that party when I gassed about Cornwall?--we have nearly said it,
but something has always prevented. I remember that you divided the world
once in a fit of youthful confidence, into Explorers and Stay-at-homes.
Well, those words will do as well as any others to describe the great
dividing line. At any rate, you're an Explorer and you're trying to get on
terms with the Stay-at-homes, and I'm a Stay-at-home and I'm trying to get
on terms with the Explorers and that's why we're both so uncomfortable. The
only happy people, take my word for it, are those who know the kind of
thing they are--Explorers or Stay-at-homes, and just stick at that and shut
their eyes tight to the other kind of people--_il n'existe pas_, that other
world. Those are the happy people, and, after all most people are like
that. But we, you and I, are uncomfortably conscious of the other
Party--want to know them, in fact, want them to receive us.

"Well, I'm getting on and it's late days for me, but you've got all your
life before you and will do great things, take my word for it. Only don't
be discouraged because the Stay-at-homes don't come to you all at once.
Give 'em time--they'll come...."

This seemed to Peter, at this moment of a whole welter of doubt and
confusion and misunderstanding of people's motives and positions, to
explain a great deal. Was that the reason why he'd been so happy in old
Zachary Tan's shop years ago? Why he'd been happy through all that
existence at the bookshop, those absurd unreal conspirators--happy, yes,
even when starving with Stephen in Bucket Lane.

He was then in his right company--explorers one and all. Whereas
here?--Now? Had he ever been happy at The Roundabout except during the
first year, and afterwards when Stephen came? And was not that, too, the
explanation of young Stephen's happiness upon the arrival of Mr. Zanti and
Brant? Did he not recognise them for what they were, explorers? He being a
young explorer himself.

On the other side Mrs. Rossiter, Clare, Cards, old Bobby who in spite of
his affection never understood half the things that Peter did or said, the
Galleons, old Mrs. Galleon and Percival and his sister?... Had Henry
Galleon known that dividing-line and suffered under it all his life, and
borne it and perhaps conquered it?

And Peter suddenly, standing at his window watching London caught by the
evening light, saw for an instant his work in front of him again. London
with her towers, her roofs and chimneys--smoke and mist and haze weaving a
web--and then beneath it, humming, buzzing, turning, all the lives, all the
comedies, all the tragedies--Kings and princes, guttersnipes and duchesses,
politicians and newsboys, criminals and saints--

Waiting, that golden top, for some hand to set it humming.

In that moment Peter Westcott, aged twenty-nine, with a book just behind
him that had been counted on every side the most dismal of failures, saw
himself the English Balzac, saw London open like a book at his feet, saw
heaven and all its glories... himself the one and only begetter of a
thousand masterpieces!

But the sun set--the towers and roofs and chimneys were coldly grey, a
ragged wind rose through the branches of the orchard, dark clouds hid the
risen moon, newsboys were crying a murder in Whitechapel.

"I hate this house," Peter said, turning away from the window, into a room
crowded now with dusk.


III

It was the first of May, and the day before Clare's birthday. It was one of
the most beautiful days of the year, with a hint of summer in its light and
shadow, a shimmer of golden sun shaking through the trees in the orchard,
flung from there on to the windows of The Roundabout, to dance in twisting
lines along the floors and across the walls.

All doors and windows seemed to be open; the scent of flowers--a prophecy
of pinks and roses where as yet there were none--flooded the little Chelsea
streets.

The Velasquez on the walls of The Roundabout danced in her stiff skirts,
looking down upon a room bathed in green and gold shadow.

It was three o'clock in the afternoon and Peter was going out to buy Clare
a present. He had seen a ruby pendant many months ago in a window in Bond
Street. He had thought of it for Clare but he had known that, with young
Stephen's education and the rest of the kid's expenses, he could not dare
to afford it. Now... things were different.

It should sign and seal this new order....

He came downstairs. He looked into the little sitting-room. Clare was
standing there by the window looking at the gay trees in the orchard. On
the opposite wall the Velasquez danced....

She had not heard him come in and she was standing by the window with her
hands clasped tightly behind her, her body strung up, so it seemed, by some
height of determination. She wore a black dress with a little white round
her neck and at the sleeves. Her hair was rolled into a pile on the top of
her head and the sunlight from the orchard was shining upon it.

When Peter called her name she turned round with a startled cry and put her
hand to her throat. Then she moved back against the window as though she
were afraid that he was going to touch her.

He noticed her movement and the words that he had intended to say were
checked on his lips. He stammered, instead, something about going out. She
nodded her head; she had pulled herself together and walked towards him
from the window.

"Won't you come, too? It is such a lovely day," he asked her.

"I've got a headache."

"It'll do your headache good."

But she shook her head--"No, I'm going upstairs to lie down."

She moved past him to the door. Then with her hand on it she turned back to
him:--

"Peter, I--" she said.

She seemed to appeal to him with her eyes beseeching, trying to say
something, but the rest of her face was dumb.

The appeal, the things that she would have said suddenly died, leaving her
face utterly without expression.

"Bobby and mother are coming to dinner to-night, aren't they?"

"Yes--"

She passed through the door across the sunlit hall, up the dark stairs. She
walked with that hesitating halting step that he knew so well: her small,
white hand lay, for a moment on the banisters--then she had disappeared.


IV

Coming through the hall Peter noticed that there was a letter in the box.
He took it out and found, with delight, that it was from Stephen Brant. He
had had no word from him since the day when he and Mr. Zanti had paid their
fateful visit.

The letter said:--

_Dear Mr. Peter,

This is a hurried line to tell you that He is dead at last, died in drink
cursing and swearing and now her mother and she, poor dear, are going to
America and I'm going to look after her hoping that we'll be marrying in a
few months' time and so realise my heart's wish.

Dear Peter I sail on Thursday from Southampton and would be coming to see
you but would not like to inconvenience you as you now are, but my heart is
ever the same to you, Dear Boy, and the day will come when we can talk over
old times once again.

Your affectionate friend, sir,

Now about to be made the happiest man in all the world,

Stephen.

N.B. I hope the little kid is strong and happy.

N.B. Zanti goes with us to America having heard of gold in California and
is to be my best man when the day comes._

So Stephen's long wait was ended at last. Peter's eyes were dimmed as he
put the letter away in his pocket. What a selfish beast, to be sure, must
this same Peter Westcott, be, for here he was wishing--yes, almost
wishing--that Stephen's happiness had not come to him. Always at the back
of everything there had been the thought of Stephen Brant. Let all the pits
in the world gape and yawn, there was one person in the world to whom Peter
was precious. Now--in America--with a wife... some of the sunlight had gone
out of the air and Peter's heart was suddenly cold with that old dread.

Another friend taken from him! Another link gone! Then he pulled himself
together, tried to rejoice with Stephen at his happiness, failed dismally,
walked down Piccadilly defiantly, with swinging shoulders and a frowning
face, like a sailor in a hostile country, and went into the Bond Street
jeweller's.

He had been there on several former occasions and a large stout man who
looked as though he must have been Lord Mayor several years running came
forward and gave Peter an audience. Precious stones were of no account in
such a place as this, and the ruby pendant looked quite small and humble
when it was brought to Peter--nevertheless it was beautiful and would suit
Clare exactly. It seemed to appeal personally to Peter, as though it knew
that he wanted it for a very especial occasion. This wasn't one of those
persons who would come in and buy you as though you were dirt. It meant
something to Peter. It meant something indeed--it meant exactly sixty
pounds--

"Isn't that rather a lot?" said Peter.

"It's as fine a ruby--" said the dignitary, looking over Peter's head out
of the window, as though he were tired of the affair and wanted to see
whether his car were there.

"I'll take it," said Peter desperately.

Sixty Pounds! Did one ever hear of such a thing? Sixty pounds ... Never
mind, it marked an occasion. The ruby smiled at Peter as it was slipped
into its case; it was glad that it was going to somebody who hadn't very
many things.

He had several other matters to settle and it was nearly five o'clock when
he turned out of Knightsbridge down Sloane Street. The sun was slipping
behind the Hyde Park Hotel so that already the shadows were lying along the
lower parts of the houses although the roofs were bright with sunshine.

It was the hour when all the dogs were taken for the last exercise of the
day. Every kind, of dog was there, but especially the fat and pampered
variety--Poms, King Charles, Pekinese, Dachshunds--a few bigger dogs, and
even one mournful-eyed Dane who walked with melancholy superiority, as a
king amongst his vassals.

The street stirred with the patterings of dogs. The light slid down the
sky--voices rang in the clear air softly as though the dying day had
besought them to be tender. The colours of the shops, of the green trees,
of slim and beautifully-dressed houses were powdered with gold-dust; the
church in Sloane Square began to ring its bells.

Peter, as he turned down the street, was cold--perhaps because
Knightsbridge had been blazing with sunshine and the light here was
hidden.... No, it was more than that....

"They say," he thought, "that Cornishmen always know when a disaster's
coming. If that's true, something ought to be going to happen to me."

And then, in a flash, that sound that he had been half-subconsciously
expecting, came--the sound of the sea. He could hear it quite distinctly, a
distant, half-determined movement that seemed so vast in its roll and
plunge, so sharp in the shock with which it met the shore, and yet so
subdued that it might be many thousands of miles away. It was as though a
vast tide were dragging back a million shells from an endless shore--the
dragging hiss, the hesitating suspense in mid-air, and then the rattle of
the returning wave.

As though hypnotised he closed his eyes. Yes, he was walking along the Sea
Road. There was that range of rock that lay out at sea like a crouching
dog. There was that white twisting circle of foam that lay about the Ragged
Stone--out there by itself, the rock with the melancholy bell. Then through
the plunging sea he could hear its note--the moan of some one in pain. And
ever that rattle, that hiss, that suspense, that crash.

"I beg your pardon--" he had run into a lady's maid who was leading a
pompous King Charles. The spaniel eyed him with hatred, the maid with
distrust. He passed on--but the Sea had departed.

To chase away his gathering depression he thought that he would go in and
have tea with Bobby and Alice. It was quite late when he got there, and
stars were in a sky that was so delicate in colour that it seemed as though
it were exhausted by the glorious day that it had had; a little sickle moon
was poised above the Chelsea trees.

To his disgust he found that Percival and Millicent Galleon were having tea
with their brother. Their reception of him very quickly showed him that
"Mortimer Stant" had put a final end to any hopes that they might have had
of his career as an artist.

"How's the book doing, Westcott?" said Percival, looking upon Peter's
loose-fitting clothes, broad shoulders and square-toed shoes with evident
contempt.

"Not very well thank you, Galleon."

"Ah, well, it didn't quite come off, did it, Westcott?--not quite. Can't
hit the nail every time. Now young Rondel in this Precipice of his has done
some splendid work. We had him to tea the other day and really he seemed
quite a nice unassuming fellow--"

"Oh! shut up," Bobby growled. "You talk too much, Percival."

Peter was growing. Quite a short time ago he would have been furious, would
have gone into his shell, refused to speak to anybody, been depressed and
glowering.

Now, smiling, he said:

"Alice, won't you consider it and come up and dine with us after all
to-night? It's only my mother-in-law beside ourselves--"

"No, thanks, Peter. I mustn't. The boy's not quite the thing."

"Well, all right--if you must."

Nevertheless, it hurt, although it was only that young ass of a Galleon.
That, though, was one of the pits into which one must not look.

He felt the little square box that contained the ruby, lying there so
snugly in his pocket. That cheered him.

"I must be getting back. Good-night, everybody. See you at dinner, Bobby."

He went.

After Percival and his sister had also gone Alice said:--

"Dear Peter's growing up."

"Yes," said Bobby. "My sweet young brother wants the most beautiful kicking
and he'll get it very soon." Then he looked at the clock. "I must go up and
dress."

"I'm rather glad," said Alice, "I'm not coming. Clare gets considerably on
my nerves just at present."

"Yes," said Bobby, "but thank God Mr. Cardillac's in Paris--for the time
being." Then he added, reflectively--

"Dear old Peter--bless him!"


CHAPTER XV

MR. WESTCOTT SENIOR CALLS CHECKMATE


I

Peter felt as he closed the hall door behind him that The Roundabout was
both cold and dark. The little hall drew dusk into its corners very swiftly
and now, as he switched on the electric light, he was conscious almost of
protest on the part of the place, as though it wished that it might have
been left to its empty dusk.

A maid passed him.

"Has your mistress gone upstairs?" he asked her.

"I don't think she has come in, sir."

"Not come in?"

"No, sir, she went out about three o'clock. I don't think she's come back,
sir."

She's running it pretty close, he thought as he looked at his watch--then
he went slowly up to dress.

He had been more irritated by the superiorities of young Percival Galleon
than he had cared to confess. Peter had, at the bottom of his soul, a most
real and even touching humility. He had no kind of opinion of his
abilities, of his work in comparison with the other workers that counted.
Moreover he would not, were his ultimate critical sense aroused, fail to
admit to himself some certain standard of achievement. Nothing that young
Galleon could say mattered from the critical standpoint--nevertheless he
seemed to represent, in this case, a universal opinion; even in his
rejection of Peter one could see, behind him, a world of readers
withdrawing their approval.

"Peter Westcott's no good.... Peter Westcott's no good.... Peter Westcott's
no good...."

In any case that was quite enough to account for the oppression that he was
feeling--feeling with increasing force as the minutes passed. He undressed
and dressed again slowly, wondering vaguely, loosely, in the back of his
mind, why it was that Clare had not come in. Perhaps she had come in and
the maid had not heard her. He took the ruby out of his pocket, opened the
little case, looked at the jewel shining there under the electric light,
thought of Clare with a sudden rush of passionate affection. "Dear thing,
won't she look lovely in it? Her neck's so white and she's never worn much
jewellery--she'll be pleased. She'll know why I'm giving it to her now--a
kind of seal on what we agreed to the other night. A new life ... new
altogether...."

He was conscious as he took his shirt off that his windows were open and a
strange scent of burning leaves was with him in the room. It was quite
strong, pungent--very pleasant, that sense of burning. Burning leaves in
the orchard.... But it was rather cold. Then he came back to his
looking-glass and, standing there, naked save for his dress trousers, he
saw that he was looking in much better health than he had looked for weeks.
The colour had returned to his face, his eyes were brighter and more
alert--the lines had gone. He was strong and vigorous as he stood there,
his body shining under the glow. He opened and shut his hands feeling the
strength, force, in his fingers. Thick-set, sturdy, with his shoulders back
again now, straight, not bent as they had been.

"Oh, I'm all right--I'm all right you know. I'll write some stuff one
day..." and even behind that his thought was--"that young Galleon, by jove,
I could jolly well break him if I wanted to--just snap him up."

And then the odour of the burnt leaves filled his nostrils again; when he
had dressed he turned out the light, opened the windows more widely, and
stood for a moment there smelling the smoke, feeling the air on his
forehead, seeing the dark fluttering shadows of the trees, the silver moon,
the dim red haze of the London sky....


II

He went down to his study. Clare must be in now. Bobby would be here in a
few minutes. He took up the _Times_ but his mind wandered. "Mr. Penning
Bruce was at his best last night in the new musical Comedy produced at the
Apollo Theatre--the humour of his performance as Lieutenant Pottle, a
humour never exaggerated nor strained...."

But he couldn't attend. He looked up at the little clock and saw that it
was nearly dinner-time. Bobby ought to be here.

He stood up and listened. The house was profoundly silent. It was often
silent--but to-night it was as though everything in the house--the
furniture, the pictures--were listening--as though The Roundabout itself
listened.

He went into the hall--stood for a moment under the stairs--and then called
"Clare--Clare." He waited and then again "Clare, Clare--I say, it's late.
Come along--"

There was no answer.

Then, crossing the hall, he opened the door of the little drawing-room and
looked in. It was black and empty--here, too, he could smell the burning
leaves.

He switched on the light and instantly, perched against the Velasquez
Infanta, saw the letter, white and still before the pink and grey of the
picture. At the sight of the letter the room that had been empty and cold
was suddenly burning hot and filled with a thousand voices. "Take it--take
it--why don't you take it? It's been waiting there for you a long time and
we've all been wondering when you were coming in for it. It's waiting there
for you. Take it--take it--take it!"

At the sight of it too, the floor of the room seemed instantly to pitch,
slanting downwards, like the deck of a sinking ship. He caught on to the
back of a chair in order that he might not slip with it. His hands shook
and there was a great pain at his heart, as though some one were pulling it
tight, then squeezing it in their fingers and letting it go again.

Then, as suddenly, all his agitation fled. The room was cold and empty
again, and his hands were steady. He took the letter and read it.

It was written in great agitation and almost illegible, and at the bottom
of the paper there was a dirty smudge that might have been a tear stain or
a finger mark. It ran:

_I must go. I have been so unhappy for so long and we don't get on
together, Peter, now. You don't understand me and I must be happy. I had
always been happy until I married you--perhaps it's partly my fault but I
only hinder your work and there is some one else who loves me. He has
always said so.

I would not have gone perhaps if it had not been for what you did on April
12. I know because some one saw you getting into a cab at midnight with
that horrible woman. That shows that you don't care about me, Peter. But
perhaps I would have gone anyhow. Once, the night I told you about baby
coming, I told you there'd be a time when you'd have to hold me. It
came--and you didn't see it. You didn't care--you can't have loved me or
you would have seen.... But anything is better than staying here like this.
I am very unhappy now but you will not care. You are cruel and hard, Peter.
You have never understood what a woman wants.

I am going to Jerry in Paris. You can divorce me. I don't care about
anything now. I won't come back--I won't, I won't--Clare._

He read this all through, very carefully with a serious brow. He finished
it and then knew that he had not read a word of it. He went, slowly, to the
window and opened it because the room was of a stifling heat. Then he took
the letter again and read it. As he finished it again he was conscious that
the door-bell was ringing. He wondered why it was ringing.

He was standing in the middle of the room and speaking to himself: "The
humour of his performance as Lieutenant Pottle, a humour never exaggerated
nor strained ..."

"The humour of his Lieutenant Pottle as a performer--never strained...
never exaggerated... never strained..."

Bobby came in and found him there. Peter's face was so white that his
collar and shirt seemed to be a continuation of his body--a sudden gruesome
nakedness. Both his hands were shaking and his eyes were puzzled as though
he were asking himself some question that he could not solve.

Bobby started forward--

"God, Peter, what--"

"She's gone away, Bobby," Peter said, in a voice that shook a little but
was otherwise grave and almost a whisper, so low was it. "She's gone
away--to Cardillac." Then he added to himself--"Cardillac is my best
friend."

Then he said "Listen," and he read the letter straight through. He repeated
some of the phrases--"What you did on April 12." "That shows that you don't
care.... You are cruel and hard, Peter.... I am going to Jerry in
Paris...."

"Jerry--that's Cardillac, you know, Bobby. He's in Paris and she's going
over to him because she can't stand me any more. She says I don't care
about her. Isn't that funny, when I love her so much?"

Bobby went to him, put his arm round his neck--

"Peter--dear--Peter--wait," and then "Oh my God! we must stop her--"

He drew himself away from Bobby's arm and, very unsteadily, went across the
room and then stood against the farther wall, his head bent, motionless.

"Stop her? Oh! no, Bobby. Stop her when she wants to go! I--" His voice
wasn't Peter's voice, it was a thin monotonous voice like some one speaking
at a great distance.

Then it seemed that intelligence was flashed upon him. He lurched forward
and with a great voice--as though he had been struck by some sudden
agonising, immortal pain--

"Bobby--Bobby--My wife--Clare--"

And at that instant Mrs. Rossiter was shown into the room.


III

The maid who opened the door had apparently some suspicion that "things
were odd," because she waited for a moment before she closed the door
again, staring with wide eyes into the room, catching, perhaps, some hint
from her master's white face that something terrible had occurred.

It was obvious enough that Mrs. Rossiter had herself, during the last week,
been in no easy mind. From the first glances at Peter and Bobby she seemed
to understand everything, for, instantly, at that glimpse of their faces
she became, for the first time in her life, perhaps, a personality, a
figure, something defined and outlined.

Her face was suddenly grey. She hesitated back against the door and, with
her face on Peter, said in a whisper, to Bobby:

"What--what has happened?"

Bobby was not inclined to spare her. As an onlooker during these last
months he felt that she, perhaps, was more guiltily responsible for the
catastrophe than any other human being.

"Clare," he said, trying to fix her eyes. "She's gone off to Cardillac--to
Paris."

Then he was himself held by the tragedy of those two faces. They faced each
other across the room. Peter, with eyes and a mouth that were not his, eyes
not sane, the eyes of no human being, mouth smiling, drawn tight like a
razor's edge, with his hands spread out against the wall, watched Mrs.
Rossiter.

Mrs. Rossiter, at Bobby's words, had huddled up, suddenly broken, only her
eyes, in her great foolish expressionless face, stung to an agony to which
the rest of her body could not move.

Her little soul--a tiny scrap of a thing in that vague prison of dull
flesh--was suddenly wounded, desperately hurt by the only weapon that could
ever have found it.

"Clare!" that soul whispered, "not gone! It's not possible--it can't be--it
can't be!"

Peter, without moving, spoke to her.

"It's you that have sent her away. It's all your doing--all your doing--"

She scarcely seemed to realise him, although her eyes never left his
face--she came up to Bobby, her hands out:

"Bobby--please, please--tell me. This is absurd--there's a mistake. Clare,
Clare would never do a thing like that--never leave me like that--why--"
and her voice rose--"I've loved her--I've loved her as no mother ever loved
her girl--she's been everything to me. She knows it--why she often says
that I'm the only one who loves her. She'd never go--"

Then Peter came forward from the wall, muttering, waving his hands at
her--"It's you! You! You! You've driven her to this--you and your cursed
interference. You took her from me--you told her to deceive me in
everything. You taught her to lie and trick. She loved me before you came
into it. Now be proud, if you like--now be proud. God damn you, for making
your daughter into a whore--That's what you've done, you with your flat
face, your filthy flat face--you've made your daughter a whore, I tell
you--and it's nothing but you--you--you--!"

He lifted his hand as though he would strike her across the face. She said
nothing but started back with her hands up as though to protect herself. He
did not strike her. His hand fell. But she, as though she had felt a blow
had her hand held to her face.

He stood over her for a moment laughing, his head flung back. Then still
laughing he went away from them out into the hall.

Then, through the open door they heard him. He passed through the upper
rooms crying out as he went--"Clare! Clare! Where are you? Come down!
They're here for dinner! You're wanted! It's time, Clare!--where are you?
Clare! Clare!"

They heard him, knocking furniture over as he went. Then there was silence.
Mrs. Rossiter seemed, at that, to come to herself. She stood up, feeling
her cheek.

"It's sent him off his head, Bobby. Go after him. He'll hurt himself." Then
as though to herself, she went on--"I must find Clare--she'll be in Paris,
I suppose. I must go and find her, Bobby. She'll want me badly."

She went quietly from the room, still with her hand to her cheek. She
listened for a moment in the hall.

She turned round to Bobby:

"It doesn't say--the letter--where Clare's gone?"

"No--only Paris."

He helped her on with her cloak and opened the front door for her. She
slipped away down the street.

Bobby turned back and saw that Peter was coming down the stairs. But now
the fury had all died from his face, only that look, as of some animal
wounded to death, a look that was so deep and terrible as almost to give
his white face no expression at all, was with him.

It had been with him at Stephen's death, it was with him far more intensely
now. He looked at Bobby.

"She's gone," in a tired, dull voice as of some one nearly asleep, "gone to
Cardillac. I loved Cards--and all the time he loved Clare. I loved Clare
and all the time she loved Cards. It's damned funny isn't it, Bobby, old
man?"

He stood facing him in the hall, no part of him moving except his mouth.
"She says I treated her like a brute. I don't think I did. She says there
was something I did one night--I don't know. I've never done anything--I've
never been with another woman--something about a cab--Perhaps it was poor
Rose Bennett. Poor Rose Bennett--damned unhappy--so am I--so am I. I'm a
lonely fellow--I always have been!"

He went past Bobby, back into the little drawing-room. Bobby followed him.

He turned round.

"You can go now, Bobby. I shan't want you any more."

"No, I'm going to stay."

"I don't want you--I don't want any one."

"I'm going to stay."

"I'd rather you went, please."

"I'm going to stay."

Peter paid no more attention. He went and sat down on a chair by the
window. Bobby sat down on a chair near him.

Once Peter said: "They took my baby. They took my work. They've taken my
wife. They're too much for me. I'm beaten."

Then there was absolute silence in the house. The servants, who had heard
the tumbling of the furniture, crept, frightened to bed.

Thus The Roundabout, dark, utterly without sound, stayed through the night.
Once, from the chair by the window in the little drawing-room a voice said,
"I'm going back to Scaw House--to my father. I'm going back--to all of
them."

During many hours the little silver clock ticked cheerfully, seeing perhaps
with its little bright eyes, the two dark figures and wondering what they
did there.


BOOK IV

SCAW HOUSE


CHAPTER I

THE SEA


I

Peter Westcott was dead.

They put his body into the 11.50 from Paddington.


II

It was a day of high, swinging winds, of dappled skies, of shining gleaming
water. Bunches now and again of heavy black clouds clustered on the
horizon, the cows and horses in the fields were sharply defined, standing
out rigidly against a distant background. The sun came and was gone,
laughed and was instantly hidden, turned the world from light to shadow and
from shadow back to light again.

Peter's body was alone in the compartment. It was propped up against red
velvet that yielded with a hard, clenched resistance, something
uncomfortable, had the body minded. The eyes of the body were the high
blank windows of a deserted house. Behind them were rooms and passages, but
lately so gaily crowded, so eager, with their lights and fires, for
hustling life--now suddenly empty--swept of all its recent company, waiting
for new, for very different inhabitants.

The white hands motionless upon the knees, the eyes facing the light but
blind, the body still against the velvet, throughout the long, long day....


III

There were occasions when some one came and asked for his ticket. Some one
came once and asked him whether "He would take lunch." Once a woman,
flushed and excited, laden with parcels, tumbled into his carriage and
then, after a glance at the white face, tumbled out again.

Then, from very, very far away, came the first whispered breath of
returning consciousness. The afternoon sun now had banished the black
clouds--the wind had fallen--the sky was a quiet blue and birds rose and
fell, rivers shone and had passed, roads were white like ribbons, broad and
brown like crinkled paper, then ribbons again as the train flung
Devonshire, scornfully, behind its back. Peter was conscious that his body
was once more to be tenanted. But by whom?

Here was some one coming to him now, some one who, as the evening light
fell about the land, dark with his cloak to his face, came softly upon the
house and knocked at the door. Peter could hear his knock--it echoed
through the empty passages, the deserted rooms, it was a knock that
demanded, imperatively, admittance. The door swung back, the black passages
gaped upon the evening light and were closed again. The house was once more
silent--but no longer untenanted.


IV

Peter was now conscious of the world. That was Exeter that they had left
behind them and soon there would be Plymouth and then the crossing of the
bridge and then--Cornwall!

Cornwall! His lips were dry--he touched them with his tongue, and knew,
suddenly, that he was thirsty, more thirsty than he had ever been. He would
never be hungry again, but he would always be thirsty. An attendant passed.
What should he drink? The attendant suggested a whisky and soda. Yes ... a
large whisky....

It was very long indeed since he had been in Cornwall--he had not been
there since his boyhood. What had he been doing all the time in between? He
did not know--he had no idea. This new tenant of the house was not aware
of those intervening years, was only conscious that he was returning after
long exile, to his home--Scaw House, yes, that was the name ... the house
with the trees and the grey stone walls--yes, he would be glad to be at
home again with his father. His father would welcome him after so long an
absence.

The whisky and soda was brought to him and as he drank it they crossed the
border and were in Cornwall.


V

They were at Trewth, that little station where you must change for Treliss.
It stood open to all the winds of heaven, two lines of paling, a little
strip of platform, standing desolately, at wistful attention in the heart
of gently breathing fields, mild skies, dark trees bending together as
though whispering secrets ... all mysterious, and from the earth there rose
that breath--sea-wind, gorse, soil, saffron, grey stone--that breath that
is only Cornwall.

Peter--somewhere in some strange dim recesses of his soul--felt it about
his body. The wind, bringing all these scents, touched his cheek and his
hair and he was conscious that that dark traveller who now tenanted his
house closed the doors and windows upon that breath. It might waken
consciousness, and consciousness memory, and memory pain ... ah!
pain!--down with the shutters, bolt the doors--no vision of the outer world
must enter here.

The little station received gratefully the evening light that had descended
upon it. A few men and women, dim bundles of figures against the pale blue,
waited for the train, a crescent moon was stealing above the hedges, from
the chimneys of two little cottages grey smoke trembled in the air.

Suddenly there came to Peter, waiting there, the determination to drive. He
could not stand there, surrounded by this happy silence any longer. All
those shadows that were creeping about the dark spaces beyond his house
were only waiting for their moment when they might leap. This silence, this
peace, would give them that moment. He must drive--he must drive.

In the road outside the station a decrepit cab with a thin rake of a man
for driver was waiting for a possible customer. The cab was faded, the
wheels encrusted with ancient mud, the horse old and wheezy, but the
cabman, standing now thinner than ever against the sky, was, in spite of a
tattered top hat, filled with that cheerful optimism that belongs to the
Cornishman who sees an opportunity of "doing" a foreigner.

"I want to drive to Treliss," said Peter.

They bargained. The battered optimist obtained the price that he demanded
and cocked his eye, derisively, at the rising moon.

Peter surveyed the cab.

"I'll sit with you on the box," he said.

The thin driver made way for him. It was a high jolting cab of the
old-fashioned kind, a cab you might have sworn was Cornish had you seen it
anywhere, a cab that smelt of beer and ancient leather and salt water, a
cab that had once driven the fashion of Treliss to elegant dances and now
must rattle the roads with very little to see, for all your trouble, at the
end of it.

The sleeping fields, like grey cloths, stretched on every side of them and
the white road cut into the heart of the distance. It was a quarter to
eight and a blue dusk. The driver tilted the top hat over one ear and they
were off.

"I know this road as yer might say back'ards. Ask any one down along
Treliss way. Zachy Jackson they'll say--which is my name, sir, if yer
requirin' a good 'orse any time o' day. Zachy Jackson! which there ain't
no man,--tarkin' of 'orses, fit to touch 'im, they'll tell yer and not far
wrong either."

But now with every stumbling step of that bony horse Peter was being shaken
into a more active consciousness, consciousness not of the past, very
slightly of the present, but rather of an eager, excited anticipation of
events shortly to befall him, of the acute sense--the first that had, as
yet, come to him--that, very shortly, he was to plunge himself into an
absolute abandonment of all the restraints and discipline that had hitherto
held him. He did not know, he could not analyse to himself--for what
purpose those restraints had been formerly enforced upon his life. Only
now--at this moment, his body was being flooded with a warm, riotous
satisfaction at the thought of the indulgences that were to be his.

Still this fortress of his house was bare and desolated, but now in some of
the rooms there were lights, fire, whispers, half-hidden faces, eyes behind
curtains.

The wind struck him in the face. "Enough of this--you're done for--you're
beaten--you're broken... you're going back to your hovel. You're creeping
home--don't make a fine thing of it--" the wind said.

The top of the hill rolled up to them and suddenly with the gust that came
from every quarter there was borne some sound. It was very delicate, very
mysterious--the sound, one might fancy, that the earth would make if all
spring flowers were to pierce the soil at one common instant--so fugitive a
whisper.

"That's the sea," said Mr. Jackson, waving his whip in the air, "down to
Dunotter Cove. There's a wind to-night. It'll blow rough presently."

Now from their hilltop in the light of a baby moon puddles of water shone
like silk, hedges were bending lines of listeners, far on the horizon a
black wood, there in one of those precipitous valleys cottages cowering,
overhead the blue night sky suddenly chequered with solemn pompous slowly
moving clouds. But here on the hilltop at any rate, a bustle of wind--such
a noise amongst the hedges and the pools instantly ruffled and then quiet
again; and so precipitous a darkness when a cloud swallowed the moon. In
the daylight that landscape, to any who loved not Cornwall, would seem ugly
indeed, with a grey cottage stuck here and there naked upon the moor, with
a bare deserted engine house upon the horizon, with trees, deep in the
little valley, but scant and staggering upon the hill--ugly by day but now
packed with a mystery that contains everything that human language has no
name for, there is nothing to do, on beholding it, but to kneel down and
worship God. Mr. Jackson had seen it often before and he went twice to
chapel every Sunday, so he just whipped up his horse and they stumbled down
the road.

"Dirty weather coming," he said.

Peter was disturbed. That whispering noise that had crept across the
country frightened him. If it went on much longer it would make him
remember--he must not remember.

They turned down into a deep, mysterious lane and the whisper was hidden.
Now there was about them only the urgent crowding of the hedges, the
wild-flowers flinging their scent on to the night air, and above and below
and on every side of the old cab there streamed into the air the sweet
smell of crushed grass, as though many fields had been pressed between
giant's fingers and so had been left.

Peter sat there and about him, like flames licking woodwork, evil thoughts
devoured his body. He was going now at last to do all those things that,
these many years, he had prevented himself from doing. That at any rate he
knew.... He would drink and drink and drink, until he would never remember
anything again ... never again.... Meanwhile as the cab slowly began to
climb the hill again Mr. Jackson was telling a story.

He rolled his r's as though life were indeed a valuable and happy thing,
and now and again, waving his thin whip in the air, he would seem to appeal
to the moon.

"'Twas down to Dunotter Cove and I, a lad, my father bein' a fisherman, and
one night, I mind it as though it were yesterday, there was a mighty wreck.
Storm and wind and rain there was that night and there we were, out in it,
suddenly, all the village of us. I but a slip of a boy, you must know,
which it was thirty year back now and the rain sizzling on the cobbles and
the wind blawin' the chimneys crooked. Well--she were a mighty wreck blawn
right up against the Dunotter rocks, you understand, and sendin' up rockets
and we seein' her clear enough, black out to sea which she seemed enormous
in the night time and all. My father and the rest of 'em went out in the
boat--we waited and we waited and they didn't come back.... They never
come back--none of them only a crazed luny, Bill Tregothny--'e was washed
up against the rocks down to Bosillian and 'e were just livin' ... And
when it come daylight,"--Mr. Jackson cleared his throat and paused--"when
it come daylight there wasn't no wreck--nothing--nor no bodies
neither--nothing--only Bill Tregothny the fool...."

Peter had heard no single word of this. His ears were straining for the
return of that whisper. They were nearly once again at the hilltop. Then in
front of them there would be the sea--at the top of the hill there would be
the sea.... He was seized with a great terror--frightened like a child in
the dark.... "Bill Tregothny, you must understand sir, 'ad always been a
idiot--always, born so. When 'e was all well again 'e told strange tales
about the lot of them havin' boarded the vessel and there bein' gold all
over the decks--bars of it with the rain fallin' all about it--piled in
'eaps and 'e said the sailors weren't like common sailors yer knew, but all
in silks with cocked hats and the gold lyin' all about--

"O course Bill was the idiot you must understand, but it's true enough that
there were no vessel in the marnin'--no vessel at all--and my father and
the rest were never seen again--nor no bodies neither.... And they _do_
say--"

Here Mr. Jackson dropped his voice--

They were just at the top of the hill now. Peter was sitting with his hands
clenched, his body trembling.

"... They do say that up in the potato field over Dunotter they've seen
a man all in a cocked hat and red silk and gold lace--a ghost you must
understand, sir--which Bill Tregothny says ..."

The sea broke upon them with an instant, menacing roar. Between them and
this violence there was now only moorland, rough with gorse bushes, uneven
with little pits of sand, scented with sea pinks, with stony tracks here
and there where the moonlight touched it.

But across it, like a mob's menace, fell the thunder, flung up to them
from below, swelling from a menace to a sudden crash, then from crash to
echo, dying to murmur again. It had in it anger and power, also pity and
tenderness, also scorn and defiance. It cared for no one--it loved every
one. It was more intimate than any confidence ever made, and then it
shouted that intimacy to the whole world. It flung itself into Peter's
face, beat his body, lashed his soul--"Oh! you young fool--you've come
slinking back, have you? After all these years you've come slinking back.
Where are all your fine hopes now, where all those early defiances, those
vast ambitions?--Worthless, broken, defeated--worthless, broken, defeated."

And then it seemed to change:

"Peter--Peter--Hold out a little longer--the battle isn't over
yet--struggle on for a little, Peter--I'll help you--I'll bring your
courage back to you--Trust me, Peter--trust me...."

Through the rattle of the surf there came the sick melancholy lowing of the
Bell Rock; swinging over a space of waters it fell across fields,
unutterably, abominably sad.

And in the boy there instantly leapt to life his soul. Maimed and bruised
and stunned it had been--now alive, tearing him, bringing on to his bending
shoulders an awful tide of knowledge: "Everything is gone--your wife, your
boy, your friend, your work.... We have won, Peter, we have won. The House
is waiting for you...."

And above those dreadful voices the thundering echo, indifferent to his
agonies, despising his frailties, flinging him, sea-wreck of the most
miserable, to any insignificant end....

Peter suddenly stood up, rocking on his box. He seized the whip from the
driver's hands. He lashed the miserable horse.

"Get on, you devil, get on--leave this noise behind you--get out of it, get
out of it--"

The cab rocked and tossed, Mr. Jackson caught the boy about the shoulders,
held him down. The horse, tired and weary, paid no heed to anything that
might be happening but stumbled on.

"Good Lord, sir," Mr. Jackson cried, "you might have had us over--What's it
all about, sir?"

But Peter now was huddled down with his coat about his ears and did not
move again.

"Catchin' the whip like that--might 'ave 'ad us right into the 'edge,"
muttered Mr. Jackson, wishing his journey well over.

As they turned the corner the lights of Treliss burst into view.


CHAPTER II

SCAW HOUSE


I

Mr. Jackson inquired as to the hotel that Peter preferred and was told to
drive anywhere, so he chose The Man at Arms.

The Man at Arms had been turned, by young Mr. Bannister, from a small
insignificant hostelry into the most important hotel in the West of
England. It stood above the town, looking over the bay, the roofs of the
new town, the cottages of the old one, the curving island to the right, the
lighthouse to the left--all Cornwall in those grey stones, that blue sea,
the grave fishing boats, the flocks of gulls, far, far below.

Mr. Bannister had spared no trouble over The Man at Arms, and now it
was luxuriously modern Elizabethan, with an old Minstrels' Gallery kept
studiously dusty, and the most splendid old oak and deep fire-places with
electric light cunningly arranged, and baths in every passage. Of course
you paid for this skilful and comfortable romance, but Mr. Bannister
always managed his bills so delicately that you expected to find a poem
by Suckling or Lovelace on the back of them. When Peter had been last
in Treliss The Man at Arms had scarcely existed, but he was now utterly
unconscious of it, and stood in the dim square hall talking to Mr.
Bannister like a man in a dream.

He was aware now that he was exhausted with a fatigue that was beyond
anything that he had ever experienced. It was a weariness that was not,
under any conditions, to be resisted. He must lie down--here,
anywhere--now, at once and sleep ... sleep ... sleep.

Mr. Bannister caught him by the arm as he swayed.

"You looked played out, sir."

"Done up... done up!"

His eyes were closed. Then suddenly he had touched Mr. Bannister's
shoulder. He was looking at a wire letter rack, hanging by the
superintendent's little office. There were some telegrams and many letters
stretched behind the wire netting. One envelope was addressed--

  _Miss Norah Monogue,
    The Man at Arms Hotel.
      Treliss,
        Cornwall._

"Miss Monogue ... Miss Monogue ... have you any one here called Miss
Monogue?"

"Yes, sir--been here some weeks. Poor lady, she's very ill I'm afraid.
Something to do with her heart--strained it in some way. Seemed much better
... but the last few days...."

Peter stumbled upstairs to his room.


II

Some clock was striking five when he awoke and looking vaguely about his
room saw, by the light, that it must be late afternoon. He must have slept
for a day and a night. As he lay back on his bed his first moments of
consciousness were filled with a pleasant sense of rest and ease. He
remembered nothing ... he only knew that in the air there was the breath of
flowers and that through the open window there floated up to him a song, a
murmur of the sea, a rattle of little carts.

He looked about his room. On a distant wall there was a
photograph--"Dunotter Rocks, from the East." Then he remembered.

He flung the bed-clothes off him and hurried to dress. He must go up to
Scaw House at once, at once, at once. Not another moment must be wasted.
His hands trembled as he put on his clothes and when he came downstairs he
was dishevelled and untidy. He had eaten nothing for many hours but food
now would have choked him. He hurried out of the hotel.

The town must have had many recollections to offer him had he observed
it but he passed through it, looking neither to the right nor the left,
brushing people aside, striding with great steps up the steep cobbled
street that leads out of the town, on to the Sea Road.

Here on the Sea Road he paused. The wind, tearing, as it had always done,
round the corner met him and for a moment he had to pull himself together
and face it. He remembered, too, at that instant, Norah Monogue. Where had
he seen her? What had brought her to his mind quite lately? What did she
mean by interfering?--interfering? Then he remembered. It was her name in
the letter rack. She was at The Man at Arms ill. Impatiently, he would have
driven her from him, but all the way down the Sea Road she kept pace with
him.

"I'm done with her.... I'm done with everybody. Damn it all, one keeps
thinking...."

In the evening light the sea below the road was a pale blue and near the
shore a calm green. It was all very peaceful. The water lapped the shore,
the Bell Rock sighed its melancholy note across space; out a little way,
when some jagged stones sprang like shoulders from the blue, gentle waves
ringed them in foam like lace and broke with a whisper against their sides.

Except for the sea there was absolute silence. Peter alone seemed to walk
the world. As he strode along his excitement increased and his knees
trembled and his eyes were burning. He did not think of the earlier days
when he had walked that same road. That was another existence that had
nothing to do with him as he was now. The anticipation that possessed him
was parallel with the eager demand of the opium-smoker. "Soon I shall be
drugged. I'm going to forget, to forget, to forget. Just to let myself
go--to sink, to drown."

He had still with him the consciousness of keeping at bay an army of
thoughts that would leap upon him if he gave them an opportunity. But soon
that would be all over--no more battle, no more struggle. He turned the
corner and saw Scaw House standing amongst its dark trees, with its black
palings in front of its garden and the deserted barren patch of field in
front of that again. The sun was getting low and the sky above the house
was flaming but the trees were sombre and the house was cold.

It did not seem to him to have changed in any way since he had left it. The
windows had always been of a grim hideous glass, the stone shape of the
place always squat and ugly, and the short flight of steps that led up to
the heavy beetling door had always hinted, with their old hard surface, at
a surly welcome and a reluctant courtesy. It was all as it had been.

The sky, now a burning red, looked down upon an utterly deserted garden,
and the silence that was over all the place seemed to rise, like streaming
mist, from the heart of the nettles that grew thick along the crumbling
wall.

The paint had faded from the door and the knocker was rusty; as Peter
hammered his arrival on to the flat silence a bird flew from the black
bunch of trees, whirred into the air and was gone....

For a long time after the echo of his knock had faded away there was
silence, and it seemed to him that this could be only another of those
dreams--those dreams when he had stood on the stone steps in the heart of
the deserted garden and woken the echoes through the empty house. At last
there were steps; some one came along the passage and halted on the other
side of the door and listened. They both waited on either side, and Peter
could hear heavy thick breathing. He caught the knocker again and let it go
with a clang that seemed to startle the house to its foundations. Then he
heard bolts, very slowly drawn back, again a pause and then, stealthily the
door swung open.

A scent of rotten apples met him as the door opened, a scent so strong that
it was confused at once with his vision of the woman who stood there, she,
with her gnarled and puckered face, her brown skin and crooked nose
standing, as it were, for an actual and visible personification of all the
rotten apples that had ever been in the world.

He recognised also a sound, the drunken hesitating hiccough of the old
clock that had been there when he had come in that evening long ago ready
to receive his beating, that had kept pace with his grandfather's snorings
and mutterings and had seemed indeed, the only understanding companion that
the old man had ever had. The woman was, he saw, the arms-akimbo ferocious
cook of the old days, but now how wrinkled and infirm!--separated by so
many more years than the lapse of time allowed her from the woman of his
past appearance there. There was more in her than the mere crumbling of her
body, there was also the crumbling of her spirit, and he saw in her old
bleared eyes the sign of some fierce battle fought by her, and fought to
her own utter defeat.

In her eyes he saw the thing that his father had become....

What did he want, she asked him, coming disturbing them at that hour, but
in her face there was, he fancied, something more than the surly question
justified, some curiosity, some eagerness that seemed to show that she did
not have many visitors here and that their company might be an eager
relief.

"I'm Peter Westcott and I've come to see my father."

She did not answer this, but only, with her hand to her breast stood back
a little and watched him with frightened eyes. She was wearing an old,
faded, green blouse, open at her scraggy neck and her skirt was a kind of
bed-quilt, odd bits of stuffs of many colours stuck together. Her scanty
hair was pulled into a bunch on the top of her head, her face where it was
not brown was purple, and her hands were always shaking so that her fingers
rattled together like twigs. But her alarmed and startled eyes had some
appeal that made one pity her poor battered old body.

"You don't remember me," he said, looking into her frightened eyes. But she
shook her head slowly.

"You'd much better have kept away," she said.

"Where is he?" he asked her.

She shuffled in front of him down the dark hall. Except for this strange
smell of rotting apples it was all very much as it had been. The lamp
hanging at the foot of the stairs made the same spluttering noise and there
was the door of the room that had once been his grandfather's, and Peter
fancied that he could still see the old man swaying there in the doorway,
laughing at his son and his grandson as they struggled there on the floor.

The woman pushed open the dining-room door and Peter went in.

Peter's first thought was that his father was not there. He saw standing in
front of the well-remembered fireplace a genial-looking gentleman clothed
in a crimson dressing-gown--a bald gentleman, rather fat, with a piece of
toast in one hand and a glass of something in the other. Peter had expected
he knew not what--something stern and terrible, something that would have
answered in one way or another to those early recollections of terror
and punishment that still dwelt with him. He had remembered his father
as short, spare, black-haired, grim, pale--this gentleman, who was now
watching him, bulged in the cheeks and the stomach, was highly coloured
with purple veins down the sides of his nose and his rather podgy hands
trembled. Nevertheless, it was his father. When the red dressing-gown spoke
it was in a kind of travesty of that old sharp voice, those cutting icy
words--a thickened and degenerate relation:

"My boy! At last!" the gentleman said.

The room presented disorder. On the table were scattered playing cards, a
chair was overturned, under the cactus plant lay what looked like a fiddle,
and the only two pictures on the wall were very indecent old drawings taken
apparently from some Hogarthian prints.

Peter stared at all this in amazement. It was, after the grim approach and
the deserted garden, like finding an Easter egg in a strong box. Peter saw
that his father was wearing under the dressing-gown a white waistcoat and
blue trousers, both of them stained with dark stains and smelling very
strongly of whisky. He noticed also that his father seemed to find it
difficult to balance himself on both his legs at the same time, and that
he was continually shifting his feet in an indeterminate kind of way, as
though he would like to dance but felt that it might not be quite the
thing.

Mr. Westcott closed up both his eyes, opened his mouth and shut it again
and shook Peter excitedly by the hand. At the same time Peter felt that
his father was shaking his hand as much because he wanted to hold on to
something as for reasons of courtesy.

"Well, I am glad. I wondered when you would come to see your poor old
father again--after all these years. I've often thought of you and said to
myself, 'Well, he'll come back one day. You only be patient,' I've said to
myself, 'and your son will come back to you--your only son, and it isn't
likely that he's going to desert you altogether.'"

"Yes, father, I've come back," said Peter, releasing his hand. "I've come
back to stay."

He thought of the many times in London when he'd pictured his father,
stern and dark, pulling the wires, dragging his wicked son back to him--he
thought of that ... and now this. And yet....

"Well now, isn't that pleasant--you've come to stay! Could I have wanted
anything better? Come and sit down--yes, that chair--and have something to
drink. What, you won't? Well, perhaps later. So you've come to keep your
old father company, have you? I'm sure that's delightful. Just what a son
ought to do. We shall get along very well, I'm sure."

All the while that his father talked, still holding the toast and the glass
of something, Peter was intensely conscious of the silent listening house.
After all that grimness, that desertion, the old woman's warning had gone
for something. And yet, in spite of a kind of dread that hung about him,
in spite of a kind of perception that there was a great deal more in his
father than he at present perceived, he could not resist a kind of warm
pleasure that here at any rate was some sort of a haven, that no one else
in the world might want him, but here was some one who was glad to see him.

"Well, my boy, tell me all you've been doing these years."

"I've been in London, writing--"

"Dear, dear--have you really now? And how's it all turned out?"

"Badly."

"Dear me, I'm sorry for that. But there are better things in the world than
writing, believe me. I dare say, my boy, you thought me unkind in those
old days but it was all for your best--oh dear me, yes, entirely for your
best."

Here, for an instant, his father's voice sounded so like his old
grandfather's that Peter jumped.

"Married?" said his father.

"My wife has left me--"

"Dear me, I am sorry to hear that." Mr. Westcott finished the toast and
wiped his fingers on a very old and dirty red handkerchief. "Women--bless
them--angels for a time, but never to be depended on. Poor boy, I'm sorry.
Children?"

"I had a son. He died."

"Well now, I am indeed sorry, I'd have liked a grandson too. Don't want the
old Westcott stock to die out. Dear me, that is a pity."

It was at this point that Peter was aware, although he could not have given
any reasonable explanation of his certainty, that his father had been
perfectly assured beforehand of all the answers to these questions. Peter
looked at the man, but the eyes were almost closed, and the smile that
played about the weak lips--once so stern and strong--told one nothing.

It was dark now. Mr. Westcott got, somewhat unsteadily, to his feet.

"Come," he said, "I'll show you the house, my boy. Not changed much since
you were here, I'm sure. Wanted a woman's care since your dear mother died
of course--and your poor old grandfather--"

He whispered over again to himself as he shuffled across the room--"your
poor old grandfather--"

It had seemed to grow very suddenly dark. Outside in the hall, under the
spluttering lamp, Mr. Westcott found a candle. The house was intensely
silent.

As they climbed the stairs, lighted only by the flickering candle-light,
Peter's feelings were a curious mixture of uneasiness and a strange
unthinking somnolence. Some part of him, somewhere, was urging him to an
active unrest--"Norah ... what does she want interfering? I'll just go and
see her and come back.... No, I won't, I'll just stay here ... never to
bother again ... never to bother again...."

He was also, in some undefined way, expecting that at any moment his
father would change. The crimson dressing-gown swayed under the flickering
candle-light. Let it turn round and what would one see inside it? His
father never stopped talking for an instant--his thick wandering voice was
the only sound in the deserted house.

The rooms were all empty. They smelt as though the windows had not been
opened for years. It was in the little room that had once been his bedroom
that the apples were stored--piles upon piles of them and most of them
rotten. The smell was all over the house.

Mr. Westcott, standing with the apples on every side of him, flung
monstrous shadows upon the wall--"This used to be your room. I remember I
used to whip you here when you were disobedient. The only way to bring up
your child. The Westcotts have always believed in it. Dear me, how long ago
it all seems ... you can have this room again if you like. Any room in the
house you please. We'll be very good company for one another...."

All about Peter there was an atmosphere of extraordinary languor--just to
sit here and let the days slip by, the years pass. Just to stay here with
no one to hurt one, no need for courage....

They were out in the long passage. Mr. Westcott came and placed his hand
upon Peter's arm. The whole house was a great cool place where one slept.
Mr. Westcott smiled into Peter's face ... the house was silent and dark
and oh! so restful. The candle swelled to an enormous size--the red
dressing-gown seemed to enfold Peter.

In another moment he would have fallen asleep there where he stood. With
the last struggle of a drowning man he pulled back his fading senses.

"I must go back to the hotel and fetch my things." He could see his
father's eyes that had been wide open disappear.

"We can send for them."

"No, I must go for them myself--"

For a moment they faced one another. He wondered what his father intended
to do. Then--with a genial laugh, Mr. Westcott said: "Well, my boy, just
as you please--just as you please. I know you'll come back to your old
father--I know you'll come back--"

He blew the candle out and put his arm through his son's and they went
downstairs together.


CHAPTER III

NORAH MONOGUE


I

Peter found, next morning, Miss Monogue sitting by her window. She gave
him at once the impression of something kept alive by a will-power so
determined that Death himself could only stand aside and wait until it
might waver.

She was so thin that sitting there in the clear white colours of the
sky beyond her window she seemed like fine silk, something that, at an
instant's breath, would be swept like a shadow, into the air. She wore
something loose and white and over her shoulders there was a grey shawl.
Her grey hair was as untidy as of old, escaping from the order that it
had been intended to keep and falling over her beautiful eyes, so that
continually she moved her hand--so thin and white with its deep purple
veins--to push it back. In this still white figure the eyes burnt with an
amazing fire. What eyes they were!

One seemed, in the old days, to have denied them their proper splendour,
but now in this swiftly fading body they had gathered more life and vigour,
showing the soul that triumphed over so slender a mortality.

She seemed to Peter, as he came into the room, to stand for so much more
than he had ever hitherto allowed her. Here, in her last furious struggle
to keep a life that had given to her nothing worth having, he saw suddenly
emblazoned about him, the part that she had played in his life, always from
the first moment that he had known her--a part that had been, by him, so
frequently neglected, so frequently denied.

As she turned and saw him he was ashamed at the joy that his coming so
obviously brought her. He felt her purity, her unselfishness, her
single-heartedness, her courage, her nobility in that triumphant welcome
that she gave him. That she should care so much for any one so worthless,
so fruitless as he had proved himself to be!

He had come to her with some dim sense that it was kind of him to visit
her; he advanced to her now across the room with a consciousness that she
was honouring him by receiving him at all.

That joy, with which she had at first greeted him, had in it also something
of surprise. He had forgotten how greatly these last terrible days must
have altered his appearance--he told much more than he knew, and the little
sad attempt that he made, as he came to her, to present as careless and
happy an appearance as he had presented in the old Brockett days was more
pathetic and betraying than anything he could have done.

But she just closed both her burning hands about his cold one, made him sit
down in a chair by her side and, trembling with the excited joy of having
him with her, forced him to determine that, whatever came of it, he would
keep his troubles from her, would let her know nothing of his old chuckling
father and the shadowy welcome that Scaw House had flung over him, would be
still the Peter that he had been when he had seen her last in London.

"Peter! How splendid to have you here! When Mr. Bannister told me last
night I could have cried for happiness, and he, dear little man, was surely
as pleased to see me happy as though I'd been his own sister."

"I'd just come down--" Peter began, trying to smile and conscious with an
alarm that surprised him, of her fragility and the way that her hand went
now and again to her breast, as though to relieve some pain there. "Are you
sure--" he broke off, "that I'm not doing you harm coming like this--not
agitating you too much, not exciting you?"

"Harm! Why, Peter," she was smiling but he noticed too that her eyes were
searching his face, as though to find some clue to the change that they saw
there--"Why it's all the good in the world. It's what I've been wanting
all this time. Despatched in search of the truants, he had found Kate at
the Vicarage, making much of the last new baby there, and devouring a sumptuous
tea of cakes and jam.

Miss West?

Oh, Miss West was sitting in the church porch, talking to old Nancy Cale,
she said to Harry.

"Why! What is it?" he exclaimed in dismay, finding that the burst of emotion
which he had taken to be laughter, meant tears. "What has happened, Alice?"

She could no more have kept the tears in than she could
help--presently--telling him the news.

He sat down by her and held her close to him, and pressed for it.

She was the daughter of George West, who had died in the dispute with
Captain Monk in the dining-room at the Hall so many years before, and
who was lying here in the corner of the churchyard; and she had never,
never known it!

Mr. Carradyne was somewhat taken to; there was no denying it; chiefly
by surprise.

"I thought your father was a soldier, Alice--Colonel West; and died
when serving in India. I'm sure it was said so when you came."

"Oh, no, that could not have been said," she cried; "unless Mrs. Moffit,
the agent, made the mistake. It was my uncle who died in India. No one here
ever questioned me about my parents, knowing they were dead.

Oh, dear," she went on in agitation, after a silent pause, "what
am I to do now?

I cannot stay at the Hall. Captain Monk would not allow it either."

"No need to tell him," quoth Mr. Harry.

"And--of course--we must part. You and I."

"Indeed! Who says so?"
"I am not sure that it would be right to--to--you know."
"To what? Go on, my dear."

Alice sighed; her eyes were fixed thoughtfully on the fast falling twilight.
"Mrs. Carradyne will not care for me when she knows who I am," she said
in low tones.

"My dear, shall I tell you how it strikes me?" returned Harry: "that my
mother will be only the more anxious to have you connected with
us by closer and dearer ties, so as to atone to you, in even a small
degree, for the cruel wrong which fell upon your father.

As to me--it shall be made my life's best and dearest privilege."
But when a climax such as this takes place, the right or the wrong thing
to be done cannot be settled in a moment.

Alice West did not see her way quite clearly, and for the present she
neither said nor did anything.

This little matter occurred on the Friday in Christmas week; on the
following day, Saturday, Mrs.

Hamlyn was returning to London. Christmas Day this year had fallen on a Monday.
Some old wives hold a superstition that when that happens, it inaugurates
but small luck for the following year, either for communities or
for individuals.

Not that that fancy has anything to do with the present history. Captain
Monk's banquet would not be held until the Monday night: as was customary
when New Year's Eve fell on a Sunday. He had urged his daughter to remain
over New Year's Day; but she declined, on the plea that as she had
been away from her husband on Christmas Day, she would like to pass
New Year's Day with him.

The truth being that she wanted to get to London to see after that yellow-haired
lady who was supposed to be peeping after Philip Hamlyn.

On the Saturday morning, Mrs. Hamlyn was driven to Evesham in the close
carriage, and took the train to London. Her husband, ever kind and attentive,
met her at the Paddington terminus. He was looking haggard, and seemed to
be thinner than when she left him nine days ago.

"Are you well, Philip?" she asked anxiously.

"Oh, quite well," quickly answered poor Philip Hamlyn, smiling a warm smile,
that he meant to look like a gay one. "Nothing ever ails me."
No, nothing might ail him bodily; but mentally--ah, how much! That awful
terror lay upon him thick and threefold; it had not yet come to
any solution, one way or the other.

Major Pratt had taken up the very worst view of it; and spent his days
pitching hard names at misbehaving syrens, gifted with "the deuce's own
cunning" and with mermaids' shining hair.

"And how have things been going, Penelope?" asked Mrs. Hamlyn of the
nurse, as she sat in the nursery with her boy upon her knee. "All right?"

"Quite so, ma'am.

Master Walter has been just as good as gold."
"Mamma's darling!" murmured the doting mother, burying her face in his.
"I have been thinking, Penelope, that your master does not look
well," she added after a minute.

"No, ma'am?

I've not noticed it. We have not seen much of him up here; he has been
at his club a good deal--and dined three or four times with old Major
Pratt."
"As if she would notice it!--servants never notice anything!" thought Eliza
Hamlyn in her imperious way of judging the world. "By the way, Penelope,"
she said aloud in light and careless tones, "has that woman with
the yellow hair been seen about much?

--has she presumed again to accost my little son?"

"The woman with the yellow hair?" repeated Penelope, looking at her mistress,
for the girl had quite forgotten the episode. "Oh, I remember--she that
stood outside there and came to us in the square-garden. No, ma'am, I've
seen nothing at all of her since that day."
"For there are wicked people who prowl about to kidnap children," continued
Mrs. Hamlyn, as if she would condescend to explain her inquiry, "and that
woman looked like one. Never suffer her to approach my darling again.
Mind that, Penelope."
The jealous heart is not easily reassured. And Mrs.

Hamlyn, restless and suspicious, put the same question to her
husband.

It was whilst they were waiting in the drawing-room for dinner to be announced,
and she had come down from changing her apparel after her journey.

How handsome she looked! a right regal woman! as she stood there arrayed
in dark blue velvet, the fire-light playing upon her proud face, and upon
the diamond earrings and brooch she wore.

"Philip, has that woman been prowling about here again?"
Just for an imperceptible second, for thought is quick, it occurred to
Philip Hamlyn to temporise, to affect ignorance, and say, What woman?
just as if his mind were not full of the woman, and of nothing else.

But he abandoned it as useless.

"I have not seen her since; not at all," he answered: and though his words
were purposely indifferent, his wife, knowing all his tones and
ways by heart, was not deceived.

"He is afraid of that woman," she whispered to herself; "or else afraid
of _me_." But she said no more.

"Have you come to any definite understanding with Mr. Carradyne in
regard to Peacock's Range, Eliza?"

"He will not come to any; he is civilly obstinate over it. Laughs in my
face with the most perfect impudence, and tells me: 'A man must be allowed
to put in his own claim to his own house, when he wants to do so.'"
"Well, Eliza, that seems to be only right and fair. Percival made no
positive agreement with us, remember."
"_Is_ it right and fair! That may be your opinion, Philip, but it is not
mine. We shall see, Mr. Harry Carradyne!"

"Dinner is served, ma'am," announced the old butler.

That evening passed. Sunday passed, the last day of the dying year; and
Monday morning, New Year's day, dawned.

* * * * *
New Year's Day. Mr. and Mrs. Hamlyn were seated at the breakfast-table.
It was a bright, cold, sunny morning, showing plenty of blue sky. Young
Master Walter, in consideration of the day, was breakfasting at their
table, seated in his high chair.

"Me to have dinner wid mamma to-day! Me have pudding!"
"That you shall, my sweetest; and everything that's good," assented his
mother.

In came Japhet at this juncture. "There's a little boy in the hall, sir,
asking to see you," said he to his master. "He--"
"Oh, we shall have plenty of boys here to-day, asking for a new year's
gift," interposed Mrs. Hamlyn, rather impatiently. "Send him a shilling,
Philip."

"It's not a poor boy, ma'am," answered Japhet, "but a little gentleman:
six or seven years old, he looks.

He says he particularly wants to see master."
Philip Hamlyn smiled. "Particularly wants a shilling, I expect. Send him
in, Japhet."
The lad came in. A well-dressed beautiful boy, refined in looks and demeanour,
bearing in his face a strange likeness to Mr. Hamlyn. He looked about
timidly.

Eliza, struck with the resemblance, gazed at him. Her husband spoke.
"What do you want with me, my lad?"
"If you please, sir, are you Mr. Hamlyn?" asked the child, going forward
with hesitating steps. "Are you my papa?"
Every drop of blood seemed to leave Philip Hamlyn's face and fly to his
heart. He could not speak, and looked white as a ghost.

"Who are you? What is your name?" imperiously demanded Philip's wife.

"It is Walter Hamlyn," replied the lad, in clear, pretty tones.

And now it was Mrs. Hamlyn's turn to look white. Walter Hamlyn?--the name
of her own dear son! when she had expected him to say Sam Smith,
or John Jones! What insolence some people had!

"Where do you come from, boy? Who sent you here?" she reiterated.

"I come from mamma. She would have sent me before, but I caught cold, and
was in bed all last week."
Mr. Hamlyn rose.

It was a momentous predicament, but he must do the best he could
in it.

He was a man of nice honour, and he wished with all his heart that the earth
would open and engulf him. "Eliza, my love, allow me to deal with this
matter," he said, his voice taking a low, tender, considerate tone.

"I will question the boy in another room.

Some mistake, I reckon."
"No, Philip, you must put your questions before me," she said, resolute
in her anger. "What is it you are fearing? Better tell me all, however
disreputable it may be."
"I dare not tell you," he gasped; "it is not--I fear--the disreputable
thing you may be fancying."
"Not dare! By what right do you call this gentleman 'papa'?"

she passionately demanded of the child.

"Mamma told me to.

She would never let me come home to him before because of not wishing to
part from me."
Mrs. Hamlyn gazed at him. "Where were you born?"
"At Calcutta; that's in India.

Mamma brought me home in the _Clipper of the Seas_, and the ship went
down, but quite everybody was not lost in it, though papa thought
so."

The boy had evidently been well instructed.

Eliza Hamlyn, grasping the whole truth now, staggered back in terror.

"Philip! Philip! is it true? Was it _this_ you feared?"
He made a motion of assent and covered his face.

"Heaven knows I would rather have died."
He stood back against the window-curtains, that they might shade his pain.
She fell into a chair and wished he _had_ died, years before.

But what was to be the end of it all? Though Eliza Hamlyn went straight
out and despatched that syren of the golden hair with a poison-tipped
bodkin (and possibly her will might be good to do it), it could not
make things any the better for herself.

III.

New Year's Night at Leet Hall, and the banquet in full swing--but not, as
usual, New Year's Eve.

Captain Monk headed his table, the parson, Robert Grame, at his right hand,
Harry Carradyne on his left. Whether it might be that the world, even that
out-of-the-way part of it, Church Leet, was improving in manners and morals;
or whether the Captain himself was changing: certain it was that the board
was not the free board it used to be. Mrs.
Carradyne herself might have sat at it now, and never once blushed by as
much as the pink of a sea-shell.

It was known that the chimes were to play this year; and, when midnight
was close at hand, Captain Monk volunteered a statement which astonished
his hearers. Rimmer, the butler, had come into the room to open the
windows.

"I am getting tired of the chimes, and all people have not liked them,"
spoke the Captain in slow, distinct tones.

"I have made up my mind to do away with them, and you will hear them
to-night, gentlemen, for the last time."

"_Really_, Uncle Godfrey!" cried Harry Carradyne, in most intense
surprise.

"I hope they'll bring us no ill-luck to-night!" continued Captain Monk
as a grim joke, disregarding Harry's remark.

"Perhaps they will, though, out of sheer spite, knowing they'll
never have another chance of it.
Well, well, they're welcome. Fill your glasses, gentlemen."

Rimmer was throwing up the windows. In another minute the church clock
boomed out the first stroke of twelve, and the room fell into a dead silence.
With the last stroke the Captain rose, glass in hand.

"A happy New Year to you, gentlemen! A happy New Year to us all. May it bring
to us health and prosperity!"
"And God's blessing," reverently added Robert Grame aloud, as if to remedy
an omission.

Ring, ring, ring! Ah, there it came, the soft harmony of the chimes,
stealing up through the midnight air. Not quite as loudly heard, perhaps,
as usual, for there was no wind to waft it, but in tones wondrously clear
and sweet. Never had the strains of the "Bay of Biscay" brought to the ear
more charming melody. How soothing it was to those enrapt listeners;
seeming to tell of peace.
But soon another sound arose to mingle with it. A harsh, grating
sound, like the noise of wheels passing over gravel. Heads were
lifted; glances expressed surprise. With the last strains of the
chimes dying away in the distance, a carriage of some kind galloped
up to the hall door.
Eliza Hamlyn alighted from it--with her child and its nurse. As
quickly as she could make opportunity after that scene enacted in
her breakfast-room in London in the morning, that is, as soon as
her husband's back was turned, she had quitted the house with the
maid and child, to take the train for home, bringing with her--it
was what she phrased it--her shameful tale.
A tale that distressed Mrs. Carradyne to sickness. A tale that so
abjectly terrified Captain Monk, when it was imparted to him on
Tuesday morning, as to take every atom of fierceness out of his
composition.

"Not Hamlyn's wife!" he gasped. "Eliza!"
"No, not his wife," she retorted, a great deal too angry herself
to be anything but fierce and fiery. "That other woman, that false
first wife of his, was not drowned, as was set forth, and she has
come to claim him, with their son."
"His wife; their son," muttered the Captain as if he were
bewildered.
"Then what are you?--what is your son? Oh, my poor Eliza."
"Yes, what are we? Papa, I will bring him to answer for it before
his country's tribunal--if there be law in the land."
No one spoke to this. It may have occurred to them to remember that
Mr.
Hamlyn could not legally be punished for what he did in innocence.
Captain Monk opened the glass doors and walked on to the terrace,
as if the air of the room were oppressive. Eliza went out after
him.
"Papa," she said, "there now exists all the more reason for your
making my darling _your_ heir. Let it be settled without delay. He
must succeed to Leet Hall."
Captain Monk looked at his daughter as if not understanding her.
"No, no, no," he said. "My child, you forget; trouble must be
obscuring your faculties. None but a _legal_ descendant of the Monks
could be allowed to have Leet Hall. Besides, apart from this, it
is already settled. I have seen for some little time now how unjust
it would be to supplant Henry Carradyne."
"Is _he_ to be your heir? Is it so ordered?"
"Irrevocably. I have told him so this morning."
"What am I to do?" she wailed in bitter despair. "Papa, what is to
become of me--and of my unoffending child?"
"I don't know: I wish I did know. It will be a cruel blight upon
us all.
You will have to live it down, Eliza. Ah, child, if you and Katherine
had only listened to me, and not made those rebellious marriages!"

He turned away as he spoke in the direction of the church, to see
that his orders were being executed there. Harry Carradyne ran after
him. The clock was striking midday as they entered the churchyard.
Yes, the workmen were at their work--taking down the bells.Then he would ask himself what the devil her right was that she should
order his life in this way?... everyday the struggle grew harder.

The tension could not hold any longer--at last it broke.


IV

One evening they were sitting in silence beside her window. The room was
in dusk and he could just see her white shadow against the dim blue light
beyond the window.

Suddenly she broke down. He could hear her crying, behind her hands. The
sound in that grey, silent room was more than he could bear. He went over
to her and put his arms round her.

"Norah, Norah, please, please. It's so awfully bad for you. I oughtn't to
come if I--"

She pulled herself together. Her voice was quite calm and controlled.

"Sit over there, Peter. I've got to talk to you."

He went back to his chair.

"I've only got a few more weeks to live. I know it. Perhaps only a few more
days. I must make the very utmost of my time. I've got to save you...."

He said nothing.

"Oh! I know that it must all have seemed to you abominable--as though I
were making use of this illness of mine to extort a promise from you, as
though just because I'm weak and feeble I can hold an advantage over you.
Oh! I know it's all abominable!--but I'll use everything--yes, simply
everything--if I can get you to leave this place and go back!"

He could feel that she was pulling herself together for some tremendous
effort.

"Peter, I want you now just to think of me, to put yourself out of
everything, absolutely, just for this half-hour. After all as I've only
a few half-hours left I've got that right."

Her laugh as she said it was one of the saddest things he'd ever heard.

"Now I'm going to tell you something--something that I'd never thought I'd
tell a soul.

"I've not had a very cheerful life. It hasn't had very much to make it
bright and interesting. I'm not complaining but it's just been that way--"
She broke off for a moment. "I don't want you to interrupt or say anything.
It'll make it easier for me if I can just talk out into the night air, as
it were--just as though no one were here."

She went on: "The one thing that's made it possible, made it bearable, made
it alive, has been my love for you. Always from the first moment I saw you
I have loved you. Oh! I haven't been foolish about it. I knew that you'd
never care for me in that kind of way. I knew from the very first that we
should be pals but that you'd never dream of anything more romantic. I've
never had any one in love with me--I'm not the kind of woman who draws the
romance out of men.

"No, I knew you'd never love me, but I just determined that I'd make you,
your career, your success, the pivot, the centre of my life.

"I wasn't blind about you--not a bit. I knew that you were selfish, weak,
incredibly young about the world. I knew that you were the last person in
existence to marry Clare--all the more reason it seemed to me why I should
be behind you. I was behind you so much more than you ever knew. I wonder
if you've the least idea what most women's lives are like. They come into
the world with the finest ideals, the most tremendous energies, with a
desire for self-sacrifice that a man can't even begin to understand.
Then they discover slowly that none of those things, those ideals, those
energies, those sacrifices, are wanted. The world just doesn't need
them--they might as well never have been born. Do you suppose I enjoyed
slaving for my mother, day and night for years? Do you suppose that I
gladly yielded up all my best blood, my vitality, to the pleasure of some
one who never valued it, never even knew that such things were being given
her? Before you came I was slowly falling into despair. Think of all the
women who are haunted by the awful thought--'The time will come when death
will be facing me and I shall be forced to own that for any place that I
have ever filled in the world I might never have been born.' How many women
are there who do not pray every day of their lives, 'God, give me something
to do before I die--some place to fill, some work to carry out, something
to save my self-respect.'

"I tell you that there is a time coming when women will force those things
that are in them upon the world. God help all poor women who are not
wanted!

"_I_ wasn't wanted. There was nothing for me to do, no place for me to
fill... then you came. At once I seized upon that-God seemed to have sent
it to me. I believed that if I turned all those energies, those desires,
those ambitions upon you that it would help you to do the things that you
were meant to do. I was with you always--I slaved for you--you became the
end in life to which I had been called.

"All the time you were only a boy--that was partly I think why I loved you.
You were so gauche, so ignorant, so violent, so confident one moment, so
plunged into despair the next. For a while everything seemed to go well. I
had thought that Clare was going to be good for you, was going to make you
unselfish. I thought that you'd got the better of all that part of you that
was your inheritance. Even when I came down here I thought that all was
well. I knew that I had come down to die and I had thanked God because
He _had_, after all, allowed me to make something of my life, that
I'd been able to see you lifted into success, that I'd seen you start a
splendid career.... Then you came and I knew that your life was broken into
pieces. I knew that what had happened to you might be the most splendid
thing in the world for you and might be the most terrible. The few points
which, at the first glance, present themselves as requiring solution are
these:--Who was the M.

Platzoff who is said to have stolen the diamond?

and what position in life did he really occupy? Is he alive or dead? If alive,
where is he now living? If he did really steal the diamond, are not the
chances as a hundred to one that he disposed of it long ago? But even
granting that we were in a position to answer all these questions; suppose,
even, that this M."Believe me, Peter dear, it all matters so little, this trouble and
unhappiness that you've had, if you take it bravely. The courage that
you've wanted before is nothing to the courage that you want now if you're
going back. Let me die knowing that we're both going back.

"Think of what your life, if it's fine enough, can mean to other people.
Go back to be battered--never mind what happens to your body--any one can
stand that. There's London waiting for you, there's life and adventure and
hardship. There are people to be helped. You'll go, with all that I can
give you, behind you ... you'll go, Peter?"

He sat with his teeth set, staring out into the world. He had known from
the first sentence of her appeal to him that she had named the one thing
that could give him courage to fight his cowardice. Some one had once said:
"If any one soul of us is all the world, this world and the next, to any
other soul, then whoever it may be that thus loves us, the inadequacy of
our return, the hopeless debt of us, must strike us to our knees with an
utter humility."

So did he feel now. Out of the wreck there had survived this one thing.
He remembered what Henry Galleon had once said about Fortitude, that the
hardest trial of all to bear was the consciousness of having missed the
Finest Thing. All these years she had been there by the side of him and he
had scarcely thought of her--now, even as he watched her, she was slipping
away from him, and soon he would be left alone with the consciousness of
missing the greatest chance of his life.

The one thing that he could do in return was to give her what she asked.
But it was hard--he was under no illusion as to the desperate determination
that it would demand. The supreme moment of his life had come. For the
first time he was going to fling away the old Peter Westcott altogether.
He could feel it clinging to him. About him, in the air, spirits were
fighting. He had never before needed Courage as he was needing it now. It
seemed to him that he had to stand up to all the devils in the world--they
were thick on every side of him.

Then, with a great uplifting of strength, with a courage that he had never
known before, he picked up Peter Westcott in his hands, held him, that
miserable figure, high in air, raised him, then flung him with all his
strength out, away, far into space, never to return, never to encumber the
earth again.

"I'll go back," Peter said--and as he said it, there was no elation in him,
only a clear-sighted vision of a life of struggle, toil, torment, defeat,
in front of him, something so hard and arduous that the new Peter Westcott
that had now been born seemed small indeed to face it.

But nevertheless he knew that at the moment that he said those words he had
broken into pieces the spell that had been over him for so many years. That
Beast in him that had troubled him for so long, all the dark shadows of
Scaw House ... these were at an end.

He felt tired, discouraged, no fine creature, as he turned to her, but he
knew that, from that moment, a new life had begun for him.

He put his arms round Norah Monogue and kissed her.


V

He got up very early next morning and went down to the Harbour. The
fishing-boats were coming in; great flocks of gulls, waiting for the spoil
that was soon to be theirs, were wheeling in clouds about the brown sails.

The boats stole, one after another, around the pier. The air was filled
with shrill cries--the only other sound was the lapping of the water as it
curled up the little beach.

As Peter stood there there crept upon him a sensation of awe. He took off
his hat. The gulls seemed to cease their cries.

As another brown sail stole round the white point, gleaming' now in the
sun, he knew, with absolute certainty, that Norah Monogue was dead.


CHAPTER IV

THE GREY HILL


I

The day of Norah Monogue's funeral was fine and clear. Peter and little Mr.
Bannister were the only mourners and it was Peter's wish that she should be
buried in the little windy graveyard of the church where his mother had
been buried.

There was always a wind on that little hill, but to-day it was gentler than
he had ever known it before. His mind went back to that other funeral, now,
as it seemed, such a lifetime ago. Out of all the world these two women
only now seemed to abide with him. As he stood beside the grave he was
conscious that there was about him a sense of peace and rest such as he
had never known before. Could it be true that some of Norah Monogue's fine
spirit had come to him? Were they, in sober fact to go on together during
the remainder of his days?

He lingered for a little looking down upon the grave. He was glad to think
that he had made her last hours happy.

Indeed she had not lived in vain.


II

Heavy black clouds were banking upon the horizon as he went down the hill
and struck the Sea Road in the direction of Scaw House. Except in that far
distance the sky was a relentless, changeless blue. Every detail in the
scene was marked with a hard outline, every sound, the sea, the Bell Rock,
the cries of sheep, the nestling trees, was doubly insistent.

He banged the knocker upon the Scaw House door and when the old woman came
to open to him he saw that something had occurred. Her hair fell about her
neck, her face was puckered with distress and her whole appearance was
dismayed.

"Is my father in?" he asked.

"He is, but he's ill," she answered him, eyeing him doubtfully. "He won't
know yer--I doubt he'll know any one. He's had a great set-back--"

Peter pushed past her into the hall--"Is he ill?"

"Indeed he is. He was suddenly took--the other evenin' I being in my
kitchen heard a great cry. I came runnin' and there in the dining-room I
found him, standing there in the midst, his hands up. His eyes, you must
understand, sir, were wide and staring--'They've beaten me,' he cried,
'They've beaten me'--just like that, sir, and then down he tumbled in a
living fit, foaming at the mouth and striking his poor head against the
fender. Yer may come up, sir, but he won't know yer which he doesn't me
either."

Peter followed her up to the dreary room that his father inhabited. Even
here the paper was peeling off the walls, some of the window-glass was
broken and the carpet was torn. His father lay on his back in an old high
four-poster. His eyes stared before him, cheeks were ashen white--his hands
too were white like ivory.

His lips moved but he made no sound. He did not see Peter, nor did his eyes
turn from the blank stare that held them.

"Has he a doctor?" Peter asked the old woman.

"Ay--there's a young man been coming--" the old woman answered him. She
was, he noticed, more subservient than she had been on the former occasion.
She obviously turned to him now with her greedy old eyes as the one who was
likely soon to be in authority.

Yet its only luxury was the bottom of a breechloader brass cartridge,
inlaid and flanked by the sharp incisors of the little Wabar, or mountain
coney.

These Bedawin make gunpowder for themselves; they find saltpetre in every
cavern, and they buy from Egypt the sulphur which is found in their own
hills.

After a few minutes we left the Hárr, which drains the tallest of
the inland hillock-ranges, and the red block "Hamrá el-Maysarah;"
and we struck south-east into the Wady Sanawíyyah.That old Peter Westcott had indeed been flung out of the high
window of Norah Monogue's room.

Leaving Scaw House on his right he struck through the dark belt of trees
and came out at the foot of the Grey Hill. The dark belt of cloud was
spreading now fast across the blue--soon it would catch the sun--the Tower
itself was already swallowed by a cold grey shadow.

Peter began to climb the hill, and remembered that he had not been there
since that Easter morning when he had kissed an unknown lady and so flung
fine omens about his future.

Soon he had reached the little green mound that lay below the Giant's
Finger. Although the Grey Hill would have been small and insignificant in
hilly country here, by its isolation, it assumed importance. On every side
of it ran the sand-dunes--in front of it, almost as it seemed up to its
very feet, ran the sea. Treliss was completely hidden, not a house could
be seen. The black clouds now had caught the sea and only far away to the
right the waves still glittered, for the rest it was an inky grey with a
touch of white here and there where submerged rocks found breakers. For one
moment the sun had still evaded the cloud, then it was caught and the world
was instantly cold.

Peter, as he sat there, felt that if he were only still enough the silence
would soon be vocal. The Hill, the Sea, the Sky--these things seemed to
have summoned him there that they might speak to him.

He was utterly detached from life. He looked down from a height in air and
saw his little body sitting there as he had done on the day when he had
proposed to Clare. He might think now of the long journey that it had come,
he might watch the course of its little history, see the full circle that
it had travelled, wonder for what new business it was now to prepare.

For full circle he had come. He, Peter Westcott, sat there, as naked, as
alone, as barren of all rewards, of all success, of all achievements as he
had been when, so many years ago he had watched that fight in the inn on
Christmas Eve. The scene passed before him again--he saw himself, a tiny
boy, swinging his legs from the high chair. He saw the room thick with
smoke, the fishermen, Dicky the Fool, the mistletoe swinging, the snow
blocking in from outside, the fight--it was all as though it passed once
more before his eyes.

His whole life came to him--the scenes at Scaw House, Dawson's, the
bookshop, Brockett's, Bucket Lane, Chelsea, that last awful scene there ...
all the people that he had known passed before him--Stephen Brant, his
grandfather, his father, his mother, Bobby Galleon, Mr. Zanti, Clare,
Cards, Mrs. Brockett, Norah, Henry Galleon, Mrs. Rossiter, dear Mrs. Launce
... these and many more. Platzoff really purloined the diamond. We have
no trustworthy evidence that the diamond itself ever had an existence."

"Surely, Mr.

Madgin, my son's letter is sufficient to prove that fact."
"Sufficient, perhaps, in conjunction with the other evidence, to prove it
in a moral sense, but certainly not in a legal one," said Mr. Madgin,
quietly but decisively. "Your ladyship must please to bear in mind that
Captain Chillington in his letter makes no absolute mention of the diamond
by name; he merely writes of it vaguely under certain initials, and, if
called upon, how could you prove that he intended those initials to stand
for the words _Great Hara Diamond_, and not for something altogether
different? If M.And as he knew, sitting there, that thus Peace had come to him, how odd it
seemed that only a few weeks ago he had been coming down to Cornwall with
his soul, as he had then thought, killed for ever.

The world had seemed, utterly, absolutely, for ever at an end; and now
here he was, sitting here, eager to go back into it all again, wanting--it
almost seemed--to be bruised and battered all over again.

And perceiving this showed him what was indeed the truth that all his life
had been only Boy's History. He had gone up--he had gone down--he had loved
and hated, exulted and despaired, but it was all with a boy's intense
realisation of the moment, with a boy's swift, easy transition from one
crisis to another.

It had been his education--and now his education was over. As he had said
those words to Norah Monogue, "I will go back," he had become a man. Never
again would Life be so utterly over as it had been two months ago--never
again would he be so single-hearted in his reserved adoption of it as he
had been those days ago, at Norah Monogue's side.

He saw that always, through everything that boy, Peter Westcott had been
in the way. It was not until he had taken, on that day in Norah Monogue's
room, Peter Westcott in his hands and flung him to the four winds that he
had seen how terribly in the way he had been. "Go back," Norah had said to
him; "you have done all these things for yourself and you have been beaten
to your knees--go back now and do something for others. You have been brave
for yourself--be brave now for others."

And he was going back.

He was going back, as he had seen on that day, to no easy life. He was
going to take up all those links that had been so difficult for him
before--he was going to learn all over again that art that he had fancied
that he had conquered at the very first attempt--he was going now with no
expectations, no hopes, no ambitions. Life was still an adventure, but now
an adventure of a hard, cruel sort, something that needed an answer grim
and dark.

The storm was coming up apace. The wind had risen and was now rushing over
the short stiff grass, bellowing out to meet the sea, blowing back to meet
the clouds that raced behind the hill.

The sky was black with clouds. Peter could see the sand rising from the
dunes in a thin mist.

Peter flung himself upon his back. The first drops of rain fell, cold, upon
his face. Then he heard:

"Peter Westcott! Peter Westcott!"

"I'm here!"

"What have you brought to us here?"

"I have brought nothing."

"What have you to offer us?"

"I can offer nothing."

He got up from the ground and faced the wind. He put his back to the
Giant's Finger because of the force of the gale. The rain was coming down
now in torrents.

He felt a great exultation surge through his body.

Then the Voice--not in the rain, nor the wind, nor the sea, but yet all
of these, and coming as it seemed from the very heart of the Hill, came
swinging through the storm--

"Have you cast _This_ away, Peter Westcott?"

"And this?"

"That also--"

"And this?"

"This also?"

"And this?"

"I have flung this, too, away."

"Have you anything now about you that you treasure?"

"I have nothing."

"Friends, ties, ambitions?"

"They are all gone."

Then out of the heart of the storm there came Voices:--

"Blessed be Pain and Torment and every torture of the Body ... Blessed be
Plague and Pestilence and the Illness of Nations....

"Blessed be all Loss and the Failure of Friends and the Sacrifice of
Love....

"Blessed be the Destruction of all Possessions, the Ruin of all Property,
Fine Cities, and Great Palaces....

"Blessed be the Disappointment of all Ambitions....

"Blessed be all Failure and the ruin of every Earthly Hope....

"Blessed be all Sorrows, Torments, Hardships, Endurances that demand
Courage....

"Blessed be these things--for of these things cometh the making of a
Man...."

Peter, clinging to the Giant's Finger, staggered in the wind. The world was
hidden now in a mist of rain. He was alone--and he was happy, happy, as he
had never known happiness, in any time, before.

The rain lashed his face and his body. His clothes clung heavily about him.

He answered the storm:

"Make of me a man--to be afraid of nothing ... to be ready for
everything--love, friendship, success ... to take if it comes ... to care
nothing if these things are not for me--

"Make me brave! Make me brave!"

He fancied that once more against the wall of sea-mist he saw tremendous,
victorious, the Rider on the Lion. But now, for the first time, the Rider's
face was turned towards him--