The river has fallen again into its channel, and nothing in the stream
itself except its red, angry color shows the wild horror of last night.
It has fallen fully twenty feet since midnight, and by to-night it will
have attained its normal depth.


Painful Scenes.

At all points from Greensburg to Long Hollow, the limit of the present
trouble, scores of people throng the stations begging and beseeching
railroad men on the repair trains to take them aboard, as they are
almost frenzied with anxiety and apprehension in regard to their friends
who live at or near Johnstown. Strong men are as tearful as the women
who join in the request.

Pitiable sights and scenes multiply more and more rapidly. The
Conemaugh is one great valley of mourning. Those who have not lost
friends have lost their house or their substance, and apparently the
grief for the one is as poignant as for the other.


They Were Warned.

The great volume of water struck Johnstown about half-past five in the
afternoon. It did not find the people unprepared, as they had had notice
from South Fork that the dam was threatening to go. Many, however,
disregarded the notice and remained in their houses in the lower part of
the city and were caught before they could get out.

Superintendent Pitcairn, of the Pennsylvania Railroad, who has spent the
entire day in assisting not only those who were afflicted by the flood,
but also in an attempt to reopen his road, went home this morning.
Before he left he issued an order to all Pennsylvania Railroad employees
to keep a sharp lookout for bodies, both in the river and in the bushes,
and to return them to their friends.

Assistant Superintendent Trump is still on the ground near Lone Hollow
directing the movements of gravel and construction trains, which are
arriving as fast as they can be fitted up and started out. The roadbeds
of both the Pennsylvania and the West Pennsylvania railroads are badly
damaged, and it will cost the latter, especially from the Bolivar
Junction to Saltsburg, many thousands of dollars to repair injuries to
embankments alone.

In Pittsburg there was but one topic of conversation, and that was the
Johnstown deluge. Crowds of eager watchers all day long besieged the
newspaper bulletin boards and rendered streets impassable in their
vicinity. Many of them had friends or relatives in the stricken
district, and "Names!" "Names!" was their cry. But there were no names.
The storm which had perhaps swept away their loved ones had also carried
away all means of communication and their vigil was unrewarded. It is
not yet known whether the telegraph operator at Johnstown is dead or
alive. The nearest point to that city which can be reached to-night is
New Florence, and the one wire there is used almost constantly by orders
for coffins, embalming fluid and preparing special cars to carry the
recovered dead to their homes.

Along the banks of the now turbulent Allegheny were placed watchers for
dead bodies, and all wreckage was carefully scanned for the dead. The
result of this vigilance was the recovery of one body, that of a woman
floating down on a pile of débris. Seven other bodies were seen, but
could not be reached owing to the swift moving wreckage by which they
were surrounded.


A Heartrending Sight.

A railroad conductor who arrived in the city this morning said:--"There
is no telling how many lives are lost. We got as far as Bolivar, and I
tell you it is a terrible sight. The body of a boy was picked up by some
of us there, and there were eleven bodies recovered altogether. I do
not think that anyone got into Johnstown, and it is my opinion that they
will not get in very soon. No one who is not on the grounds has any idea
of the damage done. It will be at least a week before the extent of this
flood is known, and then I think many bodies will never be recovered."

Assistant Superintendent Wilson, of the West Pennsylvania Railroad,
received the following despatch from Nineveh to-day:--

"There appears to be a large number of people lodged in the trees and
rubbish along the line. Many are alive. Rescuing parties should be
advised at every station."

Another telegram from Nineveh said that up to noon 175 bodies had been
taken from the river at that point.

The stage of water in the Allegheny this afternoon became so alarming
that residents living in the low-lying districts began to remove their
household effects to a higher grade. The tracks of the Pittsburgh and
Western Railroad are under water in several places, and great
inconvenience is felt in moving trains.


Criminal Negligence.

It was stated at the office of the Pennsylvania Railroad early this
morning that the deaths would run up into the thousands rather than
hundreds, as was at first supposed. Despatches received state that the
stream of human beings that was swept before the floods was pitiful to
behold. Men, women and children were carried along frantically shrieking
for help. Rescue was impossible.

Husbands were swept past their wives, and children were borne along at
a terrible speed to certain death before the eyes of their terrorized
and frantic parents. It was said at the depot that it was impossible to
estimate the number whose lives were lost in the flood. It will simply
be a matter of conjecture for several days as to who was lost and who
escaped.

The people of Johnstown were warned of the possibility of the bursting
of the dam during the morning, but very few if any of the inhabitants
took the warning seriously. Shortly after noon it gave way about five
miles above Johnstown, and sweeping everything before it burst upon the
town with terrible force.

Everything was carried before it, and not an instant's time was given to
seek safety. Houses were demolished, swept from their foundations and
carried in the flood to a culvert near the town. Here a mass of all
manner of débris soon lodged, and by evening it had dammed the water
back into the city over the tops of many of the still remaining
chimneys.


The Dam Always a Menace.

Assistant Superintendent Trump, of the Pennsylvania, is at Conemaugh,
but the officials at the depot had not been able to receive a line from
him until as late as half-past two o'clock this morning. It was said
also that it will be impossible to get a train through either one way or
the other for at least two or three days. This applies also to the
mails, as there is absolutely no way of getting mails through.

"We were afraid of that lake," said a gentleman who had lived in
Johnstown for years, "we were afraid of that lake seven years ago. No
one could see the immense height to which that artificial dam had been
built without fearing the tremendous power of the water behind it. I
doubt if there was a man or woman in Johnstown who at some time or other
had not feared and spoken of the terrible disaster that has now come.

"People wondered and asked why the dam was not strengthened, as it
certainly had become weak, but nothing was done, and by and by they
talked less and less about it as nothing happened, though now and then
some would shake their heads as though conscious that the fearful day
would come some time when their worst fears would be transcended by the
horror of the actual occurrence.


Converted Into a Lake.

"Johnstown is in a hollow between two rivers, and that lake must have
swept over the city at a depth of forty feet. It cannot be, it is
impossible that such an awful thing could happen to a city of ten
thousand inhabitants, and if it has, thousands have lost their lives,
and men are to blame for it, for warnings have been uttered a thousand
times and have received no attention."

The body of a Welsh woman, sixty years of age, was taken from the river
near the suspension bridge, at ten o'clock this morning. Four other
bodies were seen, but owing to the mass of wreckage which is coming
down they could not be recovered, and passed down the Ohio River.

A citizens' meeting has been called to devise means to aid the
sufferers. The Pennsylvania Railroad officials have already placed cars
on Liberty street for the purpose of receiving provisions and clothing,
and up to this hour many prominent merchants have made heavy donations.


Anxiety of the People.

The difficulty of obtaining definite information added tremendously to
the excitement and apprehension of the people in Pittsburgh who had
relatives and friends at the scene of the disaster.

Members of the South Fork Club, and among them some of the most eminent
men in the Pittsburgh financial and mercantile world, were in or near
Johnstown, and several of them were accompanied by their wives and
families. There happened to be also quite a number of residents of
Johnstown in Pittsburgh, and when the news of the horror was confirmed
and the railroads bulletined the fact that no trains would go east last
night the scene at Union Depot was profoundly pathetic and exciting. But
two trains were sent out by the Pennsylvania road from the Union station
at Pittsburgh.

A despatch states that the Cambria Iron Company's plant on the north
side of the Conemaugh River at Johnstown is a complete wreck. Until this
despatch was received it was not thought that this portion of the plant
had been seriously injured. It was known that the portion of the plant
located on the south bank of the river was washed away, and this was
thought to be the extent of the damage to the property of that immense
corporation. The plant is said to be valued at $5,000,000.

[Illustration]


CHAPTER II.

Death and Desolation.


The terrible situation on the second day after the great disaster only
intensifies the horror. As information becomes more full and accurate,
it does not abate one tittle of the awful havoc. Rather it adds to it,
and gives a thousand-fold terror to the dreadful calamity.

Not only do the scenes which are described appear all the more dreadful,
as is natural, the nearer they are brought to the imagination, but it
seems only too probable that the final reckoning in loss of life and
material wealth will prove far more stupendous than has even yet been
supposed.

The very greatness of the destruction prevents the possibility of an
accurate estimate. Beneath the ghastly ruins of the once happy towns and
villages along the pathway of the deluge, who shall say how many victims
lie buried? Amid the rocks and woods that border the broad track of the
waters, who shall say how many lie bruised and mangled and
unrecognizable, wedged between boulders or massed amid débris and
rubbish, or hidden beneath the heaped-up deposits of earth, and whether
all of them shall ever be found and given the last touching rites?

Already the air of the little valley, which four days ago was smiling
with all the health of nature and the contentment of industrious man,
is waxing pestiferous with the awful odor of decaying human bodies.
Buzzards, invited by their disgusting instinct, gather for a promised
feast, and sit and glower on neighboring perches or else circle round
and round in the blue empyrean over the location of unfriended corpses,
known only to their keen sense of smell or vision.

But another kind of buzzard, more disgusting, more hideous, more vile,
has hastened to this scene of woe and anguish and desolation to exult
over it to his profit. Thugs and thieves in unclean hordes have
mysteriously turned up at Johnstown and its vicinity, as hyenas in the
desert seem to spring bodily out of the deadly sand whenever the corpse
of a gallant warrior, abandoned by his kind, lies putrefying in the
night.

There is a cry from the afflicted community for the policing of the
devastated region, and there is no doubt it is greatly needed. Happily,
Nemesis does not sleep this time in the face of such provocation as is
given her by these atrociously inhuman human beings. It is a
satisfaction to record that something more than a half dozen of them
have been dealt with as promptly and as mercilessly as they deserve. For
such as they there should be no code of pity.

There is an inexhaustible store of pathos and heroism in the tale of
this disaster. Of course, in all of its awful details it never can be
fitly written. One reason is that too many of the witnesses of its more
fearful phases "sleep the sleep that knows not waking." But there is a
greater reason, and that is that there is a point in the intenser
actuality of things at which all human language fails to do justice to
it. Yet--as simply told as possible--there are many incidents of this
great tragedy which nothing has ever surpassed or ever can surpass in
impressiveness. It is a consolation, too, that human nature at such
times does betray here and there a gleam of that side of it which gives
forth a reflection of the ideal manhood or womanhood. Bits of heroism
and of tender devotedness scattered throughout this dark, dismal picture
of destruction and despair light it up with wonderful beauty, and while
they bring tears to the eyes of the sternest reader, will serve as a
grateful relief from the pervading hue of horror and blackness.

There is the very gravest need of vigorous relief measures in favor of
the survivors of the flood. A spontaneous movement in that direction has
been begun, but as yet lacks the efficiency only to be derived from a
general and organized co-operation.


Complete Annihilation.

When Superintendent Pitcairn telegraphed from Johnstown to Pittsburgh
Friday night that the town was annihilated he came very close to the
facts of the case, although he had not seen the ill-fated city. To say
that Johnstown is a wreck is but stating the facts of the case. Nothing
like it was ever seen in this country. Where long rows of dwelling
houses and business blocks stood forty-eight hours ago, ruin and
desolation now reign supreme.

The losses, however, are as nothing compared to the frightful
sacrifices of precious human lives. During Sunday Johnstown has been
drenched with the tears of stricken mortals, and the air is filled with
sobs that come from breaking hearts. There are scenes enacted here every
hour and every minute that affect all beholders profoundly. When brave
men die in battle, for country or for principle, their loss can be
reconciled to the stern destinies of life. When homes are torn asunder
in an instant, and the loved ones hurled from the arms of loving and
devoted mothers, there is an element of sadness connected with the
tragedy that touches every heart.

_The loss of life is simply dreadful. The most conservative people
declare that the number will reach 5000, while others confidently assert
that 8000 or 10,000 have perished._


How Johnstown Looks after Flood and Fire Have Done
Their Worst.

An eye-witness writing from Pittsburgh says:--We have just returned from
a trip through what is left of Johnstown. The view from beyond is almost
impossible to describe. To look upon it is a sight that neither war nor
catastrophe can equal. House is piled upon house, not as we have seen in
occasional floods of the the Western rivers, but the remains of two and
four storied buildings piled upon the top of one another.

The ruins of what is known as the Club House are in perhaps the best
condition of any in that portion of the town, but it is certainly
damaged beyond possibility of repair. _On the upper floor five bodies
are lying unidentified._ One of them, a woman of genteel birth, judging
by her dress, is locked in one of the small rooms to prevent a
possibility of spoliation by wreckers, who are flocking to the spot from
all directions and taking possession of everything they can get hold of.

Here and there bodies can be seen sticking in the ruins. Some of the
most prominent citizens are to be seen working with might and main to
get at the remains of relatives whom they have located.

_There is no doubt that, wild as the estimates of the loss of life and
damage to property have been, it is even larger than there is any idea
of._

Close on to 2,000 residences lie in kindling wood at the lower end of
the town.


Freaks of the Flood.

An idea of the eccentricity of the flood may be gathered from the fact
that houses that were situated at Woodvale and points above Johnstown
are piled at the lower end of the town, while some massive houses have
been lifted and carried from the lower end as far as the cemetery at the
extreme upper portion of the town. All through the ruins are scattered
the most costly furniture and store goods of all kinds.


Thieves are Busy.

I stood on the keyboard and strings of a piano while I watched a number
of thieves break into the remnants of houses and pilfer them, while
others again had got at a supply of fine groceries and had broken into
a barrel of fine brandy, and were fairly steeping themselves in it. I
met quite a number of Pittsburghers in the ruins looking for friends and
relatives. If the skiffs which were expected from Pittsburgh were there
they would be of vast assistance in reaching the ruins, which are
separated by the stream of water descending from the hills. A great fear
is felt that there will be some difficulty in restoring the stream to
its proper channel. Its course now lies right along Main street, and it
is about two hundred yards wide.

Something should be done to get the bodies of the dead decently taken
care of. The ruins are reeking with the smell of decaying bodies. Right
at the edge of the ruins the decaying body of a stout colored woman is
lying like the remains of an animal, without any one to identify and
take care of it.


Lynching the Ghouls.

A number of Hungarians collected about a number of bodies at Cambria
which had been washed up and began rifling the trunks. After they had
secured all the contents they turned their attention to the dead.

The ghastly spectacle presented by the distorted features of those who
had lost their lives during the flood had no influence upon the ghouls,
who acted more like wild beasts than human beings. They took every
article from the clothing on the dead bodies, not leaving anything of
value or anything that would serve to identify the remains.

After the miscreants had removed all their plunder to dry ground a
dispute arose over a division of the spoils. A pitched battle followed
and for a time the situation was alarming. Knives and clubs were used
freely. As a result several of the combatants were seriously wounded and
left on the ground, their fellow countrymen not making any attempt to
remove them from the field of strife.

JOHNSTOWN, PA., June 2, 11 A.M.

_They have just hung a man over near the railroad to the telegraph pole
for cutting the finger off of a dead woman in order to get a ring._


Vengeance, Swift and Sure.

The way of the transgressor in the desolated valley of the Conemaugh is
hard indeed. Each hour reveals some new and horrible story of suffering
and outrage, and every succeeding hour brings news of swift and merited
punishment meted out to the fiends who have dared to desecrate the stiff
and mangled corpses in the city of the dead, and torture the already
half crazed victims of the cruelest of modern catastrophes.

As the roads to the lands round about are opened tales of almost
indescribable horror come to light, and deeds of the vilest nature,
perpetrated in the darkness of the night, are brought to light.


Followed by Avenging Farmers.

Just as the shadows began to fall upon the earth last evening a party of
thirteen Hungarians were noticed stealthily picking their way along the
banks of the Conemaugh toward Sang Hollow. Suspicious of their purpose,
several farmers armed themselves and started in pursuit. Soon their
most horrible fears were realized. The Hungarians were out for plunder.

Lying upon the shore they came upon the dead and mangled body of a woman
upon whose person there were a number of trinkets and jewelry and two
diamond rings. In their eagerness to secure the plunder, the Hungarians
got into a squabble, during which one of the number severed the finger
upon which were the rings, and started on a run with his fearful prize.
The revolting nature of the deed so wrought upon the pursuing farmers,
who by this time were close at hand, that they gave immediate chase.
Some of the Hungarians showed fight, but being outnumbered were
compelled to flee for their lives. Nine of the brutes escaped, but four
were literally driven into the surging river and to their death. The
inhuman monster whose atrocious act has been described was among the
number of the involuntary suicides. Another incident of even greater
moment has just been brought to notice.


Anxious to be a Murderer.

At half-past eight this morning an old railroader who had walked from
Sang Hollow stepped up to a number of men who were congregated on the
platform stations at Curranville and said:--"Gentlemen, had I a shotgun
with me half an hour ago I would now be a murderer, yet with no fear of
ever having to suffer for my crime.

"Two miles below here I watched three men going along the banks
_stealing the jewels from the bodies of the dead wives and daughters of
men who have been robbed of all they held dear on earth._"

He had no sooner finished the last sentence than five burly men, with
looks of terrible determination written on their faces, were on their
way to the scene of plunder, one with a coil of rope over his shoulder
and another with a revolver in his hand. In twenty minutes, so it is
stated, they had overtaken two of the wretches, who were then in the act
of cutting pieces from the ears and fingers from the hands of the bodies
of two dead women.


Brutes at Bay.

With revolver leveled at the scoundrels the leader of the posse shouted,
"Throw up your hands or I'll blow your heads off!" With blanched faces
and trembling forms they obeyed the order and begged for mercy. They
were searched, and as their pockets were emptied of their ghastly finds
the indignation of the crowd intensified, and when _a bloody finger of
an infant, encircled with two tiny gold rings_, was found among the
plunder in the leader's pocket, a cry went up "_Lynch them! Lynch
them!_" _Without a moment's delay ropes were thrown around their necks
and they were dangling to the limbs of a tree, in the branches of which
an hour before were entangled the bodies of a dead father and son._

After the expiration of a half hour the ropes were cut, and the bodies
lowered and carried to a pile of rocks in the forest on the hill above.
It is hinted that an Allegheny county official was one of the most
prominent actors in this justifiable homicide.

Another case of attempted lynching was witnessed this evening near
Kernville. The man was observed stealing valuable articles from the
houses. He was seized by a mob, a rope was placed around his neck and he
was jerked up into the air. The rope was tied to the tree and his
would-be lynchers left him. Bystanders cut him down before he was dead.
The other men did not interfere and he was allowed to go. The man was so
badly scared that he could not give his name if he wanted to do so.

Two colored men were shot while robbing the dead bodies, by the
Pittsburgh police, who are doing guard about the town.


Fiends in Human Form.

To one who saw bright, bustling Johnstown a week ago the sight of its
present condition must cause a thrill of horror, no matter how callous
he might be. I doubt if any incident of war or flood ever caused a more
sickening sight. Wretchedness of the most pathetic kind met the gaze on
every side.

_Unlawfulness runs riot._ If ever military aid was needed now is the
time. _The town is perfectly overrun with thieves_, many of them from
Pittsburgh. The Hungarians are the worst. They seem to operate in
regular organized bands. In Cambria City this morning they entered a
house, drove out the occupants at the point of revolvers and took
possession. They can be constantly seen carrying large quantities of
plunder to the hills.

The number of drunken men is remarkable. Whiskey seems marvelously
plenty. Men are actually carrying it around in pails. Barrels of the
stuff are constantly located among the drifts, and men are scrambling
over each other and fighting like wild beasts in their mad search for
it.

At the cemetery, at the upper end of the town, I saw a sight that rivals
the inferno. A number of ghouls had found a lot of fine groceries, among
them a barrel of brandy, with which they were fairly stuffing
themselves. One huge fellow was standing on the strings of an upright
piano singing a profane song, every little while breaking into a wild
dance. A half dozen others were engaged in a hand-to-hand fight over the
possession of some treasure stolen from a ruined house, and the crowd
around the barrel were yelling like wild men.

The cry for help increases every hour. Something must be done to get the
bodies decently taken care of. The ruins are reeking with the smell of
decaying bodies. At the very edge of the ruins the body of a large
colored woman, in an advanced state of decomposition, is lying like the
body of an animal.


Watched Their Friends Die.

The fire in the drift above the bridge is still burning fiercely and
will continue to do so for several days. The skulls of six people can be
seen sticking up out of the ruins just above the east end of the bridge.
Nothing but the blackened skulls can be seen. They are all together.

The sad scenes will never all be written. One lady told me this morning
of seeing her mother crushed to pieces just before her eyes and the
mangled body carried off down the stream. William Yarner lost six
children and saved a baby about eighteen months old. His wife died just
three weeks ago. An aged German, his wife and five daughters floated
down on their house to a point below Nineveh, where the house was
wrecked. The five daughters were drowned, but the old man and his wife
stuck in a tree and hung there for twenty-four hours before they could
be taken off.


Died Kissing Her Babe.

One of the most pitiful sights of this terrible disaster came to my
notice this afternoon, when the body of a young lady was taken out of
the Conemaugh River. The woman was apparently quite young, though her
features were terribly disfigured. Nearly all the clothing except the
shoes was torn off the body. The corpse was that of a mother, for
although cold in death the woman clasped a young male babe apparently
not more than a year old tightly in her arms. The little one was huddled
close up to its mother's face, who when she realized their terrible
fate, had evidently raised the babe to her lips to imprint upon its
little lips the last motherly kiss it was to receive in this world. The
sight was a pathetic one and turned many a stout heart to tears.

Among the miraculous escapes to be recorded in connection with the great
disaster is that of George J. Leas and his family. He resided on Iron
street. When the rush of water came there were eight people on the
roof. The little house swung around off its moorings and floated about
for nearly half an hour before it came up against the bank of drift
above the stone bridge. A three-year-old girl with sunny golden hair and
dimpled cheeks prayed all the while that God would save them, and it
seemed that God really answered the prayer of this innocent little girl
and directed the house against the drift, enabling every one of the
eight to get off. Mrs. Leas carried the little girl in her arms, and how
she got off she doesn't know. Every house around them, she said, was
crushed, and the people either killed or drowned.


Thugs at Their Work.

One of the most dreadful features of this catastrophe has been the
miserable weakness displayed by the authorities of Johnstown and the
surrounding boroughs. Johnstown needed them sadly for forty-eight hours.
There is supposed to be a Burgess, but like most burgesses he is a
shadowy and mythical personage. If there had been concerted and
intelligent action the fire in the débris at the dam could have been
extinguished within a short time after it started. Too many cooks
spoiled this ghastly broth.

Even now if dynamite or some other explosive was intelligently applied
the huge mass of wreckage which has up to the present time escaped the
flame, and no doubt contains a number of bodies, could be saved from
fire.

This, however, is a matter of small import compared with the immunity
granted the outrageous and open graveyard robbery and disgusting
thievery which have thriven bravely since Friday morning.

Foreigners and natives carrying huge sacks, and in some instances even
being assisted by horses and carts, have been busily engaged hunting
corpses and stealing such valuables as were to be found in the wreckage.

Dozens of barrels of strong liquor have been rescued by the Hungarian
and Polish laborers from among the ruins of saloons and hotels and the
contents of the same have been freely indulged in. This has led to an
alarming debauchery, which is on the increase. All day the numbers of
the drunken crowd have been augmented from time to time by fresh
arrivals from the surrounding districts.

Those who have suffered from the tidal wave have become much embittered
against the law breakers. There have been many small fights and several
small riots in consequence. This has been regarded with apprehension by
the State authorities, and Adjutant General Hastings has arrived at
Johnstown to examine into the condition of affairs and to guard the
desolated district with troops. The Eighteenth regiment, of Pittsburgh,
has tendered its services to this work, but has received no reply to its
tender.

General Hastings estimates that the loss of life is at least eight
thousand.

An employee of J.L. Gill, of Latrobe, says he and thirty-five other men
were in a three-story building in Johnstown last night. They had been
getting out logs for the Johnstown Lumber Company. The man says that
the building was swept away and all the men were drowned except Gill and
his family.


Handling the Dead.

The recovery of bodies has taken up the time of thousands all day. The
theory now is that most of those killed by the torrent were buried
beneath the débris. To-day's work in the ruins in a large degree
justifies this assumption. I saw six bodies taken out of one pile of
rubbish not eight feet square.

The truth is that bodies are almost as plentiful as logs. The whirl of
the waters puts the bodies under and the logs and boards on top. The
rigidity of arms standing out at right angles to the bloated and bruised
bodies show that death in ninety-nine out of a hundred cases took place
amid the ruins--that is after the wreck of houses had closed over them.

Dr. D.G. Foster, who has been here all day, is of the opinion that most
of the victims were killed by coming into violent contact with objects
in the river and not by drowning. He found many fractured skulls and on
most heads blows that would have rendered those receiving them instantly
unconscious, and the water did the rest.

_Not fewer than three hundred bodies have been taken from the river and
rubbish to-day._ It has been the labor of all classes of citizens, and
marvellous work has been accomplished. The eastern end of Main street,
through which the waters tore most madly and destructively, and in which
they left their legacy of wrecked houses, fallen trees and dead bodies
in a greater degree than in any other portion of the city, has been
cleared and the remains of over fifty have been taken out.

All over town the searchers have been equally successful. As soon as a
body is found it is placed on a litter and sent to the Morgue, where it
is washed and placed on a board for several hours to await
identification.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF THE MORGUE.]

The Morgue is the Fourth-ward school house, and it has been surrounded
all day by a crowd of several thousand people. At first the crowd were
disposed to stop those bearing the stretchers, uncover the remains and
view them, but this was found to be prolific not only of great delay,
also scenes of agony that not even the bearers could endure.

Now a litter is guarded by a file of soldiers with fixed bayonets, and
the people are forced aside until the Morgue is reached. It is
astonishing to find how small a number of injured are in the city. Few
survived. It was death or nothing with the demon of the flood.

Now that an adequate idea of what has befallen them has been reached,
and the fact that a living has still to be made, that plants must be
taken care of, that contracts must be filled, the business people of the
city are giving their attention to the future. Vice President and
Director James McMillan, of the Cambria Iron Company, says their loss
has been well nigh incalculable. They are not daunted, but will
to-morrow begin the work of clearing up the ruins of their mills
preparatory to rebuilding and repairing their works. They will also
immediately rebuild the Gautier Iron Works. This is the disposition of
all.

"Our pockets are light," they say, "but if nothing happens all of us
will be in business again." The central portion of Johnstown is as
completely obliterated as if it had never had foundation. The river has
made its bed upon the sites of hundreds of dwellings, and a vast area of
sand, mud and gravel marks the old channel.

It is doubtful whether it will be possible even to reclaim what was once
the business portion of the city. The river will have to be returned to
its old bed in order to do this.

Among the lost is H.G. Rose, the District Attorney of Cambria county,
whose body was among the first discovered.

Governor Foraker, of Ohio, this afternoon sent five hundred tents to
this city. They will be pitched on the hillside to-morrow. They are
sadly needed, as the buildings that are left are either too damp or too
unsafe for occupancy.


Burying the Dead.

The work of burying the dead began this morning and has been kept up
till late this evening. The bruising of the bodies by logs and trees and
other débris and other exposure in the water have tended to hasten
decomposition, which has set in in scores of cases, making interment
instantly necessary.

Bodies are being buried as rapidly as they are identified. The work of
Pittsburgh undertakers in examining the dead has rendered it possible to
keep all those embalmed two or three days longer, but this is desirable
only in cases where identification is dubious and no claimants appear at
all.

To-day the cars sent out from Pittsburgh with provisions for the living
were hastily cleared in order to contain the bodies of the dead intended
for interment in suburban cemeteries and in graveyards handy to the
city.

Formality is dispensed with. In some instances only the undertaker and
his assistants are present, and in others only one or two members of
the family of the dead.

The dead are more plentiful than the mourners.

Death has certainly dealt briefly with the stricken city. "Let the dead
bury the dead" has been more nearly exemplified in this instance than in
any other in this country's history. The magnitude of the horror
increases with the hours. It is believed that not less than two thousand
of the drowned found lodgment beneath the _omnium gatherum_ in the
triangle of ground that the Conemaugh cut out of the bank between the
river and the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge.


The Greatest Funeral Pyre in History.

The victims were not upon it, but were parts of it. Whole houses were
washed into the apex of the triangle. Hen coops, pigstys and stables
were added to the mass. Then a stove ignited the mass and the work of
cremation began. It was a literal breast of fire. The smoke arose in a
huge funnel-shaped cloud, and at times it changed to the form of an hour
glass. At night the flames united would light up this misty remnant of
mortality. The effect upon the living, both ignorant and intelligent,
was the same. That volume of smoke with its dual form, produced a
feeling of awe in many that was superior in most cases to that felt in
the awful moment of the storm's wrath on Friday.

Hundreds stood for hours regarding the smoke and wondering whether it
foreboded another visitation more dire than its predecessor.

The people hereabouts this morning awoke to find that nothing was left
but a mass of ashes, calcined human bones, stoves, old iron and other
approximately indestructible matter, from which only a light blue vapor
was arising. General Hastings took precautions to prevent the extension
of the fire to another huge pile, a short distance away, and this will
be rummaged to-day for bodies of flood victims.

The Pittsburgh undertakers have contributed more to facilitate the
preparation of the dead for the graves than all others besides.

There was a disposition on the part of many foreigners and negroes to
raid the houses, and do an all around thieving business, but the
measures adopted by the police had a tendency to frighten them off in
nearly every case.

One man was caught in the act of robbing the body of an old woman, but
he protested that he had got nothing and was released. He immediately
disappeared, and it was found afterward that he had taken $100 from the
pocket of the corpse.

A half-breed negro yesterday and this morning was doing a thriving
business in collecting hams, shoulders, chickens and even furniture. He
had thieves in his employ, and while to some of them he was paying
regular salaries, others were doing the work for a drink of whiskey. The
authorities stopped this thing very suddenly, but not until a number of
the people threatened to lynch the half breed. In one or two instance
very narrow escapes from the rope were made.

Thousands of coffins and rough boxes have already arrived, and still
the supply is short. They are brought in marked to some undertaker, who
has a list of his dead, and as fast as the coffins come he writes the
name of its intended tenant and tells the friends (when there are any)
where to find it.


How a Funeral Takes Place.

Two of them go after it, and, carrying it between them to the Morgue or
to their homes, place the body in it and take it to the burial grounds.

One unfortunate feature of the destruction is the fact that some one has
been drowned from nearly every house in the city, and teams are
procurable only with the greatest difficulty.

Dead horses are seen everywhere. In one stable two horses, fully
harnessed, bridled and ready to be taken out, stand dead in their
stable, stiff and upright. In a sand pile near the Pennsylvania Railroad
depot a horse's hind feet, rump and tail are all that can be seen of
him. He was caught in the rapidly running waters and had been driven
into the sand.

The following telegram from Johnstown has been received at Pittsburg:

"For God's sake tell the sight-seers to keep away from Johnstown for the
present. What we want is people to work, not to look on. Citizen's
Committee."

Three trains have already been sent out with crowded cargoes of
sight-seers. At every station along the road excited crowds are waiting
for an opportunity to get aboard.

That's what would have happened to the owners of South Fork if they had
put in an appearance.

There is great indignation among the people of Johnstown at the wealthy
Pittsburghers who own South Fork. They blame them severely for having
maintained such a frightfully dangerous institution there. The feeling
among the people was intense. If any of the owners of the dam had put in
an appearance in Johnstown they would have been lynched.

The dam has been a constant menace to this valley ever since it has been
in existence, and the feeling, which has been bitter enough on the
occasion of every flood hitherto, after this horrible disaster is now at
fever heat.

Without seeing the havoc created no idea can be given of the area of the
desolation or the extent of the damage.


Only One Left to Mourn.

An utterly wretched woman stood by a muddy pool of water, trying to find
some trace of a once happy home. She was half crazed with grief, and her
eyes were red and swollen. As I stepped to her side she raised her pale
and haggard face, crying:

"They are all gone. Oh God be merciful to them. My husband and my seven
dear little children have been swept down with the flood and I am left
alone. We were driven by the raging flood into the garret, but the
waters followed us there. Inch by inch it kept rising until our heads
were crushing against the roof. It was death to remain. So I raised a
window and one by one placed my darlings on some drift wood, trusting
to the Great Creator. As I liberated the last one, my sweet little boy,
he looked at me and said:

'Mamma, you always told me that the Lord would care for me; will he look
after me now?'

"I saw him drift away with his loving face turned toward me, and with a
prayer on my lips for his deliverance he passed from sight forever. The
next moment the roof crashed in and I floated outside to be rescued
fifteen hours later from the roof of a house in Kernville. If I could
only find one of my darlings, I could bow to the will of God, but they
all are gone. I have lost everything on earth now but my life, and I
will return to my old Virginia home and lay me down for my last great
sleep."

A handsome woman, with hair as black as a raven's wing, walked through
the depot, where a dozen or more bodies were awaiting burial. Passing
from one to another, she finally lifted the paper covering from the face
of a woman, young and with traces of beauty showing through the stains
of muddy water. With a cry of anguish she reeled backward, to be caught
by a rugged man who chanced to be passing. In a moment or so she had
calmed herself sufficiently to take one more look at the features of her
dead. She stood gazing at the unfortunate as if dumb. Finally turning
away with another wild burst of grief she said:--

"And her beautiful hair all matted and her sweet face bruised and
stained with mud and water."

The dead woman was the sister of the mourner. The body was placed in a
coffin a few minutes later and sent away to its narrow house.

These incidents are but fair samples of the scenes familiar to every
turn in this stricken city.

[Illustration: THE AWFUL RUSH OF WATERS.]


CHAPTER III.

The Horror Increases.


During the night thirty-three bodies were brought to one house. As yet
the relief force is not perfectly organized and bodies are lying around
on boards and doors. Within twenty feet of where this was written the
dead body of a colored woman lies.

Provision has been made by the Relief Committee for the sufferers to
send despatches to all parts of the country. The railroad company has a
track through to the bridge. The first train arrived about half-past
nine o'clock this morning. A man in a frail craft got caught in the
rapids at the railroad bridge, and it looked as if he would increase the
already terrible list of dead, but fortunately he caught on a rock,
where he now is and is liable to remain all day.

The question on every person's lips is--Will the Cambria Iron Company
rebuild? The wire mill is completely wrecked, but the walls of the
rolling mill are still standing. If they do not resume it is a question
whether the town will be rebuilt. The Hungarians were beginning to
pillage the houses, and the arrival of police was most timely. Word had
just been received that all the men employed by Peabody, the Pittsburgh
contractor, have been saved.

The worst part of this disaster has not been told. Indeed, the most
graphic description that can be written will not tell half the tale. No
pen can describe nor tongue tell the vastness of this devastation.

I walked over the greater part of the wrecked town this morning, and one
could not have pictured such a wreck, nor could one have imagined that
an entire town of this size could be so completely swept away.

A.J. Haws, one of the prominent men of the town, was standing on the
hillside this morning, taking a view of the wreck. He said:

"I never saw anything like this, nor do I believe any one else ever did.
No idea can be had of the tremendous loss of property here. It amounts
up into the millions. I am going to leave the place. I never will build
here."

I heard the superintendents and managers of the Cambria Iron Works
saying they doubted if the works will be rebuilt. This would mean the
death blow to the place. Mr. Stackhouse, first vice-president of the
iron works, is expected here to-day. Nothing can be done until a meeting
of the company is held.


Preparations for Burial.

Adjutant General Hastings, who is in charge of the relief corps at the
railroad station, has a force of carpenters at work making rough boxes
in which to bury the dead. They will be buried on the hill, just above
the town, on ground belonging to the Cambria Iron Company. The graves
will be numbered. No one will be buried that has not been identified
without a careful description being taken. General Hastings drove
fifty-eight miles across the country in order to get here, and as soon
as he came took charge. He has the whole town organized, and in
connection with L.S. Smith has commenced the building of bridges and
clearing away the wrecks to get out the dead bodies.

[Illustration: PREPARATIONS FOR BURIAL.]

General Hastings has a large force of men clearing private tracks of the
Cambria Iron Company in order that the small engines can be put to work
bringing up the dead that have been dragged out of the river at points
below.

The bodies are being brought up and laid out in freight cars. Mr.
Kittle, of Ebensburg, has been deputized to take charge of the valuables
taken from the bodies and keep a registry of them, and also to note any
marks of identification that may be found. A number of the bodies have
been stripped of rings or bracelets and other valuables.

Over six hundred corpses have now been taken out on the south side of
Stony Creek, the greater portion of which have been identified.


Send Us Coffins.

Preparations for their burial are being carried on as rapidly as
possible, and "coffins, coffins," is the cry. No word has been received
anywhere of any being shipped. Even rough boxes will be gladly received.
Those that are being made, and in which many of the bodies are being
buried, are of rough unplaned boards. One hundred dead bodies are laid
out at the soap factory, while two hundred or more people are gathered
there that are in great distress. They were very good to us. Two of
them moved away from the fire to make room for our wet misery and
they gave us a pot of boiling water, two bivouac cocoa tablets and
a loaf of black bread.

The news spread, and civilians dropped in to stare at and question
us.

In the morning the entire population came to see the _Engländer_
prisoners.

We learned that we were only four miles from Holland, and cursed aloud.
The town was Lathen and when, the next morning, we discovered that it
was gayly bedecked with flags and bunting we decided that we were
indeed personages of note if we could cause such a celebration. However,
it was only the Kaiser's birthday.

In the afternoon they took us by rail to Meppen and shoved us in the
civilian jail, where we were allowed a daily ration of two ounces
of black bread, one pint of gruel and three-quarters of a pint of coffee
for two days, until, on January thirtieth, an escort came from Vehnmoor.
They roped us together with a clothes-line, arm to arm, and marched
us through the principal streets by a roundabout route to the station
so that all might see.

We were unwashed, unshaven and so altogether disreputable as to satisfy
the most violent hatred--such for instance as we found here.
It did not require our pride to keep our hearts up or to keep us
from feeling the humiliation of so cruel an ordeal.

We simply did not experience the painful sensations that such a proceeding
would ordinarily arouse in the breast of any man; just as after heavy
shell-fire no man feels either fear or courage; he is too dazed
and stupid for either.

Many spat at us and good old _Engländer Schwein_ came to us from
every side.

It seemed like meeting an old friend, after our few days away from it.
The faces of these people were different from those we had left at
camp but their hearts were the same. They lined the streets and
jeered at us.

But we were too tired and hungry to care.

And that ended that trip to Holland.

CHAPTER XV
PAYING THE PIPER

Sheer Starvation--Slipping It Over the Sentry--The Court Martial--Thirty
Days Cells--No Place for a Gourmand--In Napoleon's Footsteps--Parniewinkel
Camp--"Like Father, Like Son"--The Last Kind German--Running
Amuck--The Torture of the Russians--The Continental Times--"K. of K.

Is Gone!"

Upon arrival at camp, we were put in cells for eleven days while awaiting
our court-martial.

During that period we suffered terribly from sheer starvation. The daily
rations consisted of a poor soup and a small quantity of black
bread.

Hungry though I was, there was only one way by which I could eat
it--hold my breath and swallow. I am aware that the Germans consider
this food quite palatable but that may be because they are accustomed
to it.

It was to us the resort of starving men.

The cells were quite dark--four-by-eight-foot wooden boxes. The
confinement and short rations on top of our arduous journey, during
which we had had nothing but the two biscuits a day, caused us to
grow weaker daily.

Our friends, however, contrived occasionally to get portions of their food
to us. They maintained a sentry of their own, whose duty it was to watch
for and report our trips to the latrine. It was unsafe for us to ask for
this permission more than once a day with the same guard.

As the latter was frequently changed, however, we were enabled to work
the scheme to the limit.

At the worst, this let us out of our cells for a few minutes; and,
if we were lucky, enabled us to get a handful of broken food.

Seeing us come out, the prisoner on watch would stroll into the hut
and pass the word. Shortly, another would come out to us and in passing
frequently manage to slip us something. On one long-to-be-remembered
occasion, a man of the King's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry, managed to
"square" the guard, a pleasant-faced young German, in some manner we
could never fathom, so that the latter actually brought to us two spoons
and a wash basin full of boiled barley, which we ate in the latrine. That
was the most humane act experienced from German hands during my fifteen
months' sojourn in Germany.

On the eleventh day we were marched out to what would be the Germans'
orderly room.

A Canadian who had picked up a smattering of German acted as interpreter.
He did what he could for us, which was little enough.

Asked why we had tried to escape, we feared to tell the truth, that we
had been forced to it by ill-treatment; so merely stated
that we were tired of Germany and wanted to go home. The presiding
officer said:

"Well, you fellows have been a lot of trouble to us. I've been told to
tell you that if you give us any more; we'll have a little shooting bee."
We were sentenced to thirty days' dark cells. That was our court-martial.

One lucky thing happened to us here: When they took our map away it
fell in two, as a result of having been folded in our pockets.

The officer crumpled one piece up, made a handful of it and tossed
it away, at the same time shoving the other half at me, which I
eagerly clutched.

That piece showed the portion of Germany adjoining the Holland
border.

Our thirty days' dark cells were spent in the military prison at
Oldenburg.

As before, they were four-by-eight feet in size, but with a high
ceiling which gave me room to stand on my hands for exercise.

Each of us was confined alone.

The walls and floor of the cells were of stone; the shutters, of
steel which were always closed.

There was no furniture other than the three boards which served as
the mockery of a bed and which were chained up to the wall every
morning.

A small shelf which held the water pitcher was the only other
furnishing.

No ray of light was permitted to enter the place.

The month was February but there were no blankets, and the place
was unheated.

The rations consisted of half a pound of black bread and a pitcher
of water, which were thrust in to us every morning, so that except
for the guard who unchained the boards at night we had no visitation
in the twenty-four long, long hours.

I cannot remember that I brooded much. Rather, I let my mind run out
as a tired sleeper might, which was no doubt fortunate for me.

My family were greatly in my thoughts.

I wondered how my wife was making out and if she was receiving her
separation allowance all right, for I had heard of many cases where the
reverse had happened; and whether the boys were well and going to
school. I hoped that all was well with them and that they did not
worry too much over my lot.

As I was not permitted either to send or receive letters during the
period of my trial and incarceration, my wife was in fact in great
distress of mind about me as she received no word for many weeks
and imagined the worst.

And when at last I could write it was only to say that although I had
been well I had been unable to write, leaving her to draw her own
conclusions.

The cell door opened promptly at five o'clock every morning. We were allowed
ten minutes in which to clean our cell, go to the lavatory and wash
up, all under guard.

These were the only occasions during which we had an opportunity of
seeing one another or the other prisoners.

These rites were all performed in silence, and communication of any
description was forbidden and so keenly watched for as to be
impossible.

However, Simmons and I got what small comfort we could out of seeing
one another frequently, and by this time there had grown up between
us such a mutual respect as to make us value this highly. The other
prisoners included Germans as well as our allies and there were some
civilian German prisoners. The German soldier prisoners were mostly in
for committing the various crimes of soldiering which in the British Army
would have put them under the general head of defaulters.
That classification, however, had been done away with in the German
Army.

The slightest infringement of discipline was punished with cells.
Noncommissioned officers received the same punishment as the men, without,
however, losing their rank, as would have been the case in our army.

Upon finishing the ten minutes allotted to us we were forced to
re-enter our cells and stand against the wall, at the back, so that
we could neither see nor communicate with one another until the
guard got around a few minutes later and looked in to see that all
was as it should be before slamming the door.

There was no use in trying to stretch the ration out for two meals. I tried
to and gave it up.

And after that I ate the bread, filled up on water and sat down on the
cold stone floor for another twenty-four hours of waiting.

My thoughts dwelt greatly on food. We were supposed to receive soup every
fourth day, but we did not. The prisoners of other nationalities did, and
in addition were exercised regularly. At least we could hear the
rattle of their spoons against their bowls and the tramp of their
feet.

The slow starving was, to my mind, the worst.

And after that the loss of sleep. If one did drop off, the cold soon
caused a miserable awakening.

I tried not to think, and did all the gymnastic drill I knew, even to
standing on my hands in the darkness of the cell. I knew that if I gave
up it would be all off, for I could daily feel myself getting wabbly as
the confinement and starvation, added to my already enfeebled and
starved condition when I entered, began to tell on me.

It must be borne in mind that I had already served eleven days' solitary
confinement on insufficient food, after several days of jail on
ditto, and eight days while escaping, during which I had been
continually wet and without food, other than the two biscuits daily,
before beginning to serve this sentence.

Simmons, of course, was in the same plight.

The last day, that of February 22nd, rolled around finally.

We were taken from our cells at nine o'clock and marched out for an
unknown destination which we knew only as a stronger punishment camp
than the others we had been in. Ahead of us we saw poor Brumley;
but were unable to communicate with him, and I do not know whether he saw
us or not. That was all we ever learned directly of his fate. His wife,
in Toronto, has since informed me that he is still in Germany and has
only lately been recaptured after another attempt at escape.

At eleven that night we arrived at our destination. This was the strong
punishment camp of Parniewinkel, in Hanover, on the road over which
Napoleon had marched to his doom at Moscow.

We wondered if we, too, were going to ours.

We had had no food that day, nor did we get any that night, but were shoved
into a hut full of Russians, who did not know what to make of us. We
were so long of hair and beard, so ragged, so emaciated and so
altogether filthy that they must have thought us anything but British
soldiers.

Later we found that there were, in all, between four and five hundred
Russian, eighty French and Belgian, and, including ourselves,
eleven British prisoners, of whom Simmons and I were the only Canadians,
all shoved into two huts in the middle of the usual barbed-wire laager.

As Giessen was the best camp, so this one was the worst of all those we
were to know. It was not so wet as the swamp at Vehnmoor, but the drinking
water was even worse than the brackish, peat-laden water there. The general
sanitary arrangements were terrible and the food was worse than at
Giessen, the camp in which that lack had been the worst feature among
many bad ones.

And on top of it all the treatment was very bad, much worse than
any we had previously known.

A soup, made from a handful of pickled fish roe and a few potatoes,
was a stock dish, and terrible to taste. On one night a week we received
a raw herring fresh from the brine barrel, which we were supposed to
eat raw and uncleaned, but could not. On one day in seven there was
a weak cabbage soup and of course, a small daily ration of
potato-and-rye bread. Fortunately, our parcels were beginning to arrive
by this time, so that, in fact, we fared better than at any of the
better camps, in the matter of food.

With the Russians it was different, and we used to give our soup to them
in exchange for their share of boiling water, which we used in
conjunction with the contents of our parcels and which they had no
use for anyway, especially for washing purposes.

It was difficult to get an opportunity to boil water for the making of
tea or cocoa, even when parcels furnished the essentials, as there
were so many men and so few stoves that it was a constant struggle
to get near the latter.

However, as we had refused to work, we did not require very much food.

We used also to give our black bread to the Russians, for which
they insisted on doing our washing, though it was little enough of that
they did for themselves. They were very good and simple men.

Ours was a good bunch of fellows and gave freely to one another and to
the unfortunate Russians, who rarely received parcels.

There was no selling or trading on misfortune here, as in some of
the other camps we had been in.

The Germans themselves were short of necessities here.

They hated to come to the _Engländers_ to buy, so used to send the
Russians to beg for soap which they would not use in any event, and in
this case simply sold to the guards. Discovering this, we shut down
on indiscriminate giving. Soap or any other fatty substance was by that
time very scarce in Germany, amongst the lower classes at least.
I was the only "non-com" in our lot, and so put up the stripes I had
taken down to avoid giving _Augen Rechts_ at Vehnmoor. I used that
authority now to persuade my fellow Britishers to give to the unfortunate
Russians rather than to the French, who, like ourselves, were
receiving parcels.

A boy of five years or thereabouts used to come regularly to the
wire, upon which he would climb and hang like some foul spider on
its web.

Grasping it in both small hands and kicking vainly at it and us, he would
scream: "Engländer Schwein," and I know not what other names, spitting
venom like a little wildcat. This was not the riffraff of the camp. The
boy was the son of the camp Commandant, and the apple of his
father's eye and the thing was often done under that eye and amid
the vicious applause of the young father and his terrible crew.

The Commandant was a young chap, a lieutenant. What he lacked in years
he made up in hate. He was known as an England hater. We were poison
to him. The latrine, a mere shallow pit, was just outside the door of our
hut and the Commandant saw to it that the latrine fatigue was
always wished off on to the British.

We were made to bail it out daily with buckets, which we then carried
to the surrounding fields, on which we spread the contents while
the Commandant and guards laughed.

The _unteroffizier_ in immediate charge of us, if left alone would not
make us do this. He was the last kind German I remember, and I have
mentioned all whom I can recall as having performed the slightest
act of kindness to us, even of the most negative quality.

He used to say that it was a pity to treat us so; that such a job was
good enough for the Russians, who were no soldiers, anyhow, and who
smelled bad and would not wash; but for us who were soldiers it was a
great shame.

The vermin were so bad here that we chanced further trouble by
writing on post cards as though to friends in England, and complained.

We knew that they would be intercepted and go to the Commandant. They
did.

We were marched to Cellelaager to go through the fumigating machine. We
went into a large hut, stripped, tied our clothes in a bundle and
shoved them into the large oven to bake for five hours while we sat
round with nothing on but a smile.

In the interval we were made to run the clippers closely over our
heads and bodies.

There were sores on some of the Russians as big as a hand, eaten deep into
by the vermin and the bones threatened to break through the skin of some
as we sat about naked, shivering. Uncleanly at best and denied soap here,
the lower class of them neglected all the rules of cleanliness. Their
"non-coms" were the reverse, being almost without exception men of some
education and general attainments.

Upon our return to this camp we were told by a friendly Russian in the
orderly room that the post cards were being held there as evidence
against us. We begged him to give them to us. He did so, and we had
barely finished destroying them when a German officer, accompanied by a
file of men, entered and demanded them. We explained that they had
been destroyed.

He would not believe us. We pointed to the charred ashes. He searched
our bodies, our beds and the scanty furnishing of the hut, naturally
without avail. The Russian orderly was severely admonished and our fire
was cut off as punishment.

The treatment at this camp was uniformly bad.

The next morning the _Raus_ blew at four-thirty instead of five, as was
customary. While we were still engaged in dressing the guards rushed
in, some with fixed bayonets, others with them gripped short, as
with daggers. The leader wore a button, the insignia of non-commissioned
rank. He gave a berserker roar of rage and charged furiously at an
inoffensive Russian and stabbed the poor fellow in the neck; while his
victim lay back in pleading terror, with outstretched arms. And then,
still roaring, he slashed a Frenchman who was walking past, on the
back of the head.
Going down the hut, he espied Harckum, of the East Lancashire
Regiment, tying his shoes.

Without warning he plunged at him, and, striking, laid open the
entire side of the man's face, splitting the ear so that it hung
in two pieces.

This was all quite in order because we were slow in dressing.

The Russians, with the exception of a lucky few who received some from
a Russian society in England, got no parcels, and suffered accordingly.
They were more amenable to discipline than we were, and perhaps because
of their hunger used to go out daily to work on the moors from daylight
until dark. They were a cheerful lot, considering everything, little
given to thinking of their situation and not blessed by any great
love of country nor perhaps the pleasantest recollections of it;
and to that extent at least appeared to be comparatively satisfied,
even under ill treatment.

Ill fed as they were, they used frequently to fall out at their work
from sheer exhaustion, which the Germans said was only laziness and
malingering and for which they would be returned to a point near the
laager, where we were, for their punishment. By the Commandant's
orders this consisted of forcing them to run the gauntlet of two lines
of soldiers who jabbed them with bayonets if they fell into a walk--until
the victims could run no more and dropped in their tracks.

The Germans would then roll their eyelids back for signs of shamming,
and if any such indications were shown, they were jabbed again--and
usually were, anyhow--until their failure to respond proved that they
were really unconscious.

This happened with alarming frequency on a regular schedule, forenoon
and afternoon, to all Russians who refused to work.

On one occasion we saw six or eight of them laid out unconscious at one
time in this manner. We wished to do something for them, but were
refused permission, and one man who was thought to be a ring leader
was selected to make an example of; he was awarded seven days'
cells.

We had previously agreed that if we were awarded this punishment;
we should refuse to run the gauntlet and should let them do their
worst.

There was no more heard of all this, but after that the Russians were
punished on the other side of a belt of trees just outside the laager,
where we could not see them, though their piteous cries could
plainly be distinguished.

Three of the Russians broke away from this camp, and finding themselves
near the stores, crawled in the window and stole a half of a pig. They
were recaptured, and, after doing thirty days' cells, were forced
to work out the price of the pig at the rate of thirty pfennigs--or
six cents--a day, which ordinarily would have been credited to them
for the buying of necessities.

And pork came high in Germany.

There was one kind of pill for all ailments.

That however, may have been only stupidity. At least the practice is
not confined to the prison camps nor the army of Germany, as all British
soldiers know.

But even these were not for the British.

On another occasion a party of Russians arrived from another camp
twelve miles away.

They said that some Englishmen there who had refused to work had been
shot at until all were wounded in the legs.

We continued to receive our old friend, the _Continental Times_, here,
and through it first learned of the Skager-Rack or Jutland battle,
in which, the paper claimed, over thirty major British ships had been
sunk, in addition to a larger number of smaller ones. The _Times_
said it was a great victory for the Germans. The last we doubted and
the first we knew to be untrue, since some of the ships they claimed
to have sunk had been destroyed previous to our capture, nine
months before.

It was in the _Times_, too, that we first heard of Kitchener's end.
We could not believe it, and for a month laughed at the guard's
insistence on the story, until one day a post card arrived from
England, saying: "K. of K. is gone."

That was a terrible blow to us, for to the British soldier; Kitchener was
the tangible expression of the might of his Empire.

Some of our party of eleven British had been prisoners since Mons
and they were in a very bad way.

The poor food, the lack of the fundamental necessities of the human
frame, the terrible monotony of the continual barbed wire, the same
faces round them, mostly unfriendly, all combined to have a most
depressing effect, not only upon their bodies, but upon their minds.

Many of them will never be of any use again. Compared to Ladysmith, when
that place was besieged in the South African War, the latter,
terrible though it was, was far and away better than this, even if
we did live on horse meat at the last in Ladysmith.

There was a certain amount of vice here, induced by the life. A kilted
Highlander was accused of having fathered a child in a German family,
where he had been employed.

We did not learn the facts of the case; but such, at least, was camp gossip
and it served to detract materially from the habitual despondency
of our lot.

CHAPTER XVI

THE THIRD ESCAPE
Saving Up for the Day--A Special Brand--Watchful Waiting--Off Again--Why
the Man in the Moon Laughed--A German Idyll--The Narrow Escapes.

Simmons and I had been planning on another escape ever since our recapture.
So we kept on our good behaviour, while we saved up food for _Der
Tag_.

We had hitherto refused to work, as had the remaining Britishers, but
in order to keep ourselves fit; we finally volunteered to carry the
noon ration of soup out to the Russians who worked on the moor.

Our job consisted of carrying an immense can of soup, swung high
on a pole from our shoulders, out to the workers, under guard of
course.

Starting at eleven each day and, by permission of the guard, occasionally
resting, we were usually back by one o'clock. Each day we saved
a portion of our food. We wanted twenty days' rations each, estimating
that it would take us that long to walk to Holland. We specialised on
concentrated foods from our parcels--biscuits, tinned meats, and
so on. We had our cache in a hole, dug under cover of night, under the
flooring of the hut. It was unsafe to keep food on our bodies or near
our beds, as the guards were in the habit of calling the _Raus_ at all
hours, and sometimes, several times during the night.

It might be at twelve, two or four, although it was never alike on any
two nights in succession, except that they always searched us. We could
see no reason for this; other than to break our rest and perhaps
our spirits, as at Giessen Camp.

Certainly, no one would carry any forbidden thing on his person,
under such surveillance, and they well knew we could hide anything we
wished in other places; as we did.

I visited
Mumaker's planing mills and found that the report was true.

[Illustration: TAKING DEAD BODIES FROM A ROOF.]

All day long the rescuers had been at work, and at this writing (six
o'clock) they have taken out seventy-eight dead bodies, the majority of
whom are women and children. The bodies are horribly mutilated and
covered with mud and blood. Fifteen of them are those of men. Their
terribly mutilated condition makes identification for the present almost
impossible. One of the bodies found was that of a woman, apparently
about thirty-five years of age.

Every conveyance that could be used has been pressed into service.
Latrobe is all agog with excitement over the great disaster. Almost
every train takes out a load of roughs and thugs who are bent on
mischief. They resemble the mob that came to Pittsburgh during the
riots.


Measures of Relief.

Pittsburgh is in a wild state of excitement. A large mass meeting was
held yesterday afternoon and in a short space of time $1,000 was
subscribed for the sufferers.

The Pennsylvania company has been running trains every hour to the scene
of the disaster or as near it as they can get. Provisions and a large
volunteer relief corps have been sent up. The physicians have had an
enthusiastic meeting at which one and all freely offered their services.

The latest project is to have the wounded and the survivors who fled to
the hillsides from the angry rush of waters brought to Pittsburgh. The
Exposition Society has offered the use of its splendid new building as a
temporary hospital. All the hospitals in the city have also offered to
care for the sufferers free of charge to the full limit of their
capacity.

Word has been received at Allegheny Junction, twenty-two miles above
Pittsburgh, from Leechburg that a woman and two children were seen
floating past there at five o'clock yesterday morning on top of some
wreckage. They were alive, and their pitiful cries for help drew the
attention of the people on the shore. Some men got a boat and endeavored
to reach the sufferers.

As they rowed out in the stream the woman could be heard calling to them
to save the children first.

The men made a gallant effort. It was all without avail, as the strong
current and floating masses of débris prevented them from reaching the
victims, and the latter floated on down the stream until their
despairing cries could no longer be heard.

Mrs. Chambers, of Apollo, was swept away when her house was wrecked
during the night. She had gone to bed when the flood came and she had
not time to dress. Fortunately she managed to secure a hold on some
wreckage which was being carried past her. She kept her hold until her
cries were heard by some men a short distance above Leechburg. They got
out a boat and succeeded in reaching her, and took her to a house near
the bank of the river. When they got her there it was found that she was
badly bruised and all her clothing had been torn off by the débris with
which she had come in contact, leaving her entirely naked. She was also
rescued at Natrona.


A Lucky Change of Residence.

Mr. F.J. Moore, of the Western Union office in this city, is giving
thanks to-day for the fortunate escape of his wife and two children
from the devastated city. As if by some foreknowledge of the impending
disaster, Mr. Moore had arranged to have his family move yesterday from
Johnstown and join him in this city. Their household goods were shipped
on Thursday, and yesterday just in time to save themselves, the little
party departed in the single train which made the trip between Johnstown
and Pittsburgh. I called on Mrs. Moore at her husband's apartments, No.
4 Webster avenue, and found her completely prostrated by the news of the
final catastrophe, coupled with the dangerous experience through which
she and her little ones had passed.

"Oh, it was terrible," she said. "The reservoir had broken, and before
we got out of the house the water filled the cellar, and on the way to
the depot it was up to the carriage bed. Our train left at a quarter to
two P.M., and at that hour the flood had commenced to rise with terrible
rapidity. Houses and sheds were carried away, and two men were drowned
almost under our very eyes. People gathered on the roofs to take refuge
from the water which poured into the lower rooms of their dwellings, and
many families took fright and became scattered beyond hope of being
reunited. Just as the train pulled out I saw a woman crying bitterly.
Her house had been flooded and she had escaped, leaving her husband
behind, and her fears for his safety made her almost crazy. Our house
was in the lower part of the town, and it makes me shudder to think what
would have happened had we remained in it an hour longer. So far as I
know we were the only passengers from Johnstown on the train, and
therefore I suppose we are the only persons who got away in time to
escape the culminating disaster."

Mrs. Moore's little son told me how he had seen the rats driven out of
their holes by the flood and running along the tops of the fences. Mr.
Moore endeavored to get to Johnstown yesterday, but was prevented by the
suspension of traffic and says he is very glad of it.


What the Eye Hath Seen.

The scenes at Heanemyer's planing mill at Nineveh, where the dead bodies
are lying, are never to be forgotten. The torn, bruised and mutilated
bodies of the victims are lying in a row on the floor of the planing
mill which looks more like the field of Bull Run after that disasterous
battle than a work shop. The majority of the bodies are nude, their
clothing having been torn off. All along the river bits of clothing--a
tiny shoe, a baby dress, a mother's evening wrapper, a father's coat,
and in fact every article of wearing apparel imaginable may be seen
hanging to stumps of trees and scattered on the bank.

One of the most pitiful sights of this terrible disaster came to my
notice this afternoon when the body of a young lady was taken out of the
Conemaugh river. The woman was apparently quite young, though her
features were terribly disfigured. Nearly all the clothing excepting the
shoes was torn off the body. The corpse was that of a mother, for
although cold in death she clasped a young male babe, apparently not
more than a year old, tightly in her arms. The little one was huddled
close up to the face of the mother, who when she realized their terrible
fate had evidently raised it to her lips to imprint upon its lips the
last kiss it was to receive in this world. The sight forced many a stout
heart to shed tears. The limp bodies, with matted hair, some with holes
in their heads, eyes knocked out and all bespattered with blood were a
ghastly spectacle.


Story of The First Fugitives.

The first survivors of the Johnstown wreck who arrived in the city last
night were Joseph and Henry Lauffer and Lew Dalmeyer, three well known
Pittsburghers. They endured considerable hardship and had several narrow
escapes with their lives. Their story of the disaster can best be told
in their own language. Joe, the youngest of the Lauffer brothers,
said:--

"My brother and I left on Thursday for Johnstown. The night we arrived
there it rained continually, and on Friday morning it began to flood. I
started for the Cambria store at a quarter past eight on Friday, and in
fifteen minutes afterward I had to get out of the store in a wagon, the
water was running so rapidly. We then arrived at the station and took
the day express and went as far as Conemaugh, where we had to stop. The
limited, however got through, and just as we were about to start the
bridge at South Fork gave way with a terrific crash, and we had to stay
there. We then went to Johnstown. This was at a quarter to ten in the
morning, when the flood was just beginning. The whole city of Johnstown
was inundated and the people all moved up to the second floor.


Mountains of Water.

"Now this is where the trouble occurred. These poor unfortunates did not
know the reservoir would burst, and there are no skiffs in Johnstown to
escape in. When the South Fork basin gave way mountains of water twenty
feet high came rushing down the Conemaugh River, carrying before them
death and destruction. I shall never forget the harrowing scene. Just
think of it! thousands of people, men, women and children, struggling
and weeping and wailing as they were being carried suddenly away in the
raging current. Houses were picked up as if they were but a feather, and
their inmates were all carried away with them, while cries of 'God help
me!' 'Save me!' 'I am drowning!' 'My child!' and the like were heard on
all sides. Those who were lucky enough to escape went to the mountains,
and there they beheld the poor unfortunates being crushed among the
débris to death without any chance of being rescued. Here and there a
body was seen to make a wild leap into the air and then sink to the
bottom.

"At the stone bridge of the Pennsylvania company people were dashed to
death against the piers. When the fire started there hundreds of bodies
were burned. Many lookers-on up on the mountains, especially the women,
fainted."

Mr. Lauffer's brother, Harry, then told his part of the tale, which was
not less interesting. He said:--"We had the most narrow escapes of
anybody, and I tell you we don't want to be around when anything of that
kind occurs again.

"The scenes at Johnstown have not in the least been exaggerated, and
indeed the worst is to be heard. When we got to Conemaugh and just as we
were about to start the bridge gave way. This left the day express, the
accommodation, a special train and a freight train at the station. Above
was the South Fork water basin, and all of the trains were well filled.
We were discussing the situation when suddenly, without any warning, the
whistles of every engine began to shriek, and in the noise could be
heard the warning of the first engineer, 'My God! Rush to the mountains,
the reservoir has burst.' Then, with a thundering like peal came the mad
rush of waters. No sooner had the cry been heard than those who could
with a wild leap rushed from the train and up the mountains. To tell
this story takes some time, but the moments in which the horrible scene
was enacted were few. Then came the tornado of water, leaping and
rushing with tremendous force. The waves had angry crests of white and
their roar was something deafening. In one terrible swath they caught
the four trains and lifted three of them right off the track, as if they
were only a cork. There they floated in the river. Think of it, three
large locomotives and finely varnished Pullmans floating around, and
above all the hundreds of poor unfortunates who were unable to escape
from the car swiftly drifting toward death. Just as we were about to
leap from the car I saw a mother, with a smiling, blue eyed baby in her
arms. I snatched it from her and leaped from the train just as it was
lifted off of the track. The mother and child were saved, but if one
more minute had elapsed we all would have perished."


Beyond the Power of Words.

During all of this time the waters kept rushing down the Conemaugh and
through the beautiful town of Johnstown, picking up everything and
sparing nothing.

The mountains by this time were black with people, and the moans and
sighs from those below brought tears to the eyes of the most stony
hearted. There in that terrible rampage were brothers, sisters, wives
and husbands, and from the mountain could be seen the panic stricken
marks in the faces of those who were struggling between life and death.
I really am unable to do justice to the scene, and its details are
almost beyond my power to relate. Then came the burning of the débris
near the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge. The scene was too sickening to
endure. We left the spot and journeyed across country and delivered many
notes, letters, etc., that were intrusted to us.

We rode thirty-one miles in a buckboard, then walked six miles, reached
Blairsville and journeyed again on foot to what is called the "Bow," and
from thence we arrived home. On our way we met Mr. F. Thompson, a
friend of ours, who resides in Nineveh, and he stated that rescuing
parties were busy all day at Annom. One hundred and seventy-five bodies
were recovered at that place. An old couple about sixty years of age
were rescued from a tree, on which they came floating down the stream.
They were clasped in each other's arms.

President Harrison's private secretary, Elijah Halford, and wife, were
on the train which was swept away, but escaped and were in the mountains
when I left.

Among the lost are Colonel John P. Linton and his wife and children.
Colonel Linton was prominent in the Grand Army of the Republic and in
the Knights of Pythias and other orders. He was formerly Auditor General
of Pennsylvania.

[Illustration: NINEVEH STATION, WHERE TWO HUNDRED BODIES WERE FOUND.]


CHAPTER IV.

Multiplication of Terrors.


The handsome brick High School Building is damaged to such an extent
that it will have to be rebuilt. The water attained the height of the
window sills of the second floor. Its upper stories formed a refuge for
many persons. All Saturday afternoon two little girls could be seen at
the windows frantically calling for aid. They had spent all night and
the day in the building, cut off from all aid. Without food and drinking
water their condition was lamentable. Late in the evening the children
were removed to higher ground and properly cared for.

A number of persons had been taken from this building earlier in the
day, but in the excitement the children were forgotten. Their names
could not be obtained.


Death in Many Forms.

Morrell Institute, a beautiful building and the old homestead of the
Morrell family, is totally ruined. The water has weakened the walls and
foundations to such an extent that there is danger of its collapsing.
Many families took refuge in this building and were saved. Now that the
waters have receded there is danger from falling walls. All day long the
crashing of walls could be heard across the river. Before daybreak this
morning the sounds could not but make one shudder at the very thought
of the horrible deaths that awaited many who had escaped the devastating
flood.

Library Hall was another of the fine buildings of the many in the city
that is destroyed. Of the Episcopal church not a vestige remains. Where
it once stood, there is now a placid lake. The parsonage is swept away,
and the rector of the church, Rev. Mr. Diller, was drowned.


Buried Under Falling Buildings.

The church was one of the first buildings to fall. It carried with it
several of the surrounding houses. Many of them were occupied. The
victims were swept into the comparatively still waters at the bridge,
and there met death either by fire or water.

James M. Walters, an attorney, spent the night in Alma Hall and relates
a thrilling story. One of the most curious occurrences of the whole
disaster was how Mr. Walters got to the hall. He has his office on the
second floor. His home is at No. 135 Walnut street. He says he was in
the house with his family when the waters struck it. All was carried
away. Mr. Walters' family drifted on a roof in another direction. He
passed down several streets and alleys until he came to the hall. His
dwelling struck that edifice and he was thrown into his own office.


Long, Dark Night of Terror.

About two hundred persons had taken refuge in the hall, and were on the
second, third and fourth stories. The men held a meeting and drew up
some rules, which all were bound to respect. Mr. Walters was chosen
president. Rev. Mr. Beale was put in charge of the first floor, A.M.
Hart of the second floor, Doctor Matthews of the fourth floor. No lights
were allowed, and the whole night was spent in darkness. The sick were
cared for. The weaker women and children had the best accommodations
that could be had, while the others had to wait. The scenes were most
agonizing. Heartrending shrieks, sobs and moans pierced the gloomy
darkness. The crying of children mingled with the suppressed sobs of the
women. Under the guardianship of the men all took more hope. No one
slept during all the long dark night. Many knelt for hours in prayer,
their supplications mingling with the roar of the waters and the shrieks
of the dying in the surrounding houses. In all this misery two women
gave premature birth to children.


Here is a Hero.

Dr. Matthews is a hero. Several of his ribs were crushed by a falling
timber and his pains were most severe, yet through all he attended the
sick. When two women in a house across the street shouted for help he
with two other brave young men climbed across the drift and ministered
to their wants. No one died during the night, but women and children
surrendered their lives on the succeeding day as a result of terror and
fatigue. Miss Rose Young, one of the young ladies in the hall, was
frightfully cut and bruised. Mrs. Young had a leg broken. All of Mr.
Walters' family were saved.

While the loss of property about Brookville, the lumber centre of
Pennsylvania, by the great flood has been enormous, variously estimated
at from $250,000 to $500,000, not a single life has been lost. At least
there have been none reported so far, and I have travelled over the line
from Red Bank, on the Valley road, to Dubois, on the low grade division.
Every creek is swollen to many times its natural size. A great deal of
the low-lying farm lands and roads in places have water enough over them
to float an ordinary steamboat.

Leaving Pittsburgh Saturday morning on the valley road, we ran past
millions and millions of feet of lumber. From the city to the junction
opposite Freeport the river was almost choked with débris of broken and
shattered houses. In places the river was fairly black with floating
masses of lath, shingles, roofs, floors and other lumber that had
formerly been houses. The sight was appalling and spoke louder than any
pen can describe.

At Red Bank the river was filled with a different kind of lumber,
including huge saw logs ready for cutting. From the estimates of an old
lumber man who was on the train I was told that between the stations
named we passed at least ten million feet of lumber, which means a loss
of fully $100,000 to the owners. A big portion of this came out of the
Clarion river, the estimated money loss from that section alone being
anywhere from $500,000 to $750,000.

All along the Allegheny river were gathered people trying to catch the
logs, risking their lives, for the logs swept down the river in a
current that was running fully ten miles an hour. The work was very
hazardous. The catchers are allowed by law six and a quarter cents for
each log captured, and the river was almost lined with people trying to
save the property.

At Red Bank, which we left at noon, there were at least six feet of
water expected from Oil City, and with it, according to the reports from
up the river, was an immense amount of lumber. Leaving the valley road
at Red Bank we went up the low grade division to Bryant, where immense
sawmills, the largest in the vicinity are located. The current was
rushing along at a rate anywhere from twelve to fifteen miles an hour,
tossing the huge logs around like so many toothpicks and carrying
everything before them. So great was the current and mass of logs that
the big iron bridge at Reynoldsville, sixteen miles above Brookville,
was swept away, as were two wagon bridges and several small foot
bridges.


Hundreds Homeless and Suffering.

Many houses here and there along Red Bank Creek were turned upside down,
some of them floating clear away, while the more secure ones were
flooded with water clear into the second floors. Many of the smaller
cottages and shanties were covered, leaving only the peaks of the roofs
sticking out to show the spots that families had but a few hours before
called home. All along the railroad track was piled the few household
effects, furniture, bedding, tables and clothes which the poor owners
had saved before they were forced out on the high ground. These same
people had gone to bed last evening thinking themselves safe from the
high water, only to be wakened about midnight by the noise of the
rushing floods and the huge saw logs bumping against their homes. The
very narrow escapes that some of them made while getting their families
into places of safety would fill many pages of this book.


Floating to Safety on Saw Logs.

One man had to mount the different members of his family on logs. The
mother and children alike sat astride of them, and then, with the father
on the other end, were poled across to the high ground.

Another man, whose house was in a worse place, swam ashore and, throwing
a rope back to the mother, who was surrounded on the porch of the house
by the children, yelled for her to tie one end to the little ones so he
could pull them over the fast running water. This operation was
continued until the entire family was rescued.

Willing workers from the neighborhood were not long in getting huge
bonfires started, and with the aid of these and dry clothing brought in
haste by people whose homes stood on higher ground the family were soon
warmed.

The same willing hands hastily constructed sheds, and with immense
bonfires the people were kept warm till daylight. Others, more
fortunate, were able to save enough from their houses to make
themselves comfortable for a short season of camping. One poor family I
noticed had saved enough carpet to make a tent out of, and under this
temporary shelter the mother was doing her best to prepare a meal and
attend to her other household duties.


Sheltered by Friendly Neighbors.

In Brookville a great many houses were submerged, but no lives were
lost. While the people were driven from their homes, they were more
fortunate than the people of Bryants, because they could at once find
shelter under the roofs of the neighbors' houses.

All of the saw mills, the chief industry of the town, were closed down.
Some because the water was over the first floor, and others because
their entire working force were on the creek trying to construct
temporary booms, by which they expected to save at least a portion of
the property from being swept away. One man rigged a boom with the aid
of a cable 1,600 feet long and thick enough to hold the heaviest
steamer. About fifty logs were chained together for further protection.
This arrangement for a time checked the mass of logs, but just when
everybody was thinking it would stop the output a small dam gave way,
bringing down with it another half million feet of lumber. When this
struck the temporary boom it parted, as if the huge cable was a piece of
thread, and the logs shot past.

Just at Bryants, however, a gorge formed shortly after two o'clock
Friday afternoon, and within a remarkably short time there was a pile of
logs wedged in that stretched back fully a quarter of a mile and the
top of which was more than ten feet high. This of course changed the
course of the stream a little, but the natural gorge had saved enough
logs to amount to more than $100,000 in money.

The following comments by one of our journals sum up the situation after
receiving the dreadful news of the three preceding days:


The Great Calamity.

The appalling catastrophy which has spread such awful havoc through the
teeming valley of the Conemaugh almost surpasses belief and fairly
staggers imagination. Without yet measuring its dire extent, enough is
known to rank it as the greatest calamity of the natural elements which
this country has ever witnessed. Nothing in our history short of the
deadly blight of battle has approached this frightful cataclysm, and no
battle, though destroying more life, has ever left such a ghastly trail
of horror and devastation. It seems more like one of those terrible
convulsions of nature from which we have hitherto been happily spared,
but which at rare intervals have swallowed up whole communities in
remote South American or oriental lands.

Ingenious and masterful as the human intellect is in guiding and
controlling the ordinary forces of nature, how impotent and
insignificant it appears in the presence of such a transcendent
disaster! It is well nigh inconceivable that a great section throbbing
with populous towns, and resonant with the hum of industry, should be
wiped out in the twinkling of an eye by a mighty, raging torrent, more
consuming than fire and more violent than the earthquake. The suddenness
of the blow and the impossibility of communicating with the scene add to
the terror of the event. The sickening spectacle of ruin and death which
will be revealed when the veil of darkness is lifted is left to
conjecture. The imagination can scarcely picture the dread realities,
and it would be difficult to overdraw the awful features of a calamity
which has every element of horror.


The River and Lake.

Nature is so framed at the fated point for such a disaster that man was
called upon for unceasing vigilance. The Conemaugh makes its channel
through a narrow valley between high ranges. Numerous streams drain the
surrounding mountains into its current. Along its course swarm frequent
hamlets busy with the wealth dug from the seams of the earth. The chief
of these towns, the seat of an immense industry, lies in a little basin
where the gap broadens to take in a converging stream and then
immediately narrows again, no outlet save the constricted waterway. High
above stands a great lake which is held in check only by an artificial
barrier, and which, if once unchained, must pour its resistless torrent
through this narrow gorge like a besom of destruction overwhelming
everything before it. There were all the elements of an unparalleled
disaster. Years of immunity had given a feeling of security for all time
without some extraordinary and unexpected occasion. But the occasion
appeared when in unforseen force the rains descended and the floods
came, and to-day desolation reigns.


A Direful Calamity.

It is impossible yet to measure the extent of the calamity. But the
destruction of life and property must be something that it is appalling
to think of, and the sorrow and suffering to follow are incalculable. A
solemn obligation devolves upon the people of the whole country. We can
not remedy the past but we can alleviate the present and the future.
Thousands of families are homeless and destitute; thousands are without
means of support; perchance, thousands are bereft of the strong arms
upon which they have relied. There is an instant, earnest demand for
help. Let there be immediate, energetic, generous action. Let us do our
part to relieve the anguish and mitigate the suffering of a community
upon whom has fallen the most terrible visitation in all our history.


An Historic Catastrophe.

When an American Charles Reade wishes in the future to weave into the
woof of his novel the account of some great public calamity he will
portray the misfortune which overwhelmed the towns and villages lying in
the valley of the Conemaugh River. The bursting of a reservoir, and the
ensuing scenes of death and destruction, which are so vividly described
in "Put Yourself in His Place," were not the creatures of Mr. Reade's
imagination, but actual occurrences. The novelist obtained facts and
incidents for one of the most striking chapters in all of his works
from the events which followed the breaking of the Dale Dyke embankment
at Sheffield, England, in March, 1864, when 238 lives were lost and
property valued at millions was destroyed.

It will need even more vivid and vigorous descriptive powers than Mr.
Reade possessed to adequately delineate the scene of destruction and
death now presented in Johnstown and the adjacent villages. The
Sheffield calamity, disastrous as it proved to be, was a small affair
when compared with this latest reservoir accident. The Mill River
reservoir disaster of May, 1874, with its 200 lives lost and $1,500,000
of property destroyed, almost sinks into insignificance beside it. The
only recorded calamity of the kind which anywhere approaches it occurred
in Estrecho de Rientes, in Spain, in April, 1802, when a dam burst and
drowned 600 persons and swept $7,000,000 worth of property away. But
above all these calamities in sad pre-eminence will stand the Conemaugh
disaster.

But dark as the picture is, it will doubtless be relieved by many acts
of heroism. The world will wait to learn if there was not present at
Conemaugh some Myron Day, whose ride on his bareback steed before the
advancing wall of water that burst from Mill River Dam in 1874, shouting
to the unsuspecting people as he rode: "The reservoir is breaking! The
flood is coming! Fly! Fly for your lives," was the one mitigating
circumstance in that scene of woe and destruction. When the full story
of the Conemaugh calamity is told it will, doubtless, be found that
there were many deeds of heroism performed, many noble sacrifices made
and many an act as brave as any performed on the field of battle.
Already we are told of husbands and mothers who preferred to share a
watery grave with their wives and children sooner than accept safety
alone.

Such a calamity, while it makes the heart sick with its story of death
and suffering, always serves to bring out the better and higher
qualities in men and women, and to illustrate how closely all mankind
are bound together by ties of sympathy and compassion. This fact will be
made evident now by the open-handed liberality which will quickly flow
in to relieve the suffering, and, as far as possible, to repair the loss
caused by this historic calamity.


CHAPTER V.

The Awful Work of Death.


The record of June 3rd continues as follows: The horror of the situation
does not lessen. The latest estimate of the number of dead is an
official one by Adjutant General Hastings, and it places the number
between 12,000 and 15,000.

The uncovering of hundreds of bodies by the recession of the waters has
already filled the air with pestilential odors. The worst is feared for
the surviving population, who must breathe this poisoned atmosphere.
Sharp measures prompted by sheer necessity have resulted in an almost
complete subsidence of cowardly efforts to profit by the results of the
disaster. Thieves have slunk into places of darkness and are no longer
to be seen at their unholy work.

All thoughts are now fixed upon the hideous revelation that awaits the
light of day, when the waters shall have entirely quitted the ruins that
now lie beneath them, and shall have exposed the thousands upon
thousands of corpses that are massed there.

A sad and gloomy sky, almost as sad and gloomy as the human faces under
it, shrouded Johnstown to-day. Rain fell all day and added to the
miseries of the wretched people. The great plain where the best part of
Johnstown used to stand was half covered with water. The few sidewalks
in the part that escaped the flood were inches thick with black, sticky
mud, through which tramped a steady procession of poor women who are
left utterly destitute. The tents where the people are housed who cannot
find other shelter were cold and cheerless.


A Great Tomb.

The town seemed like a great tomb. The people of Johnstown have supped
so full of horrors that they go about in a sort of a daze and only half
conscious of their griefs. Every hour, as one goes through the streets,
he hears neighbors greeting each other and then inquiring without show
of feeling how many each had lost in his family. To-day I heard a gray
haired man hail another across the street with this question.

"I lost five; all are gone but Mary and I," was the reply.

"I am worse off than that," said the first old gentleman. "I have only
my grandson left. Seven of us gone."

And so they passed on without apparent excitement. They and everyone
else had heard so much of these melancholy conversations that somehow
the calamity had lost its significance to them. They treat it exactly as
if the dead persons had gone away and were coming back in a week.


The Ghastly Search.

The melancholy task of searching the ruins for more bodies went on
to-day in the soaking rain. There were little crowds of morbid curiosity
hunters around each knot of workingmen, but they were not residents of
Johnstown. All their curiosity in that direction was satiated long ago.
Even those who come in from neighboring towns with the idea of a day's
strange and ghastly experiences did not care to be near after they had
seen one body exhumed. There were hundreds and thousands of these
visitors from the country to-day. The effect of the dreadful things they
saw and heard was to drive most of them to drink. By noon the streets
were beginning to be full of boisterous and noisy countrymen, who were
trying to counteract the strain on their nerves with unnatural
excitement. Then the chief of police, foreseeing the unseemly sights
that were likely to disgrace the streets, drove out and kept out all the
visitors who had not some good reason for their presence. After that and
far into the evening all the country roads were filled with drunken
stragglers, who were trying to forget what they had seen.

One thing that makes the work of searching for the bodies very slow is
the strange way that great masses of objects were rolled into intricate
masses of rubbish.


Horrible Masses.

As the flood came down the valley of the South Fork it obliterated the
suburb of Woodvale, where not a house was left, nor a trace of one. The
material they had contained rolled on down the valley, over and over,
grinding it up to pulp and finally leaving it against an unusually firm
foundation or in the bed of an eddy. The masses contain human bodies,
but it is slow work to pick them to pieces. In the side of one of them
I saw the remnants of a carriage, the body of a harnessed horse, a baby
cradle and a doll, a tress of woman's hair, a rocking horse, and a piece
of beefsteak still hanging on a hook.

[Illustration: THE REMAINS OF CAMBRIA CITY.]

The city is now very much better patrolled than it has been at any time
since the flood occurred. Many members of the police force of Pittsburgh
came in and offered their services. One of them showed his spirit
during the first hour by striking a man, whom he saw opening a trunk
among the rubbish, a tremendous blow over the head which knocked him
senseless. Several big trunks and safes lie in full sight on the
desolate plain in the lower part of the town, but no one dared to touch
them after that.

The German Catholic Church at Cambria City, a short distance west of
Johnstown, is almost a complete wreck. Rather a singular coincidence in
connection with the destruction of the above is that the Immaculate
Conception, that stood in the northwest corner of the lecture rooms,
stands just as it was when last seen. The figure, which is wax, was not
even scratched, and the clothes, which are made of white silk and deep
duchess lace, were spotless. This seems strange, when the raging water
destroyed everything else in the building. Hundreds of persons visited
the place during the day.


Ten Bodies an Hour.

Bodies are now being brought in at lower Cambria at the rate of ten per
hour.

A man named Dougherty tells a thrilling story of a ride down the river
on a log. When the waters struck the roof of the house on which he had
taken shelter he jumped astride a telegraph pole, riding a distance of
some twenty-three miles, from Johnstown to Bolivar, before he was
rescued.

Many inquiries have been made as to why the militia did not respond when
ordered out by Adjutant General Hastings. "In the first place it is
beyond the General's authority to order troops to a scene of this kind
unless the Governor first issues a proclamation, then it becomes his
duty to issue orders." The General said he was notified that the
Pittsburgh troops, consisting of the Fourteenth and Eighteenth
regiments, had tendered their services, and no doubt would have been of
great service. The General consulted with the Chief Burgess of Johnstown
and Sheriff of Cambria county in regard to calling the troops to the
scene, but both officials strenuously objected, as they claimed the
people would object to anything of this kind. As a proof of this not a
breach of peace was committed last night in Johnstown and vicinity.

It has not been generally believed that the district in the neighborhood
of Kernville would be so extremely prolific of corpses as it has proven
to be. I visited that part of the town where both the river and Stony
Creek have done their worst. I found that within the past twenty-four
hours almost one thousand bodies had been recovered or were in sight.
The place is one great repository of the dead.


The Total May Never be Known.

The developments of every hour make it more and more apparent that the
exact number of lives lost in the Johnstown horror will never be known.
All estimates made to this time are conservative, and when all is known
will doubtless be found to have been too small. Over one thousand bodies
have been found since sunrise to-day, and the most skeptical concede
that the remains of thousands more rest beneath the débris above the
Johnstown bridge. The population of Johnstown, the surrounding towns and
the portion of the valley affected by the flood is, or was, from 50,000
to 55,000. Numerous leading citizens of Johnstown, who survived the
flood, have been interviewed, and the concensus of opinion was that
fully thirty per cent of the residents of Johnstown and Cambria had been
victims of the continued disasters of fire and water. If this be true,
the total loss of life in the entire valley cannot be less than seven or
eight thousand and possibly much greater. Of the thousands who were
devoured by the flames and whose ashes rest beneath the smoking débris
above Johnstown bridge, no definite information can ever be obtained.


Hundreds Carried Miles Away.

As little will be learned of hundreds that sank beneath the current and
were borne swiftly down the Conemaugh only to be deposited hundreds of
miles below on the banks and in the driftwood of the raging Ohio.
Probably one-third of the dead will never be recovered, and it will take
a list of the missing weeks hence to enable even a close estimate to be
made of the number of lives that were lost. That this estimate can never
be accurate will be understood when it is remembered that in many
instances whole families and their relatives were swept away, and found
a common grave beneath the wild waste of waters. The total destruction
of the city leaves no data to even demonstrate that the names of these
unfortunates ever found place on the pages of eternity's history.

"All indications point to the fact that the death list will reach over
five thousand names, and in my opinion the missing will reach eight
thousand in number," declared General D.H. Hastings to-night.

At present there are said to have been twenty-two hundred bodies
recovered. The great difficulties experienced in getting a correct list
is the great number of morgues. There is no central bureau of
information, and to communicate with the different dead houses is the
work of hours. The journey from the Pennsylvania Railroad morgue to the
one in the Fourth ward school house in Johnstown occupies at least one
hour. This renders it impossible to reach all of them in one day,
particularly as some of the morgues are situated at points inaccessible
from Johnstown. At six o'clock in the evening the 630th body had been
recovered at the Cambria depository for corpses.


None Left to Care for the Dead.

Kernville is in a deplorable condition. The living are unable to take
care of the dead. The majority of the inhabitants of the town were
drowned. A lean-to of boards has been erected on the only street
remaining in the town. This is the headquarters for the committee that
controls the dead. As quickly as the dead are brought to this point they
are placed in boxes and then taken to the cemetery and buried.

A supply store has opened in the town. A milkman who was overcharging
for milk narrowly escaped lynching. The infuriated men appropriated all
his milk and distributed it among the poor and then drove him out of
the town. The body of the Hungarian who was lynched in an orchard was
removed by his friends during the night.

There is but one street left in the town. About one hundred and
fifty-five houses are standing where once there stood a thousand. None
of the large buildings in what was once a thriving little borough have
escaped. One thousand people is a low estimate of the number of lives
lost from this town, but few of the bodies have been recovered. It is
directly above the ruins and the bodies have floated down into them,
where they burned. A walk through the town revealed a desolate sight.
Only about twenty-five able-bodied men have survived and are able to
render any assistance. Men and women can be seen with black eyes,
bruised faces and cut heads.


Useless Calls for Help.

The appearance of some of the ladies is heartrending. They were injured
in the flood, and since that have not slept. Their faces have turned a
sickly yellow and dark rings surround the eyes. Many have succumbed to
nervous prostration. For two days but little assistance could be
rendered them. The wounded remained uncared for in some of the houses
cut off by the water, and died from their injuries alone. Some were
alive on Sunday, and their shouts could be heard by the people on the
shore.

A man is now in a temporary jail in what is left of the town. He was
caught stealing a gold watch. A shot was fired at him but he was not
wounded. The only thing that saved him from lynching was the smallness
of the crowd. His sentence will be the heaviest that can be given him.

Services in the chapel from which the bodies were buried consisted
merely of a prayer by one of the survivors. No minister was present.
Each coffin had a descriptive card on it, and on the graves a similar
card was placed, so that bodies can be removed later by friends.

There are about thirty Catholic priests and nuns here. The sisters are
devoting themselves to the cure of the sick and injured in the
hospitals, while the priests are doing anything and everything and
making themselves generally useful. Bishop Phelan, who reached here on
Sunday evening, returned to Pittsburgh on the three o'clock train
yesterday afternoon. He has organized the Catholic forces in this
neighborhood, and all are devoting themselves to hard work assiduously.

Mr. Derlin, who heeded the warning as to the danger of the dam, had
hurried his wife and two children to the hills, but returned himself to
save some things from his house. While in the building the flood struck
it and swept it away, jamming it among a lot of other houses and hurling
them all around with a regular churning motion. Mr. Derlin was in a fix,
but went to his top story, clambered to the roof and escaped from there
to solid structures and then to the ground. His property was entirely
ruined, but he thinks himself fortunate in saving his family.

Where Woodvale once stood there is now a sea of mud, broken but rarely
by a pile of wreckage. I waded through mud and water up the valley
to-day over the site of the former village. As has been often stated,
nothing is standing but the old woollen mills. The place is swept bare
of all other buildings but the ruins of the Gautier wire mill. The
boilers of this great works were carried one hundred yards from their
foundations. Pieces of engines, rolls and other machinery were swept far
away from where they once stood. The wreck of a hose carriage is
sticking up out of the mud. It belonged to the crack company of
Johnstown. The engine house is swept away and the cellar is filled with
mud, so that the site is obliterated.

A German watchman was on guard at the mill when the waters came. He ran
for the hillside and succeeded in escaping. He tells a graphic story of
the appearance of the water as it swept down the valley. He declares
that the first wave was as high as the third story of a house.

The place is deserted. No effort is being made to clean off the streets.
The mire has formed the grave for many a poor victim. Arms and legs are
protruding from the mud and it makes the most sickening of pictures.


General Hastings' Report.

In answer to questions from Governor Beaver, Adjutant-General Hastings
has telegraphed the following:

"Good order prevailed throughout the city and vicinity last night.
Police arrangements are excellent. Not one arrest made. No need of
sending troops. The Mayor of Johnstown and the Sheriff of Cambria
county, with whom I am in constant communication, request that no troops
be sent. I concur in their judgment. There is a great outside clamor for
troops. Do not send tents. Have nine hundred here, which are sufficient.
I advise you to make a call on the general public for money and other
assistance.

"About two thousand bodies have been rescued and the work of embalming
and burying the dead is going on with regularity. There is plenty of
medical assistance. We have a bountiful supply of food and clothing
to-day, and the fullest telegraphic facilities are afforded and all
inquiries are promptly answered.

"Have you any instructions or inquiries? The most conservative estimates
here place the number of lives lost at fully 5,000. The prevailing
impression is that the loss will reach from 8,000 to 10,000. There are
many widows and orphans and a great many wounded--impossible to give an
estimate. Property destroyed will reach $25,000,000. The popular
estimate will reach $40,000,000 to $50,000,000.

"I will issue a proclamation to-night to the people of the country and
to all who sympathize with suffering to give aid to our deeply afflicted
people. Tell them to be of good cheer, that the sympathies of all our
people, irrespective of section, are with them, and wherever the news of
their calamity has been carried responses of sympathy and aid are coming
in. A single subscription from England just received is for $1,000."

Grand View Cemetery has three hundred buried in it. All met death in the
flood. They have thirty-five men digging graves. Seven hundred dead
bodies in the hospital on Bedford street, Conneaut. One hundred dead
bodies in the school-house hospital, Adam street, Conneaut. Three
hundred bodies found to-day in the sand banks along Stony Creek,
vicinity of the Baltimore and Ohio; 182 bodies at Nineveh.

[Illustration: ON A MISSION OF MERCY.]


CHAPTER VI.

Shadows of Despair.


Another graphic account of the fearful calamity is furnished by an
eye-witness: The dark disaster of the day with its attendant terrors
thrilled the world and drew two continents closer together in the bonds
of sympathy that bind humanity to man. The midnight terrors of Ashtabula
and Chatsworth evoked tears of pity from every fireside in Christendom,
but the true story of Johnstown, when all is known, will stand solitary
and alone as the acme of man's affliction by the potent forces to which
humanity is ever subject.

The menacing clouds still hover darkly over the valley of death, and the
muttering thunder that ever and anon reverberates faintly in the
distance seems the sardonic chuckle of the demon of destruction as he
pursues his way to other lands and other homes.


The Waters Receding.

But the modern deluge has done its worst for Johnstown. The waters are
rapidly subsiding, but the angry torrents still eddy around Ararat, and
the winged messenger of peace has not yet appeared to tell the pathetic
tale of those who escaped the devastation.

It is not a hackneyed utterance to say that no pen can adequately depict
the horrors of this twin disaster--holocaust and deluge. The deep
emotions that well from the heart of every spectator find most eloquent
expression in silence--the silence that bespeaks recognition of man's
subserviency to the elements and impotence to avert catastrophe. The
insignificance of human life is only fully realized by those who witness
such scenes as Johnstown, Chatsworth and Ashtabula, and to those whose
memory retains the picture of horror the dread experience cannot fail to
be a fitting lesson.


A Dreary Morning.

This morning opened dark and dreary. Great drops of rain fell
occasionally and another storm seems imminent. Every one feels thankful
though that the weather still remains cold, and that the gradual
putrefaction of the hundreds of bodies that still line the streams and
lie hidden under the miles of driftwood and débris is not unduly
hastened.

The peculiar stench of decaying human flesh is plainly perceptible to
the senses as one ascends the bank of Stony Creek for a half mile along
the smouldering ruins of the wreck, and the most skeptical now conceive
the worst and realize that hundreds--aye, perhaps thousands--of bodies
lie charred and blackened beneath this great funeral pyre. Searchers
wander wearily over this smoking mass, and as occasionally a sudden
shout comes over the waters, the patient watchers on the hill realize
that another ghastly discovery has been added to that long list of
revelations that chill every heart and draw tears to the eyes of
pessimists.

From the banks many charred remains of victims of flames and flood are
plainly visible to the naked eye, as the retreating waters reluctantly
give up their dead. Beneath almost every log or blackened beam a
glistening skull or the blanched remnants of ribs or limbs mark all that
remains of life's hopes and dreams.

Since ten o'clock last night the fire engines have been busy. Water has
been constantly playing on the burning ruins. At times the fire seems
almost extinguished, but fitful flames suddenly break out afresh in some
new quarter, and again the water and flames wage fierce combat.


The Count is Still Lacking.

As yet there is no telling how many lives have been lost. Adjutant
General Hastings, who has charge of everything, stated this morning that
he supposed there were at least two thousand people under the burning
débris, but the only way to find out how many lives were lost was to
take a census of the people now living and subtract that from the census
before the flood. Said he, "In my opinion there are any way from twelve
thousand to fifteen thousand lost."

Up to this morning people living here who lost whole families or parts
of families hardly seemed to realize what a dreadful calamity had
befallen them. To-day, however, they are beginning to understand the
situation. Agony is stamped on the faces of every one, and it is truly a
city of mourning.

The point of observation is on the hillside, midway between the woolen
mills of Woodvale and Johnstown proper, which I reached to-day after a
journey through the portions of the city from which the waters, receding
fast, are revealing scenes of unparalleled horror. From the point on the
hillside referred to an excellent view of the site of the town can be
obtained. Here it can be seen that from the line of the Pennsylvania
Railroad, which winds along the base of Prospect Hill, to a point at
which St. John's Catholic Church formerly stood, and from the stone
bridge to Conemaugh, on the Conemaugh River, but twelve houses by actual
count remain, and they are in such a condition as to be practically
useless. To any one familiar with the geography of the iron city of
Cambria county this will convey a vivid idea of a swarth averaging
one-half mile in width and three miles in length. In all the length and
breadth of the most peaceful and costly portion of Johnstown not a
shingle remains except those adhering to the buildings mentioned.


Houses Upside Down.

But do not think for an instant that this comprehends in full the
awfulness of the scene. What has just been mentioned is a large waste of
territory swept as clean as if by a gigantic broom. In the other
direction some few of the houses still remain, but they are upside down,
piled on top of each other, and in many ways so torn asunder that not a
single one of them is available for any purpose whatever. It is in this
district that the loss of life has been heartrending. Bodies are being
dug up in every direction.

On the main street, from which the waters have receded sufficiently to
render access and work possible, bodies are being exhumed. They are as
thick as potatoes in a field. Those in charge seem to have the utmost
difficulty in securing the removal of bodies after they have been found.

The bodies are lying among the mass of wrecked buildings as thick as
flies. The fire in the drift above the bridge is under control and is
being rapidly smothered by the Pittsburgh firemen in charge of the work.
About seven o'clock this morning a crowd of Battery B boys discovered a
family of five people in the smoking and burned ruins above the bridge.
They took out father, mother and three children, all terribly burned and
mutilated. The little girl had an arm torn off.


Finding the Dead.

The work of rescuing the bodies from the mud and débris has only fairly
begun, and yet each move in that direction reveals more fully the
horrible extent of the calamity. It is estimated that already 1,800
corpses have been found in all parts of the valley and given some little
attention. Many of them were so mangled as to be beyond identification.

A regularly organized force of men has been at work most of the day upon
the mass of débris about the stone bridge. Early in the forenoon ten
bodies were found close together. There was nothing to identify them, as
they were burnt almost to a crisp. Several of them must have belonged to
one household, as they were taken from under the blackened timbers of a
single roof.

[Illustration: THE VILLAGE OF JOHNSTOWN BEFORE THE FLOOD.]

Soon after a man, woman and child were taken from the ruins. The child
was clasped in the arms of the woman, and the trio were evidently
husband, wife and child.

It is a most distressing sight to see the relatives of people supposed
to be lost standing around and watching every body as it is pulled out,
and acting more like maniacs than sensible people.

As the work progressed the number of the ghastly finds increased. The
various parties of workmen turned out from ten to fifteen bodies and
fragments of bodies an hour all day long.

Many of the corpses found had valuables still clasped in their hands.
One woman taken from the mill this morning had several diamond rings and
earrings, a roll of government bonds and some money clasped in her
hands. She was a widow, and was very wealthy. Her body has been embalmed
and is at the house of relatives.


Suicide Brought Relief.

From under the large brick school-house 124 bodies were taken last night
and to-day, and in every corner and place the bodies are being found and
buried as fast as possible. En æsirnir tōku līk Baldrs ok fluttu til
sævar. Hring- horni hēt skip Baldrs, hann var allra skipa mestr;
hann vildu goðin fram sętja, ok gǫ̈ra þar ā bāl-fǫr Baldrs; en skipit
gekk hvęrgi fram.

Þā var sęnt ī Jǫtunheima ęptir gȳgi þeiri er Hyrrokin hēt; en er hon
kom, ok reið vargi, ok hafði hǫgg-orm at taumum, þā hljōp hon af hestinum,
en Ōðinn kallaði til ber-sęrki fjōra at gæta hestsins, ok fengu
þeir eigi haldit, nema þeir fęldi hann.

Þā gekk Hyrrokin ā [*] fram-stafn nǫkkvans, ok hratt fram ī fyrsta
við-bragði, svā
at eldr hraut ōr hlunnunum, ok lǫnd ǫll skulfu. Þā varð
Þōrr reiðr, ok greip hamarinn, ok mundi þā brjōta hǫfuð
hęnnar, āðr en goðin ǫll bāðu hęnni friðar.

Þā var borit ūt ā skipit līk Baldrs; ok er þat sā kona hans, Nanna, Neps
dōttir, þā sprakk hon af harmi, ok dō; var hon borin ā
bālit, ok slęgit ī eldi. Þā stōð Þōrr at, ok vīgði bālit með
Mjǫllni; en fyrir fōtum hans rann dvergr nakkvarr, sā er Litr nęfndr;
en Þōrr spyrndi fœti sīnum ā hann, ok hratt honum ī eldinn, ok brann
hann.

En at þessi bręnnu sōtti margs konar þjōð: fyrst at sęgja frā Ōðni,
at með honum fōr Frigg ok valkyrjur ok hrafnar hans; en Freyr ōk ī
kęrru með gęlti þeim er Gullin-bursti heitir eða Slīðrug-tanni; en
Heimdallr reið hesti þeim er Gull-toppr heitir; en Freyja kǫttum
sīnum.

Þar kömr ok mikit fōlk hrīmþursa, ok berg- risar. Ōðinn lagði ā bālit
gullhring þann er Draupnir heitir; honum fylgði sīðan sū nāttūra, at
hina nīundu hvęrja nātt drupu af honum ātta gullhringar jafn-hǫfgir.
Hestr Baldrs var leiddr ā bālit með ǫllu reiði.

En þat er at sęgja frā Hęrmōði, at hann reið nīu nætr dökkva dala ok
djūpa, svā at hann sā ekki, fyrr en hann kom til ārinnar Gjallar,
ok reið ā Gjallar-brūna; hon er þǫkð lȳsi-gulli. Mōðguðr er nęfnd mær
sū er gætir brūar- innar; hon spurði hann at nafni eða ætt, ok sagði at
hinn fyrra dag riðu um brūna fimm fylki dauðra manna; 'en eigi dynr
brūin minnr undir einum þēr, ok eigi hęfir þū lit dauðra manna; hvī
rīðr þū hēr ā hęlveg?' Hann svarar at 'ek skal rīða til hęljar at leita
Baldrs, eða hvārt hęfir þū nakkvat sēt Baldr ā hęlvegi?'

En hon sagði at Baldr hafði þar riðit um Gjallarbrū; 'en niðr ok norðr
liggr hęlvegr.' Þā
reið Hęrmōðr þar til er hann kom at hęl-grindum; þā steig hann af
hestinum, ok gyrði hann fast, steig upp, ok keyrði hann sporum, en
hestrinn hljōp svā hart, ok yfir grindina, at hann kom hvęrgi nær. Þā
reið Hęrmōðr heim til hallar- [*] innar, ok steig af hesti, gekk
inn ī hǫllina, sā þar sitja ī
ǫndvegi Baldr, brōður sinn; ok dvalðisk Hęrmōðr þar um nāttina.

En at morgni þā beiddisk Hęrmōðr af Hęlju at Baldr skyldi rīða heim
með honum, ok sagði hvęrsu mikill grātr var með āsum.

Most of the bodies embalmed last night had been taken out of the river
in the morning by the people at Nineveh, who worked incessantly night
and day searching the river. The bodies when found were placed in a
four-horse wagon, frequently twelve at a time, and driven away. Of the
bodies taken out near Moorhead fully three-fourths are women and the
rest children. But few men are found there. In one row at the planing
mill to-day were eighteen children's bodies awaiting embalming. Next to
them was a woman whose head had been crushed in so as to destroy her
features. On her hand were three diamond rings.

Dr. Graff, of the State Board of Health, stationed at Nineveh, states
that up till ten o'clock this morning they had embalmed about two
hundred bodies, and by noon to-day would about double that number, as
they were fishing bodies out of the river at this point at the rate of
one every five minutes. In the driftwood and débris bodies are being
exhumed, and an additional force of undertakers has been despatched to
this place.


In a Charnel House.

At the public school-house the scene beggars description. Boards have
been laid from desk to desk, and as fast as the hands of a large body of
men and women can put the remains in recognizable shape they are laid
out for possible identification and removed as quickly as possible.
Seventy-five still remain, although many have been taken away, and they
are being brought in every moment. It is something horrifying to see one
portion of the huge school taken up by corpses, each with a clean white
sheet covering it, and on the other side of the room a promiscuous heap
of bodies in all sorts of shapes and conditions, looking for all the
world like decaying tree trunks. Among the number identified are two
beautiful young ladies named respectively Mrs. Richardson, who was a
teacher in the kindergarten school, and Miss Lottie Yost, whose sister I
afterwards noticed at one of the corners near by, weeping as if her very
heart was broken. Not a single acquaintance did she count in all of the
great throng who passed her by, although many tendered sincere
sympathy, which was accentuated by their own losses.


Lost and Found.

At the station of Johnstown proper this morning the following names were
added to the list of bodies found and identified: Charles Marshall, one
of the engineers Cambria Company. A touching incident in connection with
his death is that he had been married but a short time and his widow is
heartbroken.


Order at any Cost.

Ex-Sheriff C.L. Dick, who was at one time Burgess of Johnstown, has
charge of a large number of special deputies guarding the river at
various points. He and a posse of his men caught seven Hungarians
robbing dead bodies in Kernville early this morning, and threw them all
into the river and drowned them. He says he has made up his mind to
stand no more nonsense with this class of persons, and he has given
orders to his men to drown, shoot or hang any man caught stealing from
the dead. He said the dead bodies of the Huns can be found in the creek.

Sheriff Dick, or "Chall" as he is familiarly called, is a tall, slim
man, and is well known in Pittsburgh, principally to sportsmen. He is a
first-class wing shot, and during the past year he has won several live
bird matches. He is slow to anger, but when forced into a fight his
courage is unfailing.


Shooting Looters on the Wing.

Dick wears corduroy breeches, a large hat, a cartridge belt, and is
armed with a Winchester rifle. He is a crack shot and has taken charge
of the deputies in the wrecked portion of the city. Yesterday afternoon
he discovered two men and a woman cutting the finger from a dead woman
to get her rings. The Winchester rifle cracked twice in quick
succession, and the right arm of each man dropped, helplessly shattered
by a bullet. The woman was not harmed, but she was so badly frightened
that she will not rob corpses again. Some five robbers altogether were
shot during the afternoon, and two of them were killed.

The lynchings in the Johnstown district so far number from sixteen to
twenty.


Treasure Lying Loose.

Notwithstanding this, and the way that the town is most thoroughly under
martial law, the pilfering still goes on. The wreck is a gold mine for
pilferers. A Hungarian woman fished out a trunk down in Cambria City
yesterday, and on breaking it open found $7,500 in it. Another woman
found a jewel box containing several rings and a gold watch. In one
house in Johnstown there is $1,700 in money, but it is impossible to get
at it.


Hanged and Riddled with Bullets.

Quite an exciting scene took place in the borough of Johnstown last
night. A Hungarian was discovered by two men in the act of blowing up
the safe in the First National Bank Building with dynamite. A cry was
raised, and in a few minutes a crowd had collected and the cry of "Lynch
him!" was raised, and in less time than it takes to tell it the man was
strung up to a tree in what was once about the central portion of
Johnstown. Not content with this the Vigilance Committee riddled the
man's body full of bullets. He remained hanging to the tree for several
hours, when some person cut him down and buried him with the other dead.

The stealing by Hungarians at Cambria City and points along the railroad
has almost ceased. The report of several lynchings and the drowning of
two Italians while being pursued by citizens yesterday, put an end to
the pilfering for a time.

While Deputy Sheriff Rose was patrolling the river bank he found two
Hungarians attempting to rob several bodies, and at once gave chase. The
men started for the woods when he pulled out a pistol and shot twice,
wounding both men badly. From the latest reports the men are still
living, but they are in a critical condition.


Cutting Off a Head for a Necklace.

It is reported that two Hungarians found the body of a lady between
Woodvale and Conemaugh who had a valuable necklace on. The devils
dragged her out of the water and severed her head from her body to get
the necklace. At eleven o'clock to-day the woods were being scoured for
the men who are supposed to be guilty of the crime.


Pickets Set, Strangers Excluded.

Up till noon to-day General Hastings has had his headquarters on the
east side of the river, but this morning he came over to the burning
débris, followed by about one hundred and twenty-five men carrying
coffins. He started to work immediately, and has ordered men from
Philadelphia, Harrisburg, and all eastern towns to do laboring work.

The Citizen's Committee are making desperate efforts to preserve peace,
and the Hungarians at Cambria City are being kept in their houses by men
with clubs, who will not permit them to go outside. There seems
considerable race prejudice at Cambria City, and trouble may follow, as
both the English and Hungarians are getting worked up to a considerable
extent.

The Sheriff has taken charge of Johnstown and armed men are this morning
patrolling the city. The people who have been properly in the limits are
permitted to enter the city if they are known, but otherwise it is
impossible to get into the town. The regulation seems harsh, but it is a
necessity.


Troops Sent Home.

Battery B, of Pittsburgh, arrived in the city this morning under command
of Lieutenant Sheppard, who went to the quarters of Adjutant-General
Hastings in the railroad watch tower. The General had just got up, and
as the officer approached the General said:--

"Who sent you here?"

"I was sent here by the Chamber of Commerce," replied the Lieutenant.

"Well, I want to state that there are only four people who can order you
out, viz.:--The Governor, Adjutant-General, Major General and the
Commander of the Second Brigade. You have committed a serious breach of
discipline, and my advice to you is to get back to Pittsburgh as soon as
possible, or you may be mustered out of service. I am surprised that you
should attempt such an act without any authority whatever."

This seemed to settle the matter, and the battery started back to
Pittsburgh. In justice to Lieutenant Sheppard it might be stated that he
was told that an order was issued by the Governor. General Hastings
stated afterwards that the sending down of the soldiers was like waving
a red flag, and it would only tend to create trouble. He said everything
was quiet here, and it was an insult to the citizens of Johnstown to
send soldiers here at present.


Extortioners Held in Check.

A riot was almost caused by the exorbitant prices that were charged for
food. One storekeeper in Millville borough was charging $5 a sack for
flour and seventy-five cents for sandwiches on Sunday. This caused
considerable complaint and the citizens grew desperate. They promptly
took by force all the contents of the store. As a result this morning
all the stores have been put under charge of the police. An inventory
was taken and the proprietor was paid the market price for his stock.

A strong guard is kept at the office of the Cambria Iron Company.
Saturday was pay day at the works, and $80,000 is in the safe. This
became known, and the officials are afraid that an attempt would be
made to rob the place.

Sheriff Dick and a posse of his men got into a riot this afternoon with
a crowd of Hungarians at Cambria City. The Hungarians got the better of
him, and he called on a squad of Battery B boys, who charged with drawn
sabres, and soon had the crowd on the run.


Men Hard at Work.

Order is slowly arising out of chaos. The survivors are slowly realizing
what is the best course to pursue. The great cry is for men. Men who
will work and not stand idly by and do nothing but gaze at the ruins.
The following order was posted on a telegraph pole in Johnstown
to-day:--

"Notice--During the day men who have been idle have been begged to aid
us in clearing the town, and many have not refused to work. We are now
so organized that employment can be found for every man who wants to
work, and men offered work who refuse to take the same and who are able
to work must leave Johnstown for the present. We cannot afford to feed
men who will not work. All work will be paid for. Strangers and idlers
who refuse to work will be ejected from Johnstown.

"By order of Citizens' Committee."


Turning Away the Idlers.

Officers were stationed at every avenue and railroad that enters the
town. All suspicious looking characters are stopped. But one question is
asked. It is, "Will you work?" If an affirmative answer is given a man
escorts him to the employment bureau, where he is put to work. If not,
he is turned back. The committee has driven one or two men out of the
town. There is a lot of idle vagabond negroes in Johnstown who will not
work. It is likely that a committee will escort them out of town. They
have caused the most trouble during the past terrible days.

It is a fact, although a disagreeable one to say, that not a few of the
relief committees who came to this city, came only out of curiosity and
positively refused to do any work, but would hang around the cars eating
food. The leaders of the committee then had to do all the work. They
deserve much credit.


Begging for Help.

An old man sat on a chair placed on a box at the intersection of two
streets in Johnstown and begged for men. "For God's sake," he said, "can
we not find men. Will not some of you men help? Look at these men who
have not slept for three days and are dropping with fatigue. We will pay
well. For God's sake help us." Tears rolled down his cheeks as he spoke.
Then he would threaten the group of idlers standing by and again plead
with them. Every man it seems wants to be a policeman.


CHAPTER VII.

Burial of the Victims.


Hundreds have been laid away in shallow trenches without forms,
ceremonies or mourners. All day long the work of burial has been going
on. There was no time for religious ceremonies or mourning and many a
mangled form was coffined with no sign of mourning save the honest
sympathy of the brave men who handled them. As fast as the wagons that
are gathering up the corpses along the stream arrive with their ghastly
loads they are emptied and return again to the banks of the merciless
Conemaugh to find other victims among the driftwood in the underbrush,
or half buried in the mud. The coffins are now beginning to arrive, and
on many streets on the hillside they are stacked as high as the second
and third story windows.

At Kernville the people are not so fortunate. It would seem that every
man is his own coffin maker, and many a man can be seen here and there
claiming the boards of what remains of his house in which perhaps he has
found the remains of a loved one, and busily patching them together with
nails and hoops or any available thing to hold the body.

When the corpses are found they are taken to the nearest dead house and
are carefully washed. They are then laid out in rows to await
identification. Cards are pinned to their breasts as soon as they are
identified, and their names will be marked on the headboards at the
graves.


Wholesale Funerals.

There were many rude funerals in the upper part of the town. The coffins
were conveyed to the cemeteries in wagons, each one carrying two, three
or more.

At Long View Cemetery and at one or two other points long trenches have
been dug to receive the coffins. The trenches are only about three feet
deep, it being thought unnecessary to bury deeper, as almost all the
bodies will be removed by friends. Nearly three hundred bodies were
buried thus to-day.

There will be no public ceremony, no funeral dirge, and but few weeping
mourners. The people are too much impressed with the necessity of
immediate and constant work to think of personal grief.

The twenty-six bodies taken to the hose house in Minersville were buried
shortly after ten o'clock yesterday morning. Of the twenty-six, thirteen
were identified. Eight women, a baby and four men were buried without
having been identified.

All day yesterday men were engaged in burying the dead. They ran short
of coffins, and in order to dispose of the rapidly decomposing bodies
they built rough boxes out of the floating lumber that was caught. In
this way they buried temporarily over fifty bodies in the cemetery just
above the town.

Putrefaction of dead bodies threatens the health of the whole region.
Now that the waters are fast shrinking back from the horrid work of
their own doing and are uncovering thousands of putrid and ill-smelling
corpses the fearful danger of pestilence is espied, stalking in the wake
of more violent destruction.

The air is already reeking with infectious filth, and the alarm is
widespread among the desolated and overwrought population.


Cremation Best.

Incident to this phase of the situation the chief sensation of the
morning was the united remonstrance of the physicians against the
extinguishment of the burning wreck of the demolished town which is
piled up against the bridge. They maintain, with a philosophy that to
anxious searchers seems heartless, that hundreds, if not thousands, of
lifeless and decaying bodies lie beneath this mass of burning ruins.

"It would be better," they say, "to permit Nature's greatest
scavenger--the flames--to pursue his work unmolested than to expose to
further decay the horde of putrefying bodies that lie beneath this
débris. There can be but one result. Days will elapse before the rubbish
can be sufficiently removed to permit the recovery of these bodies, and
long before that every corpse will be a putrid mass, giving forth those
frightful emanations of decaying human flesh that in a crowded community
like this can have but one result--the dreadful typhus. Every
battlefield has demonstrated the necessity of the hasty interment of
decaying bodies, and the stench that already arises is a forerunner of
impending danger. Burn the wreck, burn the wreck."


Sorrow Rejects Safety.

A loud cry of indignation arose from the lips of the vast multitude and
the warnings of science were lost in the eager demands of those that
sought the remains of the near and dear. The hose was again turned upon
the hissing mass, and rapidly the flames yielded to the supremacy of
water.

It is almost impossible to conceive the extent of these smoking ruins.
An area of eight or ten acres above the dam is covered to a depth of
forty feet with shattered houses, borne from the resident centre of
Johnstown. In each of these houses, it is estimated, there were from one
to twenty or twenty-five people. This is accepted as data upon which to
estimate the number that perished on this spot, and if the data be
correct the bodies that lie beneath these ruins must run well up into
the thousands.

Members of the State Board of Health arrived in Nineveh this morning and
determined to proceed at once to dredge the river, to clean it of the
dead and prevent the spreading of disease. To this end they have wired
the State Department to furnish them with the proper appliances.


Drinking Poisoned Water.

From other points in this and connecting valleys the same fear of
pestilence is expressed. The cities of Pittsburgh and Allegheny, which
have a population of three hundred and fifty thousand and drink the
waters of the Allegheny River, down which corpses and débris from
Johnstown must flow unless stopped above, are in danger of an epidemic.
The water is to-day thick with mud, and bodies have been found as far
south of here as Beaver, a distance of thirty miles below Pittsburgh. To
go this distance the bodies followed the Conemaugh from Johnstown to the
Kiskiminetas, at Blairsville, joining the Allegheny at Freeport, and the
Ohio here, the entire distance from this point being about one hundred
and fifty miles.

"This is a very serious matter," said a prominent Pittsburgh physician
who is here to me to-day, "and one that demands the immediate attention
of the Board of Health officials. The flood of water that swept through
Johnstown has cleaned out hundreds of cesspools. These and the
barnyards' manure and the dirt from henneries and swamps that were swept
by the waters have all been carried down into the Allegheny River. In
addition to this there are the bodies of persons drowned. Some of these
will, in all likelihood, be secreted among the débris and never be
found. Hundreds of carcasses of animals of various kinds are also in the
river.


Typhus Dreaded.

"These will decay, throwing out an animal poison. This filth and
poisonous matter is being carried into the Allegheny, and will be pumped
up into the reservoir and distributed throughout the city. The result is
a cause for serious apprehension. Take, for example, the town of
Hazleton, Pa. There the filth from some outhouse was carried into the
reservoir and distributed through the town. The result was a typhoid
fever epidemic and hundreds of people lost their lives. The water that
we are drinking to-day is something fearful to behold."

The municipal authorities of Pittsburgh have issued a notice embodying
the above facts.


Sanitary Work.

A message was received by the Relief Committee this morning confirming
the report that for the health of the cities of Pittsburgh and Allegheny
it is absolutely necessary that steps be taken immediately to remove the
bodies and drift from the river, and begging the committee to take early
action. The contract for clearing the river was awarded to Captain
Jutte, and he will start up the Allegheny this afternoon as far as
Freeport, and then work down. His instructions are to clear the river
thoroughly of anything that might in any way affect the water supply.


Helping Hands.

The work of relief at the scene of the great disaster is going on
rapidly. The Alliance (Ohio) Relief Committee arrived here this morning
on a special train with five carloads of provisions. The party is
composed of the most prominent iron and steel merchants of Alliance.

They have just returned from a tour of the ruined town. They have been
up to Stony Creek, a distance of five miles and up the Conemaugh River
toward South Fork, a distance of two miles.

[Illustration: DISTRIBUTING SUPPLIES FROM THE RELIEF TRAIN.]

In describing their trip, one of their number said:--"I tell you the
half has never been told. It is impossible to tell the terrible tale. I
thought I had seen horrible sights, and I served five years in the War
of the Rebellion, but in all my life it has never been my lot to look
upon such ghastly sights as I have witnessed to-day.

"While making the circuit of the ruined places we saw 103 bodies taken
out of the débris along the bank of the river and Stony Creek. Of this
number, we identified six of the victims as our friends."

[Illustration: SCENE ON SOUTH CLINTON STREET.]


CHAPTER VIII.

Johnstown and Its Industries.


At this point of our narrative a sketch of Johnstown, where the most
frightful havoc of the flood occurred, will interest the reader.

The following description and history of the Cambria Iron Company's
Works, at Johnstown, is taken from a report prepared by the State Bureau
of Industrial Statistics:

The great works operated by the Cambria Iron Company originated in a few
widely separated charcoal furnaces, which were built by pioneer iron
workers in the early years of this century. It was chartered under the
general law authorizing the incorporation of iron manufacturing
companies, in the year 1852. The purpose was to operate four
old-fashioned charcoal furnaces, located in and about Johnstown, some of
which had been erected many years before. Johnstown was then a village
of 1300 inhabitants. The Pennsylvania Railroad had only been extended
thus far in 1852, and the early iron manufacturers rightly foresaw a
great future for the industry at this point.


Immense Furnaces.

Coal, iron and limestone were abundant, and the new railroad would
enable them to find ready markets for their products. In 1853 the
construction of four coke furnaces was commenced, and it was two years
before the first was completed, while some progress was made on the
other three. England was then shipping rails into this country under a
low duty, and the iron industry, then in its infancy, was struggling for
existence.

The furnaces at Johnstown labored under greater difficulties in the
years between 1852 and 1861 than can be appreciated at this late day.
Had it not been for a few patriotic citizens in Philadelphia, who loaned
their credit and means to the failing company, the city of Johnstown
would possibly never have been built. Notwithstanding the protecting
care of the Philadelphia merchants, the company in Johnstown was unable
to continue in business, and suspended in 1854. Among its heaviest
creditors in Philadelphia were Oliver Martin and Martin, Morrell & Co.
More money was subscribed, but the establishment failed again in 1855.
D. J. Morrell, however, formed a new company with new credit.


Recovery From a Great Fire.

The year of 1856, the first after the lease was made, was one of great
financial depression, and the following year was worse. To render the
situation still more gloomy a fire broke out in June, 1857, and in three
hours the large mill was a mass of ruins. Men stood in double ranks
passing water from the Conemaugh river, 300 yards distant, with which to
fight the flames. So great was the energy, determination and financial
ability of the new company that in one week after the fire the furnaces
and rolls were once more in operation under a temporary structure. At
this early stage in the manufacturing the management found it advisable
to abandon the original and widely separated charcoal furnaces and
depend on newly constructed coke furnaces. As soon as practicable after
the fire a permanent brick mill was erected, and the company was once
more fully equipped. When the war came and with it the Morrill tariff of
1861 a broader field was opened up. Industry and activity in business
became general; new life was infused into every enterprise. In 1862 the
lease by which the company had been successfully operated for seven
years expired, and by a reorganization the present company was formed.


Advent of Steel Rails.

A new era in the manufacture of iron and steel was now about to dawn
upon the American people. In this year 1870 there were 49,757 tons of
steel produced in the United States, while in 1880 the production was
1,058,314 tons. Open hearth steel, crucible steel and blister steel,
prior to this, had been the principal products, but were manufactured by
processes too slow and too expensive to take the place of iron. The
durability of steel over iron, particularly for rails, had long been
known, but its cost of production prevented its use. In 1857 one steel
rail was sent to Derby, England, and laid down on the Midland Railroad,
at a place where the travel was so great that iron rails then in use had
to be renewed sometimes as often as once in three months. In June, 1873,
after sixteen years of use, the rail, being well worn, was taken out.
During its time 1,250,000 trains, not to speak of the detached engines,
etc., had passed over it. This was the first steel rail, now called
Bessemer rail, ever used.

[Illustration: MAP OF THE CONEMAUGH VALLEY.]

About ten years ago the Cambria Iron Company arranged with Dr. J.H.
Gautier & Sons, of Jersey City, to organize a limited partnership
association under the name of "The Gautier Steel Company, Limited," to
manufacture, at Johnstown, wire and various other forms of merchant
steel. Within less than a mile from the main works extensive mills were
erected and the business soon grew to great proportions. In a few years
so much additional capital was required, owing to the rapidly increasing
business, that Dr. Gautier, then far advanced in life, wished to be
relieved of the cares and duties incident to the growing trade, and the
Cambria Iron Company became the purchaser of his works. "The Gautier
Steel Company, Limited," went out of existence and the works are now
known as the "Gautier Steel Department of Cambria Iron Company."


Description of the Works.

The blast furnaces, steel works and rolling mills of the company are
situated upon what was originally a river flat, where the valley of the
Conemaugh expanded somewhat just below the borough of Johnstown, and now
forming part of Millville Borough. The arrangement of the works has been
necessarily governed by the fact that they have gradually expanded from
the original rolling-mill and four old style blast furnaces to their
present character and capacity of which some idea may be obtained by the
condensed description given below.

The Johnstown furnaces, Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, form one complete plant,
with stacks seventy-five feet high, sixteen feet diameter of bosh. Steam
is generated in forty boilers, fired by furnace gas, for eight vertical
direct-acting blowing engines. Nos. 5 and 6 blast furnaces form together
a second plant with stacks seventy-five feet high, nineteen feet
diameter of bosh. No. 5 has iron hot blast stoves and No. 6 has four
Whitwell fire-brick hot blast stoves. The furnaces have together six
blowing engines exactly like those at Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 furnaces. The
engines are supplied with steam by thirty-two cylinder boilers.


Marvelous Machinery.

The Bessemer plant was the sixth started in the United States (July,
1871). The main building is 102 feet in width by 165 feet in length. The
cupolas are six in number. Blast is supplied from eight Baker rotary
pressure blowers driven by engines sixteen inches by twenty-four inches,
at 110 revolutions per minute. The cupolas are located on either side of
the main trough, into which they are tapped, and down which the melted
metal is directed into a ten-ton ladle set on a hydraulic weighing
platform, where it is stored until the converters are ready to receive
it. There are two vessels of eight and a half tons capacity each, the
products being distributed by a hydraulic ladle crane. The vessels are
blown by three engines. The Bessemer works are supplied with steam by a
battery of twenty-one tubular boilers.

The best average, although not the very highest work done in the
Bessemer department is 103 heats of eight and a half tons each for
twenty-four hours. The best weekly record reached 1,847 tons of ingots,
the best monthly record of 20,304 tons, and the best daily output, 900
tons ingots. All grades of steel are made in the converters from the
softest wire and bridge stock to spring steel. All the special stock,
that is other than rails, is carefully analyzed by heats, and the
physical properties are determined by a tension test.


Ponderous Steam-Hammers.

The open hearth building, 120 feet in width by 155 feet in length,
contains three Pernot revolving hearth furnaces of fifteen tons capacity
each, supplied with natural gas. A separate pit with a hydraulic ladle
crane of twenty tons capacity is located in front of each pan. In a
portion of the mill building, originally used as a puddle mill, is
located the bolt and nut works, wherein are made track bolts and machine
bolts. This department is equipped with bolt-heading and nut making
machines, cutting, tapping and facing machines, and produces about one
thousand kegs of finished track bolts, of 200 pounds each, per month,
besides machine bolts. Near this, also, are located the axle and forging
shops, in the old puddle mill building. The axle shop has three steam
hammers to forge and ten machines to cut off, centre and turn axles. The
capacity of this shop is 100 finished steel axles per day. All axles are
toughened and annealed by a patented process, giving the strongest axle
possible. In the forging plant, located in the same building, there is
an 18,000 pound Bement hammer, and a ten-ton traveling crane to convey
forgings from the furnaces to the hammer. There are two furnaces for
heating large ingots and blooms for forgings.

A ventilating fan supplies fresh air to the mills through pipes located
overhead, and having outlets near the heating furnaces. One hundred
thousand cubic feet of fresh air per minute is distributed throughout
the mills. The mill has in addition to its boilers, over the
heating-furnaces, a brick and iron building, located near the rail mill,
205 feet long and 45 feet wide, containing twenty-four tubular boilers,
aggregating about 2000 horse-power.


Tons of Barbed Wire.

The "Gautier Steel Department" consists of a brick building 200 feet by
500 feet, where the wire is annealed, drawn and finished; a brick
warehouse 373 feet by 43 feet; many shops, offices, etc.; the barb wire
mill, 50 feet by 256 feet, where the celebrated Cambria Link barb wire
is made; and the main merchant mill, 725 feet by 250 feet. These mills
produce wire, shafting, springs, plowshare, rake and harrow teeth and
other kinds of agricultural implement steel. In 1887 they produced
50,000 tons of this material, which was marketed mainly in the Western
states.

Grouped with the principal mills are the foundries, pattern and other
shops, drafting offices, time offices, etc., all structures being of a
firm and substantial character. The company operates about thirty-five
miles of railroad tracks, employing in this service twenty-four
locomotives, and it owns 1500 cars.

In the fall of 1886 natural gas was introduced into the works.


Building up Johnstown.

Anxious to secure employment for the daughters and widows of the
employees of the company who were willing to work, its management
erected a woolen mill which now employs about 300 persons. Amusements
were not neglected, and the people of Johnstown are indebted to the
company for the erection of an opera house, where dramatic
entertainments are given.

The company owns 700 houses, which are rented exclusively to employees.
The handsome library erected by the company and presented to the town
was stocked with nearly 7000 volumes. The Cambria Hospital is also under
the control of the beneficial association of the works. The Cambria
Clubhouse is a very neat pressed brick building on the corner of Main
and Federal streets. It was first operated in 1881, and is used
exclusively for the entertainment of the guests of the company and such
of their employees as can be accommodated. The store building occupied
by Wood, Morrell & Co., limited, is a four-story brick structure on
Washington street, with three large store rooms on the first floor, the
remainder of the building being used for various forms of merchandise.

Including the surrounding boroughs, Kernville, Morrellville and Cambria
City, all of which are built up solidly to Johnstown proper, the
population is about 30,000. The Cambria Iron Company employs, in
Johnstown, about 7500 people, which would certainly indicate a
population of not less than 20,000 depending upon the company for a
livelihood.

A large proportion of the population of Johnstown are citizens of
foreign birth, or their immediate descendants. Those of German, Irish,
Welsh and English birth or extraction predominate, with a few Swedes and
Frenchmen. As a rule the working people and their families are well
dressed and orderly; in this they are above the average. Most of the
older workmen of the company, owing largely to its liberal policy, own
their houses, and many of them have houses for rent.


CHAPTER IX.

View of the Wreck.


Each visitor to the scene of the great disaster witnessed sights and
received impressions different from all others. The following graphic
account will thrill every reader:

The most exaggerative imagination cannot too strongly picture the awful
harvest of death, the wreck which accompanied that terrible deluge last
Friday afternoon. I succeeded in crossing from the north side of the
Little Conemaugh, a short distance above the point, to the sandy muddy
desert strewn with remnants of the buildings and personal property of
those who know not their loss.

It is almost an impossibility to gain access to the region, and it was
accomplished only after much difficulty in crossing the swiftly running
stream.

Standing at a point in this abode of thousands of dead the work of the
great flood can be more adequately measured than from any one place in
the devastated region. Here I first realized the appalling loss of life
and the terrible destruction of property.

It was about ten o'clock when the waters of Stony Creek rose, overflowed
their banks and what is known as the "flats," which includes the entire
business portion of the city of Johnstown. The Little Conemaugh was
running high at the same time, and it had also overreached the limit of
its banks. The water of both streams soon submerged the lower portion of
the town. Up to this time there was no intimation that a terrible
disaster was imminent. The water poured into the cellars of the houses
in the lower districts and rose several inches in the streets, but as
that had occurred before the people took no alarm.

Shortly after twelve o'clock the first drowning occurred. This was not
because of the deluge, it was simply the carelessness of the victim, who
was a driver for the Cambria Iron Company, in stepping into a cellar
which had been filled with water. The water continued to rise, and at
twelve o'clock had reached that part of the city about a block from the
point between Stony Creek and the Little Conemaugh.


Topography of the Place.

The topography of Johnstown is almost precisely like that of Pittsburgh,
only in a diminished degree. Stony Creek comes in from the mountains on
the northeast, and the Little Conemaugh comes in from the northwest,
forming the Conemaugh at Johnstown, precisely as the Allegheny and
Monongahela form the Ohio at Pittsburgh. On the west side of Stony Creek
are mountains rising to a great height, and almost perpendicularly from
the water. On the north side of the Conemaugh River mountains equally as
high as those on Stony Creek confine that river to its course. The hills
in Johnstown start nearly a half mile from the business section of the
city. This leaves a territory between the two rivers of about four
hundred acres. This was covered by costly buildings, factories and other
important manufactories.

When the waters of South Fork and Little Conemaugh broke over their
banks into that portion of the city known as the "flats," the business
community turned its attention to putting endangered merchandise in a
place of safety.


First Alarm.

In the homes of the people the women began gathering household articles
of any kind that may have been in the cellar. Little attention was paid
to the water beyond this.

Looking from the "flats" at Johnstown toward and following the
Pennsylvania Railroad tracks, which wind along the Little Conemaugh, the
village of Woodville stands, or did stand, within sight of the "flats,"
and is really a continuation of the city at this point.

The mountains on the south side of the Little Conemaugh rise here and
form a narrow valley where Woodville was located. Next joining this,
without any perceptible break in the houses, was the town of East
Conemaugh. The extreme eastern limit of East Conemaugh is about a mile
and a half from Johnstown "flats."


A Narrow Chasm.

The valley narrows as it reaches eastward, and in a narrow chasm three
miles from Johnstown "flats" is the little settlement of Mineral Point.
A few of the houses have found a place on the mountain side out of
harm's way, and so they still stand.

At East Conemaugh there is located a roundhouse of the Pennsylvania
Railroad, for the housing of locomotives used to assist trains over the
mountains. The inhabitants of this place were all employees of the
Pennsylvania and the Gautier Steel Works, of the Cambria Iron Company.
The inhabitants numbered about 1,500 people. Like East Conemaugh, 2,000
or 2,500 people, who lived at Woodville, were employees of the same
corporation and the woolen mills located there.

Just below Woodville the mountains upon the south bank of the Conemaugh
disappear and form the commencement of the Johnstown "flats." The
Gautier Steel Works of the Cambria Iron Company are located at this
point, on the south bank. The Pennsylvania Railroad traverses the
opposite bank, and makes a long curve from this point up to East
Conemaugh.


Timely Warning to Escape.

At what is known as the point where Stony Creek and the Little Conemaugh
form the Conemaugh the mountains followed by Stony Creek take an abrupt
turn northward, and the waters of the Little Conemaugh flow into the
Conemaugh at right angles with these mountains.

A few hundred feet below this point the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge
crosses the Conemaugh River. The bridge is a massive stone structure.
From the east end of the bridge there is a heavy fill of from thirty to
forty feet high to Johnstown Station, a distance of a quarter of a mile.

Within a few feet of the station a wagon bridge crosses the Little
Conemaugh, five hundred feet above the point connecting the "flats" and
the country upon the north side of the river.

The Cambria Iron Company's Bessemer department lies along the north bank
of the Conemaugh, commencing at the fill, and extends for over two miles
down the Conemaugh River upon its northern bank.

Below the Cambria Iron Company's property is Millville Borough, and on
the hill back of Millville Borough is Minersville properly--the Second
ward of Millville Borough.

The First ward of Millville was washed away completely.

While the damage from a pecuniary sense was large, the loss of life was
quite small, inasmuch as the people had timely warning to escape.

Below the Pennsylvania Railroad Bridge at Johnstown, upon the south bank
of the Conemaugh, was the large settlement of Cambria. It had a
population of some five thousand people. At Cambria the mountain
retreats for several hundred feet, leaving a level of two or three
hundred acres in extent. Just below the bridge the Conemaugh River makes
a wide curve around this level. About eight or nine hundred houses stood
upon this level.

Below Cambria stands Morrellville, a place about equal in size to
Cambria.

From this description of the location of Johnstown and neighboring
settlements the course of the waters may be better understood when
described. It was about ten minutes to three o'clock Friday afternoon
when Mr. West, of the local office of the Pennsylvania Railroad at
Johnstown, received a dispatch from the South Fork station, advising him
to notify the inhabitants that the big dam in the South Fork, above the
city, was about to break. He at once despatched couriers to various
parts of the city, and a small section was notified of the impending
danger. The messenger was answered with,

"We will wait until we see the water."

Others called "Chestnuts!" and not one in fifty of the people who
received the warning gave heed to it.


The Débris of Three Towns.

With the waters standing several inches deep in the streets of the
"flats" of the city the deluge from South Fork Lake, burst the dam and
rushed full upon Johnstown shortly after five o'clock on Friday
afternoon the last day of May.

First it swept the houses from Mineral Point down into East Conemaugh.
When the flood reached East Conemaugh the town was wiped out. This mass
of débris was borne on to Johnstown, reinforced by the material of three
towns.

The Gautier steel department of the Cambria Iron Company was the first
property attacked in the city proper. Huge rolls, furnaces and all the
machinery in the great mills, costing $6,000,000, were swept away in a
moment, and to-day there is not the slightest evidence that the mill
ever stood there.


Swept From the Roofs.

Westward from this point the flood swept over the flats. The houses, as
soon as the water reached them, were lifted from their foundation and
hurled against their neighbors'. The people who at the first crash of
their property managed to reach the roof or some other floating material
were carried on until their frail support was driven against the next
obstruction, when they went down in the crash together.

The portion of the "flats" submerged is bounded by Clinton street to the
Little Conemaugh River, to the point at Stony Creek, then back to
Clinton street by way of Bedford.

This region has an area of one mile square, shaped like a heart, and in
this district there are not more than a dozen buildings that are not
total wrecks.

Ten per cent. of this district is so covered with mud, stones, rocks and
other material, where costly buildings once stood, that it will require
excavating from eight to twenty feet to reach the streets of the city.


Remnants of the City.

Of the houses standing there is the Methodist church, the club house,
James McMillen's residence, the Morrell mansion, Dr. Lohman's house and
the First ward school building.

The Fourth ward school house and the Cambria Iron Works' general office
building are the only buildings standing on the north side of the river
from the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge to the limits of the "flats."

The Pennsylvania Railroad, from its station in Johnstown City nearly to
Wilmore, a distance of seven miles, had a magnificent road bed of solid
rock. From East Conemaugh to the point in Johnstown opposite the Gautier
Steel Works, this road bed, ballast and all are gone. Only a few rails
may occasionally be seen in the river below.


Freaks of the Flood.

When the crash came in Johnstown the houses were crushed as easily by
the huge mass as so many buildings of sand, making much the same sound
as if a pencil were drawn over the slats of a shutter. Houses were torn
from their foundations and torn to pieces before their occupants
realized their danger. Hundreds of these people were crushed to death,
while others were rescued by heroic men; but the lives of the majority
were prolonged a few minutes, when they met a more horrible death
further down the stream.

There is a narrow strip extending from the club house to the point
which, in some singular manner, escaped the mass of filling that was
distributed on the flats. This strip is about 200 feet wide, 300 long
and from 3 to 20 feet deep. What queer turn the flood took to thus spare
this section, when the surrounding territory was covered with mud,
stones and other material, is a mystery. It is, however, one of the
remarkable turns of the flood.

The German Catholic Church is standing, but is in an exceedingly shaky
condition and may fall at any minute. This and Dr. Lohman's residence
are the only buildings on the plot standing between Main street, Clinton
street, Railroad street and the Little Conemaugh.

The destruction of life in this district was too awful to contemplate.
It is estimated that not more than one thousand people escaped with
their lives, and it is believed that there were fully five thousand
persons remaining in the district when the flood came down. The flood
wiped out the "flat" with the exception of the buildings noted. The
water was twenty feet high here and hurled acres upon acres of houses
against the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge which held it and dammed the
water up until it was forty feet high. The mass accumulated until the
weight became so great that it broke through the fill east of the bridge
and the débris started out of the temporary reservoir with an awful
rush.

It was something near five o'clock when the fill broke. The water rushed
across the Cambria flats and swept every house away with the exception
of a portion of a brewery. There is nothing else standing in this
district which resembles a house.

The Johnstown Post Office Building, with all the office money and
stamps, was carried away in the flood. The Postmaster himself escaped
with great difficulty.

The dam broke in the centre at three o'clock on Friday afternoon, and
at four o'clock it was dry. That great body of water passed out in one
hour. Park & Van Buren, who are building a new draining system at the
lake, tried to avert the disaster by digging a sluiceway on one side to
ease the pressure on the dam. They had about forty men at work and did
all they could, but without avail. The water passed over the dam about a
foot above its top, beginning at about half-past two. Whatever happened
in the way of a cloud burst took place during the night. There had been
but little rain up to dark. When the workmen woke in the morning the
lake was very full and was rising at the rate of a foot an hour. It kept
on rising until at two o'clock it first began breaking over the dam and
undermining it. Men were sent three or four times during the day to warn
people below of their danger.


The Break Two Hundred Feet Wide.

When the final break came, at three o'clock, there was a sound like
tremendous and continued peals of thunder; rocks, trees and earth were
shot up into mid-air in great columns, and then the wave started down
the ravine. A farmer, who escaped, said that the water did not come down
like a wave, but jumped on his house and beat it to fragments in an
instant. He was safe upon the hillside, but his wife and two children
were killed. At the present time the lake looks like a cross between the
crater of a volcano and a huge mud puddle with stumps of trees and rocks
scattered over it. There is a small stream of muddy water running
through the centre of the lake site. The dam was seventy feet high and
the break is about two hundred feet wide, and there is but a small
portion of the dam left on either side. No damage was done to any of the
buildings belonging to the club. The whole south fork is swept, with not
a tree standing. There are but one or two small streams showing here and
there in the lake. A great many of the workmen carried off baskets full
of fish caught in the mud.


Three Millions Indemnity.

It is reported that the Sportsman's Association, which owned the South
Fork dam, was required to file an indemnity bond of $3,000,000 before
their charter was issued. When the bill granting them these privileges
was before the Legislature the representatives from Cambria and Blair
counties vigorously opposed its passage and only gave way, it is said,
upon condition that such an indemnifying bond was filed. This bond was
to be filed with the prothonotary of Cambria county.

Father Boyle, of Ebensburg, said the records at the county seat had no
trace of such a bond. He found the record of the charter, but nothing
about the bond. As the association is known to be composed of very
wealthy people, there is much talk here of their being compelled to pay
at least a part of the damages.


The Rain Did It.

It begins to dawn on us that the catastrophe was brought about not
merely by the bursting of the dam of the old canal reservoir, but by a
rainfall exceeding in depth and area all previously recorded phenomena
of the kind. The whole drainage basin of the Kiskiminetas, and more
particularly that of the Conemaugh, was affected. An area of probably
more than 600 square miles poured its precipitation through the narrow
valley in which Johnstown and associate villages are located. It is easy
to see how, with a rainfall similar to that which caused the Butcher Run
disaster of a few years ago, fully from thirty to fifty times as much
water became destructive. The whole of the water of the lake would pass
Suspension Bridge at Pittsburgh inside of from seven to ten minutes,
while the gorge at Johnstown, narrowed by the activity of mines for
generations past, was clearly insufficient to allow a free course for
Stony Creek alone, which is a stream heading away up in Somerset county,
twenty-five or thirty miles south of Johnstown. That the rainfall of the
entire Allegheny Mountain system was unprecedented is clearly
demonstrated to any one who has watched the Allegheny and Monongahela
rivers for the past three days, and this view may serve to correct the
impression in the public mind that would localize the causes of the
widespread disaster to the bursting of any single dam.


Danger Was Anticipated.

Charles Parke, of Philadelphia, the civil engineer in the employ of the
South Fork Fishing Club, in company with George C. Wilson, ex-United
States District Attorney, and several other members of the club, reached
Johnstown and brought with them the first batch of authoritative news
from Conemaugh Lake, the bursting of which, it is universally conceded,
caused the disaster.

Mr. Parke was at first averse to talking, and seemed more interested in
informing his friends in the Quaker City that he was still in the land
of the living. On being pressed he denied most emphatically that the dam
had burst, and proceeded to explain that he first commenced to
anticipate danger on Friday morning, when the water in the lake
commenced to rise at a rapid rate. Immediately he turned his force of
twenty-five Italians to opening an extra waste sluiceway in addition to
the one that had always answered before.

The five members of the club on hand all worked like horses, but their
efforts were in vain, and at three o'clock the supporting wall gave way
with a sound that seemed like distant thunder and the work was done.


The Governor's Appeal.

HARRISBURG, Pa., June 3, 1886.--The Governor issued the following:--

"COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA,    }
"EXECUTIVE CHAMBER,               }
"HARRISBURG, Pa., June 3, 1889.   }

"TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES:--

"The Executive of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has refrained
hitherto from making any appeal to the people for their benefactions, in
order that he might receive definite and reliable information from the
centres of disaster during the late floods, which have been
unprecedented in the history of the State or nation. Communication by
wire has been established with Johnstown to-day. The civil authorities
are in control, the Adjutant General of the State cooperating with them;
order has been restored and is likely to continue. Newspaper reports as
to the loss of life and property have not been exaggerated.

"The valley of the Conemaugh, which is peculiar, has been swept from one
end to the other as with the besom of destruction. It contained a
population of forty thousand to fifty thousand people, living for the
most part along the banks of a small river confined within narrow
limits. The most conservative estimates place the loss of life at 5,000
human beings, and of property at twenty-five millions. [The reader will
understand that this and previous estimates were the first and were far
too small.] Whole towns have been utterly destroyed. Not a vestige
remains. In the more substantial towns the better buildings, to a
certain extent, remain, but in a damaged condition. Those who are least
able to bear it have suffered the loss of everything.

"The most pressing needs, so far as food is concerned, have been
supplied. Shoes and clothing of all sorts for men, women and children
are greatly needed. Money is also urgently required to remove the
débris, bury the dead, and care temporarily for the widows and orphans
and for the homeless generally. Other localities have suffered to some
extent in the same way, but not in the same degree.

"Late advices seem to indicate that there is great loss of life and
destruction of property along the west branch of the Susquehanna and in
localities from which we can get no definite information. What does
come, however, is of the most appalling character, and it is expected
that the details will add new horrors to the situation.

Generous Responses.

"The responses from within and without the State have been most generous
and cheering. North and South, East and West, from the United States and
from England, there comes the same hearty, generous response of sympathy
and help. The President, Governors of States, Mayors of cities, and
individuals and communities, private and municipal corporations, seem to
vie with each other in their expressions of sympathy and in their
contributions of substantial aid. But, gratifying as these responses
are, there is no danger of their exceeding the necessities of the
situation.

Organized Distribution.

"A careful organization has been made upon the ground for the
distribution of whatever assistance is furnished. The Adjutant General
of the State is there as the representative of the State authorities and
giving personal attention, in connection with the Chief Burgess of
Johnstown and a committee of relief to the distribution of the help
which is furnished.

We were there for three months before our parcels began to arrive. We
considered ourselves lucky if we received six out of ten sent, and
with half the contents of the six intact.

In the larger camps the chances of receipt were better. The small camps
were merely units attached to and governed by the larger ones, which
handled the mail before giving it to the authorities at the smaller
ones.

Thus, a man who was "attached" to Giessen camp, although perhaps
one hundred miles away from it, had to submit to the additional
delay and chance of loss and theft included in the censoring of the
parcel at Giessen as well as at the actual place of his confinement.

This doubled the chances of fault-finding and
of theft.

Knowing this to be true, I most earnestly recommend the sending of
parcels.

True, a large proportion of them are not received, but those that are
represent the one salvation of the prisoner-of-war in German hands.
So terribly true is this that when we began to receive parcels at
irregular intervals, we used regularly to acknowledge to our friends
the receipt of parcels which we had never received. This was the
low cunning developed by our treatment.

If advised that a parcel of tea, sugar or other luxuries had been sent
and it did not appear after weeks of patient waiting, we knew that we
should never see that parcel. Nevertheless, we usually wrote and
thanked the donor and acknowledged the receipt, fearful otherwise
that he or she should say:
"What's the use?"

and send no more. And we were not allowed to tell the truth--that it had
been stolen.

The first three months of our stay at Giessen were probably the worst of
all, including as they did the transition period to this life. It
seemed then a hell on earth. The slow starvation was the worst.

Once, in desperation, I gave a Frenchman my good boots for his old
ones and two and a half marks, and then gave sixty pfennigs of this
to the French cook for a bread ration.

Again, in going down the hut one day, I espied a flat French loaf cut
into four pieces, drying on the window sill. Seizing one piece, I
tucked it under my tunic and passed on before the loss was discovered.
Some of the British could be seen at times picking over the sour refuse
in the barrels. This amused the Germans very much. We endeavoured to
get cookhouse jobs for the pickings to be had, but could not do so. At a
later date, when the Canadian Red Cross, Lady Farquhar, Mrs. Hamilton
Gault and our families were sending us packages regularly, we made out
all right.

Some English societies were in the habit of sending books, music and
games to the prisoners but none of these ever reached the group with
whom I associated, even before our later actions put us quite beyond
the German pale.

The appeal for Casement and the Irish Brigade was made to us. A number
of prisoners were taken apart and the matter broached privately
to them.

Pamphlets on the freeing of Ireland were also distributed.

I did not see any one go over, and an Irishman who was detailed
with another Canadian and myself on a brickyard fatigue said that
they had recruited only forty in the camp.

The whole thing turned out to be a failure.

There were twelve of us all told on that brickyard job. Three or four
shoveled clay into the mixing machine, two more filled the little
car which two others pushed along the track of the narrow-gauge
railroad.

We were guarded by four civilian Germans of some home defense corps, all
of whom labored with us. The two trammers used to start the car, hop
on the brake behind and let it run of its own momentum down the incline
to the edge of the bank where it would be checked for dumping.

Sometimes we forgot to brake the car so that it would ricochet on in
a flying leap off the end of the track, and so on over the dump.
The guards would rage and swear but could prove nothing so long
as our fellows did not get too raw and do this too frequently.

One day we shovelers decided to add to the gaiety of nations.

While one attracted the guards' attention elsewhere we slipped a
chunk of steel into the mess.

There was a grinding crash, and a large cogwheel tore its way through
the roof.

In a moment, the air was full of machinery and German words. It was a
proper wreck.

The guards ran around gesticulating angrily, tearing their hair and
threatening us, while we endeavoured to look surprised. It is
reasonable to suppose that we were unsuccessful, for we were hustled
back to camp and drew five days' cells each from the Commandant.

There was no trial. He merely sentenced us.

United States Ambassador Gerard only came to Giessen once in my time
there, and that was while I was off at one of the detached camps, so I
had no opportunity of observing the result.

We knew very little of what was going on in the outside world. The guards
were not allowed to converse with us, and if one was known to speak
English he was removed.

However, they were more or less curious about us so that a certain
amount of clandestine conversation occurred.

Some were certain that they were going to win the war.
Others said: "England has too much money. Germany will never win." They
used frequently to gather the Russians, Belgians and French together
and lecture them on England's sins.

They said that England was letting them do all the fighting, bleeding
them white of their men and treasure so as to come out at the end
of the war with the balance of power necessary for her plan of
retaining Constantinople and the Cinque Ports of France.

Many were convinced, and this did not add to the pleasantness of our
lot.

The notorious _Continental Times_ was circulated amongst us freely in
both French and English editions.

It regularly gave us a most appalling list of German victories and
it specialised in abuse of the English.

We counted up in one month a total of two million prisoners captured by
the Germans on all fronts.

As I have said, Giessen was the best camp of all, barring the starvation.
But the discipline there was merciless. The laager was inclosed by a
high wire fence which we were forbidden to approach within four feet
of. A Russian sergeant overstepped that mark one day to shout something
to a friend in an adjoining laager. The sentry shouted at him. He
either failed to hear or did not understand. The sentry killed him without
hesitation.

A Belgian started over one day with some leftover soup which he purposed
giving to the Russians.

The sentry would not let him pass.

He went back and told his mate. The latter, a kindly little fellow, thinking
that the sentry had not understood the nature of the mission, decided
to try himself. The sentry stopped him. He attempted to argue.
The sentry pushed him roughly back. He struck the German. The latter
dropped him with a blow on the head, and while he lay unconscious
shoved the bayonet into him. It was done quite coolly and
methodically, without heat. He was promoted for it. We were told that
he had done a good thing and that we should get the same if we did
not behave.

A Canadian who was forced to work in a munitions plant and whose
task included the replacing of waste in the wheel boxes of cars
enjoyed himself for a while, lifting the greasy waste out and
replacing it with sand.

He got ten years for that.

The German in charge of our laager hated the _verdamnt Engländer_
and lost no opportunity of bulldozing and threatening us.

One of the Canadians who had been in the American Navy was unusually
truculent.

The German purposely bunted him one day. "Don't do that again!" The German
repeated the act. The sailor jolted him in the jaw so that he went to
dreamland for fifteen minutes. The prisoner was taken to the guardroom
and we never heard his ultimate fate, but at the ruling rate he was lucky
if he got off with ten years.

It is men like this to whom our Government and people owe such a debt as
may be paid only in a small degree by our insistence after the war that
they be given their liberty. A greater glory is theirs than that
of the soldier.

They wrought amongst a world of foes, knowing their certain
punishment, but daring it rather than assist that foe's efforts
against their country.

One day we were told that we must be inoculated in the arm against
typhoid. We thought nothing of that. But the next day men began to
gather in groups so that the guards shouted roughly at them, bidding
them not to mutter and whisper so.

Where the word came from I know not. It may have emanated in the fears
of some active imagination on the chance and truthful word of a
guard, flung in derision at some desperate man, or in a kindlier
mood and in warning.

The word was that we were to be inoculated with the germs of
consumption.

I understand that it appeared also in the papers at home. It seemed
horrible beyond words to us. The idea appeared crazy but was equally on
a par with the events we witnessed daily.
Myself, I planned to take no chances; if it were humanly possible.

We were all ordered to parade for the inoculation. I hid myself with
a few others and so escaped the operation. Nothing was said so I
could only suppose that they failed to check us up as it was not in keeping
with the German character as we had come to know it to miss any
opportunity of corrective punishment even though the inoculation
had been for our own good.

It is true that some of the men so inoculated fell prey to consumption.

On the other hand one of them had had a well defined case of it before,
and it was almost certain that the living conditions prevailing
amongst us would insure the appearance of the disease so that we had
no proof that any man was so inoculated. Some of the men so affected
were sent to Switzerland for the benefit of the mountain air through an
arrangement made by the Red Cross with the Swiss authorities.

[Illustration: FELLOW PRISONERS AT GIESSEN.

FROM LEFT TO RIGHT:
A CHESHIRE REGIMENT MAN, A SIBERIAN RUSSIAN, AN EAST YORKSHIRE LIGHT
INFANTRYMAN AND A GORDON HIGHLANDER.]
[Illustration: FELLOW PRISONERS AT GIESSEN. THREE HIGHLANDERS AND A YORKSHIRE
LIGHT INFANTRYMAN.]

One of our guards was subject to fits and habitually ran amuck
amongst us, abusing some of the prisoners in a painful fashion.

We made complaint of this through the proper channels, for which crime the
officer in charge stopped our fires and other privileges for the time
being.

Most of the men wore prison uniforms or in some cases, suits sent from
England which were altered by the authorities to conform to their
regulations.

These required that if one was not in a distinctive and enemy uniform
that broad stripes of bright colored cloth be set into the seam
of the trousers; not sewed on, but into the goods. A large diamond
shaped piece or else a square of such cloth was set into the breast
and back of the tunic.

I preferred my uniform, dilapidated though it was.

We were permitted the choice, probably less out of kindness than because
of the saving involved.

There was a big simple giant of a Russian here who was badly sprung at the
knees. He had been forced to work during the winter in an underground
railway station near Berlin. He had had no shoes and had stood in the
water for weeks, digging. He was very badly crippled in consequence.

Some four hundred Russians came to us after the fall of Warsaw.

They were mostly wounded and all rotten.

On the three months' march to Giessen the wounded had received absolutely
no attention other than their own. Here we had a crazy German doctor, a
mediocre French one and Canadian orderlies.

If an Englishman went to the hospital for treatment it was "Vick!"--Get
out. These Russians were treated similarly. The French fared better. One
big, fine-looking Russian, with a filthy mass of rags wound round his
arm, reported for attention. They unwound the rag and his arm dropped
off.

He died, with five others, that afternoon, and God only knows how
many more on the trip they had just finished.

They were buried in a piano case, together. Usually they were placed in
packing cases. We asked for a flag with which to cover them as soldiers
should be. They asked what that was for and there it ended.

Another Russian had a foul arm which leaked badly so that it was not
only painful to him but offensive to the rest of us. Nothing was done
for him.

They were all thoroughly cowed, as are dogs that have been illtreated.

And they jumped to it when a German spoke--excepting two of their
officers, who refused to take down their epaulets when ordered to
do so.

We did not learn how they fared.

These were the only captive officers of any nationality whom we saw.

We became sick of the sight of one another as even the best of friends
do under such abnormal conditions. For variety I often walked around
the enclosure with a Russian. Neither of us had the faintest idea what
the other said, but it was a change!

The monotony of the wire was terrible--and just outside it in the lane
formed by the encircling set of wire, the dogs, with their tongues
out, walked back and forth, eyeing us.

There was so little to talk about.

We knew nothing and could only speculate on the outcome of the commonest
events which came to us on the tongue of rumour or arose out of our own
sad thoughts.

The authorities were not satisfied with our recognition--or lack
of it--of their officers and took us out to practice saluting
drill--a thing always detested by soldiers, especially veterans.

The idea was to make us salute visiting German officers properly,
in the German fashion and not in our own.

Theirs consisted of saluting with the right hand only, with the left held
stiffly straight at the side, while our way was to salute with the hand
farthest from the officer, giving "Eyes left" or "Eyes right" as the
case might be, and with the free hand swinging loosely with the stride.

So a school of us were led out to this. The very atmosphere was tense with
sullen rebellion. The guards eyed us askance. The officer
stood at the left awaiting us; beyond him and on the other side of
the road, a post.

An _unteroffizier_ ordered us to march by, one by one, to give the _Herr
Offizier_ "Augen Links" in the German fashion, and to the post,
which represented another officer, an "Augen Rechts" when we should
come to it.

"I'll see him in hell first," I muttered to the man next me. I was in
the lead of the party. I shook with excitement and fear of I knew
not what.

As the command rang out I stepped out with a swing, and with the action,
decision came to me.

As I approached the officer he drew up slightly and looked at me
expectantly.

I gave him a stony stare, and passed on.

A few more steps and I reached the post. I pulled back my shoulders
with a smart jerk, got my arms to swinging freely, snapped my head round
so that my eyes caught the post squarely and swung my left hand
up in a clean-cut parabola to "Eyes right," in good old regimental
order.

A half dozen shocked sentries came up on the double.

It was they who were excited now. I was master of myself and the situation.
The _unteroffizier_ ordered me to repeat and salute. I did so--literally.

The officer was, to all outward appearances, the only other person
there who remained unmoved. My ardour had cooled by this time, and
his very silence seemed worse than the threats of the guard. Nor was I
exactly in love with my self-appointed task. Nevertheless, I saw my mates
watching me and inwardly applauding. I was ashamed to quit. I did it
again. That won me another five days' cells.

CHAPTER XII

THE ESCAPE
Picking a Pal for Switzerland--Cold Feet--The Talk in the Wood--Nothing
Succeeds Like Success and--!--Simmons and Brumley Try Their Hand.

Mervin Simmons of the 7th, and Frank Brumley of the 3rd Battalion, Canadian
Expeditionary Force were planning to escape. Word of it leaked through
to me. This added fuel to the fire of my own similar ambition. They,
and I too, thought that it was not advisable for more than two to travel
together.

I began to look around for a partner. I "weighed up" all my comrades.
It was unwise to broach the subject to too many of them. I bided my time
until a certain man having dropped remarks which indicated certain
sporting proclivities, I broached the subject to him. He was most
enthusiastic. We decided on Switzerland as our objective and awaited
only the opportunity to make a break.

There were few if any preparations to make. We were not yet receiving
parcels and our allowance of food was so scanty that it was impossible
to lay any by. We had a crude map of our own drawing. And that was
our all.

In the interval we discussed ways and means of later travel and
endeavoured to prepare our minds for all contingencies, even capture.

We talked the matter over with Simmons and Brumley at every
opportunity, so as to benefit also by their plans.

This required caution so we were careful at all times that we should not
be seen together; rather that we should even appear unfriendly. We
developed the cunning of the oppressed. Once we even staged a wordy
quarrel over some petty thing for the benefit of our guards and others
of the prisoners whom we distrusted. At other times we foregathered
in dim corners of our huts as though by chance. We conversed covertly
from the corners of our mouths and without any movement of the lips, as
convicts do. This avoidance of one another was made the easier because
of the arrangement of the personnel of each hut. The various nationalities
were pretty well split up in companies, presumably to prevent illicit
co-operation and each company was separated from the others by the
wire.

Our chance came at last. We were "warned" for a working party on a railroad
grade near by. As compliance would enable us to get on the other side
of the wire, we made no protest. This work was a part of the authorities'
scheme of farming prisoners out to private individuals and corporations
who required labour. In this case it was a railroad contractor. As a
rule the contractors fed us better than the authorities, if for no
other reason than to keep our working strength up.

We were marched out of the laager without any breakfast each morning to
the work and there received a little sausage and a bit of bread for
breakfast. At noon we received soup of a better quality than the camp
stuff. It was cooked by a Russian Pole, a civilian; one of many
who was living out in the town on parole. These had to report regularly
to the authorities and had to remain in the local area.

We were on the job a week before things seemed favourable. We had only
what we stood in, excepting the rough map, which was drawn from hearsay
and our scanty knowledge of the country. We planned to travel at night,
lay our course by the stars and perhaps walk to Switzerland in six
weeks.

We worked all morning, grading on the railroad embankment. At noon
we knocked off for soup and a rest.

We were on the edge of a large wood.

Some of the men flung themselves on the bank; others went to see if the
soup was ready. A few went into the wood. The solitary guard was elsewhere.
We said good-bye to the few who knew of our plans. They bade us God-speed
and then we, too, faded into the recesses of the wood.

We had no sooner set foot in it than I noticed a curious change come over
my companion. He said that it was a bad time, a bad place, found fault
with everything and said that we should not go that day.
However, we continued, half-heartedly on his part, to shove our way on
into the wood. Occasionally he glanced fearfully over his shoulder
and voiced querulous protests.

I did not answer him. A little further on and he stopped. A dog was
barking.

"There's too many dogs about, Edwards. And just look at all those houses."
He pointed to where a village showed through the trees.

"Sure thing, there'll be houses thick like that all the way. It's
our job to keep clear of them."
"Yes, but look at the people. There's bound to be lots of them where
there's so many houses."
"Of course there are," I replied: "Germany's full of houses and
people. That's no news. Come on."
"Oh! They'll see us sure, Edwards--and telegraph ahead all over the
country. We haven't got any more show than a rabbit."
With that I lost patience and gave him a piece of my mind. We stood
there, arguing it back and forth.
It was no use: He fell prey to his own fears; saw certain capture
and a dreadful punishment. He conjured up all the dangers that an
active imagination could envisage: Every bush was a German and every
sound the occasion of a fresh alarm. He was like to ruin my own
nerves with his petty panics.
It was in vain that I pleaded with him: He could not face the dangers
that he saw ahead. The laager seemed to him, by comparison, a haven
of refuge. When all else failed, I appealed to his pride. He had
none.
I warned him that we should meet with nothing but scorn from our
comrades, excepting laughter, which was worse. I begged and pleaded
with him to go on with me. No use. All his courage was foam and had
settled back into dregs.
And so we returned. I was heart-broken. But there was no use in my
going on alone. To travel by night we must sleep in the day time
and that required that some one should always be on watch to avoid
the chance travellers of the day--which was obviously impossible
for any one who travelled alone.The water came down through a narrow gorge, which in
places was hardly two hundred feet wide. The broken dam was at an
elevation of about five hundred feet above Johnstown. The railroad
bridge across the Conemaugh River is at the lower side of Johnstown, and
the river is joined there by another mountain stream from the northeast.
It was here that the débris collected and caught fire, and I doubt if it
will ever be known how many perished there. The water came down with the
speed of a locomotive. The people there are absolutely paralyzed--so
much so that they speak of their losses in a most indifferent way. I
heard two men in conversation. One said: 'Well, I lost a wife and three
children.' 'That's nothing,' said the other; 'I lost a wife and six
children.'"


The Sudden Break.

A man named Maguire was met on his way from South Fork to Johnstown. He
said he was standing on the edge of the lake when the walls burst. The
waters were rising all day and were on a level with a pile of dirt which
he said was above the walls of the dam. All of a sudden it burst with a
report like a cannon and the water started down the mountain side,
sweeping before it the trees as if they were chips. Bowlders were rolled
down as if they were marbles. The roar was deafening. The lake was
emptied in an hour.

At the time there were about forty men at work up there, building a new
draining system at the lake for Messrs. Parke and Van Buren. They did
all they could to try and avert the disaster by digging a sluiceway on
one side to ease the pressure on the dam, but their efforts were
fruitless.

"It was about half-past two o'clock when the water reached the top of
the dam. At first it was just a narrow white stream trickling down the
face of the dam, soon its proportions began to grow with alarming
rapidity, and in an extremely short space of time a volume of water a
foot in thickness was passing over the top of the dam.

"There had been little rain up to dark. Whatever happened in the way of
a cloud burst took place during the night. When the workmen woke in the
morning the lake was very full and was rising at the rate of a foot an
hour.

"When at two o'clock the water began to flow over the dam, the work of
undermining began. Men were sent three or four times during the day


To Warn the People

below of their danger. At three o'clock there was a sound like
tremendous and continued peals of thunder. The earth seemed to shake and
vibrate beneath our feet.

"There was a rush of wind, the trees swayed to and fro, the air was full
of fine spray or mist: then looking down just in front of the dam we saw
trees, rocks and earth shot up into mid-air in great columns. It seemed
as though some great unseen force was at work wantonly destroying
everything; then the great wave, foaming, boiling and hissing, dashing
clouds of spray hundreds of feet in height as it came against some
obstruction in the way of its mad rush, clearing everything away before
it, started on its terrible death-dealing mission down the fatal
valley."


Engineer Henry's Awful Race.

Engineer Henry, of the second section of the express train, No. 8, which
was caught at Conemaugh, tells a thrilling story. His train was caught
in the midst of the wave and were the only cars that were not destroyed.
"It was an awful sight," he said. "I have often seen pictures of flood
scenes, and I thought they were exaggerations, but what I witnessed last
Friday changes my former belief. To see that immense volume of water,
fully fifty feet high, rushing madly down the valley, sweeping
everything before it, was a thrilling sight. It is engraved indelibly on
my memory. Even now I can see that mad torrent carrying death and
destruction before it.

"The second section of No. 8, on which I was, was due at Johnstown about
10.15 in the morning. We arrived there safely, and were told to follow
the first section. When we arrived at Conemaugh the first section and
the mail were there. Washouts further up the mountain prevented our
going, so we could do nothing but sit around and discuss the situation.
The creek at Conemaugh was swollen high, almost overflowing. The heavens
were pouring rain, but this did not prevent nearly all the inhabitants
of the town from gathering along its banks. They watched


The Waters Go Dashing

by and wondered whether the creek could get much higher. But a few
inches more and it would overflow its banks. There seemed to be a
feeling of uneasiness among the people. They seemed to fear that
something awful was going to happen. Their suspicions were strengthened
by the fact that warning had come down the valley for the people to be
on the lookout. The rains had swelled everything to the bursting point.
The day passed slowly, however.

"Noon came and went, and still nothing happened. We could not proceed,
nor could we go back, as the tracks about a mile below Conemaugh had
been washed away, so there was nothing for us to do but to wait and see
what would come next.

"Some time after 3 o'clock Friday afternoon I went into the train
despatcher's office to learn the latest news. I had not been there long
when I heard a fierce whistling from an engine away up the mountain.
Rushing out I found dozens of men standing around. Fear had blanched
every cheek. The loud and continued whistling had made every one feel
that something serious was going to happen. In a few moments I could
hear a train rattling down the mountain. About five hundred yards above
Conemaugh the tracks make a slight curve and we could not see beyond
this. The suspense was something awful. We did not know what was coming,
but no one could get rid of the thought that something was wrong at the
dam.

"Our suspense was not very long, however. Nearer and nearer the train
came, the thundering sound still accompanying it. There seemed to be
something behind the train, as there was a dull, rumbling sound which I
knew did not come from the train. Nearer and nearer it came; a moment
more and it would reach the curve. The next instant there burst upon our
eyes a sight that made every heart stand still. Rushing around the
curve, snorting and tearing, came an engine and several gravel cars. The
train appeared to be putting forth every effort to go faster. Nearer it
came, belching forth smoke and whistling long and loud. But


The Most Terrible Sight

was to follow. Twenty feet behind came surging along a mad rush of water
fully fifty feet high. Like the train, it seemed to be putting forth
every effort to push along faster. Such an awful race we never before
witnessed. For an instant the people seemed paralyzed with horror. They
knew not what to do, but in a moment they realized that a second's delay
meant death to them. With one accord they rushed to the high lands a few
hundred feet away. Most of them succeeded in reaching that place and
were safe.

[Illustration: AN ENGINEER'S TERRIFIC RACE IN THE VALLEY OF DEATH.]

"I thought of the passengers in my train. The second section of No. 8
had three sleepers. In these three cars were about thirty people, who
rushed through the train crying to the others 'Save yourselves!' Then
came a scene of the wildest confusion. Ladies and children shrieked and
the men seemed terror-stricken. I succeeded in helping some ladies and
children off the train and up to the highlands. Running back, I caught
up two children and ran for my life to a higher place. Thank God, I was
quicker than the flood! I deposited my load in safety on the high land
just as it swept past us.

"For nearly an hour we stood watching the mad flood go rushing by. The
water was full of débris. When the flood caught Conemaugh it dashed
against the little town with a mighty crash. The water did not lift the
houses up and carry them off, but crushed them one against the other and
broke them up like so many egg shells. Before the flood came there was a
pretty little town. When the waters passed on there was nothing but


Few Broken Boards

to mark the central portion of the city. It was swept as clean as a
newly brushed floor. When the flood passed onward down the valley I went
over to my train. It had been moved back about twenty yards, but it was
not damaged. About fifty persons had remained in the train and they were
safe. Of the three trains ours was the luckiest. The engines of both the
others had been swept off the track and one or two cars in each train
had met the same fate.

"What saved our train was the fact that just at the curve which I
mentioned the valley spread out. The valley is six or seven hundred
yards broad where our train was standing. This, of course, let the
floods pass out. It was only twenty feet high when it struck our train,
which was about in the middle of the valley.

"This fact, together with the elevation of the track, was all that saved
us. We stayed that night in the houses in Conemaugh that had not been
destroyed. The next morning I started down the valley and by 4 o'clock
in the afternoon had reached Conemaugh furnace, eight miles west of
Johnstown. Then I got a team and came home.

"In my tramp down the valley I saw some awful sights. On the tree
branches hung shreds of clothing torn from the unfortunates as they were
whirled along in the terrible rush of the torrent. Dead bodies were
lying by scores along the banks of the creeks. One woman I helped drag
from the mud had tightly clutched in her hand a paper. We tore it out of
her hand and found it to be a badly water-soaked photograph. It was
probably a picture of the drowned woman."


Over the Bridge.

Frank McDonald, a railroad conductor, says: "I certainly think I saw
1,000 bodies go over the bridge. The first house that came down struck
the bridge and at once took fire, and as fast as they came down they
were consumed. I believe I am safe in saying I saw 1,000 bodies burn. It
reminded me of a lot of flies on fly-paper struggling to get away, with
no hope and no chance to save them. I have no idea that had the bridge
been blown up the loss of life would have been any less. They would
have floated a little further with the same certain death. Then, again,
it was impossible for any one to have reached the bridge in order to
blow it up, for the waters came so fast that no one could have done it.
I saw fifteen to eighteen bodies go over the bridge. At the same time I
offered a man twenty dollars to row me across the river, but could get
no one to go, and I finally had to build a boat and get across that
way."

Nothing seems to have withstood the merciless sweep of the mighty
on-rush of pent-up Conemaugh. As for the houses of the town a thousand
of them lie piled up in a smouldering mass to the right of Conemaugh
bridge.

At the present moment, away down in its terrible depths, this mass of
torn and twisted timbers and dead humanity is slowly burning, and the
light curling smoke that rises as high almost as the mountain, and the
sickening smell that comes from the centre of this fearful funeral pile
tell that the unseen fire is feeding on other fuel than the rafters and
roofs that once sheltered the population of Johnstown.


A Ghastly Scene.

The mind is filled with horror at the supreme desolation that pervades
the whole scene. It is small wonder that the pen cannot in the hands of
the most skillful even pretend to convey one-hundredth part of what is
seen and heard every hour in the day in this fearful place. At the
present moment firemen and others are out on that ghastly aggregation of
woodwork and human kind jammed against the unyielding mass of arched
masonry.

Round them curls the white smoke from the smouldering interior of the
heaped up houses of Johnstown. Every now and then the gleam of an axe
and a group of stooping forms tell that another ghastly find has been
made, and a whisper goes round among the hundreds of watchers that other
bodies are being brought to light.

How many hundreds or thousands there are who found death by fire at this
awful spot will never be known, and the people are already giving up
hopes of ever reaching the knowledge of how their loved and lost ones
met their doom, whether in the fierce, angry embrace of the waters of
Conemaugh, or in the deadly grip of the fire fiend, who claimed the
homes of Johnstown for his own above the fatal bridge.

Every hour it becomes more and more apparent that the exact number of
lives lost will never be known. Up to the present time the disposition
has been to under rather than overestimate the number of lives
sacrificed.


A Mother Rescued by Her Daughter.

A daughter of John Duncan, superintendent of the Johnstown Street Car
Company, had an awful struggle in rescuing her mother and baby sister.
Mrs. Duncan and family had taken refuge on a roof, when a large log came
floating down the river, striking the house with immense force, knocking
Mrs. Duncan and daughter into the fast running river. Seeing what had
happened, Alvania, her fifteen-year-old daughter, leaped into the water,
and after a hard struggle landed both on the roof of the house.

The members of the Cambria Club tell of their battle for life in the
following manner: They were about to sit down to dinner when they heard
the crash, and knowing what had occurred they started for the attic just
as the flood was upon them. When the members were assured of their
safety they at once commenced saving others by grasping them as they
floated by on tree tops, houses, etc. In this manner they saved seventy
persons from death.


The Clock Stopped at 5.20.

One of the queerest sights in the centre of the town is a three-story
brick residence standing with one wall, the others having disappeared
completely, leaving the floors supported by the partitions. In one of
the upper rooms can be seen a mantel with a lambrequin on it and a clock
stopped at twenty minutes after five. In front of the clock is a lady's
fan, though from the marks on the wall-paper the water has been over all
these things.

In the upper part of the town, where the back water from the flood went
into the valley with diminished force, there are many strange scenes.
There the houses were toppled over one after another in a row, and left
where they lay. One of them was turned completely over and stands with
its roof on the foundations of another house and its base in the air.
The owner came back, and getting into his house through the windows
walked about on his ceiling. Out of this house a woman and her two
children escaped safely and were but little hurt, although they were
stood on their heads in the whirl. Every house has its own story. From
one a woman shut up in her garret escaped by chopping a hole in the
roof. From another a Hungarian named Grevins leaped to the shore as it
went whirling past and fell twenty-five feet upon a pile of metal and
escaped with a broken leg. Another is said to have come all the way from
very near the start of the flood and to have circled around with the
back water and finally landed on the flats at the city site, where it is
still pointed out.


CHAPTER XI.

New Tales of Horror.


The accounts contained in the foregoing chapters bring this appalling
story of death down to June 4th. We continue the narrative as given from
day to day by eye-witnesses, as this is the only method by which a full
and accurate description of Johnstown's unspeakable horror can be
obtained.

On the morning of June 5th one of the leading journals contained the
following announcements, printed in large type, and preceding its vivid
account of the terrible situation at Johnstown.

Death, ruin, plague! Threatened outbreak of disease in the fate stricken
valley. Awful effluvia from corpses! Swift and decisive means must be
taken to clear away the masses of putrefying matter that underlie the
wreck of what was once a town. Proposed use of explosives. Crowds of
refugees are already attacked by pneumonia and the germs of typhus
pervade both air and water. Victims yet unnumbered. Dreadful discoveries
hourly made! Heaps of the drowned, the mangled and the burned are found
in pockets between rocks and under packed accumulations of sand!
Pennsylvania regiments ordered to the scene to keep ward over an
afflicted and heartbroken people. Blame where it belongs. The ears of
the inhabitants were dulled to fear by warnings many times
repeated--forty-two years ago the dam broke--vivid stories of witnesses
of the great tragedy--the owners of the lake must bear a gigantic burden
of remorse--sufferings of survivors!

These were the terrible headings in a single issue of a newspaper.

A registry of the living who were residents of Johnstown prior to the
flood was begun to-day. Out of a total population of 39,400 the names of
only 10,600 have been recorded. This may give an approximate idea of the
number of those who lost their lives.


Gaunt Menace of Pestilence.

The most important near fact of to-day is the increasing danger of
pestilence.

As the work of disengaging the bodies of the dead progresses the
horrible peril becomes more and more apparent. There is need of the
speediest possible measures to offset the gravity of the sanitary
situation.

From every part of the stricken valley the same cry of alarm arises, for
at every point where the dead are being discovered, as the waters
continue to abate, the same peril exists.

The use of explosives, especially dynamite, has been discussed. There is
some opposition to it, but it may yet be resorted to. The great mass of
ruins at the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge, which is still smoking and
smouldering, is a ghastly mine of human flesh and bones in all sorts of
hideous shapes, and unless desperate means are employed, cannot be
cleared away in weeks to come.

[Illustration: READING THE HORRIBLE NEWS.]

Still, vigorous work in that direction is being performed, and
explosives will be used in a limited degree to further it. This great
work may be divided into two parts--the clearing away of the mass of
débris lodged against the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge, and the
examination and removal of the many wrecked buildings which mark the
site of Johnstown.


Order Out of Chaos.

Slowly something like order is beginning to appear in the chaos of
destruction. Enough militia came to-day to put the town under strict
martial law. Four hundred men of the Fourteenth regiment, of Pittsburgh,
are here. There will be no more tramping over the ruins by ungoverned
mobs. There will be no more fears of rioting.

The supplies of food are constantly growing. The much needed money is
beginning to come in, though not at all needless relief committees are
beginning to go out. Better quarters for the sufferers are being
provided. Better arrangements for systematic relief are made. Something
of the deep gloom has been dispelled, though Johnstown is still the
saddest spot on earth.

The systematic attempt to clear up the ruins at the gorge and get out
the bodies imprisoned there began to-day. The expectations of ghastly
discoveries were more than realized. Scores of burned and mangled bodies
were removed.


Freaks of the Torrent.

The great waste where the city stood looked a little different to-day.
Some attempt was made to clear up the rubbish, and fires were burning in
a dozen places to get rid of it. Tents for the soldiers and some of the
sufferers were put up in the smooth stretch of sand where a great, five
story hardware store used to stand. The dead animals that were here and
there in the débris were removed, to the benefit of the towns-people's
health.

Curious things come to light where the rubbish was cleared away. The
solid cobblestone pavement had been scooped up by the force of the water
and in some places swept so far away that there was not a sign of it.
Behind a house that was resting on one corner was found a wickerwork
baby carriage full of mud, but not injured or scratched in the least nor
yet buried in the mud, but looking as if it had been rolled there and
left. Very close to it was a piece of railroad iron that must have been
carried half a mile, bent as it it were but common wire. Exactly on the
site of a large grocery store was a box of soap and a bundle of
clothespins, while of all the brick and stone, of which the store was
built, and all the heavy furniture it contained there was not the
slightest trace.

Many articles of wearing apparel were found here, but no bodies could be
discovered in the whole stretch of the plain, from which it is inferred
that most of the deaths occurred at the gorge or else the flood swept
them far away.


Reminders of a Broken Home.

One of the few buildings that are left in this part of town is the fine
house of Mr. Geranheiser, of the Cambria Iron Company. It presents a
queer spectacle--that is common here but has not often been seen before.
The flood reached almost to the second floor and was strong enough to
cut away about half the house, leaving the rest standing. The whole
interior of the place can be seen just as the frightened inmates left
it. The carpets are torn up from the first floor, but the pictures are
still hanging on the walls and an open piano stands against the wall
full of mud; a Brussels carpet being halfway out of the second story on
the side where the wreck was and showing exactly how high the water
came. There was a centre table in the room and an open book on it.
Chairs stood about the room and the pictures were on the walls, and half
of the room was gone miles away.


Seven Acres of Wreckage.

Just below the bare plain where the business block of Johnstown stood,
and above the stone arch bridge on which the Pennsylvania Railroad
crossed the river, are seven acres of the wreckage of the flood. The
horrors that have been enacted in that spot, the horrors that are seen
there every hour, who can attempt to describe? Under and amid that mass
of conglomerate rubbish are the remains of at least one thousand persons
who died the most frightful of deaths.

This is the place where the fire broke out within twenty minutes after
the flood. It has burned ever since. The stone arch bridge acted as a
dam to the flood, and five towns were crushing each other against it. A
thousand houses came down on the great wave of water, and were held
there a solid mass in the jaws of a Cyclopean vise.

A kitchen stove upset. The mass took fire. A thousand people were
imprisoned in these houses. A thousand more were on the roofs. For most
of them there was no escape. The fire swept on from house to house. The
prisoners saw it coming and shrieked and screamed with terror, and ran
up and down their narrow quarters in an agony of fear.


Sights to Freeze Their Blood.

Thousands of people stood upon the river bank and saw and heard it all
and still were powerless to help. They saw people kneeling in the flames
and praying. They saw families gathered together with their arms around
each other and waiting for death. They saw people going mad and tearing
their hair and laughing. They saw men plunge into the narrow crevices
between the houses and seek death in the water rather than wait its
coming in the flames. Some saw their friends and some their wives and
children perishing before them, and some in the awful agony of the hour
went mad themselves and ran shrieking to the hillsides, and stronger men
laid down on the ground and wept.

All that night and all the next day, and far into the morning of Monday,
these dreadful shrieks resounded from that place of doom. The fire
burned on, aided by the fire underneath, added to by fresh fuel coming
down the river. All that time the people stood helpless on the bank and
heard those heartrending sounds. What could they do? They could not
fight the fire. Every fire engine in the town lay in that mass of
rubbish smashed to bits. For hours they had to wait until they could get
telegraph word to surrounding towns, and hours more until the fire
engines arrived at noon on Monday.


Wrecks of Five Iron Bridges.

The shrieks ceased early in the morning. Men had began to search the
ruins and had taken out the few that still lived. The fire engines began
to play on the still smouldering fire. Other workmen began to remove the
bodies. The fire had swept over the whole mass from shore to shore and
burned it to the water. A great field of crushed and charred timbers was
all that was left. The flood had gorged this in so tightly that it made
a solid bridge above the water. A tremendous, irresistible force had
ground and churned and macerated the débris until it was a confused,
solid, almost welded, conglomerate, stretching from shore to shore,
jammed high up against the stone bridge and extending up the river a
quarter of a mile, perhaps half as wide. In this tangled heap and crush
of matter were the twisted wrecks of five iron bridges, smashed
locomotives, splintered dwellings and all their contents; human beings
and domestic animals, hay and factory machinery; the rich contents of
stores and brick walls ground to powder--all the products of human
industry, all the elements of human interests, twisted, turned, broken
in a mighty mill and all thrown together.


A Sickening Spectacle.

I walked over this extraordinary mass this morning and saw the fragments
of thousands of articles. In one place the roofs of forty frame houses
were packed in together just as you would place forty bended cards one
on top of another. The iron rods of a bridge were twisted into a perfect
spiral six times around one of the girders. Just beneath it was a
woman's trunk, broken up and half filled with sand, with silk dresses
and a veil streaming out of it. From under the trunk men were lifting
the body of its owner, perhaps, so burned, so horribly mutilated, so
torn from limb to limb, that even the workmen, who have seen so many of
these frightful sights that they have begun to get used to them, turned
away sick at heart.

I saw in one place a wrecked grocery store--bins of coffee and tea,
flour, spices and nuts, parts of the counter and safe mingled together.
Near it was the pantry of the house, still partly intact, the plates and
saucers regularly piled up, a waiter and a teapot, but not a sign of the
woodwork, not a recognizable outline of a house. In another place a
halter, with a part of a horse's head tied to a bit of a manger, and a
mass of hay and straw about, but no other signs of the stable in which
the horse was burned. Two cindered towels, a cake of soap in a dish, and
a bit of carpet were taken to indicate the location of a hotel. I saw a
child's skull in a bed of ashes, but no sign of a body.


Recognized by Fragments.

In another place was a human foot and crumbling indications of a boot,
but no signs of a body. A hay rick, half ashes, stood near the centre of
the gorge. Workmen who dug about it to-day found a chicken coop, and in
it two chickens, not only alive but clucking happily when they were
released. A woman's hat, half burned; a reticule, with a part of a hand
still clinging to it; two shoes and part of a dress told the story of
one unfortunate's death. Close at hand a commercial traveller had
perished. There was his broken valise, still full of samples, fragments
of his shoes and some pieces of his clothing.

Scenes like these were occurring all over the charred field where men
were working with pick and axe and lifting out the poor, shattered
remains of human beings, nearly always past recognition or
identification, except by guesswork, or the locality where they were
found. Articles of domestic use scattered through the rubbish helped to
tell who some of the bodies were. Part of a set of dinner plates told
one man where in the intangible mass his house was. In one place was a
photograph album with one picture recognizable. From this the body of a
child near by was identified. A man who had spent a day and all night
looking for the body of his wife, was directed to her remains by part of
a trunk lid.


Dead Bodies Caressed.

Poor old John Jordan, of Conemaugh! Many a tear ran over swarthy cheeks
for him to-day. All his family, his wife and children, had been swept
from his sight in the flood. He wandered over the gorge yesterday
looking for them, and last night the police could not bring him away. At
daylight he found his wife's sewing machine and called the workmen to
help him. First they found a little boy's jacket that he recognized and
then they came upon the rest of them all buried together, the mother's
burned arms still clinging to the little children. Then the white headed
old man sat down in the ashes and caressed the dead bodies and talked to
them just as if they were alive until some one came and led him quietly
away. Without a protest he went to the shore and sat down on a rock and
talked to himself, and then got up and disappeared on the hills.


To Blow Up the Gorge.

Was this the only such scene the day saw? There were scores like it.
People worked in ruins all day to find their relatives and then went
home with horrible uncertainty. People found what they were looking for
and fainted at the sight. People looked and cried aloud and came and
stood on the banks all day, afraid to look and still afraid to go away.
The burned bodies are not the only ones in the gorge. Under the timbers
and held down in the water there must be hundreds that escaped the fire,
but were drowned. To get at these the gorge is to be blown up with
dynamite. The sanitary reasons for such a step are becoming hourly more
apparent. It is the belief of the physicians that a pestilence will be
added to the other horrors of the place if such a thing is not done. All
day the bodies have been brought to shore. Those that were not
recognized were carried on stretchers to the Morgue. One hundred and
twenty of the identified bodies were carried over the bridge in one
procession.

Relief work for the suffering goes on at the headquarters of the Relief
Committee on that little, muddy, rubbish-filled street which escaped
destruction at the edge of the flood.

The building is a wretched shanty, once a Hungarian boarding-house, and
a long line of miserable women stretches out in front of it all day
waiting for relief. They are the unfortunate who have lost everything in
the flood.

Quarters for five thousand of these people are provided in tents on the
hillside. For provisions they are dependent on the charity of the
country. Bread and meat are served out to them on the committee's order.

They are the most mournful and pitiable sight. There was not one in the
line who had not lost some one dear to her. Most of them were the wives
of merchants or laborers who went down in the disaster. They were the
sole survivors of their families. Very few had any more clothes than
they wore when their houses were washed away. They stood there for hours
in the rain yesterday without any protection, soaked with the drizzle,
squalid and utterly forlorn--a sight to move a heart of stone.


Silent Sufferers.

They did not talk to one another as women generally do even when they
are not acquainted. They got no words of sympathy from any one, and they
gave none. Not a word was spoken along the whole line. They simply stood
and waited. In truth there is nothing about the survivors of the
disaster that strikes one so forcibly as their evident inability to
comprehend their misfortune and the absence of sympathetic expressions
among them. It is not because they are naturally stolid, but the whole
thing is so vast and bears upon them so heavily they cannot grasp it.

People in California know much more about the disaster than any resident
of Johnstown knows; more information about it can be gotten from
towns-people forty miles away than from those who saw it. The people
here are not at all lacking in sympathy or kindliness of heart, but what
words of sympathy would have any meaning in such a tremendous
catastrophe? Every person of Johnstown has lost a relative or a friend,
and so has every other resident he meets. They seem to see instinctively
that condolence would be meaningless.


Famine Happily Averted.

On the west side of the lower town one or two little streets are left
from the flood. They are crowded all the time with the survivors. As I
have gone among them I have heard nothing but such conversations as
this, which is literally reproduced:--

"Hello, Will! Where's Jim?"

"He's lost."

"Is that so! Goodby."

Another was:--

"Good morning, Mr. Holden; did you save Mrs. Holden?"

"No; she went with the house. You lost your two boys, didn't you?"

"Yes. Good morning."

Two women met on the narrow rope bridge which spans the creek. As they
passed one said:--

"How about Aunt Mary?"

"Oh, she's lost; so is Cousin Hattie."

It gives an outside listener a strange sensation to hear people talk
thus with about as little emotion as they would talk about the weather.
But the people of Johnstown had so much to do with death that they think
about nothing else. I will undertake to say that half the people have
not the slightest idea what day of the week or month this is.


A Rope Bridge of Sighs.

To get from one part of the town to another it is necessary to cross the
river or creek which is now flowing over the sites of business blocks.
Of course every vestige of a bridge was swept far away, and to take
their places two ropes have been hung from high timbers built upon the
sandy island that was the city's site. On these ropes narrow boards are
tied. The whole structure is not more than four feet wide, and it hangs
trembling over the water in a way that makes nervous people shudder.
Over this frail thing hundreds of people crowd every hour, and why there
has not been another disaster is something no one can understand.

The river is rising steadily, and all the afternoon the middle of the
bridge sagged down into the water, but the people kept on struggling
across. Many of them carried coffins containing bodies from the Morgue.
There are no express wagons, no hearses--scarcely any vehicles of any
kind in the town--and all the coffins have to be carried on the
shoulders of the men.

Coffins are a dreadfully common sight. It is impossible to move a dozen
steps in any direction without meeting one or very likely a procession
of of them. One hundred of them were piled up in front of the Morgue
this morning. Twice as many more were on the platform of the
Pennsylvania station. Carloads of coffins were being unloaded from
freight cars below town and carried along the roads. Almost every house
has a coffin in it. Every boat that crosses the river carries one, and
rows of them stood by the bank to receive the bodies.


Merely a Mud Plain.

There is a narrow fringe of houses on each side of the empty plain,
which escaped because they were built on higher ground. Fine brick
blocks and paved streets filled the business part of the town, which was
about a mile long and half a mile wide. Where these blocks stood mud is
in some places six feet deep. Over and through it all is scattered an
extraordinary collection of rubbish--boilers, car wheels, fragments of
locomotives, household furniture, dead animals, clothing, sewing
machines, goods from stores, safes, passenger and street cars, some half
buried in the sand, some all exposed, helter-skelter.

It is simply impossible to realize the tremendous force exercised by the
flood, though the imagination is assisted by the presence of heavy iron
beams twisted and bent, railroad locomotives swept miles away, rails
torn up, the rocks and banks slashed away, and brick walls carried away,
leaving no traces of their foundations. The few stone houses that
resisted the shock were completely stripped of all their contents and
filled four feet deep with sand and powdered débris.


A Glimpse from a Window.

As I write this, seated within a curious circular affair, which was once
a mould for sewer pipe, are two operators busy with clicking
instruments. The floor is a foot deep with clay. There are no doors.
There are no windows which boast of glass or covering of any kind. The
lookout embraces the bulk of the devastated districts. Just below the
windows are the steep river banks, covered with a miscellaneous mass
thrown up by the flood. The big stone bridge is crowded with freight
cars loaded with material for repairing the structure and with people
who are eager to see something horrible.


That Funeral Pyre.

The further half of the bridge which was swept away has been replaced by
a trembling wooden affair, wide enough only for two persons to walk
abreast. To the left of the bridge and across the river are the great
brick mills of the Cambria Iron and Steel Company, crushed and torn out
of a semblance to workshops. Just in front of the office is what has
been called the "funeral pyre," and which threatens to become a
veritable breeding spot of pestilence.

Just before me a group of red-capped firemen are directing a stream of
water upon such portions of the mass as can be reached from the shore.


Where Death Was Busiest.

Over to the right, at the edge of a muddy lagoon which marks the limit
of the levelling rush of the mad torrent, there are dozens and dozens of
buildings leaning against each other in the oddest sort of jumble. The
spectacle would be ludicrous if it were not so awfully suggestive of the
tragic fate of the inmates. Behind this border land are the regions
where death was wofully busy. In some streets a mile from any railroad
track locomotives and cars are scattered among the smouldering ruins. In
the river the rescuers are busy, and so are the Hungarians and native
born thieves.

Men take queer souvenirs away sometimes. One came up the bank a short
time ago with a skull and two leg bones, all blackened and burned by the
fire.

There is, of course, no business done, and those who have been spared
have little to do save watch for a new phase of the greatest tragedy of
the kind in modern history. On Prospect Hill is a town of tents where
the homeless are housed and fed, and where also a formidable city of the
dead has been just prepared. Such are some of the scenes visible from
the window.


The Skeleton of Its Former Self.

The water has receded in the night almost as rapidly as it came, and
behind it remains the sorriest sight imaginable. The dove that has come
has no green leaf of promise, for its wings are draped with the hue of
mourning and desolation. There now lies the great skeleton of dead
Johnstown. The great ribs of rocky sand stretch across the chest scarred
and covered with abrasions. Acres of mud, acres of wreckage, acres of
unsteady, tottering buildings, acres of unknown dead, of ghastly objects
which have been eagerly sought for since Friday; acres of smoky,
streaming ruin, of sorrow for somebody, lie out there in the sunshine.


Like Unto Arcadia After the Fire.

The awful desolation of the scene has been described often enough
already to render a repetition of the attempt here unnecessary. These
descriptions have been as truthful and graphic as it is possible for man
to make them; but none have been adequate--none could be. Where once
stood solid unbroken blocks for squares and squares, with basements and
subcellars, there is now a level plain as free from obstruction or
excavation as the fair fields of Arcadia after they had been swept by
the British flames. The major and prettier portion of the beautiful city
has literally been blotted from the face of the earth.


Disease Succeeds to Calamity.

Up the ragged surface of Prospect Hill, whither hundreds of terrified
people fled for safety Friday night, I scrambled this afternoon. I came
upon a pneumonia scourge which bids fair to do for a number of the
escaped victims what the flood could not. Death has pursued them to
their highest places, and terror will not die. Every little house on
the hill--and there are a hundred or two of them--had thrown its doors
open to receive the bruised, half-clad fugitives on the dark day of the
deluge, and every one was now a crude hospital. Half the women who had
scaled the height were so overcome with fright that they have been
bedridden ever since. There had been pneumonia on the hill, but only a
few cases. To-day, however, several fresh cases developed among the the
flood fugitives, and a local physician said the prospects for a scourge
are all too promising. The enfeebled condition of the patients, the
unhealthy atmosphere pervading the valley and the necessarily close
quarters in which the people are crowded render the spread of the
disease almost certain.


The Military Called Out.

At the request of the Sheriff, Adjutant General Hastings called out the
Fourteenth regiment of Pittsburgh, who are to be stationed at Johnstown
proper, to guard the buildings and against emergencies. Other reasons
are known to exist for this precaution. Bodies were recovered to-day
that have been robbed by the ghouls. It is known that one lady had
several hundred dollars in her possession just before the disaster, but
when the body was recovered there was not a cent in her pocket.

The Hungarians attacked a supply wagon between Morrellville and Cambria
City to-day. The drivers of the wagon repulsed them, but they again
returned. A second fight ensued, but after lively scrambling the
Hungarians were again driven away. After that drivers and guards of
supply wagons were permitted to go armed.

General Hastings was seen later in the day, and when asked what caused
him to order the militia said: "There is no need of troops to quell
another disturbance, but now there are at least two thousand men at work
in Johnstown clearing up the débris, and I think that it will not hurt
to have the Fourteenth regiment here, as they can guard the banks and
all valuables. The Sheriff consulted me in the matter. He stated that
his men were about worn out, and he thought that we had better have some
soldiers. So I ordered them."

The people, aroused by repeated outrages, are bitterly hounding the
Hungarians, and a military force is essential to see that both sides
preserve order.


Indignant Battery B.

A number of the members of Battery B and the Washington infantry, who
were ordered back from Johnstown, are very indignant at Adjutant General
Hastings, who gave the order. They claim that General Hastings not only
acted without a particle of judgment, but when they offered to act as
picket, do police duty or anything else that might be required of them,
they state that they were treated like dogs.

They also insist that their services are badly needed for the reason
that the hills surrounding Johnstown are swarming with tramps, who are
availing themselves of every opportunity to secure plunder from the
numerous wrecks or dead bodies.

They told the General that they came more as private citizens than as
soldiers, and were willing to do what they could. The General abruptly
ordered them back to Pittsburgh. Lieutenant Gammel, who had charge of
the men, said: "We would like to have stayed but we had to obey orders
and we took the first train for home. Even the short time we were there
the fifty-five men had pulled out thirty-five bodies."

Members of the battery said: "This is a fine Governor we have, and as
for Hastings, the least said about his actions the better."

The Adjutant General's order calling out the Fourteenth regiment and
ordering them to this place is not looked upon as being altogether a
wise move by many citizens.


Narrow Escape from Lynching.

About eleven o'clock this morning, Captain W.R. Jones, of Braddock, and
his men discovered a man struggling in the hands of an angry crowd on
Main street. The crowd were belaboring the man with sticks and fists,
and Captain Jones entered the house where the disturbance occurred, and
the man shouted: "I have a right here, and am getting what belongs to my
folks!"

The crowd then demanded that he show what he had in his possession. He
reluctantly produced a handful of jewelry from his pocket, among which
was a gold watch, which was no sooner shown than a gentleman who was
standing nearby claimed it as his own, saying that the house where they
were standing was the residence of his family. He then proceeded to
identify clearly the property. The crowd, convinced of the thief's
guilt, wanted to lynch him, but after an exciting scene Captain Jones
pacified them. The man was escorted out of town by officers, released
and ordered not to return.


Johnstown Succored.

There will be no more charity except for the helpless. The lengthening
of the death roll has fearfully shortened the list to be provided for.
There is now an abundance of food and clothing to satisfy the present
necessities of all who are in need. Beginning to-morrow morning, June
5th, aid will not be extended to any who are able to work except in
payment for work. All the destitute who are able and willing will be put
to work clearing up the wreck in the river and the wastes where the
streets stood. They will be paid $2.50 and $3.00 per day for ordinary
laboring work, and thus obtain money with which to buy provisions, which
will be sold to them at reduced prices.

Those who will not work will be driven off. The money collected will be
paid out in wages, in defraying funeral expenses and in relieving those
whose bread providers have been taken away.


Dainties Not Wanted.

The supplies of food and clothing are far in excess of the demand
to-day. The mistake of sending large quantities of dainties has been
made by some of the relief committees. Bishop Phelan has been on the
ground all day in company with a number of Catholic priests from
Pittsburgh.

He has ordered provisions for all the sufferers who have taken shelter
in the buildings over which he has placed the Little Sisters of the
Poor. There are several hundred people now being cared for by the relief
corps, and as the work of rescue goes on the number increases.


Bent on Charity.

Mrs. Campbell, president of the Allegheny Woman's Christian Temperance
Union, arrived this morning, and with Miss Kate Foster, of Johnstown,
organized a temporary home for destitute children on Bedford street. On
the same train came a delegation from the Smithfield Methodist Episcopal
Church. They began relieving the wants of the suffering Methodists.

Committees from the Masonic and Odd Fellows from Pittsburgh are looking
after their brethren.

Mr. Moxham, the iron manufacturer, is Mayor pro. tem. of Johnstown
to-day. He is probably the busiest man in the United States; although
for days without sleep, he still sticks nobly to his task. Hundreds of
others are like him. Men fall to the earth from sheer fatigue. There are
many who have not closed an eye in sleep since they awoke on Friday
morning; they are hollow-eyed and pitiful looking creatures. Many have
lost near relatives and all friends.


Shylocks.

Men and horses are what are most needed to-day. Some of the unfortunates
who could not go to the relief trains endeavored to obtain flour from
the wrecked stores in Johnstown. One dealer was charging $5 a sack for
flour, and was getting it in one or two cases. Suddenly the crowd heard
of the occurrence.

Several desperate men went to the store and doled the flour gratuitously
to the homeless and stricken. Another dealer was selling flour at $1.50
a sack. He refused to give any away, but would sell it to any one who
had the money. Otherwise he would not allow any one to go near it,
guarding his store with a shotgun.


Masons on the Field.

The special train of the Masonic Relief Association which left
Pittsburgh at one o'clock yesterday afternoon on the Baltimore and Ohio
Railroad did not reach here until just before midnight, at which time it
was impossible to do anything. The ignorance of the guards made the
tragedy comic. It was very humiliating. I gritted my teeth and
swore that I at any rate should go again in spite of their incredulous
jeers.

But it was all terribly discouraging and made me most despondent.

And that finished that trip to Switzerland.

A few days later Simmons and Brumley disappeared. There was no commotion.
One day they were with us and the next--they were not. The guards said
nothing and we feared to ask. I longed ardently to be with them.

In a few days the camp was thrown into a mild turmoil. The poor fellows
were escorted in under a heavy guard.

And very dejected they looked too--in rags, very wet and evidently
short of food, sleep and a shave.

Nevertheless, I envied them.

They disappeared for a long time. We were told they got two weeks'
cells and six weeks of sitting on the stools in strafe barracks. I
remembered the Yorkshiremen and my envy was tempered.

I spent most of my time casting about for the means for a real escape.
Quite aside from my natural desire for freedom I felt that my good name
as a soldier was at stake.

However, I waited for an opportunity to converse with Simmons and
Brumley before doing anything as I felt that their experience might
contain some useful hints for me.

They appeared at the end of two months, quite undismayed. They told
me of what had happened to them and Simmons approached me on the
subject of making another try of it with them. I readily consented. They
were now convinced that three or four could make the attempt with a
better chance of success than two men. I would have agreed to go an
army! All I wanted was an opportunity to prove my mettle and
retrieve my lost reputation.

They told me their story. It seems that they had been sent out as
a working party to a near by farm. They were locked in the
room as usual at nine o'clock that night after the day's work and
then waited until they had heard the sentry pass by a couple of times
on his rounds.

The window was covered with barbed wire which they had no difficulty in
removing. By morning they were well on the way to Switzerland.
They figured that they, too, could do it in six weeks' of walking
by night, laying their course by the stars.

They had no money and were still in khaki.

They were four days' out and lying close in a small clump of bushes
adjoining a field in which women were digging potatoes when a small
boy stumbled on them. They knew they had been seen the day before and
chose this exposed spot rather than the near-by wood, thinking that it
was there the hue and cry would run.

But he was a crafty little brat and pretended that he had not seen them.
They were not certain whether he had or not and hesitated to give their
position away by running for it.

The boy walked until he neared the women, when he broke into a run and
soon all gathered in a little knot, looking and pointing toward the
fugitives. Some of the women broke away and evidently told some Bavarian
soldiers who had been searching. The latter had already been firing into
the woods to flush them out so that if the boy had not seen them
the soldiers would in all likelihood have passed on, after searching
the main wood.

It was just four o'clock with darkness still four hours off. Simmons and
Brumley were unarmed.

There was no use in running for it. So they surrendered with what
grace they could. There was the usual _verdamning_, growling and
prodding but no really bad treatment. For this they were sentenced to
two weeks cells and six weeks of strafe barracks.

They had been much bothered by the lack of a compass on their trip;
so when they finished their strafing and were once more allowed the
privileges of the mail, Simmons took a chance and wrote on the
inside of an envelope addressed to his brother in Canada: "Send a
compass.""_Resolved_, Further, that in case of their refusal to render such
service they be driven from the doors of the relief trains and warned to
vacate the premises."


Hospitals and Morgues.

Those who doubt that many thousands lost their lives in this disaster
have not visited the morgues. There are three of these dreadful places
crowded so full of the unidentified dead that there is scarcely room to
move between the bodies. To the largest morgue, which I visited this
morning, one hundred and sixty bodies have been brought for
identification. When it is remembered that most of the bodies were swept
below the limits of Johnstown, that many more found here have been
identified at once by their friends and that it is certain that many
bodies were consumed entirely in the fire at the gorge, the fact gives
some idea of the extent of the calamity.

The largest morgue is at the Fourth ward school-house, a two-story brick
building which stands just at the edge of the high mark of the flood.
The bodies were laid across the school children's desks until they got
to be so numerous that there was not room for them, excepting on the
floor. Soldiers with crossed bayonets keep out the crowd of curious
people who have morbid appetites to gratify. None of these people are
of Johnstown. People of Johnstown do not have time to come to look for
friends, and they give the morgue a wide berth. Those who do come have
that dazed, miserable look that has fallen to all the residents of the
unhappy town. They walk through slowly and look at the bodies and go
away looking no sadder nor any less perplexed than when they came in.
One of the doctors in charge at the morgue told me that many of these
people had come in and looked at the bodies of their own fathers and
brothers and gone away without recognizing them, though not at all
disfigured.


"That's Jim."

In some instances it had been necessary for other persons, who knew the
people, to point out the dead to the living and assure them positively
of the identification before they could be aroused. I saw a railroad
laborer who had come in to look for a friend. He walked up and down the
aisles like a man in a trance. He looked at the bodies, and took no
apparent interest in any of them. At last he stopped before one of them
which he had passed twice before, muttered, "That's Jim," and went out
just as he had come in. Two other identifications I saw during the hour
I was there were just like this. There was no shedding of tears nor
other showing of emotion. They gazed upon the features of their dead as
if they were totally unable to comprehend it all, and reported their
identification to the attendants and watched the body as it was put into
a coffin and went away. Many came to look for their loved ones, but I
did not see one show more grief or realization of the dreadful character
of their errand than this. Arrangements with the morgues are complete
and efficient. The bodies are properly prepared and embalmed and a
description of the clothing is placed upon each.


Hospital Arrangements.

The same praise cannot be given the hospital arrangements. The only
hospital is a small wooden church, in which apartments have been roughly
improvised, with blankets for partitions. Only twenty patients can be
cared for here, and the list of wounded is more than two hundred. The
rest have been taken to the private houses that were not overcrowded
with the homeless survivors, to farmers in the country and to outlying
towns. Two have died. It did not occur to any one until lately to get
any nurses from other places to take care of the patients, and even now
most of the nurses are Johnstown people who have lost relatives and have
their own cares. These persons sought out the hospital and volunteered
for the work.


A Procession of Coffins.

A sight most painful to behold was presented to view about noon to-day,
when a procession of fifty unidentified coffined bodies started up the
hill above the railroad to be buried in the improvised cemetery there.
Not a relation, not a mourner was present. In fact, it is doubtful if
these dead have any surviving relatives.

The different graveyards are now so crowded that it will take several
days to bury all the bodies that have been deposited in them. This was
the day appointed by the Citizens' Committee for burying all the
unidentified dead that have been laying in the different morgues since
Sunday morning, and about three hundred bodies were taken to the
cemeteries to-day.

It was not an unusual sight to see two or three coffins going along, one
after another. It is impossible to secure wagons or conveyances of any
kind, consequently all funeral processions are on foot.

Several yellow flags were noticed sticking up from the black wreckage
above the stone bridge. This was a new plan adopted by the sanitary
corps to indicate at what points bodies had been located. As it grows
dark the flags are still up, and another day will dawn upon the
imprisoned remains. People who had lost friends, and supposed they had
drifted into this fatal place, peered down into the charred mass in a
vain endeavor to recognize beloved features.


Unrecognizable Victims of Fire.

There are now nearly two thousand men employed in different parts of the
valley clearing up the ruins and prosecuting diligent search for the
undiscovered dead, and bodies are discovered with undiminished
frequency. It becomes hourly more and more apparent that not a single
vestige will ever be recognized of hundreds that were roasted in the
flames above the bridge.

A party of searchers have just unearthed a charred and unsightly mass
from the smouldering débris. The leader of the gang pronounced the
remains to be a blackened leg, and it required the authoritative verdict
of a physician to demonstrate that the ghastly discovery was the charred
remains of a human being. Only the trunk remained, and that was roasted
beyond all semblance to flesh. Five minutes' search revealed fragments
of a skull that at once disintegrated of its own weight when exposed to
air, no single piece being larger than a half dollar, and the whole
resembling the remnants of shattered charcoal.

Within the last hour a half dozen discoveries in no way less horrifying
than this ghastly find have been made by searchers as they rake with
sticks and hooks in the smouldering ruins. So difficult is it at times
to determine whether the remains are those of human beings that it is
apparent that hundreds must be burned to ashes. The number that have
found a last resting place beneath these ruins can at the best never be
more than approximated.


A Vast Charnel House.

Every moment now the body of some poor victim is taken from the débris,
and the town, or rather the remnants of it, is one vast charnel house.
The scenes at the extemporized morgue are beyond powers of description
in their ghastliness, while the moans and groans of the suffering
survivors, tossing in agony, with bruised and mangled bodies, or
screaming in a delirium of fever as they issue from the numerous
temporary hospitals, make even the stoutest hearted quail with terror.
Nearly two thousand bodies have already been recovered, and as the work
of examining the wreckage progresses the conviction grows that the
magnitude of the calamity has not yet been approximated.


The Pile of Débris Still Burning.

The débris wedged against the big Pennsylvania Railroad stone bridge is
still burning, and the efforts of the firemen to quench or stay the
progress of the flames are as futile as were those of Gulliver's
Lilliputian firemen. The mass, which unquestionably forms a funeral pyre
for thousands of victims who lie buried beneath it, is likely to burn
for weeks to come. The flames are not active, but burn away in a sullen,
determined fashion.

There are twenty-six firemen here now--all level-headed fellows--who
keep their unwieldy and almost exhausted forces under masterful control.

Although they were scattered all over the waste places to-day, the heavy
work was done in the Point district, where a couple hundred mansions lie
in solid heaps of brick, stone and timbers.


One Corpse Every Five Minutes.

Here the labors of the searchers were rewarded by the discovery of a
corpse about every five minutes. As a general thing the bodies were
mangled and unrecognizable unless by marks or letters on their persons.
In every case decomposition has set in and the work of the searchers is
becoming one that will test their stomachs as well as their hearts.
Wherever one turns Pittsburghers of prominence are encountered. They
told me he was somewhere on a stretcher.

I searched them all. I struck matches--and was met by querulous curses;
I knelt by the side of the dying; I inquired of those wounded who
still could walk, but find him I could not. It appears that a new and
heavy moustache had helped to hide him from me. I was in great distress,
but in the fullness of time and when our small circles had run
their route, I discovered him in Toronto.

The word was that we were to go to Vlamertinghe, where the Zeppelins
had bombed us in our huts.

It lay well below threatened Ypres.

We of Number One Company passed Belle-waarde Lake, with its old dug-outs
and its smells, and struck off across the fields, the better to
avoid the heavy barrage fire which made all movement of troops difficult
beyond words. We reached the railroad up and down which in quieter times
the battalion had been wont to march to and fro to the Polygon Wood
trenches.

The fire became heavier here and the going was rough so that what with
the burden of packs which seemed to weigh a ton and all other
things; we moved in a mass, as sheep do. When slung rifles jostled packs,
good friends cursed one another both loud and long. This was trench
nerves.

Shortly, we ran into a solid wall of barrage fire. The officer commanding
the company halted us. We were for pushing on to that rest each
aching bone and muscle, each tight-stretched and shell-dazed nerve
fairly screamed aloud for. But he was adamant. We cursed him. He
pretended not to hear.Levelled by Death.

Bodies of stalwart workmen lie beside the remains of refined ladies,
many of whom are still decked with costly earrings and have jewels
glittering on the fingers. Rich and poor throng these quarters and gaze
with awe-struck faces at the masses of mutilations in the hope of
recognizing a missing one, so as to accord the body a decent burial.


From Death's Gaping Jaws.

We give here the awful narrative of George Irwin's experience. Irwin is
a resident of Hillside, Westmoreland county, and was discovered in a
dying condition in a clump of bushes just above the tracks of the
Pennsylvania Railroad, about a mile below Johnstown. When stretched upon
two railroad ties near the track his tongue protruded from his mouth and
he gasped as if death was at hand. With the assistance of brandy and
other stimulants he was in a degree revived. He then told the following
story:

"I was visiting friends in Johnstown on Friday when the flood came up.
We were submerged without a moment's warning. I was taken from the
window of the house in which I was then a prisoner by Mr. Hay, the
druggist at Johnstown, but lost my footing and was not rescued. I clung
to a saw log until I struck the works of the Cambria Iron Company, when
I caught on the roof of the building. I remained there for nearly an
hour, when I was knocked again from my position by a piece of a raft. I
floated on top of this until I got down here and I stuck in an apple
tree.


Preferred Death to Such Sights.

"I saw and heard a number of other unfortunate victims when swept by me
appealing for some one to save them. One woman and two children were
floating along in apparent safety; then they struck the corner of a
building and all went down together.

"I would rather have died than have been compelled to witness that
sight.

"I have not had a bit to eat since Friday night, but I don't feel
hungry. I am afraid my stomach is gone and I am about done for."

He was taken to a hospital by several soldiers and railroad men who
rescued him.


A Young Lady's Experiences.

Miss Sue Caddick, of Indiana, who was stopping at the Brunswick Hotel,
on Washington street, and was rescued late Friday evening, returned home
to-day. She said she had a premonition of danger all day and had tried
to get Mrs. Murphy to take her children and leave the house, but the
lady had laughed at her fears and partially dissipated them.

Miss Caddick was standing at the head of the second flight of stairs
when the flood burst upon the house. She screamed to the
Murphys--father, mother and seven children--to save themselves. She ran
up stairs and got into a higher room, in which the little children, the
oldest of whom was fourteen years, also ran. The mother and father were
caught and whirled into the flood and drowned in an instant.

The waters came up and the children clung to the young lady, who saw
that she must save herself, and she was compelled to push the little
ones aside and cling to pieces of the building, which by this time had
collapsed and was disintegrating. All of the children were drowned save
the oldest boy, who caught a tree and was taken out almost unhurt near
Blairsville. Miss Caddick clung to her fraction of the building, which
was pushed into the water out of the swirl, and in an hour she was taken
out safe. She said her agony in having to cut away from the children was
greater than her fear after she got into the water.


An Old Lady's Great Peril.

Mrs. Ramsey, mother of William Ramsey and aunt of Lawyer Cassidy, of
Pittsburgh, was alone in her house when the flood came. She ran to the
third story, and although the house was twisted off its foundation, it
remained intact, and the old lady was rescued after being tossed about
for twenty-four hours.

James Hines, Jr., of Indiana, one of the survivors, to-day said that he
and twelve of the other guests took refuge on the top of the Merchants'
Hotel. They were swept off and were carried a mile down the stream, then
thrown on the shore. One of the party, James Ziegler, he said, was
drowned while trying to get to the top of the building.

One hundred and seventy-five of the corpses brought to Nineveh by the
flood were buried this afternoon and to-night on the crest of a hill
behind the town. Three trenches were dug two hundred feet long, seven
feet wide and four feet deep. The coffins were packed in very much as
grocers' boxes are stored in a warehouse. Of the two hundred bodies
picked up in the fields after the waters subsided 117 were unidentified
and were buried marked "Unknown." Twenty-five were shipped to relatives
at outside points. In many cases friends of those who were recognized
were unable to do anything to prevent their consignment to the trenches.
Altogether twenty-seven were identified to-day. The bodies as fast as
they were found were taken to the storehouse of Theodore F. Nimawaker,
the station agent here, and laid out on boards. It was impossible on
account of their condition to keep them any longer. The County
Commissioners bought an acre of ground for $100, out of which they made
a cemetery.


By Locomotive Headlights.

It was sad to see the coffins going up the steep hill on farm wagons,
two or three on each wagon. No tender mourners followed the mud-covered
hearses. Enough laborers sat on each load to handle it when it reached
its destination. The Commissioners of Cumberland county have certainly
behaved very handsomely. The coffins ordered were of the best. Some
economical citizens suggested that they buy an acre of marsh land by the
river, which could be had for a few dollars, but they declared that the
remains should be placed in dry ground. The lifeless clay reposes now
far out of the reach of the deadly waters which go suddenly down the
Conemaugh Valley. It is a pretty spot, this cemetery, and one that a
poet would choose for a resting place. Mountains well wooded are on
every hand; no black factory smoke defaces the sky line.

Two locomotive headlights shed their rays over the cemetery to-night and
gave enough light for the men to work by. They rapidly shoveled in the
dirt. No priests were there to consecrate the ground or say a prayer
over the cold limbs of the unknown. Upon the coffins I noticed such
inscriptions as these: "No. 61, unknown girl, aged eight years, supposed
to be Sarah Windser." "No. 72, unknown man, black hair, aged about
thirty-five years, smooth face." Some of the bodies were more
specifically described as "fat," "lean," and to one I saw the term
"lusty" applied.


CHAPTER XII.

Pathetic Scenes.


Some of the really pathetic scenes of the flood are just coming to the
public ear. John Henderson, his wife, his three children, and the mother
of Mrs. Henderson remained in their house until they were carried out by
the flood, when they succeeded in getting upon some drift. Mr. Henderson
took the babe from his wife, but the little thing soon succumbed to the
cold and the child died in its father's arms. He clung to it until it
grew cold and stiff and then, kissing it, let it drop into the water.
His mother-in-law, an aged lady, was almost as fragile as the babe, and
in a few minutes Mr. Henderson, who had managed to get near to the board
upon which she was floating saw that she, too, was dying. He did what
little he could to help her, but the cold and the shock combined were
too much. Assuring himself that the old lady was dead, Mr. Henderson
turned his attention to his own safety and allowed the body to float
down the stream.

In the meantime Mrs. Henderson, who had become separated from her
husband, had continued to keep her other two children for some time, but
finally a great wave dashed them from her arms and out of her sight.
They were clinging to some driftwood, however, and providentially were
driven into the very arms of their father, who was some distance down
the stream quite unconscious of the proximity of his loved ones. Another
whirl of the flood and all were driven over into some eddying water in
Stony Creek and carried by backing water to Kernville, where all were
rescued. Mrs. Henderson had nearly the same experience.


Dr. Holland's Awful Plunge.

Dr. Holland, a physician who lived on Vine street, saw both of his
children drown before his eyes, but they were not washed out of the
building. He took both of them in his arms and bore them to the roof,
caring nothing for the moment for the rising water. Finally composing
himself, he kissed them both and watched them float away. His father
arrived here to-day to assist his son and take home with him the bodies
of the children, which have been recovered. Dr. Holland, after the death
of his children, was carried out into the flood and finally to a
building, in the window of which a man was standing. The doctor held up
his hands; the man seized them and dextrously slipping a valuable ring
from the finger of one hand, brutally threw him out into the current
again. The physician was saved, however, and has been looking for the
thief and would-be murderer ever since.


Crushed in His Own House.

David Dixon, an engineer in the employ of the Cambria Iron Works, was
with his family in his house on Cinder Street, when the flood struck the
city. The shock overturned his house against that of his neighbor,
Evans, and he, with his infant daughter, Edith, was pinned between the
houses as a result of the upturning. Both houses were carried down
against the viaduct of the Pennsylvania Railroad and there, in sight of
his wife and children, excepting a 15-year-old lad, he was drowned, the
water rising and smothering him because of his inability to get from
between the buildings. His wife was badly crushed and it is thought will
be an invalid the remainder of her days. The children, including the
babe in its father's arms, were all saved, and the other boy, Joe, one
of the brightest, bravest, handsomest little fellows in the world, was
in his news-stand near the Pennsylvania passenger station, and was
rescued with difficulty by Edward Decker, another boy, just as the
driftwood struck the little store and lifted it high off its foundation.


Babies who Died Together.

This morning two little children apparently not over three and four
years old, were taken from the water clasped in each other's arms so
tightly that they could not be separated, and they were coffined and
buried together.

A bright girl, in a gingham sun-bonnet and a faded calico dress came out
of the ruins of a fine old brick house next the Catholic church on
Jackson street this afternoon. She had a big platter under her arm and
announced to a bevy of other girls that the china was all right in the
cupboard, but there was so much water in there that she didn't dare go
in. She chatted away quite volubly about the fire in the Catholic
church, which also destroyed the house of her own mother, Mrs. Foster.
Āstrīðr kona jarls, dōttir Burizleifs konungs, var vinr mikill Ōlāfs
konungs, ok var þat mjǫk af hinum fyrrum tęngðum, er Ōlafr konungr hafði
ātt Geiru, systur [*] hęnnar. Sigvaldi jarl var maðr vitr ok rāðugr;
en er hann kom sēr ī rāða-gęrð við Ōlāf konung, þā dvalði hann
mjǫk fęrðina hans austan at sigla, ok fann til þess mjǫk ȳmsa hluti.
[*] En lið Ōlāfs konungs lēt geysi illa, ok vāru męnn mjǫk heim-fūsir,
er þeir lāgu albūnir, en veðr byr-væn.

Sigvaldi jarl fekk njōsn leyniliga af Danmǫrk, at þā var austan
kominn hęrr Svīakonungs, ok Eirīkr jarl hafði þā ok būinn sinn hęr,
ok þeir hǫfðingjarnir mundu þā koma austr undir Vindland, ok þeir
hǫfðu ā kveðit, at þeir mundu bīða Ōlāfs konungs við ey þā er Svǫlðr
heitir, svā þat, at jarl skyldi svā til stilla [*] at þeir mætti
þar finna Ōlāf konung.

Þā kom pati nakkvarr til Vindlands, at Sveinn Dana- konungr hęfði hęr ūti,
ok gǫ̈rðisk brātt sā kurr, at Sveinn Danakonungr mundi vilja finna Ōlāf
konung. En Sigvaldi jarl sęgir konungi: 'ekki er þat rāð Sveins konungs
at lęggja til bardaga við þik með Dana-hęr einn saman, svā
mikinn hęr sem þēr hafið. En ef yðr er nakkvarr grunr ā
þvī, at ū-friðr muni fyrir, þā skal ek fylgja yðr með mīnu [*] liði, ok
þōtti þat styrkr vera fyrr, hvar sem Jōms-vīkingar fylgðu hǫfðingjum;
mun ek fā þēr ellifu skip vel skipuð.'

Konungr jātti þessu.

Var þā lītit veðr ok hag-stœtt; lēt konungr þā leysa flotann, ok
blāsa til brott-lǫgu. Drōgu męnn þā segl sīn, ok gengu meira
smā-skipin ǫll, ok sigldu [*] þau undan ā haf ūt. En jarl sigldi nær
konungs-skipinu, ok kallaði til þeira, bað konung sigla ęptir sēr: 'mēr
er kunnast,' sęgir hann, 'hvar djūpast er um eyja-sundin, en þēr
munuð þess þurfa með þau in stōru skipin.' Sigldi þā jarl fyrir með
sīnum skipum. Hann hafði ellifu skip, en konungr sigldi ęptir honum
með sinum stōr-skipum, hafði hann þar ok ellifu skip, en allr annarr
hęrrinn sigldi ūt ā hafit. En er Sigvaldi jarl sigldi utan at Svǫlðr,
þā
röri ā mōti þeim skūta ein. Þeir sęgja jarli at hęrr Dana- konungs lā þar
ī hǫfninni fyrir þeim.

Þā lēt jarl hlaða seglunum, ok rōa þeir inn undir eyna.

Sveinn Danakonungr ok Ōlāfr Svīakonungr ok Eirīkr jarl vāru þar þā
með allan hęr sinn; þā var fagrt veðr ok bjart sōl-skin. Gengu þeir
nū upp ā hōlminn allir hǫfðingjar með miklar sveitir manna, ok sā er
skipin sigldu ūt ā hafit mjǫk mǫrg saman. Ok nū sjā þeir hvar siglir
eitt mikit skip ok glæsiligt; þā mæltu bāðir konungarnir:
'þetta er mikit skip ok ākafliga fagrt, þetta mun vera Ormrinn langi.'
Eirīkr jarl svarar ok sęgir: 'ekki er þetta Ormr hinn langi.' Ok svā
var sem hann sagði; þetta skip ātti Eindriði af Gimsum. Lītlu sīðar sā
þeir hvar annat skip sigldi miklu meira en hit fyrra. Þā mælti Sveinn
konungr: 'hræddr er Ōlāfr Tryggvason nū, eigi þorir hann at sigla
með hǫfuðin ā skipi sīnu.'

Þā sęgir Eirīkr jarl: 'ekki er þetta konungs skip, kęnni ek þetta
skip ok seglit, þvī at stafat er seglit, þat ā Erlingr Skjālgsson;
lātum sigla þā, bętra er oss skarð ok missa ī flota Ōlāfs konungs
en þetta skip þar svā būit.'

En stundu sīðar sā þeir ok kęndu skip Sigvalda jarls, ok viku þan þannig
at hōlmanum. Þā sā þeir hvar sigldu þrjū skip, ok var eitt mikit
skip.

Mælti þā Sveinn konungr, biðr þā
ganga til skipa sinna, sęgir at þar fęrr Ormrinn langi. Eirīkr jarl
mælti: 'mǫrg hafa þeir ǫnnur stōr skip ok glæsilig en Orm hinn
langa, bīðum ęnn.'

Þā mæltu mjǫk margir męnn:
'eigi vill Eirīkr jarl nū bęrjask, ok hęfna fǫður sīns; þetta er skǫmm
mikil, svā at spyrjask mun um ǫll lǫnd, ef vēr liggjum hēr með jafn-miklu
liði, en Ōlāfr konungr sigli ā
hafit ūt hēr hjā oss sjālfum.' En er þeir hǫfðu þetta talat um hrīð,
þā sā þeir hvar sigldu fjogur skip, ok eitt af þeim var dręki all-mikill
ok mjǫk gull-būinn. Þā stōð upp Sveinn konungr, ok mælti: 'hātt mun
Ormrinn bera mik ī
kveld, honum skal ek stȳra.'

Þā mæltu margir, at Ormrinn var furðu mikit skip ok frītt, ok rausn mikil
at lāta gǫ̈ra slīkt skip. Þā mælti Eirīkr jarl, svā at nakkvarir
męnn heyrðu: 'þōtt Ōlāfr konungr hęfði ekki meira skip en þetta, þā mundi
Sveinn konungr þat aldri fā af honum með einn saman Danahęr.' Dreif þā
fōlkit til skipanna, ok rāku af tjǫldin, ok ætluðu at būask skjōtliga.
En er hǫfðingjar rœddu þetta milli sīn, sem nū er sagt, þā sā þeir,
hvar sigldu þrjū
skip all-mikil, ok fjōrða sīðast, ok var þat Ormrinn langi.

En þau hin stōru skip, er āðr hǫfðu siglt, ok þeir hugðu at Ormrinn væri,
þat var hit fyrra Traninn, en hit sīðara Ormrinn skammi. En þā er þeir
sā Orminn langa, kęndu allir, ok mælti þā engi ī mōt, at þar mundi
sigla Ōlāfr Tryggvason; gengu þā til skipanna, ok skipuðu til at-
lǫgunnar.
He says: "I was standing on the river bank about 7.30 last
evening when a raft swept into view. It must have been the floor of a
dismantled house. Upon it were grouped two women and a man. They were
evidently his mother and sister, for both clung to him as though
stupefied with fear as they were whirled under the bridge here. The man
could save himself if he had wished by simply reaching up his hand and
catching the timber of the structure. He apparently saw this himself,
and the temptation must have been strong for him to do so, but in one
second more he was seen to resolutely shake his head and clasp the women
tighter around the waist.

"On they sped. Ropes were thrown out from the tree tops, but they were
unable to catch them, though they grasped for the lines eagerly enough.
Then a tree caught in their raft and dragged after them. In this way
they swept out of view."

Still finding bodies by scores in the burning débris; still burying the
dead and caring for the wounded; still feeding the famishing and housing
the homeless, and this on the fourth day following the one on which
Johnstown was swept away. The situation of horror has not changed; there
are hundreds, and it is feared thousands, still buried beneath the
scattered ruins that disfigure the V-shaped valley in which Johnstown
stood. A perfect stream of wagons bearing the dead as fast as they are
discovered is constantly filing to the improvised morgues, where the
bodies are taken for identification. Hundreds of people are constantly
crowding to these temporary houses, one of which is located in each of
the suburban boroughs that surround Johnstown. Men armed with muskets,
uniformed sentinels, constituting the force that guard the city while it
is practically under martial law, stand at the doors and admit the crowd
by tens.


In the Central Dead House.

In the Central dead house in Johnstown proper, as early as 9 o'clock
to-day there lay two rows of ghastly dead. To the right were twenty
bodies that had been identified. They were mostly women and children and
they were entirely covered with white sheets, and a piece of paper
bearing the name was pinned at the feet. To the left were eighteen
bodies of the unknown dead. As the people passed they were hurried along
by an attendant and gazed at the uncovered faces seeking to identify
them. All applicants for admission if it is thought they are prompted
by idle curiosity, are not allowed to enter. The central morgue was
formerly a school-house, and the desks are used as biers for the dead
bodies. Three of the former pupils yesterday lay on the desks dead, with
white pieces of paper pinned on to the white sheets that covered them,
giving their names.


Looking for Their Loved Ones.

But what touching scenes are enacted every hour about this mournful
building. Outside the sharp voices of the sentinels are constantly
shouting: "Move on." Inside, weeping women and sad-faced, hollow-eyed
men are bending over loved and familiar faces. Back on the steep grassy
hill which rises abruptly on the other side of the street are crowds of
curious people who come in from the country round about to look at the
wreckage strewn around where Johnstown was. "Oh, Mr. Jones," a
pale-faced woman asks, walking up, sobbing, "can't you tell me where we
can get a coffin to bury Johnnie's body?"

"Do you know," asks a tottering old man, as the pale-faced woman turns
away, "whether they have found Jennie and the children?"

"Jennie's body has just been found at the bridge," is the answer, "but
the children can't be found." Jennie is the old man's married daughter,
and she was drowned, with her two children, while her husband was at
work over at the Cambria Mills.


They Ran for Their Lives.

Miss Jennie Paulson, who was on the Chicago day express, is dead. She
was seen to go back with a companion into the doomed section of the day
express in the Conemaugh Valley, and is swept away in the flood.

Last evening, after the evening train had just left Johnstown for
Pittsburgh, it was learned that quite a number of the survivors of the
wrecked train, who have been at Altoona since last Saturday, were on
board. After a short search they were located, and quite an interesting
talk was the result. Probably the most interesting interview, at least
to Pittsburghers, was that had with Mrs. Montgomery Wilcox, of
Philadelphia, who was on one of the Pullman sleepers attached to the
lost express train. She tells a most exciting tale and confirms beyond
the shadow of a doubt the story of Miss Jennie Paulson's tragic death.


A Fatal Pair of Rubbers.

She says: "We had been making but slow progress all the day. Our train
laid at Johnstown nearly the whole day of Friday. We then proceeded as
far as Conemaugh, and had stopped for some cause or other, probably on
account of the flood. Miss Paulson and a Miss Bryan were seated in front
of me. Miss Paulson had on a plaid dress with shirred waist of red cloth
goods. Her companion was dressed in black. Both had lovely corsage
bouquets of roses. I had heard that they had been attending a wedding
before they left Pittsburgh. The Pittsburgh lady was reading a novel.
Miss Bryan was looking out of the window. When the alarm came we all
sprang toward the door, leaving everything behind us. I had just
reached the door when poor Miss Paulson and her friend, who were behind
me, decided to return for their rubbers, which they did.


Chased as by a Serpent.

"I sprang from the car into a ditch next the hillside in which the water
was already a foot and a half deep and with the others climbed up the
mountainside for our very lives. We had to do so as the water glided up
after us like a huge serpent. Any one ten feet behind us would have been
lost beyond a doubt. I glanced back at the train when I had reached a
place of safety, but the water already covered it and the Pullman car in
which the ladies were was already rolling down the valley in the grasp
of the angry waters. Quite a number of us reached the house of a Mr.
Swenzel, or some such name, one of the railroad men, whom we afterward
learned had lost two daughters at Johnstown. We made ourselves as
comfortable as possible until the next day, when we proceeded by
conveyances as far as Altoona, having no doubt but what we could
certainly proceed east from that point. We found the middle division of
the Pennsylvania Railroad was, if anything, in a worse condition than
the western, so we determined to go as far as Ebensburg by train, whence
we reached Johnstown to-day by wagon."


Mrs. G.W. Childs' Escape.

Mrs. George W. Childs, of Philadelphia, was also a member of the party.
She was on her way West, and reached Altoona on Friday, after untold
difficulties. She is almost prostrated by the severe ordeal through
which she and many others have passed, and therefore had but little to
say, only averring that Mrs. Wilcox and her friends, who were on the
lost train, had passed through perils beside which her own sank into
insignificance.

[Illustration: SWEPT AWAY ON THE TRAIN.]

Assistant Superintendent Crump telegraphs from Blairsville Junction that
the day express, eastbound from Chicago to New York, and the mail train
from Pittsburgh bound east, were put on the back tracks in the yard at
Conemaugh when the flooded condition of the main tracks made it
apparently unsafe to proceed further. When the continued rise of the
water made their danger apparent, the frightened passengers fled from
the two trains to the hills near by. Many in their wild excitement threw
themselves into the raging current and were drowned. It is supposed that
about fifteen persons lost their lives in this way.

After the people had deserted the cars, the railroad officials state,
the two Pullman cars attached to the day express were set on fire and
entirely consumed. A car of lime was standing near the train. When the
water reached the lime it set fire to the car and the flames reaching
the sleepers they were entirely consumed.


Exhuming the Dead.

Three hundred bodies were exhumed to-day. In one spot at Main and Market
streets the workmen came upon thirty, among whom were nine members of
the Fitzparis family--the father, mother, seven children and the
grandfather. Only one child, a little girl of nine years, is left out of
a family of ten. She is now being cared for by the citizens' committee.
The body of a beautiful young girl was found at the office of the
Cambria Iron Company. When the corpse was conveyed to the morgue a man
entered in search of some relatives. The first body he came to he
exclaimed: "That's my wife," and a few feet further off he recognized in
the young girl found at the Cambria Iron Company's office his daughter,
Theresa Downs. Both bodies had been found within a hundred yards of each
other.

A dozen instances have occurred where people have claimed bodies and
were mistaken. This is due to the over-zeal of people to get their
relatives and bury them. Nine children walked into one of the relief
stations this morning, led by a girl of sixteen years. They said that
their father, mother and two other children had been swallowed up by the
flood, the family having originally comprised thirteen persons in all.
Their story was investigated by Officer Fowler, of Pittsburgh, and it
was found to be true. Near Main street the body of a woman was taken out
with three children lying on her. She was about to become a mother.


Nursing Their Sorrows.

The afflicted people quietly bear their crosses. The calamity has been
so general that the sufferers feel that everybody has been treated
alike. Grouped together, the sorrows of each other assist in keeping up
the strength and courage of all. In the excitement and hurry of the
present, loss of friends is forgotten, but the time will come when it is
all over and the world gradually drifts back to business, forgetful that
such a town as Johnstown ever existed.

Then it is that sufferers will realize what they have lost. Hearts will
then be full of grief and despair and the time for sympathy will be at
hand. Michael Martin was one of those on the hillside when the water was
rushing through the town. The spectacle was appalling. Women on the
hills were shrieking and ringing their hands--in fact, people beyond
reach of the flood made more noise than those unfortunate creatures
struggling in the water. The latter in trying to save themselves hadn't
time to shriek.

Michael Martin said: "I was on the hillside and watched the flood. You
ask me what it looked like. I can't tell. I never saw such a scene
before and never expect to again. On one of the first houses that struck
the bridge there was standing a woman wearing a white shawl. When the
house struck the bridge she threw up her hands and fell back into the
water. A little boy and girl came floating down on a raft from South
Fork. The water turned the raft toward the Kernville hill and as soon as
it struck the bank he jumped on the hill, dragging his little sister
with him. Both were saved.

"I saw three men and three women on the roof of a house. When they were
passing the Cambria Iron Works the men jumped off and the women were
lost. Mr. Overbeck left his family in McM. row and swam to the club
house, then he tried to swim to Morrell's residence and was drowned. His
family was saved. At the corner of the company's store a man called for
help for two days, but no one could reach him. The voice finally ceased
and I suppose he died.


A Brave Girl.

"Rose Clark was fastened in the débris at the bridge. Her coolness was
remarkable and she was more calm than the people trying to get her out.
She begged the men to cut her leg off. One man worked six hours before
she was released. She had an arm and leg broken. I saw three men strike
the bridge and go down. William Walter was saved. He was anchored on
Main street and he saw about two hundred people in the water. He
believes two-thirds of them were drowned. A frightened woman clung to a
bush near him and her long hair stood straight out. About twenty people
were holding to those in the neighborhood, but most of them were lost.

"John Reese, a policeman, got out on the roof of his house. In a second
afterward the building fell in on his wife and drowned her. She waved a
kiss to her husband and then died. Two servant girls were burned in the
Catholic priest's house. The church was also consumed."


Along the Valley of Death.

Fifteen miles by raft and on foot along the banks of the raging
Conemaugh and in the refugee trains between Johnstown and Pittsburgh.
Such was the trip, fraught with great danger, but prolific of results,
which the writer has just completed. All along the line events of
thrilling interest mingled with those of heartrending sadness
transpired, demonstrating more than ever the magnitude of the horrible
tragedy of last Friday.

Just as the day was dawning I left the desolate city of Johnstown, and,
wending my way along the shore of the winding Conemaugh to Sheridan, I
succeeded in persuading a number of brave and stout-hearted men, who had
constructed a raft and were about to start on an extended search for the
lost who are known to be strewn all along this fated stream, to take me
with them.

The river is still very high, and while the current is not remarkably
swift, the still flowing débris made the expedition one of peril.
Between the starting point and Nineveh several bodies were recovered.
They were mostly imbedded in the sand close to the shore, which had to
be hugged for safety all the way. Indeed the greater part of the trip
was made on foot, the raft being towed along from the water's edge by
the tireless rescuers.

Just above Sang Hollow the party stopped to assist a little knot of men
who were engaged in searching amid the ruins of a hut which lay wedged
between a mass of trees on the higher ground. A man's hat and coat were
fished out, but there was no trace of the human being to whom they once
belonged. Perhaps he is alive; perhaps his remains are among the
hundreds of unidentified dead, and perhaps he sleeps beneath the waters
between here and the gulf. Who can tell?


Died in Harness.

A little farther down we came across two horses and a wagon lying in the
middle of the river. The dumb animals had literally died in harness. Of
their driver nothing is known. At this point an old wooden rocker was
fished out of the water and taken on shore.

Here three women were working in the ruins of what had once been their
happy home. En hvęrir eigu þau hin stōru skip, er þar liggja ūt ā
bak-borða Dǫnum?' 'Þar er,' sęgja þeir 'Eirīkr jarl Hākonar-son.'
Þā svaraði Ōlāfr konungr: 'hann mun þykkjask eiga við oss skapligan fund,
ok oss er vān snarpligrar orrostu af þvī liði; þeir eru Norð-męnn,
sem vēr erum.'

Sīðan greiða konungar at-rōðr.

Lagði Sveinn konungr sitt skip mōti Orminum langa, en Ōlāfr konungr Sœnski
lagði ūt frā, ok stakk stǫfnum at yzta skipi Ōlāfs konungs Tryggvasonar,
en ǫðrum megin Eirīkr jarl. Tōksk þar þā
hǫrð orrosta. Sigvaldi jarl lēt skotta við sīn skip, ok lagði ekki til
orrostu.

Þessi orrosta var hin snarpasta ok all-mann-skœð.

Fram- byggjar ā Orminum langa ok Orminum skamma ok Trananum fœrðu
akkeri ok stafn-ljā ī skip Sveins konungs, en āttu vāpnin at bera niðr
undir fœtr sēr; hruðu þeir ǫll þau skip er þeir fengu haldit. En konungrinn
Sveinn ok þat lið er undan komsk flȳði ā ǫnnur skip, ok þar næst lǫgðu
þeir frā ōr skot-māli.

Ok fōr þessi hęrr svā sem gat Ōlāfr konungr Tryggvason.

Þā lagði þar at ī staðinn Ōlāfr Svīakonungr; ok þegar er þeir koma nær
stōrskipum, þā
fōr þeim sem hinum, at þeir lētu lið mikit ok sum skip sīn, ok lǫgðu frā
við svā būit. En Eirīkr jarl sī-byrði Barðanum við hit yzta skip Ōlāfs
konungs, ok hrauð hann þat, ok hjō
þegar þat ōr tęngslum, en lagði þā at þvī, er þar var næst, ok
barðisk til þess er þat var hroðit. Tōk þā liðit at hlaupa af hinum
smærum skipunum, ok upp ā stōrskipin. En Eirīkr jarl hjō hvęrt ōr
tęngslunum, svā sem hroðit var.The thrilling yet pathetic story of the escape of
the old Judge is best told in his own language. Said he:

"You ask me how I was saved. I answer, God alone knows. With my little
family I lived on Walnut street, next door to the residence of President
McMillan, of the Cambria Iron Company. When the waters surrounded us we
made our way to the third floor, and huddled together in one room,
determined, if die we must, to perish together.


Encircled by Water.

"Higher and higher rose the flood, while our house was almost knocked
from its foundations by the ever-increasing mountain of débris floating
along. At last the bridge at Woodvale, which had given way a short time
before, struck the house and split it asunder, as a knife might have
split a piece of paper.

"The force of the shock carried us out upon the débris, and we floated
around upon it for hours, finally landing near the bridge. When we
looked about for Jennie (here the old man broke down and sobbed
bitterly) she was nowhere to be seen. She had obeyed the Master's
summons."


A Miraculous Escape.

The three little girls, to whom I have referred, were the children of
Austin Lountz, a plasterer, living back of Water street. They were as
happy as happy could be and cut up in childish fashion all the way down.
Their good spirits were easily accounted for when it was learned that
father, mother, children and all had a miraculous escape, when it looked
as if all would be lost. The entire family floated about for hours on
the roof of a house, finally landing high upon the hillside.

Elmer G. Speck, traveling salesman of Pittsburgh, was at the Merchants'
Hotel when the flood occurred, having left the Hurlburt House but a few
hours before. He said:

"With a number of others I got from the hotel to the hill in a wagon.
The sight from our eminence was one that I shall never forget--that I
can never fully describe. The whole world appeared to be topsy-turvy and
at the mercy of an angry and destroying demon of the elements. People
were floating about on housetops and in wagons, and hundreds were
clinging to tree-trunks, logs and furniture of every imaginable
description.

"My sister, Miss Nina, together with my step-brother and his wife, whom
she was visiting, drifted with the tide on the roof of a house a
distance of two blocks, where they were rescued. With a number of others
I built a raft and in a short time had pulled eleven persons from the
very jaws of death. Continuing, Mr. Speck related how a number of folks
from Woodvale had all come down upon their housetops. Mr. Curtis
Williams and his family picked their way from house to house, finally
being pulled in the Catholic church window by ropes."


Three of a Family Drowned.

William Hinchman, with his wife and two children, reached the stone
bridge in safety. Here one of the babies was swept away through the
arches. The others were also swept with the current, and when they came
out on the other side the remaining child was missing, while below Mrs.
Hinchman disappeared, leaving her husband the sole survivor of a family
of four.

"Did your folks all escape alive?" I asked of George W. Hamilton, late
assistant superintendent of the Cambria Iron Company, whom I met on the
road near New Florence.

"Oh, no" was his reply. "Out of a family of sixteen seven are lost. It
was January and very cold and sleep was impossible under such conditions.
We nibbled our tiny rations and struck out as soon as darkness came.
Our plan was to go straight across country, but Brumley could not navigate
the rough going of the fields; although on the level roads he made
out fairly well.

So we chanced it on the latter.

Brumley was struggling along manfully but his legs caused him great
suffering. At about two o'clock in the morning we lay to in the shadow
of a clump of trees at the roadside, thinking to ease him a bit. He
flung himself down. Simmons massaged Brumley's legs whilst I watched.

We had just said: "Come on," and they were rising to their feet, when
another figure stepped off the road and in amongst our trees. It
was so dark where we stood that he probably would not have seen us had
not Brumley at that very moment been rising to his feet. He appeared
as much surprised as we were and started back as though in amazement. And
then without more ado, he turned and fled the way we had come whilst
we made what haste we could in the opposite direction, all equally
alarmed.

Who he was or what he wanted, we could only surmise. If he was not also
an escaped prisoner then he must have been badly wanted by the authorities
to have been travelling in such a fashion at such an hour; and above
all, to have been so alarmed by this chance meeting with fugitives. In
any event we wished him luck and promptly forgot all about him.

Later on in the night our road led us directly into a village. We
hesitated as to what we should do. Brumley was for pushing through.
The alternative was to go round and through the fields, lose valuable
time and play out Brumley's precious legs.

It was past midnight, so we decided on the village route, and started
on.

We passed through without being molested, but just as we were leaving the
other side some civilians saw us and shouted "Halt!" and other words
meaning "to shoot."

We paid no attention.

Espying a wood in the distance, we struck out for it. Brumley was
in misery and threw up the sponge. We stopped to argue with him,
at the same time dragging him along, and while doing so saw two
more civilians rushing up and shouting as they came. Lights began
to spring up all over the village.His house was
in the track of the storm, and, with his two daughters, Tillie and
Mamie, his granddaughter and a dog, he was carried down on the kitchen
roof. They floated into the Bon Ton Clothing House, a mile and a half
away, on Main street. Here they remained all night, but were taken off
by Mrs. Emil Young and went to Pittsburgh.

Jacob I. Horner and his family of eight had their house in Hornerstown
thrown down by the water and took refuge in a tree. After awhile they
returned to their overturned house, but again got into the tree, from
which they were rescued after an enforced stay of a number of hours.

Charles Barnes, a real estate dealer on Main street, was worth $10,000
last Friday and had around him a family of four. To-day all his loved
ones are dead and he has only $6 in his pockets.

The family of John Higson, consisting of himself, wife, and young son,
lived at 123 Walnut street. Miss Sarah Thomas, of Cumberland, was a
visitor, and a hired man, a Swede, also lived in the house. The water
had backed up to the rear second-story windows before the great wave
came, and about 5 o'clock they heard the screaching of a number of
whistles on the Conemaugh. Rushing to the windows they saw what they
thought to be a big cloud approaching them. Before they could reach a
place of safety the building was lifted up and carried up Stony creek
for about one-quarter of a mile. As the water rushed they turned into
the river and were carried about three-quarters of a mile further on.
All the people were in the attic and as the house was hurled with
terrific force against the wreckage piled up against the Pennsylvania
Railroad bridge Higson called to them to jump. They failed to do so,
but at the second command Miss Thomas leaped through the window, the
others followed, and after a dangerous walk over fifty yards of broken
houses safely reached the shore.

[Illustration: CHILD FOUND THUMPING ON A WRECKED PIANO.]


CHAPTER XIII.

Digging for the Dead.


A party started in early exploring the huge mass of débris banked
against the Pennsylvania Railroad bridge. This collection, consisting of
trees, sides of houses, timber and innumerable articles, varies in
thickness from three or four feet to twenty feet. It is about four
hundred yards long, and as wide as the river. There are thousands of
tons in this vast pile. How many bodies are buried there it is
impossible to say, but conservative estimates place it at one thousand
at least.

The corps of workmen who were searching the ruins near the Methodist
Church late this evening were horrified by unearthing one hundred
additional bodies. The great number at this spot shows what may be
expected when all have been recovered.

When the mass which blazed several days was extinguished it was simple
to recover the bodies on the surface. It is now a question, however, of
delving into the almost impenetrable collection to get at those lodged
within. The grinding tree trunks doubtless crushed those beneath into
mere unrecognizable masses of flesh. Those on the surface were nearly
all so much burned as to resemble nothing human.

Meanwhile the searchers after bodies, armed with spikes, hooks and
crowbars, pry up the débris and unearth what they can. Bodies, or rather
fractions of them, are found in abundance near the surface.


Tracing Bodies by the Smell.

I was here when the gang came across one of the upper stories of a
house. It was merely a pile of boards apparently, but small pieces of a
bureau and a bed spring from which the clothes had been burned showed
the nature of the find. A faint odor of burned flesh prevailed exactly
at this spot. "Dig here," said the physician to the men. "There is one
body at least quite close to the surface." The men started in with a
will. A large pile of underclothes and household linen was brought up
first. It was of fine quality and evidently such as would be stored in
the bedroom of a house occupied by people quite well to do. Shovels full
of jumbled rubbish were thrown up, and the odor of flesh became more
pronounced. Presently one of the men exposed a charred lump of flesh and
lifted it up on the end of a pitchfork. It was all that remained of some
poor creature who had met an awful death between water and fire.

The trunk was put on a cloth, the ends were looped up making a bag of
it, and the thing was taken to the river bank. It weighed probably
thirty pounds. A stake was driven in the ground to which a tag was
attached giving a description of the remains. This is done in many cases
to the burned bodies, and they lay covered with cloths upon the bank
until men came with coffins to remove them. Then the tag was taken from
the stakes and tacked on the coffin lid, which was immediately closed
up, as identification was of course out of the question. There is a
stack of coffins by the railroad bridge. Sometimes a coffin is carried
to the spot on the charred débris where the find is made.


Prodding Corpses with Canes.

The searchers by thrusting down a stick or fork are pretty sure to find
a corpse. I saw a man run a cane in the débris down to the hilt and it
came up with human flesh sticking to it. Another ran a stick into the
thoroughly cooked skull of a little boy two feet below the surface.
There are bodies probably as far down as seventy feet in some cases, and
it does not seem plain now how they are to be recovered. One plan would
be to take away the top layers of wood with derricks, and of course the
mass beneath will rise closer to the surface. The weather is cold
to-day, and the offensive smell that was so troublesome on the warm days
is not noticeable at a distance.


Saved From Disfiguration.

The workers began on the wreck on Main street just opposite the First
National Bank, one of the busiest parts of the city. A large number of
people were lost here, the houses being crushed on one side of the
street and being almost untouched on the other, a most remarkable thing
considering the terrific force of the flood. Twenty-one bodies were
taken out in the early morning and removed to the morgue. They were not
very much injured, considering the weight of lumber above them. In many
instances they were wedged in crevices. They were all in a good state
of preservation, and when they were embalmed they looked almost
lifelike. In this central part of the city examination is sure to result
in the unearthing of bodies in every corner. Cottages which are still
standing are banked up with lumber and driftwood, and it is like mining
to make any kind of a clear space. I have seen relations of people who
are missing, and who are supposed to be in the ruins of their homes,
waiting patiently by the hour for men to come and take away the débris.

When bodies are found, the location of which was known, there are
frequently two or three friends on the spot to see them dug up. Four and
five of the same family have been taken from a space of ten feet square.
In one part of the river gorge this afternoon were found the bodies of a
woman and a child. They were close together and they were probably
mother and infant. Not far away was the corpse of a man looking like a
gnarled and mis-shapen section of a root of a tree. The bodies from the
fire often seem to have been twisted up, as if the victims died in great
agony.


Rapidly Burying the Dead.

The order that was issued last night that all unidentified dead be
buried to-day is being rapidly carried out. The Rev. Mr. Beall, who has
charge of the morgue at the Fourth ward school-house, which is the chief
place, says that a large force of men has been put at work digging
graves, and at the close of the afternoon the remains will be laid away
as rapidly as it can be done.

At least she wrote me later for information. There was no need
of his dying even though it might have been necessary to have amputated
his arm higher up. Royston was exchanged to Switzerland and recovered
from his wounds except for the loss of an eye.

CHAPTER VIII
THE PRINCESS PATRICIA'S GERMAN UNCLE
Roulers--The Old Woman and the Gentle Uhlans--Billeted in a
Church--Quizzed by a Prince.

We were marched to Roulers, which we reached well after dark. A
considerable crowd of soldiers and civilians awaited our coming.
The Belgian women and children congregated in front of the church while
we waited to be let in, and threw us apples and cigarettes. The uhlans
and infantrymen rushed them with the flat side of their swords and
the butts of their muskets; and mistreated them. They knocked one old
woman down quite close to where I stood.

So we had to do without and were not even permitted to pick up the
gifts that lay at our feet, much less the old woman.

The church had been used as a stable quite recently and the stone-flagged
floor was deep with the decayed straw and accumulated filth of men
and horses. We lay down in it and got what rest we could for the
remainder of the night. There were about one hundred and
fifty prisoners in all--Shropshires, Cheshires, King's Royal Rifles and
other British regiments--all from our division and mostly from our
brigade. Other small parties continued to come in during the night,
but there were no more P.P.'s. In the morning a large tub of water was
carried in and each man was given a bit of black bread and a slice
of raw fat bacon.

The latter was salty and so thoroughly unappetizing that I cannot
recall that any one ate his ration, for in spite of the fact that we had
been twenty-four hours without food, we were so upset by the experiences
we had undergone, so shattered by shell fire and lack of rest that
we were perhaps inclined to be more critical of our food than normal
men would have been.

Shortly afterward a high German officer came in with his staff. He was a
stout and well-built man of middle age or over, typically German in
his general characteristics but not half bad looking. His uniform
was covered with braid and medals. Every one paid him the utmost
deference.

He stopped in the middle of the room.

"Are there any Canadians here?"

I stepped forward. "Yes, sir."
"I mean the Princess Patricia's Canadians."
"Yes, sir. I am. And here's some more of them," and I pointed at the
prostrate figures of my companions, where they sprawled on the
flagstones.

"Princess Patricia's Regiment?"
"Yes, sir."
"Well, the Princess Patricia is my niece--awfully nice girl. I hope it
won't be long before I see her again."

I grinned: "Well, I hope it won't be long before I see her, too,
sir."

The other fellows joined us, the straw and the smell of it still sticking
to their clothes as they formed a little knot about the Prince and
his staff.

The scene was incongruous, the smart uniforms of the immaculately kept
staff officers contrasting strangely with our own unkempt
foulness. We occupied the centre of the stage. Around us were grouped
the men of our sister regiments, most of them lying on the floor in
a dazed condition. There were few who came forward to listen. They were
too tired, and to them at least, this was merely an incident--one of
a thousand more important ones. Odd parts of clothes hung on the ornate
images and decorations of the room. A German rifle hung by its sling
from the patient neck of a life-sized Saviour, while further over,
the vermin-infested shirt of a Britisher hung over the rounded
breasts of a brooding Madonna, with the Infant in her lap.

At the door a small group of guards stood stiffly to a painful
attention and continued so to do whilst royalty touched them with the
shadow of its wings.

The Prince questioned us further and I told him that I had been on a
guard of honor to the Princess when she had been a child and when
her father, the Duke of Connaught had been the General Officer Commanding
at Aldershot.

He laughed back at us and was altogether very friendly. "You'll go to a
good camp and you'll be all right if you behave yourselves."
Scarfe shoved in his oar here, grousing in good British-soldier
fashion: "I don't call it very good treatment when they steal the
overcoats from wounded men."
"Who did that?" He was all steel, and I saw a change come over the
officers of the staff.
"The chaps that took us prisoners," said Scarfe.
"What regiment were they?" The Prince glanced at an aide, who hastily
drew out a notebook and began to take down our replies.
"The 21st Prussians, sir." 
"Do you know the men?"
"Their faces but not their names."
"Of what rank was the officer in charge?"They were immediately removed to the
morgue for identification.

Dr. Beall, who has the supervision of the morgues in Johnstown, said
that so far 2,300 bodies had been recovered in Johnstown proper, most of
which had been identified and buried.


Dynamite and Derricks Used.

At one o'clock this afternoon the use of dynamite was resumed to burst
the logs so that the débris in the dam at the bridge can be loosened and
floated down the river. The dynamite is placed in holes bored into the
massive timbers. When the log has been broken a chain is attached to its
parts and it is then hoisted by a machine on the bridge and dropped into
the current of the river. Contractor Kirk has abandoned the idea of
constructing a dam to overflow the mass of ruins at the bridge. The
water has fallen and cannot be raised to a serviceable height. A
powerful windlass has been constructed at a point about one hundred feet
below the bridge, and a rope attached to it is fastened to logs at the
edge of the débris. In this way the course between one of the six spans
of the railroad bridge has been cleared out. Where dynamite has been
used to burst the logs another span has been freed of the débris, a
space of about twenty by forty feet being cleared. The men are now well
supplied with tools, but the force is not large enough to make rapid
headway. It is believed that many more bodies will be found when the
débris is loosened and started down the river.


Dynamite Tears the Bodies.

Thirteen bodies were taken from the burning débris at the stone bridge
at one time this afternoon. None of the bodies were recognizable, and
they were put in coffins and buried immediately. They were so badly
decomposed that it was impossible to keep them until they could be
identified. During a blast at the bridge this afternoon two bodies were
almost blown to pieces. The blasting has had the effect of opening the
channel under the central portion of the bridge.


In Unwholesome Company.

I came up here from Nineveh last night with the most disreputable crowd
I ever traveled with. They were human buzzards flocking to the scene of
horrors.

There was danger of a fight every moment, and if one had been started
there is little doubt that it would have been short and bloody, for the
conduct of the rowdy portion of the travellers had enraged the decent
persons, to whom the thought of drunkenness and ribaldry at such a time
was abhorrent, and they were quite ready to undertake the work of
pitching the demoralized beings off the cars.

Wedged in here and there between intoxicated ruffians, who were
indulging in the foulest jests about the corpses on which they were
about to feast their eyes, were pale faced women, sad and red eyed, who
looked as if they had had little sleep since the horrible collapse of
the dam. Some of them were bound for Johnstown to claim and bring back
bodies already identified, while others were on a trip for the ruins to
commence a long and perhaps fruitless search for whatever might be left
of their relatives. Some of those who misbehaved were friends of the
lost, who, worn out with loss of sleep, had taken to drink and become
madmen, but the greater part were merely sight-seers or robbers of the
dead.


Avaricious Tramps.

There were many tramps whose avarice had been stimulated by hearing of
diamond rings and watches found on the dead. There was one little
drunken hunchback who told those in the car who listened to him that
years ago he had quarrelled with his parents in Johnstown and had not
seen them since. He was on the way now to see if anything was left of
them. One moment he was in maudlin tears and the next he was cracking
some miserable joke about the disaster. He went about the car shaking
dice with other inebriated passengers, and in the course of half an hour
had won $6. Over this he exhibited almost the glee of a maniac, and the
fate of his people was lost sight of. Then he would presently forget his
gains and go sobbing up the aisle looking for listeners to his pitiful
story.

There were two sinister looking Hungarians in the smoking car and their
presence excited the anger of a handful of drunken maniacs. They made
loud speeches, denouncing the conduct of Hungarians who robbed the
Johnstown dead, levelling their remarks at the particular two. As they
grew more excited they demanded that the passengers make a move and
lynch the fellows. A great deal of trouble would have ensued, doubtless,
if the train had not at that moment stopped at Sang Hollow, four miles
from Johnstown. The conductor shouted out that the passengers must leave
the car and walk along the track the remainder of the distance.


A Strange Procession.

We started out in the fast gathering darkness and the loiterers who held
back made a long string. The drunken ruffians staggered along the
tracks, howling with glee and talking about corpses, showing what their
object was in coming. The tired out and disheartened women crowded under
the shelter of the more respectable men. There was one member of the
Pennsylvania National Guard in the troop with his bayonet, and he seemed
to be the rallying point for the timid.

[Illustration: MAP OF THE DISTRICT SWEPT BY THE FLOOD.]

When the mob reached the outskirts of Johnstown they came across a
little camp of military with outposts. I had been told that soldiers
were keeping people who had no business there out of the lost city, and
to insure my passage through the lines I had procured an order from Mr.
McCreery, chairman of the Chamber of Commerce Committee at Pittsburgh,
stating that I was entitled to go through. I knew that the drunken
lunatics behind me could have no such documents, and I imagined the
soldiers would stop them. Nothing of the kind happened. Whole troops
surged through the line. No passes were asked from them and they showed
none. They only quieted down for a moment when they saw the uniforms of
the National Guard.


Reinforcing Disorder.

The mob merely helped to swell the host of thieves, cutthroats and
pickpockets with which the region is infested.

The trains which had passed us, going from Johnstown to Pittsburgh
looked as if they might be made up of joyous excursionists. The cars
were crowded to the platforms, and for some reason or other dozens of
the inebriated passengers thought it appropriate to cheer and yell,
though God knows the whole surroundings were calculated to make a human
being shed tears of anguish. The sight of the coffins in the baggage
cars, some of them containing the dead, had no dampening effect upon the
spirit of these roysterers.

The reaction from debauches and excitement is terrible, and there can be
little doubt that many minds will give way under the strain. One of the
wonders of the disaster is the absence of suicide and the apparently
calm way in which the most wofully bereaved support themselves under
their terrible loss. It must be an unnatural calm. Men have quietly told
me that they have lost their entire families and then have suddenly
changed the subject and talked of some absurdly trivial matter with an
air of great interest, but it was easy to see that there was some
numbing influence over the mechanism of the mind. It is unnatural and
awful. It is almost impossible to realize that the troops of workmen
leisurely digging in the ruins as if engaged in everyday employment are
really digging for the dead, and it is only in the actual sight of death
and its emblems that one can persuade one's self that it is all true.
The want of sleep conduces to an unnatural condition of the mind, under
which these awful facts are bearable to the bereaved.


Picketing the Ruins.

It was like a military camp here last night. So many citizens have been
knocked down and robbed that the soldiers had special instructions to
see that no queer characters got through to the centre of the town. I
had an excellent chance of seeing how impossible it was for an
unauthorized person to move about the town easily, although he could get
into the interior. I had been kindly invited to sleep on a wisp of hay
in a neighboring barn, but being detained late in the valley reached the
press headquarters after my host had left. It was a question of hunting
shelter or sleeping on the ground.

A gentleman whom I met told me that he was living in a Baltimore and
Ohio day passenger coach about a mile out, and that if we could find our
way there I was welcome to a soft place on the floor. We spoke to the
nearest picket. He told us that it would be madness to try to cross one
part of the ground unless we had revolvers, because a gang of Huns were
in hiding ready to knock down passengers and hold up any one who seemed
defenceless. However, after a little cogitating, he said that he would
escort us to General Hastings' headquarters, and we started, picking our
way over the remains of streets and passing over great obstructions that
had been left by the torrent. Ruin and wreck were on every hand. You
could not tell where one street began and another left off, and in some
places there was only soft mud, as devoid of evidence of the former
presence of buildings as a meadow is, though they had been the sites of
business blocks. It was washed clean.


A Weird Journey.

Our guide told us the details of the capture of five marauders who had
been robbing the dead. They had cut off the head of a woman found in the
débris to get her earrings. He said that a number of deputy sheriffs had
declared that at dawn they would march to the place where the prisoners
were and take them out and hang them. My military friend said that he
and his comrades would not be particularly anxious to interfere. The
scene as we picked our way was lighted up by camp fires, around which
sat groups of deputy sheriffs in slouch hats. They were a grim looking
set, armed with clubs and guns. A few had rifles and some wore revolvers
in their belts in regular leather cowboy pockets. The camp fires were
about two hundred yards apart and to pass them without being challenged
was impossible. At the adjutant general's office we got a pass entitling
us to pass the pickets, and bidding our guardsman good-night we started
off escorted by a deputy sheriff. There were long lines of camp fires
and every few rods we had to produce credentials. It was a pretty effect
that was produced by the blazing logs. They lighted up the valley for
some distance, throwing in relief the windowless ruins of what were once
fine residences, bank buildings or factories. Embedded in the mud were
packages of merchandise, such as sugar in barrels, etc., and over these
we stumbled continually.


A Muddy Desert.

Streams were running through the principal streets of the city. In some
parts all that was left of the thoroughfares were the cobble stones--by
which it was possible to trace streets for a short distance--and the
street railway tracks remaining in places for spaces of a hundred feet
or so. There were some buildings outside of the track of the full force
of the torrent, the roofs of which seemed not to have been reached.
Others had been on fire and had lost parts of their walls. It was a
dismal sight, this desolation, as shown up by the fitful camp fires. It
was only after climbing over perilous places, crossing streams and
narrowly escaping with our necks, that we came within sight of the car
at two o'clock this morning. We passed by a school house used as a
morgue. Several people were inside gazing by lamp light at the silent
bodies in a hunt for lost ones. Piles of coffins, brown and white, were
in the school playground, which resounded not many days ago with the
shouts of children, some of whom lie there now. There are heaps of
coffins everywhere throughout the city. Conversation with the deputy
sheriffs showed a deep-rooted hatred against the Huns, and a
determination to shoot them down like dogs if they were caught prowling
about near the exposed property. While we were toiling over débris we
heard three shots about a quarter of a mile off. We could learn nothing
of their report. The service done by the deputy sheriffs was excellent.


Mistaken Identification.

At St. Columba's Catholic Church the scenes were striking in their
individual peculiarities. One woman came in and identified a body as
that of Katie Frank. The undertakers labeled it accordingly, but in a
few moments another woman entered the church, raised the lid of the
coffin, scanned the face of the corpse, and then tore the label from the
casket. The undertakers were then warned by the woman to be more careful
in labelling coffins in the future. She then began to weep, and left the
church in despair. She was Katie's mother, and Katie is yet among the
wreck in the river below.

The lot of bodies held and coffined at Morrellville presented a
different feature. The mud was six inches deep, and the drizzling rain
added gloom to the scene. Here and there could be seen, kneeling in the
mud, broken hearted wives and mothers who sobbed and prayed. The
incidents here were heartrending.

At the Fourth ward school-house morgue a woman from Erie, whose name
could not be learned, went to the morgue in search of some one, but
fainted on seeing the long line of coffins. At the Kernville morgue one
little boy named Elrod, on finding his father and mother both dead,
seized a hatchet, and for some time would let no one enter the place,
claiming that the people were lying to him and wanted to rob him of his
father and mother.

One sad incident was the sight of two coffins lying in the Gautier
graveyard with nobody to bury them. A solitary woman was gazing at them
in a dazed manner, while the rain beat on her unprotected head.


CHAPTER XIV.

Hairbreadth Escapes.


So vast is the field of destruction that to get an adequate idea from
any point level with the town is simply impossible. It must be viewed
from a height. From the top of Kernville Mountain just at the east of
the town the whole strange panorama can be seen.

Looking down from that height many strange things about the flood that
appear inexplicable from below are perfectly plain. How so many houses
happened to be so queerly twisted, for instance, as if the water had a
whirling instead of a straight motion, was made perfectly clear.

The town was built in an almost equilateral triangle, with one angle
pointed squarely up the Conemaugh Valley to the east, from which the
flood came. At the northerly angle was the junction of the Conemaugh and
Stony creeks. The Southern angle pointed up the Stony Creek Valley. Now
about one-half of the triangle, formerly densely covered with buildings,
is swept as clean as a platter, except for three or four big brick
buildings that stand near the angle which points up the Conemaugh.


Course of the Flood.

The course of the flood from the exact point where it issued from the
Conemaugh Valley to where it disappeared below in a turn in the river
and above by spreading itself over the flat district of five or six
miles, is clearly defined. The whole body of water issued straight from
the valley in a solid wave and tore across the village of Woodvale and
so on to the business part of Johnstown at the lower part of the
triangle. Here a cluster of solid brick blocks, aided by the
conformation of the land, evidently divided the stream. The greater part
turned to the north, swept up the brick block and then mixed with the
ruins of the villages above down to the stone arch bridge. The other
stream shot across the triangle, was turned southward by the bluffs and
went up the valley of Stony Creek. The stone arch bridge in the meantime
acted as a dam and turned part of the current back toward the south,
where it finished the work of the triangle, turning again to the
northward and back to the stone arch bridge. The stream that went up
Stony Creek was turned back by the rising ground and then was reinforced
by the back water from the bridge again and started south, where it
reached a mile and a half and spent its force on a little settlement
called Grubbtown.


Work of the Water.

The frequent turning of this stream, forced against the buildings and
then the bluffs, gave it a regular whirling motion from right to left
and made a tremendous eddy, whose centrifugal force twisted everything
it touched. This accounts for the comparatively narrow path of the flood
through the southern part of the town, where its course through the
thickly clustered frame dwelling houses is as plain as a highway. The
force of the stream diminished gradually as it went south, for at the
place where the currents separated every building is ground to pieces
and carried away, and at the end the houses were only turned a little on
their foundations. In the middle of the course they are turned over on
their sides or upside down. Further down they are not single, but great
heaps of ground lumber that look like nothing so much as enormous pith
balls.

To the north the work of the waters is of a different sort. It picked up
everything except the big buildings that divided the current and piled
the fragments down about the stone bridge or swept them over and soon
down the river for miles. This left the great yellow, sandy and barren
plain so often spoken of in the despatches where stood the best
buildings in Johnstown--the opera house, the big hotel, many wholesale
warehouses, shops and the finest residences. In this plain there are now
only the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad train, a school-house, the Morrell
Company's stores and an adjoining warehouse and the few buildings at the
point of the triangle. One big residence, badly shattered, is also
standing.


Houses Changed Base.

These structures do not relieve the shocking picture of ruin spread out
below the mountain, but by contrast making it more striking. That part
of the town to the south where the flood tore the narrow path there
used to be a separate village which was called Kernville. It is now
known as the South Side. Some of the queerest sights of the wreck are
there, though few persons have gone to see them. Many of the houses that
are there, scattered helter skelter, thrown on their sides and standing
on their roofs, were never in that neighborhood nor anywhere near it
before. They came down on the breast of the wave from as far up as
Franklin, were carried safely by the factories and the bridges, by the
big buildings at the dividing line, up and down on the flood and finally
settled in their new resting places little injured. A row of them,
packed closely together and every one tipped over at about the same
angle, is only one of the queer freaks the water played.

I got into one of these houses in my walk through the town to-day. The
lower story had been filled with water, and everything in it had been
torn out. The carpet had been split into strips on the floor by the
sheer force of the rushing tide. Heaps of mud stood in the corners.
There was not a vestige of furniture. The walls dripped with moisture.
The ceiling was gone, the windows were out, and the cold rain blew in
and the only thing that was left intact was one of those worked worsted
mottoes that you always expect to find in the homes of working people.
Lacking a gun limber, the Germans used a post with a cross-bar for this
man's case. After that, this was a recognized mode of punishment
for many petty offences in this camp.

     It is true that this form of punishment is a part of the so-called
discipline of our army.

I saw a wagon in the middle of a side street sticking tongue, and all,
straight up into the air, resting on its tail board, with the hind
wheels almost completely buried in the mud. I saw a house standing
exactly in the middle of Napoleon street, the side stove in by crashing
against some other house and in the hole the coffin of its owner was
placed. Some scholar's library had been strewn over the street in the
last stage of the flood, for there was a trail of good books left half
sticking in the mud and reaching for over a block. One house had been
lifted over two others in some mysterious way and then had settled down
between them and there it stuck, high up in the air, so its former
occupants might have got into it again with ladders.

Down at the lower end of the course of the stream, where its force was
greater, there was a house lying on one corner and held there by being
fastened in the deep mud. Through its side the trunk of a tree had been
driven like a lance, and there it stayed sticking out straight in the
air. Māl mun vera upp at standa ok klæðask, en ekki eigu þēr nū langa
leið fram til borgar- innar er kǫlluð er Ūt-garðr. Heyrt hęfi ek at þēr
hafið
kvisat ī milli yðvar at ek væra ekki lītill maðr vęxti, en sjā
skulu þēr þar stœrri męnn, er þēr komið ī Ūtgarð.

Nū mun ek rāða yðr heil-ræði: lāti þēr eigi stōrliga yfir yðr, ekki munu
hirðmęnn Ūtgarða-loka vel þola þvīlīkum kǫgur- sveinum kǫpur-yrði; en
at ǫðrum kosti hverfið aptr, ok þann ætla ek yðr bętra af at taka.
People who stood near the ruins of Poplar Bridge saw four
women on a roof float up on the stream, turn a short distance above and
come back and go past again and once more return. Then they went far
down on the current to the lower part of the town and were rescued as
they passed the second story window of a school house. A man who was
imprisoned in the attic of his house put his wife and two children on a
roof that was eddying past and stayed behind to die alone. They floated
up the stream and then back and got upon the roof of the very house they
had left, and the whole family was saved.

At Grubbtown there is a house that came all the way from Woodvale. On it
was a man who lived near Grubbtown, but was working at Woodvale when the
flood came. He was carried right past his own house and coolly told the
people at the bridge to bid his wife good-bye for him. The house passed
the bridge three times, the man carrying on a conversation with the
people on shore and giving directions for his burial if his body should
be found. The third time the house went up it grounded at Grubbtown, and
in an hour or two the man was safe at home. Three girls who went by on a
roof crawled into the branches of a tree and had to stay there all night
before they could make any one understand where they were. At one time
scores of floating houses were wedged in together near the ruins of
Poplar street bridge. Four brave men went out from the shore, and,
stepping from house roof to house roof, brought in twelve women and
children.


Starvation Overcomes Modesty.

Some women crawled from roofs into the attics of houses. In their
struggles with the flood most of their clothes had been torn from them,
and rather than appear on the streets they stayed where they were until
hunger forced them to shout out of the windows for help. At this stage
of the flood more persons were lost by being crushed to death than by
drowning. As they floated by on roofs or doors the toppling houses fell
over upon them and killed them.


Nineveh was Spared.

The valley of death, twenty-three miles long, practically ends at
Nineveh. It begins at Woodvale, where the dam broke, and for the entire
distance to this point the mountains make a canyon--a water trap, from
which escape was impossible. the Prince asked, decently enough.

I lied brazenly: "Sorry, sir; I've lost mine."

The fact was I had shoved it down under my puttees while lying back of
the trench the previous afternoon.

Scarfe said: "You
can have mine, sir."

He took it. "Thanks so much." He glanced at the aide again; rather sharply
this time, I thought.

The latter blushed and hastily extracted a wallet, from which he
handed Scarfe a two-mark piece, equal to one and ten pence, or
forty-four cents.Every spring, the station agent tells me, there have been a score of
such alarms, and when the people heard Nunamaker they laughed and called
him an old fogy for his pains. They had run too often to the mountains
to escape some imaginary flood to be scared by anything less than the
actual din of the torrent in their ears. Two hours and a half later a
despatch came saying that the dam had indeed broken.

Again the station agent went on a trot to the residential part of the
town. That same despatch had gone thundering down the whole valley.
Johnstown heard the news and so did Conemaugh. No one believed it. It
was what they called "a chestnut." But the cry had put the people a
little on the alert. One hour after the despatch came the first warning
note of the disaster. Mr. Nunamaker tells me that it took really more
than that time for the head of the leaping cataract to travel the
twenty-three miles. If that is so the people of Johnstown must have had
half an hour's warning at least, for Johnstown is half way between here
and the fatal dam.


Awful Scenes.

Nineveh is very flat on the river side where the people live, though,
fortunately, the main force of the current was not directed on this side
of the stream. In a second the river rose two feet at a jump. The green
apples and the berries which we got here proved a most welcome change
in our diet.

"August thirty-first: Not much rain but very cold. Too dark to
travel last night. No stars out to go by. Crossed the river this
morning, at last.There
were pitiful shrieks from despairing women. The people of Nineveh could
do nothing. No boat could have stemmed the cataract. During the night
there were shrieks heard from the flooded meadows. Next morning at nine
o'clock the flood had fallen three feet. Bodies could be seen on the
trees by the Nineveh people, who stayed up all night in the hope of
being able to do some act of humanity.


The Living and the Dead.

