"Dolly and Emma are staying out," said Mrs. Witherspoon. "Two of our
guests did not come." 

"Well," Sylvia exclaimed, "that just makes it right! Please let them
take the place of Mr. Shirley and myself. You see, we haven't seen
each other for three or four years, and it's hard for us to get
interested into a game of cards." 

The whole room caught its breath at once; and here and there one
heard a little squeak of hysteria, cut short by some one who was not
sure whether it was a joke or a scandal. "Why--Sylvia!" stammered
Mrs. So that, if by studying Roger Bacon's life or his books we could
get into touch with his mind and acquire some of that special moving
and inspiring quality of his, it would help us far more than would
the mere knowledge of the optician.

This truth is no doubt hard to see in the case of purely technical
science; in books of wider range, such as Darwin's for instance,
it is easy for any reader to feel the presence of a really great
mind, producing inspiration of a different sort from that of the
most excellent up-to-date examination text-book. In philosophy,
religion, poetry, and the highest kinds of art, the greatness of
the author's mind seems as a rule to be all that matters; one almost
ignores the date at which he worked.

She stood and waited, to make
sure that her ex-fiancé was not too paralysed to follow. She led him
out through the tangle of card-tables; and in the door-way she
stopped and waited for Mrs. Armistead and Mrs. Witherspoon, and
literally forced these two ladies to come with her out of the room. 

23. Do you care to hear the details of the punishment which Sylvia
administered to the two conspirators? She took them to the sofa, and
made Frank draw up chairs for them, and when she had got comfortably
seated, she proceeded to talk to Frank just as gently and sincerely
and touchingly as she would have talked if there had been nobody
present. She asked about all that had befallen him, and when she
discovered that he was still not able to chat, she told him about
herself, about her baby, who was beautiful and dear, even if she was
blind, and about all the interesting things she had seen in Europe.
When presently the old ladies showed signs of growing restless, she
put hand cuffs on them and chained them to their chairs. 

"You see," she said, "it would never do for Mr. Shirley and myself
to talk without a chaperon. You got me into this situation, you
know, and papa and mamma would never forgive you." 

"You are mistaken, Sylvia!" cried Mrs. Witherspoon. "Mr. Shirley so
seldom goes out, and he had said he didn't think he would come!" 

"I am willing to accept that explanation," said Sylvia, politely,
"but you must help me out now that the embarrassing accident has
happened." 

Nor did it avail Mrs. Witherspoon to plead her guests and their
score. "You may be sure they don't care about the score," said
Sylvia. "They'd much prefer you stayed here, so that you can tell
them how Frank and I behaved." 

And then, while Mrs. Witherspoon was getting herself together,
Sylvia turned upon the other conspirator. "We will now hold one of
my eugenics classes," she said, and added, to Frank, "Mrs. Armistead
told me that you wanted to join my class." 

"I don't understand," replied Frank, at a loss. 

"I will explain," said Sylvia. "It is not a very refined joke they
have in the town. Mrs. Armistead meant to say that she credits a
disgraceful story that was circulated about you when we were
engaged, and which my people made use of to make me break our
engagement. I am glad to have a chance to tell you that I have
investigated and satisfied myself that the story was not true. I
want to apologise to you for ever having believed it; and I am sure
that Mrs. Armistead may be glad of this opportunity to apologise for
having said that she believed it." 

"I never said that I believed it!" cried Sallie Ann. 

"No, you didn't, Mrs. Armistead--you would not be so crude as to say
it directly. You merely dropped a hint, which would lead everybody
to understand that you believed it." 

Sylvia paused, just long enough to let the wicked lady suffer, but
not long enough to let her find a reply. "When you tell your friends
about this scene," she continued, "please make clear that I did not
drop hints about anything, but said exactly what I meant--that the
story is false, so far as it implies any evil done by Mr. Shirley,
and that I am deeply ashamed of myself for having ever believed it.
It is all in the past now, of course--we are both of us married, and
we shall probably never meet again. But it will be a help to us in
future to have had this little talk--will it not, Frank?" 

There was a pause, while Sallie Ann Armistead recovered from her
dismay, and got back a little of her fighting power. Suddenly she
rose: "Virginia," she said, firmly, "you are neglecting your
guests." 

"I don't think you ought to go until Frank has got himself
together," said Sylvia. "Frank, can you sort your cards now?" 

"Virginia!" commanded Sallie Ann, imperiously. "Come!" 

Mrs. Witherspoon rose, and so did Sylvia. "We can't stay here
alone," said she. "Frank, will you take Mrs. Witherspoon in?" And
she gently but firmly took Mrs. Suppose it is argued that an average
optician at the present day knows more optics than Roger Bacon,
the inventor of spectacles; suppose it is argued that therefore he
is, as far as optics go, a greater man, and that Roger Bacon has
nothing to teach us; what is the answer?

Through the remainder
of the evening Sylvia chatted and played, and later partook of
refreshments with Malcolm McCallum, and mildly teased that
inconsolable bachelor, quite as in the old days. Now and then she
stole a glance at Frank Shirley, and saw that he was holding up his
end; but he kept away from her, and she never even caught his eye. 

Yet there are some few such books. Up till about the year 1900 the
elements of geometry were regularly taught, throughout Europe, in a
text-book written by a Greek called Eucleides in the fourth or
third century B. C.[1] That text-book lasted over two thousand
years._ Oh, sister, I felt _thrills_ running up and
down my back! Sister, what _did_ you say to him? Sister, do you know
old Mr. Perkins kept leaning over me and asking what was happening;
and how could I shout into his deaf ear that everybody was stopping
to hear what you were saying to Frank Shirley?" 

At the end of the ride, there was Aunt Varina waiting up as
usual--to renew her own youth in the story of the evening, what this
person had worn and what that person had said. But Sylvia left her
sister to tell the story, and fled to her room and locked the door,
and flung herself upon the bed and gave way to a torrent of weeping.

Half an hour later Celeste went up, and finding that the door
between her room and Sylvia's was unlocked, opened it softly, and
stood listening. Finally she stole to her sister's side and put her
arm about her. "Never mind, sister dear," she whispered, solemnly,
"I know how it is! We women all have to suffer!"