To-day I shook myself together. I could not stand such wretchedness. I
said, I will get a novel, and I will put myself into it--grimly--I will
read in spite of everything.

       *       *       *       *       *

And such a book as I lighted on by chance!--Once I had whole yawning vistas
of books toward which I stretched out my arms; but somehow I had forgotten
them all to-day. I could do no better than pick up a book by chance.--

I picked up Tess of the D'Urbervilles, and I found myself in the midst of
the same misery that haunts me here. I read it, but it did not help me.

       *       *       *       *       *

--It is strange what poverty has ground into my soul. I find myself reading
such a book with but one feeling, one idea crying out in me. I discover
that my whole being is reduced to the great elemental, primitive instinct
of self-preservation. Love is dead in me, generosity, humanity, imagination
is dead,--everything but one wild-beast passion; and I find myself panting
as I read: "Get some money! Get some money! Hold on to it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

--After a while I think suddenly: "And I am a poet!" That brings a moan
from me and I sit shuddering.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 7th.

Tess of the D'Urbervilles is one of the most unconvincing books I ever
read. I neither believed in it nor cared about it in the slightest.

I am shown a "pure woman," and by and by I learn, to my perplexity, that
she has been seduced; after which she continues the "pure woman" again, and
I am asked to agonize over her troubles! But all the time I keep saying,
"This is not a woman that you are showing me at all--a woman with a soul;
it is a puppet figure that you suppose 'seduced' for the sake of the
story."

It is our absurd English ideas of "propriety" that make possible such
things. If the author had had to show the seduction of "Tess" the weakness
of the thing would have been plain in an instant. That he did not show it
was his lack of conscience. There is no propriety in art but truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 8th.

I took the manuscript to the editor again to-day. He told me to come in on
Monday.

Deep in my soul I can have no more disappointments about it. I take it
about from habit. I sat and looked it over last night, but one can not read
emotional things in cold blood. I said, Is this true? Is it natural? Is
there any _use_ in it?

I was tempted to cut out one or two things; but I decided to let it stay as
it was.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 10th.

I have been sitting to-night in my room, half-dazed, or pacing about the
streets talking to myself in a frenzy. I can hardly believe that it is
true, I can hardly realize it! I laugh with excitement, and then I cry.

       *       *       *       *       *

I went to-day to get back my manuscript. And the editor said: "Mr.
Stirling, it is a most extraordinary piece of work. It is a most
interesting thing, I like it very much."

I stared at him gasping. Then I waited to hear him say--"But I regret"--But
he didn't!

"I can't tell you anything definite about it," he said. "I want to submit
it to the firm. I wouldn't undertake to accept any such unusual thing for
the magazine without consulting them, and especially seeing if they will
bring it out afterward--"

"You are thinking of using it in the magazine!" I cried.

"As I tell you, I can't say positively. I can only tell you what I think of
it. I will have them read it at once--"

"I will take it to them to-day!" I put in.

"No," he said, "you need not, for I am going there this afternoon, and I
will take it, and ask them to read it immediately."

I can't remember what else he said. I was deaf, crazy! I rushed home,
talking to myself incoherently. I remember sitting here in a chair and
saying aloud, "Oh, it can't be! It is impossible! That it should be good
enough to publish in a magazine like that! It is some mistake--it will all
come to nothing. It's absurd!"

       *       *       *       *       *

So I sat, and I thought what such a thing would mean to me--it would make
my reputation in a day--I should be free--_free_! But I thought of it
and it did not make me happy; I only sat staring at myself, shuddering. The
endless mournfulness that is in my heart surged up in me like a tide, and
suddenly I began to cry like a child.

"It has come to me too late," I exclaimed, "too late! I can't believe
it--it doesn't mean anything to me. I don't care anything about it--I mean
the poem! _I don't believe in it myself_!"

God, do you know I said that, and _meant_ it? I said more--I sat and
whispered it to myself: "Let them take it, yes, let them! I don't care--it
will set me free--I shall have some money! But they're fools to do it,
they're fools!"

       *       *       *       *       *

March 11th.

I tremble with excitement all the day, dreaming about that thing. I go
about half-mad. "Oh, just think of it," I whisper, "just think of it!"

I linger about it hungrily! He spoke as if he really meant to make them
take it.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 13th.

I went to see him to-day to ask. No, they had not let him know yet, but
they had the manuscript. He would write me.

I made up my mind that I would not bother him again. I will wait, hard as
it is.

       *       *       *       *       *

I sat asking myself to-day, "Do you really mean that you believe that poem
is going to stir the world--this huge, heedless world you see about you?
Have you truly that blind, unreasoning faith that you try to persuade
yourself you have?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ah, I don't know what I believe now. Only, once I had my young courage,--I
feared not the world, I could do anything. Now I am but one among a
million.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 16th.

I force myself to read these things that half-interest me; but I think I
spend a quarter of my time wandering about whispering that they are going
to publish it. I cry out, "Oh, they must!" I go into the library and stare
at the magazine and think of it there. I walk past the publishers', and
think of it there! I have been inquiring all about publishing, about terms
and all that sort of thing. It makes my brain reel--why, they might pay me
five hundred dollars for it! Think of it--five hundred dollars!--I could go
crazy with such a thought as that.

And then I think what the reviews will say of it, and I cry, "Oh, no, it
can't be true!"

Again I find myself saying, "Only let them take it! I don't care about the
rest, whether it succeeds or not--let them take it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

March 18th.

I walked past the editor's office to-day. It took just every bit of will
that I had, not to go in. I said: "He might know even now, and I wouldn't
hear till to-morrow!"

But I didn't do it. I said I would wait a week, anyhow.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 20th.

I don't know what in the world to make of it.

The week ended to-day, and nothing yet; and I hit upon another scheme, I
went to the publishers. I said: "I will ask them, and he needn't know
anything about it and it won't bother him." So I went in and they referred
me to the manuscript clerk. She said she had never heard of The Captive.

"But it's here somewhere," I said, "the editor brought it here."

"There is no manuscript ever comes here," she answered, "that is not
entered on my books."

"But," I said, "some member of the firm must have it."

"If any member of the firm got it," she said, smiling, "the first thing he
would do would be to bring it to me to enter in the books."

I insisted. I wanted to see somebody in the firm, but she answered me there
was no use. Finally she suggested that they might know something about it
up in the offices of the magazine. I went there, but no, no one had ever
heard of it there.

I came home dazed. I don't know what in the world to make of it. He
certainly said that the firm was reading it. I wrote to-night to ask him
about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 23d.

I have waited day by day in the utmost perplexity to hear from him about
that. I should have heard from him yesterday. I don't know what in the
world to make of it. Can he have gone in to them privately? Or can he have
forgotten it--he is so busy!

I dread the latter circumstance--but I dread as much to anger him in the
other case.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 27th.

I waited four days more. I went up to see him. Just as I feared. I have
annoyed him. I could see it. I know he must be tired of seeing my face.

"Mr. Stirling," he said, "I have told you that the poem is being read by
the firm, and that I will let you know the moment I hear from them."

"I only came," I said, "because the clerk told me--"

"There are some things clerks don't know," he put in.

I tremble at the thought of making him angry. I will not go near him again.

       *       *       *       *       *

March 30th.

I am doing my best to keep my mind on some reading, so as not to make the
agony unbearable. But it is very hard--the mails disturb you. I can only
read in the middle of the day, and at night. In the morning I expect the
first mail, trembling; but after that I know a city letter can't come till
afternoon, so I can read. Then again at night I know it can't come.

       *       *       *       *       *

--I am reading The Ring and the Book. I have always found that it doesn't
do to take vulgar opinions. I had supposed I should find The Ring and the
Book hard reading.

It _is_ skippable--the consequence of having a foolish scheme to fill
out. But the story of Pompilia and Giuseppi is one of the finest things I
know of anywhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 3d.

It has been another week. I could not stand it any more. I am going over to
the publishers' again this afternoon.

--What in Heaven's name does this thing mean? I met the satisfied smile of
the clerk again. "We have never seen the manuscript, Mr. Stirling!"

If you could only see how positive she is! "I don't know anything about
what the editor told you, I can only tell you positively that he has never
submitted any such manuscript to the firm, or to anybody connected with the
firm."

That thing drove me wild. I don't know what to make of it. Surely he's
given it to some one, for he told me so.

I went up to the magazine rooms, and he was in his office; but he had left
word that he would not see any one, and they would not even take in my
name.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 4th.

I can do nothing but haunt that place till I find out what it means! It
has been three weeks and a half since he gave it to them, and he said I
would hear at once. What in the world does he think it means to me? Can't
I presume the slightest gleam of interest, of care, on his part?

       *       *       *       *       *

April 5th.

To-day I could not stand it any longer. I went to the place again. I saw
the manuscript clerk once more--the same answer. I went upstairs; he was
there again, but busy. I wrote a note and left it. I explained that I did
not in the least wish to trouble him, but that the thing meant a great
deal to me, and that I had the utmost need of promptness; that it had been
almost four weeks since he gave it to the firm, and that nobody there
seemed to know anything about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 7th.

He did not answer my letter! I thought I should hear to-day. O God, this is
the most tormenting thing! Think what it means! And what in Heaven's name
has he done? Surely some one--he must have given it to some one!

Only why in the world doesn't he understand my perplexity and explain?

       *       *       *       *       *

April 9th.

No letter yet. I went back to the publishers' again this morning. I have
been wandering by the place every day since. They had not seen it yet. She
said she'd have the firm inquire, but I said not to, as it might annoy him.
"He surely has given it to some one, you know."--She laughed at me.

I went up to the magazine office again. He was not there, but I saw his
associate. The associate did not know anything about it either.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 10th.

I waited one day more and no answer. I wrote to him again to-night, begging
him to please reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

--I have begun several novels, but I can't get interested in them. I am
simply sick. I came out of that horrible restaurant with money enough to do
me for ten weeks, and here are over five of them gone in this hideous way.
Oh, it is monstrous!

It has been nine weeks and a half since I gave him that poem in the
beginning! I never spent nine such weeks of horror in my life.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 12th.

"In answer to your letter I beg to inform you that the manuscript of The
Captive is now in the hands of the firm, and that you may expect a decision
in about a week."

So! It is a relief at any rate to know that the thing is all right. I can
wait a little better now.

Of course I knew it must be there. A plague on that foolish clerk!

       *       *       *       *       *

April 14th.

All the while that I am writing about this thing I keep up my courage by
thinking what it will mean to me. It is something so immense that I can
hardly realize it. I shall be famous!--And he really liked it, there can be
no doubt about that! He was too busy to talk much, but he showed he liked
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 17th.

Oh my soul, I think this is the most frightful thing--is it not simply a
nightmare? I have been pacing the floor to-night in an agony. _They have
never seen that manuscript_!

I was going by there to-day, and I couldn't withstand the temptation; the
week was not up, but I said: "If I inquire, there's no reason why he should
know about it." I went in.

And that terrible clerk--she smiled at me still! The more I talked, the
more she shook her head. "There's no such manuscript ever been seen here,"
she said. I showed her the letter, and that decided her to go in and see
the firm. They sent out word that neither they nor their readers had ever
heard of it, but that they would write to the editor at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

Oh, I think this is horrible--horrible! And then just guess what I did! I
couldn't bear the agony--I went to the other place, and he wasn't there,
and so at last I went to his club.

He wasn't at the club, but they told me where he was; and I spent ten cents
telephoning him. At this place they said he had an engagement to be there
later, so I spent another ten cents, and that time I found him. I told him
who I was. "The week isn't up yet," I said, "but the firm say they have
never received the manuscript."

"So?" he said; his voice sounded hard, I thought, and it made me shudder.
"You come up to see me the day after to-morrow at ten o'clock, and you'll
hear about your manuscript."

And that is all. And I walked out of the great, rich club, and I have been
pacing up and down in my own garret ever since. I am almost too ill with
anxiety to stand.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 18th.

And to-day I can only wait. Once I lay down upon the bed and cried.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 19th.

I don't know how to tell this thing. I am simply dazed. I had an experience
to-day--the most hideous thing that I think ever happened to me in my life.
Oh, I have been like a madman ever since--I lost my head--I did not know
what I was doing. I was really crazy--it is three o'clock in the morning,
now, but I shall write it down--I can not sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

To-day I went up to see that man as he told me to. I went trembling with
suspense--just think, it has been eleven weeks since this agony began. And
I went into his office--he was alone; and when he saw me he sprang to his
feet--my soul, he looked like a tiger. He stood there in the middle of the
room fairly gasping with rage.

"So," he cried, "you've come, have you! I tell you, young man, I have never
been subjected to such an outrage as this in my life! I would not read
another manuscript for you--why, I wouldn't stand for such an imposition
from Balzac or Thackeray--no, sir, I wouldn't!"

I stared at the man simply speechless with astonishment. "Why," I panted,
"what do you mean?"

"What do I mean? Why, you have hounded me about this city until I'm crazy.
There's no place I can go to escape you. You come to my office, you come
here, you come to my club! You have made yourself a perfect pest at the
publishers to every one! Why--"

He stopped out of breath. Of course I have no courage or head with men--I
was ready to grovel at his feet. "My dear sir," I pleaded, "I assure you
I didn't mean to do anything of the kind--it was only that the clerk kept
telling me--"

"I don't care what the clerk kept telling you! I tell you that that
manuscript has been in the hands of the company since the day I told you I
would leave it there. Of course there have been delays, there is all sorts
of routine to go through with; but suppose all our contributors did the
same thing--what would we do?"

He was talking at me as if expecting a reply. Fortunately the right words
came to my lips--I was really ready to cry with shame and perplexity.

"I don't think it is quite the same with all your contributors," I said,
with a trembling voice. "While I have been waiting I have been simply
starving."

It seemed to clear the atmosphere. He stared at me, and then he sat down.
He was ashamed of himself, I could see. "Why," he said, "you couldn't have
been paid anything for months."

"I didn't know," I said, "I didn't know anything about it. But I have been
starving."

He spoke more quietly. "Mr. Stirling," he said, "I'm very sorry about this,
the whole thing has been unfortunate. Excuse me that I spoke angrily; let
us not think any more about it."

I stood there, feeling almost like crying, I was so nervous.

"Now, about that manuscript," he went on, "I'm doing what I can to learn
about it. It's been there all along, as I told you, and you will hear about
it soon. Why, Mr. Stirling, I even took the trouble to send my secretary
down there yesterday to make sure that it was all right."

"I did not want you to go to any such trouble," I stammered.

"That's all right," he said, "don't mention it. Now they will have decided
in a few days, and I will write you--"

"No, please do not," I said, still with my abject humility. "Don't take any
more trouble--let me go there and find out--"

"By no means!" said he. "Take my advice and don't go near there again under
any circumstances. You can't tell how much an author hurts himself by
troubling a publisher as you have done. Don't go near there--let me write
to you."

I promised that I would; and then with more abjectness I got myself out of
that room, and I went out and sat down upon a step near by, simply shaking
like a leaf.

"Oh, heavens!" I gasped. "That was horrible! Horrible!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I sat dazed--thinking about it--thinking it over and over--I couldn't
understand it, try as I might. Why should he have been so angry _that_
day--had he not told me to come there? And had he not said I should have a
report?

       *       *       *       *       *

--And then suddenly something flashed over me that made me leap! That
firm had written him a letter the day before yesterday asking about the
manuscript, and _that_ was why he was angry! And he had sent his
secretary down to inquire!--But why in Heaven's name should he send his
secretary down to inquire _when he had a telephone connecting with the
firm right there in his office_!

And so I saw it--all in one instant the thing flashed over me!

I was so wild I paid a car-fare--I rode straight as a die down to that
place, and I went in and saw the clerk.

"He has sent the manuscript now," I said, "hasn't he?"

"Yes," she said.

"He sent it in yesterday?" I said.

"Yes."

"He sent it by his secretary, didn't he?"

"Yes," she said again.

"Thank you," I answered, and went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Is not that simply monstrous, simply awful beyond words? I have been beside
myself tonight with rage, with amazement, with perplexity. Oh, think
what I have suffered at the hands of that frightful man! And what have I
_done_ to him--why should he have treated me so? What does it mean? I
am baffled every way I turn.

The thing is like flame in my blood--like acid in my veins. It makes me
hysterical with pain. I cry aloud.

       *       *       *       *       *

--What do you mean by it, you monster, you wretch? Why, here for eleven
weeks I have been hanging upon your every word--eleven weeks of my life
spent in torment--absolutely flung away! _Eleven weeks!_ And you have
lied to me--and you have kicked me about like a dog!

What do you mean? What do you mean? Tell me, above all, _why_ you did
it! Were you torturing me on purpose? Or did you simply forget it? But
then, how could you forget it when you had to tell me all those miserable
falsehoods? And when you had to write me those letters?

And then to-day!

That is the thing that goads me most--to-day! I stood there cringed before
you like a beaten cur--you kicked me--you spit upon me! And it was every
bit of it a lie! That insolent rage of yours--why, it wasn't even genuine!
You weren't even angry--you knew that you had no reason to be angry--that
you had treated me as if I were a worm to tread on! And yet you stood there
and abused me!

Oh--why, the thing is madness to think of! It is more madness the more you
realize it! I have never known anything like it before in my life.

Yes--actually--it is something quite new to me. I have met blind
people--people who would not heed me--but a really evil person I have never
known before! A person who has no respect for another's rights--who would
trample upon another! Oh, you miserable wretch--and the lies--the lies! The
hateful sneaking of it--you black-hearted, insolent man! The manuscript had
been there all the time! _The delays, the routine_! And you had sent
your secretary down to inquire! And above all--oh, above all--the prince of
them--I must not go near there lest I should injure myself! I must not go
near them--they were so weary of seeing me! And I never saw a single soul
there in my life but one clerk!

I never suffered such a thing as this before in all my days--deliberate,
brutal injustice! And that I should be so placed as to be a victim of such
a thing--that I should have to hang upon your words and to be at your mercy
for eleven weeks of agony! You are a great editor, a clubman, a rich man!
You have fame and power and wealth--and you stand up there and scald me
with your rage--and with your heart a mess of lies all the time!

       *       *       *       *       *

--But _why_ did you do it? That is the thing I ask myself in
consternation. Why? _Why?_--Were you not interested in my work? If you
weren't--why didn't you give it back to me, and let me go my way? And if
you were--if you had any idea of publishing it--then why did you use me in
this way? Where was the manuscript all this time? What did you mean to do
with it? How long did you expect me to wait? And what object did you have
in telling me untruths about it meanwhile?

--The whole thing is as blank to me as night. That a man should have in him
so much infinite indifference about another as to leave that manuscript in
a drawer, and write me that I was to "have a report on it within a week"!
Why, it is something of which I can not even think. And then to get out of
it by that sham anger and that sneaking!--

       *       *       *       *       *

April 20th.

I have done absolutely nothing but brood over this thing and rage all day.
What am I to do?--I sat and wondered if there was anything I could do but
go and shoot that man. And I asked myself: Ought I not at least to go and
get the manuscript from that accursed place this instant? Ought I not to
have taken it then and there? But see the utter misery of my situation, the
abject shame of it--suppose they were to take the thing! It is my one hope
in this world--I dare not lose it--I have to leave it there!

       *       *       *       *       *

But then, what hope is there now? I ask. Why, he was going to urge it upon
them! And now, of course, he's simply sent it in there without a word!

Don't you see what it was--it was that letter of inquiry they wrote him! He
paid no more attention to me than if I were a hound; but he had to send it
when they wrote! And perhaps they said something about carelessness and
that made him wild.

Oh, the thing is an endless spring of gall to me! I am all raw with it--I
have to rush out on the street and walk away my passion. I never saw
my situation so plainly--the horrible impotence of it! Just see what I
struggle against, the utter insane futility of everything I do! Why, I beat
my wings in a void, I hammer my head against a wall!

       *       *       *       *       *

--And now I must wait for that thing to come back--don't I know that it
will come back? And don't I know that that will be the end of me?

A black, horrible gloom has settled down upon me. I am utterly lost in
despair.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 21st.

I will write no more about that man--my whole being is turned to
bitterness. I wonder at myself--I have no longer one feeling left in this
world except a black brooding hatred of him!

       *       *       *       *       *

--And all the time the thing haunts me like a detective story--I can't find
the solution! What does it mean? Why did he do it? It is so irrational--so
impossible--so utterly incomprehensible! And shall I _never_ know the
truth about it?

       *       *       *       *       *

April 24th.

"We regret that we are not advised to undertake the publication of The
Captive. We return the manuscript by express."

       *       *       *       *       *

There it is! I read that thing, and I felt my whole being sinking down as
if into hell. There it is! And that is the end of it all! Oh, merciful
Providence, is it not simply too cruel to be believed! Eleven weeks!
_Eleven weeks_!

       *       *       *       *       *

--I can do no more--I do not know where to turn. I believe I shall go mad
with my misery.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 25th.

To-day I thought I would go up and see him--I thought I could not live
until I knew what this thing meant. I heard myself saying, "I _demand_
to know why you treated me thus? I say I demand it! Before God, how
_dared_ you--or don't you believe in a God?"

       *       *       *       *       *

--Then again I thought, I will plead with him. It must be some mistake--I
can't believe that it is all over. Why, he liked it! And now perhaps it was
only looked over by some careless reader and flung aside!

But no--I could not go near the place! I could not face that man again. The
memory of his look as he stood there in his insolence is so hateful to me
that it makes me tremble.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 26th.

I see myself crying this out from the housetops. I even wrote a letter to a
newspaper, but I did not send it.

I went to a lawyer, a man I used to know. I told him I had no money--I
asked him to help me. But I can not sue him--he was under no obligations,
it seems; and I can not prove that the manuscript was injured in value by
the delay.

So there is nothing that I can do. He will go his way--he will never think
of me again. He is rich and famous.--

       *       *       *       *       *

--I have just nine dollars left of my money. I can not possibly make it do
more than three or four weeks; and meanwhile I sit and brood and watch them
go by in blank despair.

       *       *       *       *       *

April 28th.

I fight with myself--I must get that hellish thing out of my head! I went
to a publisher's to-day--I didn't have the heart to go in, but I gave it to
the clerk.

It will take two or three weeks. This will be the eighth publisher.

       *       *       *       *       *

I said to-day: "I will force myself to read, I will get myself together; I
will not let myself be stamped to the mud by this man."

       *       *       *       *       *

There is nothing I can do about it--I only poison my whole soul thinking of
it. I must put it out of my mind--I must work!

       *       *       *       *       *

May 1st.

I said to myself to-day: "Do you really believe that the world would heed
that poem? Do you think that if any publisher published it, he could sell
it?" I answered, "No, I do not."

If one took it I should think I was making a fool of him. I offer it on
that chance!

--What am I going to do? I do not know. I must try to find some work that
does not tear me to pieces; and then perhaps some day I shall be able to
write something different.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 3d.

My whole soul is in a turmoil these days. I struggle,--I can not give
up while I live; but for what do I struggle? I am a man journeying in a
thicket; I can not see one step before me.

--I try to forget myself--I try to get interested in a book. But I never
had but one kind of interest. I can not get used to living without a
purpose, without enthusiasm, without morality.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have no ideas any more. My whole life is shrunken and contracted. It is
all stagnant--the garden of my soul is full of weeds. The broad fields that
I used to cover, the far-off things I used to strive for--what have they to
do with me now?

       *       *       *       *       *

--I heard a gull to-day--far, far up--a mere speck in the sky. I started,
as I watched him vanish. Then I said: "But you, too, will have to come down
and mingle in the turmoil and the danger!"

       *       *       *       *       *

May 6th.

I go over into the Park--the springtime is in full glory, all the sights
that used to thrill my heart are there; the splendor of new verdure and
young flowers, the birds that I love rioting in song. But it moves me not
in the least, it only makes me ten times more mournful. I turn away.

Why, once an apple spray in blossom was to me a drunken ecstasy.

--Shall I ever know what it is to be generous, and rich and royal in my
heart again? To know that surging fulness of emotion that makes you think
of gold and purple and regal pomp?

I tell you the whole thing is a question of money with me. I have come down
to the bare bed-rock of sordidness--I must have money--_money!_--It is
everything in this world to me. I can never think of anything else again
until I have it.

       *       *       *       *       *

I see myself going out into the world and fighting as other men fight, and
making a place in it for myself.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 8th.

I am getting down again; my poor hoard is going! I sit and count it--I
calculate it--I lay out my bill of fare. Oh, where shall I go, what
_can_ I do? Can I write anything? I ask. I have nothing in me but
a naked, shivering longing.

I dread to be in the desperate fix I was the last time I could find no
work. And yet I can not make up my mind to do anything until I hear from
this one publisher more.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 9th.

I walked over there to-day to save a postage-stamp. They had not heard from
the reader yet.

       *       *       *       *       *

--I sit down and try to study. Then I get up and say I ought not to put it
off any longer. Then again I think: "Wait until to-morrow, at any rate."

       *       *       *       *       *

May 10th.

I was looking at that man's magazine to-day. What thoughts it brought to
me--what agonies, what longings, what despair! And, above all, what
ocean-floods of bitterness!

       *       *       *       *       *

I walked all the way down to the wholesale-paper store. I thought I would
prefer that to evils that I know not of. I have almost a terror of having
to come into contact with new people.

But my place was filled. I trudged home again. I went to the publisher's
too; nothing yet. The three weeks were up to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 12th.

I dared not wait any more to-day. I had just three dollars and ten cents
left. And my rent is due the day after to-morrow. I have answered every
sort of advertisement, from dishwashing to tutoring a boy. I guess I looked
too seedy for the latter.

       *       *       *       *       *

--Sometimes when I am wandering around in all this misery, still yearning
for what I might have been, the thought comes across my mind: "And in this
huge world there might yet be some one who would understand the thing!
Some one who would help me! Some one by whom it would be an honor to be
helped--if I could only find him."

And here I am, having my life beaten out of me, spark by spark,--and I
can't find him--I _can't_!

       *       *       *       *       *

I cry out for money--for money!

       *       *       *       *       *

But no, it is others who have it.--And the way that they use it--O God, the
way that they use it!

If all the world were poor, it would not be so bad; but the sight of
wealth--of infinite oceans of it squandered in perfect frenzies of
ostentation! The sight of this "world"--this world, which they take quite
as a matter of course!

       *       *       *       *       *

I have seen a good deal of this world myself, and I at least do not take
it thus. I gaze upon the men and women who do take it thus, and I say,
"Are you men and women really? Or are you not some strange, un-Godmade
creatures, without ever a thought about justice, without ever a gleam of
reason or purpose or sense?"

       *       *       *       *       *

May 14th.

I have tramped the streets for two days more. I was made so ill by my
anxiety last time that I made up my mind I would not risk it again. I asked
my landlady to-night to wait a while, as I was looking for some work. She
was ungracious enough, but I have no longer any sensibilities--I only want
to be safe. She can wait--she has my trunk, as I told her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Probably she wouldn't even be as willing, if she could see what is in it! I
have no longer anything to sell. I had to exchange my waiter's costume for
a pair of trousers, for mine were all in rags.

I have two dollars and seventy cents. I imagine that is a safe margin.

