Where was the motive for the crime? Until that was made clear I could
not hope to piece together the scraps of evidence into a solid
structure of proof. And what motive could there be that would reconcile
the Doddridge Knapp who sought the life of Henry Wilton, with the
Doddridge Knapp of this morning, who was ready to engage him in his
confidential business? And had I the right to accept any part in his
business? It had the flavor of treachery about it; yet it seemed the
only possible chance to come upon the secret springs of his acts, to
come in touch with the tools and accomplices in his crime. And the
unknown mission, that had brought Henry to his death? How was I to play
his part in that? And even if I could take his place, how was I to
serve the mysterious employer and Doddridge Knapp at the same time,
when Doddridge Knapp was ready to murder me to gain the Unknown's
secret.

Fatigue and loss of sleep deepened the dejection of mind that oppressed
me with these insistent questions, and as I vainly struggled against
it, carried me at last into the oblivion of dreamless slumber.

The next I knew I was awaking to the sound of breaking glass. It was
dark but for a feeble light that came from the window. Every bone in my
body ached from the cramped position in which I had slept, and it
seemed an age before I could rouse myself to act. It was, however, but
a second before I was on my feet, revolver in hand, with the desk
between me and a possible assailant.

Silence, threatening, oppressive, surrounded me as I stood listening,
watching, for the next move. Then I heard a low chuckle, as of some one
struggling to restrain his laughter; and so far from sympathizing with
his mirth, I was tempted to try the effect of a shot as an assistance
in suppressing it.

"I thought the transom was open," said a low voice, which still seemed
to be struggling with suppressed laughter.

"I guess it woke him up," said another and harsher voice. "I heard a
noise in there."

"You're certain he's there?" asked the first voice with another
chuckle.

"Sure, Dicky. I saw him go in, and Porter and I have taken turns on
watch ever since."

"Well, it's time he came out," said Dicky. "He can't be asleep after
that racket. Say!" he called, "Harry! What's the matter with you? If
you're dead let us know."

They appeared friendly, but I hesitated in framing an answer.

"We'll have to break down the door, I guess," said Dicky. "Something
must have happened." And a resounding kick shook the panel.

"Hold on!" I cried. "What's wanted?"

"Oh," said Dicky sarcastically. "You've come to life again, have you."

"Well, I'm not dead yet."

"Then strike a light and let us in. And take a look at that reminder
you'll find wrapped around the rock I heaved through the transom. I
thought it was open." And Dicky went off into another series of
chuckles in appreciation of his mistake.

"All right," I said. I was not entirely trustful, and after I had
lighted the gas-jet I picked up the stone that lay among the fragments
of glass, and unwrapped the paper. The sheet bore only the words:

  "At Borton's, at midnight. Richmond."

This was the name of the agent of the Unknown, who had sent the other
note. Dicky and his companion must then be protectors instead of
enemies. I hastened to unlock the door, and in walked my two visitors.

The first was a young man, tall, well-made, with a shrewd, good-humored
countenance, and a ready, confident air about him. I had no trouble in
picking him out as the amused Dicky. The other was a black-bearded
giant, who followed stolidly in the wake of the younger man.

"You've led me a pretty chase," said Dicky. "If it hadn't been for Pork
Chops here, I shouldn't have found you till the cows come home."

"Well, what's up now?" I asked.

"Why, you ought to know," said Dicky with evident surprise. "But you'd
better be hurrying down to Borton's. The gang must be there by now."

I could only wonder who Borton might be, and where his place was, and
what connection he might have with the mystery, as Dicky took me by the
arm and hurried me out into the darkness. The chill night air served to
nerve instead of depress my spirits, as the garrulous Dicky
unconsciously guided me to the meeting-place, joyously narrating some
amusing adventure of the day, while the heavy retainer stalked in
silence behind.

Down near the foot of Jackson Street, where the smell of bilge-water
and the wash of the sewers grew stronger, and the masts of vessels
could just be seen in the darkness outlined against the sky, Dicky
suddenly stopped and drew me into a doorway. Our retainer disappeared
at the same instant, and the street was apparently deserted. Then out
of the night the shape of a man approached with silent steps.

"Five-sixteen," croaked Dicky.

The man gave a visible start.

"Sixteen-five," he croaked in return.

"Any signs?" whispered Dicky.

"Six men went up stairs across the street. Every one of them did the
sailor-drunk act."

"Sure they weren't sailors?"

"Well, when six coves goes up the same stairs trying the same dodge,
all inside of ten minutes, I has a right to my suspicions. And Darby
Meeker ain't been to sea yet that I knows on."

"Darby Meeker!" exclaimed Dicky in a whisper. And he drew a whistle
under his breath. "What do you think of that, Wilton? I had no idea he
was back from that wild-goose chase you sent him on."

"It looks bad," I admitted cautiously. "I dare say he isn't in good
temper."

"You'll have to settle with him for that piece of business," said Dicky
with a chuckle.

I failed to see the amusing side of the prospect. I wished I knew what
Mr. Meeker looked like.

The guard had melted away into the darkness without another word, and
we hurried forward with due caution. Just past the next corner was a
lighted room, and the sound of voices broke the quiet. A triangular
glass lantern projected from above the door, and such of the paint as
had not weathered away made the announcement:

[Illustration: BORTON'S Meals Liquors Lodgings]

We pushed open the door and walked in. The room was large and dingy,
the ceiling low. Tables were scattered about the sanded floor. A bar
took up the side of the room next the entrance, and a general air of
disreputability filled the place. The only attempts at ornament, unless
the arrangement of various-colored bottles behind the bar came under
that head, were the circles and festoons of dirty cut paper hanging
from the ceiling.

About the room, some at the tables, some at the bar, were numbers of
stout, rough-looking men, with a few Greek fishermen and two or three
sailors.

Behind the bar sat a woman whose appearance in that place almost
startled me. She might have been nearing seventy, and a hard and evil
life had left its marks on her bent frame and her gaunt face. Her
leathery cheeks were lined deep, and a hawk-like nose emphasized the
unpleasant suggestions conveyed by her face and figure. But the most
remarkable feature about her was her eyes. There was no trace of age in
them. Bright and keen as the eyes of a rat, they gave me an unpleasant
thrill as I felt her gaze fixed upon me when I entered the door, arm in
arm with Dicky. It was as though they had pierced me through, and had
laid bare something I would have concealed. It was a relief to pass
beyond her into a recessed part of the room where her gaze might waste
itself on the back of my head.

"Mother Borton's up late to-night," said Dicky thoughtfully, as he
ordered wine.

"You can't blame her for thinking that this crowd needs watching," I
suggested with as much of airiness as I could throw into my manner.

Dicky shook his head for a second, and then resumed his light-hearted,
bantering way. Yet I could see that he was perplexed and anxious about
something that had come to his attention on our arrival.

"You'll not want to attend to business till all the boys are here?"
asked Dicky.

"Not unless there's something to be done," I responded dryly.

Dicky gave me a quick glance.

"Of course," he said with a laugh that was not quite easy, "not unless
there's something to be done. But I thought there was something."

"You've got a fine mind for thinking, Dicky," I replied. "You'd better
cultivate it."

"Well, they say there's nothing like society for that sort of
cultivation," said Dicky with another laugh. "They don't say what kind,
but I've got a pretty good stock here to choose from." He was at his
ease in banter again, but it struck unpleasantly on me that there was
something behind.

"Oh, here's a queer friend," he said suddenly, looking to the door.
"I'd better speak to him on the matter of countersigns."

"By all means," I said, turning in my chair to survey the new-comer.

I saw the face for an instant. The man wore a sou'wester, and he had
drawn his thick, rough coat up as though he would hide his head under
the collar. Cheek and chin I could see were covered by a thick blond
beard. His movements were apparently clumsy, but his figure was lithe
and sinuous. And his eyes! Once seen they never could be forgotten. At
their glance, beard and sou'wester dropped away before my fancy, and I
saw in my inner vision the man of the serpent glance who had chilled my
spirit when I had first put foot in the city. It flashed on me in an
instant that this was the same man disguised, who had ventured into the
midst of his enemies to see what he might learn of their plans.

As I watched Dicky advance and greet the new-comer with apparent
inquiry, a low harsh voice behind gave me a start of surprise.

"This is your wine, I think,"--and a lean, wrinkled arm passed over my
shoulder, and a wrinkled face came near my own.

I turned quickly. It was Mother Borton, leering at me with no apparent
interest but in her errand.

"What are you doing here?" asked the crone in a voice still lower.
"You're not the one they take you to be, but you're none the less in
danger. What are you doing with his looks, and in this place? Look out
for that man you're with, and the other. Yes, sir," her voice rose. "A
small bottle of the white; in a minute, sir."

I understood her as Dicky and the new-comer came to the table and took
seats opposite. I commanded my face to give no sign of suspicion, but
the warning put me on the alert. I had come on the supposition that I
was to meet the band to which Henry Wilton belonged. Instead of being
among friends, however, it seemed now that I was among enemies.

"It's all right," said Dicky carelessly. "He's been sent."

"That's lucky," said I with equal unconcern. "We may need an extra hand
before morning."

The new-comer could not repress a triumphant flash in the serpent eyes.

"I'm the one for your job," he said hoarsely, his face as impassive as
a stone wall.

"What do you know about the job?" I asked suspiciously.

"Only what I've been told," he answered.

"And that is--"

"That it's a job for silence, secrecy, and--"

"Spondulicks," said Dicky with a laugh, as the other hesitated for a
word.

"Just so," said the man.

"And what else?" I continued, pressing him firmly.

"Well," he admitted hoarsely, "I learned as how there was to be a
change of place to-night, and I might be needed."

I looked at him inquiringly. Perhaps I was on the threshold of
knowledge of this cursed business from the mouth of the enemy.

"I heard as how the boy was to be put in a safer place," he said,
wagging his head with affected gravity.

Some imp put it into my brain to try him with an unexpected bit of
news.

"Oh," I said coolly, "that's all attended to. The change was made
yesterday."

The effect of this announcement was extraordinary. The man started with
an oath.

"The hell you say!" he exclaimed in a low, smooth voice, far different
from the harsh tone he had used thus far. Then he leaped to his feet,
with uncontrollable rage.

"Tricked--by God!" he shouted impulsively, and smote the table with his
fist.

His outburst threw the room into confusion. Men sprang from their
chairs. Glasses and bottles fell with clinking crash. Oaths and shouts
arose from the crowd.

"Damn you, I'll have it out of you!" said the man with suppressed fury,
his voice once again smooth and low. "Where is the boy?"

He smote the table again; and with that stroke the false beard fell
from his chin and cheek, and exposed the malignant face, distorted with
rage. A feeling of horrible repulsion came over me, and I should have
struck at that serpent's head but for a startling occurrence. As he
spoke, a wild scream rose upon the air, and as it echoed through the
room the lights went out.

The scream was repeated, and after an instant's silence there rose a
chorus of shouts and oaths, mingled with the crash of tables and the
clink of breaking glass and crockery, as the men in the room fought
their way to the door.

"Oh, my God, I'm cut!" came in a shriek out of the darkness and clamor;
and there followed the flash of a pistol and a report that boomed like
a cannon in that confined place.

My eyes had not been idle after the warning of Mother Borton, and in an
instant I had decided what to do. I had figured out what I conceived to
be the plan of the house, and thought I knew a way of escape. There
were two doors at the rear of the room, and facing me. One led, as I
knew, to the kitchen; the other opened, I reasoned, on a stair to the
lodging-rooms above.

Before the scream that accompanied the extinction of the lights had
died away, I had made a dive beneath the table, and, lifting with all
my might, had sent it crashing over with my enemy under it. With one
leap I cleared the remaining table that lay between me and the door.
And with the clamor behind me, I turned the knob and bounded up the
stairs, three steps at a time.


CHAPTER VII

MOTHER BORTON


The noise of the struggle below continued. Yells and curses rose from
the maddened men. Three shots were fired in quick succession, and a cry
of "Oh, my Lord!" penetrated through the closed door with the sound of
one sorely hurt.

I lingered for a little, listening to the tumult. I was in a strange
and dangerous position. Enemies were behind me. There were friends,
too, but I knew no way to tell one from the other, and my ignorance had
nearly brought me to my death. I hesitated to move, but I could not
remain in the open hall; and as the sounds of disturbance from below
subsided, I felt my way along the wall and moved cautiously forward.

I had progressed perhaps twenty steps when a door, against which my
hand pressed, yielded at the touch and swung slowly open. I strove to
stop it, for the first opening showed a dim light within. But the panel
gave no hold for my fingers, and my efforts to close the door only
swung it open the faster. I drew back a little into the shadow, for I
hesitated to dash past the sight of any who might occupy the room.

"Come in!" called a harsh voice.

I hesitated. Behind, the road led to the eating-room with its known
dangers. A dash along the hall for the front door meant the raising of
an alarm, and probably a bullet as a discourager of burglary. Should I
escape this, I could be certain of a warm reception from the enemies on
watch outside. Prudence lay in facing the one rather than risking the
many. I accepted the invitation and walked into the room.

"I was expecting you," said the harsh voice composedly. "Good evening."

"Good evening," I returned gravely, swallowing my amazement as best I
could.

By the table before me sat Mother Borton, contemplating me as calmly as
though this meeting were the most commonplace thing in the world. A
candle furnished a dim, flickering light that gave to her hard wicked
countenance a diabolic leer that struck a chill to my blood.

"Excuse me," I said, "I have lost my way, I fear."

"Not at all," said Mother Borton. "You are in the right place."

"I was afraid I had intruded," I said apologetically.

"I expected you," she repeated. "Shut the door."

I glanced about the room. There was no sign of another person to be
seen, and no other door. I obeyed her.

"You might as well sit down," she said with some petulance. "There's
nothing up here to hurt you." There was so much meaning in her tone of
the things that would hurt me on the floor below that I hastened to
show my confidence in her, and drew up a chair to the table.

"At your service," I said, leaning before her with as much an
appearance of jaunty self-possession as I could muster.

"Who are you, and what are you doing here?" she asked grimly.

What should I answer? Could I tell her the truth? "Who are you?" she
repeated impatiently, gazing on me. "You are not Wilton. Tell me. Who
are you?"

The face, hard as it was, seamed with the record of a rough and evil
life, as it appeared, had yet a kindly look as it was turned on me.

"My name is Dudley,--Giles Dudley."

"Where is Wilton?"

"Dead."

"Dead? Did you kill him?" The half-kindly look disappeared from her
eyes, and the hard lines settled into an expression of malevolent
repulsiveness.

"He was my best friend," I said sadly; and then I described the leading
events of the tragedy I had witnessed.

The old woman listened closely, and with hardly the movement of a
muscle, to the tale I told.

"And you think he left his job to you?" she said with a sneer.

"I have taken it up as well as I can. To be frank with you, Mrs.
Borton, I know nothing about his job. I'm going along on blind chance,
and trying to keep a whole skin."

The old woman looked at me in amazement.

"Poor boy!" she exclaimed half-pityingly, half-admiringly. "You put
your hands to a job you know nothing about, when Henry Wilton couldn't
carry it with all his wits about him."

"I didn't do it," said I sullenly. "It has done itself. Everybody
insists that I'm Wilton. If I'm to have my throat slit for him I might
as well try to do his work. I wish to Heaven I knew what it was,
though."

Mother Borton leaned her head on her hand, and gazed on me thoughtfully
for a full minute.

"Young man," said she impressively, "take my advice. There's a train
for the East in the mornin'. Just git on board, and never you stop
short of Chicago."

"I'm not running away," said I bitterly. "I've got a score to settle
with the man who killed Henry Wilton. When that score is settled, I'll
go to Chicago or anywhere else. Until that's done, I stay where I can
settle it."

Mother Borton caught up the candle and moved it back and forth before
my face. In her eyes there was a gleam of savage pleasure.

"By God, he's in earnest!" she said to herself, with a strange laugh.
"Tell me again of the man you saw in the alley."

I described Doddridge Knapp.

"And you are going to get even with _him_?" she said with a
chuckle that had no mirth in it.

"Yes," said I shortly.

"Why, if you should touch him the people of the city would tear you to
pieces."

"I shall not touch him. I'm no assassin!" I exclaimed indignantly. "The
law shall take him, and I'll see him hanged as high as Haman."

Mother Borton gave a low gurgling laugh.

"The law! oh, my liver,--the law! How young you are, my boy! Oh, ho, oh
ho!" And again she absorbed her mirthless laugh, and gave me an evil
grin. Then she became grave again, and laid a claw on my sleeve. "Take
my advice now, and git on the train."

"Not I!" I returned stoutly.

"I'm doing it for your own good," she said, with as near an approach to
a coaxing tone as she could command. It was long since she had used her
voice for such a purpose and it grated. "For my sake I'd like to see
you go on and wipe out the whole raft of 'em. But I know what'll happen
to ye, honey. I've took a fancy to ye. I don't know why. But there's a
look on your face that carries me back for forty years, and--don't try
it, dearie."

There were actually tears in the creature's eyes, and her hard, wicked
face softened, and became almost tender and womanly.

"I can't give up," I said. "The work is put on me. But can't you help
me? I believe you want to. I trust you. Tell me what to do--where I
stand. I'm all in the dark, but I must do my work." It was the best
appeal I could have made.

"You're right," she said. "I'm an old fool, and you've got the real
sand. You're the first one except Henry Wilton that's trusted me in
forty years, and you won't be sorry for it, my boy. You owe me one,
now. Where would you have been to-night if I hadn't had the light
doused on ye?"

"Oh, that was your doing, was it? I thought my time had come."

"Oh, I was sure you'd know what to do. It was your best chance."

"Then will you help me, now?" The old crone considered, and her face
grew sharp and cunning in its look.

"What can I do?"

"Tell me, in God's name, where I stand. What is this dreadful mystery?
Who is this boy? Why is he hidden, and why do these people want to know
where he is? Who is behind me, and who threatens me with death?"

I burst out with these questions passionately, almost frantically. This
was the first time I had had chance to demand them of another human
being.

Mother Borton gave me a leer.

"I wish I could tell you, my dear, but I don't know."

"You mean you dare not tell me," I said boldly. "You have done me a
great service, but if I am to save myself from the dangers that
surround me I must know more. Can't you see that?"

"Yes," she nodded. "You're in a hard row of stumps, young man."

"And you can help me."

"Well, I will," she said, suddenly softening again. "I took a shine to
you when you came in, an' I says to myself, 'I'll save that young
fellow,' an' I done it. And I'll do more. Mr. Wilton was a fine
gentleman, an' I'd do something, if I could, to git even with those
murderin' gutter-pickers that laid him out on a slab."

She hesitated, and looked around at the shadows thrown by the
flickering candle.

"Well?" I said impatiently. "Who is the boy, and where is he?"

"Never you mind that, young fellow. Let me tell you what I know. Then
maybe we'll have time to go into the things I don't know."

It was of no use to urge her. I bowed my assent to her terms.

"I'll name no names," she said. "My throat can be cut as quick as
yours, and maybe a damned sight quicker."

Mother Borton had among her failings a weakness for profanity. I have
omitted most of her references to sacred and other subjects of the kind
in transcribing her remarks.

"The ones that has the boy means all right. They're rich. The ones as
is looking for the boy is all wrong. They'll be rich if they gits him."

"How?"

"Why, I don't know," said Mother Borton. "I'm tellin' you what Henry
Wilton told me."

This was maddening. I began to suspect that she knew nothing after all.

"Do you know where he is?" I asked, taking the questioning into my own
hands.

"No,"--sullenly.

"Who is protecting him?"

"I don't know."

"Who is trying to get him?"

"It's that snake-eyed Tom Terrill that's leading the hunt, along with
Darby Meeker; but they ain't doing it for themselves."

"Is Doddridge Knapp behind them?"

The old woman looked at me suddenly in wild-eyed alarm.

"S-s-h!" she whispered. "Don't name no names."

"But I saw--"

She put her hand over my mouth.

"He's in it somewhere, or the devil is, but I don't know where. He's an
awful man. He's everywhere at once. He's--oh Lord! What was that?"

I had become infected with her nervousness, and at a cracking or
creaking sound turned around with half an expectation of seeing
Doddridge Knapp himself coming in the door.

There was no one there--nothing to be seen but the flickering shadows,
and no sound broke the stillness as we listened.

"It's nothing," I said.

"I reckon I ain't got no call to be scared at any crackings in this old
house," said Mother Borton with a nervous giggle. "I've hearn 'em long
enough. But that man's name gives me the shivers."

"What did he ever do to you?" I asked with some curiosity.

"He never did nothing," she said, "but I hearn tell dreadful things
that's gone on of nights,--how Doddridge Knapp or his ghost was seen
killing a Chinaman over at North Beach, while Doddridge Knapp or his
ghost,--whichever was the other one,--was speaking at a meeting, at the
Pavilion. And I hearn of his drinkin' blood--"

"Nonsense!" said I; "where did you get such stories?"

"Well, they're told me for true, and by ones I believe," she said
stoutly. "Oh, there's queer things goes on. Doddridge Knapp or the
devil, it's all one. But it's ill saying things of them that can be in
two places at once." And the old dame looked nervously about her.
"They've hushed things up in the papers, and fixed the police, but
people have tongues."

I wondered what mystification had given rise to these absurd reports,
but there was nothing to be gained by pursuing them. The killing of the
Chinaman might have been something to my hand, but if Doddridge Knapp
had such a perfect alibi it was a waste of time to look into it.

"And is this all you know?" I asked in disappointment.

Mother Borton tried to remember some other point.

"I don't see how it's going to keep a knife from between my ribs," I
complained.

"You keep out of the way of Tom Terrill and his hounds, and you'll be
all right, I reckon."

"Am I supposed to be the head man in this business?"

"Yes."

"Who are my men?"

"There's Wilson and Fitzhugh and Porter and Brown," and she named ten
or a dozen more.

"And what is Dicky?"

"It's a smart man as can put his finger on Dicky Nahl," said Mother
Borton spitefully.

"Nahl is his name?"

"Yes. And I've seen him hobnob with Henry Wilton, and I've seen him
thick as thieves with Tom Terrill, and which he's thickest with the
devil himself couldn't tell. I call him Slippery Dicky."

"Why did he bring me here to-night?"

"I hearn there's orders come to change the place--the boy's place, you
know. You was to tell 'em where the new one was to be, I reckon, but
Tom Terrill spoiled things. He's lightning, is Tom Terrill. But I guess
he got it all out of Dicky, though where Dicky got it the Lord only
knows."

This was all that was to be had from Mother Borton. Either she knew no
more, or she was sharp enough to hide a knowledge that might be
dangerous, even fatal, to reveal. She was willing to serve me, and I
was forced to let it pass that she knew no more.

"Well, I'd better be going then," said I at last. "It's nearly four
o'clock, and everything seems to be quiet hereabouts. I'll find my way
to my room."

"You'll do no such thing," said Mother Borton. "They've not given up
the chase yet. Your men have gone home, I reckon, but I'll bet the
saloon that you'd have a surprise before you got to the corner."

"Not a pleasant prospect," said I grimly.

"No. You must stay here. The room next to this one is just the thing
for you. See?"

She drew me into the adjoining room, shading the candle as we passed
through the hall that no gleam might fall where it would attract
attention.

"You'll be safe here," she said. "Now do as I say. Go to sleep and git
some rest. You ain't had much, I guess, since you got to San
Francisco."

The room was cheerless, but in the circumstances the advice appeared
good. I was probably safer here than in the street, and I needed the
rest.

"Good night," said my strange protectress, "You needn't git up till you
git ready. This is a beautiful room--beautiful. I call it our bridal
chamber, though we don't get no brides down here. There won't be no sun
to bother your eyes in the mornin', for that window don't open up
outside. So there, can't nobody git in unless he comes from inside the
house. There, git to bed. Look out you don't set fire to nothing. And
put out the candle. Now good night, dearie."

Mother Borton closed the door behind her, and left me to the shadows.

Her departure did not leave me wholly at my ease. I had escaped from my
foes, but I was no closer to being in touch with those who would be my
friends; and before daylight I might be lying here with my throat slit.
At the reflection I hastily bolted the door, and tried the fastenings
of the window. All seemed secure, but the sound of a footstep in the
passageway gave me a start for an instant.

"Only Mother Borton going down stairs," I thought, with a smile at my
fears.

There was nothing to be gained by sitting up, and the candle was past
its final inch. I felt that I could not sleep, but I would lie down on
the bed and rest my tired limbs, that I might refresh myself for the
demands of the day. I kicked off my boots, put my revolver under my
hand, and lay down.

Heedless of Mother Borton's warning I left the candle to burn to the
socket, and watched the flickering shadows chase each other over walls
and ceiling. The shadows grew larger and blacker, and took fantastic
shapes of men and beasts. And then with a confused impression of deadly
fear and of an effort to escape from peril, a blacker shadow swallowed
up all that had gone before, and carried me with it.


CHAPTER VIII

IN WHICH I MEET A FEW SURPRISES


I awoke with the sense of threatened danger strong in my mind. For a
moment I was unable to recall where I was, or on what errand I had
come. Then memory returned in a flood, and I sprang from the bed and
peered about me.

A dim light struggled in from the darkened window, but no cause for
apprehension could be seen. I was the only creature that breathed the
air of that bleak and dingy room.

I drew aside the curtain, and threw up the window. It opened merely on
a light-well, and the blank walls beyond gave back the cheery
reflection of a patch of sunlight that fell at an angle from above.

The fresher air that crept in from the window cleared my mind, a dash
of water refreshed my body, and I was ready once more to face whatever
might befall.

I looked at my watch. It was eight o'clock, and I had slept four hours
in this place. Truly I had been imprudent after my adventure below, but
I had been right in trusting Mother Borton. Then I began to realize
that I was outrageously hungry, and I remembered that I should be at
the office by nine to receive the commands of Doddridge Knapp, should
he choose to send them.

I threw back the bolt, but when I tried to swing the door open it
resisted my efforts. The key had been missing when I closed it, but a
sliding bolt had fastened it securely. Now I saw that the door was
locked.

Here was a strange predicament. I had heard nothing of the noise of the
key before I lost myself in slumber. Mother Borton must have turned it
as an additional precaution as I slept. But how was I to get out? I
hesitated to make a noise that could attract attention. It might bring
some one less kindly disposed than my hostess of the night. But there
was no other way. I was trapped, and must take the risk of summoning
assistance.

I rapped on the panel and listened. No sound rewarded me. I rapped
again more vigorously, but only silence followed. The house might have
been the grave for all the signs of life it gave back.

There was something ominous about it. To be locked, thus, in a dark
room of this house in which I had already been attacked, was enough to
shake my spirit and resolution for the moment. What lay without the
door, my apprehension asked me. Was it part of the plot to get the
secret it was supposed I held? Had Mother Borton been murdered, and the
house seized? Or had Mother Borton played me false, and was I now a
prisoner to my own party for my enforced imposture, as one who knew too
much to be left at large and too little to be of use? On a second and
calmer thought it was evidently folly to bring my jailers about my
ears, if jailers there were. I abandoned my half-formed plan of
breaking down the door, and turned to the window and the light-well.
Another window faced on the same space, not five feet away. If it were
but opened I might swing myself over and through it; but it was closed,
and a curtain hid the unknown possibilities and dangers of the
interior. A dozen feet above was the roof, with no projection or
foothold by which it might be reached. Below, the light-well ended in a
tinned floor, about four feet from the window sill.

I swung myself down, and with two steps was trying the other window. It
was unlocked. I raised the sash cautiously, but its creaking protest
seemed to my excited ears to be loud enough to wake any but the dead. I
stopped and listened after each squeak of the frame. There was no sign
of movement.

Then I pushed aside the curtain cautiously, and looked within. The room
appeared absolutely bare. Gaining confidence at the sight, I threw the
curtain farther back, and with a bound climbed in, revolver in hand.

A scurrying sound startled me for an instant, and with a scramble I
gained my feet, prepared to face whatever was before me. Then I saw the
disappearing form of a great rat, and laughed at my fears.

The room was, as I had thought, bare and deserted. There was a musty
smell about it, as though it had not been opened for a long time, and
dust and desolation lay heavy upon it. A dark stain on the floor near
the window suggested to my fancy the idea of blood. Had some wayfarer
less fortunate than I been inveigled to his death in this evil place?

There was, however, nothing here to linger for, and I hastened to try
the door. It was locked. I stooped to examine the fastening. It was of
the cheapest kind, attached to door and casement by small screws. With
a good wrench it gave way, and I found myself in a dark side-hall
between two rooms. Three steps brought me to the main hall, and I
recognized it for the same through which I had felt my way in the
darkness of the night. It was not improved by the daylight, and a
strange loneliness about it was an oppression to the spirits. There
were six or eight rooms on the floor, and the doors glowered
threateningly on me, as though they were conscious that I was an
intruder in fear of his life.

The intense stillness within the house, instead of reassuring me,
served as a threat. After my experience of the night, it spoke of
treachery, not of peace.

I took my steps cautiously down the stairs, following the way that led
to the side entrance. The saloon and restaurant room I was anxious to
evade, for there would doubtless be a barkeeper and several loiterers
about. It could not be avoided, however. As I neared the bottom of the
stairs, I saw that a door led from the hallway to the saloon, and that
it was open.

I moved slowly down, a step at a time, then from over-cautiousness
tripped and came down the last three steps at once with the clatter of
a four-horse team.

But nobody stirred. Then I glanced through the open door, and was
stricken cold with astonishment. The room was empty!

The chairs and tables that a few hours ago I had seen scattered about
were gone. There was no sign that the place had been occupied in
months.

I stepped into the room that I had seen crowded with eager friends and
enemies, eating, drinking, ready for desperate deeds. My step echoed
strangely with the echo of an untenanted house. The bar and the shelves
behind it were swept clear of the bottles and glasses that had filled
them. Dust was thick over the floor and walls. The windows were stained
and dirty, and a paper sign on each pane informed the passers-by that
the house was "To Let."

Bewildered and apprehensive, I wondered whether, after all, the events
of the night, the summons from Dicky Nahl, the walk in the darkness,
the scene in the saloon, the encounter with the snake-eyed man, the
riot, the rush up the dark stair, and the interview with the old crone,
were not a fantastic vision from the land of dreams.

I looked cautiously through the other rooms on the first floor. They
were as bare as the main room. The only room in the whole house that
held a trace of furniture or occupancy must be the one from which I had
escaped. It seemed that an elaborate trap had been set for my benefit
with such precautions that I could not prove that it ever had been.

There was, however, no time to waste in prying into this mystery. By my
watch it was close on nine o'clock, and Doddridge Knapp might even now
be making his way to the office where he had stationed me.

The saloon's front doors were locked fast, but the side door that led
from the stairway to the street was fastened only with a spring lock,
and I swung it open and stepped to the sidewalk.

A load left my spirits as the door closed behind me. The fresh air of
the morning was like wine after the close and musty atmosphere I had
been breathing.

The street was but a prosaic place after the haunt of mystery I had
just left. It was like stepping from the Dark Ages into the nineteenth
century. Yet there was something puzzling about it. The street had no
suggestion of the familiar, and it appeared somehow to have been turned
end for end. I had lost my sense of direction. The hills were where the
bay ought to be. I seemed to have changed sides of the street, and it
took me a little time to readjust the points of the compass. I reasoned
at last that Dicky Nahl had led me to the street below before turning
to the place, and I had not noticed that we had doubled on our course.

I hurried along the streets with but a three-minute stop to swallow a
cup of coffee and a roll, and once more mounted the stairs to the
office and opened the door to Number 15.

The place was in disorder. The books that had been arranged on the desk
and shelves were now scattered about in confusion, as though they had
been hurriedly examined and thrown aside in a fruitless search. This
was a disturbing incident, and I was surprised to discover that the
door into the adjoining room was ajar. I pushed it wide open, and
started back. Before me stood Doddridge Knapp, his face pale as the
face of a corpse, and his eyes starting as though the dead had risen
before him.


CHAPTER IX

A DAY IN THE MARKET


The King of the Street stood for a moment staring at me with that
strange and fearsome gaze. What was there in that dynamic glance that
struck a chill to my spirit as though the very fountain of life had
been attacked? Was it the manifestation of the powerful will behind
that mask? Or was it terror or anger that was to be read in the fiery
eyes that gleamed from beneath those bushy brows, and in the play of
the cruel mouth, which from under that yellow-gray mustache gave back
the sign of the Wolf?

"Have you any orders, sir?" I asked in as calm a voice as I could
command.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" said the Wolf slowly, covering his fangs.

It flashed on me that the attack in the Borton den was of his planning,
that Terrill was his tool, and that he had supposed me dead. It was
thus that I could account for his startled gaze and evident
discomposure.

"Nine o'clock was the time, you said," I suggested deferentially. "I
believe it's a minute or two past."

"Oh, yes," said Doddridge Knapp, pulling himself together. "Come in
here."

He looked suspiciously at me as he took a seat at his desk, and
motioned me to another.

"I had a little turn," he said, eying me nervously; "a vertigo, I
believe the doctor called it. Just reach my overcoat pocket there, will
you?--the left-hand side. Yes, bring me that flask."

He poured out a small glass of liquor, and the rich odor of brandy rose
through the room. Then he took a vial from an inside pocket, counted a
few drops into the glass, and drank it at a swallow.

I marveled at the actions of the man, and wondered if he was nerving
himself to some deed that he lacked courage to perform.

When he had cleared his throat of the fiery liquor, the Wolf turned to
me with a more composed and kindly expression.

"I never drink during business hours," he said with a trace of apology
in his tone. "It's bad for business, and for the drink, too. But this
is a little trouble I've had a touch of in the last two months. Just
remember, young man, that I expect you to do your drinking after
business is over--and not too much then. And now to business," said my
employer with decision. "Take down these orders."

The King of the Street was himself once more, and I marveled again at
the quickness and clearness of his directions. I was to buy one hundred
shares of this stock, sell five hundred of that stock, buy one thousand
of another in blocks of one hundred, and sell the same in a single
block at the last session.

"And the last thing you do," he continued, "buy every share of Omega
that is offered. There'll be a big block of it thrown on the market,
and more in the afternoon. Buy it, whatever the price. There's likely
to be a big slump. Don't bid for it--don't keep up the price, you
understand--but get it."

"If somebody else is snapping it up, do I understand that I'm not to
bid over them?"

"You're not to understand anything of the kind," he said, with a little
disgust in his tone. "You're to get the stock. You've bought and sold
enough to know how to do that. But don't start a boom for the price.
Let her go down. Sabe?"

I felt that there was deep water ahead.

"Perfectly," I said. "I think I see the whole thing."

The King of the Street looked at me with a grim smile.

"Maybe you do, but all the same you'd better keep your money out of
this little deal unless you can spare it as well as not. Well, get back
to your room. You've got your check-book all right?"

Alone once more I was in despair of unraveling the tangle in which I
was involved. I felt convinced that Doddridge Knapp was the mover in
the plots that sought my life. He had, I felt sure, believed me dead,
and was startled into fear at my unheralded appearance. Yet why should
he trust me with his business? I could not doubt that the buying and
selling he had given to my care were important. I knew nothing about
the price of stocks but I was sure that the orders he had given me
involved many thousands of dollars. Yet it might be--the thought struck
home to me--that the credit had not been provided for me, and my checks
on the Nevada Bank would serve only to land me in jail.

The disturbed condition of the books attracted my attention once more.
The volumes were scattered over the desk and thrown about the room as
though somebody had been seeking for a mislaid document. I looked
curiously over them as I replaced them on the shelves. They were law-
books, California Reports, and the ordinary text-books and form-books
of the attorney. All bore on the fly-leaf the name of Horace H.
Plymire, but no paper or other indication of ownership could I find.

I wondered idly who this Plymire might be, and pictured to myself some
old attorney who had fallen into the hands of Doddridge Knapp, and had,
through misfortune, been forced to sell everything for the mess of
pottage to keep life in him. But there was small time for musing, and I
went out to do Doddridge Knapp's bidding in the stock-gambling
whirlpool of Pine Street.

There was already a confused murmur of voices about the rival exchanges
that were the battlegrounds of millionaires. The "curbstone boards"
were in session. The buyers who traded face to face, and the brokers
who carried their offices under their hats, were noisily bargaining,
raising as much clamor over buying and selling a few shares as the most
important dealer in the big boards could raise over the transfer of as
many thousands.

It was easy to find Bockstein and Eppner, and there could be no
mistaking the prosperity of the firm. The indifference of the clerks to
my presence, and the evident contempt with which an order for a hundred
shares of something was being taken from an apologetic old gentleman
were enough to assure me of that.

Bockstein and Eppner were together, evidently consulting over the
business to be done. Bockstein was tall and gray-haired, with a stubby
gray beard. Eppner was short and a little stooped, with a blue-black
mustache, snapping blue-black eyes, and strong blue-black dots over his
face where his beard struggled vainly against the devastating razor.
Both were strongly marked with the shrewd, money-getting visage. I set
forth my business.

"You wand to gif a larch order?" said Bockstein, looking over my
memoranda. "Do you haf references?"

"Yes," echoed Eppner. "References are customary, you know." He spoke in
a high-keyed voice that had irritating suggestions in it.

"Is there any reference better than cash?" I asked.

The partners looked at each other. "None," they replied.

"How much will secure you on the order?"

They named a heavy margin, and the sum total took my heart into my
mouth. How large a balance I could draw against I had not the faintest
idea. Possibly this was a trap to throw me into jail as a common
swindler attempting to pass worthless checks. But there was no time to
hesitate. I drew a check for the amount, signed Henry Wilton's name,
and tossed it over to Bockstein.

"All ridt," said the senior partner. "Zhust talk it ofer vit Misder
Eppner. He goes on der floor."

I knew well enough what was wanted. My financial standing was to be
tested by the head of the firm, while the junior partner kept me
amused.

Eppner was quick to take my ideas. A few words of explanation, and he
understood perfectly what I wanted.

"You have not bought before?" It was an interrogation, not an
assertion.

"Oh, yes," I said carelessly, "but not through you, I believe."

"No, no, I think not. I should have remembered you."

I thought this might be a favorable opportunity to glean a little
information of what was going on in the market.

"Are there any good deals in prospect?" I ventured.

I could see in the blue-black depths of his eyes that an unfavorable
opinion he had conceived of my judgment was deepened by this question.
There was doubtless in it the flavor of the amateur.

"We never advise our customers," was the high-keyed reply.

"Certainly not," I replied. "I don't want advice--merely to know what
is going on."

"Excuse me, but I never gossip. It is a rule I make."

"It might interfere with your opportunities to pick up a good bargain
now and then," I suggested, as the blue-black man seemed at a loss for
words.

"We never invest in stocks," was the curt reply.

"Excellent idea," said I, "for those who know too much or too little."

Eppner failed to smile, and could think of nothing to say. I was a
little abashed, notwithstanding the tone of haughty indifference I
took. I began to feel very young before this machine-like impersonation
of the market.

Bockstein relieved the embarrassment of the situation by coming in out
of breath, with a brave pretense of having been merely consulting a
customer in the next room.

"You haf exblained to Misder Eppner?" he inquired. "Den all is done.
Here is a card to der Board Room. If orders you haf to gif, Eppner vill
dake dem on der floor. Zhust gif him der check for margin, and all is
vell."

At the end of this harangue I found myself outside the office, with
Bockstein's back waddling toward the private room where the partners
were to have their last consultation before going to the Board.

My check had been honored, then, and Bockstein had assured himself of
my solvency. In the rebound from anxiety, I swelled with the pride of a
capitalist--on Doddridge Knapp's money.

In the Board Room of the big Exchange the uproar was something
astonishing. The confusion outside had given me a suggestion that the
business of buying and selling stocks was carried on in a somewhat less
conventional manner than the trade in groceries. But it had not quite
prepared me for the scene in the Exchange.

The floor was filled with a crowd of lunatics, howling, shaking fists,
and pushing and scrambling from one place to another with the frenzy of
a band of red men practising the scalp dance by the bright glow of the
white man's fire-water. A confused roar rose from the mob, and whenever
it showed signs of flagging a louder cry from some quarter would renew
its strength, and a blast of shouts and screams, a rush of struggling
men toward the one who had uttered the cry, and a waving of fists,
arms, and hats, suggested visions of lynching and sudden death.

After a little I was able to discover a method in the outbreaks of
apparent lunacy, and found that the shouts and yells and screams, the
shaking of fists, and the waving of arms were merely a more or less
energetic method of bidding for stocks; that the ringing of gongs and
the bellow of the big man who smiled on the bear-garden from the high
desk were merely the audible signs that another stock was being called;
and that the brazen-voiced reading of a roll was merely the official
announcement of the record of bargains and sales that had been going on
before me.

It was my good fortune to make out so much before the purchase of the
stocks on my order list was completed. The crisis was at hand in which
I must have my wits about me, and be ready to act for myself.
Eppner rushed up and reported the bargains made, handing me a slip with
the figures he had paid for the stocks. He was no longer the impassive
engine of business that he had appeared in the back room of his office.
He was now the embodiment of the riot I had been observing. His blue-
black hair was rumpled and on end. His blue-black eyes flashed with
animation. The blue-black dots that showed where his beard would be if
he had let it were almost overwhelmed by the glow that excitement threw
into his sallow cheeks.

"Any more orders?" he gasped. He was trembling with excitement and
suppressed eagerness for the fray.

"Yes," I shouted above the roar about me. "I want to buy Omega."

He gave a look that might have been a warning, if I could have read it;
but it was gone with a shrug as though he would say, "Well, it's no
business of mine."

"How much?" he asked. "Wait!"

He started away at a scream from the front, but returned in a moment.
He had bought or sold something, but I had not the least idea what it
was, or which he had done.

"It's coming!" he yelled in my ear.

The gong rang. There was a confused cry from the man at the big desk.
And pandemonium let loose.

I had thought the riot that had gone before as near the climax of noise
as it was possible to get. I was mistaken. The roar that followed the
call was to the noise that had gone before as is the hurricane to the
zephyr. There was a succession of yells, hoots, cries and bellows; men
rushed wildly at each other, swung in a mad dance, jumped up and down;
and the floor became a frantic sea of fists, arms, hats, heads, and all
things movable.

"Omega opens at sixty-five," shouted Eppner.

"Bid sixty," I shouted in reply, "but get all you can, even if you have
to pay sixty-five."

Eppner gave a bellow, and skated into a group of fat men, gesticulating
violently. The roar increased, if such a thing were possible.

In a minute Eppner was back, perspiring, and I fancied a trifle
worried.

"They're dropping it on me," he gasped in my ear. "Five hundred at
sixty-two and one thousand at sixty. Small lots coming fast and big
ones on the way."

"Good! Bid fifty-five, and then fifty, but get them."

With a roar he rushed into the midst of a whirling throng. I saw twenty
brokers about him, shouting and threatening. One in his eagerness
jumped upon the shoulders of a fat man in front of him, and shook a
paper under his nose.

I could make out nothing of what was going on, except that the
excitement was tremendous.

Twice Eppner reported to me. The stock was being hammered down stroke
by stroke. There was a rush to sell. Fifty-five--fifty-three--fifty,
came the price--then by leaps to forty-five and forty. It was a panic.
At last the gong sounded, and the scene was over. Men staggered from
the Exchange, white as death, some cursing, some angry and red, some
despairing, some elate. I could see that ten had lost for one who had
gained.

Eppner reported at the end of the call. He had bought for me twelve
thousand five hundred shares, over ten thousand of them below fifty.
The total was frightful. There was half a million dollars to pay when
the time for settlement came. It was folly to suppose that my credit at
the Nevada was of this size. But I put a bold face on it, gave a check
for the figure that Eppner named, and rose.

"Any more orders?" he asked.

"Not till afternoon."

As I passed into the street I was astonished at the swift
transformation that had come over it. The block about the Exchange was
crowded with a tossing throng, hundreds upon hundreds pushing toward
its fateful doors. But where cheerfulness and hope had ruled, fear and
gloom now vibrated in electric waves before me. The faces turned to the
pitiless, polished granite front of the great gambling-hall were white
and drawn, and on them sat Ruin and Despair. The men were for the most
part silent, with here and there one cursing; the women, who were there
by scores, wept and mourned; and from the multitudes rose that peculiar
whisper of crowds that tells of apprehension of things worse to come.
And this, I must believe, was the work of Doddridge Knapp.


CHAPTER X

A TANGLE OF SCHEMES


Doddridge Knapp was seated calmly in my office when I opened the door.
There was a grim smile about the firm jaws, and a satisfied glitter in
the keen eyes. The Wolf had found his prey, and the dismay of the sheep
at the sight of his fangs gave him satisfaction instead of distress.

The King of the Street honored me with a royal nod.

"There seems to have been a little surprise for somebody on the Board
this morning," he suggested.

"I heard something about it on the street," I admitted.

"It was a good plan and worked well. Let me see your memoranda of
purchases."

I gave him my slips.

He looked over them with growing perplexity in his face.

"Here's twelve thousand five hundred shares of Omega."

"Yes."

"You paid too much for that first lot." He was still poring over the
list.

"It's easier to see that now than then," I suggested dryly.

"Humph! yes. But there's something wrong here." He was comparing my
list with another in his hand.

"There!" I thought; "my confounded ignorance has made a mess of it."
But I spoke with all the confidence I could assume: "What's the matter,
now?"

"Eleven thousand and twelve thousand five hundred make twenty-three
thousand five hundred; and here are sales of Omega this morning of
thirty-three thousand eight hundred and thirty." He seemed to be
talking more to himself than to me, and to be far from pleased.

"How's that? I don't understand." I was all in the dark over his
musings.

"I picked up eleven thousand shares in the other Boards this morning,
and twelve thousand five hundred through you, but somebody has taken in
the other ten thousand." The King of the Street seemed puzzled and, I
thought, a little worried.

"Well, you got over twenty-three thousand shares," I suggested
consolingly. "That's a pretty good morning's work."

The King of the Street gave me a contemptuous glance.

"Don't be a fool, Wilton. I sold ten thousand of those shares to
myself."

A new light broke upon me. I was getting lessons of one of the many
ways in which the market was manipulated.

"Then you think that somebody else--"

The King of the Street broke in with a grim smile.

"Never mind what I think. I've got the contract for doing the thinking
for this job, and I reckon I can 'tend to it."

The great speculator was silent for a few moments.

"I might as well be frank with you," he said at last. "You'll have to
know something, to work intelligently. I must get control of the Omega
Company, and to do it I've got to have more stock. I've been afraid of
a combination against me, and I guess I've struck it. I can't be sure
yet, but when those ten thousand shares were gobbled up on a panicky
market, I'll bet there's something up."

"Who is in it?" I asked politely.

"They've kept themselves covered," said the King of the Street, "but
I'll have them out in the open before the end. And then, my boy, you'll
see the fur fly."

As these words were uttered I could see the yellow-gray goatee rise
like bristles, and the fangs of the Wolf shine white under the yellow-
gray mustache.

"I've got a few men staked out," he continued slowly, "and I reckon
I'll know something about it by this time to-morrow." There was the
growl of the Wolf in his voice.

"Now for this afternoon," he continued. "There's got to be some sharp
work done. I reckon the falling movement is over. We've got to pay for
what we get from now on. I've got a man looking after the between-Board
trading. With the scare that's on in the chipper crowd out there, I
look to pick up a thousand shares or so at about forty."

"Well, what's the program?" I asked cheerfully.

"Buy," he said briefly. "Take everything that's offered this side of
seventy-five."

"Um--there's a half-million wanted already to settle for what I bought
this morning."

The bushy brows drew down, but the King of the Street answered lightly:

"Your check is good for a million, my boy, as long as it goes to settle
for what you're ordered to buy." Then he added grimly: "I don't think
you'd find it worth much for anything else."

There was a knock at the door beyond, and he hastily rose.

"Be here after the two-thirty session," he said. And the Wolf, huge and
masterful, disappeared with a stealthy tread, and the door closed
softly behind him.

A million dollars! My check honored for unlimited amounts! Doddridge
Knapp trusting me with a great fortune! I was overwhelmed, intoxicated,
with the consciousness of power.

Yet this was the man who had brought death to Henry Wilton, and had
twice sought my life in the effort to wrest from me a packet of
information I did not have. This was the man whose face had gleamed
fierce and hateful in the lantern's flash in the alley. This was the
man I had sworn to bring to the gallows for a brutal crime. And now I
was his trusted agent, with control, however limited, of millions.

It was a puzzle too deep for me. I was near coming to Mother Borton's
view that there was something uncanny about Doddridge Knapp. Did two
spirits animate that body? What was the thread that should join all
parts of the mystery into one harmonious whole?

I wondered idly who Doddridge Knapp's visitor might be, but as I could
see no way of finding out, and felt no special concern over his
identity or purposes, I rose and left the office. As I stepped into the
hall I discovered that somebody had a deeper curiosity than I. A man
was stooping to the keyhole of Doddridge Knapp's room in the endeavor
to see or hear. As he heard the sound of my opening door he started up,
and with a bound, was around the turn of the hall and pattering down
the stairs.

In another bound I was after him. I had seen his form for but a second,
and his face not at all. But in that second I knew him for Tim Terrill
of the snake-eyes and the murderous purpose.

When I reached the head of the stairs he was nowhere to be seen, but I
heard the patter of his feet below and plunged down three steps at a
time and into Clay street, nearly upsetting a stout gentleman in my
haste. The street was busy with people, but no sign of the snake-eyed
man greeted me.

Much disturbed in mind at this apparition of my enemy, I sought in vain
for some explanation of his presence. Was he spying on Doddridge Knapp?
Did he not stand on a better footing with his employer than this? He
was, I must suppose, trusted with the most secret and evil purposes of
that strange man, and should be able to speak with him on even terms.
Yet here he was, doing the work of the merest spy. What wickedness was
he planning? What treachery was he shaping in his designs on the man
whose bread he was eating and whose plans of crime he was the chief
agent to assist or execute?

I must have stood gaping in the street like a countryman at a fair as I
revolved these questions in my mind without getting an answer to them,
for I was roused by a man bumping into me roughly.

I suspected that he had done it on purpose, but I begged his pardon and
felt for my watch. I could find none of my personal property missing,
but I noticed the fellow reeling back toward me, and doubled my fist
with something of an intention to commit a breach of the peace if he
repeated his trick. I thought better of it, and started by him briskly,
when he spoke in a low tone:

"You'd better go to your room, Mr. Wilton." He said something more that
I did not catch, and, reeling on, disappeared in the crowd before I
could turn to mark or question him.

I thought at first that he meant the room I had just left. Then it
occurred to me that it was the room Henry had occupied--the room in
which I had spent my first dreadful night in San Francisco, and had not
revisited in the thirty hours since I had left it.

The advice suited my inclination, and in a few minutes I was entering
the dingy building and climbing the worn and creaking stairs. The place
lost its air of mystery in the broad sunshine and penetrating daylight,
and though its interior was as gloomy as ever, it lacked the haunting
suggestions it had borrowed from darkness and the night.

Slipped under the door I found two notes. One was from Detective
Coogan, and read:

"Inquest this afternoon. Don't want you. Have another story. Do you
want the body?"

The other was in a woman's hand, and the faint perfume of the first
note I had received rose from the sheet. It read:

"I do not understand your silence. The money is ready. What is the
matter?"

The officer's note was easy enough to answer. I found paper, and,
assuring Detective Coogan of my gratitude at escaping the inquest, I
asked him to turn the body over to the undertaker to be buried at my
order.

The other note was more perplexing. I could make nothing of it. It was
evidently from my unknown employer, and her anxiety was plain to see.
But I was no nearer to finding her than before, and if I knew how to
reach her I knew not what to say. As I was contemplating this state of
affairs with some dejection, and sealing my melancholy note to
Detective Coogan, there was a quick step in the hall and a rap at the
panel. It was a single person, so I had no hesitation in opening the
door, but it gave me a passing satisfaction to have my hand on the
revolver in my pocket as I turned the knob.

It was a boy, who thrust a letter into my hand.

"Yer name Wilton?" he inquired, still holding on to the envelope.

"Yes."

"That's yourn, then." And he was prepared to make a bolt.

"Hold on," I said. "Maybe there's an answer."

"No, there ain't. The bloke as gave it to me said there weren't."

"Well, here's something I want you to deliver," said I, taking up my
note to Detective Coogan. "Do you know where the City Hall is?"

"Does I know--what are yer givin' us?" said the boy with infinite scorn
in his voice.

"A quarter," I returned with a laugh, tossing him the coin. "Wait a
minute."

"Yer ain't bad stuff," said the boy with a grin. I tore open the
envelope and read on the sheet that came from it:

"Sell everything you bought--never mind the price. Other orders off. D.
K."

I gasped with amazement. Had Doddridge Knapp gone mad? To sell twelve
thousand five hundred shares of Omega was sure to smash the market, and
the half-million dollars that had been put into them would probably
shrink by two hundred thousand or more if the order was carried out.

I read the note again.

Then a suspicion large enough to overshadow the universe grew up in my
brain. I recalled that Doddridge Knapp had given me a cipher with which
he would communicate with me, and I believed, moreover, that he had no
idea where I might be at the present moment.

"It's all right, sonny," I said. "Trot along."

"Where's yer letter?" asked the boy, loyally anxious to earn his
quarter.

"It won't have to go now," I said coolly. I believed that the boy meant
no harm to me, but I was not taking any risks.

The boy sauntered down the hall, singing _My Name Is Hildebrandt
Montrose_, and I was left gazing at the letter with a melancholy
smile.

"Well, I must look like a sucker if they think I can be taken in by a
trick like that," was my mental comment. I charged the scheme up to my
snake-eyed friend and had a poorer opinion of his intelligence than I
had hitherto entertained. Yet I was astonished that he should, even
with the most hearty wish to bring about my downfall, contrive a plan
that would inflict a heavy loss on his employer and possibly ruin him
altogether. There was more beneath than I could fathom. My brain
refused to work in the maze of contradictions and mysteries, plots and
counterplots, in which I was involved.

I took my way at last toward the market, and, hailing a boy to whom I
intrusted my letter to Detective Coogan, walked briskly to Pine Street.


CHAPTER XI

THE DEN OF THE WOLF


The street had changed its appearance in the two or three hours since I
had made my way from the Exchange through the pallid, panic-stricken
mob. There were still thousands of people between the corner of
Montgomery Street and Leidesdorff, and the little alley itself was
packed full of shouting, struggling traders. The thousands were broken
into hundreds of groups, and men were noisily buying and selling, or
discussing the chances of the market when the "big Board" should open
once more. But there was an air of confidence, almost of buoyancy, in
place of the gloom and terror that had lowered over the street at noon.
Plainly the panic was over, and men were inspirited by a belief that
"stocks were going up."

I made a few dispositions accordingly. Taking Doddridge Knapp's hint, I
engaged another broker as a relief to Eppner, a short fat man, with the
baldest head I ever saw, a black beard and a hook-nose, whose
remarkable activity and scattering charges had attracted my attention
in the morning session.

Wallbridge was his name, I found, and he proved to be as intelligent as
I could wish--a merry little man, with a joke for all things, and a
flow of words that was almost overwhelming.

"Omega? Yes," chuckled the stout little broker, after he had assured
himself of my financial standing. "But you ought to have bought this
morning, if that's what you want. It was hell popping and the roof
giving 'way all at once." The little man had an abundant stock of
profanity which he used unconsciously and with such original variations
that one almost forgot the blasphemy of it while listening to him. "You
ought to have been there," he continued, "and watched the boys shell
'em out!"

"Yes, I heard you had lively times."

"Boiling," he said, with coruscating additions in the way of speech and
gesture. "If it hadn't been for Decker and some fellow we haven't had a
chance to make out yet the bottom of the market would have been resting
on the roof of the lower regions." The little man's remark was slightly
more direct and forcible, but this will do for a revised version.

"Decker!" I exclaimed, pricking up my ears. "I thought he had quit the
market."

As I had never heard of Mr. Decker before that moment this was not
exactly the truth, but I thought it would serve me better.

"Decker out of it!" gasped Wallbridge, his bald head positively
glistening at the absurdity of the idea. "He'll be out of it when he's
carried out."

"I meant out of Omega. Is he getting up a deal?"

The little broker looked vexed, as though it crossed his mind that he
had said too much.

"Oh, no. Guess not. Don't think he is," he said rapidly. "Just wanted
to save the market, I guess. If Omega had gone five points lower, there
would have been the sickest times in the Street that we've seen since
the Bank of California closed and the shop across the way,"--pointing
his thumb at the Exchange,--"had to be shut up. But maybe it wasn't
Decker, you know. That's just what was rumored on the Street, you
know."

I suspected that my little broker knew more than he was willing to
tell, but I forbore to press him further; and giving him the order to
buy all the Omega stock he could pick up under fifty, I made my way to
Eppner.

The blue-black eyes of that impassive agent snapped with a glow of
interest when I gave him my order to sell the other purchases of the
morning and buy Omega, but faded into a dull stare when I lingered for
conversation.

I was not to be abashed.

"I wonder who was picking up Omega this morning?" I said.

"Oh, some of the shorts getting ready to fill contracts," he replied in
his dry, uninterested tones.

"I heard that Decker was in the market for the stock," I said.

The blue-black eyes gave a flash of genuine surprise.

"Decker!" he exclaimed. Then his eyes fell, and he paused a moment
before replying in his high inflexible voice. "He might be."

"Is he after Omega, or is he just bracing up the market?"

"Excuse me," said Eppner with the cold reflection of an apologetic
tone, "but we never advise customers. Are you walking over to the
Exchange?"

In the Exchange all was excitement, and the first call brought a roar
of struggling brokers. I could make nothing of the clamor, but my
nearest neighbor shouted in my ear:

"A strong market!"

"It looks that way," I shouted back. It certainly was strong in noise.

I made out at last that prices were being held to the figures of the
morning's session, and in some cases were forced above them.

The excitement grew as the call approached Omega. There was an electric
tension in the air that told of the anxious hopes and fears that
centered in the coming struggle. The stock was called at last, and I
looked for a roar that would shake the building and a scene of riot on
the floor that would surpass anything I had witnessed yet.

It failed to come. There was almost a pause in the proceedings.

I caught a glimpse of Doddridge Knapp across the room, looking on with
a grim smile on the wolf jaws and an apparently impassive interest in
the scene. I marveled at his coolness when his fortune, perhaps, turned
on the events of the next five minutes. He gave no sign, nor once
looked in my direction.

The clamor on the floor began and swelled in volume, and a breath of
visible relief passed over the anxious assembly.

Wallbridge and Eppner made a dive at once for a yelling broker, and a
cold chill ran down my back. I saw then that I had set my brokers
bidding against each other for the same stock.

"Great Mammon!" I thought. "If Doddridge Knapp ever finds it out, what
a circus there will be!"

"She's going up!" said my neighbor with a shout of joy. He owned none
of the stock, but like the rest of the populace he was a bull on
principle.

I nodded with a dubious attempt to imitate his signs of satisfaction.

Forty-five--forty-seven--fifty-five--it was going up by leaps. I
blessed the forethought that had suggested to me to put a limit on
Wallbridge and stop the competition between my agents at fifty. The
contest grew warmer. I could follow with difficulty the course of the
proceedings, but I knew that Omega was bounding upward.

The call closed amid animation; but the excitement was nothing compared
to the scene that had followed the fall in the morning. Omega stood at
eighty asked, and seventy-eight bid, and the ship of the stock gamblers
was again sailing on an even keel. Some hundreds had been washed
overboard, but there were thousands left, and nobody foresaw the day
when the market would take the fashion of a storm-swept hulk, with only
a chance survivor clinging here and there to the wreckage and
exchanging tales of the magnificence that once existed.

The session was over at last, and Wallbridge and Eppner handed me their
memoranda of purchases.

"You couldn't pick Omega off the bushes this afternoon, Mr. Wilton,"
said Wallbridge, wiping his bald head vigorously. "There's fools at all
times, and some of 'em were here and ready to drop what they had; but
not many. I gathered in six hundred for you, but I had to fight for
it."

I thanked the merry broker, and gave him a check for his balance.

Eppner had done some better with a wider margin, but all told I had
added but three thousand one hundred shares to my list. I wondered how
much of this had been sold to me by my employer. Plainly, if Doddridge
Knapp was needing Omega stock he would have to pay for it.

There was no one to be seen as I reached Room 15. The connecting door
was closed and locked, and no sound came from behind it. I turned to
arrange the books, to keep from a bad habit of thinking over the
inexplicable. But there was nothing exciting enough, in the statutes or
reports of court decisions or text-books, to cover up the questions
against which I had been beating in vain ever since I had entered this
accursed city.

An hour passed, and no Doddridge Knapp. It was long past office hours.
The sun had disappeared in the bank of fog that was rolling up from the
ocean and coming in wisps and streamers over the hills, and the light
was fast failing.

Just as I was considering whether my duty to my employer constrained me
to wait longer, I caught sight of an envelope that had been slipped
under the door. I wondered, as I hastily opened it and brought its
inclosure to the failing light, how it could have got there. It was in
cipher, but it yielded to the key with which Doddridge Knapp had
provided me. I made it out to be this:

  "Come to my house to-night.
   Bring your contracts with you.
     Knapp."

I was thrown into some perplexity by this order. For a little I
suspected a trap, but on second thought this seemed unlikely. The
office furnished as convenient a place for homicidal diversions as he
could wish, if these were in his intention, and possibly a visit to
Doddridge Knapp in his own house would give me a better clue to his
habits and purposes, and a better chance of bringing home to him his
awful crime, than a month together on the Street.

The clocks were pointing past eight when I mounted the steps that led
to Doddridge Knapp's door. Doddridge Knapp's house fronted upper Pine
Street much as Doddridge Knapp himself fronted lower Pine Street. There
was a calmly aggressive look about it that was typical of the owner. It
defied the elements with easy strength, as Doddridge Knapp defied the
storms of the market. I had the fancy that even if the directory had
not given me its position I might have picked it out from its neighbors
by its individuality, its impression of reserve force.

I had something of trepidation, after all, as I rang the bell, for I
was far from being sure that Doddridge Knapp was above carrying out his
desperate purposes in his own house, and I wondered whether I should
ever come out again, once I was behind those massive doors. I had taken
the precaution to find a smaller revolver, "suitable for an evening
call," as I assured myself, but it did not look to be much of a
protection in case the house held a dozen ruffians of the Terrill
brand. However, I must risk it. I gave my name to the servant who
opened the door.

"This way," he said quietly.

I had hardly time as I passed to note the large hall, the handsome
staircase, and the wide parlors that hung rich with drapery, but in
darkness. I was led beyond and behind them, and in a moment was ushered
into a small, plainly-furnished room; and at a desk covered with papers
sat Doddridge Knapp, the picture of the Wolf in his den.

"Sit down, Wilton," said he with grim affability, giving his hand. "You
won't mind if an old man doesn't get up."

I made some conventional reply.

"Sorry to disappoint you this afternoon, and take up your evening," he
said; "but I found some business that needed more immediate attention.
There was a little matter that had to be looked after in person." And
the Wolf's fangs showed in a cruel smile, which assured me that the
"little matter" had terminated unhappily for the other man.

I airily professed myself happy to be at his service at any time.

"Yes, yes," he said; "but let's see your memoranda. Did you do well
this afternoon?"

"No-o," I returned apologetically. "Not so well as I wished."

He took the papers and looked over them carefully.

"Thirty-one hundred," he said reflectively. "Those sales were all
right. Well, I was afraid you couldn't get above three thousand. I
didn't get more than two thousand in the other Boards and on the
Street."

"That was the best I could do," I said modestly. "They average at
sixty-five. Omega got away from us this afternoon like a runaway
horse."

"Yes, yes," said the King of the Street, studying his papers with drawn
brows. "That's all right. I'll have to wait a bit before going
further." I bowed as became one who had no idea of the plans ahead.

"And now," said Doddridge Knapp, turning on me a keen and lowering
gaze, "I'd like to know what call you have to be spying on me?"

I opened my eyes wide in wonder.

"Spying? I don't understand."

"No?" said he, with something between a growl and a snarl. "Well, maybe
you don't understand that, either!" And he tossed me a bit of paper.

I felt sure that I did not. My ignorance grew into amazement as I read.
The slip bore the words:

  "I have bought Crown Diamond. What's the limit?
    Wilton."

"I certainly don't understand," I said. "What does it mean?"

"The man who wrote it ought to know," growled Doddridge Knapp, with his
eyes flashing and the yellow-gray mustache standing out like bristles.
The fangs of the Wolf were in sight.

"Well, you'll have to look somewhere else for him," I said firmly. "I
never saw the note, and never bought a share of Crown Diamond."

Doddridge Knapp bent forward, and looked for an instant as though he
would leap upon me. His eye was the eye of a wild beast in anger. If I
had written that note I should have gone through the window without
stopping for explanations. As I had not written it I sat there coolly
and looked him in the face with an easy conscience.

"Well, well," he said at last, relaxing his gaze, "I almost believe
you."

"There's no use going any further, Mr. Knapp, unless you believe me
altogether."

"I see you understand what I was going to say," he said quietly. "But
if you didn't send that, who did?"

"Well, if I were to make a guess, I should say it was the man who wrote
this."

I tossed him in turn the note I had received in the afternoon, bidding
me sell everything.

The King of the Street looked at it carefully, and his brows drew lower
and lower as its import dawned on him. The look of angry perplexity
deepened on his face.

"Where did you get this?"

I detailed the circumstances.

The anger that flashed in his eyes was more eloquent than the outbreak
of curses I expected to hear.

"Um!" he said at last with a grim smile. "It's lucky, after all, that
you had something besides cotton in that skull of yours, Wilton."

"A fool might have been caught by it," I said modestly.

"There looks to be trouble ahead," he said, "There's a rascally gang in
the market these days." And the King of the Street sighed over the
dishonesty that had corrupted the stock gamblers' trade. I smiled
inwardly, but signified my agreement with my employer.

"Well, who wrote them?" he asked almost fiercely. "They seem to come
from the same hand."

"Maybe you'd better ask that fellow who had his eye at your keyhole
when I left the office this noon."

"Who was that?" The Wolf gave a startled look. "Why didn't you tell
me?"

"He was a well-made, quick, lithe fellow, with an eye that reminded me
of a snake. I gave chase to him, but couldn't overhaul him. He squirmed
away in the crowd, I guess."

The last part of my tale was unheard. At the description of the snake-
eyed man, Doddridge Knapp sank back in his chair, the flash of anger
died out of his eyes, and his mind was far away.

Was it terror, or anxiety, or wonder, that swept in shadow across his
face? The mask that never gave up a thought or purpose before the
changing fortunes of the market was not likely to fail its owner here.
I could make nothing out of the page before me, except that the vision
of Terrill had startled him.

"Why didn't you tell me?" he said at last, in a steady voice.

"I didn't suppose it was worth coming back for, after I got into the
street. And, besides, you were busy."

"Yes, yes, you were right: you are not to come--of course, of course."

The King of the Street looked at me curiously, and then said smoothly:

"But this isn't business." And he plunged into the papers once more.
"There were over nine thousand shares sold this afternoon, and I got
only five thousand of them."

"I suppose Decker picked the others up," I said.

The King of the Street did me the honor to look at me in amazement.

"Decker!" he roared. "How did you--" Then he paused and his voice
dropped to its ordinary tone. "I reckon you're right. What gave you the
idea?"

I frankly detailed my conversation with Wallbridge. As I went on, I
fancied that the bushy brows drew down and a little anxiety showed
beneath them.

I had hardly finished my account when there was a knock at the door,
and the servant appeared.

"Mrs. Knapp's compliments, and she would like to see Mr. Wilton when
you are done," he said.

I could with difficulty repress an exclamation, and my heart climbed
into my throat. I was ready to face the Wolf in his den, but here was a
different matter. I recalled that Mrs. Knapp was a more intimate
acquaintance of Henry Wilton's than Doddridge Knapp had been, and I saw
Niagara ahead of my skiff.

"Yes, yes; quite likely," said my employer, referring to my story of
Wallbridge. "I heard something of the kind from my men. I'll know to-
morrow for certain, I expect. I forgot to tell you that the ladies
would want to see you. They have missed you lately." And the Wolf
motioned me to the door where the servant waited.

Here was a predicament. I was missed and wanted--and by the ladies. My
heart dropped back from my throat, and I felt it throbbing in the
lowest recesses of my boot-heels as I rose and followed my guide.


CHAPTER XII

LUELLA KNAPP


As the door swung open, my heart almost failed me. If there had been a
chance of escape I should have made the bolt, then and there.

I had not counted on an interview with the women of Doddridge Knapp's
family. I had, to be sure, vaguely foreseen the danger to come from
meeting them, but I had been confident that it would be easy to avoid
them. And now, in the face of the emergency, my resources had failed
me, and I was walking into Mrs. Knapp's reception-room without the
glimmer of an idea of how I should find my way out.

Two women rose to greet me as I entered the room.

"Good evening," said the elder woman, holding out her hand. "You have
neglected us for a long time." There was something of reproach as well
as civility in the voice.

Mrs. Doddridge Knapp, for I had no doubt it was she who greeted me, was
large of frame but well-proportioned, and stood erect, vigorous, with
an air of active strength rare in one of her years. Her age was, I
supposed, near forty-five. Her face was strong and resolute, yet it was
with the strength and resolution of a woman, not of a man. Altogether
she looked a fit mate for Doddridge Knapp.

"Yes," I replied, adjusting my manner nicely to hers, "I have been very
busy."

As she felt the touch of my hand and heard the sound of my voice, I
thought I saw a look of surprise, apprehension and hesitation in her
eyes. If it was there it was gone in an instant, and she replied gaily:

"Busy? How provoking of you to say so! You should never be too busy to
take the commands of the ladies."

"That is why I am here," I interrupted with my best bow. But she
continued without noting it:

"Luella wagered with me that you would make that excuse. I expected
something more original."

"I am very sorry," I said, with a reflection of the bantering air she
had assumed.

"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed the younger woman, to whom my eyes had turned
as Mrs. Knapp spoke her name. "How very unkind of you to say so, when I
have just won a pair of gloves by it. Good evening to you!" And she
held out her hand.

It was with a strong effort that I kept my self-possession, as for the
first time I clasped the hand of Luella Knapp.

Was it the thrill of her touch, the glance of her eye, or the magnetism
of her presence, that set my pulses beating to a new measure, and gave
my spirit a breath from a new world? Whatever the cause, as I looked
into the clear-cut face and the frank gray eyes of the woman before me,
I was swept by a flood of emotion that was near overpowering my self-
control.

Nor was it altogether the emotion of pleasure that was roused within
me. As I looked into her eyes, I had the pain of seeing myself in a
light that had not as yet come to me. I saw myself not the friend of
Henry Wilton, on the high mission of bringing to justice the man who
had foully sent him to death. In that flash I saw Giles Dudley hiding
under a false name, entering this house to seek for another link in the
chain that would drag this girl's father to the gallows and turn her
life to bitterness and misery. And in the reflection from the clear
depths of the face before me, I saw Imposter and Spy written large on
my forehead.

I mastered the emotion in a moment and took the seat to which she had
waved me.

I was puzzled a little at the tone in which she addressed me. There was
a suggestion of resentment in her manner that grew on me as we talked.

Can I describe her? Of what use to try? She was not beautiful, and
"pretty" was too petty a word to apply to Luella Knapp. "Fine looking,"
if said with the proper emphasis, might give some idea of her
appearance, for she was tall in figure, with features that were
impressive in their attractiveness. Yet her main charm was in the light
that her spirit and intelligence threw on her face; and this no one can
describe.

The brightness of her speech did not disappoint the expectation I had
thus formed of her. It was a finely-cultivated mind that was revealed
to me, and it held a wit rare to woman. I followed her lead in the
conversational channel, giving but a guiding oar when it turned toward
acquaintances she held in common with Henry Wilton, or events that had
interested them together.

Through it all the idea that Miss Knapp was regarding me with a hidden
disapproval was growing on me. I decided that Henry had made some
uncommon blunder on his last visit and that I was suffering the penalty
for it. The admiration I felt for the young woman deepened with every
sentence she spoke, and I was ready to do anything to restore the good
opinion that Henry might have endangered, and in lieu of apology
exerted myself to the utmost to be agreeable.

I was unconscious of the flight of time until Mrs. Knapp turned from
some other guests and walked toward us.

"Come, Henry," she said pointedly, "Luella is not to monopolize you all
the time. Besides, there's Mr. Inman dying to speak to her."

I promptly hated Mr. Inman with all my heart and felt not the slightest
objection to his demise; but at her gesture of command I rose and
accompanied Mrs. Knapp, as a young man with eye-glasses and a smirk
came to take my place. I left Luella Knapp, congratulating myself over
my cleverness in escaping the pitfalls that lined my way.

"Now I've a chance to speak to you at last," said Mrs. Knapp.

"At your service," I bowed. "I owe you something."

"Indeed?" Mrs. Knapp raised her eyebrows in surprise.

"For your kind recommendation to Mr. Knapp."

"My recommendation? You have a little the advantage of me."

I was stricken with painful doubts, and the cold sweat started upon me.
Perhaps this was not Mrs. Knapp after all.

"Oh, perhaps you didn't mean it," I said.

"Indeed I did, if it was a recommendation. I'm afraid it was
unconscious, though. Mr. Knapp does not consult me about his business."

I was in doubt no longer. It was the injured pride of the wife that
spoke in the tone.

"I'm none the less obliged," I said carelessly. "He assured me that he
acted on your words."

"What on earth are you doing for Mr. Knapp?" she asked earnestly,
dropping her half-bantering tone. There was a trace of apprehension in
her eyes.

"I'm afraid Mr. Knapp wouldn't think your recommendations were quite
justified if I should tell you. Just get him in a corner and ask him."

"I suppose it is that dreadful stock market."

"Oh, madam, let me say the chicken market. There is a wonderful
opportunity just now for a corner in fowls."

"There are a good many to be plucked in the market that Mr. Knapp will
look after," she said with a smile. But there was something of a
worried look behind it. "Oh, you know, Henry, that I can't bear the
market. I have seen too much of the misery that has come from it. It
can eat up a fortune in an hour. A dear friend saw her home, the house
over her head, all she possessed, go in a breath on a turn of the cards
in that dreadful place. And her husband left her to face it with two
little children. The coward escaped it with a bullet through his head,
after he had brought ruin on his home and family."

She shuddered as she looked about her, as though in fancy she saw
herself turned from the palace into the street.

"Mr. Knapp is not a man to lose," I said.

"Mr. Knapp is a strong man," she said with a proud straightening of her
figure. "But the whirlpool can suck down the strongest swimmer."

"But I suspect Mr. Knapp makes whirlpools instead of swimming into
them," I said meaningly.

"Ah, Henry," she said sadly, "how often have I told you that the best
plan may come to ruin in the market? It may not take much to start a
boulder rolling down the mountain-side, but who is to tell it to stop
when once it is set going?"

"I think," said I, smiling, "that Mr. Knapp would ride the boulder and
find himself in a gold mine at the end of the journey."

"Perhaps. But you're not telling me what Mr. Knapp is doing."

"He can tell you much better than I."

"No doubt," she said with a trace of sarcasm in her voice.

"And here he comes to do it, I expect," I said, as the tall figure of
the King of the Street appeared in the doorway opposite.

"I'm afraid I shall have to depend on the newspapers," she said. "Mr.
Knapp is as much afraid of a woman's tongue as you are. Oh," she
continued after a moment's pause, "I was going to make you give an
account of yourself; but since you will tell nothing I must introduce
you to my cousin, Mrs. Bowser." And she led me, unresisting, to a
short, sharp-featured woman of sixty or thereabouts, who rustled her
silks, and in a high, thin voice professed herself charmed to see me.

She might have claimed and held the record as the champion of the
conversational ring. I had never met her equal before, nor have I met
one to surpass her since.

Had I been long in the city? She had been here only a week. Came from
down Maine way. This was a dear, dreadful city with such nice people
and such dreadful winds, wasn't it? And then she gave me a catalogue of
the places she had visited, and the attractions of San Francisco, with
a wealth of detail and a poverty of interest that was little less than
marvelous.

Fortunately she required nothing but an occasional murmur of assent in
the way of answer from me.

I looked across the room to the corner where Luella was entertaining
the insignificant Inman. How vivacious and intelligent she appeared!
Her face and figure grew on me in attractiveness, and I felt that I was
being very badly used. As I came to this point I was roused by the
sound of two low voices that just behind me were plainly audible under
the shrill treble of Mrs. Bowser. They were women with their heads
close in gossip.

"Shocking, isn't it?" said one.

"Dreadful!" said the other. "It gives me the creeps to think of it."

"Why don't they lock him up? Such a creature shouldn't be allowed to go
at large."

"Oh, you see, maybe they can't be sure about it. But I've heard it's a
case of family pride."

I was recalled from this dialogue by Mrs. Bowser's fan on my arm, and
her shrill voice in my ear with, "What is your idea about it, Mr.
Wilton?"

"I think you are perfectly right," I said heartily, as she paused for
an answer.

"Then I'll arrange it with the others at once," she said.

This was a bucket of ice-water on me. I had not the first idea to what
I had committed myself.

"No, don't," I said. "Wait till we have time to discuss it again."

"Oh, we can decide on the time whenever you like. Will some night week
after next suit you?"

I had to throw myself on the mercy of the enemy.

"I'm afraid I'm getting rather absent-minded," I said humbly. "I was
looking at Miss Knapp and lost the thread of the discourse for a
minute."

"That's what I was talking about," she said sharply,--"about taking her
and the rest of us through Chinatown."

"Yes, yes. I remember," I said unblushingly. "If I can get away from
business, I'm at your service at any time."

Then Mrs. Bowser wandered on with the arrangements she would find
necessary to make, and I heard one of the low voices behind me:

"Now this is a profound secret, you know. I wouldn't have them know for
the world that any one suspects. I just heard it this week, myself."

"Oh, I wouldn't dare breathe it to a soul," said the other. "But I'm
sure I shan't sleep a wink tonight." And they moved away.

I interrupted Mrs. Bowser to explain that I must speak to Mrs. Knapp,
and made my escape as some one stopped to pass a word with her.

"Oh, must you go, Henry?" said Mrs. Knapp. "Well, you must come again
soon. We miss you when you stay away. Don't let Mr. Knapp keep you too
closely."

I professed myself happy to come whenever I could find the time, and
looked about for Luella. She was nowhere to be seen. I left the room a
little disappointed, but with a swelling of pride that I had passed the
dreaded ordeal and had been accepted as Henry Wilton in the house in
which I had most feared to meet disaster. My opinion of my own
cleverness had risen, in the language of the market, "above par."

As I passed down the hall, a tall willowy figure stepped from the
shadow of the stair. My heart gave a bound of delight. It was Luella
Knapp. I should have the pleasure of a leave-taking in private.

"Oh, Miss Knapp!" I said. "I had despaired of having the chance to bid
you good night." And I held out my hand.

She ignored the hand. I could see from her heaving bosom and shortened
breath that she was laboring under great agitation. Yet her face gave
no evidence of the effort that it cost her to control herself.

"I was waiting for you," she said in a low voice.

I started to express my gratification when she interrupted me.

"Who are you?" broke from her lips almost fiercely.

I was completely taken aback, and stared at her in amazement with no
word at command.

"You are not Henry Wilton," she said rapidly. "You have come here with
his name and his clothes, and made up to look like him, and you try to
use his voice and take his place. Who are you?"

There was a depth of scorn and anger and apprehension in that low voice
of hers that struck me dumb.

"Can you not answer?" she demanded, catching her breath with
excitement. "You are not Henry Wilton."

"Well?" I said half-inquiringly. It was not safe to advance or retreat.

"Well--! well--!" She repeated my answer, with indignation and disdain
deepening in her voice. "Is that all you have to say for yourself?"

"What should I say?" I replied quietly. "You make an assertion. Is
there anything more to be said?"

"Oh, you may laugh at me if you please, because you can hoodwink the
others."

I protested that laughter was the last thing I was thinking of at the
moment.

Then she burst out impetuously:

"Oh, if I were only a man! No; if I were a man I should be hoodwinked
like the rest. But you can not deceive me. Who are you? What are you
here for? What are you trying to do?"

She was blazing with wrath. Her tone had raised hardly an interval of
the scale, but every word that came in that smooth, low voice was heavy
with contempt and anger. It was the true daughter of the Wolf who stood
before me.

"I am afraid, Miss Knapp, you are not well tonight," I said soothingly.

"What have you done with Henry Wilton?" she asked fiercely. "Don't try
to speak with his voice. Drop your disguise. You are no actor. You are
no more like him than--"

The simile failed her in her wrath.

"Satyr to Hyperion," I quoted bitterly. "Make it strong, please."

I had thought myself in a tight place in the row at Borton's, but it
was nothing to this encounter.

"Oh, where is he? What has happened?" she cried.

"Nothing has happened," I said calmly, determining at last to brazen it
out. I could not tell her the truth. "My name is Henry Wilton."

She looked at me in anger a moment, and then a shadow of dread and
despair settled over her face.

I was tempted beyond measure to throw myself on her mercy and tell all.
The subtle sympathy that she inspired was softening my resolution. Yet,
as I looked into her eyes, her face hardened, and her wrath blazed
forth once more.

"Go!" she said. "I hope I may never see you again!" And she turned and
ran swiftly up the stair. I thought I heard a sob, but whether of anger
or sorrow I knew not.

And I went out into the night with a heavier load of depression than I
had borne since I entered the city.


CHAPTER XIII

A DAY OF GRACE


The wind blew strong and moist and salt from the western ocean as I
walked down the steps into the semi-darkness of Pine Street. But it was
powerless to cool the hot blood that surged into my cheeks in the
tumult of emotion that followed my dismissal by Luella Knapp. I was
furious at the poor figure I had cut in her sight, at the insults I had
been forced to bear without reply, and at the hopelessness of setting
myself right. Yet, more than all was I sick at heart at the dreadful
task before me. My spirit was bleeding from every stab that this girl
had dealt me; yet I had to confess that her outburst of rage had
challenged my admiration even more than her brightness in the hour that
had gone before. How could I go through with my work? How could I bear
to overwhelm her with the sorrow and disgrace that must crush on her if
I proved to the world the awful facts that were burned on my brain?

Resolve, shame, despair, fought with each other in the tumult in my
mind as I passed between the bronze lions and took my way down the
street. I was called out of my distractions with a sudden start as
though a bucket of cold water had been thrown over me. I had proceeded
not twenty feet when I saw two dark forms across the street. They had,
it struck me, been waiting for my appearance, for one ran to join the
other and both hastened toward the corner as though to be ready to meet
me.

I could not retreat to the house of the Wolf that loomed forbiddingly
behind me. There was nothing to do but to go forward and trust to my
good fortune, and I shifted my revolver to the side-pocket of my
overcoat as I stepped briskly to the corner. Then I stopped under the
lamp-post to reconnoiter.

The two men who had roused my apprehensions did not offer to cross the
street, but slackened their pace and strolled slowly along on the other
side. I noted that it seemed a long way between street-lamps
thereabouts. I could see none between the one under which I was
standing and the brow of the hill below. Then it occurred to me that
this circumstance might not be due to the caprice of the street
department of the city government, but to the thoughtfulness of the
gentlemen who were paying such close attention to my affairs. I decided
that there were better ways to get down town than were offered by Pine
Street.

To the south the cross-street stretched to Market with an unbroken
array of lights, and as my unwary watchers had disappeared in the
darkness, I hastened down the incline with so little regard for dignity
that I found myself running for a Sutter Street car--and caught it,
too. As I swung on to the platform I looked back; but I saw no sign of
skulking figures before the car swept past the corner and blotted the
street from sight.

The incident gave me a distaste for the idea of going back to Henry
Wilton's room at this time of the night. So as Montgomery Street was
reached I stepped into the Lick House, where I felt reasonably sure
that I might get at least one night's sleep, free from the haunting
fear of the assassin.

But, once more safe, the charms of Luella Knapp again claimed the major
part of my thoughts, and when I went to sleep it was with her scornful
words ringing in my ears. I awoke in the darkness--perhaps it was in
but a few minutes--with the confused dream that Luella Knapp was seized
in the grasp of the snake-eyed Terrill, and I was struggling to come to
her assistance and seize him by his hateful throat. But, becoming calm
from this exciting vision, I slept soundly until the morning sun peeped
into the room with the cheerful announcement that a new day was born.

In the fresh morning air and the bright morning light, I felt that I
might have been unduly suspicious and had fled from harmless citizens;
and I was ashamed that I had lacked courage to return to Henry's room
as I made my way thither for a change of clothes. I thought better of
my decision, however, as I stepped within the gloomy walls of the house
of mystery, and my footfalls echoed through the chilling silence of the
halls. And I lost all regret over my night's lack of courage when I
reached my door. It was swung an inch ajar, and as I approached I
thought I saw it move.

"I'm certain I locked it," was my inward comment.

I stopped short and hunted my revolver from my overcoat pocket. I was
nervous for a moment, and angry at the inattention that might have cost
me my life.

"Who's there?" I demanded.

No reply.

I gave a knock on the door at long reach.

There was no sound and I gave it a push that sent it open while I
prudently kept behind the fortification of the casing. As no
developments followed this move, I peeped through the door in cautious
investigation. The room was quite empty, and I walked in.

The sight that met my eyes was astonishing. Clothes, books, papers,
were scattered over the floor and bed and chairs. The carpet had been
partly ripped up, the mattress torn apart, the closet cleared out, and
every corner of the room had been ransacked.

It was clear to my eye that this was no ordinary case of robbery. The
search, it was evident, was not for money and jewelry alone, and
bulkier property had been despised. The men who had torn the place to
pieces must, I surmised, have been after papers of some kind.

I came at once to the conclusion that I had been favored by a visit
from my friends, the enemy. As they had failed to find me in, they had
looked for some written memoranda of the object of their search.

I knew well that they had found nothing among the clothing or papers
that Henry had left behind. I had searched through these myself, and
the sole document that could bear on the mystery was at that moment
fast in my inside pocket. I was inclined to scout the idea that Henry
Wilton had hidden anything under the carpet, or in the mattress, or in
any secret place. The threads of the mystery were carried in his head,
and the correspondence, if there had been any, was destroyed.

As I was engaged in putting the room to rights, the door swung back,
and I jumped to my feet to face a man who stood on the threshold.

"Hello!" he cried. "House-cleaning again?"

It was Dicky Nahl, and he paused with a smile on his face.

"Ah, Dicky!" I said with an effort to keep out of my face and voice the
suspicions I had gained from the incidents of the visit to the Borton
place. "Entirely unpremeditated, I assure you."

"Well, you're making a thorough job of it," he said with a laugh.

"Fact is," said I ruefully, "I've been entertaining angels--of the
black kind--unawares. I was from home last night, and I find that
somebody has made himself free with my property while I was away."

"Whew!" whistled Dicky. "Guess they were after you."

I gave Dicky a sidelong glance in a vain effort to catch more of his
meaning than was conveyed by his words.

"Shouldn't be surprised," I replied dryly, picking up an armful of
books. "I'd expect them to be looking for me in the book-shelf, or
inside the mattress-cover, or under the carpet."

Dicky laughed joyously.

"Well, they did rather turn things upside down," he chuckled. "Did they
get anything?" And he fell to helping me zealously.

"Not that I can find out," I replied. "Nothing of value, anyhow."

"Not any papers, or anything of that sort?" asked Dicky anxiously.

"Dicky, my boy," said I; "there are two kinds of fools. The other is
the man who writes his business on a sheet of paper and forgets to burn
it."

Dicky grinned merrily.

"Gad, you're getting a turn for epigram! You'll be writing for the
_Argonaut_, first we know."

"Well, you'll allow me a shade of common sense, won't you?"

"I don't know," said Dicky, considering the proposition doubtfully. "It
might have been awkward if you had left anything lying about. But if
you had real good sense you'd have had the guards here. What are you
paying them for, anyhow?"

I saw difficulties in the way of explaining to Dicky why I had not
ordered the guards on duty.

"Oh, by the way," said Dicky suddenly, before a suitable reply had come
to me; "how about the scads--spondulicks--you know? Yesterday was pay-
day, but you didn't show up."

I don't know whether my jaw dropped or not. My spirits certainly did.

"By Jove, Dicky!" I exclaimed, catching my breath. "It slipped my mind,
clean. I haven't got at our--ahem--banker, either."

I saw now what that mysterious money was for--or a part of it, at all
events. What I did not see was how I was to get it, and how to pay it
to my men.

"That's rough," said Dicky sympathetically. "I'm dead broke."

It would appear then that Dicky looked to me for pay, whether or not he
felt bound to me in service.

"There's one thing I'd like explained before a settlement," said I
grimly, as I straightened out the carpet; "and that is the little
performance for my benefit the other night."

Dicky cocked his head on one side, and gave me an uneasy glance.

"Explanation?" he said in affected surprise.

"Yes," said I sternly. "It looked like a plant. I was within one of
getting a knife in me."

"What became of you?" inquired Dicky. "We looked around for you for an
hour, and were afraid you had been carried off."

"That's all right, Dicky," I said. "I know how I got out. What I want
to know is how I got in--taken in."

"I don't know," said Dicky anxiously. "I was regularly fooled, myself.
I thought they were fishermen, all right enough, and I never thought
that Terrill had the nerve to come in there. I was fooled by his
disguise, and he gave the word, and I thought sure that Richmond had
sent him." Dicky had dropped all banter, and was speaking with the tone
of sincerity.

"Well, it's all right now, but I don't want any more slips of that
sort. Who was hurt?"

"Trent got a bad cut in the side. One of the Terrill gang was shot. I
heard it was only through the arm or leg, I forget which."

I was consumed with the desire to ask what had become of Borton's, but
I suspected that I was supposed to know, and prudently kept the
question to myself.

"Well, come along," said I. "The room will do well enough now. Oh,
here's a ten, and I'll let you know as soon as I get the rest. Where
can I find you?"

"At the old place," said Dicky; "three twenty-six."

"Clay?" I asked in desperation. Dicky gave me a wondering look as
though he suspected my mind was going.

"No--Geary. What's the matter with you?"

"Oh, to be sure. Geary Street, of course. Well, let me know if anything
turns up. Keep a close watch on things."

Dicky looked at me in some apparent perplexity as I walked up the stair
to my Clay Street office, but gave only some laughing answer as he
turned back.

But I was in far from a laughing humor myself. The problem of paying
the men raised fresh prospects of trouble, and I reflected grimly that
if the money was not found I might be in more danger from my unpaid
mercenaries than from the enemy.

Ten o'clock passed, and eleven, with no sign from Doddridge Knapp, and
I wondered if the news I had carried him of the activities of Terrill
and of Decker had disarranged his plans.

I tried the door into Room 16. It was locked, and no sound came to my
ears from behind it.

"I should really like to know," I thought to myself, "whether Mr.
Doddridge Knapp has left any papers in his desk that might bear on the
Wilton mystery."

I tried my keys, but none of them fitted the lock. I gave up the
attempt--indeed, my mind shrank from the idea of going through my
employer's papers--but the desire of getting a key that would open the
door was planted in my brain.

Twelve o'clock came. No Doddridge Knapp had appeared, and I sauntered
down to the Exchange to pick up any items of news. It behooved me to be
looking out for Doddridge Knapp's movements. If he had got another
agent to carry out his schemes, I should have to prepare my lines for
attack from another direction.

Wallbridge was just coming rapidly out of the Exchange.

"No," said the little man, mopping the perspiration from his shining
head, "quiet as lambs to-day. Their own mothers wouldn't have known the
Board from a Sunday-school."

I inquired about Omega.

"Flat as a pancake," said the little man. "Nothing doing."

"What! Is it down?" I exclaimed with some astonishment.

"Lord bless you, no!" said Wallbridge, surprised in his turn. "Strong
and steady at eighty, but we didn't sell a hundred shares to-day. Well,
I'm in a rush. Good-by, if you don't want to buy or sell." And he
hurried off without waiting for a reply.

So I was now assured that Doddridge Knapp had not displaced me in the
Omega deal. It was a recess to prepare another surprise for the Street,
and I had time to attend to a neglected duty.

The undertaker's shop that held the morgue looked hardly less gloomy in
the afternoon sun than in the light of breaking day in which I had left
it when I parted from Detective Coogan. The office was decorated
mournfully to accord with the grief of friends who ordered the coffins,
or the feelings of the surviving relatives on settling the bills.

"I am Henry Wilton," I explained to the man in charge. "There was a
body left here by Detective Coogan to my order, I believe."

"Oh, yes," he said: "What do you want done with it?"

I explained that I wished to arrange to have it deposited in a vault
for a time, as I might carry it East.

"That's easy done," he said; and he explained the details. "Would you
like to see the body?" he concluded. "We embalmed it on the strength of
Coogan's order."

I shrank from another look at the battered form. The awfulness of the
tragedy came upon me with hardly less force than in the moment when I
had first faced the mangled and bleeding body on the slab in the dead-
room. Again I saw the scene in the alley; again his last cry for help
rang in my ears; again I retraced the dreadful experiences of the
night, and stood in the dim horror of the morgue with the questioning
voice of the detective echoing beside me; and again did that wolf-face
rise out of the lantern-flash over the body of the man whose death it
had caused.

The undertaker was talking, but I knew not what he said. I was shaking
with the horror and grief of the situation, and in that moment I
renewed my vow to have blood for blood and life for life, if law and
justice were to be had.

"We'll take it out any time," said the undertaker, with a decorous
reflection of my grief upon his face. "Would you like to accompany the
remains?"

I decided that I would.

"Well, there's nothing doing now. We can start as soon as we have
sealed the casket."

"As soon as you can. There's nothing to wait for."

The ride to the cemetery took me through a part of San Francisco that I
had not yet seen. Flying battalions of fog advanced swiftly upon us as
we faced the West, and the day grew pale and ghostlike. The gray masses
were pouring fast over the hills toward which we struggled, and the
ranks thickened as we drew near the burial-place.

I paid little attention to the streets through which we passed. My mind
was on the friend whose name I had taken, whose work I was to do. I was
back with him in our boyhood days, and lived again for the fleeting
minutes the life we had lived in common; and the resolve grew stronger
on me that his fate should be avenged.

And yet a face came between me and the dead--a proud face, with varying
moods reflected upon it, now gay, now scornful, now lighted with
intelligence and mirth, now blazing with anger. But it was powerless to
shake my resolve. Not even Luella Knapp should stand between me and
vengeance.

"There's the place," said the undertaker, pointing to the vault. "I'll
have it opened directly."

The scene was in accord with my feelings. The gray day gave a somber
air to the trees and flowers that grew about. The white tombstones and
occasional monuments to be seen were sad reminders of mortality.

Below me stretched the city, half-concealed by the magic drapery of the
fog that streamed through it, turning it from a place of wood and stone
into a fantastic illusion, heavy with gloom and sorrow.

It was soon over. The body of Henry Wilton was committed to the vault
with the single mourner looking on, and we drove rapidly back in the
failing light.

I had given my address at the undertaker's shop, and the hack stopped
in front of my house of mystery before I knew where we were. Darkness
had come upon the place, and the street-lamps were alight and the gas
was blazing in the store-windows along the thoroughfares. As I stepped
out of the carriage and gazed about me, I recognized the gloomy doorway
and its neighborhood that had greeted me on my first night in San
Francisco.

As I was paying the fare, a stout figure stepped up to me.

"Ah, Mr. Wilton, it's you again."

I turned in surprise. It was the policeman I had met on my first night
in San Francisco.

"Oh, Corson, how are you?" I said heartily, recognizing him at last. I
felt a sense of relief in the sight of him. The place was not one to
quiet my nerves after the errand from which I had just come.

"All's well, sor, but I've a bit of paper for ye." And after some
hunting he brought it forth. "I was asked to hand this to ye."

I took it in wonder. Was there something more from Detective Coogan? I
tore open the envelope and read on its inclosure:

  "Kum tonite to the house. Shure if youre life is wurth savein.

    "Muther Borton."


CHAPTER XIV

MOTHER BORTON'S ADVICE


I studied the note carefully, and then turned to Policeman Corson.

"When did she give you this--and where?"

"A lady?" said Corson with a grin. "Ah, Mr. Wilton, it's too sly she is
to give it to me. 'Twas a boy askin' for ye. 'Do you know him?' says
he. 'I do that,' says I. 'Where is he?' says he. 'I don't know,' says
I. 'Has 'e a room?' says he. 'He has,' says I. 'Where is it?' says he.
'What's that to you?' says I--"

"Yes, yes," I interrupted. "But where did he get the note?"

"I was just tellin' ye, sor," said the policeman amiably. "He shoves
the note at me ag'in, an' says he, 'It's important,' says he. 'Go up
there,' says I. 'Last room, top floor, right-hand side.' Before I comes
to the corner up here, he's after me ag'in. 'He's gone,' says he. 'Like
enough,' says I. 'When'll he be back?' says he. 'When the cows come
home, sonny,' says I. 'Then there'll be the divil to pay,' says he. I
pricks up my ears at this. 'Why?' says I. 'Oh, he'll be killed,' says
he, 'and I'll git the derndest lickin',' says he. 'What's up?' says I,
makin' a grab for him. But he ducks an' blubbers. 'Gimme that letter,'
says I, 'and you just kite back to the folks that sent you, and tell
them what's the matter. I'll give your note to your man if he comes
while I'm on the beat,' says I. I knows too much to try to git anything
more out of him. I says to meself that Mr. Wilton ain't in the safest
place in the world, and this kid's folks maybe means him well, and
might know some other place to look for him. The kid jaws a bit, an'
then does as I tells him, an' cuts away. That's half an hour ago, an'
here you are, an' here's your letter."

I hesitated for a little before saying anything. It was with quick
suspicion that I wondered why Mother Borton had secured again that
gloomy and deserted house for the interview she was planning. That
mystery of the night, with its memories of the fight in the bar-room,
the escape up the stair, the fearsome moments I had spent locked in the
vacant place, came on me with nerve-shaking force. It was more likely
to be a trap than a meeting meant for my advantage. There was, indeed,
no assurance that the note was written by Mother Borton herself. It
might well be the product of the gentlemen who had been lending such
variety to an otherwise uninteresting existence.

All these considerations flashed through my mind in the seconds of
hesitation that passed before my reply to Policeman Corson's account.

"That was very kind of you. You didn't know what was in the letter
then?"

"No, sor," replied Corson with a touch of wounded pride. "It's not me
as would open another man's letter, unless in the way of me duty."

"Do you know Mother Borton?" I continued.

"Know her? know her?" returned Corson in a tone scornful of doubt on
such a point. "Do I know the slickest crook in San Francisco? Ah, it's
many a story I could tell you, Mr. Wilton, of the way that ould she-
divil has slipped through our fingers when we thought our hands were on
her throat. And it's many of her brood we have put safe in San
Quentin."

"Yes, I suppose so," said I dryly. "But the woman has done me a
service--saved my life, I may say--and I'm willing to forget the bad in
her."

"That's not for me to say, sor; but there's quare things happens, no
doubt."

"This note," I continued, "is written over her name. I don't know
whether it came from her, or not; but if she sent it I must see her. It
may be a case of life or death for me."

"An' if it didn't come from her?" asked the policeman shrewdly.

"Then," said I grimly, "it's likely to be a case of death if I venture
alone."

"I'll tell you what, Mr. Wilton," said Corson after a pause. "If you'll
wait a bit, I'll go with you--that is, if there isn't somebody else
you'd like better to have by your side to-night. You don't look to have
any of your friends about."

"Just the thing," I said heartily. "There's no one I'd rather have.
We'll go down as soon as we can get a bite to eat."

"I'll have to wait a bit, sor, till my relief comes. He'll be along
soon. As for getting a bite, you can't do better than wait till you get
to Mother Borton's. It's a rough place, but it's got a name for good
cooking."

I was bewildered.

"I guess there's not much to be got in the way of eating in the house.
There was nothing left in it yesterday morning but the rats." I spoke
with considerable emphasis.

"That's square, now," he said, looking to see if there was a jest
behind the words. "But 'twas all there when McPherson and I put a club
to a drunk as was raising the Ould Nick in the place and smashing the
bottles, not six hours ago. When we took him away in the ixpriss wagon
the ould woman was rowling out those long black curses in a way that
would warm the heart of the foul fiend himself."

There was some fresh mystery about this. I held my tongue with the
reflection that I had better let it straighten itself out than risk a
stumble by asking about things I ought to know.

Corson's relief soon appeared. "It's a nasty night," he said, buttoning
up his overcoat closely, as Corson gave him a brief report of the
situation on the beat.

"It's good for them as likes it dark," said Corson.

"It's just such a night as we had when Donaldson was murdered. Do you
mind it?"

"Do I mind it? Am I likely to forgit it? Well, a pleasant time to you,
me boy. Come along, sor. We'd better be moving. You won't mind stepping
up to the hall with me, will ye, while I report?"

"Certainly not," I said with a shiver, half at the grim suggestion of
murder and half at the chill of the fog and the cutting wind that blew
the cold vapor through to the skin.

"You've no overcoat," said Corson. "We'll stop and get one. I'll have
mine from the station."

The silence of the house of mystery was no less threatening now than on
the night when Henry Wilton was walking through the halls on the way to
his death. But the stout-hearted policeman by my side gave me
confidence, and no sign showed the presence of an enemy as I secured
Henry's heavy overcoat and the large revolver he had given me, and we
took our way down the stairs.

A short visit to the grimy, foul-smelling basement of the City Hall,
where a few policemen looked at me wonderingly, a brisk walk with the
cutting wind at our backs and the fog currents hurrying and whirling in
eddies toward the bay, and I felt rather than saw that we were in the
neighborhood of the scene of my adventures of a night that had come so
near costing me my life. I could not be certain of my bearings, but I
trusted to the unconscious guidance of Corson, with a confused idea
that we were bearing away from the place. Then with relief combined
with bewilderment, I saw the lantern sign give forth its promise of the
varied entertainment that could be had at Borton's.

"Here we are," said Corson.

We pushed open the door and entered. The place had the same appearance
as the one to which I had been taken by Dicky Nahl.

"A fine night, Mother Borton," said Corson cheerily, as he was the
first to enter, and then added under his breath, "--for the divil's
business."

Mother Borton stared at him with a black look and muttered a curse.

"Good evening," I hastened to say. "I took the liberty to bring a
friend; he doesn't come as an officer to-night."

The effect on the hag's features was marvelous. The black scowl
lightened, the tight-drawn lips relaxed, and there was a sign of
pleasure in the bright eyes that had flashed hatred at the policeman.

"Ah, it's you, is it?" she said sharply, but with a tone of kindness in
her greeting. "I didn't see ye. Now sit down and find a table, and I'll
be with ye after a bit."

"We want a dinner, and a good one. I'm half-starved."

"Are ye, honey?" said the woman with delight.

"Then it's the best dinner in town ye shall have. Here, Jim! Put these
gentlemen over there at the corner table."

And if the cooking was not what we could have had at the Maison Dorée
and the service was a little off color, neither of us was disposed to
be critical.

"It's not the aristocracy of stoile ye get here," said Corson, lighting
his pipe after the coffee, "but it's prime eating."

I nodded in lazy contentment, and then started up in remembrance of the
occasion of our being in this place as the shadow of Mother Borton fell
across the table. Her keen eyes fixed on me and her sharp beak nodding
toward me gave her the uncanny aspect of a bird of prey, and I felt a
sinking of courage as I met her glance.

"If you will go upstairs," she said sourly. "You know the way. I guess
your friend can spare you."

"Is there anything that can't be told before him?" I asked.

The features of the old woman hardened.

"You'll be safer in my care than in his," she said, with warning in her
tone.

"Yes, yes, I know I am safe here, but how is it with my friend if I
leave him here? We came together and we'll go together."

The crone nodded with a laugh that ended in a snarl.

"If the gang knew he was here there would be more fun than you saw the
other night."

"Don't worry about me, Mr. Wilton," said Corson with a grin. "I've
stood her crowd off before, and I can do it again if the need comes.
But I'd rather smoke a poipe in peace."

"You can smoke in peace, but it's not yourself you can thank for it,"
said Mother Borton sharply. "There'll be no trouble here to-night. Come
along." And the old woman started for the door.

"Are you sure you're all right?" asked Corson in a low voice. "There's
men gone up those stairs that came down with a sheet over them."

"It's all right--that is, unless there's any danger to you in leaving
you here."

"No. Go ahead. I'll wait for ye. I'd as lief sit here as anywheres."

I hastened after Mother Borton, who was glowering at me from the
doorway, and followed her footsteps in silence to the floor above.
There was a dim light and a foul smell in the upper hall, both of which
came from a lamp that burned with a low flame on a bracket by the
forward stair. There were perhaps a dozen doors to be seen, all closed,
but all giving the discomforting suggestion that they had eyes to mark
my coming.

Mother Borton walked the passage cautiously and in silence, and I
followed her example until she pushed open a door and was swallowed up
in the blackness. Then I paused on the threshold while she lighted a
candle; and as I entered, she swiftly closed and locked the door behind
me.

"Sit down," she said in a harsh voice, motioning me to a chair by the
stand that held the candle. Then this strange creature seated herself
in front of me, and looked steadily and sternly in my face for a full
minute. The gaze of the piercing, deep-sunken eyes of the old hag, the
evil lines that marked the lean, sharp features, gaining a still more
sinister meaning from the wavering, flickering light thrown upon her
face by the candle, gave me a feeling of anything but ease in my
position.

"What have you done that I should help you?" she broke forth in a harsh
voice, her eyes still fixed on my face.

"I really couldn't say," I replied politely. "You have done me one or
two services already. That's the best reason I know why you should do
me another."

The hard lines on the face before me relaxed at the sound of my voice,
and the old woman nodded approvingly.

"Ay, reason enough, I guess. Them as wants better can find it
themselves. But why did you sneak out of the house the other night like
a cop in plain clothes? Didn't I go bail you were safe? Do you want any
better word than mine?" she had begun almost softly, but the voice grew
higher and harsher as she went on.

"Why," I said, bewildered again, "the house sneaked away from me--or,
at least you left me alone in it."

"How was that?" she asked grimly. And I described graphically my
experience in the deserted building.

As I proceeded with my tale an amused look replaced the harsh lines of
suspicion on Mother Borton's face.

"Oh, my lud!" she cried with a chuckle. "Oh, my lud! how very green you
are, my boy. Oh ho! oh ho!" And then she laughed an inward, self-
consuming laugh that called up anything but the feeling of sympathetic
mirth.

"I'm glad it amuses you," I said with injured dignity.

"Oh, my liver! Don't you see it yet? Don't you see that you climbed
into the next house back, and went through on to the other street?" And
she relapsed into her state of silent merriment.

I felt foolish enough as the truth flashed over me. I had lost my sense
of direction in the strange house, and had been deceived by the
resemblance of the ground plan of the two buildings.

"But what about the plot?" I asked. "I got your note. It's very
interesting. What about it?"

"What plot?"

"Why, I don't know. The one you wrote me about."

Mother Borton bent forward and searched my face with her keen glance.

"Oh," she said at last, "the one I wrote you about. I'd forgotten it."

This was disheartening. How could I depend on one whose memory was thus
capricious?

"Yes," said I gloomily; "I supposed you might know something about it."

"Show me the note," she said sharply.

I fumbled through my pockets until I found it. Mother Borton clutched
it, held it up to the candle, and studied it for two or three minutes.

"Where did you get it?"

I described the circumstances in which it had come into my possession,
and repeated the essentials of Corson's story. Mother Borton's sharp,
evil face was impassive during my recital. When it was done she
muttered:

"Gimme a fool for luck." Then she appeared to consider for a minute or
more.

"Well?" said I inquiringly.

"Well, honey, you're having a run of the cards," she said at last.
"Between having the message trusted to a fool boy, and having a cop for
your friend, an' maybe gitting this note before you're expected to,
you're setting here genteel-like having agreeable conversation along
with me, instead of being in company you mightn't like so well--or
maybe floating out toward Fort Point."

"So you didn't write it?" I said coolly. "I had an idea of the kind.
That's why my friend Corson is smoking his pipe down stairs."

Mother Borton gave me a pleased look and nodded. I hoped I had made her
regret the cruel insinuation in her application of the proverb to me as
the favorite of fortune.

"I see," I said. "I was to be waylaid on the road here and killed."

"Carried off, more likely. I don't say as it wouldn't end in killin'
ye. But, you see, you'd be of mighty small use in tellin' tales if you
was dead; but you might be got to talk if they had ye in a quiet
place."

"Good reasoning. But Henry Wilton was killed."

"Yes," admitted Mother Borton; "they thought he carried papers, and
maybe they ain't got over the idea yit. It's jest as well you're here
instid of having a little passear with Tom Terrill and Darby Meeker and
their pals."

"Well," said I, as cheerfully as I could under the depressing
circumstances, "if they want to kill me, I don't see how I can keep
them from getting a chance sooner or later."

Mother Borton looked anxious at this, and shook her head.

"You must call on your men," she said decidedly. "You must have
guards."

"By the way," I said, "that reminds me. The men haven't been paid, and
they're looking to me for money."

"Who's looking to you for money?"

"Dicky Nahl--and the others, I suppose."

"Dicky Nahl?"

"Why, yes. He asked me for it."

"And you gave it to him?" she asked sharply.

"No-o--that is, I gave him ten dollars, and told him he'd have to wait
for the rest. I haven't got the money from the one that's doing the
hiring yet, so I couldn't pay him."

Mother Borton gave an evil grin, and absorbed another inward laugh.

"I reckon the money'll come all right," said Mother Borton, recovering
from her mirth. "There's one more anxious than you to have 'em paid,
and if you ain't found out you'll have it right away. Now for guards,
take Trent--no, he's hurt. Take Brown and Porter and Barkhouse and
Fitzhugh. They're wide-awake, and don't talk much. Take 'em two and
two, and never go without 'em, night or day. You stop here to-night,
and I'll git 'em for you to-morrow."

I declined the proffered hospitality with thanks, and as a compromise
agreed to call for my bodyguard in the early morning. Rejoining Corson,
I explained Mother Borton's theory of the plot that had brought me
thither.

"She's like to be right," said the policeman. "She knows the gang. Now,
if you'll take my advice, you'll let the rats have your room for this
night, and come along up to some foine hotel."

The advice appeared good, and fifteen minutes later Corson was drinking
my health at the Lick House bar, and calling on the powers of light and
darkness to watch over my safety as I slept.

Whether due to his prayers or not, my sleep was undisturbed, even by
dreams of Doddridge Knapp and his charming but scornful daughter; and
with the full tide of life and business flowing through the streets in
the morning hours I found myself once more in Mother Borton's dingy
eating-room, ordering a breakfast.

Mother Borton ignored my entrance, and, perched on a high stool behind
the bar and cash-drawer, reminded me of the vulture guarding its prey.
But at last she fluttered over to my table and took a seat opposite.

"Your men are here," she said shortly. And then, as I expressed my
thanks, she warmed up and gave me a description by which I should know
each and led me to the room where, as she said, they were "corralled."

"By the way," I said, halting outside the door, "they'll want some
money, I suppose. Do you know how much?"

"They're paid," she said, and pushed open the door before I could
express surprise or ask further questions. I surmised that she had paid
them herself to save me from annoyance or possible danger, and my
gratitude to this strange creature rose still higher.

The four men within the room saluted me gravely and with Mother
Borton's directions in mind I had no hesitation in calling each by his
name. I was pleased to see that they were robust, vigorous fellows, and
soon made my dispositions. Brown and Barkhouse were to attend me during
daylight, and Fitzhugh and Porter were to guard together at night. And,
so much settled, I hastened to the office.

No sign of Doddridge Knapp disturbed the morning, and at the noon hour
I returned to the room in the house of mystery that was still my only
fixed abode.

All was apparently as I had left it, except that a letter lay on the
table.

"I must get a new lock," was my comment, as I broke the seal. "This
place is getting too public when every messenger has a key." I was
certain that I had locked the door when Corson and I had come out on
the evening before.

The letter was from my unknown employer, and read:

"Richmond has paid the men. Be ready for a move at any moment. Leave
your address if you sleep elsewhere."

And now came three or four days of rest and quiet after the merry life
I had been leading since my arrival in San Francisco.

No word did I get from Doddridge Knapp. I kept close watch of the stock
market, and gossiped with speculators and brokers, for I wished to know
at once if he had employed another agent. My work would lie in another
direction if such should prove to be the case. But there was no
movement in Omega, and I could hear no hint of another deal that might
show a trace of his dexterous hand. "Quiet trading," was the report
from all quarters.

"Fact is," said Wallbridge on the fourth day, trying to look doleful,
"I haven't made enough this week to pay for the gas--and I don't burn
any."

In the interval I improved my time by getting better acquainted with
the city. Emboldened by my body-guard, I slept for two nights in
Henry's room, and with one to watch outside the door, one lying on a
mattress just inside, and a new lock and bolt, I was free from
disturbance.

Just as I had formed a wild idea of looking up Doddridge Knapp in his
home, I came to the office in the morning to find the door into Room 16
wide open and the farther door ajar.

"Come in, Wilton," said the voice of the King of the Street; and I
entered his room to find him busied over his papers, as though nothing
had occurred since I had last met him.

"The market has had something of a vacation." I ventured, as he failed
to speak.

"I have been out of town," he said shortly. "What have you done?"

"Nothing."

He gave a grunt of assent.

"You didn't expect me to be buying up the market, did you?" The yellow-
gray mustache went up, and the wolf-fangs gleamed from beneath.

"I reckon it wouldn't have been a very profitable speculation," he
replied.

Then he leaned back in his chair and looked meditatively at the wall.

"It was for one fellow, though," he continued, mellowing as he mused in
his recollections. "It was at the time of the Honest Injun deal--I
guess you don't remember that. It must have been ten years ago. Well, I
had a fellow named--why, what was his name?--oh, Riggs, or Rix, I
forget which,--and he was handling about a hundred thousand dollars for
me. We had Honest Injun run up from one dollar till it was over twenty
dollars a share. I had to go up to Nevada City, and left ten thousand
shares with him with orders to sell at twenty-five."

"Yes," I said, as the King of the Street paused and seemed inclined to
drop the story. "At twenty-five."

"Well," he continued at this encouragement, "when I came back, Honest
Injun was down to ten cents, or somewhere around there, which was just
about as I expected. Riggs comes up to me as proud as a spotted pup,
and tells me that he'd sold at thirty dollars, and cleared fifty
thousand more than I'd expected."

"A pretty good deal," I suggested.

"It happened that way, but it wouldn't happen so once in ten years. The
stock had gone up to thirty-one or thirty-two before it broke, and he
had sold just in time."

"Did he get a reward?" I asked, as my employer appeared to wait for an
observation from me.

"He did," said the Wolf with a growl. "I discharged him on the spot.
And hanged if I didn't tell him that the fifty thousand was his--and
let him have it, too. Oh, he was playing in great luck! That
combination wouldn't come twice in a thousand years. The next man who
tried it went to jail," he added with a snap of the jaws.

"Quite correct," I said. "Orders must be obeyed."

"Just remember that," he said significantly. "Have you heard anything
more of Decker?"

"I've heard enough to satisfy me that he's the man who got the Omega
stock."

"What other deal is he in?" asked the King of the Street.

"I don't know."

The King of the Street smiled indulgently.

"Well, you've got something to learn yet. I'll give you till next week
to find the answer to that question."

I was convinced from his air that he had information on both these
points himself, and was merely trying my knowledge.

"I'll not be back before next Wednesday," he concluded.

"Going away again?" I asked in surprise.

"I'm off to Virginia City," he replied after considering for a little.
"I'm not sure about Omega, after all--and there's another one I want to
look into. You needn't mention my going. When I come back we'll have a
campaign that will raise the roof of every Board in town. No orders
till then unless I telegraph you. That's all."

The King of the Street seemed straightforward enough in his statement
of plans, and it did not occur to me to distrust him while I was in his
presence. Yet, once more in my office, with the locked door between, I
began to doubt, and tried to find some hidden meaning in each word and
look. What plan was he revolving in that fertile brain? I could not
guess. The mystery of the great speculator was beyond my power to
fathom. And we worked, each in ignorance of the other's purposes, and
went the appointed road.


CHAPTER XV

I AM IN THE TOILS


"Welcome once more, Mr. Wilton," said Mrs. Doddridge Knapp, holding out
her hand. "Were you going to neglect us again?"

"Not at all, madam," said I with unblushing mendacity. "I am always at
your command."

Mrs. Knapp bowed with regal condescension, and replied with such
intimations of good will that I was glad I had come. I had vowed I
would never set foot again in the place. The hot blood of shame had
burned my cheeks whenever I recalled my dismissal from the lips of the
daughter of the house. But I had received a letter from Mrs. Bowser,
setting forth that I was wanted at the house of Doddridge Knapp, and
her prolixity was such that I was unable to determine whether she, or
Mrs. Knapp, or Luella, wished to see me. But as all three appeared to
be concerned in it I pocketed pride and resentment, and made my bow
with some nervous quavers at the Pine Street palace.

As I was speaking I cast my eyes furtively about the room. Mrs. Knapp
interpreted my glance.

"She will be in presently." There was to my ear a trace of mocking
laughter in her voice as she spoke, but her face betokened only a
courteous interest.

"Thanks--I hope so," I said in a little confusion. I wished I knew
whether she meant Luella or Mrs. Bowser.

"You got the note?" she asked.

"It was a great pleasure."

"Mrs. Bowser wished so much to see you again. She has been singing your
praises--you were such an agreeable young man."

I cursed Mrs. Bowser in my heart.

"I am most flattered," I said politely.

There was a mischievous sparkle in Mrs. Knapp's eye, but her face was
serenely gracious.

"I believe there was some arrangement between you about a trip to see
the sights of Chinatown. Mrs. Bowser was quite worried for fear you had
forgotten it, so I gave her your address and told her to write you a
note."

I had not been conscious of expecting anything from my visit, but at
this bit of information I found that I had been building air-castles
which had been invisible till they came tumbling about my ears. I could
not look for Miss Knapp's company on such an expedition.

"Oh," said I, with an attempt to conceal my disappointment, "the matter
had slipped my mind. I shall be most happy to attend Mrs. Bowser, or to
see that she has a proper escort."

We had been walking about the room during this conversation, and at
this point had come to an alcove where Mrs. Knapp motioned me to a
seat.

"I may not get a chance to talk with you alone again this evening," she
continued, dropping her half-bantering tone, "and you come so little
now. What are you doing?"

"Keeping out of mischief."

"Yes, but how?" she persisted. "You used to tell me everything. Now you
tell me nothing."

"Mr. Knapp's work--" I began.

"Oh, of course I don't expect you to tell me about that. I know Mr.
Knapp, and you're as close-mouthed as he, even when he's away."

"I should tell you anything of my own, but, of course, another's--"

"I understand." Mrs. Knapp, sitting with hands clasped in her lap, gave
me a quick look. "But there was something else. You were telling me
about your adventures, you remember. You told me two or three weeks ago
about the way you tricked Darby Meeker and sent him to Sierra City."
And she smiled at the recollection of Darby Meeker's discomfiture.

"Oh, yes," I said, with a laugh that sounded distressingly hollow to my
ears. "That was a capital joke on Meeker."

Here was a fine pack of predicaments loosed on my trail. It was with an
effort that I kept my countenance, and the cold sweat started on my
forehead. How much had Henry told of his business? Had he touched on it
lightly, humorously, or had he given a full account of his adventures
to the wife of the man with whose secrets he was concerned, and whose
evil plans had brought him to his death? The questions flashed through
my mind in the instant that followed Mrs. Knapp's speech.

"How did it turn out?" asked Mrs. Knapp with lively interest. "Did he
get back?"

I decided promptly on a judicious amount of the truth.

"Yes, he got back, boiling with wrath, and loaded to the guards with
threats--that is, I heard so from my men. I didn't see him myself, or
you might have found the rest of it in the newspaper."

"What did he do? Tell me about it." Mrs. Knapp gave every evidence of
absorbed interest.

"Well, he laid a trap for me at Borton's, put Terrill in as advance
guard, and raised blue murder about the place." And then I went on to
give a carefully amended account of my first night's row at Borton's,
and with an occasional question, Mrs. Knapp had soon extorted from me a
fairly full account of my doings.

"It is dreadful for you to expose yourself to such dangers."

I was privately of her opinion.

"Oh, that's nothing," said I airily. "A man may be killed any day by a
brick falling from a building, or by slipping on an orange peel on the
crossing."

"But it is dreadful to court death so. Yet," she mused, "if I were a
man I could envy you your work. There is romance and life in it, as
well as danger. You are doing in the nineteenth century and in the
midst of civilization what your forefathers may have done in the days
of chivalry."

"It is a fine life," I said dryly. "But it has its drawbacks."

"But while you live no one can harm the child," she said. There was
inquiry in her tone, I thought.

I suppressed a start of surprise. I had avoided mention of the boy.
Henry had trusted Mrs. Knapp further than I had dreamed.

"He shall never be given up by me," I replied with conviction.

"That is spoken like a true, brave man," said Mrs. Knapp with an
admiring look.

"Thank you," I said modestly.

"Another life than yours depends on your skill and courage. That must
give you strength," she said softly.

"It does indeed," I replied. I was thinking of Doddridge Knapp's life.

"But here come Luella and Mrs. Bowser," said Mrs. Knapp. "I see I shall
lose your company."

My heart gave a great bound, and I turned to see the queenly grace of
Luella Knapp as she entered the room in the train of Mrs. Bowser.

Vows of justice and vengeance, visions of danger and death, faded away
as I looked once more on the mobile, expressive face of the girl who
had claimed so great a share of my waking thoughts and filled my dreams
from the first moment her spirit had flashed on mine. I rose and my
eyes followed her eagerly as I stood by the curtain of the alcove,
oblivious of all else in the room.

Was it fancy, or had she grown paler and thinner since I had last seen
her? Surely those dark hollows under her eyes that told of worry and
lost sleep were not there when her brightness had chained my
admiration. I could guess that she was grieving for Henry, and a
jealous pang shot through my heart. She gave no glance in my direction
as she walked into the room and looked about her. I dreaded her eye as
I hungered for a look.

"Luella!" called Mrs. Knapp. I fancied she gave a low, musical laugh as
she spoke, yet a glance showed me that her face was calm and serious.
"Luella, here is some one you will like to see."

Luella Knapp turned and advanced. What was the look that lighted up her
face and sparkled from her eyes? Before I could analyze the magnetic
thrill that came from it, it was gone. A flush passed over her face and
died away as she came.

"You honor our poor house once more?" she said, dropping a mock
courtesy. "I thought you had deserted us."

I was surprised at this line of attack, and for a moment my little army
of ideas was thrown into confusion. I felt, rather than heard, the
undertone that carried the real meaning of her words.

"Not I," said I stoutly, recovering myself, and holding out my hand. I
saw there was a little play to be carried on for the benefit of Mrs.
Knapp. For some reason she had not confided in her mother. "Not I. I am
always your very humble knight."

I saw that Mrs. Knapp was looking at us curiously, and pressed my
advantage. Luella took my hand unwillingly. I was ready to dare a good
deal for the clasp of her fingers, but I scarcely felt the thrill of
their touch before she had snatched them away.

"There's nothing but pretty speeches to be had from you--and quotations
at that," she said. There was malice under the seeming innocence of a
pretended pout.

"There's nothing that could be so becoming in the circumstances."

"Except common sense," frowned Luella.

"The most uncommon of qualities, my dear," laughed Mrs. Knapp. "Sit
down, children. I must see to Mr. Carter, who is lost by the portière
and will never be discovered unless I rescue him."

"Take him to dear Aunt Julia," said Luella as her mother left us.

"Dear Aunt Julia," I inferred, was Mrs. Bowser.

I was certain that Mr. Carter would not find the demands of
conversation too much for him if he was blest with the company of that
charming dame.

Luella took a seat, and I followed her example. Then, with chin in hand
and elbow on the arm of her chair, the young woman looked at me calmly
and thoughtfully.

I grew a little uncomfortable as my self-possession melted away before
this steady gaze. I had no observations to make, being uncertain about
the weather, so I had the prudence to keep silent.

"Well," said Luella at last, in a cutting voice, "why don't you talk?"

"It's your lead," said I gloomily. "You took the last trick."

At this reference to our meeting, Luella looked surprised. Then she
gave a little rippling laugh.

"Really," she said, "I believe I shall begin to like you, yet."

"That's very kind of you; but turn about is fair play."

"You mustn't do that," said she severely, "or I shan't."

"I meant it," said I defiantly.

"Then you ought to know better than to say it," she retorted.

"I'm in need of lessons, I fear."

"How delightful of you to confess it! Then shall I tell you what to
do?"

This was very charming. I hastened to say:

"Do, by all means."

The young woman sank back in her chair, clasped her hands in her lap as
her mother had done, and glanced hastily about. Then in a low voice she
said:

"Be yourself."

It was an electric shock she gave me, not more by the words than by the
tone.

I struggled for a moment before I regained my mental balance.

"Don't you think we could get on safer ground?" I suggested.

"No," said Luella. "There isn't any safe ground for us otherwise."

The sudden heart-sickness at the reminder of my mission with which
these words overwhelmed me, tied my tongue and mastered my spirits. It
was this girl's father that I was pursuing. It was to bring him to the
halter that I must keep up my masquerade. It was to bring her to sorrow
and disgrace that I was bound by the dead hand of my murdered friend.
Oh, why was this burden laid upon me? Why was I to be torn on the rack
between inclination and duty?

Luella watched my face narrowly through the conflict in my mind, and I
felt as though her spirit struggled with mine to win me to the course
of open, honest dealing. But it was impossible. She must be the last of
all to know.

Her eyes sank as though she knew which had won the victory, and a
proud, scornful look took the place of the grave good humor that had
been there a moment before. Then, on a sudden, she began to speak of
the theaters, rides, drives and what-not of the pleasures of the day.
To an observer it would have seemed that we were deep in friendly
discourse; but I, who felt her tone and manner, knew that she was miles
away from me and talking but for the appearance of courtesy. Suddenly
she stopped with a weary look.

"There's Aunt Julia waiting for you," she said with a gleam of
malicious pleasure. "Come along. I deliver you over a prisoner of war."

"Wait a minute," I pleaded.

"No," she said, imperiously motioning me. "Come along." And with a sigh
I was given, a helpless, but silently protesting, captive, to the
mercies of Mrs. Bowser.

That eloquent lady received me with a flutter of feathers, if I may
borrow the expression, to indicate her pleasure.

"Oh, Mr. Wilton, you'll pardon my boldness, I'm sure," she said with an
amiable flirt of the head, as I seated myself beside her and watched
Luella melt away into the next room; "but I was afraid you had
forgotten all about us poor women, and it's a dreadful thing to be in
this great house when there isn't a man about, though of course there
are the servants, but you can't count them as men, besides some of them
being Chinamen. And we--I--that is, I really did want to see you, and
we ought to have so much to talk over, for I've heard that your
mother's first cousin was a Bowser, and I do so want to see that dear,
delightful Chinatown that I've heard so much about, though they do say
it's horrid and dirty, but you'll let us see that for ourselves, won't
you, and did you ever go through Chinatown, Mr. Wilton?"

Mrs. Bowser pulled up her verbal coach-and-six so suddenly that I felt
as though she must have been pitched off the box.

"Oh," said I carelessly, "I've seen the place often enough."

"How nice!" Then suddenly looking grave, Mrs. Bowser spoke from behind
her fan. "But I hope, Mr. Wilton, there's nothing there that a lady
shouldn't see."

I hastened to assure her that it was possible to avoid everything that
would bring a blush to the cheek of a matron of her years.

Mrs. Bowser at this rattled on without coming to any point, and, after
waiting to learn when she expected to claim my services, and seeing no
prospect of getting such information without a direct question, I
allowed my eyes and attention to wander about the room, feeding the
flow of speech, when it was checked, with a word or two of reply. I
could see nothing of Luella, and Mrs. Knapp appeared to be too much
taken up with other guests to notice me. I was listening to the flow of
Mrs. Bowser's high-pitched voice without getting any idea from it, when
my wandering attention was suddenly recalled by the words, "Mr. Knapp."

"What was that?" I asked in some confusion. "I didn't catch your
meaning."

"I was saying I thought it strange Mr. Knapp wouldn't go with us, and
he got awfully cross when I pressed him, and said--oh, Mr. Wilton, he
said such a dreadful word--that he'd be everlastingly somethinged if he
would ever go into such a lot of dens of--oh, I can't repeat his
dreadful language--but wasn't it strange, Mr. Wilton?"

"Very," I said diplomatically; "but it isn't worth while to wait for
him, then."

"Oh, laws, no!--he'll be home to-morrow, but he won't go."

"Home to-morrow!" I exclaimed. "I thought he wasn't to come till
Wednesday."

Mrs. Bowser looked a little uncomfortable.

"I guess he's old enough to come and go when he likes," she said. But
her flow of words seemed to desert her.

"Very true," I admitted. "I wonder what's bringing him back in such a
hurry."

Mrs. Bowser's beady eyes turned on me in doubt, and for a moment she
was dumb. Then she followed this miracle by another, and spoke in a low
tone of voice.

"It's not for me to say anything against a man in his own house, but I
don't like to talk of Doddridge Knapp."

"What's the matter?" I asked. "A little rough in his speech? Oh, Mrs.
Bowser, you should make allowances for a man who has had to fight his
way in the roughest business life in the world, and not expect too much
of his polish."

"Oh, laws, he's polite enough," whispered Mrs. Bowser. "It ain't that--
oh, I don't see how she ever married him."

I followed the glance that Mrs. Bowser gave on interrupting herself
with this declaration, and saw Mrs. Knapp approaching us.

"Oh," she exclaimed cheerily, "is it all settled? Have you made all the
arrangements, Cousin Julia?"

"Well, I declare! I'd forgotten all about telling him," cried Mrs.
Bowser in her shrillest tone. "I'd just taken it for a fact that he'd
know when to come."

"That's a little too much to expect, I'm afraid," said Mrs. Knapp,
smiling gaily at Mrs. Bowser's management. "I see that I shall have to
arrange this thing myself. Will Monday night suit you, Henry?"

"As well as another," said I politely, concealing my feelings as a
victim of feminine diplomacy.

"You have told him who are going, haven't you?" said Mrs. Knapp to Mrs.
Bowser.

"Laws, no! I never thought but what he knew."

"Oh!" exclaimed Mrs. Knapp. "What a gift as a mind-reader Mr. Wilton
ought to have! Well, I suppose I'd better not trust to that, Henry.
There's to be Mrs. Bowser, of course, and Mr. and Mrs. Carter, and Mr.
Horton, and--oh, yes--Luella."

My heart gave a jump, and the trip to Chinatown suddenly became an
object of interest.

"I, mama?" said an inquiring voice, and Luella herself stood by her
mother.

"Yes," said Mrs. Knapp. "It's the Chinatown expedition for Monday
night."

Luella looked annoyed, and tapped her foot to the floor impatiently.

"With Mr. Wilton," there was the slightest emphasis on the words, "to
accompany the party, I shouldn't think it would be necessary for me to
go."

"It is either you or I," said Mrs. Knapp.

"You will be needed to protect Mr. Horton," said I sarcastically.

"Oh, what a task!" she said gaily. "I shall be ready." And she turned
away before I could put in another word, and I walked down the room
with Mrs. Knapp.

"And so Mr. Knapp is coming home to-morrow?" I said.

Mrs. Knapp gave me a quick look.

"Yes," she said. There was something in her tone that set me to
thinking that there was more than I knew behind Mr. Knapp's sudden
return.

"I hope he is not ill," I said politely.

Mrs. Knapp appeared to be considering some point deeply, and did not
answer for a little. Then she shook her head as though the idea was not
to her liking.

"I think you will find him all right when you see him. But here--you
must meet Mr. and Mrs. Carter. They are just from the East, and very
charming people, and as you are to do them the honors on Monday
evening, you should know them."

Mr. and Mrs. Carter had pleasant faces and few ideas, and as the
conversational fire soon burned low I sought Mrs. Knapp and took my
leave. Luella was nowhere to be seen.

"You must be sure that you are well-guarded," said Mrs. Knapp. "It
quite gives me the terrors to think of those murderous fellows. And
since you told me of that last plot to call you down to Borton's, I
have a presentiment that some special danger is ahead of you. Be
cautious as well as brave."

She had followed me into the hall, and spoke her warning freely. There
was a sadness in her eyes that seemed as though she would dissuade me
from my task.

I thanked her as she pressed my hand, and, with no Luella awaiting me
by the stair, I took my way down the stone steps, between the bronze
lions, and joined Porter and Barkhouse on the sidewalk.


CHAPTER XVI

AN ECHO OF WARNING


"All quiet?" I asked of my guards, as we took our way down the street.

"All quiet," said Porter.

"You'd better tell him," said Barkhouse.

"Oh, yes," said Porter, as if in sudden recollection. "Dicky Nahl was
along here, and he said Terrill and Meeker and the other gang was
holding a powwow at Borton's, and we'd best look out for surprises."

"Was that all?"

"Well, he said he guessed there was a new deal on hand, and they was a-
buzzin' like a nest of hornets. It was hornets, wasn't it, Bob?"

"Hornets was what he said," repeated Barkhouse stolidly.

"Where's Dicky now?" I asked.

"I ain't good at guessing," said Porter, "and Bob's nothing at all at
it."

"Well," said I, "we had better go down to Borton's and look into this
matter."

There was silence for a time. My guards walked beside me without
speaking, but I felt the protest in their manner. At last Barkhouse
said respectfully:

"There's no use to do that, sir. You'd better send some one that ain't
so likely to be nabbed, or that won't matter much if he is. We'd be in
a pretty fix if you was to be took."

"Here comes Dicky, now," said Porter, as a dark figure came swinging
lightly along.

"Hullo!" cried Dicky, halting and shading his eyes from the gaslight.
"I was just going up to look for you again."

"What's up, Dicky?"

"I guess it's the devil," said Dicky, so gravely that I broke into a
laugh.

"He's right at home if he's come to this town," I said.

"I'm glad you find it so funny," said Dicky in an injured tone. "You
was scared enough last time."

I had put my foot in it, sure enough. I might have guessed that the
devil was not his Satanic Majesty but some evil-minded person in the
flesh whom I had to fear.

"Can it be Doddridge Knapp?" flashed across my mind but I dismissed the
suspicion as without foundation. I spoke aloud:

"Well, I've kept out of his claws this far, and it's no use to worry.
What's he trying to do now?"

"That's what I've been trying to find out all the evening. They're
noisy enough, but they're too thick to let one get near where there's
anything going on--that is, if he has a fancy for keeping a whole
skin."

"Suppose we go down there now," I suggested. "We might find out
something."

Dicky stopped short.

"Cæsar's ghost!" he gasped; "what next? Wouldn't you like to touch off
a few powder-kegs for amusement? Won't you fire a pistol into your
mouth to show how easy you can stop the bullet?"

"Why, you have been down there and are all right," I argued.

"Well, there's nothing much to happen to me, but where would you be if
they got hold of you? You're getting off your _cabesa_, old
fellow," said Dicky anxiously.

"If I could see Mother Borton I could fix it," I said confidently.

"What! That she-devil?" cried Dicky. "She'd give you up to have your
throat cut in a minute if she could get a four-bit piece for your
carcass. I guess she could get more than that on you, too."

Mother Borton's warnings against Dicky Nahl returned to me with force
at this expression of esteem from the young man, and I was filled with
doubts.

"I came up to tell you to look out for yourself," continued Dicky. "I'm
afraid they mean mischief, and here you come with a wild scheme for
getting into the thick of it."

"Well, I'll think better of it," I said. "But see if you can find out
what is going on. Come up and let me know if you get an inkling of
their plans."

"All right," said Dicky. "But just sleep on a hair-trigger to-night."

"Good night," I said, as I turned toward my room, and Dicky, with an
answering word, took his way toward the Borton place.

I had grown used to the silent terrors of my house. The weird fancies
that clung around the gloomy halls and dark doorways still whispered
their threatening tales of danger and death. The air was still peopled
with the ghosts of forgotten crimes, and the tragedy of the alley that
had changed my life was heavy on the place. But habit, and the
confidence that had come to me with the presence of my guards, had made
it a tolerable spot in which to live. But as we stumbled up the
stairway the apprehensions of Dicky Nahl came strong upon me, and I
looked ahead to the murky halls, and glanced at every doorway, as
though I expected an ambush. Porter and Barkhouse marched stolidly
along, showing little disposition to talk.

"What's that?" I exclaimed, stopping to listen.

"What was it?" asked Barkhouse, as we stopped on the upper landing and
gazed into the obscurity.

"I thought I heard a noise," said I. "Who's there?"

"It was a rat," said Porter. "I've heard 'em out here of nights."

"Well, just light that other gas-jet," I said. "It will help to make
things pleasant in case of accidents."

The doors came out of the darkness as the second jet blazed up, but
nothing else was to be seen.

Suddenly there was a scramble, and something sprang up before my door.
Porter and I raised the revolvers that were ready in our hands, but
Barkhouse sprang past us, and in an instant had closed with the figure
and held it in his arms.

There was a volley of curses, oaths mingled with sounds that reminded
me of nothing so much as a spitting cat, and a familiar voice screamed
in almost inarticulate rage:

"Let me go, damn ye, or I'll knife ye!"

"Good heavens!" I cried. "Let her go, Barkhouse. It's Mother Borton."

Mother Borton freed herself with a vicious shake, and called down the
wrath of Heaven and hell on the stalwart guard.

"You're the black-hearted spawn of the sewer rats, to take a
respectable woman like a bag of meal," cried Mother Borton indignantly,
with a fresh string of oaths. "It's fire and brimstone you'll be
tasting yet, and you'd 'a' been there before now, you miserable gutter-
picker, if it wasn't for me. And this is the thanks I git from ye!"

"I'll apologize for his display of gallantry," said I banteringly.
"I've always told him that he was too fond of the ladies."

I was mistaken in judging that this tone would be the most effective to
restore her to good humor. Mother Borton turned on me furiously.

"Oh, it's you that would set him on a poor woman as comes to do you a
service. I was as wide-awake as any of ye. I never closed my eyes a
wink, and you has to come a-sneakin' up and settin' your dogs on me."
Mother Borton again drew on an apparently inexhaustible vocabulary of
oaths. "Oh, you're as bad as him," she shouted, "and I reckon you'd be
worse if you knowed how." And she spat out more curses, and shook her
fist in impotent but verbose rage.

"Come in," I said, unlocking the door and lighting up my room. "You can
be as angry as you like in here, and it won't hurt anything."

Mother Borton stormed a bit, and then sullenly walked in and took a
chair. Silence fell on her as she crossed the threshold, but she
glowered on us with fierce eyes.

"It's quite an agreeable surprise to see you," I ventured as cheerfully
as I could, as she made no move to speak. My followers looked awkward
and uncomfortable.

At the sound of my voice, Mother Borton's bent brows relaxed a little.

"If you'd send these fellows out, I reckon we could talk a bit better,"
she said sourly.

"Certainly. Just wait in the hall, boys; and close the door."

Porter and Barkhouse ambled out, and Mother Borton gave her chair a
hitch that brought us face to face.

"You ain't so bad off here," she said, looking around critically. "Can
any one git in them winders?"

I explained that the west window might be entered from the rear
stairway by the aid of the heavy shutter, if it were swung back and the
window were open. I added that we kept it closed and secured.

"And you say there's a thirty-foot drop from this winder?" she
inquired, pointing to the north.

I described the outlook on the alley.

She nodded as if satisfied.

"I reckon you don't think I come on a visit of perliteness?" she said
sharply, after a brief silence.

I murmured something about being glad to entertain her at any time.

"Nonsense!" she sniffed. "I'm a vile old woman that the likes of you
would never put eyes on twice if it wasn't for your business--none
knows it better than me. I don't know why I should put myself out to
help ye." Her tone had a touch of pathos under its hardness.

"I know why," I said, a little touched. "It's because you like me."

She turned a softened eye on me.

"You're right," she said almost tenderly, with a flash of womanly
feeling on her seamed and evil face. "I've took a fancy to ye and no
mistake, and I'd risk something to help ye."

"I knew you would," I said heartily.

"And that's what I come to do," she said, with a sparkle of pleasure
in her eye. "I've come to warn ye."

"New dangers?" I inquired cheerfully. My prudence suggested that I had
better omit any mention of the warning from Dicky Nahl.

"The same ones," said Mother Borton shortly, "only more of 'em."

Then she eyed me grimly, crouching in her chair with the appearance of
an evil bird of prey, and seemed to wait for me to speak.

"What is the latest plot?" I asked gravely, as I fancied that my light
manner grated on my strange guest.

"I don't know," she said slowly.

"But you know something," I argued.

"Maybe you know what I know better than I knows it myself," growled
Mother Borton with a significant glance.

I resigned myself to await her humor.

"Not at all," said I carelessly. "I only know that you've come to tell
me something, and that you'll tell it in your own good time."

"It's fine to see that you've learned not to drive a woman," she
returned with grim irony. "It's something to know at your age."

I smiled sympathetically upon her, and she continued:

"I might as well tell ye the whole of it, though I reckon my throat's
jist as like to be slit over it as not."

"I'll never breathe a word of it," I replied fervently.

"I'd trust ye," she said. "Well, there was a gang across the street to-
night--across from my place, I mean--and that sneaking Tom Terrill and
Darby Meeker, and I reckon all the rest of 'em, was there. And they was
runnin' back and forth to my place, and a-drinkin' a good deal, and the
more they drinks the louder they talks. And I hears Darby Meeker say to
one feller, 'We'll git him, sure!' and I listens with all my ears,
though pretendin' to see nothin'. 'We'll fix it this time,' he said;
'the Old Un's got his thinkin' cap on.' And I takes in every word, and
by one thing and another I picks up that there's new schemes afoot to
trap ye. They was a-sayin' as it might be an idee to take ye as you
come out of Knapp's to-night."

"How did they know I was at Knapp's?" I asked, somewhat surprised,
though I had little reason to be when I remembered the number of spies
who might have watched me.

"Why, Dicky Nahl told 'em," said Mother Borton. "He was with the gang,
and sings it out as pretty as you please."

This gave me something new to think about, but I said nothing.

"Well," she continued, "they says at last that won't do, fer it'll git
'em into trouble, and I reckon they're argyfying over their schemes
yit. But one thing I finds out."

Mother Borton stopped and looked at me anxiously.

"Well," I said impatiently, "what was it?"

"They're a-sayin' as how, if you're killed, the one as you knows on'll
have to git some one else to look after the boy, and mebbe he won't be
so smart about foolin' them."

"That's an excellent idea," said I. "If they only knew that I was the
other fellow they could see at once what a bright scheme they had hit
upon."

"Maybe they ain't a-goin' to do it," said Mother Borton. "There's a
heap o' things said over the liquor that don't git no further, but
you'll be a fool if you don't look out. Now, do as I tell you. You just
keep more men around you. Keep eyes in the back of your head, and if
you see there's a-goin' to be trouble, jest you shoot first and ax
questions about it afterward. They talked of getting you down on the
water-front or up in Chinatown with some bogus message and said how
easy it would be to dispose of you without leaving clues behind 'em.
Now, don't you sleep here without three or four men on guard, and don't
you stir round nights with less than four. Send Porter out to git two
more men, and tell him to look sharp and see if the coast's clear
outside. I reckon I'll slide out if no one's lookin'."

"I've got some men on the next floor," I said. "I thought it would be
just as well to have a few around in case of emergencies. I'll have two
of them out, and send Porter to reconnoiter."

"Who told you to git your men together?"

"A little idea of my own."

"You've got some sense, after all."

The reinforcements were soon ready to take orders, and Porter returned
to bring word that no suspicious person was in sight in the street.

"I reckon I'd best go, then," said Mother Borton. "I don't want no
knife in me jest yit, but if there's no one to see me I'm all right."

I pressed Mother Borton to take two of my men as escort, but she
sturdily refused.

"They'd know something was up if I was to go around that way, and I'd
be a bloody ghost as soon as they could ketch me alone," she said.
"Well, good night--or is it mornin'? And do take keer of yourself,
dearie." And, so saying, Mother Borton muffled herself up till it was
hard to tell whether she was man or woman, and trudged away.

Whatever designs were brewing in the night-meeting of the conspirators,
they did not appear to concern my immediate peace of body. The two
following days were spent in quiet, and, in spite of warnings, I began
to believe that no new plan of action had been determined on.

"Don't you feel too sure of yourself," said Dicky Nahl, to whom I
confided this view of the situation. "You won't feel so funny about it
if you get prodded in the ribs with a bowie some dark night, or find
your head wrapped up in a blanket when you think you're just taking a
'passy-ar' in Washington Square in the evening."

Dicky looked very much in earnest, and his bright and airy manner was
gone for the moment.

"You seem to get along well enough with them," I suggested tartly,
remembering Mother Borton's stories with some suspicion.

"Of course," said Dicky. "Why shouldn't I? They're all right if you
don't rub the fur the wrong way. But I haven't got state secrets in my
pockets, so they know it's no use to pick 'em."

I was not at all sure of Dicky's fidelity, in spite of his seeming
earnestness, but I forbore to mention my doubts, and left the garrulous
young man to go his way while I turned to the office that had been
furnished by Doddridge Knapp. I hardly expected to meet the King of the
Street. He had, I supposed, returned to the city, but he had set
Wednesday as the day for resuming operations in the market, and I did
not think that he would be found here on Monday.

The room was cold and cheerless, and the dingy books in law-calf
appeared to gaze at me in mute protest as I looked about me.

The doors that separated me from Doddridge Knapp's room were shut and
locked. What was behind them? I wondered. Was there anything in
Doddridge Knapp's room that bore on the mystery of the hidden boy, or
would give the clue to the murder of Henry Wilton? As I gazed on the
panels the questions became more and more insistent. Was it not my duty
to find the answer? The task brought my mind to revolt. Yet the thought
grew on me that it was necessary to my task. If vengeance was to be
mine; if Doddridge Knapp was to pay the penalty of the gallows for the
death of Henry Wilton, it must be by the evidence that I should wrest
from him and his tools. I must not stop at rummaging papers, nor at
listening at keyholes. I had just this morning secured the key that
would fit the first door. I had taken the impression of the lock and
had it made without definite purpose, but now I was ready to act.

With a sinking heart but a clear head I put the key cautiously to the
lock and gently turned it. The key fitted perfectly, and the bolt flew
back as it made the circle. I opened the door into the middle room. The
second door, as I expected, was closed. Would the same key fit the
second lock, or must I wait to have another made? I advanced to the
second door and was about to try the key when a sound from behind it
turned my blood to water.

Beyond that door, from the room I had supposed to be empty, I heard a
groan.

I stood as if petrified, and, in the broad daylight that streamed in at
the window, with the noise and rush of Clay Street ringing in my ears,
I felt my hair rise as though I had come on a ghost. I listened a
minute or more, but heard nothing.

"Nonsense!" I thought to myself; "it was a trick of the imagination."

I raised my hand once more to the lock, when the sound broke again,
louder, unmistakable. It was the voice of one in distress of body or
mind.

What was it? Could it be some prisoner of Doddridge Knapp's, brought
hither by the desperate band that owned him as employer? Was it a man
whom I might succor? Or was it Doddridge Knapp himself, overwhelmed by
recollection and remorse, doing penance in solitude for the villainy he
had done and dared not confess? I listened with all my ears. Then there
came through the door the low, stern tones of a man's voice speaking
earnestly, pleadingly, threateningly, but in a suppressed monotone.

Then the groan broke forth again, and it was followed by sobs and
choked sounds, as of one who protested, yet, strangely, the voice was
the same. There was one man, not two. It was self-accusation, self-
excuse, and the sobs seemed to come in answer to self-reproaches.

Then there was sound as of a man praying, and the prayer was broken by
sobs; and again I thought there were two men. And then there was noise
of a man moving about, and a long smothered groan, as of one in agony
of spirit. Fearful that the door might be flung open in my face, I
tiptoed back to my room, and silently turned the key, as thoroughly
mystified as ever I had been in the strange events that had crowded my
life since I had entered the city.


CHAPTER XVII

IN A FOREIGN LAND


I stood long by my own door, irresolute, listening, hoping, fearing, my
brain throbbing with the effort to seize some clue to the maze of
mysteries in which I was entangled. Was the clue behind those locked
doors? Did the man whose groans and prayers had startled me hold the
heart of the mystery?

The groans and prayers, if they continued, could be heard no longer
through the double doors, and I seated myself by the desk and took
account of the events that had brought me to my present position. Where
did I stand? What had I accomplished? What had I learned? How was I to
reach the end for which I struggled and bring to justice the slayer of
my murdered friend? As I passed in review the occurrences that had
crowded the few weeks since my arrival, I was compelled to confess that
I knew little more of the mysteries that surrounded me than on the
night I arrived. I knew that I was tossed between two opposing forces.
I knew that a mysterious boy was supposed to be under my protection,
and that to gain and keep possession of him my life was sought and
defended. I knew that Doddridge Knapp had caused the murder of Henry
Wilton, and yet for some unfathomable reason gave me his confidence and
employment under the belief that I was Henry Wilton. But I had been
able to get no hint of who the boy might be, or where he was concealed,
or who was the hidden woman who employed me to protect him, or why he
was sought by Doddridge Knapp. Mother Borton's vague hints seemed
little better than guess-work. If she knew the name of the boy and the
identity of the woman, she had some good reason for concealing them. It
flashed over my mind that Mother Borton might herself be the mysterious
employer. I had never yet seen a line of her handwriting, and the notes
might have come from her. It was she who first had told me that my men
were already paid, and a few hours later I had found the note from my
employer assuring me that the demands were fully settled. Could it be
that she was the woman with whom Doddridge Knapp was battling with a
desperate purpose that did not stop at murder? The idea was gone as
soon as it came. It was preposterous to suppose that these two could
feel so overwhelming an interest in the same child.

How long I sat by the desk waiting, thinking, planning, I know not. One
scheme of action after another I had considered and rejected, when a
sound broke on my listening ears. I started up in feverish anxiety. It
was from the room beyond, and I stole toward the door to learn what it
might mean.

Again it came, but, strain as I might, I could not determine its cause.
What could be going on in the locked office? If two men were there was
it a personal encounter? If one man, was he doing violence upon
himself? Was the heart of the mystery to be found behind those doors if
I had the courage to throw them open? Burning with impatience, I thrust
aside the fears of the evil that might follow hasty action. I had drawn
the key and raised it once more to the slot, when I heard a step in the
middle room. I had but time to retreat to my desk when a key was fitted
in the lock, the door was flung open, and Doddridge Knapp stepped
calmly into the room.

"Ah, Wilton," said the King of the Street affably. "I was wondering if
I should find you here."

There was no trace of surprise or agitation in the face before me. If
this was the man whose prayers and groans and sobs had come to me
through the locked door, if he had wrestled with his conscience or even
had been the accusing conscience of another, his face was a mask that
showed no trace of the agony of thoughts that might contort the spirit
beneath it.

"I was attending to a little work of my own," I answered, after
greeting. If I felt much like a disconcerted pickpocket I was careful
to conceal the circumstance, and spoke with easy indifference. "You
have come back before I expected you," I continued carelessly.

"Yes," said the King of the Street with equal carelessness. "Some
family affairs called me home sooner than I had thought to come."

I had an inward start. Mrs. Knapp's troubled look, Mrs. Bowser's
confusion, and the few words that had passed, returned to me. What was
the connection between them?

"Mrs. Knapp is not ill, I trust?" I ventured.

"Oh, no."

"Nor Miss Knapp?"

"Oh, all are well at the house, but sometimes you know women-folks get
nervous."

Was it possible that Mrs. Knapp had sent for her husband? What other
meaning could I put on these words? But before I could pursue my
investigations further along this line, the wolf came to the surface,
and he waved the subject aside with a growl.

"But this is nothing to you. What you want to know is that I won't need
you before Wednesday, if then."

"Does the campaign reopen?" I asked.

"If you don't mind, Wilton," said the Wolf with another growl, "I'll
keep my plans till I'm ready to use them."

"Certainly," I retorted. "But maybe you would feel a little interest to
know that Rosenheim and Bashford have gathered in about a thousand
shares of Omega in the last four or five days."

Doddridge Knapp gave me a keen glance.

"There were no sales of above a hundred shares," he said.

"No--most of them ran from ten to fifty shares."

"Well," he continued, looking fixedly at me, "you know something about
Rosenheim?"

"If it won't interfere with your plans," I suggested apologetically.

The Wolf drew back his lips over his fangs, and then turned the snarl
into a smile. "Go on," he said, waving amends for the snub he had
administered.

"Well, I don't know much about Rosenheim, but I caught him talking with
Decker."

"Were the stocks transferred to Decker?"

"No; they stand to Rosenheim, trustee."

"Well, Wilton, they've stolen a march on us, but I reckon we'll give
'em a surprise before they're quite awake."

"And," I continued coolly, "Decker's working up a deal in Crown Diamond
and toying a little with Confidence--you gave me a week to find out,
you may remember."

"Very good, Wilton," said the King of the Street with grudging
approval. "We'll sell old Decker quite a piece of Crown Diamond before
he gets through. And now is there anything more in your pack?"

"It's empty," I confessed. "Well, you may go then."

I was puzzled to know why Doddridge Knapp should wish to get me out of
the office. Was there some secret locked in his room that he feared I
might surprise if I stayed? I looked at him sharply, but there was
nothing to be read on that impassive face.

Doddridge Knapp followed me to the door, and stood on the threshold as
I walked down the hall. There was no chance for spying or listening at
keyholes, if I were so inclined, and it was not until I had reached the
bottom stair that I thought I heard the sound of a closing door behind
me.

As I stood at the entrance, almost oblivious of the throng that was
hurrying up and down Clay Street, Porter joined me.

"Did you see him?" he asked.

"Him? Who?"

"Why, Tom Terrill sneaked down those stairs a little bit ago, and I
thought you might have found him up there."

Could it be possible that this man had been with Doddridge Knapp, and
that it was his voice I had heard? This in turn seemed improbable,
hardly possible.

"There he is now," whispered Porter.

I turned my eyes in the direction he indicated, and a shock ran through
me; for my eye had met the eye of a serpent. Yes, there again was the
cruel, keen face, and the glittering, repulsive eye, filled with malice
and hatred, that I had beheld with loathing and dread whenever it had
come in my path. With an evil glance Terrill turned and made off in the
crowd.

"Follow that man, Wainwright," said I to the second guard, who was
close at hand. "Watch him to-night and report to me to-morrow."

I wondered what could be the meaning of Terrill's visit to the
building. Was it to see Doddridge Knapp and get his orders? Or was it
to follow up some new plan to wrest from me the secret I was supposed
to hold? But there was no answer to these questions, and I turned
toward my room to prepare for the excursion that had been set for the
evening.

It was with hope and fear that I took my way to the Pine Street palace.
It was my fear that was realized. Mrs. Bowser fell to my lot--indeed, I
may say that I was surrounded by her in force, and surrendered
unconditionally--while Luella joined Mr. Carter, and Mrs. Carter with
Mr. Horton followed.

Corson was waiting for us at the old City Hall. I had arranged with the
policeman that he should act as our guide, and had given him Porter and
Barkhouse as assistants in case any should be needed.

"A fine night for it, sor," said Corson in greeting. "There's a little
celebration goin' on among the haythens to-night, so you'll see 'em at
their best."

"Oh, how sweet!" gushed Mrs. Bowser. "Is it that dear China New Year
that I've heard tell on, and do they take you in to dinner at every
place you call, and do they really eat rats? Ugh, the horrid things!"
And Mrs. Bowser pulled up short in mid career.

"No, ma'am," said Corson, "leastways it ain't Chaney New Year for a
couple of months yet. As for eatin' rats, there's many a thing gets
eaten up in the dens that would be better by bein' turned into a rat."

Looking across the dark shrubbery of Portsmouth Square and up
Washington Street, the eye could catch a line of gay-colored lanterns,
swaying in the light wind, and casting a mellow glow on buildings and
walks.

"Oh, isn't it sweet! So charming!" cried Mrs. Bowser, as we came into
full view of the scene and crossed the invisible line that carries one
from modern San Francisco into the ancient oriental city, instinct with
foreign life, that goes by the name of Chinatown. Sordid and foul as it
appears by daylight, there was a charm and romance to it under the
lantern-lights that softened the darkness. Windows and doors were
illuminated. Brown, flat-nosed men in loose clothing gathered in groups
and discussed their affairs in a strange singsong tongue and high-
pitched voices. Here, was the sound of the picking of the Chinese
banjo-fiddle; there, we heard a cracked voice singing a melancholy song
in the confusion of minor keys that may pass for music among the brown
men; there, again, a gong with tin-pan accompaniment assisted to
reconcile the Chinese to the long intervals between holidays. Crowds
hurried along the streets, loitered at corners, gathered about points
of interest, but it seemed as though it was all one man repeated over
and over.

"Why, they're all alike!" exclaimed Mrs. Bowser. "How do they ever tell
each other apart?"

"Oh, that's aisy enough, ma'am," replied Corson with a twinkle in his
eye. "They tie a knot in their pigtails, and that's the way you know
'em."

"Laws! you don't say!" said Mrs. Bowser, much impressed. "I never could
tell 'em that way."

"It is a strange resemblance," said Mr. Carter. "Don't you find it
almost impossible to distinguish between them?"

"To tell you the truth, sor, no," said Corson. "It's a trick of the eye
with you, sor. If you was to be here with 'em for a month or two you'd
niver think there was two of 'em alike. There's as much difference
betwixt one and another as with any two white men. I was loike you at
first. I says to meself that they're as like as two pease. But, now,
look at those two mugs there in that door. They're no more alike than
you and me, as Mr. Wilton here can tell you, sor."

The difference between the two Chinese failed to impress me, but I was
mindful of my reputation as an old resident.

"Oh, yes; a very marked contrast," I said promptly, just as I would
have sworn that they were twins if Corson had suggested it.

"Very remarkable!" said Mr. Carter dubiously.

In and out we wound through the oriental city--the fairy-land that
stretched away, gay with lanterns and busy with strange crowds,
changing at times as we came nearer to a tawdry reality, cheap, dirty,
and heavy with odors. Here was a shop where ivory in delicate carvings,
bronze work that showed the patient handicraft and grotesque fancy of
the oriental artist, lay side by side with porcelains, fine and coarse,
decorated with the barbaric taste in form and color that rules the art
of the ancient empire. Beyond, were carved cabinets of ebony and
sandal-wood, rich brocades and soft silks and the proprietor sang the
praises of his wares and reduced his estimate of their value with each
step we took toward the door. Next the rich shop was a low den from
whose open door poured fumes of tobacco and opium, and in whose misty
depths figures of bloused little men huddled around tables and swayed
hither and thither. The click of dominoes, the rattling of sticks and
counters, and the excited cries of men, rose from the throng.

"They're the biggest gamblers the Ould Nick iver had to his hand," said
Corson; "there isn't one of 'em down there that wouldn't bet the coat
off his back."

"Dear me, how dreadful!" said Mrs. Bowser. "And do we have to go down
into that horrible hole, and how can we ever get out with our lives?"

"We're not going down there, ma'am," interrupted Corson shortly.

"And where next?" asked Luella.

The question was addressed to the policeman, not to me. Except for a
formal greeting when we had met, Luella had spoken no word to me during
the evening.

"Here's the biggest joss-house in town," said Corson. "We might as well
see it now as any time."

"Oh, do let us see those delightfully horrible idols," cried Mrs.
Bowser. "But," she added, with a sudden access of alarm at some
recollection of the reading of her school-days, "do they cut people's
hearts out before the wicked things right in the middle of the city?"

The policeman assured her that the appetite of the joss for gore
remained unsatisfied, and led the way into the dimly-lighted building
that served as a temple.

I lingered a moment by the door to see that all my party passed in.

"There's Wainwright," whispered Porter, who closed the procession.

"Where?" I asked, a dim remembrance of the mission on which I had sent
him in pursuit of the snake-eyed man giving the information a sinister
twist.

Porter gave a chirrup, and Wainwright halted at the door.

"He's just passed up the alley here," said Wainwright in a low voice.

"Who? Terrill?" I asked.

"Yes," said Wainwright. "I've kept him in sight all the evening."

"Hasn't he seen you?" asked Porter. "I spied you as soon as you turned
the corner."

"Don't know," said Wainwright; "but something's up. There he goes now.
I mustn't miss him." And Wainwright darted off.

I looked searchingly in the direction he took, but could see no sign of
the snake-eyed enemy.

The presence of Terrill gave me some tremors of anxiety, for I knew
that his unscrupulous ferocity would stop at nothing. I feared for the
moment that some violence might threaten the party, and that perhaps
Luella was in danger. Then I reflected that the presence of Doddridge
Knapp's daughter was a protection against an attack from Doddridge
Knapp's agents, and I followed the party into the heathen temple
without further apprehensions.

The temple was small, and even in the dim, religious light that gave an
air of mystery to the ugly figure of the god and the trappings of the
place, the whole appeared cheap--a poor representative of the majesty
of a religion that claims the devotion of four hundred million human
beings.

"That's one of the richest carvings ever brought into this country,"
said Corson, pointing to a part of the altar mounting. "Tin thousand
dollars wouldn't touch one side of it."

"You don't say!" cried Mrs. Bowser, while the rest murmured in the
effort to admire the work of art. "And is that stuff burning for a
disinfectant?"

She pointed to numerous pieces of punk, such as serve the small boy on
the Fourth of July, that were consuming slowly before the ugly joss.

"No, ma'am--not but they needs it all right enough," said Corson, "but
that's the haythen way of sayin' your prayers."

This information was so astonishing that Corson was allowed to finish
his explanation without further remarks from Mrs. Bowser.

"I'll show you the theater next," said he, as he led the way out of the
temple with Mrs. Bowser giving her views of the picturesque heathen in
questions that Corson found no break in the conversation long enough to
answer. As I lingered for a moment in some depression of spirit,
waiting for the others to file out, a voice that thrilled me spoke in
my ear.

"Our guide is enjoying a great favor." It was Luella, noticing me for
the first time since the expedition had started.

"He has every reason to be delighted," I returned, brightening at the
favor I was enjoying.

"Foreign travel is said to be of great value in education," said
Luella, taking my arm, "but it's certainly stupid at times."

I suspected that Mr. Carter had not been entirely successful in meeting
Miss Knapp's ideas of what an escort should be.

"I didn't suppose you could find anything stupid," I said.

"I am intensely interested," she retorted, "but unfortunately the list
of subjects has come to an end."

"You might have begun at the beginning again."

"He did," she whispered, "so I thought it time he tried the guide or
Aunt Julia."

"Thank you," I said.

"Thank him, you mean," she said gaily. "Now don't be stupid yourself,
so please change the subject. Do you know," she continued without
giving me time to speak, "that the only way I can be reconciled to this
place and the sights we have seen is to imagine I am in Canton or
Peking, thousands of miles from home? Seen there, it is interesting,
instructive, natural--a part of their people. As a part of San
Francisco it is only vile."

"Ugh!" said I, as a whiff from an underground den floated up on the
night air, and Luella caught her handkerchief to her face to get her
breath. "I'm not sure that this rose would smell any sweeter by the
name of Canton."

"I'm afraid your argument is too practical for me to answer," she
laughed. "Yet I'm certain it would be more poetic seven thousand miles
away."

"Come this way," said Corson, halting with the party at one of the
doors. "I'll show you through some of the opium dens, and that will
bring us to the stage door of the theater."

"How close and heavy the air is!" said Luella, as we followed the
winding passage in the dim illumination that came from an occasional
gas-jet or oil lamp.

"The yellow man is a firm believer in the motto, 'Ventilation is the
root of all evil,'" I admitted.

The fumes of tobacco and opium were heavy on the air, and a moment
later we came on a cluster of small rooms or dens, fitted with couches
and bunks. It needed no description to make the purpose plain. The
whole process of intoxication by opium was before me, from the heating
of the metal pipe to the final stupor that is the gift and end of the
Black Smoke. Here, was a coolie mixing the drug; there, just beyond
him, was another, drawing whiffs from the bubbling narcotic through the
bamboo handle of his pipe; there, still beyond, was another, lying back
unconscious, half-clad, repulsive, a very sorry reality indeed to the
gorgeous dreams that are reputed to follow in the train of the
seductive pipe.

"Do they really allow them to smoke that dreadful stuff?" asked Mrs.
Bowser shrilly. "Why, I should think the governor, or the mayor, or
you, Mr. Policeman, would stop the awful thing right off. Now, why
don't you?"

"Oh, it's no harm to the haythen," said Corson. "It's death and
destruction to the white man, but it's no more to the yellow man than
so much tobacco and whiskey. They'll be all right to-morrow. We niver
touches 'em unless they takes the whites into their dens. Then we raids
'em. But there's too much of it goin' on, for all that."

"This is depressing," said Luella, with a touch on my arm. "Let's go
on."

"Turn to the right there," Corson called out, as we led the way while
he was explaining to Mr. Carter the method of smoking.

"Let us get where there is some air," said Luella. "This odor is
sickening."

We hastened on, and, turning to the right, soon came on two passages.
One led up a stair, hidden by a turn after half a dozen steps. The
other stretched fifty or seventy-five feet before us, and an oil lamp
on a bracket at the farther end gave a smoky light to the passage and
to a mean little court on which it appeared to open.

"We had better wait for the rest," said Luella cautiously.

As she spoke, one of the doors toward the farther end of the passage
swung back, and a tall heavy figure came out. My heart gave a great
bound, and I felt without realizing it at the moment, that Luella
clutched my arm fiercely.

In the dim light the figure was the figure of the Wolf, the head was
the head of the Wolf, and though no light shone upon it, the face was
the face of the Wolf, livid, distorted with anger, fear and brutal
passions.

"Doddridge Knapp!" I exclaimed, and gave a step forward.

It flashed on me that one mystery was explained. I had found out why
the Doddridge Knapp of plot and counterplot, and the Doddridge Knapp
who was the generous and confidential employer, could dwell in the same
body. The King of the Street was a slave of the Black Smoke, and, like
many another, went mad under the influence of the subtle drug.

As I moved forward, Luella clung to me and gave a low cry. The Wolf
figure threw one malignant look at us and was gone.

"Take me home, oh, take me home!" cried Luella in low suppressed tones,
trembling and half-falling. I put my arm about her to support her.

"What is it?" I asked.

She leaned upon me for one moment, and the black walls and gloomy
passage became a palace filled with flowers. Then her strength and
resolution returned, and she shook herself free.

"Come; let us go back to the others," she said a little unsteadily. "We
should not have left them."

"Certainly," I replied. "They ought to be here by this time."

But as we turned, a sudden cry sounded as of an order given. There was
a bang of wood and a click of metal, and, as we looked, we saw that
unseen hands had closed the way to our return. A barred and iron-bound
door was locked in our faces.


CHAPTER XVIII

THE BATTLE IN THE MAZE


For an instant I was overwhelmed with terror and self-reproach. The
bolted door before me gave notice of danger as plainly as though the
word had been painted upon its front. The dark and lowering walls of
the passage in which the Wolf figure of Doddridge Knapp had appeared
and disappeared whispered threats. The close air was heavy with the
suggestion of peril, and the solitary lamp that gave its dim light from
the end of the passage flashed a smoky warning. And I, in my folly and
carelessness, had brought Luella Knapp into this place and exposed her
to the dangers that encircled me. It was this thought that, for the
moment, unnerved me.

"What does this mean?" asked Luella in a matter-of-fact tone.

"It is a poor practical joke, I fear," said I lightly. I took occasion
to shift a revolver to my overcoat pocket.

"Well, aren't you going to get me out of here?" she asked with a little
suggestion of impatience.

"That is my present intention," I replied, beating a tattoo on the
door.

"You'll hurt your fists," she said. "You must find some way besides
beating it down."

"I'm trying to bring our friends here," said I. "They should have been
with us before now."

"Isn't there another way out?" asked Luella.

"I suspect there are a good many ways out," I replied, "but,
unfortunately, I don't know them." And I gave a few resounding kicks on
the door.

"Where does this stairway go, I wonder?" said Luella.

"Into the celestial regions, I suppose," I ventured.

Matters were in too serious a position for the jest to be appreciated,
and Luella continued:

"It can't be the way out. Isn't there another?"

"We might try the passage."

She gave a shudder and shrank toward me.

"No, no," she cried in a low voice. "Try the door again. Somebody must
hear you, and it may be opened."

I followed her suggestion with a rain of kicks, emphasized with a shout
that made the echoes ring gloomily in the passage.

I heard in reply a sound of voices, and then an answering shout, and
the steps of men running.

"Are you there, Mr. Wilton?" cried the voice of Corson through the
door.

"Yes, all safe," I answered.

"Well, just hold on a bit, and we'll--"

The rest of his sentence was lost in a suppressed scream from Luella. I
turned and darted before her, just in time to face three Chinese
ruffians who were hastening down the passage. The nearest of the trio,
a tall dark savage with a deep scar across his cheek, was just reaching
out his hand to seize Luella when I sprang forward and planted a blow
square upon his chin. He fell back heavily, lifted almost off his feet
by my impact, and lay like a log on the floor.

The other two ruffians halted irresolute for an instant, and I drew my
revolver. In the faint light of the passage I could scarcely see their
villainous faces. The countenance of the coolie is not expressive at
best, but I could feel, rather than see, the stolid rascality of their
appearance. Their wish seemed to be to take me alive if possible. After
a moment of hesitation there was a muttered exclamation and one of the
desperadoes drew his hand from his blouse.

"Oh!" cried Luella. "He's got a knife!"

Before he could make another movement I fired once, twice, three times.
There was a scramble and scuffle in the passageway, and the smoke
rolled thick in front, blotting out the scene that had stood in
silhouette before us.

Fearful of a rush from the Chinese, I threw one arm about Luella, and,
keeping my body between her and possible attack, guided her to the
stair that led upward at nearly right angles from the passage. She was
trembling and her breath came short, but her spirit had not quailed.
She shook herself free as I placed her on the first step.

"Have you killed them?" she asked quietly.

"I hope so," I replied, looking cautiously around the corner to see the
results of my fusillade. The smoke had spread into a thin haze through
the passage.

"There's one fellow there," I said. "But it's the one I knocked down."

"Can't you see the others?" inquired Luella.

"No more in sight," said I, after a bolder survey. "They've run away."

"Oh, I'm glad," said Luella. "I should have seen them always if you had
killed them."

"I shouldn't have minded giving them something to remember," said I,
vexed at my poor display of marksmanship, but feeling an innate
conviction that I must have hit them.

"What on earth did they attack us for?" exclaimed Luella indignantly.
"We hadn't hurt anything."

Before I could reply to Luella's question, a tattoo was beaten upon the
door and a muffled shout came from the other side. I stepped down from
the stair to listen.

"Are you hurt?" shouted Corson. "What's the matter?"

"No damage," I returned. "I drove them off."

Corson shouted some further words, but they were lost in a sudden
murmur of voices and a scuffle of feet that arose behind.

"Look out!" cried Luella peremptorily. "Come back here!"

I have said that the passage opened into a little court, and at the end
a lamp gave light to the court and the passage.

As I turned I saw a confusion of men pouring into the open space and
heading for the passage. They were evidently Chinese, but in the gleam
of the lamp I was sure I saw the evil face and snake-eyes of Tom
Terrill. He was wrapped in the Chinese blouse, but I could not be
mistaken. Then with a chorus of yells there was the crack of a pistol,
and a bullet struck the door close to my ear.

It was all done in an instant. Before the sound of the shot I dropped,
and then made a leap for the stair.

"Oh!" cried Luella anxiously; "were you hit?"

"No, I'm all right," I said, "but it was a close shave. The gang means
mischief."

"Go up the stairs, and find a way out or a place to hide," said Luella
excitedly. "Give me the pistol. They won't hurt me. It's you they're
after. Go, now."

Her tone was the tone of the true daughter of the Wolf.

"Thank you, Miss Knapp. I have a pressing engagement here with a lady,
and I expect to meet Mr. Corson in a few minutes."

I stooped on an impulse and kissed the back of her gloved hand, and
murmured, "I couldn't think of leaving."

"Well, tell me something I can do," she said.

I gave her my smaller revolver. "Hand that to me when I want it," I
said. "If I'm killed, get up the stairs and defend yourself with it.
Don't fire unless you have to. We are short of ammunition." I had but
three shots in the large six-shooter.

"Are they coming?" asked Luella, as the wild tumult of shouts stilled
for a moment and a single voice could be heard.

I peered cautiously around the corner.

"There's a gentleman in a billycock hat who's rather anxious to have
them lead the way," I said; "but they seem to prefer listening to
fighting."

The gentleman whose voice was for war I discovered to be my snake-eyed
friend. He seemed to be having difficulty with the language, and was
eking out his Pidgin-English with pantomime.

"There!" cried Luella with a start; "what's that?"

A heavy blow shook the walls of the building and sounded through the
passage.

"Good!" I said. "If our friends yonder are going to make trouble they
must do it at once. Corson's got an ax, and the door will be down first
they know."

"Thank Heaven!" whispered Luella. And then she began to tremble.

The blows followed fast upon each other, but suddenly they were drowned
in a chorus of yells, and a volley of revolver shots sent the bullets
spatting against the door.

"Look out, Miss Knapp," I said. "They're coming. Stand close behind me,
and crouch down if they get this far."

I could feel her straighten and brace herself once more behind me as I
bent cautiously around the corner.

The band was advancing with a frightful din, but was making more noise
than speed. Evidently it had little heart for its job.

I looked into the yelling mob for the snake-eyed agent of Doddridge
Knapp, but could not single him out.

I dared wait no longer. Aiming at the foremost I fired twice at the
advancing assailants. There were shouts and screams of pain in answer,
and the line hesitated. I gave them the remaining cartridge, and,
seizing the smaller weapon from Luella, fired as rapidly as I could
pull the trigger.

The effect was instantaneous. With a succession of howls and curses the
band broke and ran--all save one man, who leaped swiftly forward with a
long knife in his hand.

It would have gone hard with me if he had ever reached me, for he was a
large and powerful fellow, and my last shot was gone. But in the dark
and smoky passage he stumbled over the prostrate body of the first
desperado whom I had been fortunate enough to knock down, and fell
sprawling at full length almost at my feet.

With one leap I was on his back, and with a blow from the revolver I
had quieted him, wrenched the knife from his hand, and had the point
resting on his neck.

Luella gave a scream.

"Oh!" she cried, "are you hurt?"

"No," I said lightly, "but I don't think this gentleman is feeling very
well. He's likely to have a sore head for a day or two."

"Come back here," said Luella in a peremptory tone. "Those men may come
again and shoot you."

"I don't think so," said I. "The door is coming down. But, anyhow, I
can't leave our friend here. Lie still!" I growled, giving the captive
a gentle prod in the neck with the point of his knife to emphasize my
desire to have peace and quiet between us.

I heard him swear under his breath. The words were foreign, but there
was no mistaking the sentiment behind them.

"You aren't killing him are you?" inquired Luella anxiously.

"I think it might be a service to the country," I confessed, "but I'll
save him for the hangman."

"You needn't speak so regretfully," laughed Luella, with a little
return of her former spirit. "But here our people come."

The ax had been plied steadily on the stubborn planks all through the
conflict and its sequel. But the iron-bound beams and heavy lock had
been built to resist police raids, and the door came down with
difficulty.

At last it was shaking and yielding, and almost as Luella spoke it
swayed, bent apart, and broke with a crash, and with a babel of shouts
Corson, Porter, Barkhouse and Wainwright, with two more policemen,
poured through the opening.

"Praise the powers, you're safe!" cried Corson, wringing my hand, while
the policemen took the prostrate Chinese in charge. "And is the young
lady hurt?"

"No harm done," said Luella. "Mr. Wilton is quite a general."

"I can't think what's got into the scoundrelly highbinders," said
Corson apologetically. "It's the first time I ever knew anything of the
kind to happen." And he went on to explain that while the Chinese
desperado is a devil to fight among his own kind, he does not interfere
with the white man.

I called my men aside and spoke sharply.

"You haven't obeyed orders," I said. "You, Porter, and you, Barkhouse,
were to keep close by me to-night. You didn't do it, and it's only by
good luck that the young lady and I were not killed. You, Wainwright,
were to follow Tom Terrill. I saw Terrill just now in a gang of
Chinese, and you turn up on the other side of a barred door."

Porter and Barkhouse looked sheepish enough, but Wainwright protested:

"I was following Terrill when he gets into a gang of highbinders, and
goes into one of these rooms over here a ways. I waits a while for him,
and then starts to look around a bit, and first I knows, I runs up
against Porter here hunting for an ax, and crazy as a loon, saying as
how you was murdered, and they had got to save you."

"Well, just keep close to me for the rest of the night, and we'll say
no more about it. There's no great damage done--nothing but a sore
knuckle." I was feeling now the return effects of my blow on the
coolie's chin. I felt too much in fault myself to call my attendants
very sharply to task. It was through me that Luella had come into
danger, and I had to confess that I had failed in prudence and had come
near to paying dear for it.

"I don't understand this, Mr. Wilton," said Corson in confidential
perplexity. "I don't see why the haythen were after yez."

"I saw--I saw Tom Terrill," said I, stumbling over the name of
Doddridge Knapp. I determined to keep the incident of his appearance to
myself.

"I don't see how he worked it," said Corson with a shake of the head.
"They don't like to stand against a white man. It's a quare tale he
must have told 'em, and a big sack he must have promised 'em to bring
'em down on ye. Was it for killin' ye they was tryin', or was they for
catchin' yez alive?"

"They were trying to take us alive at first, I think, but the bullets
whistled rather close for comfort."

"I was a little shaky myself, when they plunked against the door," said
Corson with a smile.

"Oh, Mr. Wilton," said Mrs. Bowser, "it was awful of you--for it was so
frightfully improper to get behind that locked door, to say nothing of
throwing us all into conniptions with firing guns, and calling for
axes, and highbinders, and police, and Heaven knows what all--and what
are highbinders, Mr. Wilton? And it's a blessing we have our dear
Luella safe with us again. I was near fainting all the time, and it's a
mercy I had a smelling bottle."

"Dear Luella" looked distressed, and while Corson was attempting to
explain to Mrs. Bowser the nature of the blackmailing bands of the
Chinese criminal element, Luella said:

"Please get us out of this. I can't stand it."

I had marveled at her calm amid the excited talk of those about her,
but I saw now that it was forced by an effort of her will. She was
sadly shaken.

"Take my arm," I said. "Mr. Corson will lead the way." I signed to
Porter to go ahead and to Barkhouse and Wainwright to follow me. "It's
very close here."

"It's very ridiculous of me," said Luella, with an hysterical laugh,
"but I'm a little upset."

"I dare say you're not used to it," I suggested dryly.

Luella gave me a quick glance.

"No, are you? It's not customary in our family," she said with an
attempt at gaiety.

I thought of the wolf-figure who had come out of the opium-den, and the
face framed in the lantern-flash of the alley, and was silent. Perhaps
the thought of the scene of the passage had come to her, too, for she
shuddered and quickened her step as though to escape.

"Do you want to go through the theater?" asked Corson.

"No--no," whispered Luella, "get me home at once."

"We have seen enough sights for the evening, I believe," said I.

Mrs. Bowser was volubly regretful, but declined Corson's offer to
chaperon her through a night of it.

On the way home Luella spoke not a word, but Mrs. Bowser filled the
time with a detailed account of her emotions and sensations while
Corson and his men were searching for us and beating down the door. And
her tale was still growing when the carriage pulled up before the
bronze lions that guarded the house of the Wolf, and I handed the
ladies up the steps.

At the door Luella held out her hand impulsively.

"I wish I knew whom to thank--but I do thank him--for my safety--
perhaps for my life. Believe me--I am grateful to a brave man."

I felt the warm clasp of her fingers for a moment, and then with a
flash of her eyes that set my blood on fire she was gone, and I was
staggering down Doddridge Knapp's steps in a tumult of emotions that
turned the dark city into the jeweled palaces of the genii peopled with
angels.

But there was a bitter in the sweet. "I wish I knew whom to thank." The
bitter grew a little more perceptible as her phrases stamped themselves
on my brain. I blessed and cursed at once the day that had brought me
to her.


CHAPTER XIX

A DEAL IN STOCKS


The wolf-face, seamed with hatred and anger, and hideous with evil
passions, that had glowered for a moment out of the smoky frame of the
Chinese den, was still haunting me as I forced myself once more to
return to the office. Wednesday morning had come, and I was due to meet
Doddridge Knapp. But as I unlocked the door, I took some comfort in the
reflection that I could hardly be more unwilling to meet the Wolf than
he must be to meet me.

I had scarcely settled myself in my chair when I heard the key turn in
the lock. The door swung open, and in walked Doddridge Knapp.

I had thought to find at least some trace of the opium debauch through
which I had gained the clue to his strange and contradictory acts--some
mark of the evil passions that had written their story upon his face at
the meeting in the passage. But the face before me was a mask that
showed no sign of the experiences through which he had passed. For all
that appeared, he might have employed the time since I had left here
two days before in studying philosophy and cultivating peace and good-
will with his neighbors.

"Ah, Wilton," he said affably, rubbing his hands with a purring growl.
"You're ready for a hard day's work, I hope."

"Nothing would please me better," I said cheerfully, my repugnance
melting away with the magnetism of his presence. "Is the black flag up
today?"

He looked at me in surprise for an instant and then growled, still in
good humor:

"'No quarter' is the motto to-day." And I listened closely as the King
of the Street gave his orders for the morning.

I marveled at the openness and confidence with which he seemed to treat
me. There was no trace nor suggestion in his demeanor to-day of the man
who sought my life by night. And I shuddered at the power of the Black
Smoke to change the nature of this man to that of a demon. He trusted
me with secrets of his campaign that were worth millions to the market.

"You understand now," he said at the end of his orders, "that you are
to sell all the Crown Diamond that the market will take, and buy all
the Omega that you can get below one hundred."

"I understand."

"We'll feed Decker about as big a dose as he can swallow, I reckon,"
said the King of the Street grimly.

"One thing," I said, "I'd like to know if I'm the only one operating
for you."

The King of the Street drew his bushy brows down over his eyes and
scowled at me a moment.

"You're the only one in the big Board," he said at last. "There are men
in the other Boards, you understand."

I thought I understood, and sallied forth for the battle. At Doddridge
Knapp's suggestion I arranged to do my business through three brokers,
and added Lattimer and Hobart to Wallbridge, and Bockstein and Eppner.

Bockstein greeted me affably:

"Velgome to de marget vonce more, Mr.--, Mr.--"

"Wilton," said Eppner, assisting his partner in his high, dry voice,
with cold civility. His blue-black eyes regarded me as but a necessary
part of the machinery of commerce.

I gave my orders briefly.

"Dot is a larch order," said Bockstein dubiously.

"You don't have to take it," I was about to retort, when Eppner's high-
pitched voice interrupted:

"It's all right. The customary margin is enough."

Wallbridge was more enthusiastic.

"You've come just in the nick of time," said the stout little man,
swabbing his bald head from force of habit, though the morning was
chill. "The market has been drier than a fish-horn and duller than a
foggy morning. You saved me from a trip to Los Angeles. I should have
been carried off by my wife in another day."

"You have got Gradgrind's idea of a holiday," I laughed.

"Gradgrind, Gradgrind?" said the little man reflectively. "Don't know
him. He's not in the market, I reckon. Oh, I'm death on holidays! I
come near dying every day the Board doesn't meet. When it shut up shop
after the Bank of California went to the wall, I was just getting ready
to blow my brains out for want of exercise, when they posted the notice
that it was to open again."

I laughed at the stout broker's earnestness, and told him what I wanted
done.

"Whew!" he exclaimed, "you're in business this time, sure. Well, this
is just in my line."

Lattimer and Hobart, after a polite explanation of their rules in
regard to margins, and getting a certified check, became obsequiously
anxious to do my bidding.

I distributed the business with such judgment that I felt pretty sure
our plans could not in any way be exposed, and took my place at the
rail in the Boardroom.

The opening proceedings were comparatively tame. I detected a sad
falling-off in the quality and quantity of lung power and muscular
activity among the buyers and sellers in the pit.

At the call of Confidence, Lattimer and Hobart began feeding shares to
the market. Confidence dropped five points in half a minute, and the
pit began to wake up. There was a roar and a growl that showed me the
animals were still alive.

The Decker forces were taken by surprise, but with a hasty consultation
came gallantly to the rescue of their stock. At the close of the call
they had forced it back and one point higher than at the opening.

This, however, was but a skirmish of outposts. The fighting began at
the call of Crown Diamond.

It opened at sixty-three. The first bid was hardly made when with a
bellow Wallbridge charged on Decker's broker, filled his bid, and
offered a thousand shares at sixty-two.

There was an answering roar from a hundred throats and a mob rushed on
Wallbridge with the apparent intent of tearing him limb from limb.
Wallbridge's offer was snapped up at once, but a few weak-kneed holders
of the stock threw small blocks on the market.

These were taken up at once, and Decker's brokers were bidding sixty-
five.

At this Eppner gave a blast like a cornet, and, waving his arms
frantically, plunged into a small-sized riot. I had entrusted him with
five thousand shares of Crown Diamond to be sold for the best price
possible, and he was feeding the opposition judiciously. The price
wavered for a moment, but rallied and reached sixty-six.

At this I signaled to Wallbridge, and with another bellow he started an
opposition riot on the other side of the room from Eppner, and fed
Crown Diamond in lumps to the howling forces of the Decker combination.

The battle was raging furiously.

I had no wish to break the price of the stock. I was intent only at
selling shares at a good price, but I had convinced the Decker forces
that there was a raid on the stock, and they had rallied to protect it
at whatever cost.

The price see-sawed between sixty-six and sixty-five, and amid a tumult
of yells and shouts I sold twelve thousand shares. At last they were
gone, but the offers still continued.

Outsiders had become scared at the persistent selling, and were trying
to realize before a break should come, and in spite of Decker's efforts
the price ran down to sixty.

There was a final rally of the Decker forces, and the call closed with
Crown Diamond at sixty-three.

I was pleased at the result. Doddridge Knapp had intrusted me with the
shares with the remark, "I paid fifty for 'em and they're not worth a
tinker's dam. I got an inside look at the mine when I was in Virginia
City. Feed Decker all he'll take at sixty. He's been fooled on the
thing, and I reckon he'll buy a good lot of them at that."

I had sold Doddridge Knapp's entire lot of the stock at an average of
over sixty-five, had netted him a profit of fifteen dollars a share,
and had, for a second purpose, served the plan of campaign by drawing
the enemy's resources to the defense of Crown Diamond and weakening, by
so much, his power of operating elsewhere.

By the time Omega was reached I had the plans fully in hand.

The assault on Crown Diamond had caused a nervous feeling all along the
line, and under rumors of a bear raid there had been a drop of several
points.

Omega felt the results of the nervousness and depression, and opened at
seventy-five.

There was a moment's buzz--the quiet of a crowd expectant of great
events. Then Wallbridge charged into the throng with a roar. I could
not distinguish his words, but I knew that he was carrying out my order
to drop five thousand shares on the market. At his cry there was an
answering roar, and the scene upon the floor turned to a riot. Men
rushed hither and thither, screaming, shouting, waving their arms,
pushing, jostling, tearing each other to get into the midst of the
throng, whirling about, mobbing first one and then another of the
leather-lunged leaders who furnished at each moment fresh centers for
the outbreak of disorder. How the market was going, I could only guess.
At Wallbridge's onset I saw Lattimer and Eppner make a dive for him and
then separate, following other shouting, screaming madmen who
pirouetted about the floor and tried to save themselves from a mobbing.
I heard seventy shouted from one direction, but could not make out
whether it set the price of the stock or not. The din was too confusing
for me to follow the course of events.

At last Wallbridge staggered up to the rail, flushed, collarless and
panting for breath, with his hat a hopeless wreck.

"We've done it!" he gasped in my ear. "The dogs of war are making the
fur fly down here, you bet! Don't you wish you was in it?"

"No, I don't!" I shouted decidedly. "How does it go?"

"I sold down to seventy-one--average seventy-three, I guess--and she's
piling in fit to break the floor."

"Did Lattimer and Eppner get your stock?" I could not help asking.

"They got about three thousand of it. Rosenheim got the rest."

I remembered Rosenheim as the agent of Decker, and sighed. But Lattimer
and Eppner were busy, and I had hopes.

"Where is it now?" I asked.

"Sixty-nine and a half."

I meditated an instant whether to use my authority to throw another
five thousand shares on the market. But I caught sight of Decker
opposite, pale, hawklike, just seizing an envelope from a messenger. He
tore it open, and though his face changed not a line, I felt by a
mysterious instinct that it brought assurance of the aid he sought.

"Buy every share you can get," I said promptly. "Don't get in the way
of Lattimer or Eppner. Put on steam, too."

"Two-forty on a turnpike road," said Wallbridge. And, refreshed by a
minute of rest, he gave a prolonged bellow and charged frantically for
a stout man in a white waistcoat who was doing the maniac dance across
the hall.

A moment later the clamor grew louder and the excitement increased. I
heard shouts of seventy-five, seventy-eight, eighty and eighty-five.
Decker's men had entered into the bidding with energy. The sinews of
war had been recruited, and it was a battle for the possession of every
block of stock.

Thus far I had followed closely the plan laid down for me by Doddridge
Knapp, and the course of the market had agreed with the outlines of his
prophecy. But now it was going up faster than he had expected. Yet I
could do nothing but buy. I dared not set bounds to the bidding. I
dared not stop for an instant to hear how the account of purchases
stood, for it might allow Decker to get the stock that my employer
would need to give him the control of the mine. I could only grip the
railing and wait for the end of the call.

At last it came, and "Omega, one hundred and five and three-quarters"
was the closing quotation. I feverishly took the totals of my purchases
from the brokers, and gave the checks to bind them. Then I hastily made
my way through the excited throngs that blocked the entrance to the
Exchange, brought thither by the exciting news of "a boom in Omega,"
and hurried to the office.

Doddridge Knapp had not yet come, and I consumed myself with impatience
for ten minutes till I heard his key in the lock and he entered with a
calm smile on his face.

"What luck, Wilton?" was his greeting. The King of the Street, whose
millions had been staked in the game, was less excited than I who
risked nothing.

I gave him my memoranda, and tried to read his face as he studied them.

"You did a good job with Crown Diamond," he grunted approvingly.

"Thanks," I returned. "I thought it wasn't bad for a stock that was not
worth mentioning."

"Um, yes. Decker can light his cigars with it next month."

"A million dollars' worth of cigar-lighters might be called a piece of
extravagance," I murmured.

"You'll think so if you ever buy 'em, Wilton," growled the King of the
Street feelingly. "And here is seven thousand six hundred shares of
Omega bought and five thousand sold. That scheme worked pretty well. We
made twenty-six hundred by it. Um--the price went up pretty fast."

The King of the Street looked sourly at the figures before him. "You
ought to have got more stock," he growled.

This was a shock to my self-congratulation over my success, and I gave
an inquiring "Yes?"

"As I figure it out," he said, "somebody else got seven thousand shares
and odd. There were over fifteen thousand shares sold in your Board."

I murmured that I had done my best.

"Yes, yes; I suppose so," said my employer. "But we need more."

"How much?" I asked.

"I've got a little over forty-eight thousand shares," he said slowly,
"and I must have near sixty thousand. It looks as though I'd have to
fight for them."

"Which will cost you about a million and a half at present rates," I
returned.

"I'll give you a million commission, Wilton, if you'll get them for
that."

The King of the Street plainly did not underrate the task he had set.

"Well, Decker isn't any better off than you," I said consolingly.

"He's ten or fifteen thousand shares worse off than I am."

"And he's put a fortune into Crown Diamond, and is pretty well loaded
with Confidence."

"True, my boy."

"And so," I argued, "he must be nearer the bottom of his sack than you
are."

"Very good, Wilton," said the King of the Street with a quizzical look.
"But you've left one thing out. You don't happen to know that the
directors of the El Dorado Bank had a secret meeting last night and
decided to back Decker for all they are worth."

"Rather a rash proceeding," I suggested.

"Well, he had three millions of their money in his scheme, so I reckon
they thought the tail might as well follow the hide," explained my
employer.

"The only thing to do then is to get a bank yourself," I returned.

Doddridge Knapp's lips closed, and a trace of a frown was on his brows.

"Well, this isn't business," he said. "Now here is what I want," he
continued. And he gave directions for the buying at the afternoon
session.

"Now, not over one hundred and twenty-five," was his parting
injunction. "You may not get much--I don't think you will--though I
have a scheme that may bring a reaction."

Doddridge Knapp's scheme for a reaction must have been one of the kind
that goes off backward, for Omega jumped skyward on the afternoon call,
and closed at one hundred and thirty. Rumors were flying fast that a
big bonanza, "bigger than the Consolidated Virginia," had been
discovered on the six-hundred-foot level, and the great public was
rushing to Pine Street to throw its dollars into the blind pool against
Knapp, Decker and the El Dorado bank. And I had been able to get a
scant one thousand five hundred shares when the call was over.

"I did better than you," said Doddridge Knapp, when I explained to him
the course of the session. "I found a nest of two thousand five
hundred, and gathered them in at one hundred and twenty. But that's all
right. You've done well enough--as well as I expected."

"And still eight thousand to get," I said.

"Nearly."

"Well, we'll get them in due time, I suppose," I said cheerfully.

"We'll have 'em by Monday noon, or we won't have 'em at all," growled
Doddridge Knapp.

"How is that?"

"You seem to have forgotten, young man, that the stock transfer books
of the Omega Company close on Monday at two o'clock."

As I had never heard this interesting piece of information before, I
could not in strictness be said to have forgotten it.

"Well, we ought to have the stock by that time," I said consolingly.

"We ought," said the King of the Street grimly, pausing in the doorway,
"but things don't always happen as they ought."

As I remembered that if things had happened as they ought Doddridge
Knapp would be in jail, I gave a hearty assent to the proposition as
the door closed behind my retreating employer.


CHAPTER XX

MAKING PROGRESS


"You really don't mean it," said Luella severely, "and it's very wrong
to say what you don't mean."

"In society?" I asked blandly. "I'm afraid you're a heretic, L----- Miss
Knapp."

I blushed as I stumbled over her name. She was Luella to me by night
and day, but I did not consider myself on a footing to use so thrilling
a word in her presence.

"Don't be rude," she said. "Everything has its place in society."

"Even prevarication," I assented.

"Even a polite consideration for the feelings of others," corrected
Luella.

"Then you might have some consideration for mine," I said in an injured
tone.

"But we're not in society,--not just now, that is to say. We're just
friends talking together, and you're not to say what you don't mean
just for the sake of pleasing my vanity."

"Well, if we're just friends talking together--" said I, looking up in
her face. I was seated on the footstool before her, and it was very
entertaining to look at her face, so I stopped at that.

"Yes," said Luella, bending forward in her interest.

"It was the bravest and truest and most womanly girl I ever knew or
heard of. It's the kind a man would be glad to die for."

I really couldn't help it. Her hand lay very temptingly near me, and I
don't think I knew what I was doing till she said:

"Please let go of my hand."

"But he'd rather live for her," I continued boldly.

"If you don't behave yourself, I'll surrender you to Aunt Julia," said
Luella, rising abruptly and slipping to the curtains of the alcove in
which we were sitting. She looked very graceful and charming as she
stood there with one hand raised to the lace folds.

"Has she recovered?" I asked.

"What a melancholy tone! The poor dear was in bed all Tuesday, but she
took advantage of her rest to amplify her emotions."

"She has acquired a subject of conversation, at least."

"To last her for the rest of her life," laughed Luella, turning back.
"'Twill be a blood-curdling tale by the time she reaches the East once
more. And now do be sensible--no, you sit right where you are--and tell
me how it all happened, and what it was about."

I revolved for a moment the plan of a romance that would have, at
least, the merit of chaining Miss Knapp's interest. But it was gone as
I looked into her serious eyes.

"That's what I should like to know myself," I confessed candidly. Then
I added with pardonable mendacity: "I think I must have been taken for
somebody else, if it was anything more than a desperate freak of the
highbinders."

"Are you sure they had no interest in seeking you?" asked Luella
gravely, with a charming tremor in her voice.

Before I could reply, Mrs. Knapp's voice was in my ear, and Mrs.
Knapp's figure was in the archway of the alcove.

"Oh, you are here," she said. "I thought I heard your voices. Luella,
your father wants to see you a minute. And how do you do, Mr. Wilton?"

I greeted Mrs. Knapp cordially, though I wished that she had delayed
her appearance, and looked regretfully after Luella.

"I want to thank you for your heroism the other evening," she said.

"Oh, it was nothing," I answered lightly. "Any one would have done the
same."

"Perhaps--but none the less we are all very grateful. If I had only
suspected that anything of the kind could have happened, I should never
have allowed them to go."

I felt rebelliously glad that she had not suspected.

"I blame myself for it all," I bowed. "It was very careless of me."

"I'm afraid so, after all the warning you have had," said Mrs. Knapp.

"But as it turned out, no harm was done," I said cheerfully.

"I suppose so," said Mrs. Knapp absently. Then she spoke with sudden
attention. "Do you think your enemies followed you there?"

I was taken aback with the vision of the Wolf figure in the grimy
passage, a fiend in the intoxication of opium, and stammered for a
reply.

"My snake-eyed friend made himself a little familiar, I'm afraid," I
admitted.

"It is dreadful that these dangers should follow you everywhere," said
Mrs. Knapp with feeling. "You must be careful."

"I have developed eyes in the back of my head," I said, smiling at her
concern.

"I fear you need more than that. Now tell me how it all happened, just
as you saw it. I'm afraid Luella was a little too hysterical to give a
true account of it."

I gave her the story of the scene in the passage, with a few judicious
emendations. I thought it hardly worth while to mention Doddridge
Knapp's appearance, or a few other items that were more precious to me
than to anybody else.

When I had done Mrs. Knapp sighed.

"There must be an end of this some day," she said.

"I hope the day isn't far off," I confessed, "unless it should happen
to be the day the coroner is called on to take a particular interest in
my person."

Mrs. Knapp shuddered.

"Oh no, no--not that way."

Then after a pause, she continued: "Would you not rather attack your
dangers at once, and have them over, than to wait for them to seek
you?"

I felt a trifle uneasy at this speech. There seemed to be a suggestion
in it that I could end the whole matter by marching on my enemies, and
coming to decisive battle. I wished I knew what she was hinting at, and
how it was to be done, before I answered.

"I haven't felt any particular disposition to hunt them up," I
confessed, "but if I could cut off all the heads of the hydra at once,
it would be worth while. Anything for peace and quiet, you know."

Mrs. Knapp smiled.

"Well, there is no use challenging your fate. There is no need for you
to act, unless the boy is in danger."

"Oh, no, none at all," I replied unblushingly.

"And we'll hope that he will be kept safe until the danger has passed."

I hoped so devoutly, and said as much. And after a few more words, Mrs.
Knapp led me, feebly resisting, to Mrs. Bowser.

"Oh, Mr. Wilton," said that charming dame, "my heart goes pit-a-pat
when I see you, for it's almost like being among those dreadful
highbinders again, and how could you bring the horrid creatures down on
our dear Luella, when she might have been captured and sold into
slavery under our very eyes."

"Ah, Mrs. Bowser," said I gallantly, "I ought to have known what to
expect on bringing such a temptation before our Chinese friends. I do
not see how you escaped being carried off."

"Oh, now, Mr. Wilton," exclaimed Mrs. Bowser, retreating behind her
fan; "you are really too flattering. I must say, though, that some of
them did make dreadful eyes at me, till I felt that I should faint. And
do they really hold their slave-market right in the middle of San
Francisco? And why doesn't the president break it up, and what is the
Emancipation Proclamation for, I should like to know?"

"Madam," I replied, "the slave-market is _sub rosa_, but I advise
you to keep out of Chinatown. Some temptations are irresistible."

Mrs. Bowser giggled behind her fan and was too pleased to speak, and I
took advantage of the lull to excuse myself and make a dive into the
next room where I espied Luella.

"Yes, you may sit down here," she said carelessly. "I want to be
amused."

I was not at all certain that I was flattered to be considered amusing;
but I was willing to stay on any terms, so we fell into animated
conversation on nothing and everything. In the midst of this
entertaining situation I discovered that Mrs. Knapp was watching us,
and her face showed no easy state of mind. As I caught her eye she
moved away, and a minute later Mr. Carter appeared with,--

"Excuse me, Miss Knapp, but your mother would like to see you. She and
my wife have some conspiracy on hand."

I was pleased to see that Luella did not take the interruption
gratefully, but she surrendered her place to Mr. Carter, who talked
about the weather with a fertility of commonplaces that excited my
admiration. But as even the weather has its limits as a subject of
interest and the hour grew late, I suppressed a yawn and sought the
ladies to take my leave.

"Oh, must you go?" said Luella, rising. And, leaving Mrs. Carter to her
mother, she walked with me to the hall as though she would speak with
me.

But once more alone, with only the hum of voices from the reception-
room as company, she fell silent, and I could think of nothing to say.

"It's very good of you to come," she said hesitatingly.

My mind went back to that other evening when I had left the door in
humiliation and bitterness of spirit. Perhaps she, too, was thinking of
the time.

"It's much better of you to wish me to come," I said with all my heart,
taking her hand.

"Come on Saturday," she said at last.

"I'm at your service at any time," I murmured.

"Don't," she said. "That's conventional. If you are to be conventional
you're not to come." And she laughed nervously. I looked into her eyes,
and then on impulse stooped and kissed the hand I still held.

"It was what I meant," I said.

She snatched her hand away, and as she did so I saw in the dim light
that hid the further end of the hall, the figure of the Wolf, massive,
dark, threatening, and my mind supplied it with all the fires of
passion and hate with which I had twice seen the face inflamed.

Luella's eyes grew large with wonder and alarm as she caught on my face
the reflection of the Wolf's coming. But as she turned to look, the
figure faded away without sound, and there was only Mrs. Knapp
appearing in the doorway; and her alarm turned to amusement.

"Oh, I was afraid you had gone," said Mrs. Knapp. "Would you mind,
Luella, looking after the guests a minute?"

Luella bowed me a good night and was gone.

"Oh, Henry," said Mrs. Knapp, "I wanted to ask you about Mr. Knapp. Is
your aid absolutely essential to his success?"

"I presume not, thought it would probably embarrass him somewhat if I
should take ship for China before morning."

As I held in the bank securities worth nearly three millions of
dollars, I believed that I spoke within bounds.

"I suppose it would do no good to try to dissuade him from his plans?"

"It would take a bolder man than I," said I with a smile at the
audacity of the idea.

Mrs. Knapp smiled sadly in response.

"Do you think, Henry," she asked hesitatingly, "do you think that Mr.
Knapp is quite himself?"

My mind leaped at the recollection of the Wolf figure in the opium-
dens. But I choked down the thought, and replied calmly:

"He certainly has a vigorous business head on his shoulders."

"I wish you could tell me about his business affairs," said Mrs. Knapp
wistfully. "But I know you won't."

"You wouldn't think much of me if I did," I said boldly.

"It would be right to tell _me_," she said. "But I mustn't keep
you standing here. Good night."

I walked down the steps, and joined my waiting guards with a budget of
new thoughts and feelings to examine.

The three days that followed were days of storm and stress in the
market; a time of steady battle in the Stock Exchange, of feints and
sallies on stocks which we did not want, of "wash sales" and bogus
bargains, of rumors on rumors and stratagems on stratagems--altogether
a harvest season for the Father of Lies.

Doddridge Knapp fought for the control of Omega, and the Decker
syndicate fought as stubbornly for the same end. I was forced to admire
the fertility of resource displayed by the King of the Street. He was
carrying on the fight with the smaller capital, yet by his attack and
defense he employed his resources to better result. The weakness of the
syndicate lay in its burden of Confidence and Crown Diamond. Doddridge
Knapp had sold out his holdings of both at a handsome profit, but, so
far from ceasing his sales of these stocks, as I had expected, he had
only begun. He suddenly developed into a most pronounced "bear," and
sold both stocks for future delivery in great blocks. He was cautious
with Confidence, but his assaults on Crown Diamond were ruthless. At
every session he sold for future delivery at lower and lower prices,
and a large contingent of those "on the Street" joined in the bear
movement. Decker and his brokers stood gallantly to the defense of
their threatened properties and bought heavily. Yet it was evident that
Omega, Crown Diamond and Confidence together made a little heavier
burden than even the El Dorado Bank could carry. In spite of their
efforts to buy everything that was offered, Crown Diamond "futures"
fell to forty, thirty, twenty-five, and even twenty, closing at the
afternoon session at twenty and three-fourths.

But the King of the Street was less successful in his manipulation of
Omega. Despite his efforts, despite the rumors that were industriously
spread about of the "pinching out" of the great veins, the price
continued to go up by leaps and bounds. The speculating public as well
as Decker and Company were reaching out for the stock, and it was
forced up ten and twenty points at a time, closing on Saturday
afternoon at three hundred and twenty-five.

"This is merry war," gasped Wallbridge, at the close of the last
session. "I wouldn't have missed this for five years of my life.
Doddridge Knapp is the boy for making the market hum when he takes the
notion. By George, we've had a picnic this week! And last Monday I
thought everything was dead, too!"

"Doddridge Knapp!" I exclaimed. "Is he in this deal, too?"

Wallbridge looked at me in a little confusion, and mopped his head with
comical abandon. Then he winked a most diabolical wink, and chuckled.

"Of course, a secret's a secret; but when the whole Street's talking
about it, you can't exactly call it a close-corporation secret," he
explained apologetically.

I assured the stout little broker solemnly that Doddridge Knapp was to
know nothing of my dealings.

"I'll do anything for a good customer like you," he gasped. "Lord, if
it wasn't for the lying, where would the market be? Dead, sir, dead!"
And Wallbridge shook his head merrily over the moral degradation of the
business that chained his thoughts by day and his dreams by night.

I joined Doddridge Knapp at the office and confided to him the fact
that the cat was out of the bag. The King of the Street looked a little
amused at the announcement.

"Good Lord, Wilton! Where are your ears?" he said. "The Street had the
whole story on Friday. Decker was sure of it on Wednesday. But I kept
under cover long enough to get a good start, and that was as much as I
expected."

"How do we stand now?" I asked. I knew that our purchases had not been
progressing very well.

"There's five hundred shares to get," said the King of the Street
thoughtfully; "five hundred and thirty-six, to be accurate."

"That's not a very promising outlook," I suggested, remembering that we
had secured only four hundred shares in the whole day's struggle.

"Well, there'll be an earthquake in the Street if we don't get them,
and maybe there'll be one if we do. Decker is likely to dump all his
shares on the market the minute we win, and it will be the devil's own
job to keep the bottom from falling out if he does."

The King of the Street then gave some brief directions.

"Now," he continued, "you are to be at the Exchange without fail, on
Monday morning. I'll be there to give you your orders. Don't be one
minute behind hand, or there may be Tophet to pay." And he emphasized
his words with an impressive growl that showed the Wolf's fangs.

"I'll be on hand," I replied.

"Well, then, go," he growled; "and see that you come with a clear head
on Monday. Keep your thirst until after the game is over."

A few hours later I was at the house of the Wolf, but I forgot to ask
for Doddridge Knapp. Luella received me with apparent indifference that
contrasted sharply with her parting, and I was piqued. Mrs. Knapp was
gracious, and sailed between us before I had received a dozen words.

"Where are your spirits to-night?" she asked railingly. "Have you left
them in lower Pine Street?"

"I have a heart for any fate," I returned lightly. "Am I too grave for
the occasion?"

"You're always under orders to be cheerful," Luella broke in, "or at
least to explain the reason why."

"He can't explain," retorted her mother. "Mr. Knapp won't let him."

It struck me, on watching mother and daughter, that it was they who
were grave. Luella gave an occasional flash of brightness, but seemed
tired or depressed, while Mrs. Knapp appeared to struggle against some
insistent sorrow. But presently we found a subject in which Luella
roused her interest, and her bright mind and ready wit drove away the
fancy that had first assailed me. Then some caller claimed the
attention of Mrs. Knapp, and I was content to monopolize Luella's
conversation for the evening. At last I was constrained to go. Mrs.
Knapp was still busied in conversation with her visitor, and Luella
followed me once more into the hall.

Again her animation left her, and she was silent; and I, on my side,
could think of nothing to say. Then her deep gray eyes flashed upon me
a look that sent my pulses throbbing, an indefinable, pleading glance
that shook my soul.

"Can't you tell me--won't you tell me?" she said in a low tone that was
the complement of the silent speech of the eyes.

"I wish I could," I whispered.

"I know it must be right--it is right," she said in the same tone. "But
I wish that I might know. Will you not tell me?"

"I will tell you some day," I said brokenly. "Now it is another's, and
I can not. But it shall all be yours."

"All?"

"Everything."

In another moment I know not what I should have done, so stirred and
tempted was I by her tone and look. But in an instant her manner
changed, and she exclaimed in a mocking voice:

"Now I have your promise, so I'll let you go. You'd better not linger,
or mama will certainly have some business to talk over with you." And
before I could touch her hand she was gone, and her laughing "good
night" echoed down the hall.

I was puzzled by these changes of mood, and decided that Luella Knapp
was a most unaccountable young woman. And then there dashed over me a
sickening realization of what I had done, of what I had promised, and
of how impossible it was that I should ever reveal to her the secret I
guarded. I cursed the mad folly and crime of her father, for they stood
between her and me. Yet under the subtle influence that she cast upon
me I felt the bonds of duty relaxed and slipping away. I had now to
confess to myself that I loved Luella Knapp. And she? I hoped and
feared, and ran over in my mind every incident of my later visits that
might tell in what regard I was held--the tones, the words, the manner,
that ran from deep interest to indifference. And trying to untangle the
skein, I was a good deal startled to feel a touch on my arm as I
reached the sidewalk.

"Oh, it's you, Porter, is it?" I exclaimed, on recognizing my retainer.
"Is Barkhouse here?"

"Yes, sir. An' here's Wilson with a message for you."

"A message for me! From whom?"

Wilson took me aside, and thrust an envelope into my hand.

"That come to your room--about nine o'clock, I reckon," he said.
"Leastways, that's the first we saw of it. An' Mother Borton was there,
an' she says she must see you to-night, sure. She wouldn't stay, but
says you was to come down there before you goes to bed, sure, if you
wants to keep out of trouble."

I looked at the envelope, and in the flickering light from the street-
lamp I could make out the address to Henry Wilton. By the handwriting
and by the indefinable scent that rose from the paper, I knew it for a
message from the Unknown who held for me the secrets of life and death.


CHAPTER XXI

AT THE BIDDING OF THE UNKNOWN


The windows of Borton's shone cheerfully, although it was past
midnight. At our cautious approach a signal was given, and with the
answering word a man appeared from the obscurity.

"All safe?" I inquired.

"It's all right," said Barkhouse. "There's a dozen men in the bar-room,
and I'm not sure there ain't some of the hounds amongst them. But
you're to go in the side door, and right up stairs."

"Two of you may keep at the foot of the stairs, just inside the door,"
I said. "You may stand watch outside, Barkhouse."

There was sound of rude song, and the clink of glass and bottle in the
bar and dining-room, as I passed through the side hall. But the door
was closed, and I saw nothing of the late revelers. In the upper
hallway Mother Borton stood by an open door, silhouetted dark and
threatening against the dim flickerings that came from the candle in
the room behind her.

I had but opened my mouth to give her word of greeting when she raised
a warning claw, and then seizing me, drew me swiftly into the room and
closed and locked the door.

"How air ye, dearie?" she said, surveying me with some apparent pride.
"You're safe and whole, ain't ye?"

As the candlelight fell on her face, she seemed older and more like a
bird of prey than ever. The nose and chin had taken a sharper cast, the
lines of her face were deeper drawn with the marks of her evil life,
and her breath was strong with the strength of water-front whisky. But
her eyes burned bright and keen as ever in their sunken sockets, with
the fire of her fevered brain behind them.

"I am safe," I said, "though I had a close shave in Chinatown."

"I heerd of it," said Mother Borton sourly. "I reckon it ain't much
good to sit up nights to tell you how to take keer of yourself. It's a
wonder you ever growed up. Your mammy must 'a' been mighty keerful
about herdin' ye under cover whenever it rained."

"I _was_ a little to blame," I admitted, "but your warning was not
thrown away. I thought I was well-guarded."

Mother Borton sniffed contemptuously.

"I s'pose you come down here alone?"

"No." And I explained the disposition of my forces.

"That's not so bad," she said. "They could git up here soon enough, I
reckon, if there was a row. But I guess you didn't think I sent for ye
jest to tell ye you was a fool in Chinatown."

I admitted that I should have expected to wait till morning for such a
piece of information.

"Well," said Mother Borton, "that ain't it. Something's up."

"And what might it be?" I inquired. "The moon?"

Mother Borton did not take this flippancy kindly. Her face grew darker
and more evil as it was framed in the dancing shadows behind her.

"You can git a knife in ye as easy as winking if I'll jest keep my
mouth shut," she cried spitefully.

"Yes," said I repentantly, putting my hand upon her arm. "But you are
my very good friend, and will tell me what I ought to know."

The creature's face lighted at my tone and action, and her eyes melted
with a new feeling.

"That I will," she said; "that I will, as if you were my own boy."

She seized my hand and held it as she spoke, and looked intently,
almost lovingly, on my face. Elsewhere I could have shivered at the
thought of her touch. Here, with the bent figure amid the gloomy
shadows of the den in which we sat, with the atmosphere of danger heavy
about us, I was moved by a glow of kindly feeling.

"I was a-listening to 'em," she continued in a low, earnest tone,
glancing around fearfully as if she had the thought that some one else
might be listening in turn. "I was a-listening, an' I heerd what they
says."

"Who said?" I inquired.

"The ones you knows on," she returned mysteriously.

"What ones?" I persisted, though I supposed she meant to indicate some
of my energetic enemies.

Mother Borton paid no attention to my question, and continued:

"I knowed they was a-talking about you, an' they says they would cut
your liver out if they found ye there."

"And where is there?" I asked with growing interest.

"That's what I was listening to find out," said Mother Borton. "I
couldn't hear much of what they says, but I hears enough to git an
idee."

"Well?" I said inquiringly as she hesitated.

She bent forward and hissed rather than whispered:

"They've found out where the boy is!"

"Are you certain?" I asked in sudden alarm.

"Pretty sure," she said, "pretty sure. Now you won't go near the place,
will ye, dearie?" she continued anxiously.

"You forget that I haven't the first idea where the boy is hidden," I
returned.

"Oh, Lord, yes! I reckon my mind's going," grunted Mother Borton. "But
I'm afeard of their knives for ye."

"I wish I could give warning," said I, much disturbed by the
information. "The protector of the boy ought to know about this. I'm
afraid I have done wrong."

Mother Borton looked at me fixedly.

"Don't you worry, my dear. She'll know about it all right."

Again the feeling stole over me that this woman knew more than she
told. But I knew that it was useless to question her directly. I
considered a moment, and then decided to trust her with a secret which
might surprise her into admitting her knowledge.

"I suspect that she knows already. I got a note to-night," said I,
drawing from my pocket the envelope I had received from the Unknown.

Mother Borton seized it, looked for a moment at the firm, delicate hand
of the address, and drew out the sheet that it inclosed.

"Read it, dearie," she said, handing it back after a scrutiny. "I can't
tell anything but big print."

I suspected that Mother Borton was trying to deceive me, but I repeated
the words of the note:

"Send six men to 8 o'clock boat. Come with one in hack to courtyard of
the Palace Hotel at 7:40."

Mother Borton's face changed not a whit at the reading, but at the end
she nodded. "She knows," she said.

"What does it mean?" I asked. "What is to happen?"

"Don't go, dearie--you won't go, will you?"

"Yes," I said. "I must go."

"Oh," she wailed; "you may be killed. You may never come back."

"Nonsense," said I. "In broad daylight, at the Palace Hotel? I'm much
more likely to be killed before I get home to-night."

Her earnestness impressed me, but my resolution was not shaken. Mother
Borton rested her head on the table in despair at my obstinacy.

"Well, if you will, you will," she said at last; "and an old woman's
warnings are nothing to you. But if you will put your head in the
traps, I'll do my best to make it safe after you git it there. You jist
sit still, honey." And she took the candle and went to a corner where
she seated herself at a stand.

Her shadow grew very large, and her straggling locks sent streamers of
blackness dancing on the grimy ceiling. The weird figure, thrown into
bold relief by the candle-lighted wall beyond it while all else was in
obscurity, gave an uncanny feeling that turned half to dread as I
looked upon her. What secret did she hold? What was the danger she
feared?

Mother Borton appeared to have some difficulty in arranging her words
to her liking. She seemed to be writing, but the pen did not flow
smoothly. At last she was done, and, sealing her work in an envelope,
she brought the flickering light once more to the table.

"Take that," she said, thrusting the envelope into my hand. "If you
find a one-eyed man when you git into trouble, give him that letter
I've writ ye, and it may do ye some good. It's the best I can do fer
ye. You'd better go now and git some sleep. You may need it."

I thanked Mother Borton and pressed her hand, and she held the candle
as I tiptoed down the stairs, joined my waiting guards, and went out
into the night.

The fresh, cool air of the early morning hours was grateful after the
close and tainted atmosphere of the den we had left, but I had other
things to think of than the pleasure of once more filling my lungs.

"Where are Barkhouse and Phillips?" I asked, as we turned our faces
toward the west.

Porter gave a low whistle, and, as this failed to bring an answer,
followed it with one louder and more prolonged. We listened, but no
response came.

"We'd better get out of here," said Wilson. "There's no telling what
may happen when they hear that whistle."

"Hist! What's that?" said Porter, drawing me back into a doorway.

There were running steps on the block above us, and I thought a shadow
darted from one side of the street to the other.

"There seem to be friends waiting for us," said I. "Just get a good
grip of your clubs, boys, and keep your revolvers handy in case they
think they have a call to stop us."

"Hold on," said Porter. "There's a gang of 'em there. I see a dozen of
'em, and if we're the ones they're after we had better cut for it."

"I believe you are right," said I, peering into the darkness. I could
see a confused mass, but whether of men or boxes I could only guess.

"We'll go up here, and you can cut around the other way," said Porter.
"There's no need for you to risk it."

"There's no need for any one to risk it. We'll cut together."

"This way then," said Wilson. "I know this part of town better than you
do. Run on your toes." And he darted past Borton's, and plunged into an
alley that led toward the north. Porter and I followed, as quietly as
possible, through the dark and noisome cut-off to Pacific Street.
Wilson turned toward the bay, and crossing the street at the next
corner followed the main thoroughfare to Broadway.

"I guess we're all right now," he gasped, as we turned again to the
west, "but we'd best keep to the middle of the street."

And a little later we were in sight of the house of mystery which
fronted, forbidding and gloomy as ever, on Montgomery Street.

"Where's Barkhouse?" I asked of Trent, who was on guard.

"He hasn't come in, sir. Phillips got here a bit ago, and I think he
has something to report."

As Phillips had been sent scouting with Barkhouse I thought it likely,
and called him to my room.

"No, sir, I didn't see Bob for nigh on an hour before I came back. Not
after we got to Borton's."

"I left him just outside the door," I said.

"Then you seen him after I did. I was following two fellows down to the
Den, you know, and that was the last I seen of Bob."

I understood that the Den was one of the meeting-places of the enemy.

"Did you find anything there?"

"Not a thing. The two fellows went in, but they didn't come out.
Another gang of three comes along and goes in, but none of 'em shows up
again, and I reckoned they'd gone to bed; so I takes it as a hint and
comes up here."

"I suppose it would have done no good to wait."

"You don't think Bob's been took, do you?"

I did feel uneasy over the absence of the stalwart scout, and but for
the orders I had received for the morning I should have had my forces
out to find him, or get a hostage in exchange. But as it was, I
dissembled my fears and made some reassuring reply.

At the earliest light of the morning I was once more astir, but half-
refreshed by my short and broken rest, and made my dispositions for the
day. I ordered Porter, Fitzhugh, Brown, Wilson, Lockhart and Abrams to
wait for me at the Oakland Ferry. Trent, who was still weak from his
wound, I put in charge of the home-guard, with Owens, Phillips and
Larson as his companions, and gave instructions to look for Barkhouse,
in case he did not return. Wainright I took with me, and hailing a hack
drove to the Palace Hotel.

There was a rattle of wagons and a bustle of departing guests as we
drove into the courtyard of the famous hostelry. The eight-o'clock boat
was to carry the passengers for the east-bound overland train, and the
outgoing travelers were filling the place with noise and confusion.

I stepped out of the hack, and looked about me anxiously. Was I to meet
the Unknown? or was I to take orders from some emissary of my hidden
employer? No answering eye met mine as I searched the place with eager
glance. Neither woman nor man of all the hurrying crowd had a thought
for me.

The hotel carriages rattled away, and comparative quiet once more fell
on the court. I looked impatiently about. Was there some mistake? Had
the plans been changed? But as I glanced at the clock that ticked the
seconds in the office of the hotel I saw that I had been early, and
that it was even now but twenty minutes to the hour.

The minute-hand had not swept past the figure VIII when the door
opened, there was a hurried step, and two women stood before me,
leading a child between them. Both women were closely veiled, and the
child was muffled and swathed till its features could not be seen.

One of the women was young, the other older--perhaps middle-aged. Both
were tall and well-made. I looked eagerly upon them, for one of them
must be the Unknown, the hidden employer whose task had carried Henry
Wilton to his death, who held my life in her hands, and who fought the
desperate battle with the power and hatred of Doddridge Knapp.

I was conscious of some disappointment, I could not say why. But
neither of the women filled the outline of the shadowy picture my fancy
had drawn of the Unknown. Neither gave impression of the force and
decision with which my fancy had endowed the woman who had challenged
the resources and defied the vengeance of the Wolf. So much I took to
my thoughts in the flash of an eye as they approached. It was to the
younger that I turned as the more likely to have the spirit of contest,
but it was the older who spoke.

"Here is your charge, Mr. Wilton," she said in a low, agitated voice.
As she spoke, I felt the faint suggestion of the peculiar perfume that
had greeted me from the brief letters of the Unknown.

"I am ready for orders," I said with a bow.

It was apparently a mere business matter between us. I had fancied
somehow that there had been a bond of friendship, as much as of
financial interest, between Henry Wilton and his employer, and felt the
sense of disappointment once more.

"Your orders are in this envelope," said the Unknown, hurriedly
thrusting a paper into my hand. "Drive for the boat, and read them on
the way. You have no time to lose."

The younger woman placed the child in the hack.

"Climb in, Wainwright," said I, eying the youngster unfavorably. "Will
he travel with us, ma'am? He's rather young."

"He'll go all right," said the elder woman with some agitation. "He
knows that he must. But treat him carefully. Now good-by."

"Oakland Ferry, driver," I cried, as I stepped into the hack and
slammed the door. And in a moment we were dashing out into New
Montgomery Street, and with a turn were on Market Street, rolling over
the rough cobbles toward the bay.


CHAPTER XXII

TRAILED


"Did you see him?" asked Wainwright, as the hack lurched into Market
Street and straightened its course for the ferry.

"Who?"

"Tom Terrill. He was behind that big pillar near the arch there. I saw
him just as the old lady spoke to you, but before I catches your eye,
he cuts and runs."

I felt of my revolver at this bit of news, and was consoled to have the
touch of it under my hand.

"I didn't see him," I said. "Keep the child between us, and shoot
anybody who tries to stop us or to climb into the hack. I must read my
orders."

"All right, sir," said Wainwright, making the child comfortable between
us.

I tore open the envelope and drew forth the scented paper with its
familiar, firm, yet delicate handwriting, and read the words:

"Take the train with your men for Livermore. Await orders at the hotel.
Protect the boy at all hazards."

Inclosed in the sheet were gold-notes to the value of five hundred
dollars--a thoughtful detail for which I was grateful at the outset of
such an expedition. I thrust the money into my pocket and pondered upon
the letter, wondering where Livermore might be. My knowledge of the
geography of California was exceedingly scant. I knew that Oakland lay
across the bay and that Brooklyn lay close by, a part of Oakland. I
remembered a dinner at Sacramento, and knew Los Angeles on the map.
Further than this my ideas were of the most hazy character, and
Livermore was nowhere to be found in my geographical memory.

I had some thought of questioning Wainwright, who was busy trying to
make friends with the child, but reflecting that I might be supposed to
know all about it I was silent. Wainwright's efforts to get the child
to speak were without success. The little thing might from its size
have been five years old, but it was dumb--frightened, as I supposed,
by the strangeness of the situation, and would speak no word.

This, then, was the mysterious boy whose fate was linked so closely
with my own; about whose body battled the hirelings of Doddridge Knapp
and of my unknown employer; for whom murder had been done, and for whom
perhaps many now living were to give up their lives.

Who was he? Whence had he come? What interests were bound up in his
life? Why was his body the focus of plot and counterplot, and its
possession disputed with a fierce earnestness that stopped at no crime?
Perhaps, could he be got to talk, the key of the mystery might be put
in my hands. Out of the mouth of the babe I might learn the secret that
had racked my brain for days and weeks.

And why was he put thus in my charge? What was I to do with him?
Whither was I to carry him? I reproached myself that I had not stopped
the Unknown to ask more questions, to get more light on the duties that
were expected of me. But the hack on a sudden pulled up, and I saw that
we were before the long, low, ugly wooden building that sat square
across Market Street as the gateway to San Francisco through which the
tide of travel must pass to and from the Golden City.

"Look out on both sides, Wainwright," I cautioned. "You carry the boy
and I'll shoot if there's any trouble. See that you keep him safe."

There were nearly ten minutes before the boat left, but the hurry for
tickets, the rush to check baggage, the shouts of hackmen and
expressmen, the rattle and confusion of the coming and departing
street-cars that centered at the ferry, made us inconspicuous among the
throng as we stepped out of the hack.

"Here Fitzhugh, Brown," I said, catching sight of two of my retainers,
"get close about. Have you seen anything--_any_ signs of the
enemy?"

"I haven't," said Fitzhugh, "but Abrams thought he saw Dotty Ferguson
over by the Fair Wind saloon there. Said he cut up Clay Street before
the rest of us caught sight of him--so maybe Abrams was off his nut."

"Quite likely," I admitted as we turned the jutting corner of the
building and came under shelter by the ticket office. "But keep a close
watch."

The other four retainers were in the passageway, and I called to the
ticket-seller for the tickets to Livermore. By the price I decided that
Livermore must be somewhere within fifty miles, and marshaling my troop
about the boy, marched into the waiting-room, past the door-keeper,
through the sheds, and on to the ferry boat.

I saw no signs of the enemy, and breathed freer as the last belated
passenger leaped aboard, the folding gang-plank was raised, and the
steamer, with a prolonged blast of the whistle, slid out into the
yellow-green waters of the bay.

The morning had dawned pleasant, but the sky was now becoming overcast.
The wind came fresh and strong from the south. The white-capped waves
were beginning to toss and fret the shallow waters, and the air gave
promise of storm. We could see men busy making all things snug on the
vessels that swung uneasily to their anchors in the harbor, and tugs
were rushing about, puffing noisily over nothing, or here and there
towing some vessel to a better position to meet the rising gale. The
panorama of the bay, with the smoke-laden city, grim and dark behind,
the forest of masts lining its shore, the yellow-green waters, dotted
here and there with ships tossing sharply above the white-capped waves
that chased each other toward the north, the cloud squadrons flying up
in scattered array from the south, and the Alameda hills lying somber
and dark under the gray canopy of the eastern sky in front, had a charm
that took my mind for the time from the mysterious enterprise that lay
before me.

"Keep together, boys," I cautioned my retainers as I recalled the
situation. "Has any one seen signs of the other gang?"

There was a general murmur in the negative.

"Well, Abrams, will you slip around and see if any of them got aboard?
There's no such thing as being comfortable until we are sure."

In the hurry and excitement of preparation and departure, the orders I
had given and received, and the work that filled every moment, I had
been conscious of the uneasy burden of a task forgotten. I had surely
neglected something. Yet for my life I could not see that we lacked
anything. I had my seven retainers, the boy was safe with us, I had my
purse, we were well-armed, and every man had his ticket to Livermore.
But at last the cause of my troubles came to my mind.

"Great Scott!" I thought. "It's Doddridge Knapp. That little engagement
in the stock-market is casting its shadow before."

It seemed likely indeed that the demands of my warring employers would
clash here as well as in the conflict over the boy.

Yet with all the vengeful feeling that filled my heart as I looked on
the child and called up the memory of my murdered friend, I could but
feel a pang of regret at the prospect that Doddridge Knapp's fortune
should be placed in hazard through any unfaithfulness of mine. He had
trusted me with his plans and his money. And the haunting thought that
his fortune was staked on the venture, and that his ruin might follow,
with the possible beggary of Luella and Mrs. Knapp, should I fail him
at tomorrow's crisis, weighed on my spirits.

My uncomfortable reflections were broken by the clanging engine-bells
and the forward movement of the passengers as the steamboat passed into
the slip at Long Wharf.

"Stand together, boys," I cautioned my men. "Keep back of the crowd.
Wainwright will take the boy, and the rest of you see that nobody gets
near him."

"All right," said Wainwright, lifting the child in his arms. "It will
take a good man to get him away from me."

"Where's Abrams?" I asked, noting that only six of my men were at hand.

"You sent him forward," said Lockhart.

"Not for all day."

"Well, he hasn't been seen since you told him to find out who's
aboard."

I was a little vexed at the seeming neglect of my retainer, and as we
had come down the rear stairs to avoid the crowd and marched through
the driveway on the lower deck, I cast a glance into the bar-room with
the expectation of finding him engaged in the gentle art of fortifying
his courage. But no sign of the missing man met my eye.

"It's no use to wait for him," I growled. "But the next man that takes
French leave had better look somewhere else for a job, for by the great
horn spoon, he's no man of mine."

We marched off the boat in the rear of the crowd, I in no pleasant
humor, and the men silent in reflection of my displeasure. And with
some difficulty we found seats together in a forward coach. I arranged
my men in three seats on one side of the car and two on the other,
Wainwright taking the center of the three with the boy, guarded thus
front and rear, while I sat opposite and one seat behind, where I could
observe any attempt at interference, with Lockhart in front of me. I
judged that any one who tried to attack the position would have a
lively five minutes on his hands.

The train was the east-bound overland, and it seemed hours before the
baggage was taken aboard and the signal given to start. I grew uneasy,
but as my watch assured me that only ten minutes had passed when the
engine gave the first gentle pull at the train, I suspected that I was
losing the gift of patience. The train had not gathered headway before
a man bent beside me, and Abrams' voice spoke softly in my ear.

"There are two of 'em aboard."

"Yes? Where did you find them?" I asked.

"In the stoke hole. I hid behind a bench till every one had gone and
saw 'em crawl out. They bribed a fireman or deck-hand or some one to
keep 'em under cover. They got off the boat at the last minute, and I
sneaked after 'em."

"And they're on the train?"

"Yes, three cars back,--next to the sleepers. Shall we chuck 'em
overboard as soon as we get out of Oakland?"

"Not unless we are attacked," I returned. "Just sit down by the rear
door and give the signal if they come this way. There'll be no trouble
if they are only two."

My precautions were not called to a test, and we reached Livermore at
near eleven o'clock, without further incident than a report from Abrams
that the spies of the enemy got off the train at every station and
watched for our landing. Yet when we stood on the platform of the bare
little station at Livermore and saw the yellow cars crawling away on
their eastward journey, we looked in vain for the men who had tracked
us.

"Fooled, by thunder!" said Fitzhugh with a laugh in which the others
joined. "They're off for Sacramento."

"They'll have to earn their money to find us there," said Abrams.

The gray day had become grayer, and the wind blew fresh in our faces
with the smell of rain heavy upon it, as we sought the hotel. It was a
bare country place, yet trees grew by the hotel and there were vines
climbing about its side, and it looked as though we might be
comfortable for a day, should we have to stay there so long.

"Plenty of room," said the landlord rubbing his hands.

"Are there any letters here for Henry Wilton?" I inquired, bethinking
me that orders might have been sent me already.

"No, sir."

"Nor telegrams?"

"O Lord, no, sir. We don't have telegrams here unless somebody's dead."

"You may give me Mr. Wilton's mail if any comes," I said.

The landlord led the way up the stairs, and beguiled me by informing me
what a fine house he had and how hard the times were.

"We wish a large room, you know, where we can be together," I said,
"and sleeping-rooms adjoining."

"Here's just the place for you," said the landlord, taking the way to
the end of the upper hall and throwing open a double door. "This is the
up-stairs parlor, but I can let you have it. There's this large bedroom
opening off it,--the corner bedroom, sir,--and this small one here at
this side opens into the parlor and the hall. Perhaps you would like
this other one, too."

He seemed ready and anxious to rent us the whole house.

"This is enough for our comfort," I assured him.

"There'll be a fire here in a minute," said the landlord, regarding the
miserable little stove with an eye of satisfaction that I attributed to
its economical proportions.

"This is good enough," said Lockhart, looking about approvingly at the
prim horsehair furniture that gave an awesome dignity to the parlor.

"Beats our quarters below all hollow," said Fitzhugh. "And no need to
have your gun where you can grab it when the first man says boo!"

"Don't get that idea into your head," said I. "Just be ready for
anything that comes. We're not out of the woods yet, by a long way."

"They've gone on to Sacramento," laughed Fitzhugh; and the others
nodded in sympathy.

"Indeed?" I said. "How many of you could have missed seeing a party of
nine get off at a way-station on this line?"

There was silence.

"If there's any one here who thinks he would have missed us when he was
set to look for us, just let him speak up," I continued with good-
humored raillery.

"I guess you're right," said Fitzhugh. "They couldn't well have missed
seeing us."

"Exactly. And they're not off for Sacramento, and not far from
Livermore."

"Well, they're only two," said Lockhart.

"How long will it take to get a dozen more up here?" I asked.

"There's a train to Niles about noon," said one of the men. "They could
get over from there in an hour or two more by hard riding."

"The Los Angeles train comes through about dark," said another.

"I think, gentlemen," said I politely, "that we'd best look out for our
defenses. There's likely to be a stormy evening, I should judge."

"Well," growled Wainwright, "we can look out for ourselves as well as
the next fellow."

"If there's bloody crowns going round, the other gang will get its
share," said Fitzhugh. And the men about me nodded.

I was cheered to see that they needed nobody to do their fighting,
however advisable it might be to do their thinking by deputy.

"Very good," I said. "Now I'll just look about the town a bit. You may
come with me, if you please, Fitzhugh."

"Yes, sir."

"And Abrams and Lockhart may go scouting if they like."

Abrams and Lockhart thought they would like.

"Better keep together," I continued. "What's the earliest time any one
could get here?"

"Two o'clock--if they drove over."

"I'll be around here by that time. You, Abrams, can look out for the
road and see who comes into town."

"All right, sir," said Abrams. "There won't anybody get in here without
I catch sight of him."

Lockhart nodded his assent to the boast, and after cautioning the men
who were left behind we sallied forth.

The town was a straggling, not unpleasing country place. The business
street was depressing with its stores closed and its saloons open. A
few loafers hung about the doors of the dram-shops, but the moist
breath of the south wind eddying about with its burden of dust and dead
leaves made indoors a more comfortable location, and through the blue
haze of tobacco smoke we could see men gathered inside. Compared with
the dens I had found about my lodgings in the city, the saloons were
orderly; but nevertheless they offended my New England sense of the
fitness of things. In the city I had scarcely known that there was a
Sunday. But here I was reminded, and felt that something was amiss.

In the residence streets I was better pleased. Man had done little, but
nature was prodigal to make up for his omissions. The buildings were
poor and flimsy, but in the middle of December the flowers bloomed,
vines were green, bushes sent forth their leaves, and the beauty of the
scene even under the leaden skies and rising gale made it a delight to
the eye.

"Not much of a place," said Fitzhugh, looking disdainfully at the
buildings. "Hello! Here's Dick Thatcher. How are you, Dick? It's a year
of Sundays that I haven't seen you. This is--er--a friend of mine,
Thatcher,--you needn't mention that you've seen us." And Fitzhugh
stumbled painfully over the recollection that we were incognito, and
became silent in confusion.

"We needn't be strangers to Mr. Thatcher," I laughed. "My name is
Wilton. Of course you won't mention our business."

"Oh, no, Mr. Wilton," said Thatcher, impressed, and shifting the quid
of tobacco in his lantern jaws. "Of course not."

"And you needn't say anything of our being here at all," I continued.
"It might spoil the trade."

"Mum's the word," said Thatcher. "I'll not let a soul know till you say
'Let 'er go.' O Lord! I hope the trade goes through. We want a lot more
capital here."

Mr. Thatcher began to scratch his head and to expectorate tobacco-juice
copiously, and I suspected he was wondering what the secret might be
that he was not to betray. So I made haste to say:

"Is this stable yours?"

"Yes, sir," said Thatcher eagerly. "I've been running it nigh on two
years now."

"Pretty good business, eh, Dick?" said Fitzhugh, looking critically
about.

"Nothin' to brag on," said Thatcher disparagingly. "You don't make a
fortune running a livery stable in these parts--times are too hard."

And then Mr. Thatcher unbent, and between periods of vigorous
mastication at his cud, introduced us to his horses and eagerly
explained the advantages that his stable possessed over any other this
side of Oakland.

"Very good," I said. "We may want something in your line later. We can
find you here at any time, I suppose."

"O Lord, yes. I live here days and sleep here nights. But if you want
to take a look at the property before it gets a wetting you'll have to
be pretty spry."

My suggestion of a trade had misled the worthy stableman into the
impression that I was considering the purchase of real estate.

"I'll see about it," I said.

"There's a big rain coming on, sure," he said warningly, as we turned
back to the hotel.

It was a little after one o'clock, but as we approached our quarters
Lockhart came running toward me.

"What is it?" I asked, as he panted, out of breath.

"There's a special train just come in," he said; "an engine and one
car. It's at the station now."

"So? Did any of our friends come on it?"

"Abrams has gone down to find out."

"Come along then," said I. "We'll see what is to be seen."

"Don't!" cried Fitzhugh, catching my arm. "They might get you."

"Nonsense," said I, shaking off his grasp. "Have your revolver ready,
and follow me."


CHAPTER XXIII

A PIECE OF STRATEGY


A few idlers were on the platform of the station as we approached with
much apparent unconcern, our hands in our overcoat pockets where the
weapons lay.

"Where's the train?" I asked, looking at the bare track.

"Yonder," grunted a native, pointing his thumb lazily up the road where
the engine lay by the watering tank, slaking its thirst.

"Well, just let me and Lockhart walk ahead," said Fitzhugh gruffly, as
we started along the track. "I shouldn't have the first idea what we
was here for if you was to be knocked over."

Fitzhugh could not be much more in the dark on this point than I, but I
let him have his way. If some one was to be shot, I was ready to resign
my claim to the distinction in favor of the first comer.

There were perhaps a score of people about the car.

"There's Abrams," said Lockhart.

"There's no danger, then," said Fitzhugh with a grin. "See, he's
beckoning to us."

We hastened forward eagerly.

"What is it?" I asked.

"There's no one here," said Abrams, with a puzzled look.

"Well, this car didn't come alone," I returned. "Have you asked the
engineer?"

"Yes."

"And the fireman?"

"Yes."

"And they say--"

"That it's against the rules to talk."

"Nonsense; I'll see them myself." And I went forward to the engine.

The engineer was as close-mouthed as though words were going at a
dollar apiece and the market bounding upward. He declined dinner, could
not be induced to come and take a drink, and all that could be got out
of him was that he was going back to Niles, where he would stop until
he got orders from the superintendent.

When I tried to question the fireman, the engineer recovered his
tongue, and had so many orders to be attended to that my words were
lost in a rattle of coal and clang of iron.

And the engine, having drunk its fill, changed its labored breathing to
a hissing and swishing of steam that sent the hot vapor far on both
sides, and then gathering speed, puffed its swift way back the road by
which it had come, leaving the car deserted on a siding.

"Here's a go!" cried Fitzhugh. "A regular puzzler!"

"Guess it's none of the gang, after all," said Lockhart.

Abrams shook his head.

"Don't you fool yourself," he said. "They've landed below here, and
maybe they're in town while we've got our mouths open, fly-catching
around an empty car."

"Good boy, Abrams," I said. "My opinion exactly."

"And what's to be done, then?" he asked anxiously.

"For the first thing, to visit the telegraph office at once."

The operator was just locking his little room in the station as we came
up.

"No, sir, no telegrams," he said; "none for anybody."

"This is a new way of running trains," I said with a show of
indifference, nodding toward the empty car.

"Oh, there was a party came up," said the agent; "a dozen fellows or
more. Bill said they took a fancy to get off a mile or more down here,
and as they were an ugly-looking crew he didn't say anything to stop
them."

"I don't see what they can be doing up in this part of the country," I
returned innocently.

"I guess they know their business--anyway, it's none of mine," said the
agent. "Do you go in here, sir? Well, it will save you from a wetting."

We had been walking toward the hotel, and the chatty agent left us
under its veranda just as the light drops began to patter down in the
dust of the road, and to dim the outlines of the distant hills.

"I reckon that's the gang," said Fitzhugh.

"I told you so," said Abrams. "I knew it was one of Tom Terrill's
sneaky tricks."

"Shall we take a look for 'em?" asked Lockhart.

"There's no need," I replied.

The home guard of our party received the news calmly.

Wainwright had established a _modus vivendi_ with his young
charge, and I saw that he managed to get a word out of him now and
then. I had to abandon the theory that the boy was dumb, but I
suspected that it was fear rather than discretion that bridled his
tongue.

"Do you think the gang have got into town?" asked one.

"They'll have wet jackets if they are on the road," I returned, looking
at the rain outside.

"Hadn't we better find out?" inquired Wainwright.

"Are you in a hurry?" I asked in turn. "The landlord has promised to
send up a good dinner in a few minutes."

"But you see--"

"Yes, I see," I interrupted. "I see this--that they are here, that
there are a dozen or more of them, and that they are ready for any
deviltry. What more can we find out by roaming over the country?"

Wainwright nodded his agreement with me.

"And then," I continued, "they won't try to do anything until after
dark--not before the middle of the night, I should say--or until the
townspeople have gone to bed."

"You're right, sir," said Abrams. "A dark night and a clear field suits
that gang best."

"Well, here's the dinner," said I; "so you can make yourselves easy.
Porter, you may keep an eye on the stairway, and Brown may watch from
the windows. The rest of us will fall to."

In the midst of the meal Porter came in.

"Darby Meeker's in the office below," he announced.

"Very good," I said. "Just take Fitzhugh and Wilson with you, and ask
Mr. Meeker to join us."

The men looked blank. Porter was the first to speak.

"You don't mean--"

"I mean to bring him up here," I said blandly, rising from the table.
"I suppose, though, it's my place as host to do the honors."

"No--no," came in chorus from the men.

"Come on, Porter--Fitzhugh--Wilson," I said; and then added sharply,
"sit down, the rest of you! We don't need a regiment to ask a man to
dinner."

The others sank back into their seats, and the three I had named
followed me meekly down the hall and stairs.

I had never had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Meeker face to face, but I
doubted not that I should be able to pick him out. I was right. I knew
him the moment I saw him. He was tall and broad of shoulder, long of
arm, shifty of eye, and his square jaw was covered with a stubby red
beard. His color heightened as we walked into the office and cut off
the two doors of retreat.

"An unexpected pleasure," I said, giving him good day.

His hand slipped to the side pocket of his sack coat, and then back
again, and he made a remark in an undertone that I fear was not
intended for a pleasant greeting.

"There's a little dinner of a few friends going on up stairs," I said
politely. "Won't you join us?"

Meeker scowled a moment with evident surprise.

"No, I won't," he growled.

"But it is a sad case for a man to dine alone," I said smoothly. "You
will be very welcome."

"No, sir," said he, looking furtively at my men drawing near, between
him and the doors.

"But I insist," I said politely. Then I added in a lower tone meant for
him alone: "Resist, you hound, and I'll have you carried up by your
four legs."

His face was working with fear and passion. He looked at the blocked
way with the eye of a baited animal.

"I'll be damned first!" he cried. And seizing a chair he whirled
around, dashed it through a window, and leaped through the jagged panes
before I could spring forward to stop him.

"Round in front, men!" I cried, motioning my followers to sally through
the door. "Bring him back!" And an instant later I leaped through the
window after the flying enemy.

There was a fall of six feet, and as I landed on a pile of broken
glass, a bit shaken, with the rain beating on my head, it was a few
seconds before I recovered my wits. When I looked, no one was in sight.
I heard the men running on the porch of the hotel, so the enemy was not
to be sought that way. I set off full speed for the other corner, fifty
yards away, half suspecting an ambush. But at the turn I stopped. The
rain-soaked street was empty for a block before me. Far down the next
block a plodding figure under an umbrella bent to the gusts of the wind
and tried to ward off the driving spray of the storm. But Darby Meeker
had disappeared as though the earth had swallowed him up.

"Where is he?" cried Porter, the first of my men to reach my side.

I shrugged my shoulders. "I haven't seen him."

"He didn't come our way--that I'll swear," panted Fitzhugh.

"He was out of sight before I got my feet," said I. "They must have a
hiding-place close by."

"He must have jumped the fence here," said Wilson, pointing to a
cottage just beyond the hotel's back yard. "I'll see about it." And he
vaulted the pickets and looked about the place.

He was back in a minute with a shake of the head.

"Well, it's no great matter," I said. "We can get along without another
guest for the afternoon. Now get under cover, boys, or you'll be soaked
through."

The landlord met us with an air half-anxious, half-angry.

"I'd like to know who's to pay for this!" he cried. "There's a sash and
four panes of glass gone to smithereens."

"The gentleman who just went out will be glad to pay for it, if you'll
call it to his attention," I said blandly.

"I'll have the law on him!" shouted the landlord, getting red in the
face. "And if he's a friend of yours you'd better settle for him, or it
will be the worse for him."

"I'm afraid he isn't a friend of mine," I said dubiously. "He didn't
appear to take that view of it."

"That's so," admitted the landlord. "But I don't know his name, and
somebody's got to settle for that glass."

I obliged the landlord with Mr. Meeker's name, and with the bestowal of
this poor satisfaction returned to the interrupted meal.

"Well, I reckon he wouldn't have been very pleasant company if you'd
got him," said one of the men consolingly, when we had told our tale of
the search for a guest.

"I suspect he would be less disagreeable in here than out with his
gang," I returned dryly, and turned the subject. I did not care to
discuss my plan to get a hostage now that it had failed.

The gray day plashed slowly toward nightfall. The rain fell by fits and
starts, now with a sudden dash, now gently as though it were only of
half a mind to fall at all. But the wind blew strong, and the clouds
that drove up from the far south were dark enough to have borne threats
of a coming deluge.

As the time wore on I suspected that my men grew uneasy, wondering what
we were there for, and why I did not make some move. Then I reflected
that this could not be. It was I who was wondering. The men were
accustomed to let me do their thinking for them, and could be troubled
no more here than in San Francisco. But what was I expected to do?
Where could my orders be? Had they gone astray? Had the plans of the
Unknown come to disaster through the difficulty of getting the
telegraph on Sunday? The office here was closed. The Unknown, being a
woman, I ungallantly reflected, would have neglected to take so small a
circumstance into consideration, and she might even now be besieging
the telegraph office in San Francisco in a vain effort to get word to
Livermore.

On this thought I bestirred myself, and after much trouble had speech
with the young man who combined in his person the offices of telegraph
operator, station master, ticket seller, freight agent and baggage
handler for the place. He objected to opening the office "out of office
hours."

"There might be inducements discovered that would make it worth your
while, I suppose?" I said, jingling some silver carelessly in my
pocket.

He smiled.

"Well, I don't care if I do," he replied. "Whatever you think is fair,
of course."

It was more than I thought fair, but the agent thawed into friendship
at once, and expressed his readiness to "call San Francisco" till he
got an answer if it took till dark.

I might have saved my trouble and my coin. San Francisco replied with
some emphasis that there was nothing for me, and never had been, and
who was I, anyhow?

There was nothing to be done. I must possess my soul in patience in the
belief that the Unknown knew what she was about and that I should get
my orders in due time--probably after nightfall, when darkness would
cover any necessary movement.

But if I could shift the worry and responsibility of the present
situation on the Unknown, there was another trouble that loomed larger
and more perplexing before my mind with each passing hour. If the
mission of to-day were prolonged into the morrow, what was to become of
the Omega deal, and where would Doddridge Knapp's plans of fortune be
found? I smiled to think that I should concern myself with this
question when I knew that Doddridge Knapp's men were waiting and
watching for my first movement with orders that probably did not stop
at murder itself. Yet my trouble of mind increased with the passing
time as I vainly endeavored to devise some plan to meet the difficulty
that had been made for me.

But as I saw no way to straighten out this tangle, I turned my
attention to the boy in the hope of getting from him some information
that might throw light on the situation.

"He's as shy as a young quail," said Wainwright, when my advances were
received in stubborn silence.

"You seem to be getting along pretty well with him," I suggested.

"Yes, sir; he'll talk a bit with me, but he's as close-mouthed a chap
as you'll find in the state, sir, unless it's one of them deef and
dummies."

I made another unsuccessful attempt to cultivate the acquaintance of my
charge.

"You've got a day's job before you if you get him to open his head,"
said Wainwright, amused at the failure of my efforts as an infant-
charmer.

"What has he been talking about?" I inquired, somewhat disgusted.

"The train," chuckled Wainwright. "Blamed if I think he's seen anything
else since he started."

"The train?"

"Yes; the one we come on. He's been talking about it, and wondering
what I'd do with it and without it till I reckon we've covered pretty
near everything that could happen to a fellow with a train or without
one."

"Is that the only subject of interest?"

