And Mr. Bolton yielded.  He could never refuse such appeals.  If he had
befriended a man once and been cheated by him, that man appeared to have
a claim upon him forever.  He shrank, however, from telling his wife what
he had done on this occasion, for he knew that if any person was more
odious than Small to his family it was Bigler.

"Philip tells me," Mrs. Bolton said that evening, "that the man Bigler
has been with thee again to-day.  I hope thee will have nothing more to
do with him."

"He has been very unfortunate," replied Mr. Bolton, uneasily.

"He is always unfortunate, and he is always getting thee into trouble.
But thee didn't listen to him again?"

"Well, mother, his family is in want, and I lent him my name--but I took
ample security.  The worst that can happen will be a little
inconvenience."

Mrs. Bolton looked grave and anxious, but she did not complain or
remonstrate; she knew what a "little inconvenience" meant, but she knew
there was no help for it.  If Mr. Bolton had been on his way to market to
buy a dinner for his family with the only dollar he had in the world in
his pocket, he would have given it to a chance beggar who asked him for
it.  Mrs. Bolton only asked (and the question showed that she was no mere
provident than her husband where her heart was interested),

"But has thee provided money for Philip to use in opening the coal mine?"

"Yes, I have set apart as much as it ought to cost to open the mine,
as much as we can afford to lose if no coal is found.  Philip has the
control of it, as equal partner in the venture, deducting the capital
invested.  He has great confidence in his success, and I hope for his
sake he won't be disappointed."

Philip could not but feel that he was treated very much like one of the
Bolton-family--by all except Ruth.  His mother, when he went home after
his recovery from his accident, had affected to be very jealous of Mrs.
Bolton, about whom and Ruth she asked a thousand questions
--an affectation of jealousy which no doubt concealed a real heartache,
which comes to every mother when her son goes out into the world and
forms new ties.  And to Mrs. Sterling; a widow, living on a small income
in a remote Massachusetts village, Philadelphia was a city of many
splendors.  All its inhabitants seemed highly favored, dwelling in ease
and surrounded by superior advantages.  Some of her neighbors had
relations living in Philadelphia, and it seemed to them somehow a
guarantee of respectability to have relations in Philadelphia.
Mrs. Sterling was not sorry to have Philip make his way among such
well-to-do people, and she was sure that no good fortune could be too
good for his deserts.

"So, sir," said Ruth, when Philip came from New York, "you have been
assisting in a pretty tragedy.  I saw your name in the papers.  Is this
woman a specimen of your western friends?"

"My only assistance," replied Philip, a little annoyed, was in trying to
keep Harry out of a bad scrape, and I failed after all.  He walked into
her trap, and he has been punished for it.  I'm going to take him up to
Ilium to see if he won't work steadily at one thing, and quit his
nonsense."

"Is she as beautiful as the newspapers say she is?"

"I don't know, she has a kind of beauty--she is not like--'

"Not like Alice?"

"Well, she is brilliant; she was called the handsomest woman in
Washington--dashing, you know, and sarcastic and witty.  Ruth, do you
believe a woman ever becomes a devil?"

"Men do, and I don't know why women shouldn't.  But I never saw one."

"Well, Laura Hawkins comes very near it.  But it is dreadful to think of
her fate."

"Why, do you suppose they will hang a woman?  Do you suppose they will be
so barbarous as that?"

"I wasn't thinking of that--it's doubtful if a New York jury would find a
woman guilty of any such crime.  But to think of her life if she is
acquitted."

"It is dreadful," said Ruth, thoughtfully, "but the worst of it is that
you men do not want women educated to do anything, to be able to earn an
honest living by their own exertions.  They are educated as if they were
always to be petted and supported, and there was never to be any such
thing as misfortune.  I suppose, now, that you would all choose to have
me stay idly at home, and give up my profession."

"Oh, no," said Philip, earnestly, "I  respect your resolution.  But,
Ruth, do you think you would be happier or do more good in following your
profession than in having a home of your own?"

"What is to hinder having a home of my, own?"

"Nothing, perhaps, only you never would be in it--you would be away day
and night, if you had any practice; and what sort of a home would that
make for your husband?"

"What sort of a home is it for the wife whose husband is always away
riding about in his doctor's gig?"

"Ah, you know that is not fair.  The woman makes the home."

Philip and Ruth often had this sort of discussion, to which Philip was
always trying to give a personal turn.  He was now about to go to Ilium
for the season, and he did not like to go without some assurance from
Ruth that she might perhaps love him some day; when he was worthy of it,
and when he could offer her something better than a partnership in his
poverty.

"I should work with a great deal better heart, Ruth," he said the morning
he was taking leave, "if I knew you cared for me a little."

Ruth was looking down; the color came faintly to her cheeks, and she
hesitated.  She needn't be looking down, he thought, for she was ever so
much shorter than tall Philip.

"It's not much of a place, Ilium," Philip went on, as if a little
geographical remark would fit in here as well as anything else, "and I
shall have plenty of time to think over the responsibility I have taken,
and--" his observation did not seem to be coming out any where.

But Ruth looked up, and there was a light in her eyes that quickened
Phil's pulse.  She took his hand, and said with serious sweetness:

"Thee mustn't lose heart, Philip."  And then she added, in another mood,
"Thee knows I graduate in the summer and shall have my diploma.  And if
any thing happens--mines explode sometimes--thee can send for me.
Farewell."

The opening of the Ilium coal mine was begun with energy, but without
many omens of success.  Philip was running a tunnel into the breast of
the mountain, in faith that the coal stratum ran there as it ought to.
How far he must go in he believed he knew, but no one could tell exactly.
Some of the miners said that they should probably go through the
mountain, and that the hole could be used for a railway tunnel.  The
mining camp was a busy place at any rate.  Quite a settlement of board
and log shanties had gone up, with a blacksmith shop, a small machine
shop, and a temporary store for supplying the wants of the workmen.
Philip and Harry pitched a commodious tent, and lived in the full
enjoyment of the free life.

There is no difficulty in digging a bole in the ground, if you have money
enough to pay for the digging, but those who try this sort of work are
always surprised at the large amount of money necessary to make a small
hole.  The earth is never willing to yield one product, hidden in her
bosom, without an equivalent for it.  And when a person asks of her coal,
she is quite apt to require gold in exchange.

It was exciting work for all concerned in it.  As the tunnel advanced
into the rock every day promised to be the golden day.  This very blast
might disclose the treasure.

The work went on week after week, and at length during the night as well
as the daytime.  Gangs relieved each other, and the tunnel was every
hour, inch by inch and foot by foot, crawling into the mountain.  Philip
was on the stretch of hope and excitement.  Every pay day he saw his
funds melting away, and still there was only the faintest show of what
the miners call "signs."

The life suited Harry, whose buoyant hopefulness was never disturbed.
He made endless calculations, which nobody could understand, of the
probable position of the vein.  He stood about among the workmen with the
busiest air.  When he was down at Ilium he called himself the engineer of
the works, and he used to spend hours smoking his pipe with the Dutch
landlord on the hotel porch, and astonishing the idlers there with the
stories of his railroad operations in Missouri.  He talked with the
landlord, too, about enlarging his hotel, and about buying some village
lots, in the prospect of a rise, when the mine was opened.  He taught the
Dutchman how to mix a great many cooling drinks for the summer time, and
had a bill at the hotel, the growing length of which Mr. Dusenheimer
contemplated with pleasant anticipations.  Mr. Brierly was a very useful
and cheering person wherever he went.

Midsummer arrived: Philip could report to Mr. Bolton only progress, and
this was not a cheerful message for him to send to Philadelphia in reply
to inquiries that he thought became more and more anxious.  Philip
himself was a prey to the constant fear that the money would give out
before the coal was struck.

At this time Harry was summoned to New York, to attend the trial of Laura
Hawkins.  It was possible that Philip would have to go also, her lawyer
wrote, but they hoped for a postponement.  There was important evidence
that they could not yet obtain, and he hoped the judge would not force
them to a trial unprepared.  There were many reasons for a delay, reasons
which of course are never mentioned, but which it would seem that a New
York judge sometimes must understand, when he grants a postponement upon
a motion that seems to the public altogether inadequate.

Harry went, but he soon came back.  The trial was put off.  Every week we
can gain, said the learned counsel, Braham, improves our chances.  The
popular rage never lasts long.


CHAPTER XLIX.

"We've struck it!"

This was the announcement at the tent door that woke Philip out of a
sound sleep at dead of night, and shook all the sleepiness out of him in
a trice.

"What!  Where is it?  When?  Coal?  Let me see it.  What quality is it?"
were some of the rapid questions that Philip poured out as he hurriedly
dressed.  "Harry, wake up, my boy, the coal train is coming.  Struck it,
eh?  Let's see?"

The foreman put down his lantern, and handed Philip a black lump.  There
was no mistake about it, it was the hard, shining anthracite, and its
freshly fractured surface, glistened in the light like polished steel.
Diamond never shone with such lustre in the eyes of Philip.

Harry was exuberant, but Philip's natural caution found expression in his
next remark.

"Now, Roberts, you are sure about this?"

"What--sure that it's coal?"

"O, no, sure that it's the main vein."

"Well, yes.  We took it to be that"

"Did you from the first?"

"I can't say we did at first.  No, we didn't.  Most of the indications
were there, but not all of them, not all of them.  So we thought we'd
prospect a bit."

"Well?"

"It was tolerable thick, and looked as if it might be the vein--looked as
if it ought to be the vein.  Then we went down on it a little.  Looked
better all the time."

"When did you strike it?"

"About ten o'clock."

"Then you've been prospecting about four hours."

"Yes, been sinking on it something over four hours."

"I'm afraid you couldn't go down very far in four hours--could you?"

"O yes--it's a good deal broke up, nothing but picking and gadding
stuff."

"Well, it does look encouraging, sure enough--but then the lacking
indications--"

"I'd rather we had them, Mr. Sterling, but I've seen more than one good
permanent mine struck without 'em in my time."

"Well, that is encouraging too."

"Yes, there was the Union, the Alabama and the Black Mohawk--all good,
sound mines, you know--all just exactly like this one when we first
struck them."

"Well, I begin to feel a good deal more easy.  I guess we've really got
it.  I remember hearing them tell about the Black Mohawk."

"I'm free to say that I believe it, and the men all think so too.  They
are all old hands at this business."

"Come Harry, let's go up and look at it, just for the comfort of it,"
said Philip.  They came back in the course of an hour, satisfied and
happy.

There was no more sleep for them that night.  They lit their pipes, put a
specimen of the coal on the table, and made it a kind of loadstone of
thought and conversation.

"Of course," said Harry, "there will have to be a branch track built, and
a 'switch-back' up the hill."

"Yes, there will be no trouble about getting the money for that now.  We
could sell-out tomorrow for a handsome sum.  That sort of coal doesn't go
begging within a mile of a rail-road.  I wonder if Mr. Bolton' would
rather sell out or work it?"

"Oh, work it," says Harry, "probably the whole mountain is coal now
you've got to it."

"Possibly it might not be much of a vein after all," suggested Philip.

"Possibly it is; I'll bet it's forty feet thick.  Each individual is so far
right end, where he was part of the general purpose of us could.

Because the satisfaction for which all accessible in the same way, is finally
in the certainty of the individual consciousness and its underlying purpose
beyond barriers - for a world humanity and purpose - even to address its
own value as a _Träger_ higher idea, as executor of a divine will to feel.
At this point, meet ethics and metaphysics. So of course we come to an
autonomous legal community through organized community, which is in
the laws and culture is embodied state. Once the legal organization of
the above discussed conditions are met, it is the highest external moral
good, and the other communities, such as family, professional community,
religious community, etc., must be necessary with their legal systems
contained in it, insofar as they are moral communities. Otherwise would
be so valuable to the individual purposes to which he always only
associations in sub-socialized, not included in the overall purpose.

Certainly we have here is an ideal state to be done, but not utopian, but
with a mental nature of our secondary scientific ideals, however,
achieving a result of the shortcomings of human nature is impossible,
but we are approaching, if we succeed, a civic education organization,
which after such objectives is addressed. In this business like us to
strengthen the awareness, fact that in the course of human culture
is the state organization in the direction of a better legal and
cultural society has developed, albeit not straight, but under some
setbacks, which an entity of pure power as the state always necessary
to be exposed.

The opposition, which themselves against claims from my final goal
of education rises again, stems from a misunderstanding, which is,
despite my repeated explanations of the incoming state concept and
the concept of civic education never _Erziehung to achieving the
highest ethical idea of the goods in the outer well-understood
services of the given State versteht_, but only the blind, education
for the service of a permanent government established organism.

Once the honest intention is that this fundamental difference to understand
is also the misconception disappear.

Also another misconception then dissolves the dominates those which the
goal of all education is not about how Herbart on the strength of character
of morality, but in education the autonomous personality look, or how
school Gaudig expresses itself in _Selbst_bestimmung in the provision
»Idealität one's own ego."

Who self-determination as an educational purpose statements must be the
objective of this self-determination clearly define.
She was nothing but a woman, and did
not know how much of the business prosperity of the world is only a,
bubble of credit and speculation, one scheme helping to float another
which is no better than it, and the whole liable to come to naught and
confusion as soon as the busy brain that conceived them ceases its power
to devise, or when some accident produces a sudden panic.

"Perhaps, I shall be the stay of the family, yet," said Ruth, with an
approach to gaiety; "When we move into a little house in town, will thee
let me put a little sign on the door: DR. RUTH BOLTON?"

"Mrs. Dr. Longstreet, thee knows, has a great income."

"Who will pay for the sign, Ruth?" asked Mr. Bolton.

A servant entered with the afternoon mail from the office.  Mr. Bolton
took his letters listlessly, dreading to open them.  He knew well what
they contained, new difficulties, more urgent demands fox money.

"Oh, here is one from Philip.  Poor fellow.  I shall feel his
disappointment as much as my own bad luck.  It is hard to bear when one
is young."

He opened the letter and read.  As he read his face lightened, and he
fetched such a sigh of relief, that Mrs. Bolton and Ruth both exclaimed.

"Read that," he cried, "Philip has found coal!"

The world was changed in a moment.  One little sentence had done it.
There was no more trouble.  Philip had found coal.  That meant relief.
That meant fortune.  A great weight was taken off, and the spirits of the
whole household rose magically.  Good Money! beautiful demon of Money,
what an enchanter thou art!  Ruth felt that she was of less consequence
in the household, now that Philip had found Coal, and perhaps she was not
sorry to feel so.

Mr. Bolton was ten years younger the next morning.  He went into the
city, and showed his letter on change.  It was the sort of news his
friends were quite willing to listen to.  They took a new interest in
him.  If it was confirmed, Bolton would come right up again.  There would
be no difficulty about his getting all the money he wanted.  The money
market did not seem to be half so tight as it was the day before.
Mr. Bolton spent a very pleasant day in his office, and went home
revolving some new plans, and the execution of some projects he had long
been prevented from entering upon by the lack of money.

The day had been spent by Philip in no less excitement.  By daylight,
with Philip's letters to the mail, word had gone down to Ilium that coal
had been found, and very early a crowd of eager spectators had come up to
see for themselves.

The "prospecting" continued day and night for upwards of a week, and
during the first four or five days the indications grew more and more
promising, and the telegrams and letters kept Mr. Bolton duly posted.
But at last a change came, and the promises began to fail with alarming
rapidity.  In the end it was demonstrated without the possibility of a
doubt that the great "find" was nothing but a worthless seam.

Philip was cast down, all the more so because he had been so foolish as
to send the news to Philadelphia before he knew what he was writing
about.  And now he must contradict it.  "It turns out to be only a mere
seam," he wrote, "but we look upon it as an indication of better further
in."

Alas!  Mr. Bolton's affairs could not wait for "indications."  The future
might have a great deal in store, but the present was black and hopeless.
It was doubtful if any sacrifice could save him from ruin.  Yet sacrifice
he must make, and that instantly, in the hope of saving something from
the wreck of his fortune.

His lovely country home must go.  That would bring the most ready money.
The house that he had built with loving thought for each one of his
family, as he planned its luxurious apartments and adorned it; the
grounds that he had laid out, with so much delight in following the
tastes of his wife, with whom the country, the cultivation of rare trees
and flowers, the care of garden and lawn and conservatories were a
passion almost; this home, which he had hoped his children would enjoy
long after he had done with it, must go.

The family bore the sacrifice better than he did.  They declared in fact
--women are such hypocrites--that they quite enjoyed the city (it was in
August) after living so long in the country, that it was a thousand tunes
more convenient in every respect; Mrs. Bolton said it was a relief from
the worry of a large establishment, and Ruth reminded her father that she
should have had to come to town anyway before long.

Mr. Bolton was relieved, exactly as a water-logged ship is lightened by
throwing overboard the most valuable portion of the cargo--but the leak
was not stopped.  Indeed his credit was injured instead of helped by the
prudent step be had taken.  It was regarded as a sure evidence of his
embarrassment, and it was much more difficult for him to obtain help than
if he had, instead of retrenching, launched into some new speculation.

Philip was greatly troubled, and exaggerated his own share in the
bringing about of the calamity.

"You must not look at it so!" Mr. Bolton wrote him.  "You have neither
helped nor hindered--but you know you may help by and by.  It would have
all happened just so, if we had never begun to dig that hole.  That is
only a drop.  Work away.  I still have hope that something will occur to
relieve me.  At any rate we must not give up the mine, so long as we have
any show."

Alas!  the relief did not come.  New misfortunes came instead.  When the
extent of the Bigler swindle was disclosed there was no more hope that
Mr. Bolton could extricate himself, and he had, as an honest man, no
resource except to surrender all his property for the benefit of his
creditors.

The Autumn came and found Philip working with diminished force but still
with hope.  He had again and again been encouraged by good "indications,"
but he had again and again been disappointed.  He could not go on much
longer, and almost everybody except himself had thought it was useless to
go on as long as he had been doing.

When the news came of Mr. Bolton's failure, of course the work stopped.
The men were discharged, the tools were housed, the hopeful noise of
pickman and driver ceased, and the mining camp had that desolate and
mournful aspect which always hovers over a frustrated enterprise.

Philip sat down amid the ruins, and almost wished he were buried in them.
How distant Ruth was now from him, now, when she might need him most.
How changed was all the Philadelphia world, which had hitherto stood for
the exemplification of happiness and prosperity.

He still had faith that there was coal in that mountain.  He made
a picture of himself living there a hermit in a shanty by the tunnel,
digging away with solitary pick and wheelbarrow, day after day and year
after year, until he grew gray and aged, and was known in all that region
as the old man of the mountain.  In order that the school social "teachings",
or their position in the theoretical with the practical tasks of life as
a background elects, it shall not in any way the social and technical
interests of the child.He wondered why
Providence could not have reversed the usual process, and let the
majority of men begin with wealth and gradually spend it, and die poor
when they no longer needed it.

