The great deficiency in Lord George Murray's character was the absence
of hope; but, independent of that vital defect, his attributes as a
soldier and a general cannot fail to excite admiration. His exertions
were unparalleled; besides the marching and fatigue that others had to
undergo, he had the vast responsibility of command. "Though others were
relieved and took their turns," he remarks, "I had none to relieve." On
first assuming the command, he received and despatched every express
himself; and saw the guards and sentinels settled. In gaining
intelligence he was indefatigable; and his discipline was such that the
country suffered but little from the visitations of his well-governed
forces. But the time was fast approaching when his great abilities,
which never ceased to be acknowledged by the whole army, his fortitude,
and personal valour were to be put to the severest test.

On the third of April, Lord George Murray joined Charles Edward at
Inverness. On the eleventh intelligence was received that the Duke of
Cumberland, who had been stationed for some time at Aberdeen, was
marching towards Inverness. At first the intelligence of the Duke's
approach was received with acclamations of joy; but the circumstances
under which the battle of Culloden was eventually fought, and the
fatigues and impediments by which it was prefaced, changed that
sentiment into one of distrust and despondency.[190]

Upon receiving intelligence of the Duke's approach, expresses were sent
in all directions in order to re-assemble the Jacobite forces. Those
troops which had been at the siege of Fort William were on their march
to Inverness; but Lord Cromartie and his detachment were still at a
great distance; the Duke of Perth and Lord John Drummond were at
Spey-side, with a considerable body of men and all the horse. These were
ordered to retire as Cumberland's army approached. Unhappily, many of
the Highlanders, it being now seed time, had slipped away to their
homes, and it was, indeed, no easy task to allure them back. The
influence of Lord George Murray over the forces continued, nevertheless,
unabated. His mode of managing this fine, but rude people, was well
adapted to his purpose, and proceeded from an intimate knowledge of
their character. "Fear" he considered as necessary as "love." "I was
told," he remarks, "that all the Highlanders were gentlemen, and never
to be beaten, but I was well acquainted with their tempers." Their
chiefs even inflicted personal chastisement upon them, which they
received without murmurs when conscious of an offence. But they would
only receive correction from their own officers, and never would the
chief of one Clan correct even the lowest soldier of another. "But I,"
observes Lord George, "had as much authority over them all as each had
amongst his own men; and I will venture to say that never an officer
was more beloved of the whole, without exception, than I was." At any
time when there was a post of more danger than another, Lord George,
possessing as he did this unbounded influence over the minds of his
countrymen, found it more difficult to restrain those who were too
forward, than in finding those who were willing to rush into peril.

On Sunday morning, the thirteenth of April, it became a matter of
certainty among the Jacobite forces that the enemy had passed the Spey.
On the following day, Lochiel joined the army; the Duke of Perth also
returned, and the Prince and his forces assembled on an open moor, near
Culloden. Many of the officers suggested that it would be desirable to
retire to a stronger position than this exposed plain, until the army
were all collected, but the baggage being at Inverness, this scheme was
rejected. The experienced eye of Lord George Murray soon perceived that
the ground which had been chosen was ill-adapted for the Highland mode
of warfare, and he proposed that the other side of the water of Nairn
should be reconnoitred. But objections were made to any change of
position; and, situated as Lord George now was, distrusted by the
Prince, and, perhaps, in some measure by others, since the failure at
Blair, he was in no condition to contest so important a point. It was
afterwards attempted to venture an attack by night. To this proposition
not only the Prince, but Lord George and most of the other officers were
at first favourable: but, in the evening, it being generally understood
that there was no provision for the subsistence of the men the next day,
a circumstance attributable to the negligence of the persons employed
for the purpose at Inverness, a number of men dispersed in search of
food. The forces being thus reduced, Lord George objected, in concert
with others, to the projected night march; but Charles Edward, trusting
to the bravery of his army, and being for fighting on all occasions, was
determined on the attempt. "What he had seen them do, and the justice of
his cause, made him too venturous."[191] The attack was, therefore,
agreed upon, and Lord George commanding the rear, after marching nearly
six miles, found that it would be impossible to attack the enemy before
day-break, and, therefore, gave it up, and returned to Culloden about
five in the morning.

Fatigued and hungry, the army awaited the approach of the English
forces. It was between ten and eleven in the morning when they drew up
on the moor, and were placed in order of battle by O'Sullivan. Again
Lord George observed to that officer, that the ground was unfavourable:
the reply was, that the moor was so interspersed with moss and deep
earth, that the enemy's horse and cannon could be of little service to
them; and that it was therefore well selected. By this time the young
and unfortunate Master of Lovat had joined the forces, but Lord
Cromartie was still, by a fatal mistake, absent; and Macpherson, of
Clunie, was at three or four miles distance, marching with all possible
expedition towards Culloden. The stragglers and others were also
collecting, so that, as Lord George conjectured, the army would have
been increased by two or three thousand more men that night, or the
next day. Stimulated by this reflection, he again looked wistfully to
the position beyond the water, and considered that if they passed there,
they would probably leave the moors to the enemy, and occupy a better
post. But he was overruled.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I shall say little," writes Lord George Murray, in his journal, "of
this battle, which was so fatal." In a memoir, written by Colonel Ker,
of Gradyne, an officer of distinguished military reputation, a minute
and animated account is, however, given of all the incidents of the
eventful fifteenth of April.

Charles Edward having with some difficulty procured some bread and
whiskey at Culloden, reposed for a short time after marching all night.
In the morning intelligence was brought him that the enemy were in
sight. Whilst the army was forming, Colonel Ker was sent to reconnoitre
the enemy. On returning, he informed the Prince and Lord George Murray,
who was then with him, that the enemy were marching in three columns,
with their cavalry on the left, so that they would form their line of
battle in an instant. The Prince then ordered his men to draw up in two
lines, and the few horse which he had were disposed in the rear towards
the wings; the cannon was to be dispersed in the front; this was brought
up with difficulty from the want of horses. The ground which had been
occupied the day before was too distant for the army to reach; so that
they were drawn up a mile to the westward with a stone enclosure which
ran down to the water of Nairn, on the right of the first line.

The Highland soldiers, many of whom had been summoned from their sleep
among the woods of Culloden, were aroused from among the bushes, and
came drowsy, and half-exhausted to the field; yet they formed themselves
into order of battle with wonderful dispatch. Unhappily no council of
war was held upon the plain of Culloden in the hurry of that day. In
addition to the confusion, and want of concert which this omission
produced, was a still more injurious circumstance. The army, as has been
related, was drawn up in two lines; Lord George commanded the first,
which was composed of the Atholl brigade. This regiment was placed by
Lord George on the right of the line: unfortunately, the Clan Macdonald,
proud and fiery, claimed the precedence. They grounded their assertion
of right to the usage of time immemorial; and to their having had it
during the two previous battles. Lord George, on the other hand,
uncompromising as usual, insisted that in those actions even, his Atholl
men had the pre-eminence. The Prince, unable to decide, persuaded the
chief of the Macdonalds to waive his claim; but the pride of the Scotch
is never subdued; and whilst Macdonald yielded, their men were offended
and disgusted with his compliance.

The Duke of Cumberland formed his line of battle at a great distance,
and marched in battle order until he came within cannon shot, when he
halted, and placed his artillery in different parts in the front. His
army, to use a military phrase, outwinged that of Charles, both to the
right and left, without his cavalry.[192]

It is not, as Lord George Murray observes, "an easy task to describe a
battle." Most officers are necessarily taken up with what is near them,
and the confusion, noise, and agitation effectually impede observation.
The commencement of the battle of Culloden was obscured by a thick fall
of hail and snow, and on this occasion the tempestuous climate of
Scotland favoured her enemies, for the Prince's army faced the wind, and
encountered the snow-storm in their faces. It was expected that the Duke
would begin the attack; and a party of his horse were sent during the
interval to reconnoitre the Jacobite army. When they came within cannon
shot, loud hurras were heard on both sides; and voices (soon for ever to
be silenced) sent up to Heaven expressions of exultation and defiance.
The young Chevalier, whilst awaiting that event, rode along the lines to
encourage his men, placing himself in a post of danger, in which one of
his servants was killed by his side. After some few minutes of solemn
expectation, Lord George Murray, who commanded the right of the army,
sent Colonel Ker to the Prince to know if he should begin the attack? an
answer in the affirmative was returned. As the right was farther distant
than the left, Colonel Ker went first to the Duke of Perth who commanded
the left, and ordered him to begin; he then rode along the field until
he came to the right line, where Lord George Murray received from him a
similar command. The Prince then placed himself behind the centre of the
army, having the whole of his forces under his eye, and thus being able
to send orders on all exigencies.

The cannon of Prince Charles was first heard. It was returned with a
firing from the enemy of grape shot, which did great execution.

The Highlanders, who were forbidden to move until the word of command
was given, suffered that fire very impatiently. Some of them threw
themselves flat on the ground, and a few gave way and ran off.[193] The
artillery of the enemy was very well served; that of the Jacobites was
managed by common soldiers, the cannoniers belonging to one battery
being absent. The contest was in every way unequal; yet the brave
insurgents, although ready to drop with fatigue, seemed to forget all
their weariness and hunger when the enemy advanced.

At length, after some preliminary manoeuvres, the Prince sent orders
to Lord George Murray to march up to the enemy. It seemed, indeed, high
time to come to a close engagement; for the cannonading of the enemy,
which was directed chiefly towards the place which the Prince occupied
among the cavalry, was very destructive; yet still Lord George delayed
the attack, judging, as it is supposed, that the adversaries were still
at too great a distance, and that the strength of his men would be
exhausted before they could reach them. There appears also to have been
another reason for the delay; Lord George had, on his right, a
farm-house, and some old enclosure walls, which the enemy now occupied;
and he is conjectured to have been waiting until the Duke of
Cumberland's army came up to these walls, which would prevent him being
flanked by the dragoons, who were, he observed, mostly on the left. But
the Duke did not advance. The Highlanders, who were impatient at the
delay, called out loudly to be led on; and at last he gave the command
to attack.

His orders were obeyed. As his line began to move, the enemy began a
smart fire, which played chiefly upon the Atholl men, and was kept up by
a detachment of Campbells, who were stationed behind the enclosure
walls. It was the custom of the Highlanders to give a general discharge
of their fire-arms, and then to rush, sword in hand, upon their foes:
and the only chance of a victory for their party that day, was a general
shock of their whole line at once; for the fury and valour of these
northern warriors produced results almost incredible. Unhappily, several
circumstances destroyed this advantage. The two armies were not exactly
parallel to each other, the right of Prince Charles's being nearer to
the foe than the left. The impetuosity of the Highlanders was such, that
they broke their ranks before it was time to give their fire; their
eagerness to come up with an enemy that had so greatly the advantage of
them at such a distance, made them rush on with such violence, and in
such a confusion, that their fire-arms were of little service.[194]
This, it appears, was the disadvantage which Lord George had
apprehended. But there was still another inconvenience: the wind, which
had favoured the Jacobites at Falkirk, was now against them. They were
buried in a cloud of smoke, and felt their enemies without seeing them.
In spite of all these obstacles they went, sword in hand, and broke the
first line of the enemy; but the second advancing, and firing on them,
they gave way, leaving, says one who beheld the terrific scene, "many
brave fellows on the spot." The rout, which began on the right of the
army, soon became general. (unclear) Theodore Atkinson Jn Gray John
Penhallow John Denison
FRANCOIS XAVIER (Signature) Sign.

MEGONUMBA (Signature) Sign.

TOTEMS.

The figures or emblems connected with the signatures of the Indians are
called, in the language of the Algonquins, _Totems_; and are the
distinguishing marks or signs of the clans or tribes into which the various
nations are divided. They are not the personal emblems of the chiefs,
although in signing treaties they employ them as their sign manual. Each
tribe or clan had its emblem, consisting of the figure of some bird,
beast, or reptile, and is distinguished by the name of the animal
which it has assumed as a device, as Wolf, Hawk, Tortoise. To different
totems, says Parkman in his "Conspiracy of Pontiac," attach different
degrees of rank and dignity; and those of the Bear, the Tortoise,
and the Wolf are among the first in honor. Each man is proud of his badge,
jealously asserting its claim to respect. The use of the totem
prevailed among the southern, as well as the northern tribes; Mr.
Parkman says that Mr. Gallatin informed him, that he was told by the
chief of a Choctaw deputation at Washington, that in their tribe were
eight totemic clans, divided into two classes of four each.

Mr. Parkman says again, in the work above cited, page 9, "But the
main stay of the Iroquois polity was the system of _totemship_.
It was this which gave the structure its elastic strength; and but
for this, a mere confederacy of jealous and warlike tribes must
soon have been rent asunder by shocks from without, or discord from
within. At some early period the Iroquois must have formed an
individual nation; for the whole people, irrespective of their
separation into tribes, consisted of eight totemic clans; and the
members of each clan, to what nation soever they belonged, were
mutually bound to one another by those close ties of fraternity
which mark this singular institution.Independent of the inequality
of numbers, was the inequality of circumstances; but greater, in many
senses, on this occasion, were the conquered, than their conquerors.

The Prince, seeing his army entirely routed, was at length prevailed
upon to retire. Most of his horse soldiers assembled round his person;
and he rode leisurely, and in good order, for the enemy advanced very
leisurely over the ground. "They made," observes Maxwell, "no attack
where there was any body of the Prince's men together, but contented
themselves with sabering such unfortunate people as fell in their way,
single and disarmed." "As the Duke's corps," Lord Elcho relates,
"continued to pursue in order of battle, always firing their cannon and
platoons in advancing, there were not so many people taken or killed as
there would have been had they detached corps to pursue; but every body
that fell into their hands got no quarter, except a few whom they
reserved for public punishment."

In the flight of the Prince's army, most of the left wing took the road
to Inverness; the right wing crossed the water of Nairn, and went to
Ruthven of Badenoch; the rest, to the number of five hundred, mostly
officers, followed the Prince into Stratherick, where he had stopped
about four miles from the field of Culloden. Of the Prince's conduct
after the battle, a very painful impression is given by Lord Elcho. "As
he had taken it into his head he had been betrayed, and particularly by
Lord George Murray, he seemed very diffident of everybody except the
Irish officers; and he appeared very anxious to know whether he had
given them all higher commissions than they had at their arrival, on
purpose that they might get them confirmed to them upon their return to
France. He neither spoke to any of the Scots' officers present, nor
inquired after any of the absent. Nor, indeed, at any of the preceding
battles did he ever inquire after any of the wounded officers. He
appeared very uneasy as long as the Scots were about him; and in a short
time ordered them all to go to Ruthven of Badenoch, where he would send
them orders; but before they had rode a mile, he sent Mr. Sheridan after
them, to tell them that they might disperse, and everybody shift for
himself the best way he could. Lord George Murray and Lord John Drummond
repeated the same orders to all the body of the army that had assembled
at Ruthven. The Prince kept with him some of Fitzjames's Horse, and went
that night to a house in the head of Stratherick, where he met Lord
Lovat and a great many other Scots' gentlemen, who advised him not to
quit the country, but to stay and gather together his scattered forces.
But he was so prejudiced against the Scots, that he was afraid they
would give him up to make their peace with the Government; for some of
the Irish were at pains to relate to him, in very strong terms, how the
Scots had already sold his great-grandfather to the English: and, as he
was naturally of a suspicious temper, it was not a difficult matter to
persuade him of it. And he always believed it until the fidelity of the
Highlanders shown to him during the long time he was hid in their
country, convinced him and everybody else of the contrary."[198]

This history of distrust and ingratitude is, however, to be contrasted
with very different statements. When the Prince heard from Colonel Ker,
after the battle, that Lord George Murray had been thrown from his
horse, but was not wounded, Charles, in the presence of all the officers
who were assembled around his person, desired Colonel Ker to find out
Lord George, and to "take particular care of him." Nor was there, among
the whole number of those writers who witnessed the battle of Culloden,
a dissentient voice with regard to the bravery of their
Lieutenant-General and to the admirable disposition of his troops. Had
he, like Lord Strathallan, sought and found his fate upon the field of
battle, his memory would have been exalted into that of a hero.

Two days after the defeat, the Duke of Perth, the Marquis of
Tullibardine, Lord George Murray, Lord Ogilvie, Lord Nairn, and several
other chieftains and officers met at Ruthven in Badenoch, and discussed
the events which had ended in the ruin of their cause. They were
unanimous in concluding that the night attack, upon which many persons
insisted as practicable, could not have been attempted.[199]

For some time after the battle, hopes were entertained of an effectual
rallying of the forces. By a letter from one of the Prince's
aides-de-camp, Alexander Macleod, to Clunie Macpherson, on the very day
of the battle, it appears that his party soon hoped, or pretended to
hope, "to pay Cumberland back in his own coin." A review of the fragment
of the army was projected at Fort-Augustus, on the seventeenth of April;
and amends were promised to be made for the "ruffle at Culloden."[200]
"For God's sake," wrote Mr. Macleod, "make haste to join us; and bring
with you all the people that can possibly be got together. Take care in
particular of Lumisden and Sheridan, as they carry with them the sinews
of war."

To this letter Lord George Murray added some lines, which prove how
hopeless, at that moment, he considered any project of rallying; and,
indeed, even before the epistle was dispatched to Clunie, the Prince had
left Gorteleg, and taken refuge in "Clanranald's country."

Notwithstanding the Prince's flight, Lord George Murray, presuming that
he could still make a stand, remained at Ruthven, where a force of
between two and three thousand men was assembled. It was found, however,
impossible, from the want of provisions, to keep such an army together;
and, in a few days, a message from Charles, ordering his ill-fated
adherents to disperse, decided their fate. At this epoch Lord George
Murray addressed a letter to Charles, certainly not calculated to soothe
the feelings of the unfortunate young man, nor to conciliate the bitter
spirit which afterwards, during the lapse of years, never abated towards
his former General. Washington wrote many other letters to his sprightly foster-child,
but they have been lost or destroyed.

    These serve to show how his comprehensive mind had moments of thought
and action to bestow on all connected with him, and how deeply his
affections were interested in the family of his wife, who were cared
for as if they were his own.

    They were written at a time when the cares of state, as president
    of the republic, were pressing heavily upon him.
    
    [124] Life of Washington, v. 279.
    
    
    After this preface Lord George, in no softened terms, pointed out what
he conceived to be the causes of the failure of the enterprise;--the
imprudence of having set up the standard without aid from France; the
deficiencies and blunders of Mr. O'Sullivan, whose business it was to
reconnoitre the field of battle, but who had not so much as viewed it
before the affair of Culloden. He next pointed out the negligence, if
not treachery, of Mr. Hay, who had the charge of the provisions. To the
disgraceful mismanagement of this important department might, indeed,
the ruin of the army be traced. "For my own part," added Lord George,
"I never had any particular discussion with either of them; but I ever
thought them incapable and unfit to serve in the stations they were
placed in."

After these too just remarks, Lord George formally resigned his
commission into the Prince's hands. It had, it appears, been his
intention to have done so after the failure at Blair; but he was
dissuaded by his friends. "I hope your Royal Highness will now accept of
my demission. What commands you may have for me in any other situation,
please honour me with them."

This letter was dated from Ruthven, two days after the battle of
Culloden. The inference which has been drawn from it was, that Lord
George did not contemplate the abandonment of the campaign. It appears
to have been his opinion that the Highlanders could have made a summer
campaign without any risk, marching, as they could, through places in
which no regular troops could follow them. They could never starve as
long as there were sheep and cattle in the country; and they might
probably have carried on an offensive, instead of a defensive war. But
Charles, disheartened, as men of over sanguine tempers usually are, in
misfortune, to the last degree, resolved on escaping to France. He
addressed a farewell letter to the Chiefs, and then commenced that long
and perilous course of wanderings in which his character rose to
heroism, and which presents one of the most interesting episodes in
history of which our annals can boast.

Lord George Murray was long a fugitive from place to place in his native
country, before he could find means to escape to the continent. I
am sincerely sorry to see them." How utterly insincere appears the
last clause of this paragraph, compared with the one next preceding
it! The most scurrilous of the attacks alluded to proceeded from
Freneau, a clerk in Mr. Jefferson's office!Whether he ever returned to his native country is doubtful,
although it appears, from a letter among the Stuart papers, that he had
it in contemplation, in order to bring over his wife and family.

His fate in a foreign land, however embittered by the ingratitude and
hatred of Charles Edward, was cheered by the presence of his wife and
children, with the exception of his eldest son, who was retained in
Scotland, and educated under the auspices of James Duke of Atholl. His
first movement after reaching Holland, was to repair to Rome, there to
pay his respects to the Chevalier St. George, and to unfold to him the
motives of his conduct in the foregoing campaign of 1745. The Chevalier,
affectionately attached as he was to his eldest son, was aware of his
defects, and sensible of the pernicious influence which was exercised
over his mind by the enemies of Lord George Murray; James, who never
appears in a more amiable light than in his correspondence, endeavoured
to conciliate both parties. His letters to Charles Edward, treasured
among the Stuart papers, display kindness and great good sense. His
mediation in this instance was, however, wholly ineffectual. After the
treacherous conduct of Murray of Broughton, the Prince began even to
suspect that Lord George was concerned in the baseness of that
individual. This notion was urgently combated by James; at the same time
he recommended the Prince, not only as a matter of right, but of
policy, to conciliate Lord George, who "owned that he had been wrong
towards Charles, but insisted upon his zeal in the Prince's service."
Genet, Hamilton said, "From forty to one hundred persons give you the
extremes of the number present." On the ensuing evening a much
greater number attended.
Altogether the demonstration, in _numbers_, was a failure.
[48] Griswold's _Republican Court_, page 350But James addressed himself to one who could never
dissimulate. Whatever Charles's errors might be, they were not envenomed
by any portion of cunning, and no motive of prudence could soften him
towards one whom he unjustly disliked.

Lord George, who expected no favour from the English Government, was,
nevertheless, anxious to be "near home." He left Rome in May 1747, and
after remaining some time at Bologna, proceeded to Paris.[202] Here
Charles was playing that ill-judged and desperate game, which was better
suited to a rash impostor, than to the acknowledged descendant of a long
line of monarchs. Here he was rapidly effacing the remembrance of the
brave and generous wanderer who trusted to the honesty of the
Highlanders; who bore his misfortunes as if he had been born in that
land of heroes.

The first idea of Charles, upon hearing of Lord George Murray's arrival
in Paris, was to imprison him as a traitor. "I hope in God," writes his
father to the young Prince, "you will not think of getting Lord George
secured after all I wrote to you about him, and will at least receive
him civilly." But no intercessions could nullify the indignation of
Charles towards his former general.

It was far from Lord George Murray's intention, if we may believe the
Chevalier St. George, again to embroil himself in public affairs, or
even to remain in Paris. His intention was to live privately in Germany
or Flanders, in the hope of being rejoined by his wife. Upon reaching
Paris, he informed the Prince of his arrival; and proposed paying his
respects to him at St. Omer, where Charles was then living. Late on the
evening of the eleventh of July, 1747, a gentleman, who at first refused
to give his name, but who afterwards announced himself as Mr. Stafford,
called on Lord George to convey to him a message desiring him not to "go
near" the Prince, and ordering him to leave Paris immediately. An answer
was returned, signifying that the Prince's commands should be obeyed.
Lord George left Paris, and he and the unfortunate young man whom he had
served, met no more. It is possible that the irritation of Charles was
aggravated by the recent intelligence of his brother's having become a
cardinal: upon receiving the news of that event he shut himself up for
some hours alone. FOOTNOTES:

[8] The following are the names of the delegates: _New Hampshire_--John
Langdon, John Pickering, Nicholas Gilman, and Benjamin West.

_Massachusetts_--Francis Dana, Elbridge Gerry, Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus
King, and Caleb Strong. _Connecticut_--William Samuel Johnson, Roger
Sherman, and Oliver Ellsworth. _New York_--Robert Yates, John Lansing,
Jr., and Alexander Hamilton. _New Jersey_--David Brearly, William
Churchill Houston, William Paterson, John Neilson, William Livingston,
Abraham Clark, and Jonathan Dayton.He changed his name to that of
De Valignie, and here he remained in obscurity with his family. "My
wife," he writes to the Chevalier St. George, "came here on the tenth of
September, 1748, but was soon after seized with an intermitting fever,
which has not yet left her. She begs leave to throw herself at your
Majesty's feet." In 1750, Lord George removed to Emmerick; here he wrote
an account of his campaign, which he addressed to Mr. Hamilton of
Bangour; from this, repeated extracts have been given in this memoir of
his life. The kindness of James Stuart towards him continued unabated:
he recommended him to the notice of the court of France; and consulted
him as to the probable success of a future enterprise in Scotland. On
such a project Lord George Murray expressed himself cautiously, yet
somewhat encouragingly; and declared himself ready to shed the last drop
of his blood in the cause. Happily his zeal was not again put to the
test. Lord George appears, in his letters, to have cherished in his
retirement at Emmerick, a lingering hope that at some future day the
Stuarts might make another attempt. He was now in the decline of life,
and yearning to behold again the country which he was destined to see no
more. "How happily," he writes to Mr. Edgar,[204] "should you and I be
to sit over a bottle in Angus, or Perthshire, after a restoration, and
talk over old services. May that soon happen!"

Meantime some members of Lord George's family suffered the severest
distress. His uncle, Lord Nairn, had, it is true, escaped to France; but
Lady Nairn and her daughter, Lady Clementina, were reduced to the
utmost penury in Scotland. They remained in their native country,
probably with the hope of saving the wreck of their fortunes, until all
that the troops had spared was sold, and the money which accrued from
the sale was exhausted. Such was the rapacity of the plunderers, that
they took even Lady Nairn's watch and clothes. The Government, although
in possession of her estate, never gave her one farthing for
subsistence, but even made her pay a rent for the garden of one of Lord
Nairn's own houses in which she lived. But this is only one instance of
that catalogue of cruelties towards the Jacobites, which it would take
volumes to detail.

In 1751, Lord George Murray visited Dresden, where, owing to the
mediation of James Stuart, he was well received. His letters at this
period refer frequently to the exertions which he made for Lord Macleod,
the son of Lord Cromartie: to this young man a company was given in
Finland, in the Prussian service, and the Chevalier St. George furnished
him with his accoutrements and equipage.

The eldest son of Lord George Murray remained, as we have seen, in
Scotland; but the second was, through the favour of the Chevalier,
recommended to the especial notice of the court of Prussia. The visit of
Lord George to Dresden seems to have been chiefly designed to push the
interests of this young man, who was introduced to the Count and
Countess De Bruhl. The youth was to study the military science and
exercises at Dresden, and at the same time to enjoy, in the house of the
Pope's Nuncio, the advantage of seeing company, and of forming
connections.

Having arranged these affairs, Lord George returned to Emmerick. His
wife had left him for Scotland, in order to be confined there; and this
event, attended by so much inconvenience, and prefaced by a voyage of
twelve days, "put her," as Lord George observed, "somewhat out of
countenance, after twenty-three years' marriage." Her return was delayed
for some time. "I shall be pretty lonely this winter (1751)," writes Lord
George to Mr. Edgar, "for my wife, who was brought to bed of a daughter
the middle of September, recovered but very slowly, and now the season
of the year is too far advanced for her to venture so long a voyage;
besides, she has some thoughts that Lady Sinclair (his daughter) may
come with her in the spring." In his solitude, anxieties about his
patrimonial property added to the sorrows of the exile. "I am
told,"[205] he writes, "that the Duke of Atholl is desirous of selling
the roialty of the Isle of Man to the London Government, for which, they
say, he is offered fifteen thousand pounds sterling. Had it not been for
my situation, I believe he could not have done it without my consent;
but, I'm sorry to say it, and it is a truth, that he is full as much my
enemy as any of that Government. He has sent my eldest son abroad, but,
as I understand, with positive orders not to see nor correspond with me.
All this is the more extraordinary that, thirty years ago, before he
turned courtier, he seemed to have very different notions. Most people
in Britain now regard neither probity nor any other virtue--all is
selfish and vainal (venial). But how can I complean of such hard usage,
when my royal master has met with what is a thousand times more cruel:
he bears it like a Christian hero, and it would ill suit me to repine. I
thank the Almighty I never did, and I think it my greatest honour and
glory to suffer in so just and upright a cause." Hope, however, of one
day returning to Scotland, was not extinct. He thus continues: "Upon
receipt of the note you sent me, I have gott the carabin, for which I
return you many thanks. I expect to kill a wild bore with it; but I fain
hope Providence may still order it that I may make use of it at home,
and, if all succeeds to our wishes, how happy should I think myself to
send you, when you returned to Angus, a good fatt stagg, shott in the
forest of Atholl with your own gun."

Until five years before his death, Lord George still cherished the hope
that France would again find it her interest to support the claims of
the Stuarts. He had always considered that the support of the French
would be decisive of the success of the cause. "Had the ministers of the
court of Versailles, ten years ago, been persuaded that the supporting
of his Royal Highness the Prince, at the beginning of his attempt, in a
proper manner with the best measures they could take for the interest of
their master as well as that of the King, our gracious sovereign, I
think I do not say too much if I affirm that his Royal Highness would
not have failed of success. was a subject of violent contest, the people
in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, wishing
it to be in their respective states. Debates had run high upon the
subject in Congress, and the public press had discussed it vigorously.
It being observed at Jefferson's dinner-party that a reconsideration
of the assumption bill, and its adoption, would be "a bitter pill"
to the southern states, it was proposed that "some concomitant measure
should be adopted to sweeten it a little to them."Then there would be no difficulty in
adjusting limits in America. I have been much longer upon the subject
than I intended. Perhaps zeal has led me too far."

The period was now approaching when Lord George Murray was to close a
life of vicissitude and turmoil. He died in 1760 at Medenblinck, in
Holland, leaving three sons and two daughters. Upon the death of James
Duke of Atholl in 1764, John, the eldest son of Lord George Murray,
succeeded to the dukedom, and to the great possessions of the family. He
married his first cousin, Charlotte, only daughter and heiress of his
uncle, the Duke of Atholl; and in 1765 their Graces sold the sovereignty
of the Isle of Man, upon the disposal of which Lord George Murray had
expressed much solicitude, to the British Government. The present Duke
of Atholl, who succeeded his father in 1830, is the grandson of John,
third Duke of Atholl, and the great-grandson of Lord George Murray. The
descendants of this justly celebrated man have, therefore, shared a
happier fortune than those of many of the other attainted noblemen of
his party.

The attainder was not, however, set aside in favour of the son of Lord
George Murray without a petition to the King, upon which the House of
Lords gave a favourable report, and the objection was overcome.[206]
Besides his eldest son, Lord George left two others; James, of Strowan,
in right of his mother; George, of Pitkeathly, who became Vice-Admiral
of the White--and two daughters; Amelia, first married to Lord Sinclair,
and afterwards to James Farquharson, of Inverness; and Charlotte, who
died unmarried.

