Amid all the distractions of this new and very different mode of
life, I diligently strove to concentrate and steel my soul
against these influences, bearing in mind my experiences of
success in the past. By May of my thirtieth year I had finished
my poem Der Venusberg ('The Mount of Venus'), as I called
Tannhauser at that time. I had not yet by any means gained any
real knowledge of mediaeval poetry. The classical side of the
poetry of the Middle Ages had so far only faintly dawned upon me,
partly from my youthful recollections, and partly from the brief
acquaintance I had made with it through Lehrs' instruction in
Paris.

Now that I was secure in the possession of a royal appointment
that would last my lifetime, the establishment of a permanent
domestic hearth began to assume great importance; for I hoped it
would enable me to take up my serious studies once more, and in
such a way as to make them productive--an aim which my theatrical
life and the miseries of my years in Paris had rendered
impossible. My hope of being able to do this was strengthened by
the character of my official employment, which was never very
arduous, and in which I met with exceptional consideration from
the general management. Though I had only held my appointment for
a few months, yet I was given a holiday this first summer, which
I spent in a second visit to Toplitz, a place which I had grown
to like, and whither I had sent on my wife in advance.

Keenly indeed did I appreciate the change in my position since
the preceding year. I could now engage four spacious and well-
appointed rooms in the same house--the Eiche at Schonau--where I
had before lived in such straitened and frugal circumstances. I
invited my sister Clara to pay us a visit, and also my good
mother, whose gout necessitated her taking the Toplitz baths
every year. I also seized the opportunity of drinking the mineral
waters, which I hoped might have a beneficial effect on the
gastric troubles from which I had suffered ever since my
vicissitudes in Paris. Unfortunately the attempted cure had a
contrary effect, and when I complained of the painful irritation
produced, I learned that my constitution was not adapted for
water cures. In fact, on my morning promenade, and while drinking
my water, I had been observed to race through the shady alleys of
the adjacent Thurn Gardens, and it was pointed out to me that
such a cure could only be properly wrought by leisurely calm and
easy sauntering. It was also remarked that I usually carried
about a fairly stout volume, and that, armed with this and my
bottle of mineral water, I used to take rest in lonely places.

This book was J. Grimm's German Mythology. All who know the work
can understand how the unusual wealth of its contents, gathered
from every side, and meant almost exclusively for the student,
would react upon me, whose mind was everywhere seeking for
something definite and distinct. Formed from the scanty fragments
of a perished world, of which scarcely any monuments remained
recognisable and intact, I here found a heterogeneous building,
which at first glance seemed but a rugged rock clothed in
straggling brambles. Nothing was finished, only here and there
could the slightest resemblance to an architectonic line be
traced, so that I often felt tempted to relinquish the thankless
task of trying to build from such materials. And yet I was
enchained by a wondrous magic. The baldest legend spoke to me of
its ancient home, and soon my whole imagination thrilled with
images; long-lost forms for which I had sought so eagerly shaped
themselves ever more and more clearly into realities that lived
again. There rose up soon before my mind a whole world of
figures, which revealed themselves as so strangely plastic and
primitive, that, when I saw them clearly before me and heard
their voices in my heart, I could not account for the almost
tangible familiarity and assurance of their demeanour. The effect
they produced upon the inner state of my soul I can only describe
as an entire rebirth. Just as we feel a tender joy over a child's
first bright smile of recognition, so now my own eyes flashed
with rapture as I saw a world, revealed, as it were, by miracle,
in which I had hitherto moved blindly as the babe in its mother's
womb.

But the result of this reading did not at first do much to help
me in my purpose of composing part of the Tannhauser music. I had
had a piano put in my room at the Eiche, and though I smashed all
its strings, nothing satisfactory would emerge. With much pain
and toil I sketched the first outlines of my music for the
Venusberg, as fortunately I already had its theme in my mind.
Meanwhile I was very much troubled by excitability and rushes of
blood to the brain. I imagined I was ill, and lay for whole days
in bed, where I read Grimm's German legends, or tried to master
the disagreeable mythology. It was quite a relief when I hit upon
the happy thought of freeing myself from the torments of my
condition by an excursion to Prague. Meanwhile I had already
ascended Mount Millischau once with my wife, and in her company I
now made the journey to Prague in an open carriage. There I
stayed once more at my favourite inn, the Black Horse, met my
friend Kittl, who had now grown fat and rotund, made various
excursions, revelled in the curious antiquities of the old city,
and learned to my joy that the two lovely friends of my youth,
Jenny and Auguste Pachta, had been happily married to members of
the highest aristocracy. Thereupon, having reassured myself that
everything was in the best possible order, I returned to Dresden
and resumed my functions as musical conductor to the King of
Saxony.

We now set to work on the preparations and furnishing of a roomy
and well-situated house in the Ostra Allee, with an outlook upon
the Zwinger. Everything was good and substantial, as is only
right for a man of thirty who is settling down at last for the
whole of his life. As I had not received any subsidy towards this
outlay, I had naturally to raise the money by loan. But I could
look forward to a certain harvest from my operatic successes in
Dresden, and what was more natural than for me to expect soon to
earn more than enough? The three most valued treasures which
adorned my house were a concert grand piano by Breitkopf and
Hartel, which I had bought with much pride; a stately writing-
desk, now in possession of Otto Kummer, the chamber-music artist;
and the title-page by Cornelius for the Nibelungen, in a handsome
Gothic frame--the only object which has remained faithful to me
to the present day. But the thing which above all else made my
house seem homelike and attractive was the presence of a library,
which I procured in accordance with a systematic plan laid down
by my proposed line of study. On the failure of my Dresden career
this library passed in a curious way into the possession of Herr
Heinrich Brockhaus, to whom at that time I owed fifteen hundred
marks, and who took it as security for the amount. My wife knew
nothing at the time of this obligation, and I never afterwards
succeeded in recovering this characteristic collection from his
hands. Upon its shelves old German literature was especially well
represented, and also the closely related work of the German
Middle Ages, including many a costly volume, as, for instance,
the rare old work, Romans des douze Paris. Beside these stood
many excellent historical works on the Middle Ages, as well as on
the German people in general. At the same time I made provision
for the poetical and classical literature of all times and
languages. Among these were the Italian poets, Shakespeare and
the French writers, of whose language I had a passable knowledge.
All these I acquired in the original, hoping some day to find
time to master their neglected tongues. As for the Greek and
Roman classics, I had to content myself with standard German
translations. Indeed, on looking once more into my Homer--whom I
secured in the original Greek--I soon recognised that I should be
presuming on more leisure than my conductorship was likely to
leave me, if I hoped to find time for regaining my lost knowledge
of that language. Moreover, I provided most thoroughly for a
study of universal history, and to this end did not fail to equip
myself with the most voluminous works. Thus armed, I thought I
could bid defiance to all the trials which I clearly foresaw
would inevitably accompany my calling and position. In hopes,
therefore, of long and peaceable enjoyment of this hard-earned
home, I entered into possession with the best of spirits in
October of this year (1843), and though my conductor's quarters
were by no means magnificent, they were stately and substantial.

The first leisure in my new home which I could snatch from the
claims of my profession and my favourite studies was devoted to
the composition of Tannhauser, the first act of which was
completed in January of the new year, 1844. I have no
recollections of any importance regarding my activities in
Dresden during this winter. The only memorable events were two
enterprises which took me away from home, the first to Berlin
early in the year, for the production of my Fliegender Hollander,
and the other in March to Hamburg for Rienzi.

Of these the former made the greater impression upon my mind. The
manager of the Berlin theatre, Kustner, quite took me by surprise
when he announced the first performance of the Fliegender
Hollander for an early date.

