C3.23. I think one sees how Xenophon built up his ideal structure on a
basis of actual living facts. The actual diverts the creator of Cyrus
from the ideal at times, as here. It is a slight declension in the
character of Cyrus to lay down this law, "equestrian once, equestrian
always." Xenophon has to account for the actual Persian horror of
pedestrianism: Cyrus himself can dismount, and so can the Persian
nobles with Cyrus the Younger, but still the rule is "never be seen
walking;" and without the concluding paragraph the dramatic narrative
that precedes would seem a little bit unfinished and pointless: with
the explanation it floats, and we forgive "the archic man" his
partiality to equestrianism, as later on we have to forgive him his
Median get-up and artificiality generally, which again is contrary to
the Xenophontine and the ideal Spartan spirit.

C4. Xenophon has this theory of mankind: some are fit to rule, the
rest to be ruled. It is parallel to the Hellenic slavery theory. Some
moderns, e.g. Carlyle (Ruskin perhaps) inherit it, and in lieu of
Hellenic slavery we have a good many caste-distinction crotchets still
left.

C4.13, fin. The first salaam, ominous of the advent of imperialism;
the sun's rim visible, and a ray shot up to the zenith.

C5. Here the question forces itself in the midst of all this "ironic"
waiting on the part of the Persians in Spartan durance for a future
apotheosis of splendour and luxuriance,--what is the moral? "Hunger
now and thirst, for ye shall be filled"--is that it? Well, anyhow it's
parallel to the modern popular Christianity, reward-in-heaven theory,
only on a less high level, but exactly the same logicality.

C5.6. A point, this reward to the catcher, and this rigid /couvrefeu/
habit (cf. modern military law).

C5.8. A dramatic contrast, the Median Cyaxares who follows Pleasure,
and the Persian Cyrus who follows Valour, /vide/ Heracles' choice
[/Memorabilia/, II. i. 21]. This allegorising tendency is engrained in
Xenophon: it is his view of life; one of the best things he got from
Socrates, no doubt. Later (§ 12) the "ironic" suicidal self-assertion
of Cyaxares is contrasted with the health-giving victorious self-
repression of Cyrus.

C5.9-10. Xenophon can depict character splendidly: this is the
crapulous {orge} of the somewhat "hybristic" nature, seeing how the
land lies, /siccis luminibus/, the day after the premature revel.
Theophrastus couldn't better have depicted the irascible man. These
earliest portraits of character are, according to Xenophon's genius,
all sketched in the concrete, as it were. The character is not
philosophised and then illustrated by concrete instances after the
manner of Theophrastus, but we see the man moving before us and are
made aware of his nature at once.

C5.17. {kalos ka nomimos}, "in all honour, and according to the law,"
almost a Xenophontine motto, and important in reference to the
"questionable" conduct on his part in exile--"questionable" from a
modern rather than an "antique" standard. [The chief reference is to
Xenophon's presence on the Spartan side at the battle of Coronea
against his native city of Athens. See /Sketch/, Works, Vol. I. pp.
cxxiii. ff.]

C5.20. The "archic man" does not recognise the littleness of soul of
the inferior nature, he winks at it, and so disarms at once and
triumphs over savagery, and this not through cunning and pride, but a
kind of godlike imperturbable sympathy, as of a fearless man with a
savage hound. Still there is a good dash of diplomacy.

C5.21, fin. Pretty sentence. Xenophon's words: some of these are
prettily-sounding words, some are rare and choice and exquisite, some
are charged with feeling, you can't touch them with your finger-tips
without feeling an "affective" thrill. That is in part the /goeteia/,
the witchery, of his style.

C5.30-31. A brilliant stroke of diplomacy worthy of the archic man.
This {arkinoia} of the Hellene is the necessary sharp shrewdness of a
brain, which, however "affectively" developed, is at bottom highly
organised intellectually. H. S.[*] has it, all 'cute people and
nations have it, the Americans, e.g.--every proposition must, however
else it presents itself, be apprehended in its logical bearings: the
result may be logically damaging to the supporter of it, but does not
necessarily banish an affective sympathetic attitude on the part of
the common-sense antagonist, who is not bound, in other words, to be a
sharp practitioner because he sees clearly. Affection is the inspirer,
intellect the up-and-doing agent of the soul. The Hellenes and all
'cute people put the agent to the fore in action, but if besides being
'cute they are affective, the operations of the agent will be confined
within prescribed limits.

[* "H. S." = Henry Sidgwick, the philosopher, author of /Methods of
Ethics/, etc., a life-long friend of Mr. Dakyns.]

C5.32. This is almost pummelling, but it's fair: it's rather, "See, I
have you now in Chancery, I could pummel if I would."

C5.37. These constant masters' meetings!

C5.38 ff. The mind of Xenophon: guiding principles, rule of Health,
rule of Forethought. Religious trust in the divine, and for things
beyond man's control; orderly masterly working out of problems within
his power. Economic, diplomatic, anchinoetic, archic manhood. Moral
theory, higher hedonism.

C5.45. The archic man trusts human nature: this appeal to their good
faith is irresistible. The archic is also the diplomatic method.

C5.54. N.B.--Rhetorical artifice of winding-up a speech with a joke.
This is the popular orator. Xenophon the prototype himself perhaps.

C6.3. Is this by chance a situation in Elizabethan or other drama?
It's tragic enough for anything.

C6.4. Admirable colloquial style: "well done, me!"

C6.6, fin. Beautifully-sounding sentence [in the Greek]. Like harp or
viol with its dying mournful note.

C6.8. A new tributary for the archic man, and a foothold in the
enemy's country.

C6.9, fin. As to this daughter, /vide infra/. Who do you think will
win her? We like her much already.

C6.11. The first flutings of this tale. The lady of Susa, quasi-
historic, or wholly imaginative, or mixed?


BOOK V

[C.1] Such were the deeds they did and such the words they spoke. Then
Cyrus bade them set a guard over the share chosen for Cyaxares,
selecting those whom he knew were most attached to their lord, "And
what you have given me," he added, "I accept with pleasure, but I hold
it at the service of those among you who would enjoy it the most."

At that one of the Medes who was passionately fond of music said, "In
truth, Cyrus, yesterday evening I listened to the singing-girls who
are yours to-day, and if you could give me one of them, I would far
rather be serving on this campaign than sitting at home."

And Cyrus said, "Most gladly I will give her; she is yours. And I
believe I am more grateful to you for asking than you can be to me for
giving; I am so thirsty to gratify you all."

So this suitor carried off his prize. [2] And then Cyrus called to his
side Araspas the Mede, who had been his comrade in boyhood. It was he
to whom Cyrus gave the Median cloak he was wearing when he went back
to Persia from his grandfather's court. Now he summoned him, and asked
him to take care of the tent and the lady from Susa. [3] She was the
wife of Abradatas, a Susian, and when the Assyrian army was captured
it happened that her husband was away: his master had sent him on an
embassy to Bactria to conclude an alliance there, for he was the
friend and host of the Bactrian king. And now Cyrus asked Araspas to
guard the captive lady until her husband could take her back himself.
[4] To that Araspas replied, "Have you seen the lady whom you bid me
guard?"

"No, indeed," said Cyrus, "certainly I have not."

"But I have," rejoined the other, "I saw here when we chose her for
you. When we came into the tent, we did not make her out at first, for
she was seated on the ground with all her maidens round her, and she
was clad in the same attire as her slaves, but when we looked at them
all to discover the mistress, we soon saw that one outshone the
others, although she was veiled and kept her eyes on the ground. [5]
And when we bade her rise, all her women rose with her, and then we
saw that she was marked out from them all by her height, and her noble
bearing, and her grace, and the beauty that shone through her mean
apparel. And, under her veil, we could see the big tear-drops
trickling down her garments to her feet. [6] At that sight the eldest
of us said, 'Take comfort, lady, we know that your husband was
beautiful and brave, but we have chosen you a man to-day who is no
whit inferior to him in face or form or mind or power; Cyrus, we
believe, is more to be admired than any soul on earth, and you shall
be his from this day forward.' But when the lady heard that, she rent
the veil that covered her head and gave a pitiful cry, while her
maidens lifted up their voice and wept with their mistress. [7] And
thus we could see her face, and her neck, and her arms, and I tell
you, Cyrus," he added, "I myself, and all who looked on her, felt that
there never was, and never had been, in broad Asia a mortal woman half
so fair as she. Nay, but you must see her for yourself."

[8] "Say, rather, I must not," answered Cyrus, "if she be such as you
describe."

"And why not?" asked the young man.

"Because," said he, "if the mere report of her beauty could persuade
me to go and gaze on her to-day, when I have not a moment to spare, I
fear she would win me back again and perhaps I should neglect all I
have to do, and sit and gaze at her for ever."

[9] At that the young man laughed outright and said:

"So you think, Cyrus, that the beauty of any human creature can compel
a man to do wrong against his will? Surely if that were the nature of
beauty, all men would feel its force alike. [10] See how fire burns
all men equally; it is the nature of it so to do; but these flowers of
beauty, one man loves them, and another loves them not, nor does every
man love the same. For love is voluntary, and each man loves what he
chooses to love. The brother is not enamoured of his own sister, nor
the father of his own daughter; some other man must be the lover.
Reverence and law are strong enough to break the heart of passion.
[11] But if a law were passed saying, 'Eat not, and thou shalt not
starve; Drink not, and thou shalt not thirst; Let not cold bite thee
in winter nor heat inflame thee in summer,' I say there is no law that
could compel us to obey; for it is our nature to be swayed by these
forces. But love is voluntary; each man loves to himself alone, and
according as he chooses, just as he chooses his cloak or his sandals."

[12] "Then," said Cyrus, "if love be voluntary, why cannot a man cease
to love when he wishes? I have seen men in love," said he, "who have
wept for very agony, who were the very slaves of those they loved,
though before the fever took them they thought slavery the worst of
evils. I have seen them make gifts of what they ill could spare, I
have seen them praying, yes, praying, to be rid of their passion, as
though it were any other malady, and yet unable to shake it off; they
were bound hand and foot by a chain of something stronger than iron.
There they stood at the beck and call of their idols, and that without
rhyme or reason; and yet, poor slaves, they make no attempt to run
away, in spite of all they suffer; on the contrary, they mount guard
over their tyrants, for fear these should escape."

[13] But the young man spoke in answer: "True," he said, "there are
such men, but they are worthless scamps, and that is why, though they
are always praying to die and be put out of their misery and though
ten thousand avenues lie open by which to escape from life, they never
take one of them. These are the very men who are prepared to steal and
purloin the goods of others, and yet you know yourself, when they do
it, you are the first to say stealing is not done under compulsion,
and you blame the thief and the robber; you do not pity him, you
punish him. [14] In the same way, beautiful creatures do not compel
others to love them or pursue them when it is wrong, but these good-
for-nothing scoundrels have no self-control, and then they lay the
blame on love. But the nobler type of man, the true gentleman,
beautiful and brave, though he desire gold and splendid horses and
lovely women, can still abstain from each and all alike, and lay no
finger on them against the law of honour. [15] Take my own case," he
added, "I have seen this lady myself, and passing fair I found her,
and yet here I stand before you, and am still your trooper and can
still perform my duty."

[16] "I do not deny it," said Cyrus; "probably you came away in time.
Love takes a little while to seize and carry off his victim. A man may
touch fire for a moment and not be burnt; a log will not kindle all at
once; and yet for all that, I am not disposed to play with fire or
look on beauty. You yourself, my friend, if you will follow my advice,
will not let your own eyes linger there too long; burning fuel will
only burn those who touch it, but beauty can fire the beholder from
afar, until he is all aflame with love."

[17] "Oh, fear me not, Cyrus," answered he; "if I looked till the end
of time I could not be made to do what ill befits a man."

"A fair answer," said Cyrus. "Guard her then, as I bid you, and be
careful of her. This lady may be of service to us all one day."

[18] With these words they parted. But afterwards, after the young man
saw from day to day how marvellously fair the woman was, and how noble
and gracious in herself, after he took care of her, and fancied that
she was not insensible to what he did, after she set herself, through
her attendants, to care for his wants and see that all things were
ready for him when he came in, and that he should lack for nothing if
ever he were sick, after all this, love entered his heart and took
possession, and it may be there was nothing surprising in his fate. So
at least it was.

[19] Meanwhile Cyrus, who was anxious that the Medes and the allies
should stay with him of their own free choice, called a meeting of
their leading men, and when they were come together he spoke as
follows:

[20] "Sons of the Medes and gentlemen all, I am well aware it was not
from need of money that you went out with me, nor yet in order to
serve Cyaxares; you came for my sake. You marched with me by night,
you ran into danger at my side, simply to do me honour. [21] Unless I
were a miscreant, I could not but be grateful for such kindness. But I
must confess that at present I lack the ability to make a fit
requital. This I am not ashamed to tell you, but I would feel ashamed
to add, 'If you will stay with me, I will be sure to repay you,' for
that would look as though I spoke to bribe you into remaining.
Therefore I will not say that; I will say instead, 'Even if you listen
to Cyaxares and go back to-day, I will still act so that you shall
praise me, I will not forget you in the day of my good fortune.' [22]
For myself, I will never go back; I cannot, for I must confirm my oath
to the Hyrcanians and the pledge I gave them; they are my friends and
I shall never be found a traitor to them. Moreover, I am bound to
Gobryas, who has offered us the use of his castle, his territory, and
his power; and I would not have him repent that he came to me. [23]
Last of all, and more than all, when the great gods have showered such
blessings on us, I fear them and I reverence them too much to turn my
back on all they have given us. This, then, is what I myself must do;
it is for you to decide as you think best, and you will acquaint me
with your decision."

[24] So he spoke, and the first to answer was the Mede who had claimed
kinship with Cyrus in the old days.

"Listen to me," he said, "O king! For king I take you to be by right
of nature; even as the king of the hive among the bees, whom all the
bees obey and take for their leader of their own free will; where he
stays they stay also, not one of them departs, and where he goes, not
one of them fails to follow; so deep a desire is in them to be ruled
by him. [25] Even thus, I believe, do our men feel towards you. Do you
remember the day you left us to go home to Persia? Was there one of
us, young or old, who did not follow you until Astyages turned us
back? And later, when you returned to bring us aid, did we not see for
ourselves how your friends poured after you? And again, when you had
set your heart on this expedition, we know that the Medes flocked to
your standard with one consent. [26] To-day we have learnt to feel
that even in an enemy's country we may be of good heart if you are
with us, but, without you, we should be afraid even to return to our
homes. The rest may speak for themselves, and tell you how they will
act, but for myself, Cyrus, and for those under me, I say we will
stand by you; we shall not grow weary of gazing at you, and we will
continue to endure your benefits."

[27] Thereupon Tigranes spoke:

"Do not wonder, Cyrus, if I am silent now. The soul within me is
ready, not to offer counsel, but to do your bidding." [28] And the
Hyrcanian chieftain said, "For my part, if you Medes turn back to-day
I shall say it was the work of some evil genius, who could not brook
the fulfilment of your happiness. For no human heart could think of
retiring when the foe is in flight, refusing to receive his sword when
he surrenders it, rejecting him when he offers himself and all that he
calls his own; above all, when we have a prince of men for our leader,
one who, I swear it by the holy gods, takes delight to do us service,
not to enrich himself."

[29] Thereupon the Medes cried with one consent:

"It was you, Cyrus, who led us out, and it is you who must lead us
home again, when the right moment comes."

And when Cyrus heard that, he prayed aloud:

"O most mighty Zeus, I supplicate thee, suffer me to outdo these
friends of mine in courtesy and kindly dealing."

[30] Upon that he gave his orders. The rest of the army were to place
their outposts and see to their own concerns, while the Persians took
the tents allotted to them, and divided them among their cavalry and
infantry, to suit the needs of either arm. Then they arranged for the
stewards to wait on them in future, bring them all they needed, and
keep their horses groomed, so that they themselves might be free for
the work of war. Thus they spent that day.

[C.2] But on the morrow they set out for their march to Gobryas. Cyrus
rode on horseback at the head of his new Persian cavalry, two thousand
strong, with as many more behind them, carrying their shields and
swords, and the rest of the army followed in due order. The cavalry
were told to make their new attendants understand that they would be
punished if they were caught falling behind the rear-guard, or riding
in advance of the column, or straggling on either flank. [2] Towards
evening of the second day the army found themselves before the castle
of Gobryas, and they saw that the place was exceedingly strong and
that all preparations had been made for the stoutest possible defence.
They noticed also that great herds of cattle and endless flocks of
sheep and goats had been driven up under the shelter of the castle
walls. [3] Then Gobryas sent word to Cyrus, bidding him ride round and
see where the place was easiest of approach, and meanwhile send his
trustiest Persians to enter the fortress and bring him word what they
found within. [4] Cyrus, who really wished to see if the citadel
admitted of attack in case Gobryas proved false, rode all round the
walls, and found they were too strong at every point. Presently the
messengers who had gone in brought back word that there were supplies
enough to last a whole generation and still not fail the garrison. [5]
While Cyrus was wondering what this could mean, Gobryas himself came
out, and all his men behind him, carrying wine and corn and barley,
and driving oxen and goats and swine, enough to feast the entire host.
[6] And his stewards fell to distributing the stores at once, and
serving up a banquet. Then Gobryas invited Cyrus to enter the castle
now that all the garrison had left it, using every precaution he might
think wise; and Cyrus took him at his word, and sent in scouts and a
strong detachment before he entered the palace himself. Once within,
he had the gates thrown open and sent for all his own friends and
officers. [7] And when they joined him, Gobryas had beakers of gold
brought out, and pitchers, and goblets, and costly ornaments, and
golden coins without end, and all manner of beautiful things, and last
of all he sent for his own daughter, tall and fair, a marvel of beauty
and stateliness, still wearing mourning for her brother. And her
father said to Cyrus, "All these riches I bestow on you for a gift,
and I put my daughter in your hands, to deal with as you think best.
We are your suppliants; I but three days gone for my son, and she this
day for her brother; we beseech you to avenge him."

[8] And Cyrus made answer:

"I gave you my promise before that if you kept faith with me I would
avenge you, so far as in me lay, and to-day I see the debt is due, and
the promise I made to you I repeat to your daughter; God helping me, I
will perform it. As for these costly gifts," he added, "I accept them,
and I give them for a dowry to your daughter, and to him who may win
her hand in marriage. One gift only I will take with me when I go, but
that is a thing so precious that if I changed it for all the wealth of
Babylon or the whole world itself I could not go on my way with half
so blithe a heart."

[9] And Gobryas wondered what this rare thing could be, half
suspecting it might be his daughter. "What is it, my lord?" said he.
And Cyrus answered, "I will tell you. A man may hate injustice and
impiety and lies, but if no one offers him vast wealth or unbridled
power or impregnable fortresses or lovely children, he dies before he
can show what manner of man he is. [10] But you have placed everything
in my hands to-day, this mighty fortress, treasures of every kind,
your own power, and a daughter most worthy to be won. And thus you
have shown all men that I could not sin against my friend and my host,
nor act unrighteously for the sake of wealth, nor break my plighted
word of my own free will. [11] This is your gift, and, so long as I am
a just man and known to be such, receiving the praise of my fellow-
men, I will never forget it; I will strive to repay you with every
honour I can give. [12] Doubt not," he added, "but that you will find
a husband worthy of your daughter. I have many a good man and true
among my friends, and one of them will win her hand; but I could not
say whether he will have less wealth, or more, than what you offer me.
Only of one thing you may be certain; there are those among them who
will not admire you one whit the more because of the splendour of your
gifts; they will only envy me and supplicate the gods that one day it
will be given to them to show that they too are loyal to their
friends, that they too will never yield to their foes while life is in
them, unless some god strike them down; that they too would never
sacrifice virtue and fair renown for all the wealth you proffer and
all the treasure of Syria and Assyria to boot. Such is the nature,
believe me, of some who are seated here."

[13] And Gobryas smiled. "By heaven, I wish you would point them out
to me, and I would beg you to give me one of them to be my son-in-
law." And Cyrus said, "You will not need to learn their names from me;
follow us, and you will be able to point them out yourself."

[14] With these words he rose, clasped the hand of Gobryas, and went
out, all his men behind him. And though Gobryas pressed him to stay
and sup in the citadel, he would not, but took his supper in the camp
and constrained Gobryas to take his meal with them. [15] And there,
lying on a couch of leaves, he put this question to him, 'Tell me,
Gobryas, who has the largest store of coverlets, yourself, or each of
us?" And the Assyrian answered, "You, I know, have more than I, more
coverlets, more couches, and a far larger dwelling-place, for your
home is earth and heaven, and every nook may be a couch, and for your
coverlets you need not count the fleeces of your flocks, but the
brushwood, and the herbage of hill and plain."

[16] Nevertheless, when the meal began, it must be said that Gobryas,
seeing the poverty of what was set before him, thought at first that
his own men were far more open-handed than the Persians. [17] But his
mood changed as he watched the grace and decorum of the company; and
saw that not a single Persian who had been schooled would ever gape,
or snatch at the viands, or let himself be so absorbed in eating that
he could attend to nothing else; these men prided themselves on
showing their good sense and their intelligence while they took their
food, just as a perfect rider sits his horse with absolute composure,
and can look and listen and talk to some purpose while he puts him
through his paces. To be excited or flustered by meat and drink was in
their eyes something altogether swinish and bestial. [18] Nor did
Gobryas fail to notice that they only asked questions which were
pleasant to answer, and only jested in a manner to please; all their
mirth was as far from impertinence and malice as it was from vulgarity
and unseemliness. [19] And what struck him most was their evident
feeling that on a campaign, since the danger was the same for all, no
one was entitled to a larger share than any of his comrades; on the
contrary, it was thought the perfection of the feast to perfect the
condition of those who were to share the fighting. [20] And thus when
he rose to return home, the story runs that he said:

"I begin to understand, Cyrus, how it is that while we have more
goblets and more gold, more apparel and more wealth than you, yet we
ourselves are not worth as much. We are always trying to increase what
we possess, but you seem to set your hearts on perfecting your own
souls."

[21] But Cyrus only answered:

"My friend, be here without fail to-morrow, and bring all your cavalry
in full armour, so that we may see your power, and then lead us
through your country and show us who are hostile and who are
friendly."

[22] Thus they parted for the time and each saw to his own concerns.

But when the day dawned Gobryas appeared with his cavalry and led the
way. And Cyrus, as a born general would, not only supervised the
march, but watched for any chance to weaken the enemy and add to his
own strength. [23] With this in view, he summoned the Hyrcanian chief
and Gobryas himself; for they were the two he thought most likely to
give him the information that he needed.

"My friends," said he, "I think I shall not err if I trust to your
fidelity and consult you about the campaign. You, even more than I,
are bound to see that the Assyrians do not overpower us. For myself,
if I fail, there may well be some loophole of escape. But for you, if
the king conquers, I see nothing but enmity on every side. [24] For,
although he is my enemy, he bears me no malice, he only feels that it
is against his interest for me to be powerful and therefore he attacks
me. But you he hates with a bitter hatred, believing he is wronged by
you."

To this his companions answered that he must finish what he had to
say; they were well aware of the facts, and had the deepest interest
in the turn events might take.

[25] Thereupon Cyrus put his questions: "Does the king suppose that
you alone are his enemies, or do you know of others who hate him too?"
"Certainly we do," replied the Hyrcanian, "the Cadousians are his
bitterest foes, and they are both numerous and warlike. Then there are
the Sakians, our neighbours, who have suffered severely at his hands,
for he tried to subdue them as he subdued us."

[26] "Then you think," said Cyrus, "that they would be glad to attack
him in our company?" "Much more than glad," answered they; "if they
could manage to join us." "And what stands in their way?" asked he.
"The Assyrians themselves," said they, "the very people among whom you
are marching now." [27] At that Cyrus turned to Gobryas:

"And what of this lad who is now on the throne? Did you not charge him
with unbridled insolence?"

"Even so," replied Gobryas, "and I think he gave me cause." "Tell me,"
said Cyrus, "were you the only man he treated thus, or did others
suffer too?"

[28] "Many others," said Gobryas, "but some of them were weak, and why
should I weary you with the insults they endured? I will tell you of a
young man whose father was a much greater personage than I, and who
was himself, like my own son, a friend and comrade of the prince. One
day at a drinking-bout this monster had the youth seized and
mutilated, and why? Some say simply because a paramour of his own had
praised the boy's beauty and said his bride was a woman to be envied.
The king himself now asserts it was because he had tried to seduce his
paramour. That young man, eunuch as he is, is now at the head of his
province, for his father is dead."

[29] "Well," rejoined Cyrus, "I take it, you believe he would welcome
us, if he thought we came to help him?" "I am more than sure of that,"
said Gobryas, "but it is not so easy to set eyes on him." "And why?"
asked Cyrus. "Because if we are to join him at all, we must march
right past Babylon itself." [30] "And where is the difficulty in
that?" said Cyrus. "Heaven help us!" cried Gobryas. "The city has only
to open her gates, and she can send out an army ten thousand times as
large as yours. That is why," he added, "the Assyrians are less prompt
than they were at bringing in their weapons and their horses, because
those who have seen your army think it so very small, and their report
has got about. So that in my opinion it would be better to advance
with the utmost care."

[31] Cyrus listened and replied.

"You do well, Gobryas, my friend, in urging as much care as possible.
But I cannot myself see a safer route for us than the direct advance
on Babylon, if Babylon is the centre of the enemy's strength. They are
numerous, you say, and if they are in good heart, we shall soon know
it. [32] Now, if they cannot find us and imagine that we have
disappeared from fear of them, you may take it as certain that they
will be quit of the terror we have inspired. Courage will spring up in
its place, and grow the greater the longer we lie hid. But if we march
straight on then, we shall find them still mourning for the dead whom
we have slain, still nursing the wounds we have inflicted, still
trembling at the daring of our troops, still mindful of their own
discomfiture and flight. [33] Gobryas," he added, "be assured of this;
men in the mass, when aflame with courage, are irresistible, and when
their hearts fail them, the more numerous they are the worse the panic
that seizes them. [34] It comes upon them magnified by a thousand
lies, blanched by a thousand pallors, it gathers head from a thousand
terror-stricken looks, until it grows so great that no orator can
allay it by his words, no general arouse the old courage by a charge,
or revive the old confidence by retreat; the more their leader cheers
them on, the worse do the soldiers take their case to be. [35] Now by
all means let us see exactly how things stand with us. If from
henceforward victory must fall to those who can reckon the largest
numbers, your fears for us are justified, and we are indeed in fearful
danger; but if the old rule still holds, and battles are decided by
the qualities of those who fight, then, I say, take heart and you will
never fail. You will find far more stomach for the fight among our
ranks than theirs. [36] And to hearten you the more, take note of
this: our enemies are far fewer now than when we worsted them, far
weaker than when they fled from us, while we are stronger because we
are conquerors, and greater because fortune has been ours; yes, and
actually more numerous because you and yours have joined us, for I
would not have you hold your men too low, now that they are side by
side with us. In the company of conquerors, Gobryas, the hearts of the
followers beat high. [37] Nor should you forget," he added, "that the
enemy is well able to see us as it is, and the sight of us will
certainly not be more alarming if we wait for him where we are than if
we advance against him. That is my opinion, and now you must lead us
straight for Babylon."

[C.3] And so the march continued, and on the fourth day they found
themselves at the limit of the territory over which Gobryas ruled.
Since they were now in the enemy's country Cyrus changed the
disposition of his men, taking the infantry immediately under his own
command, with sufficient cavalry to support them, and sending the rest
of the mounted troops to scour the land. Their orders were to cut down
every one with arms in his hands, and drive in the rest, with all the
cattle they could find. The Persians were ordered to take part in this
raid, and though many came home with nothing for their trouble but a
toss from their horses, others brought back a goodly store of booty.

[2] When the spoil was all brought in, Cyrus summoned the officers of
the Medes and the Hyrcanians, as well as his own peers, and spoke as
follows:

"My friends, Gobryas has entertained us nobly; he has showered good
things upon us. What say you then? After we have set aside the
customary portion for the gods and a fair share for the army, shall we
not give all the rest of the spoil to him? Would it not be a noble
thing, a sign and symbol at the outset that we desire to outdo in
well-doing those who do good to us?"

[3] At that all his hearers with one consent applauded, and a certain
officer rose and said:

"By all means, Cyrus, let us do so. I myself cannot but feel that
Gobryas must have thought us almost beggars because we were not laden
with coins of gold and did not drink from golden goblets. But if we do
this, he will understand that men may be free and liberal without the
help of gold."

[4] "Come then," said Cyrus, "let us pay the priests our debt to
heaven, select what the army requires, and then summon Gobryas and
give the rest to him."

So they took what they needed and gave all the rest to Gobryas.

[5] Forthwith Cyrus pressed on towards Babylon, his troops in battle
order. But as the Assyrians did not come out to meet them, he bade
Gobryas ride forward and deliver this message:

"If the king will come out to fight for his land, I, Gobryas, will
fight for him, but, if he will not defend his own country, we must
yield to the conquerors."

[6] So Gobryas rode forward, just far enough to deliver the message in
safety. And the king sent a messenger to answer him:

"Thy master says to thee: 'It repents me, Gobryas, not that I slew thy
son, but that I stayed my hand from slaying thee. And now if ye will
do battle, come again on the thirtieth day from hence. We have no
leisure now, our preparations are still on foot.'"

[7] And Gobryas made answer:

"It repents thee: may that repentance never cease! I have begun to
make thee suffer, since the day repentance took hold on thee."

[8] Then Gobryas brought back the words of the king to Cyrus, and
Cyrus led his army off, and then he summoned Gobryas and said to him:

"Surely you told me that you thought the man who was made an eunuch by
the king would be upon our side?"

"And I am sure he will," answered Gobryas, "for we have spoken freely
to each other many a time, he and I." [9] "Then," said Cyrus, "you
must go to him when you think the right moment has come: and you must
so act at first that only he and you may know what he intends, and
when you are closeted with him, if you find he really wishes to be a
friend, you must contrive that his friendship remain a secret: for in
war a man can scarcely do his friends more good than by a semblance of
hostility, or his enemies more harm than under the guise of
friendship." [10] "Aye," answered Gobryas, "and I know that Gadatas
would pay a great price to punish the king of Assyria. But it is for
us to consider what he can best do." [11] "Tell me now," rejoined
Cyrus, "you spoke of an outpost, built against the Hyrcanians and the
Sakians, which was to protect Assyria in time of war,--could the
eunuch be admitted there by the commandant if he came with a force at
his back?" "Certainly he could," said Gobryas, "if he were as free
from suspicion as he is to-day." [12] "And free he would be," Cyrus
went on, "if I were to attack his strongholds as though in earnest,
and he were to repel me in force. I might capture some of his men, and
he some of my soldiers, or some messengers sent by me to those you say
are the enemies of Assyria, and these prisoners would let it be known
that they were on their way to fetch an army with scaling-ladders to
attack this fortress, and the eunuch, hearing their story, would
pretend that he came to warn the commandant in time." [13]
"Undoubtedly," said Gobryas, "if things went thus, the commandant
would admit him; he would even beg him to stay there until you
withdrew."

"And then," Cyrus continued, "once inside the walls, he could put the
place into our hands?" [14] "We may suppose so," said Gobryas. "He
would be there to settle matters within, and you would be redoubling
the pressure from without."

"Then be off at once," said Cyrus, "and do your best to teach him his
part, and when you have arranged affairs, come back to me; and as for
pledges of good faith, you could offer him none better than those you
received from us yourself."

[15] Then Gobryas made haste and was gone, and the eunuch welcomed him
gladly; he agreed to everything and helped to arrange all that was
needed. Presently Gobryas brought back word that he thought the eunuch
had everything in readiness, and so, without more ado, Cyrus made his
feigned attack on the following day, and was beaten off. [16] But on
the other hand there was a fortress, indicated by Gadatas himself,
that Cyrus took. The messengers Cyrus had sent out, telling them
exactly where to go, fell into the hands of Gadatas: some were allowed
to escape--their business was to fetch the troops and carry the
scaling-ladders--but the rest were narrowly examined in the presence
of many witnesses, and when Gadatas heard the object of their journey
he got his equipment together and set out in the night at full speed
to take the news. [17] In the end he made his way into the fortress,
trusted and welcomed as a deliverer, and for a time he helped the
commandant to the best of his ability. But as soon as Cyrus appeared
he seized the place, aided by the Persian prisoners he had taken. [18]
This done, and having set things in order within the fortress, Gadatas
went out to Cyrus, bowed before him according to the custom of his
land, and said, "Cyrus, may joy be yours!"

[19] "Joy is mine already," answered he, "for you, God helping you,
have brought it to me. You must know," he added, "that I set great
store by this fortress, and rejoice to leave it in the hands of my
allies here. And for yourself, Gadatas," he added, "if the Assyrian
has robbed you of the ability to beget children, remember he has not
stolen your power to win friends; you have made us yours, I tell you,
by this deed, and we will stand by as faithfully as sons and grandsons
of your own."

[20] So Cyrus spoke. And at that instant the Hyrcanian chief, who had
only just learnt what had happened, came running up to him, and
seizing him by the hand cried out:

"O Cyrus, you godsend to your friends! How often you make me thank the
gods for bringing me to you!"

[21] "Off with you, then," said Cyrus, "and occupy this fortress for
which you bless me so. Take it and make the best use of it you can,
for your own nation, and for all our allies, and above all for
Gadatas, our friend, who won it and surrenders it to us."

[22] "Then," said the chieftain, "as soon as the Cadousians arrive and
the Sakians and my countrymen, we must, must we not? call a council of
them all, so that we may consult together, and see how best to turn it
to account."

[23] Cyrus thought the proposal good, and when they met together it
was decided to garrison the post with a common force, chosen from all
who were concerned that it should remain friendly and be an outer
balwark to overawe the Assyrians. [24] This heightened the enthusiasm
of them all, Cadousians, Sakians, and Hyrcanians, and their levies
rose high, until the Cadousians sent in 20,000 light infantry and 4000
cavalry, and the Sakians 11,000 bowmen, 10,000 on foot and 1000
mounted, while the Hyrcanians were free to despatch all their reserves
of infantry and make up their horsemen to a couple of thousand strong,
whereas previously the larger portion of their cavalry had been left
at home to support the Cadousians and Sakians against Assyria.

[25] And while Cyrus was kept in the fortress, organising and
arranging everything, many of the Assyrians from the country round
brought in their horses and handed over their arms, being by this time
in great dread of their neighbours.

[26] Soon after this Gadatas came to Cyrus and told him that
messengers had come to say that the king of Assyria, learning what had
happened to the fortress, was beside himself with anger, and was
preparing to attack his territory. "If you, Cyrus," said he, "will let
me go now, I will try to save my fortresses: the rest is of less
account." [27] Cyrus said, "If you go now, when will you reach home?"
And Gadatas answered, "On the third day from this I can sup in my own
house." "Do you think," asked Cyrus, "that you will find the Assyrian
already there?" "I am sure of it," he answered, "for he will make
haste while he thinks you are still far off." [28] "And I," said
Cyrus, "when could I be there with my army?" But to this Gadatas made
answer, "The army you have now, my lord, is very large, and you could
not reach my home in less than six days or seven." "Well," Cyrus
replied, "be off yourself: make all speed, and I will follow as best I
can."

[29] So Gadatas was gone, and Cyrus called together all the officers
of the allies, and a great and goodly company they seemed, noble
gentlemen, beautiful and brave. And Cyrus stood up among them all and
said:

[30] "My allies and my friends, Gadatas has done deeds that we all
feel worthy of high reward, and that too before ever he had received
any benefit from us. The Assyrians, we hear, have now invaded his
territory, to take vengeance for the monstrous injury they consider he
has done them, and moreover, they doubtless argue that if those who
revolt to us escape scot-free, while those who stand by them are cut
to pieces, ere long they will not have a single supporter on their
side. [31] To-day, gentlemen, we may do a gallant deed, if we rescue
Gadatas, our friend and benefactor; and truly it is only just and
right thus to repay gift for gift, and boon for boon. Moreover, as it
seems to me, what we accomplish will be much to our own interest. [32]
If all men see that we are ready to give blow for blow and sting for
sting, while we outdo our benefactors in generous deeds, it is only
natural that multitudes will long to be our friends, and no man care
to be our foe. [33] Whereas, if it be thought that we left Gadatas in
the lurch, how in heaven's name shall we persuade another to show us
any kindness? How shall we dare to think well of ourselves again? How
shall one of us look Gadatas in the face, when all of us, so many and
so strong, showed ourselves less generous than he, one single man and
in so sore a plight?"

[34] Thus Cyrus spoke, and all of them assented right willingly, and
said it must be done.

"Come then," concluded Cyrus, "since you are all of one mind with me,
let each of us choose an escort for our waggons and beasts of burden.
[35] Let us leave them behind us, and put Gobryas at their head. He is
acquainted with the roads, and for the rest he is a man of skill. But
we ourselves will push on with our stoutest men and our strongest
horses, taking provision for three days and no more: the lighter and
cheaper our gear the more gaily shall we break our fast and take our
supper and sleep on the road. [36] And now," said he, "let us arrange
the order of the march. You, Chrysantas, must lead the van with your
cuirassiers, since the road is broad and smooth, and you must put your
brigadiers in the first line, each regiment marching in file, for if
we keep close order we shall travel all the quicker and be all the
safer. [37] I put the cuirassiers in the front," he added, "because
they are our heaviest troops, and if the heaviest are leading, the
lighter cannot find it hard to follow: whereas where the swiftest lead
and the march is at night, it is no wonder if the column fall to
pieces: the vanguard is always running away. [38] And behind the
cuirassiers," he went on, "Artabazas is to follow with the Persian
targeteers and the bowmen, and behind them Andamyas the Mede with the
Median infantry, and then Embas and the Armenian infantry, and then
Artouchas with the Hyrcanians, and then Thambradas with the Sakian
foot, and finally Datamas with the Cadousians. [39] All these officers
will put their brigadiers in the first line, their targeteers on the
right, and their bowmen on the left of their own squares: this is the
order in which they will be of most use. [40] All the baggage-bearers
are to follow in the rear: and their officers must see that they get
everything together before they sleep, and present themselves betimes
in the morning, with all their gear, and always keep good order on the
march. [41] In support of the baggage-train," he added, "there will
be, first, Madatas the Persian with the Persian cavalry, and he too
must put his brigadiers in the front, each regiment following in
single file, as with the infantry. [42] Behind them Rambacas the Mede
and his cavalry, in the same order, and then you, Tigranes, and yours,
and after you the other cavalry leaders with the men they brought. The
Sakians will follow you, and last of all will come the Cadousians, who
were the last to join us, and you, Alkeunas, who are to command them,
for the present you will take complete control of the rear, and allow
no one to fall behind your men. [43] All of you alike, officers, and
all who respect yourselves, must be most careful to march in silence.
At night the ears, and not the eyes, are the channels of information
and the guides for action, and at night any confusion is a far more
serious matter than by day, and far more difficult to put right. For
this reason silence must be studied and order absolutely maintained.
[44] Whenever you mean to rise before daybreak, you must make the
night-watches as short and as numerous as possible, so that no one may
suffer on the march because of his long vigil before it; and when the
hour for the start arrives the horn must be blown. [45] Gentlemen, I
expect you all to present yourselves on the road to Babylon with
everything you require, and as each detachment starts, let them pass
down the word for those in the rear to follow."

[46] So the officers went to their quarters, and as they went they
talked of Cyrus, and what a marvellous memory he had, always naming
each officer as he assigned him his post. [47] The fact was Cyrus took
special pains over this: it struck him as odd that a mere mechanic
could know the names of all his tools, and a physician the names of
all his instruments, but a general be such a simpleton that he could
not name his own officers, the very tools he had to depend on each
time he wanted to seize a point or fortify a post or infuse courage or
inspire terror. Moreover it seemed to him only courteous to address a
man by name when he wished to honour him. [48] And he was sure that
the man who feels he is personally known to his commander is more
eager to be seen performing some noble feat of arms, and more careful
to refrain from all that is unseemly and base. [49] Cyrus thought it
would be quite foolish for him to give his orders in the style of
certain householders: "Somebody fetch the water, some one split the
wood." [50] After a command of that kind, every one looks at every one
else, and no one carries it out, every one is to blame, and no one is
ashamed or afraid, because there are so many beside himself. Therefore
Cyrus always named the officers whenever he gave an order.

[51] That, then, was his view of the matter. The army now took supper
and posted their guards and got their necessaries together and went to
rest. [52] And at midnight the horn was blown. Cyrus had told
Chrysantas he would wait for him at a point on the road in advance of
the troops, and therefore he went on in front himself with his own
staff, and waited till Chrysantas appeared shortly afterwards at the
head of his cuirassiers. [53] Then Cyrus put the guides under his
command, and told him to march on, but to go slowly until he received
a message, for all the troops were not yet on the road. This done,
Cyrus took his stand on the line of march, and as each division came
up, hurried it forward to its place, sending messengers meanwhile to
summon those who were still behind. [54] When all had started, he
despatched gallopers to Chrysantas to tell him that the whole army was
now under way, and that he might lead on as quick as he could. [55]
Then he galloped to the front himself, reined up, and quietly watched
the ranks defile before him. Whenever a division advanced silently and
in good order, he would ride up and ask their names and pay them
compliments; and if he saw any sign of confusion he would inquire the
reason and restore tranquillity. [56] One point remains to add in
describing his care that night; he sent forward a small but picked
body of infantry, active fellows all of them, in advance of the whole
army. They were to keep Chrysantas in sight, and he was not to lose
sight of them; they were to use their ears and all their wits, and
report at once to Chrysantas if they thought there was any need. They
had an officer to direct their movements, announce anything of
importance, and not trouble about trifles.

[57] Thus they pressed forward through the night, and when day broke
Cyrus ordered the mass of the cavalry to the front, the Cadousians
alone remaining with their own infantry, who brought up the rear, and
who were as much in need as others of cavalry support. But the rest of
the horsemen he sent ahead because it was ahead that the enemy lay,
and in case of resistance he was anxious to oppose them in battle-
order, while if they fled he wished no time to be lost in following up
the pursuit. [58] It was always arranged who were to give chase and
who were to stay with himself: he never allowed the whole army to be
broken up. [59] Thus Cyrus conducted the advance, but it is not to be
thought that he kept to one particular spot; he was always galloping
backwards and forwards, first at one point and then at another,
supervising everything and supplying any defect as it arose. Thus
Cyrus and his men marched forward.

[C.4] Now there was a certain officer in the cavalry with Gadatas, a
man of power and influence, who, when he saw that his master had
revolted from Assyria, thought to himself, "If anything should happen
to him, I myself could get from the king all that he possessed."

Accordingly he sent forward a man he could trust, with instructions
that, if he found the Assyrian army already in the territory of
Gadatas, he was to tell the king that he could capture Gadatas and all
who were with him, if he thought fit to make an ambuscade. [2] And the
messenger was also to say what force Gadatas had at his command and to
announce that Cyrus was not with him. Moreover, the officer stated the
road by which Gadatas was coming. Finally, to win the greater
confidence, he sent word to his own dependents and bade them deliver
up to the king of Assyria the castle which he himself commanded in the
province, with all that it contained: he would come himself, he added,
if possible, after he had slain Gadatas, and, even if he failed in
that, he would always stand by the king.

[3] Now the emissary rode as hard as he could and came before the king
and told his errand, and, hearing it, the king at once took over the
castle and formed an ambuscade, with a large body of horse and many
chariots, in a dense group of villages that lay upon the road. [4]
Gadatas, when he came near the spot, sent scouts ahead to explore, and
the king, as soon as he sighted them, ordered two or three of his
chariots and a handful of horsemen to dash away as though in flight,
giving the impression that they were few in number and panic-stricken.
At this the scouting party swept after them, signalling to Gadatas,
who also fell into the trap and gave himself up to the chase.

The Assyrians waited till the quarry was within their grasp and then
sprang out from their ambuscade. [5] The men, with Gadatas, seeing
what had happened, turned back and fled, as one might expect, with the
Assyrians at their heels, while the officer who had planned it all
stabbed Gadatas himself. He struck him in the shoulder, but the blow
was not mortal. Thereupon the traitor fled to the pursuers, and when
they found out who he was he galloped on with them, his horse at full
stretch, side by side with the king. [6] Naturally the men with the
slower horses were overtaken by the better mounted, and the fugitives,
already wearied by their long journey, were at the last extremity when
suddenly they caught sight of Cyrus advancing at the head of his army,
and were swept into safety, as glad and thankful, we may well believe,
as shipwrecked mariners into port.

[7] The first feeling of Cyrus was sheer astonishment, but he soon saw
how matters stood. The whole force of the Assyrian cavalry was rolling
on him, and he met it with his own army in perfect order, till the
enemy, realising what had happened, turned and fled. Then Cyrus
ordered his pursuing party to charge, while he followed more slowly at
the pace he thought the safest. [8] The enemy were utterly routed:
many of the chariots were taken, some had lost their charioteers,
others were seized in the sudden change of front, others surrounded by
the Persian cavalry. Right and left the conquerors cut down their
foes, and among them fell the officer who had dealt the blow at
Gadatas. [9] But of the Assyrian infantry, those who were besieging
the fortress of Gadatas escaped to the stronghold that had revolted
from him, or managed to reach an important city belonging to the king,
where he himself, his horsemen, and his chariots had taken refuge.

[10] After this exploit Cyrus went on to the territory of Gadatas, and
as soon as he had given orders to those who guarded the prisoners, he
went himself to visit the eunuch and see how it was with him after his
wound. Gadatas came out to meet him, his wound already bandaged. And
Cyrus was gladdened and said, "I came myself to see how it was with
you." [11] "And I," said Gadatas, "heaven be my witness, I came out to
see how a man would look who had a soul like yours. I cannot tell what
need you had of me, or what promise you ever gave me, to make you do
as you have done. I had shown you no kindness for your private self:
it was because you thought I had been of some little service to your
friends, that you came to help me thus, and help me you did, from
death to life. Left to myself I was lost. [12] By heaven above, I
swear it, Cyrus, if I had been a father as I was born to be, God knows
whether I could have found in the son of my loins so true a friend as
you. I know of sons--this king of ours is such an one, who has caused
his own father ten thousand times more trouble than ever he causes
you."

[13] And Cyrus made answer:

"You have overlooked a much more wonderful thing, Gadatas, to turn and
wonder at me."

"Nay," said Gadatas, "what could that be?"

"That all these Persians," he answered, "are so zealous in your
behalf, and all these Medes and Hyrcanians, and every one of our
allies, Armenians, Sakians, Cadousians."

[14] Then Gadatas prayed aloud:

"O Father Zeus, may the gods heap blessings on them also, but above
all on him who has made them what they are! And now, Cyrus, that I may
entertain as they deserve these men you praise, take the gifts I bring
you as their host, the best I have it in my power to bring."

And with the word he brought out stores of every kind, enough for all
to over sacrifice who listed; and the whole army was entertained in a
manner worthy of their feat and their success.

[15] Meanwhile the Cadousians had been always in the rear, unable to
share in the pursuit, and they longed to achieve some exploit of their
own. So their chieftain, with never a word to Cyrus, led them forth
alone, and raided the country towards Babylon. But, as soon as they
were scattered the Assyrians came out from their city of refuge in
good battle-order. [16] When they saw that the Cadousians were
unsupported they attacked them, killing the leader himself and numbers
of his men, capturing many of their horses and retaking the spoil they
were in the act of driving away. The king pursued as far as he thought
safe, and then turned back, and the Cadousians at last found safety in
their own camp, though even the vanguard only reached it late in the
afternoon. [17] When Cyrus saw what had happened he went out to meet
them, succouring every wounded man and sending him off to Gadatas at
once, to have his wounds dressed, while he helped to house the others
in their quarters, and saw that they had all they needed, his Peers
aiding him, for at such times noble natures will give help with all
their hearts. [18] Still it was plain to see that he was sorely vexed,
and when the hour for dinner came, and the others went away, he was
still there on the ground with the attendants and the surgeons; not a
soul would he leave uncared for if anything could be done: he either
saw to it himself or sent for the proper aid.

[19] So for that night they rested. But with daybreak Cyrus sent out a
herald and summoned a gathering of all the officers and the whole
Cadousian army, and spoke as follows:

"My friends and allies, what has happened is only natural; for it is
human nature to err, and I cannot find it astonishing. Still we may
gain at least one advantage from what has occurred, if we learn that
we must never cut off from our main body a detachment weaker than the
force of the enemy. [20] I do not say that one is never to march
anywhere, if necessary, with an even smaller fraction than the
Cadousians had; but, before doing so you must communicate with some
one able to bring up reinforcements, and then, though you may be
trapped yourself, it is at least probable that your friends behind you
may foil the foilers, and divert them from your own party: there are
fifty ways in which one can embarrass the enemy and save one's
friends. Thus separation need not mean isolation, and union with the
main force may still be kept, whereas if you sally forth without
telling your plan, you are no better off than if you were alone in the
field. [21] However, God willing, we shall take our revenge for this
ere long; indeed, as soon as you have breakfasted, I will lead you out
to the scene of yesterday's skirmish, and there we will bury those who
fell, and show our enemies that the very field where they thought
themselves victorious is held by those who are stronger than they:
they shall never look again with joy upon the spot where they slew our
comrades. Or else, if they refuse to come out and meet us, we will
burn their villages and harry all their land, so that in lieu of
rejoicing at the sight of what they did to us, they shall gnash their
teeth at the spectacle of their own disasters. [22] Go now," said he,
"the rest of you, and take your breakfast forthwith, but let the
Cadousians first elect a leader in accordance with their own laws, and
one who will guide them well and wisely, by the grace of God, and with
our human help, if they should need it. And when you have chosen your
leader, and had your breakfast, send him hither to me."

[23] So they did as Cyrus bade them, and when he led the army out, he
stationed their new general close to his own person, and told him to
keep his detachment there, "So that you and I," said he, "may rekindle
the courage in their souls."

In this order they marched out, and thus they buried the Cadousian
dead and ravaged the country. Which done, they went back to the
province of Gadatas, laden with supplies taken from the foe.

[24] Now Cyrus felt that those who had come over to his side and who
dwelt in the neighbourhood of Babylon would be sure to suffer unless
he were constantly there himself, and so he bade all the prisoners he
set free take a message to the king, and he himself despatched a
herald to say that he would leave all the tillers of the soil
unmolested and unhurt if the Assyrian would let those who had come
over to him continue their work in peace. [25] "And remember," he
added, "that even if you try to hinder my friends, it is only a few
whom you could stop, whereas there is a vast territory of yours that I
could allow to be cultivated. As for the crops," he added, "if we have
war, it will be the conqueror, I make no doubt, who will reap them,
but if we have peace, it will be you. If, however, any of my people
take up arms against you, or any of yours against me, we must, of
course, each of us, defend ourselves as best we can."

[26] With this message Cyrus despatched the herald, and when the
Assyrians heard it, they urged the king to accept the proposal, and so
limit the war as much as possible. [27] And he, whether influenced by
his own people or because he desired it himself, consented to the
terms. So an agreement was drawn up, proclaiming peace to the tillers
of the soil and war to all who carried arms.

[28] Thus Cyrus arranged matters for the husbandmen, and he asked his
own supporters among the drovers to bring their herds, if they liked,
into his dominions and leave them there, while he treated the enemy's
cattle as booty wherever he could, so that his allies found attraction
in the campaign. For the risk was no greater if they took what they
needed, while the knowledge that they were living at the enemy's
expense certainly seemed to lighten the labour of the war.

[29] When the time came for Cyrus to go back, and the final
preparations were being made, Gadatas brought him gifts of every kind,
the produce of a vast estate, and among the cattle a drove of horses,
taken from cavalry of his own, whom he distrusted owing to the late
conspiracy. [30] And when he brought them he said, "Cyrus, this day I
give you these for your own, and I would pray you to make such use of
them as you think best, but I would have you remember that all else
which I call mine is yours as well. For there is no son of mine, nor
can there ever be, sprung from my own loins, to whom I may leave my
wealth: when I die myself, my house must perish with me, my family and
my name. [31] And I must suffer this, Cyrus, I swear to you by the
great gods above us, who see all things and hear all things, though
never by word or deed did I commit injustice or foulness of any kind."

But here the words died on his lips; he burst into tears over his
sorrows, and could say no more. [32] Cyrus was touched with pity at
his suffering and said to him:

"Let me accept the horses, for in that I can help you, if I set loyal
riders on them, men of a better mind, methinks, than those who had
them before, and I myself can satisfy a wish that has long been mine,
to bring my Persian cavalry up to ten thousand men. But take back, I
pray you, all these other riches, and guard them safely against the
time when you may find me able to vie with you in gifts. If I left you
now so hugely in your debt, heaven help me if I could hold up my head
again for very shame."

[33] Thereto Gadatas made answer, "In all things I trust you, and will
trust you, for I see your heart. But consider whether I am competent
to guard all this myself. [34] While I was at peace with the king, the
inheritance I had from my father was, it may be, the fairest in all
the land: it was near that mighty Babylon, and all the good things
that can be gathered from a great city fell into our laps, and yet
from all the trouble of it, the noise and the bustle, we could be free
at once by turning our backs and coming home here. But now that we are
at war, the moment you have left us we are sure to be attacked,
ourselves and all our wealth, and methinks we shall have a sorry life
of it, our enemies at our elbow and far stronger than ourselves. [35]
I seem to hear some one say, why did you not think of this before you
revolted? But I answer, Cyrus, because the soul within me was stung
beyond endurance by my wrongs; I could not sit and ponder the safest
course, I was always brooding over one idea, always in travail of one
dream, praying for the day of vengeance on the miscreant, the enemy of
God and man, whose hatred never rested, once aroused, once he
suspected a man, not of doing wrong, but of being better than himself.
[36] And because he is a villain, he will always find, I know, worse
villains that himself to aid him, but if one day a nobler rival should
appear--have no concern, Cyrus, you will never need to do battle with
such an one, yonder fiend would deal with him and never cease to plot
against him until he had dragged him in the dust, only because he was
the better man. And to work me trouble and disaster, he and his wicked
tools will, I fear me, have strength enough and to spare."

[37] Cyrus thought there was much in what he said, and he answered
forthwith:

"Tell me, Gadatas, did we not put a stout garrison in your fortress,
so as to make it safe for you whenever you needed it, and are you not
taking the field with us now, so that, if the gods be on our side as
they are to-day, that scoundrel may fear you, not you him? Go now,
bring with you all you have that is sweet to look on and to love, and
then join our march: you shall be, I am persuaded, of the utmost
service to me, and I, so far as in me lies, will give you help for
help."

[38] When Gadatas heard that, he breathed again, and he said:

"Could I really be in time to make my preparations and be back before
you leave? I would fain take my mother with me on the march."

"Assuredly," said Cyrus, "you will be in time: for I will wait until
you say that all is ready."

[39] So it came to pass that Gadatas went his way, and with the aid of
Cyrus put a strong garrison in his fortress, and got together the
wealth of his broad estates. And moreover he brought with him in his
own retinue servants he could trust and in whom he took delight, as
well as many others in whom he put no trust at all, and these he
compelled to bring their wives with them, and their sisters, that so
they might be bound to his service.

[40] Thus Gadatas went with Cyrus, and Cyrus kept him ever at his
side, to show him the roads and the places for water and fodder and
food, and lead them where there was most abundance.

[41] At last they came in sight of Babylon once more, and it seemed to
Cyrus that the road they were following led under the very walls.
Therefore he summoned Gobryas and Gadatas, and asked them if there was
not another way, so that he need not pass so close to the ramparts.
[42] "There are many other ways, my lord," answered Gobryas, "but I
thought you would certainly want to pass as near the city as possible,
and display the size and splendour of your army to the king. I knew
that when your force was weaker you advanced to his walls, and let him
see us, few as we were, and I am persuaded that if he has made any
preparation for battle now, as he said he would, when he sees the
power you have brought with you, he will think once more that he is
unprepared."

[435] But Cyrus said:

"Does it seem strange to you, Gobryas, that when I had a far smaller
army I took it right up to the enemy's walls, and to-day when my force
is greater I will not venture there? [44] You need not think it
strange: to march up is not the same as to march past. Every leader
will march up with his troops disposed in the best order for battle
and a wise leader will draw them off so as to secure safety rather
than sped. [45] But in marching past there is no means of avoiding
long straggling lines of waggons, long strings of baggage-bearers, and
all these must be screened by the fighting-force so as never to leave
the baggage unprotected. [46] But this must mean a thin weak order for
the fighting-men, and if the enemy choose to attack at any point with
their full force, they can strike with far more weight than any of the
troops available to meet them at the moment. [47] Again, the length of
line means a long delay in bringing up relief, whereas the enemy have
only a handsbreadth to cover as they rush out from the walls or
retire. [48] But now, if we leave a distance between ourselves and
them as wide as our line is long, not only with they realise our
numbers plainly enough, but our veil of glittering armour will make
the whole multitude more formidable in their eyes. [49] And, if they
do attack us anywhere, we shall be able to foresee their advance a
long way off and be quite prepared to give them welcome. But it is far
more likely, gentlemen," he added, "that they will not make the
attempt, with all that ground to cover from the walls, unless they
imagine that their whole force is superior to the whole of ours: they
know that retreat will be difficult and dangerous."

[50] So Cyrus spoke, and his listeners felt that he was right, and
Gobryas led the army by the way that he advised. And as one detachment
after another passed the city, Cyrus strengthened the protection for
the rear and so withdrew in safety.

[51] Marching in this order, he came back at last to his first
starting-point, on the frontier between Assyria and Media. Here he
dealt with three Assyrian fortresses: one, the weakest, he attacked
and took by force, while the garrisons of the other two, what with the
eloquence of Gadatas and the terror inspired by Cyrus, were persuaded
to surrender.

[C.5] And now that his expedition was completed, Cyrus sent to
Cyaxares and urged him to come to the camp in order that they might
decide best how to use the forts which they had taken, and perhaps
Cyaxares, after reviewing the army, would advise him what the next
move ought to be, or, Cyrus added to the messenger, "if he bids me,
say I will come to him and take up my encampment there." [2] So the
emissary went off with the message, and meanwhile Cyrus gave orders
that the Assyrian tent chosen for Cyaxares should be furnished as
splendidly as possible, and the woman brought to her apartment there,
and the two singing-girls also, whom they had set aside for him.

[3] And while they were busied with these things the envoy went to
Cyaxares and delivered his message, and Cyaxares listened and decided
it was best for Cyrus and his men to stay on the frontier. The
Persians whom Cyrus had sent for had already arrived, forty thousand
bowmen and targeteers. [4] To watch these eating up the land was bad
enough, and Cyaxares thought he would rather be quit of one horde
before he received another. On his side the officer in command of the
Persian levy, following the instructions from Cyrus, asked Cyaxares if
he had any need of the men, and Cyaxares said he had not. Thereupon,
and hearing that Cyrus had arrived, the Persian put himself at the
head of his troops and went off at once to join him. [5] Cyaxares
himself waited till the next day and then set out with the Median
troopers who had stayed behind. And when Cyrus knew of his approach he
took his Persian cavalry, who were now a large body of men, and all
the Medes, Hyrcanians, and Armenians, and the best-mounted and best-
armed among the rest, and so went out to meet Cyaxares and show the
power he had won. [6] But when Cyaxares saw so large a following of
gallant gentlemen with Cyrus, and with himself so small and mean a
retinue, it seemed to him an insult, and mortification filled his
heart. And when Cyrus sprang from his horse and came up to give him
the kiss of greeting, Cyaxares, though he dismounted, turned away his
head and gave him no kiss, while the tears came into his eyes. [7]
Whereupon Cyrus told the others to stand aside and rest, and then he
took Cyaxares by the hand and led him apart under a grove of palm-
trees, and bade the attendants spread Median carpets for them, and
made Cyaxares sit down, and then, seating himself beside him, he said:

[8] "Uncle of mine, tell me, in heaven's name, I implore you, why are
you angry with me? What bitter sight have you seen to make you feel
such bitterness?"

And then Cyaxares answered:

"Listen, Cyrus; I have been reputed royal and of royal lineage as far
back as the memory of man can go; my father was a king and a king I
myself was thought to be; and now I see myself riding here, meanly and
miserably attended, while you come before me in splendour and
magnificence, followed by the retinue that once was mine and all your
other forces. [9] That would be bitter enough, methinks, from the hand
of an enemy, but--O gods above us!--how much more bitter at the hands
of those from whom we least deserve it! Far rather would I be
swallowed in the earth than live to be seen so low, aye, and to see my
own kinsfolk turn against me and make a mock of me. And well I know,"
said he, "that not only you but my own slaves are now stronger and
greater than myself: they come out equipt to do me far more mischief
than ever I could repay."

[10] But here he stopped, overcome by a passion of weeping, so much so
that for very pity Cyrus' own eyes filled with tears. There was
silence between them for a while, and then Cyrus said:

"Nay, Cyaxares, what you say is not true, and what you think is not
right, if you imagine that because I am here, your Medes have been
equipt to do you any harm. [11] I do not wonder that you are pained,
and I will not ask if you have cause or not for your anger against
them: you will ill brook apologies for them from me. Only it seems to
me a grievous error in a ruler to quarrel with all his subjects at
once. Widespread terror must needs be followed by widespread hate:
anger with all creates unity among all. [12] It was for this reason,
take my word for it, that I would not send them back to you without
myself, fearing that your wrath might be the cause of what would
injure all of us. Through my presence here and by the blessing of
heaven, all is safe for you: but that you should regard yourself as
wronged by me,--I cannot but feel it bitter, when I am doing all in my
power to help my friends, to be accused of plotting against them. [13]
However," he continued, "let us not accuse each other in this useless
way; if possible, let us see exactly in what I have offended. And as
between friend and friend, I will lay down the only rule that is just
and fair: if I can be shown to have done you harm, I will confess I am
to blame, but if it appears that I have never injured you, not even in
thought, will you not acquit me of all injustice towards you?"

"Needs must I," answered Cyaxares.

[14] "And if I can show that I have done you service, and been zealous
in your cause to the utmost of my power, may I not claim, instead of
rebuke, some little meed of praise?"

"That were only fair," said Cyaxares.

[15] "Then," said Cyrus, "let us go through all I have done, point by
point, and see what is good in it and what is evil. [16] Let us begin
from the time when I assumed my generalship, if that is early enough.
I think I am right in saying that it was because you saw your enemies
gathering together against you, and ready to sweep over your land and
you, that you sent to Persia asking for help, and to me in private,
praying me to come, if I could, myself, at the head of any forces they
might send. Was I not obedient to your word? Did I not come myself
with the best and bravest I could bring?"

[17] "You did indeed," answered Cyaxares.

"Tell me, then, before we go further, did you see any wrong in this?
Was it not rather a service and a kindly act?" "Certainly," said
Cyaxares, "so far as that went, I saw nothing but kindliness." [18]
"Well, after the enemy had come, and we had to fight the matter out,
did you ever see me shrink from toil or try to escape from danger?"
"That I never did," said Cyaxares, "quite the contrary."

[19] "And afterwards, when, through the help of heaven, victory was
ours, and the enemy retreated, and I implored you to let us pursue
them together, take vengeance on them together, win together the
fruits of any gallant exploit we might achieve, can you accuse me then
of self-seeking or self-aggrandisement?"

[20] But at that Cyaxares was silent. Then Cyrus spoke again. "If you
would rather not reply to that, tell me if you thought yourself
injured because, when you considered pursuit unsafe, I relieved you of
the risk, and only begged you to lend me some of your cavalry? If my
offence lay in asking for that, when I had already offered to work
with you, side by side, you must prove it to me; and it will need some
eloquence."

[21] He paused, but Cyaxares still kept silence. "Nay," said Cyrus,
"if you will not answer that either, tell me at least if my offence
lay in what followed, when you said that you did not care to stop your
Medes in their merry-making and drive them out into danger, do you
think it was wrong in me, without waiting to quarrel on that score, to
ask you for what I knew was the lightest boon you could grant and the
lightest command you could lay on your soldiers? For I only asked that
he who wished it might be allowed to follow me. [22] And thus, when I
had won your permission, I had won nothing, unless I could win them
too. Therefore I went and tried persuasion, and some listened to me,
and with these I set off on my march, holding my commission from your
own self. So that, if you look on this act as blameworthy, it would
seem that not even the acceptance of your own gifts can be free from
blame. [23] It was thus we started, and after we had gone, was there,
I ask you, a single deed of mine that was not done in the light of
day? Has not the enemy's camp been taken? Have not hundreds of your
assailants fallen? And hundreds been deprived of their horses and
their arms? Is not the spoiler spoiled? The cattle and the goods of
those who harried your land are now in the hands of your friends, they
are brought to you, or to your subjects. [24] And, above all and
beyond all, you see your own country growing great and powerful and
the land of your enemy brought low. Strongholds of his are in your
power, and your own that were torn from you in other days by the
Syrian domination are now restored to you again. I cannot say I should
be glad to learn that any of these things can be bad for you, or short
of good, but I am ready to listen, if so it is. [25] Speak, tell me
your judgment of it all."

Then Cyrus paused, and Cyaxares made answer:

"To call what you have done evil, Cyrus, is impossible. But your
benefits are of such a kind that the more they multiply upon me, the
heavier burden do they bring. [26] I would far rather," he went on,
"have made your country great by own power than see mine exalted in
this way by you. These deeds of yours are a crown of glory to you; but
they bring dishonour to me. [27] And for the wealth, I would rather
have made largess of it to yourself than receive it at your hands in
the way you give it now. Goods so gotten only leave me the poorer. And
for my subjects--I think I would have suffered less if you had injured
them a little than I suffer now when I see how much they owe you. [28]
Perhaps," he added, "you find it inhuman of me to feel thus, but I
would ask you to forget me and imagine that you are in my place and
see how it would appear to you then. Suppose a friend of yours were to
take care of your dogs, dogs that you bred up to guard yourself and
your house, such care that he made them fonder of him than of
yourself, would you be pleased with him for his attention? [29] Or
take another instance, if that one seems too slight: suppose a friend
of yours were to do so much for your own followers, men you kept to
guard you and to fight for you, that they would rather serve in his
train than yours, would you be grateful to him for his kindness? [30]
Or let me take the tenderest of human ties: suppose a friend of yours
paid court to the wife of your bosom so that in the end he made her
love him more than yourself, would he rejoice your heart by his
courtesy? Far from it, I trow; he who did this, you would say, did you
the greatest wrong in all the world. [31] And now, to come nearest to
my own case, suppose some one paid such attention to your Persians
that they learnt to follow him instead of you, would you reckon that
man your friend? No; but a worse enemy than if he had slain a
thousand. [32] Or again, say you spoke in all friendship to a friend
and bade him take what he wished, and straightway he took all he could
lay hands on and carried it off, and so grew rich with your wealth,
and you were left in utter poverty, could you say that friend was
altogether blameless? [33] And I, Cyrus, I feel that you have treated
me, if not in that way, yet in a way exactly like it. What you say is
true enough: I did allow you to take what you liked and go, and you
took the whole of my power and went, leaving me desolate, and to-day
you bring the spoil you have won with my forces, and lay it so grandly
at my feet--magnificent! And you make my country great through the
help of my own might, while I have no part or lot in the performance,
but must step in at the end, like a woman, to receive your favours,
while in the eyes of all men, not least my faithful subjects yonder,
you are the man, and I--I am not fit to wear a crown. [34] Are these,
I ask you, Cyrus, are these the deeds of a benefactor? Nay, had you
been kind as you are kin, above all else you would have been careful
not to rob me of my dignity and honour. What advantage is it to me for
my lands to be made broad if I myself am dishonoured? When I ruled the
Medes, I ruled them not because I was stronger than all of them, but
because they themselves thought that our race was in all things better
than theirs."

[35] But while he was still speaking Cyrus broke in on his words,
crying:

"Uncle of mine, by the heaven above us, if I have ever shown you any
kindness, be kind to me now. Do not find fault with me any more, wait,
and put me to the test, and learn how I feel towards you, and if you
see that what I have done has really brought you good, then, when I
embrace you, embrace me in return and call me your benefactor, and if
not, you may blame me as you please."

[36] "Perhaps," answered Cyaxares, "you are right. I will do as you
wish."

"Then I may kiss you?" said Cyrus.

"Yes, if it pleases you. "And you will not turn aside as you did just
now?" "No, I will not turn aside." And he kissed him.

[37] And when the Medes saw it and the Persians and all the allies--
for all were watching to see how matters would shape--joy came into
their hearts and gladness lit up their faces. Then Cyrus and Cyaxares
mounted their horses and rode back, and the Medes fell in behind
Cyaxares, at a nod from Cyrus, and behind Cyrus the Persians, and the
others behind them. [38] And when they reached the camp and brought
Cyaxares to the splendid tent, those who were appointed made
everything ready for him, and while he was waiting for the banquet his
Medes presented themselves, some of their own accord, it is true, but
most were sent by Cyrus. [39] And they brought him gifts; one came
with a beautiful cup-bearer, another with an admirable cook, a third
with a baker, a fourth with a musician, while others brought cups and
goblets and beautiful apparel; almost every one gave something out of
the spoils they had won. [40] So that the mood of Cyaxares changed,
and he seemed to see that Cyrus had not stolen his subjects from him,
and that they made no less account of him than they used to do.

[41] Now when the hour came for the banquet, Cyaxares sent to Cyrus
and begged him to share it: it was so long, he said, since they had
met. But Cyrus answered, "Bid me not to the feast, good uncle. Do you
not see that all these soldiers of ours have been raised by us to the
pitch of expectation? And it were ill on my part if I seemed to
neglect them for the sake of my private pleasure. If soldiers feel
themselves neglected even the good become faint-hearted, and the bad
grow insolent. [42] With yourself it is different, you have come a
long journey and you must fall to without delay, and if your subjects
do you honour, welcome them and give them good cheer, that there may
be confidence between you and them, but I must go and attend to the
matters of which I speak. [43] Early to-morrow morning," he added,
"our chief officers will present themselves at your gate to hear from
you what you think our next step ought to be. You will tell us whether
we ought to pursue the campaign further or whether the time has now
come to disband our army."

[44] Thereupon Cyaxares betook himself to the banquet and Cyrus called
a council of his friends, the shrewdest and the best fitted to act
with him, and spoke to them as follows:

"My friends, thanks to the gods, our first prayers are granted.
Wherever we set foot now we are the masters of the country: we see our
enemies brought low and ourselves increasing day by day in numbers and
in strength. [45] And if only our present allies would consent to stay
with us a little longer, our achievements could be greater still,
whether force were needed or persuasion. Now it must be your work as
much as mine to make as many of them as possible willing and anxious
to remain. [46] Remember that, just as the soldier who overthrows the
greatest number in the day of battle is held to be the bravest, so the
speaker, when the time has come for persuasion, who brings most men to
his side will be thought the most eloquent, the best orator and the
ablest man of action. [47] Do not, however, prepare your speeches as
though we asked you to give a rhetorical display: remember that those
whom you convince will show it well enough by what they do. [48] I
leave you then," he added, "to the careful study of your parts: mine
is to see, so far as in me lies, that our troops are provided with all
they need, before we hold the council of war."


NOTES

C.1. Cyrus' generosity: he is not cold, not incapable of soft
pleasure, but too pre-occupied with greater things. On the whole, if a
hedonist, this type of man, a hedonist that = a stoic (cf. Socrates,
H. Sidgwick, also J. P.).

C1.4, init. Well told: we feel the character of Araspas at once, as
soon as he opens his lips.

C1.4, med. An Eastern picture. She is one of the Bible women, as
Gadatas and Gobryas are brothers of Barzillai; she is sister of Ruth
or Susanna or Judith or Bathsheba. Perhaps she is nobler than any of
them. She is also the sister of the Greek tragedy women, Antigone,
Alcestis; especially Euripidean is she: no doubt she is sister to the
great women of all lands.

C1.10 ff. Xenophon, Moralist. Cf. /Memorabilia/ for a similar
philosophical difficulty about the will and knowledge. And for this
raising of ethical problems in an artistic setting of narrative, cf.
Lyly. I see a certain resemblance between the times and the writers'
minds. /Vide/ J. A. Symonds on the predecessors of Shakespeare.
Araspas' point is that these scamps have only themselves to blame,
being {akrateis}, and then they turn round and accuse love. (We are
thrown back on the origin of {akrasia}: /vide Memorabilia/ [e.g. I.
ii. v.; IV. v.] for such answer as we can get to that question.)
Whereas the {kaloi kagathoi} desire strongly but can curb their
desires.

C1.13. Shows a confidence in the healthy action of the will. When
Araspas himself is caught later on he develops the theory of a double
self, a higher and a lower (so hgd., and so, I think, Xenophon and
Socrates. /Vide Memorabilia/).

C1.16, fin. Cyrus || Socrates, his prototype here.

C1.18. Very natural and beautiful. Xenophon sympathetic with such a
beautiful humanity. The woman's nature brought out by these touches.
Xenophon, Dramatist: the moral problem is subordinate, that is to say,
is made to grow out of the dramatic action and characterisation.

C1.20. Notice the absolutely fair and warrantable diplomatic advantage
given to the archic man: each step he takes opens up new avenues of
progress. Herein is fulfilled "to him who hath shall be given," but
Cyrus plays his part also, he has the wisdom of serpents with the
gentleness of doves.

C1.21. This is the true rhetoric, the right road to persuasiveness, to
be absolutely frank.

C1.24. The desire to be ruled by the archic man, which the archomenoi
--i.e. all men--feel, is thus manifest. Notice again how the Mede's
own character is maintained: he speaks as he felt then.

C2.8. The bridegroom will be found to be Hystaspas; but we have no
suspicion as yet, without looking on.

C2.9. In this interview Cyrus' character still further developed. /Ex
ore Cyri./, Xenophon propounds his theory of the latent virtue in man,
which only needs an opportunity to burst forth, but, this lacking,
remains unrevealed. Now it is a great godsend to get such a chance. It
is thoroughly Hellenic, or Xenophon-Socratic, this feeling, "Give me a
chance to show my virtue." (But has Cyrus a touch of superhuman
conscious rectitude?)

C2.12. The same thought again: it is full of delicacy and spiritual
discernment: the more one ponders it the more one feels that.

C2.12, fin. For Hellenic or Xenophontine or old-world theory of the
misfortunes which befall the virtuous, /vide/ Homer, /vide/ Book of
Job (Satan), /vide/ Tragedians.

C2.15. Cf. the /Economist/ for praise of rural simplicity. It is
Xenophon /ipsissimus/.

C2.17. Whose bad manners is Xenophon thinking of? Thebans'?

C2.20, fin. A very noble sentence. The man who utters it and the
people whose heart and mind it emanates from must be of a high order;
and in the /Memorabilia/ Socrates has this highest praise, that he
studied to make himself and /all others also/ as good as possible.

C2.21. Notice the practical answer of Cyrus to this panegyric (cf. J.
P.).

C2.32. Prolix, Xenophontic.

C3.6 ff. Here also I feel the mind of Xenophon shimmering under
various lights. The /Cyropaedia/ is shot with Orientalism. Homeric
Epicism--antique Hellenism and modern Hellenism are both there.
Spartan simplicity and Eastern quaintness both say their say. In this
passage the biblical element seems almost audible.

C3.7. This is in the grand style, Oriental, dilatory, ponderous,
savouring of times when battles were affairs of private arrangement
between monarchs and hedged about by all the punctilios of an affair
of honour.

C3.12. N.B.--The archic man shows a very ready wit and inventiveness
in the great art of "grab" in war, though as he said to his father he
was "a late learner" in such matters. Cf. in modern times the duties
of a detective or some such disagreeable office. G. O. Trevelyan as
Irish secretary. Interesting for /war ethics/ in the abstract, and for
Xenophon's view, which is probably Hellenic. Cyrus now has the
opportunity of carrying out the selfish decalogue, the topsy-turvy
morality set forth in I. C.6, C.26 ff.

C3.13. Cf. Old Testament for the sort of subterfuges and preparations,
e.g. the Gibeonites.

C3.15. The archic man has no time. Cyrus {ou skholazei}. Cf. J. P. It
comes from energy combined with high gifts of organisation, economic,
architectonic.

C3.19. Nice, I think, this contrasting of spiritual and natural
productiveness.

C3.32. Here is the rule of conduct clearly expressed, nor do I see how
a military age could frame for itself any other. Christianity only
emerged /sub pace Romana/, which for fraternal brotherhood was the
fullness of time; and even in the commercial age the nations tumble
back practically into the old system.

C3.36 ff. An army on forced march: are there any novelties here?

C3.53. These minute details probably not boring at the time, but
interesting rather, perhaps useful.

C4.13. Cyrus resembles Fawcett in his unselfish self-estimate. Gadatas
is like the British public, or hgd.

C4.16. Here we feel that the Assyrian is not a mere weakling: he can
play his part well enough if he gets a good chance. It needs an Archic
and Strategic Man to overpower him.

C4.17. ANCIENT and MODERN parallelism in treatment of wounded.

C4.24. Hellenic war ethics: non-combatant tillers of the soil to be
let alone. Is this a novelty? If not, what is the prototype? Did the
modern rights of non-combatants so originate?

C4.27, fin. A touch which gives the impression of real history: that
is the art of it.

C4.34. Almost autobiographical: the advantage of having a country seat
in the neighbourhood of a big town. Here we feel the MODERNISM of
XENOPHON. The passage which Stevenson chose for the motto to his
/Silverado Squatters/ would suit Xenophon very well (Cicero, De Off.
I. xx.). Xenophon || Alfred Tennyson. [Mr. Dakyns used the geometric
sign || to indicate parallelism of any sort. The passage from Cicero
might be translated thus: "Some have lived in the country, content
with the happiness of home. These men have enjoyed all that kings
could claim, needing nothing, under the dominion of no man,
untrammelled and in freedom; for the free man lives as he chooses."]

C4.36. The wicked man as conceived in Hellenico-Xenophontine fashion,
charged with the spirit of meanness, envy, and hatred, which cannot
brook the existence of another better than itself.

C4.38. A nice touch: we learn to know Gadatas and Xenophon also, and
the Hellenic mind.

C5.10. Pathos well drawn: /vide/ Richard II. and Bolingbroke.
Euripidean quality.

C5.12. The archic man has got so far he can play the part of
intercessor between Cyaxares and his Medes. The discussion involves
the whole difficulty of suppression ("he must increase, but I must
decrease" is one solution, not touched here).

C5.34. Perhaps this is the very point which Xenophon, Philosopher,
wishes to bring out, the pseudo-archic man and the archic man
contrasted, but Xenophon, lover of man and artist, draws the situation
admirably and truthfully without any doctrinal purpose. It is
{anthropinon} human essentially, this jealousy and humiliation of
spirit.

C5.35. Cyrus' tone of voice and manner must have some compelling charm
in them: the dialectic debate is not pursued, but by a word and look
the archic man wins his way.

C5.36. Oriental and antique Hellenic, also /modern/, formalities. I
can imagine some of those crowned heads, emperors of Germany and
Austria, going through similar ceremonies, walking arm-in-arm, kissing
on both cheeks fraternally, etc.

C5.39-40. This reveals the incorrigible weakness of Cyaxares. He can
never hold his own against the archic man. As a matter of philosophic
"historising," probably Xenophon conceives the Median element as the
corrupting and sapping one in the Persian empire (/vide/ Epilogue),
only he to some extent justifies and excuses Cyrus in his imitations
of it. That is a difficulty.

C5.41. The archic man shows self-command again: his energy somewhat
relieves ignobler actors of responsibility and so far saps their
wills. His up-and-doingness a foil to their indolence.


BOOK VI

[C.1] So the day ended, and they supped and went to rest. But early
the next morning all the allies flocked to Cyaxares' gates, and while
Cyaxares dressed and adorned himself, hearing that a great multitude
were waiting, Cyrus gave audience to the suitors his own friends had
brought. First came the Cadousians, imploring him to stay, and then
the Hyrcanians, and after them the Sakians, and then some one
presented Gobryas, and Hystaspas brought in Gadatas the eunuch, whose
entreaty was still the same. [2] At that Cyrus, who knew already that
for many a day Gadatas had been half-dead with fear lest the army
should be disbanded, laughed outright and said, "Ah, Gadatas, you
cannot conceal it: you have been bribed by my friend Hystaspas to take
this view."

[3] But Gadatas lifted up his hands to heaven and swore most solemnly
that Hystaspas had not influenced him.

"Nay," said he, "it is because I know myself that, if you depart, I am
ruined utterly. And therefore it was that I took it upon me to speak
with Hystaspas myself, and ask him if he knew what was in your mind
about the disbanding of the army."

[4] And Cyrus said, "It would be unjust then, I suppose, to lay the
blame on Hystaspas." "Yes, Cyrus, most unjust," said Hystaspas, "for I
only said to Gadatas that it would be impossible for you to carry on
the campaign, as your father wanted you home, and had sent for you."

[5] "What?" cried Cyrus, "you dared to let that be known whether I
wished it or not?"

"Certainly I did," he answered, "for I can see that you are mad to be
home in Persia, the cynosure of every eye, telling your father how you
wrought this and accomplished that."

"Well," said Cyrus, "are you not longing to go home yourself?"

"No," said the other. "I am not. Nor have I any intention of going:
here I shall stay and be general-in-chief until I make our friend
Gadatas the lord and the Assyrian his slave."

[6] Thus half in jest and half in earnest they played with one
another, and meanwhile Cyaxares had finished adorning himself and came
forth in great splendour and solemnity, and sat down on a Median
throne. And when all were assembled and silence was proclaimed,
Cyaxares said:

"My friends and allies, perhaps, since I am present and older than
Cyrus, it is suitable that I should address you first. It appears to
me that the moment has come to discuss one question before all others,
the question whether we ought to go on with the campaign or disband
the army. Be pleased," he added, "to state your opinions on the
matter."

[7] Then the leader of the Hyrcanians stood up at once and said:

"Friends and allies, I hardly think that words are needed when facts
themselves show us the path to take. All of us know that while we
stand together we give our enemy more trouble than we get: but when we
stood alone it was they who dealt with us as they liked best and we
liked least."

[8] Then the Cadousian followed.

"The less we talk," said he, "about breaking-up and going home
separately the better; separation has done us anything but good, it
seems to me, even on the march. My men and I, at any rate, very soon
paid the penalty for private excursions; as I dare say you have not
forgotten."

[9] Upon that Artabazus rode, the Mede who had claimed kinship with
Cyrus in the old days.

"Cyaxares," said he, "in one respect I differ from those who have
spoken before me: they think we should stay here in order to go on
with the campaign, but I think I am always on campaign at home. [10] I
was for ever out on some expedition or other, because our people were
being harried, or our fortresses threatened, and a world of trouble I
had, what with fears within and fighting without, and all too at my
own expense. As it is now, I occupy the enemy's forts, my fear of them
is gone, I make good cheer on their own good things, and I drink their
own good wine. Since home means fighting and service here means
feasting, I am not in favour myself," said he, "of breaking up the
company."

[11] Then Gobryas spoke.

"Friends," said he, "I have trusted Cyrus' word and had no fault to
find with him: what he promises that he performs: but if he leaves the
country now, the Assyrian will be reprieved, he will never be punished
for the wrongs he tried to inflict on you and did inflict on me: I
shall be punished instead, because I have been your friend."

[12] At that Cyrus rose at last and said:

"Gentlemen, I am well aware that the disbanding of our forces must
mean the decrease of our power and the increase of theirs. If some of
them have given up their weapons, they will soon procure others; if
some have lost their horses, the loss will soon be made good; if some
have fallen in battle, others, younger and stronger, will take their
place. We need not be surprised if they are soon in a condition to
cause us trouble again. [13] Why, then, did I ask Cyaxares to put the
question to debate? Because, I answer, I am afraid of the future. I
see opponents against us whom we cannot fight, if we conduct the
campaign as we are doing now. [14] Winter is advancing against us, and
though we may have shelter for ourselves we have nothing, heaven
knows, for our horses and our servants and the great mass of our
soldiery, without whom we cannot even think of a campaign. As to
provisions, up to the limits of our advance and because of that
advance they have been exhausted; and beyond that line, owing to the
terror we inspire, the inhabitants will have stowed their supplies
away in strong places where they can enjoy them and we cannot get
them. [15] Where is the warrior, stout of heart and strong of will,
who can wage war with cold and hunger? If our style of soldiering is
to be only what it has been, I say we ought to disband at once of our
own accord, and not wait to be driven from the field against our will
by sheer lack of means. If we do wish to go forward, this is what we
must do: we must detach from the enemy all the fortresses we can and
secure all we can for our own: if this is done, the larger supply will
be in the hands of those who can stow away the larger store, and the
weaker will suffer siege. [16] At present we are like mariners on the
ocean: they may sail on for ever, but the seas they have crossed are
no more theirs than those that are still unsailed. But if we hold the
fortresses, the enemy will find they are living in a hostile land,
while we have halcyon weather. [17] Some of you may dread the thought
of garrison duty far from home; if so, dispel your doubts. We
Persians, who must, as it is, be exiles for the time, will undertake
the positions that are nearest to the foe, while it will be for you to
occupy the land on the marches between Assyria and yourselves and put
it under tillage. [18] For, if we can hold his inner line, your peace
will not be disturbed in the outlying parts: he will scarcely neglect
the danger at his door to attack you out in the distance."

[19] At this the whole assembly rose to express their eagerness and
assent, and Cyaxares stood up with them. And both Gadatas and Gobryas
offered to fortify a post if the allies wished, and thus provide two
cities of refuge to start with.

[20] Finally Cyrus, thus assured of the general consent to his
proposals, said, "If we really wish to carry out what we have set
ourselves, we must prepare battering-rams and siege engines, and get
together mechanics and builders for our own castles." [21] Thereupon
Cyaxares at once undertook to provide an engine at his own expense,
Gadatas and Gobryas made themselves responsible for a second, Tigranes
for a third, and Cyrus himself promised he would try to furnish two.
[22] That done, every one set to work to find engineers and artisans
and to collect material for the machines; and superintendents were
appointed from those best qualified for the work.

[23] Now Cyrus was aware that all this would take some time, and
therefore he encamped his troops in the healthiest spot he could find
and the easiest to supply, strengthening, wherever necessary, the
natural defences of the place, so that the detachment left in charge
for the time should always be in complete security, even though he
might be absent himself with the main body of his force. [24] Nor was
this all; he questioned those who knew the country best, and, learning
where he would be rewarded for his pains, he would lead his men out to
forage, and thus procure as large supplies as possible, keep his
soldiers in the best of health and strength, and fix their drill in
their minds.

[25] So Cyrus spent his days, and meanwhile the deserters from Babylon
and the prisoners who were captured all told the same story: they said
that the king had gone off to Lydia, taking with him store of gold and
silver, and riches and treasures of every kind. [26] The mass of the
soldiers were convinced that he was storing his goods away from fear,
but Cyrus knew that he must have gone to raise, if possible, an
opponent who could face them, and therefore he pushed his preparations
forward vigorously, feeling that another battle must be fought. He
filled up the Persian cavalry to its full complement, getting the
horses partly from the prisoners, partly from his own friends. There
were two gifts he would never refuse, horses and good weapons. [27] He
also procured chariots, taking them from the enemy or wherever he
could find them. The old Trojan type of charioteering, still in use to
this day among the Cyrenaeans, he abolished; before his time the
Medes, the Syrians, the Arabians, and all Asiatics generally, used
their chariots in the same way as the Cyrenaeans do now. [28] The
fault of the system to his mind was that the very flower of the army,
if the picked men were in the chariots, could only act at long range
and so contribute little after all to the victory. Three hundred
chariots meant twelve hundred horses and three hundred fighting-men,
besides the charioteers, who would naturally be men above the common,
in whom the warriors could place confidence: and that meant another
three hundred debarred from injuring the enemy in any kind of way.
[29] Such was the system he abolished in favour of the war-chariot
proper, with strong wheels to resist the shock of collision, and long
axles, on the principle that a broad base is the firmer, while the
driver's seat was changed into what might be called a turret, stoutly
built of timber and reaching up to the elbow, leaving the driver room
to manage the horses above the rim. The drivers themselves were all
fully armed, only their eyes uncovered. [30] He had iron scythes about
two feet long attached to the axles on either side, and others, under
the tree, pointing to the ground, for use in a charge. Such was the
type of chariot invented by Cyrus, and it is still in use to-day among
the subjects of the Great King. Beside the chariots he had a large
number of camels, collected from his friends or captured from the
enemy. [31] Moreover, he decided to send a spy into Lydia to ascertain
the movements of the king, and he thought that the right man for this
purpose was Araspas, the officer in charge of the fair lady from Susa.
Matters had gone ill with Araspas: he had fallen passionately in love
with his prisoner, and been led to entreat her to be his paramour.
[32] She had refused, faithful to her husband who was far away, for
she loved him dearly, but she forbore to accuse Araspas to Cyrus,
being unwilling to set friend at strife with friend. [33] But when at
length Araspas, thinking it would help him in his desires, began to
threaten her, saying that if she would not yield he would have his
will of her by force, then in her dread of violence she could keep the
matter hid no longer, and she sent her eunuch to Cyrus with orders to
tell him everything. [34] And when Cyrus heard it he smiled over the
man who had boasted that he was superior to love, and sent Artabazus
back with the eunuch to tell Araspas that he must use no violence
against such a woman, but if he could persuade her, he might do so.
[35] But Artabazus, when he saw Araspas, rebuked him sternly, saying
that the woman was a sacred trust, and his conduct disgraceful,
impious, and wicked, till Araspas burst into tears of misery and
shame, and was half dead at the thought of what Cyrus would do. [36]
Learning this, Cyrus sent for him, saw him alone, and said to him face
to face:

"Araspas, I know that you are afraid of me and in an agony of shame.
Be comforted; we are told that the gods themselves are made subject to
desire, and I could tell you what love has forced some men to undergo,
men who seemed most lofty and most wise. Did I not pass sentence on
myself, when I confessed I was too weak to consort with loveliness and
remain unmoved? Indeed it is I who am most to blame in the matter, for
I shut you up myself with this irresistible power."

[37] But Araspas broke in on his words:

"Ah, Cyrus, you are ever the same, gentle and compassionate to human
weaknesses. But all the rest of the world has no pity on me; they
drown me in wretchedness. As soon as the tattlers got wind of my
misfortune, all my enemies exulted, and my friends came to me,
advising me to make away with myself for fear of you, because my
iniquity was so great."

[38] Then Cyrus said, "Now listen: this opinion about you may be the
means by which you can do me a great kindness and your comrades a
great service." "Oh, that it were possible!" said Araspas, "for me
ever to be of service to you!" [39] "Well," said the other, "if you
went to the enemy, feigning that you had fled from me, I think they
would believe you." "I am sure they would," said Araspas, "I know even
my own friends would think that of course I ran away." [40] "Then you
will come back to us," Cyrus went on, "with full information about the
enemy's affairs; for, if I am right in my expectation, they will trust
you and let you see all their plans, so that you need miss nothing of
what we wish to know." "I will be off this moment," said Araspas; "it
will be my best credential to have it thought I was just in time to
escape punishment from you."

[41] "Then you can really bring yourself to leave the beautiful
Pantheia?"

"Yes, Cyrus," he answered, "I can; for I see now that we have two
souls. This is the lesson of philosophy that I have learnt from the
wicked sophist Love. If we had but a single soul, how could she be at
once evil and good? How could she be enamoured at once of nobleness
and baseness, or at once desire and not desire one deed and the same?
No, it is clear that we have two souls, and when the beautiful soul
prevails, all fair things are wrought, and when the evil soul has the
mastery, she lays her hand to shame and wickedness. But to-day my good
soul conquers, because she has you to help her."

[42] "Well," said Cyrus, "if you have decided on going, it is thus you
had better go. Thus you will win their confidence, and then you must
tell them what we are doing, but in such a way as to hinder their own
designs. It would hinder them, for example, if you said that we were
preparing an attack on their territory at a point not yet decided; for
this would check the concentration of their forces, each leader being
most concerned for the safety of his own home. [43] Stay with them,"
he added, "till the last moment possible: what they do when they are
close at hand is just what is most important for us to know. Advise
them how to dispose their forces in the way that really seems the
best, for then, after you are gone and although it may be known that
you are aware of their order, they will be forced to keep to it, they
will not dare to change it, and should they do so at the last moment
they will be thrown into confusion."

[44] Thereupon Araspas took his leave, called together his trustiest
attendants, said what he thought necessary for the occasion, and
departed.

[45] Now Pantheia, when she heard that Araspas had fled, sent a
messenger to Cyrus, saying:

"Grieve not, Cyrus, that Araspas has gone to join the foe: I will
bring you a far trustier friend than he, if you will let me send for
my husband, and I know he will bring with him all the power that he
has. It is true that the old king was my husband's friend, but he who
reigns now tried to tear us two asunder, and my husband knows him for
a tyrant and a miscreant, and would gladly be quit of him and take
service with such a man as you."

[46] When Cyrus heard that, he bade Pantheia send word to her husband,
and she did so. Now when Abradatas saw the tokens from his wife, and
learnt how matters stood, he was full of joy, and set out for Cyrus'
camp immediately, with a thousand horsemen in his train. And when he
came to the Persian outposts he sent to Cyrus saying who he was, and
Cyrus gave orders that he should be taken to Pantheia forthwith. [47]
So husband and wife met again after hope had well-nigh vanished, and
were in each other's arms once more. And then Pantheia spoke of Cyrus,
his nobleness, his honour, and the compassion he had shown her, and
Abradatas cried:

"Tell me, tell me, how can I repay him all I owe him in your name and
mine!" And she answered:

"So deal with him, my husband, as he has dealt with you."

[48] And thus Abradatas went to Cyrus, and took him by the hand, and
said:

"Cyrus, in return for the kindness you have shown us, I can say no
more than this: I give myself to you, I will be your friend, your
servant, and your ally: whatever you desire, I will help you to win,
your fellow-worker always, so far as in me lies."

[49] Then Cyrus answered:

"And I will take your gift: but for the moment you must leave me, and
sup with your wife: another day you will let me play the host, and
give you lodging with your friends and mine."

[50] Afterwards Abradatas perceived how much Cyrus had at heart the
scythe-bearing chariots and the cavalry and the war-horses with their
armour, and he resolved to equip a hundred chariots for him out of his
own cavalry force. [51] These he proposed to lead himself in a chariot
of his own, four-poled and drawn by eight horses, all the eight
protected by chest-plates of bronze. [52] So Abradatas set to work,
and this four-poled chariot of his gave Cyrus the idea of making a car
with eight poles, drawn by eight yoke of oxen, to carry the lowest
compartment of the battering engines, which stood, with its wheels,
about twenty-seven feet from the ground. [53] Cyrus felt that he had a
series of such towers brought into the field at a fair pace they would
be of immense service to him, and inflict as much damage on the enemy.
The towers were built with galleries and parapets, and each of them
could carry twenty men. [54] When the whole was put together he tested
it and found that the eight yoke of oxen could draw the whole tower
with the men more easily than one yoke by itself could manage the
ordinary weight of baggage, which came to about five-and-twenty
talents apiece, whereas the tower, build of planks about as thick as
the boards for a stage, weighed less than fifteen for each yoke. [55]
Thus, having satisfied himself that the attempt was perfectly
possible, he arranged to take the towers into action, believing that
in war selfishness meant salvation, justice, and happiness.

[C.2] About this time ambassadors came to Cyrus from India with gifts
of courtesy and a message from their king, saying:

"I send you greeting, Cyrus, and I rejoice that you told me of your
needs. I desire to be your friend and I offer you gifts; and if you
have need of anything more, I bid you say the word, and it shall be
yours. I have told my men to do whatever you command."

[2] Then Cyrus answered:

"This, then, is my bidding: the rest of you shall stay where you have
pitched your tents; you shall guard your treasures and live as you
choose: but three of you shall go to the enemy and make believe that
you have come to him about an alliance with your king, and thus you
shall learn how matters stand, and all they say and all they do, and
so bring me word again with speed. And if you serve me well in this, I
shall owe you even more than I could owe you for these gifts. There
are some spies who are no better than slaves, and have no skill to
find out anything more than is known already, but there are men of
another sort, men of your stamp, who can discover plans that are not
yet disclosed."

[3] The Indians listened gladly, and for the moment made themselves at
home as the guests of Cyrus: but the next day they got ready and set
off on their journey, promising to find out as much as they could of
the enemy's secrets and bring him word again with all possible speed.

[4] Meanwhile Cyrus continued his preparations for the war on a
magnificent scale, like one who meant to accomplish no small
achievement. Not only did he carry out all the resolutions of the
allies, but he breathed a spirit of emulation into his own friends and
followers, till each strove to outshine his fellows in arms and
accoutrements, in horsemanship and spearmanship and archery, in
endurance of toil and danger. [5] Cyrus would lead them out to the
chase, and show especial honour to those who distinguished themselves
in any way: he would whet the ambition of the officers by praising all
who did their best to improve their men, and by gratifying them in
every way he could. [6] At every sacrifice and festival he instituted
games and contests in all martial exercises, and lavished prizes on
the victors, till the whole army was filled with enthusiasm and
confidence. [7] By this time Cyrus had almost everything in readiness
for the campaign, except the battering-machines. The Persian cavalry
was made up to its full number of ten thousand men, and the scythed
chariots were complete, a hundred of his own, and a hundred that
Abradatas of Susa had provided. [8] Beside these there were a hundred
of the old Median chariots which Cyrus had persuaded Cyaxares to
remodel on his own type, giving up the Trojan and Lydian style. The
camels were ready also, each animal carrying a couple of mounted
archers.

The bulk of the great army felt almost as though they had already
conquered, and the enemy's power was held of no account.

[9] While matters were thus, the Indians whom Cyrus had sent out
returned with their report. Croesus had been chosen leader and
general-in-chief; a resolution had been passed, calling on all the
allied kings to bring up their entire forces, raise enormous sums for
the war, and spend them in hiring mercenaries where they could and
making presents where they must. [10] Large numbers of Thracians,
armed with the short sword, had already been enrolled, and a body of
Egyptians were coming by sea, amounting--so said the Indians--to
120,000 men, armed with long shields reaching to their feet, huge
spears (such as they carry to this day), and sabres. Beside these, an
army was expected from Cyprus, and there were already on the spot all
the Cilicians, the men of both the Phrygias, of Lycaonia, Paphlagonia,
and Cappadocia, the Arabians, the Phoenicians, and all the Assyrians
under the king of Babylon. Moreover, the Ionians, and Aeolians, and
indeed nearly all the Hellenic colonists on the coast were compelled
to follow in the train of Croesus. [11] Croesus himself had already
sent to Lacedaemon to propose an alliance with the Spartans. The
armament was mustering on the banks of the Pactolus, and they were to
push forward presently to Thymbrara (the place which is still the
mustering-ground for all the Asiatic subjects of the Great King west
of Syria), and orders had been issued to open a market there. This
report agreed with the accounts given by the prisoners, for Cyrus was
always at pains to gave men captured from whom he could get some
information, and he would also send out spies disguised as runaway
slaves.

[12] Such were the tidings, and when the army heard the news there was
much anxiety and concern, as one may well suppose. The men went about
their work with an unusual quietness, their faces clouded over, or
gathered in knots and clusters everywhere, anxiously asking each other
the news and discussing the report. [13] When Cyrus saw that fear was
in the camp, he called a meeting of his generals, and indeed of all
whose dejection might injure the cause and whose confidence assist it.
Moreover, he sent word that any of the attendants, or any of the rank
and file, who wished to hear what he had to say, would be allowed to
come and listen. When they met, he spoke as follows:

[14] "My friends and allies, I make no secret of the reason I have
called you here. It was because I saw that some of you, when the
reports of the enemy reached us, looked like men who were panic-
stricken. But I must say I am astonished that any of you should feel
alarm because the enemy is mustering his forces, and not be reassured
by remembering that our own is far larger than it was when we
conquered him before, and far better provided, under heaven, with all
we need. [15] I ask you how you would have felt, you who are afraid
now, if you had been told that a force exactly like our own was
marching upon us, if you had heard that men who had conquered us
already were coming now, carrying in their hearts the victory they had
won, if you knew that those who made short work then of all our bows
and javelins were advancing again, and others with them, ten thousand
times as many? [16] Suppose you heard that the very men who had routed
our infantry once were coming on now equipt as before, but this time
on horseback, scorning arms and javelins, each man armed with one
stout spear, ready to charge home? [17] Suppose you heard of chariots,
made on a new pattern, not to be kept motionless, standing, as
hitherto, with their backs turned to the foe as if for flight, but
with the horses shielded by armour, and the drivers sheltered by
wooden walls and protected by breastplates and helmets, and the axles
fitted with iron scythes so that they can charge straight into the
ranks of the foe? [18] And suppose you heard that they have camels to
ride on, each one of which would scare a hundred horses, and that they
will bring up towers from which to help their own friends, and
overwhelm us with volleys of darts so that we cannot fight them on
level ground? [19] If this were what you had heard of the enemy, I as
you, once again, you who are now so fearful what would you have done?
You who turn pale when told that Croesus has been chosen commander-in-
chief, Croesus who proved himself so much more cowardly than the
Syrians, that when they were worsted in battle and fled, instead of
helping them, his own allies, he took to his heels himself. [20] We
are told, moreover, that the enemy himself does not feel equal to
facing you alone, he is hiring others to fight for him better than he
could for himself. I can only say, gentlemen, that if any individual
considers our position as I describe it alarming or unfavourable, he
had better leave us. Let him join our opponents, he will do us far
more service there than here."

[21] When Cyrus had ended, Chrysantas the Persian stood up and said:

"Cyrus, you must not wonder if the faces of some were clouded when
they heard the news. The cloud was a sign of annoyance, not of fear.
Just as if," he went on, "a company were expecting breakfast
immediately, and then were told there was some business that must be
got through first, I do not suppose any of them would be particularly
pleased. Here we were, saying to ourselves that our fortunes were
made, and now we are informed there is still something to be done, and
of course our countenances fell, not because we were afraid, but
because we could have wished it all over and done with. [22] However,
since it now appears that Syria is not to be the only prize--though
there is much to be got in Syria, flocks and herds and corn and palm-
trees yielding fruit--but Lydia as well, Lydia the land of wine and
oil and fig-trees, Lydia, to whose shores the sea brings more good
things than eyes can feast on, I say that once we realise this we can
mope no longer, our spirits will rise apace, and we shall hasten to
lay our hands on the Lydian wealth without delay."

So he spoke, and the allies were well pleased at his words and gave
him loud applause.

[23] "Truly, gentlemen," said Cyrus, "as Chrysantas says, I think we
ought to march without delay, if only to be beforehand with our foes,
and reach their magazines before they do themselves; and besides, the
quicker we are, the fewer resources we shall find with them. [24] That
is how I put the matter, but if any one sees a safer or an easier way,
let him instruct us."

But many speakers followed, all urging an immediate march, without one
speech in opposition, and so Cyrus took up the word again and said:

[25] "My friends and allies, God helping us, our hearts, our bodies,
and our weapons have now been long prepared: all that remains is to
get together what we need for ourselves and our animals on a march of
at least twenty days. I reckon that the journey itself must take more
than fifteen, and not a vestige of food shall we find from end to end.
It has all been made away with, partly by ourselves, partly by our
foes, so far as they could. [26] We must collect enough corn, without
which one can neither fight nor live: and as for wine, every man must
carry just so much as will accustom him to drink water: the greater
part of the country will be absolutely devoid of wine, and the largest
supply we could take with us would not hold out. [27] But to avoid too
sudden a change and the sickness that might follow, this is what we
must do. We must begin by taking water with our food: we can do this
without any great change in our habits. [28] For every one who eats
porridge has the oatmeal mixed with water, and every one who eats
bread has the wheat soaked in water, and all boiled meat is prepared
in water. We shall not miss the wine if we drink a little after the
meal is done. [29] Then we must gradually lessen the amount, until we
find that, without knowing it, we have become water-drinkers. Gradual
change enables every creature to go through a complete conversion; and
this is taught us by God, who leads us little by little out of winter
until we can bear the blazing heat of summer, and out of heat back
again into the depths of winter. So should we follow God, and take one
step after another until we reach our goal. [30] What you might spend
on heavy rugs and coverlets spend rather on food: any superfluity
there will not be wasted: and you will not sleep less soundly for lack
of bedclothes; if you do, I give you leave to blame me. But with
clothing the case is different: a man can hardly have too much of that
in sickness or in health. [31] And for seasoning you should take what
is sharp and dry and salted, for such meats are more appetising and
more satisfying. And since we may come into districts as yet unravaged
where we may find growing corn, we ought to take handmills for
grinding: these are the lightest machines for the purpose. [32] Nor
must we forget to supply ourselves with medicines--they are small in
bulk and, if need arises, invaluable. And we ought to have a large
supply of straps--I wonder what is not fastened by a strap to man or
horse? But straps wear out and get broken and then things are at a
standstill unless there are spare ones to be had. [33] Some of you
have learnt to shave spears, so that it would be as well not to forget
a plane, and also to carry a rasp, for the man who sharpens a
spearhead will sharpen his spirit too. He will feel ashamed to whet
the edge and be a coward. And we must take plenty of timber for
chariots and waggons; there is bound to be many a breakdown on the
road. [34] Also we shall need the most necessary tools for repairs,
since smiths and carpenters are not to be found at every turn, but
there are few who cannot patch up a makeshift for the time. Then there
should be a mattock and a shovel apiece for every waggon, and on every
beast of burden a billhook and an axe, always useful to the owner and
sometimes a boon to all. [35] The provisions must be seen to by the
officers of the fighting-line; they must inspect the men under their
command and see that nothing is omitted which any man requires; the
omission would be felt by us all. Those of you who are in command of
the baggage-train will inspect what I have ordered for the animals and
insist upon every man being provided who is not already supplied. [36]
You, gentlemen, who are in command of the road-makers, you have the
lists of the soldiers I have disqualified from serving as javelin-men,
bowmen, or slingers, and you will make the old javelin men march with
axes for felling timber, the bowmen with mattocks, and the slingers
with shovels. They will advance by squads in front of the waggons so
that if there is any road-making to be done you may set to work at
once, and in case of need I may know where to get the men I want. [37]
I mean also to take a corps of smiths, carpenters, and cobblers, men
of military age, provided with the proper tools, to supply any
possible need. These men will not be in the fighting-line, but they
will have a place assigned to them where they can be hired by any one
who likes. [38] If any huckster wishes to follow the army with his
wares, he may do so, but if caught selling anything during the fifteen
days for which provisions have been ordered, he will be deprived of
all his goods: after the fifteen days are done he may sell what he
likes. Any merchant who offers us a well-stocked market will receive
recompense and honour from the allies and myself. [39] And if any one
needs an advance of money for trading, he must send me guarantors who
will undertake that he will march with the army, and then he can draw
on our funds. These are the general orders: and I will ask any of you
who think that anything has been omitted to point it out to me. [40]
You will now go back to your quarters and make your preparations, and
while you do so I will offer sacrifice for our journey and when the
signs are favourable we will give the signal. At that you must present
yourselves, with everything I have ordered, at the appointed place,
under your own officers. [41] And you, gentlemen," said he, turning to
the officers, "when your divisions are all in line, you will come to
me in a body to receive your final orders."

[C.3] With these instructions the army went to make their preparations
while Cyrus offered sacrifice.

As soon as the victims were favourable, he set out with his force.

On the first day they encamped as near by as possible, so that
anything left behind could easily be fetched and any omission readily
supplied. [2] Cyaxares stayed in Media with a third of the Median
troops in order not to leave their own country undefended. Cyrus
himself pushed forward with all possible speed, keeping his cavalry in
the van and constantly sending explorers and scouts ahead to some
look-out. Behind the cavalry came the baggage, and on the plains he
had long strings of waggons and beasts of burden, and the main army
behind them, so that if any of the baggage-train fell back, the
officers who caught them up would see that they did not lose their
places in the march. [3] But where the road was narrower the fighting-
men marched on either side with the baggage in the middle, and in case
of any block it was the business of the soldiers on the spot to attend
to the matter. As a rule, the different regiments would be marching
alongside their own baggage, orders having been given that all members
of the train should advance by regiments unless absolutely prevented.
[4] To help matters the brigadier's own body-servant led the way with
an ensign known to his men, so that each regiment marched together,
the men doing their best to keep up with their comrades. Thus there
was no need to search for each other, everything was to hand, there
was greater security, and the soldiers could get what they wanted more
quickly.

[5] After some days the scouts ahead thought they could see people in
the plain collecting fodder and timber, and then they made out beasts
of burden, some grazing and others already laden, and as they scanned
the distance they felt sure they could distinguish something that was
either smoke rising or clouds of dust; and from all this they
concluded that the enemy's army was not far off. [6] Whereupon their
commander despatched a messenger with the news to Cyrus, who sent back
word that the scouts should stay where they were, on their look-out,
and tell him if they saw anything more, while he ordered a squadron of
cavalry to ride forward, and intercept, if they could, some of the men
on the plain and so discover the actual state of affairs. [7] While
the detachment carried out this order Cyrus halted the rest of his
army to make such dispositions as he thought necessary before coming
to close quarters. His first order was for the troops to take their
breakfast: after breakfast they were to fall in and wait for the word
of command. [8] When breakfast was over he sent for all the officers
from the cavalry, the infantry, and the chariot brigade, and for the
commanders of the battering engines and the baggage train, and they
came to him. [9] Meanwhile the troop of horse had dashed into the
plain, cut off some of the men, and now brought them in captive. The
prisoners, on being questioned by Cyrus, said they belonged to the
camp and had gone out to forage or cut wood and so had passed beyond
their own pickets, for, owing to the size of their army, everything
was scarce.

[10] "How far is your army from here?" asked Cyrus. "About seven
miles," said they. "Was there any talk about us down there?" said he.
"We should think there was," they answered; "it was all over the camp
that you were coming." "Ah," said Cyrus, "I suppose they were glad to
hear we were coming so soon?" (putting this question for his officers
to hear the answer). "That they were not," said the prisoners, "they
were anything but glad; they were miserable." [11] "And what are they
doing now?" asked Cyrus. "Forming their line of battle," answered
they; "yesterday and the day before they did the same."

"And their commander?" said Cyrus, "who is he?" "Croesus himself,"
said they, "and with him a Greek, and also another man, a Mede, who is
said to be a deserter from you."

"Ah," cried Cyrus, "is that so? Most mighty Zeus, may I deal with him
as I wish!"

[12] Then he had the prisoners led away and turned to speak to his
officers, but at this moment another scout appeared, saying that a
large force of cavalry was in the plain. "We think," he added, "that
they are trying to get a sight of our army. For about thirty of them
are riding ahead at a good round pace and they seem to be coming
straight for our little company, perhaps to capture our look-out if
they can, for there are only ten of us there."

[13] At that Cyrus sent off a detachment from his own bodyguard,
bidding them gallop up to the place, unseen by the enemy, and stay
there motionless. "Wait," he said, "until our own ten must leave the
spot and then dash out on the thirty as they come up the hill. And to
prevent any injury from the larger body, do you, Hystaspas," said he,
turning to the latter, "ride out with a thousand horse, and let them
see you suddenly, face to face. But remember not to pursue them out of
sight, come back as soon as you have secured our post. And if any of
your opponents ride up with their right hands raised, welcome them as
friends."

[14] Accordingly Hystaspas went off and got under arms, while the
bodyguard galloped to the spot. But before they reached the scouts,
some one met them with his squires, the man who had been sent out as a
spy, the guardian of the lady from Susa, Araspas himself. [15] When
the news reached Cyrus, he sprang up from his seat, went to meet him
himself, and clasped his hand, but the others, who of course knew
nothing, were utterly dumbfounded, until Cyrus said:

"Gentlemen, the best of our friends has come back to us. It is high
time that all men should know what he has done. It was not through any
baseness, or any weakness, or any fear of me, that he left us; it was
because I sent him to be my messenger, to learn the enemy's doings and
bring us word. [16] Araspas, I have not forgotten what I promised you,
I will repay you, we will all repay you. For, gentlemen, it is only
just that all of you should pay him honour. Good and true I call him
who risked himself for our good, and took upon himself a reproach that
was heavy to bear."

[17] At that all crowded round Araspas and took him by the hand and
made him welcome. Then Cyrus spoke again:

"Enough, my friends, Araspas has news for us, and it is time to hear
it. Tell us your tale, Araspas, keep back nothing of the truth, and do
not make out the power of the enemy less than it really is. It is far
better that we should find it smaller than we looked for rather than
strong beyond our expectations." [18] "Well," began Araspas, "in order
to learn their numbers, I managed to be present at the marshalling of
their troops." "Then you can tell us," said Cyrus, "not only their
numbers but their disposition in the field." "That I can," answered
Araspas, "and also how they propose to fight." "Good," said Cyrus,
"but first let us hear their numbers in brief." [19] "Well," he
answered, "they are drawn up thirty deep, infantry and cavalry alike,
all except the Egyptians, and they cover about five miles; for I was
at great pains," he added, "to find out how much ground they
occupied."

[20] "And the Egyptians?" Cyrus said, "how are they drawn up? I
noticed you said, 'all except the Egyptians.'"

"The Egyptians," he answered, "are drawn up in companies of ten
thousand, under their own officers, a hundred deep, and a hundred
broad: that, they insisted, was their usual formation at home.
Croesus, however, was very loth to let them have their own way in
this: he wished to outflank you as much as possible." "Why?" Cyrus
asked, "what was his object?" "To encircle you, I imagine, with his
wings." "He had better take care," said Cyrus, "or his circle may find
itself in the centre. [21] But now you have told us what we most
needed to know, and you, gentlemen," said he to the officers, "on
leaving this meeting, you will look to your weapons and your harness.
It often happens that the lack of some little thing makes man or horse
or chariot useless. To-morrow morning early, while I am offering
sacrifice, do you take your breakfast and give your steeds their
provender, so that when the moment comes to strike you may not be
found wanting. And then you, Araspas, must hold the right wing in the
position it has now, and the rest of you who command a thousand men
must do the same with your divisions: it is no time to be changing
horses when the race is being run; and you will send word to the
brigadiers and captains under you to draw up the phalanx with each
company two deep." (Now a company consisted of four-and-twenty men.)

[22] Then one of the officers, a captain of ten thousand, said:

"Do you think, Cyrus, that with so shallow a depth we can stand
against their tremendous phalanx?"

"But do you suppose," rejoined he, "that any phalanx so deep that the
rear-ranks cannot close with the enemy could do much either for friend
or foe? [23] I myself," he added, "would rather this heavy infantry of
theirs were drawn up, not a hundred, but ten thousand deep: we should
have all the fewer to fight. Whereas with the depth that I propose, I
believe we shall not waste a man: every part of our army will work
with every other. [24] I will post the javelin-men behind the
cuirassiers, and the archers behind them: it would be absurd to place
in the van troops who admit that they are not made for hand-to-hand
fighting; but with the cuirassiers thrown in front of them they will
stand firm enough, and harass the enemy over the heads of our own men
with their arrows and their darts. And every stroke that falls on the
enemy means so much relief to our friends. [25] In the very rear of
all I will post our reserve. A house is useless without a foundation
as well as a roof, and our phalanx will be no use unless it has a
rear-guard and a van, and both of them good. [26] You," he added,
"will draw up the ranks to suit these orders, and you who command the
targeteers will follow with your companies in the same depth, and you
who command the archers will follow the targeteers. [27] Gentlemen of
the reserve, you will hold your men in the rear, and pass the word
down to your own subordinates to watch the men in front, cheer on
those who do their duty, threaten him who plays the coward, and if any
man show signs of treachery, see that he dies the death. It is for
those in the van to hearten those behind them by word and deed; it is
for you, the reserve, to make the cowards dread you more than the foe.
[28] You know your work, and you will do it. Euphratus," he added,
turning to the officer in command of the artillery, "see that the
waggons with the towers keep as close to the phalanx as possible. [29]
And you, Daouchus, bring up the whole of your baggage-train under
cover of the towers and make your squires punish severely any man who
breaks the line. [30] You, Carouchas, keep the women's carriages close
behind the baggage-train. This long line of followers should give an
impression of vast numbers, allow our own men opportunity for
ambuscades, and force the enemy, if he try to surround us, to widen
his circuit, and the wider he makes it the weaker he will be. [31]
That, then, is your business; and you, gentlemen, Artaozus and
Artagersas, each of you take your thousand foot and guard the baggage.
[32] And you, Pharnouchus and Asiadatas, neither of you must lead your
thousand horse into the fighting-line, you must get them under arms by
themselves behind the carriages: and then come to me with the other
officers as fully-equipt as if you were to be the first to fight. [53]
You, sir, who command the camel-corps will take up your post behind
the carriages and look for further orders to Artagersas. [34] Officers
of the war-chariots, you will draw lots among yourselves, and he on
whom the lot falls will bring his hundred chariots in front of the
fighting-line, while the other two centuries will support our flanks
on the right and left."

[35] Such were the dispositions made by Cyrus; but Abradatas, the lord
of Susa, cried:

"Cyrus, let me, I pray you, volunteer for the post in front."

[36] And Cyrus, struck with admiration for the man, took him by the
hand, and turning to the Persians in command of the other centuries
said:

"Perhaps, gentlemen, you will allow this?"

But they answered that it was hard to resign the post of honour, and
so they all drew lots, and the lot fell on Abradatas, and his post was
face to face with the Egyptians. Then the officers left the council
and carried out the orders given, and took their evening meal and
posted the pickets and went to rest.

[C.4] But early on the morrow Cyrus offered sacrifice, and meanwhile
the rest of the army took their breakfast, and after the libation they
armed themselves, a great and goodly company in bright tunics and
splendid breastplates and shining helmets. All the horses had
frontlets and chest-plates, the chargers had armour on their
shoulders, and the chariot-horses on their flanks; so that the whole
army flashed with bronze, and shone like a flower with scarlet. [2]
The eight-horse chariot of Abradatas was a marvel of beauty and
richness; and just as he was about to put on the linen corslet of his
native land, Pantheia came, bringing him a golden breastplate and a
helmet of gold, and armlets and broad bracelets for his wrists, and a
full flowing purple tunic, and a hyacinth-coloured helmet-plume. All
these she had made for him in secret, taking the measure of his armour
without his knowledge. [3] And when he saw them, he gazed in wonder
and said:

"Dear wife, and did you destroy your own jewels to make this armour
for me?"

But she said, "No, my lord, at least not the richest of them all, for
you shall be my loveliest jewel, when others see you as I see you
now."

As she spoke, she put the armour on him, but then, though she tried to
hide it, the tears rolled down her cheeks.

[4] And truly, when Abradatas was arrayed in the new panoply, he, who
had been fair enough to look upon before, was now a sight of
splendour, noble and beautiful and free, as indeed his nature was. [5]
He took the reins from the charioteer, and was about to set foot on
the car, when Pantheia bade the bystanders withdraw, and said to him,
"My own lord, little need to tell you what you know already, yet this
I say, if any woman loved her husband more than her own soul, I am of
her company. Why should I try to speak? Our lives say more than any
words of mine. [6] And yet, feeling for you what you know, I swear to
you by the love between us that I would rather go down to the grave
beside you after a hero's death than live on with you in shame. I have
thought you worthy of the highest, and believed myself worthy to
follow you. [7] And I bear in mind the great gratitude we owe to
Cyrus, who, when I was his captive, chosen for his spoil, was too
high-minded to treat me as a slave, or dishonour me as a free woman;
he took me and saved me for you, as though I had been his brother's
wife. [8] And when Araspas, my warder, turned from him, I promised, if
he would let me send for you, I would bring him a friend in the
other's place, far nobler and more faithful."

[9] And as Pantheia spoke, Abradatas listened with rapture to her
words, and when she ended, he laid his hand upon her head, and looking
up to heaven he prayed aloud:

"O most mighty Zeus, make me worthy to be Pantheia's husband, and the
friend of Cyrus who showed us honour!"

[10] Then he opened the driver's seat and mounted the car, and the
driver shut the door, and Pantheia could not take him in her arms
again, so she bent and kissed the chariot-box. Then the car rolled
forward and she followed unseen till Abradatas turned and saw her and
cried, "Be strong, Pantheia, be of a good heart! Farewell, and hie
thee home!"

[11] Thereupon her chamberlains and her maidens took her and brought
her back to her own carriage, and laid her down and drew the awning.
But no man, of all who was there that day, splendid as Abradatas was
in his chariot, had eyes to look on him until Pantheia had gone.

[12] Meanwhile Cyrus had found the victims favourable, and his army
was already drawn up in the order he had fixed. He had scouts posted
ahead, one behind the other, and then he called his officers together
for his final words:

[13] "Gentlemen, my friends and allies, the sacred signs from heaven
are as they were the day the gods gave us victory before, and I would
call to your minds thoughts to bring you gladness and confidence for
the fight. [14] You are far better trained than your enemies, you have
lived together and worked together far longer than they, you have won
victories together. What they have shared with one another has been
defeat, and those who have not fought as yet feel they have traitors
to right and left of them, while our recruits know that they enter
battle in company with men who help their allies. [15] Those who trust
each other will stand firm and fight without flinching, but when
confidence has gone no man thinks of anything but flight. [16] Forward
then, gentlemen, against the foe; drive our scythed chariots against
their defenceless cars, let our armed cavalry charge their unprotected
horse, and charge them home. [17] The mass of their infantry you have
met before; and as for the Egyptians, they are armed in much the same
way as they are marshalled; they carry shields too big to let them
stir or see, they are drawn up a hundred deep, which will prevent all
but the merest handful fighting. [18] If they count on forcing us back
by their weigh, they must first withstand our steel and the charge of
our cavalry. And if any of them do hold firm, how can they fight at
once against cavalry, infantry, and turrets of artillery? For our men
on the towers will be there to help us, they will smite the enemy
until he flies instead of fighting. [19] If you think there is
anything wanting, tell me now; God helping us, we will lack nothing.
And if any man wishes to say anything, let him speak now; if not, go
to the altar and there pray to the gods to whom we have sacrificed,
and then fall in. [20] Let each man say to his own men what I have
said to him, let him show the men he rules that he is fit to rule, let
them see the fearlessness in his face, his bearing, and his words."


NOTES

C1.9. Artabazus "the kinsman" named now for the first time, why?

C1.11. Cf. Anglicè "his word": a delicate appeal to a man of honour.
It suits G.'s character.

C1.14-15. Speech full of metaphor: winter stalking on, with hunter and
frost attendant on either side; a stealthy, but august advance.

C1.16. A happy simile: /vide/ Book of Wisdom [c. 5, 10, "And as a ship
that passeth over the waves of the water," etc.].

C1.38. How a fault may be turned to account: Hellenic stool of
repentance.

C1.41. Theory of two souls, to account for the yielding to base
desires. It works, but is it not the theory of a man whose will is
weak, as we say, or whose sympathetic nature has been developed at the
expense of his self-regulative? There is another way of putting it in
/Memorabilia/, Bk. I. c. ii., §§ 19-28. Xenophon is not more a
philosopher than a "philanthropist." He is full of compassion for
human weaknesses.

C1.44. Exit Araspas, to be baptised under this cloud of ignominy into
the sunshine of recognised joyous serviceableness.

C1.45. We grow fonder than ever of Pantheia.

C1.50. Irony: the chariots that are to cost Abradatas his life
hereafter. Is this tale "historic" at all? I mean, did Xenophon find
or hear any such story current? What is the relation, if any, to it of
Xenophon Ephesius, Antheia, and Abrocomas? [/Xenophon Ephesius/, a
late writer of romances.] Had that writer any echo of the names in his
head? What language are "Pantheia" and "Abradatas"?

C1.52. All very well, but the author hasn't told us anything about the
construction of these {mekhanai}, these battering engines, before, to
prepare us for this. Is that a slip, or how explainable? I think he is
betrayed into the description by reason of his interest in such
strategic matters. The expression is intelligible enough to any one
who knows about engines, just as we might speak of the butt or the
stanchion, or whatever it be.

C2.1-3. The Medians bring back the bread that was cast upon the
waters. Cyrus turns this gain to new account. He sacrifices the
present natural gain, i.e. the wealth, to the harder spiritual gain,
viz., their positive as opposed to their merely negative alliance.
Cyrus /is/ the archic man.

C2.4. I have a sort of idea, or feeling that here the writer takes up
his pen afresh after a certain interval. C4-6 are a reduplication, not
unnatural indeed, but /pro tanto/ tautological.

C2.7. Semi-historical basis. Prototype, when Agesilaus meditated the
advance on Persia, just before his recall. [See /Hellenica/, III. iv.,
Works II. p. 29.]

C2.13 foll. The archic man can by a word of his mouth still the
flutter and incipient heave of terror-stricken hearts.

C2.15-18. A review of the improvements amounting to a complete
revolution in arms and attack effected by Cyrus. This is imagined as
an ideal accompaniment to the archic man and conqueror. Xenophon
nowadays on the relative advantages of the bayonet and the sword,
cavalry and infantry, etc., would have been very interesting. Cf. a
writer like Forbes.

[C2.19. "Syrians." The word is used loosely, including the Assyrians
and their kindred. See below C.22. "Syria" = Assyria and the adjacent
country.]

C2.21, fin. Xenophon has more than once witnessed this clouding of the
brow, the scowl or sulk of the less stalwart moral-fibred men (notably
in /Hellenica/).

C2.26 ff. How to give up wine: the art in it. Now listen, all you
blue-ribbonists! Xenophon, Hygienist.

C2.37. One would like to know how the price was regulated. Does any
learned German know? Note the orderliness and economy of it all. Is
it, as far as the army goes, novel in any respect, do you suppose, or
only idealised Hellenic? Spartan?

C3.14. A slight (intentional?) aposiopesis. Did H. have to drive back
the great cavalry division of the enemy?

C3.17. How quickly the archic man passes on! Cf. J. P.

C3.19. Notice the part given to the Egyptians to play. Why? (Agesilaus
died on his last campaign in Egypt.)

C3.25. Is it dramatic to make Cyrus speak in this way as if he were
lecturing a class on strategics?

C3.30. The advantage even of sutlers and women. This several-times-
repeated remark surprises me. But no doubt the arrangement would give
the enemy pause, and waste his time in out-flanking movements: violà
tout, hgd. At Cunaxa, however, the Persian did get behind the Greek
camp. No prototype there, then. [Xenophon, /Anabasis/, Bk. I. c. 10.]

C4.2. We are more and more enamoured of Pantheia.

C4.7. As delicate as any modern in the respect for wedded womanhood.

C4.13 ff. Notice how in this stirring and inspiriting speech Cyrus by
dealing with the Egyptians (the only unknown quantity) strikes a new
note and sets up a new motive, as it were, preparing us for the tragic
struggle which is to come, which will cost Abradatas and other good
men dear, not to speak of the brave Egyptians themselves (cf. Sudanese
Arabs). Also note Xenophon's enthusiasm in reference to the new arming
and the odds of encounter between cavalry and infantry (cf. Napier,
Forbes, etc.).


BOOK VII

[C.1] So they prayed to the gods and went to their place, and the
squires brought food and drink to Cyrus and his staff as they stood
round the sacrifice. And he took his breakfast where he stood, after
making the due offering, sharing what he had with all who needed it,
and he poured out the libation and prayed, and then drank, and his men
with him.

Then he supplicated Zeus, the god of his fathers, to be his leader and
helper in the fight, and so he mounted his horse and bade those about
him follow. [2] All his squires were equipped as he was, with scarlet
tunics, breastplates of bronze, and brazen helmets plumed with white,
short swords, and a lance of cornel-wood apiece. Their horses had
frontlets, chest-plates, and armour for their shoulders, all of
bronze, and the shoulder-pieces served as leg-guards for the riders.
In one thing only the arms of Cyrus differed from the rest: theirs was
covered with a golden varnish and his flashed like a mirror. [3] As he
sat on his steed, gazing into the distance, where he meant to go, a
peal of thunder rang out on the right, and he cried, "We will follow
thee, O Zeus most high!"

So he set forth with Chrysantas on his right at the head of cavalry
and Arsamas on his left with infantry. [4] And the word went down the
lines, "Eyes on the standard and steady marching."

The standard was a golden eagle, with outspread wings, borne aloft on
a long spear-shaft, and to this day such is the standard of the
Persian king.

Before they came in full sight of the Assyrians Cyrus halted the army
thrice. [5] And when they had gone about two miles or more, they began
to see the enemy advancing. As soon as both armies were in full view
of each other, and the Assyrians could see how much they outflanked
the Persians on either side, Croesus halted, in order to prepare an
encircling movement, and pushed out a column on the right wing and the
left, so that the Persian forces might be attacked on every side at
once.

[6] Cyrus saw it, but gave no sign of stopping; he led straight on as
before. Meanwhile he noticed that the turning-point where the
Assyrians had pushed out on either flank was an immense distance from
their centre, and he said to Chrysantas:

"Do you see where they have fixed their angle?" "Yes, I do," answered
Chrysantas, "and I am surprised at it: it seems to me they are drawing
their wings too far away from their centre." "Just so," said Cyrus,
"and from ours too." [7] "Why are they doing that?" asked the other.
"Clearly," said Cyrus, "they are afraid we shall attack, if their
wings are in touch with us while their centre is still some way off."
"But," went on Chrysantas, "how can they support each other at such a
distance?" "Doubtless," said Cyrus, "as soon as their wings are
opposite our flanks, they will wheel round, and then advance at once
on every side and so set us fighting everywhere at once." [8] "Well,"
said Chrysantas, "do you think the movement wise?" "Yes," said Cyrus,
"it is good enough in view of what they can see, but, in view of what
they cannot, it is worse for them than if they had advanced in a
single column. Do you," he said, turning to Arsamas, "advance with
your infantry, slowly, taking your pace from me, and do you,
Chrysantas, march beside him with your cavalry, step for step. I will
make for their angle myself, where I propose to join battle, first
riding round the army to see how things are with all our men. [9] When
I reach the point, and we are on the verge of action, I will raise the
paean and then you must quicken your pace. You will know when we have
closed with the enemy, the din will be loud enough. At the same moment
Abradatas will dash out upon them: such will be his orders; your duty
is to follow, keeping as close to the chariots as possible. Thus we
shall fall on the enemy at the height of his confusion. And, God
helping me, I shall be with you also, cutting my way through the rout
by the quickest road I can.

[10] So he spoke, and sent the watchword down the lines, "Zeus our
saviour, and Zeus our leader," and went forward. As he passed between
the chariots and the cuirassiers, he would say to some, "My men, the
look on your faces rejoices my heart," and to others, "You understand,
gentlemen, that this battle is not for the victory of a day, but for
all that we have won ere now, and for all our happiness to come." [11]
And to others, "My friends, we can never reproach the gods again:
to-day they have put all blessings in our hands. [12] Let us show
ourselves good men and true." Or else, "Gentlemen, can we invite each
other to a more glorious feast than this? This day all gallant hearts
are bidden; this day they may feast their friends." [13] Or again,
"You know, I think, the prizes in this game: the victors pursue and
smite and slay, and win wealth and fame and freedom and empire: the
cowards lose them all. He who loves his own soul let him fight beside
me: for I will have no disgrace." [14] But if he met soldiers who had
fought for him before, he only said, "To you, gentlemen, what need I
say? You know the brave man's part in battle, and the craven's." [15]
And when he came to Abradatas, he halted, and Abradatas gave the reins
to his charioteer and came up to him, and others gathered round from
the infantry and the chariots, and Cyrus said:

"God has rewarded you, Abradatas, according to your prayer, you and
yours. You hold the first rank among our friends. And you will not
forget, when the moment for action comes, that those who watch you
will be Persians, and those who follow you, and they will not let you
bear the brunt alone."

[16] And Abradatas answered:

"Even so, Cyrus; and with us here, methinks, all looks well enough:
but the state of our flanks troubles me: the enemy's wings are strong
and stretch far: he has chariots there, and every kind of arm as well,
while we have nothing else with which to oppose him. So that for
myself," said he, "if I had not won by lot the post I hold, I should
feel ashamed to be here in the safest place of all."

[17] "Nay," answered Cyrus, "if it is well with you, have no concern
for the rest. God willing, I mean to relieve our flanks. But you
yourself, I conjure you, do not attack until you see the rout of those
detachments that you fear."

So much of boasting did Cyrus allow himself on the eve of action,
though he was the last man to boast at other times.

"When you see them routed," he said, "you may take it that I am there,
and then make your rush, for that is the moment when you will find the
enemy weakest and your own men strongest. [18] And while there is
time, Abradatas, be sure to drive along your front and prepare your
men for the charge, kindle their courage by your looks, lift up their
hearts by your hopes. Breathe a spirit of emulation into them, to make
them prove themselves the flower of the chariot-force. Be assured if
things go well with us all men will say nothing is so profitable as
valour."

[19] Accordingly Abradatas mounted his chariot and drove along the
lines to do as Cyrus bade.

Meanwhile Cyrus went on to the left where Hystaspas was posted with
half the Persian cavalry, and he called to him and said:

"Hystaspas, here is work to test your pace! If we are quick enough in
cutting off their heads, none of us will be slaughtered first."

[20] And Hystaspas answered with a laugh:

"Leave it to us! We'll see to the men opposite. But set some one to
deal with the fellows on our flank: it would be a pity for them to be
idle."

And Cyrus answered, "I am going to them myself. But remember,
Hystaspas, to which ever of us God grants the victory, so long as a
single foeman is on the field, attack we must, again and again, until
the last has yielded."

[21] With that he passed on, and as he came to the flank he went up to
the officer in command of the chariots and said to him:

"Good, I intend to support you myself. And when you hear me fall on
the wing, at that instant do your best to charge straight through your
opponents; you will be far safer once outside their ranks than if you
are caught half-way."

[22] Then he went on to the rear and the carriages, where the two
detachments were stationed, a thousand horse and a thousand foot, and
told Artagersas and Pharnouchus, their leaders, to keep the men where
they were.

"But when," he added, "you see me close with the enemy on our right,
then set upon those in front of you: take them in flank, where they
are weakest, while you advance in line, at your full strength. Their
lines, as you see, are closed by cavalry; hurl your camels at these,
and you may be sure, even before the fighting begins, they will cut a
comic figure."

[23] Thus, with all his dispositions made, Cyrus rode round the head
of his right. By this time Croesus, believing that the centre, where
he himself was marching, must be nearer the enemy than the distant
wings, had the signal raised for them to stop their advance, halt, and
wheel round where they were. When they were in position opposite the
Persian force, he signalled for them to charge, and thus three columns
came at once against Cyrus, one facing his front and one on either
flank. [24] A tremor ran through the whole army; it was completely
enclosed, like a little brick laid within a large, with the forces of
the enemy all round it, on every side except the rear, cavalry and
heavy infantry, targeteers, archers, and chariots. [25] None the less,
the instant Cyrus gave the word they swung round to confront the foe.
There was deep silence through the ranks as they realised what they
had to face, and then Cyrus, when the moment came, began the battle-
hymn and it thundered through the host. [26] And as it died away the
war-cry rang out unto the God of Battles, and Cyrus swooped forward at
the head of his cavalry, straight for the enemy's flank, and closed
with them then and there, while the infantry behind him followed,
swift and steady, wave on wave, sweeping out on either side, far out-
flanking their opponents, for they attacked in line and the foe were
in column, to the great gain of Cyrus. A short struggle, and the ranks
broke and fled before him headlong. [27] Artagersas, seeing that Cyrus
had got to work, made his own charge on the left, hurling his camels
forward as Cyrus had advised. Even at a distance the horses could not
face the camels: they seemed to go mad with fear, and galloped off in
terror, rearing and falling foul of one another: such is the strange
effect of camels upon horses. [28] So that Artagersas, his own troops
well in hand, had easy work with the enemy's bewildered masses. At the
same moment the war-chariots dashed in, right and left, so that many,
flying from the chariots, were cut down by the troopers, and many,
flying from these, were caught by the chariots. [29] And now Abradatas
could wait no longer. "Follow me, my friends," he shouted, and drove
straight at the enemy, lashing his good steeds forward till their
flanks were bloody with the goad, the other charioteers racing hard
behind him. The enemy's chariots fled before them instantly, some not
even waiting to take up their fighting-men. [30] But Abradatas drove
on through them, straight into the main body of the Egyptians, his
rush shared by his comrades on either hand. And then, what has often
been shown elsewhere was shown here, namely, that of all strong
formations the strongest is a band of friends. His brothers-in-arms
and his mess-mates charged with him, but the others, when they saw
that the solid ranks of the Egyptians stood firm, swung round and
pursued the flying chariots. [31] Meanwhile Abradatas and his
companions could make no further way: there was not a gap through the
Egyptian lines on either hand, and they could but charge the single
soldiers where they stood, overthrow them by the sheer weight of horse
and car, and crush them and their arms beneath the hoofs and wheels.
And where the scythes caught them, men and weapons were cut to shreds.
[32] In the midst of indescribable confusion, the chariots rocking
among the weltering mounds, Abradatas was thrown out and some of his
comrades with him. There they stood, and fought like men, and there
they were cut down and died. The Persians, pouring in after them,
dealt slaughter and destruction where Abradatas and his men had
charged and shaken the ranks, but elsewhere the Egyptians, who were
still unscathed, and they were many, moved steadily on to meet them.

[33] There followed a desperate struggle with lance and spear and
sword, and still the Egyptians had the advantage, because of their
numbers and their weapons. Their spears were immensely stout and long,
such as they carry to this day, and the huge shield not only gave more
protection than corslet and buckler, but aided the thrust of the
fighter, slung as it was from the shoulder.

[34] Shield locked into shield, they thrust their way forward; and the
Persians could not drive them back, with their light bucklers borne on
the forearm only. Step by step they gave ground, dealing blow for
blow, till they came under cover of their own artillery. Then at last
a second shower of blows fell on the Egyptians, while the reserves
would allow no flight of the archers or the javelin-men: at the
sword's point they made them do their duty. [35] Thick was the
slaughter, and loud the din of clashing weapons and whirring darts,
and shouting warriors, cheering each other and calling on the gods.

[36] At this moment Cyrus appeared, cutting his way through his own
opponents. To see the Persians thrust from their position was misery
to him, but he knew he could check the enemy's advance most quickly by
galloping round to their rear, and thither he dashed, bidding his
troops follow, and there they fell upon them and smote them as they
were gazing ahead, and there they mowed them down.

[37] The Egyptians, seeing what had happened, cried out that the enemy
had taken them in the rear, and wheeled round under a storm of blows.
At this the confusion reached its height, cavalry and infantry
struggling all together. An Egyptian fell under Cyrus' horse, and as
the hoofs struck him he stabbed the creature in the belly. The charger
reared at the blow and Cyrus was thrown. [38] Then was seen what it is
for a leader to be loved by his men. With a terrible cry the men
dashed forward, conquering thrust with thrust and blow with blow. One
of his squires leapt down and set Cyrus on his own charger. [39] And
as Cyrus sprang on the horse he saw the Egyptians worsted everywhere.
For by now Hystaspas was on the ground with his cavalry, and
Chrysantas also. Still Cyrus would not allow them to charge the
Egyptian phalanx: the archers and javelin-men were to play on them
from outside. Then he made his way along the lines to the artillery,
and there he mounted one of the towers to take a survey of the field,
and see if any of the foe still held their ground and kept up the
fight. [40] But he saw the plain one chaos of flying horses and men
and chariots, pursuers and pursued, conquerors and conquered, and
nowhere any who still stood firm, save only the Egyptians. These, in
sore straits as they were, formed themselves into a circle behind a
ring of steel, and sat down under cover of their enormous shields.
They no longer attempted to act, but they suffered, and suffered
heavily. [41] Cyrus, in admiration and pity, unwilling that men so
brave should be done to death, drew off his soldiers who were fighting
round them, and would not let another man lift sword.

Then he sent them a herald asking if they wished to be cut to pieces
for the sake of those who had betrayed them, or save their lives and
keep their reputation for gallantry? And they answered, "Is it
possible that we can be saved and yet keep our reputation
untarnished?" [42] And Cyrus said, "Surely yes, for we ourselves have
seen that you alone have held your ground and been ready to fight."
"But even so," said the Egyptians, "how can we act in honour if we
save ourselves?"

"By betraying none of those at whose side you fought," answered Cyrus:
"only surrender your arms to us, and become our friends, the friends
of men who chose to save you when they might have destroyed you." [43]
"And if we become your friends," said they, "how will you treat us?"
"As you treat us," answered he, "and the treatment shall be good."

"And what will that good treatment be?" they asked once more. "This,"
said Cyrus: "better pay than you have had, so long as the war lasts,
and when peace comes, if you choose to stay with me, lands and cities
and women and servants." [44] Then they asked him if he would excuse
them from one duty, service against Croesus. Croesus, they said, was
the only leader who knew them; for the rest, they were content to
agree. And so they came to terms, and took and gave pledges of good
faith. [45] Thus it came about that their descendants are to this day
faithful subjects of the king, and Cyrus gave them cities, some in the
interior, which are still called the cities of the Egyptians, beside
Larissa and Kyllene and Kyme on the coast, still held by their
descendants.

When this matter was arranged darkness had already fallen, and Cyrus
drew off his army and encamped at Thymbrara.

[46] In this engagement the Egyptians alone among the enemy won
themselves renown, and of the troops under Cyrus the Persian cavalry
was held to have done the best, so much so that to this day they are
still armed in the manner that Cyrus devised. [47] High praise also
was given to the scythe-bearing chariots, and this engine of war is
still employed by the reigning king. [48] As for the camels, all they
did was to scare the horses; their riders could take no part in the
slaughter, and were never touched themselves by the enemy's cavalry.
For not a horse would come near the camels. [49] It was a useful arm,
certainly, but no gallant gentleman would dream of breeding camels for
his own use or learning to fight on camel-back. And so they returned
to their old position among the baggage-train.

[C.2] Then Cyrus and his men took their evening meal and posted their
pickets and went to rest. But Croesus and his army fled in haste to
Sardis, and the other tribes hurried away homewards under cover of
night as fast and as far as they could. [2] When day broke Cyrus
marched straight for Sardis, and when he came before the citadel he
set up his engines as though for the assault and got out his ladders.
But the following night he sent a scaling party of Persians and
Chaldaeans to climb the fortifications at the steepest point. The
guide was a Persian who had served as a slave to one of the garrison
in the citadel, and who knew a way down to the river by which one
could get up. [4] As soon as it became clear that the heights had been
taken, all the Lydians without exception fled from the walls and hid
wherever they could. At daybreak Cyrus entered the city and gave
orders that not a man was to leave the ranks. [5] Croesus, who had
shut himself up inside his palace, cried out on Cyrus, and Cyrus left
a guard round the building while he himself went to inspect the
captured citadel. Here he found the Persians keeping guard in perfect
order, but the Chaldaean quarters were deserted, for the men had
rushed down to pillage the town. Immediately he summoned their
officers, and bade them leave his army at once. [6] "I could never
endure," he said, "to have undisciplined fellows seizing the best of
everything. You know well enough," he added, "all that was in store
for you. I meant to make all who served with me the envy of their
fellows; but now," he said, "you cannot be surprised if you encounter
some one stronger than yourselves on your way home."

[7] Fear fell on the Chaldaeans at this, and they intreated him to lay
aside his anger and vowed they would give back all the booty they had
taken. He answered that he had no need of it himself. "But if," he
added, "you wish to appease me, you will hand it over to those who
stayed and guarded the citadel. For if my soldiers see that discipline
means reward, all will be well with us."

[8] So the Chaldaeans did as he bade them, and the faithful and
obedient received all manner of good things.

Then Cyrus made his troops encamp in the most convenient quarter of
the town, and told them to stay at their posts and take their
breakfast there. [9] That done, he gave orders that Croesus should be
brought to him, and when he came into his presence, Croesus cried:

"Hail, Cyrus, my lord and master! Fate has given you that title from
now henceforward, and thus must I salute you."

[20] "All hail to you likewise," answered Cyrus: "we are both of us
men. And tell me now," he continued, "would you be more willing to
advise me as a friend?" "I should be more than glad," said Croesus,
"to do you any good. It would mean good for myself, I know." [11]
"Listen, then," answered Cyrus: "I see that my soldiers have endured
much toil and encountered many dangers, and now they are persuaded
that they have taken the wealthiest city in all Asia, after Babylon. I
would not have them cheated of their recompense, seeing that if they
win nothing by their labour, I know not how I can keep them obedient
to me for long. Yet I am unwilling to give them this city over to
plunder. I believe it would be utterly destroyed, and moreover I know
full well that in plunder the worst villains win the most."

[12] To this Croesus answered, "Suffer me then to tell what Lydians I
please that I have won your promise that the city shall not be sacked,
nor their women and children made away with. [13] I promise you in
return that my men will bring you willingly everything that is costly
and beautiful in Sardis. If I can announce such terms, I am certain
there is not one treasure belonging to man or woman that will not be
yours to-morrow. Further, on this day year, the city will overflow
once more with wealth and beauty. But if you sack it, you will destroy
the crafts in its ruin, and they, we know, are the well-spring of all
loveliness. [14] Howbeit, you need not decide at once, wait and see
what is brought to you. Send first," he added, "to my own treasuries,
and let your guards take some of my own men with them."

To all this Cyrus consented, and then he said:

[15] "And now, O Croesus, tell me one thing more. How did matters go
between you and the oracle at Delphi? It is said that you did much
reverence to Apollo and obeyed him in all things."

[16] "I could wish it had been so," said Croesus, "but, truth to say,
from the beginning I have acted in all things against him." "How can
that be?" said Cyrus. "Explain it to me: for your words seem strange
indeed." [17] "Because," he answered, "in the first place, instead of
asking the god for all I wanted I must needs put him to the test, to
see if he could speak the truth. This," he added, "no man of honour
could endure, let be the godhead. Those who are doubted cannot love
their doubters. [18] And yet he stood the test; for though the things
I did were strange, and I was many leagues from Delphi, he knew them
all. And so I resolved to consult him about my children. [19] At first
he would not so much as answer me, but I sent him many an offering,
some of gold and some of silver, and I propitiated him, as I deemed,
by countless sacrifices, and at last he answered me when I asked him
what I must do that sons might be born to me. He said they should be
born. [20] And so they were; in that he uttered no lie, but they
brought me no joy. One of them was dumb his whole life long, and the
noblest perished in the flower of his youth. And I, crushed by these
sorrows, sent again to the god and asked him how I could live in
happiness for the rest of my days, and he answered:

  "'Know thyself, O Croesus, and happiness shall be thine.'

"And when I heard the oracle, I was comforted. [21] I said to myself,
the god has laid the lightest of tasks upon me, and promised me
happiness in return. Some of his neighbours a man may know and others
not: but every one can know himself. [22] So I thought, and in truth
so long as I was at peace I had no fault to find with my lot after my
son's death; but when the Assyrian persuaded me to march against you I
encountered every danger. Yet I was saved, I came to no harm. Once
again, therefore, I have no charge to bring against the god: when I
/knew myself/ incapable of warring against you, he came to my help and
saved mine and me. [23] But afterwards, intoxicated by my wealth,
cajoled by those who begged me to be their leader, tempted by the
gifts they showered on me, flattered by all who said that if I would
but lead them they would obey me to a man, and that I would be the
greatest ruler in all the world, and that all their kings had met
together and chosen me for their champion in the war, I undertook the
generalship as though I were born to be the monarch of the world, for
I did not /know myself/. [24] I thought myself able to fight against
you, you who are sprung from the seed of the gods, born of a royal
line, trained in valour and virtue from your youth, while I--I believe
that the first of my ancestors to reign won his freedom and his crown
on the self-same day. For this dull ignorance of mine I see I am
justly punished. [25] But now at last, O Cyrus," he cried, "now I
/know myself/. And tell me, do you think the god will still speak
truth? Do you think that, knowing myself, I can be happy now? I ask
you, because you of all men have it in your power to answer best.
Happiness is yours to give."

[26] Cyrus answered, "Give me time to deliberate, Croesus. I bear in
mind your former happiness and I pity you. I give you back at once
your wife and your daughters (for they tell me you have daughters),
and your friends and your attendants; they are yours once more. And
yours it is to sit at your own table as you used to live. But battles
and wars I must put out of your power."

[27] "Now by the gods above us," cried Croesus, "you need take no
further thought about your answer: if you will do for me what you say,
I shall live the life that all men called the happiest of lives, and I
knew that they were right." [28] "And who," said Cyrus, "who was it
that lived that life of happiness?" "My own wife," said Croesus; "she
shared all my good things with me, my luxuries, my softest joys; but
in the cares on which those joys were based, in war and battle and
strife, she had no part or lot. Methinks, you will provide for me as I
provided for her whom I loved beyond all others in the world, and I
must needs send to Apollo again, and send thank-offerings."

[29] And as Cyrus listened he marvelled at the man's contentedness of
soul, and for the future wherever he went he took Croesus with him,
either because he thought he might be useful or perhaps because he
felt it was safer so.

[C.3] So for that night they rested. But the next day Cyrus called his
friends and generals together and told some to make an inventory of
their treasures and others to receive all the wealth that Croesus
brought in. First they were to set aside for the gods all that the
Persian priests thought fit, and then store the rest in coffers,
weight them, and pack them on waggons, distributing the waggons by lot
to take with them on the march, so that they could receive their
proper share at any convenient time. [2] So they set about the work.

Then Cyrus called some of his squires and said:

"Tell me, have any of you seen Abradatas? I wonder that he who used to
come to me so often is nowhere to be found."

[3] Then one of the squires made answer, "My lord, he is dead: he fell
in the battle, charging straight into the Egyptian ranks: the rest,
all but his own companions, swerved before their close array. [4] And
now," he added, "we hear that his wife has found his body and laid it
in her own car, and has brought it here to the banks of the Pactolus.
[5] Her chamberlains and her attendants are digging a grave for the
dead man upon a hill, and she, they say, has put her fairest raiment
on him and her jewels, and she is seated on the ground with his head
upon her knees."

[6] Then Cyrus smote his hand upon his thigh and leapt up and sprang
to horse, galloping to the place of sorrow, with a thousand troopers
at his back. [7] He bade Gadatas and Gobryas take what jewels they
could find to honour the dear friend and brave warrior who had fallen,
and follow with all speed: and he bade the keepers of the herds, the
cattle, and the horses drive up their flocks wherever they heard he
was, that he might sacrifice on the grave.

[8] But when he saw Pantheia seated on the ground and the dead man
lying there, the tears ran down his cheeks and he cried:

"O noble and loyal spirit, have you gone from us?"

Then he took the dead man by the hand, but the hand came away with his
own: it had been hacked by an Egyptian blade. [9] And when he saw
that, his sorrow grew, and Pantheia sobbed aloud and took the hand
from Cyrus and kissed it and laid it in its place, as best she could,
and said:

[10] "It is all like that, Cyrus. But why should you see it?" And
presently she said, "All this, I know, he suffered for my sake, and
for yours too, Cyrus, perhaps as much. I was a fool: I urged him so to
bear himself as became a faithful friend of yours, and he, I know, he
never thought once of his own safety, but only of what he might do to
show his gratitude. Now he has fallen, without a stain upon his
valour: and I, who urged him, I live on to sit beside his grave."

[11] And Cyrus wept silently for a while, and then he said:

"Lady, his end was the noblest and the fairest that could be: he died
in the hour of victory. Take these gifts that I have brought and adorn
him."

For now Gobryas and Gadatas appeared with store of jewels and rich
apparel. "He shall not lack for honour," Cyrus said; "many hands will
raise his monument: it shall be a royal one; and we will offer such
sacrifice as befits a hero. [12] And you, lady," he added, "you shall
not be left desolate. I reverence your chastity and your nobleness,
and I will give you a guardian to lead you withersoever you choose, if
you will but tell me to whom you wish to go."

[13] And Pantheia answered:

"Be at rest, Cyrus, I will not hide from you to whom I long to go."

[14] Therewith Cyrus took his leave of her and went, pitying from his
heart the woman who had lost so brave a husband, and the dead man in
his grave, taken from so sweet a wife, never to see her more. Then
Pantheia bade her chamberlains stand aside "until," she said, "I have
wept over him as I would." But she made her nurse stay with her and
she said:

"Nurse, when I am dead, cover us with the same cloak." And the nurse
entreated and besought her, but she could not move her, and when she
saw that she did but vex her mistress, she sat down and wept in
silence. Then Pantheia took the scimitar, that had been ready for her
so long, and drew it across her throat, and dropped her head upon her
husband's breast and died. And the nurse cried bitterly, but she
covered the two with one cloak as her mistress had bidden her.

[15] And when Cyrus heard what Pantheia had done he rushed out in
horror to see if he could save her. And when the three chamberlains
saw what had happened they drew their own scimitars and killed
themselves, there where she had bidden them stand. [16, 17] And when
Cyrus came to that place of sorrow, he looked with wonder and
reverence on the woman, and wept for her and went his way and saw that
all due honour was paid to those who lay there dead, and a mighty
sepulchre was raised above them, mightier, men say, than had been seen
in all the world before.

[C.4] After this the Carians, who were always at war and strife with
one another, because their dwellings were fortified, sent to Cyrus and
asked for aid. Cyrus himself was unwilling to leave Sardis, where he
was having engines of artillery made and battering-rams to overthrow
the walls of those who would not listen to him. But he sent Adousius,
a Persian, in his place, a man of sound judgment and a stout soldier
and withal a person of winning presence. He gave him an army; and the
Cilicians and Cypriotes were very ready to serve under him. [2] That
was why Cyrus never sent a Persian satrap to govern either Cilicia or
Cyprus; he was always satisfied with the native kings; only he exacted
tribute and levied troops whenever he needed them.

[3] So Adousius took his army and marched into Caria, where he was met
by the men of both parties, ready to receive him inside their walls to
the detriment of their opponents. Adousius treated each in exactly the
same way, he told whichever side was pleading that he thought their
case was just, but it was essential that the others should not realise
he was their friend, "for thus, you perceive, I will take them
unprepared whenever I attack."

He insisted they should give him pledges of good faith, and the
Carians had to swear they would receive him without fraud or guile
within their walls and for the welfare of Cyrus and the Persians; and
on his side he was willing to swear that he would enter without fraud
or guile himself and for the welfare of those who received him. [4]
Having imposed these terms on either party without the knowledge of
the other, he fixed on the same night with both, entered the walls,
and had the strongholds of both parties in his hands. At break of day
he took his place in the midst with his army, and sent for the leading
men on either side. Thus confronted with each other they were more
than a little vexed, and both imagined they had been cheated. [5]
However, Adousius began:

"Gentlemen, I took an oath to you that I would enter your walls
without fraud or guile and for the welfare of those who received me.
Now if I am forced to destroy either of you, I am persuaded I shall
have entered to the detriment of the Carians. But if I give you peace,
so that you can till your lands in safety, I imagine I shall have come
for your welfare. Therefore from this day forwards you must meet on
friendly terms, cultivate your fields without fear, give your children
to each other, and if any one offends against these laws, Cyrus and
ourselves will be his enemies."

[6] At that the city gates were flung wide open, the roads were filled
with folk hurrying to one another, the fields were thronged with
labourers. They held high festival together, and the land was full of
peace and joyfulness.

[7] Meanwhile messengers came from Cyrus inquiring whether there was
need for more troops or siege-engines, but Adousius answered, on the
contrary his present force was at Cyrus' service to employ elsewhere
if he wished, and so drew off his army, only leaving a garrison in the
citadels. Thereupon the Carians implored him to remain, and when he
would not, they sent to Cyrus begging him to make Adousius their
satrap.

[8] Meanwhile Cyrus had sent Hystaspas with an army into Phrygia on
the Hellespont, and when Adousius came back he bade him follow, for
the Phrygians would be more willing to obey Hystaspas if they heard
that another army was advancing.

[9] Now the Hellenes on the seaboard offered many gifts and bargained
not to receive the Asiatics within their walls, but only to pay
tribute and serve wherever Cyrus commanded. [10] But the king of
Phrygia made preparations to hold his fortresses and not yield, and
sent out orders to that effect. However, when his lieutenants deserted
him and he found himself all alone, he had to put himself in the hands
of Hystaspas, and leave his fate to the judgment of Cyrus. Then
Hystaspas stationed strong Persian garrisons in all the citadels, and
departed, taking with him not only his own troops but many mounted men
and targeteers from Phrygia. [11] And Cyrus sent word to Adousius to
join Hystaspas, put himself at the head of those who had submitted and
allow them to retain their arms, while those who showed a disposition
to resist were to be deprived of their horses and their weapons and
made to follow the army as slingers.

[12] While his lieutenants were thus employed, Cyrus set out from
Sardis, leaving a large force of infantry to garrison the place, and
taking Croesus with him, and a long train of waggons laden with riches
of every kind. Croesus presented an accurate inventory of everything
in each waggon, and said, as he delivered the scrolls:

"With these in your possession, Cyrus, you can tell whether your
officers are handing over their freights in full or not."

[13] And Cyrus answered:

"It was kindly done, Croesus, on your part, to take thought for this:
but I have arranged that the freights should be in charge of those who
are entitled to them, so that if the men steal, they steal their own
property."

With these words he handed the documents to his friends and officers
to serve as checks on their own stewards.

[14] Cyrus also took Lydians in his train; allowing some to carry
arms, those, namely, who were at pains to keep their weapons in good
order, and their horses and chariots, and who did their best to please
him, but if they gave themselves ungracious airs, he took away their
horses and bestowed them on the Persians who had served him from the
beginning of the campaign, burnt their weapons, and forced them to
follow the army as slingers. [15] Indeed, as a rule, he compelled all
the subject population who had been disarmed to practise the use of
the sling: it was, he considered, a weapon for slaves. No doubt there
are occasions when a body of slingers, working with other detachments,
can do excellent service, but, taken alone, not all the slingers in
the world could face a mere handful armed with steel.

[16] Cyrus was marching to Babylon, but on his way he subdued the
Phrygians of Greater Phrygia and the Cappadocians, and reduced the
Arabians to subjection. These successes enabled him to increase his
Persian cavalry till it was not far short of forty thousand men, and
he had still horses left over to distribute among his allies at large.

At length he came before Babylon with an immense body of cavalry,
archers, and javelin-men, beside slingers innumerable.

[C.5] When Cyrus reached the city he surrounded it entirely with his
forces, and then rode round the walls himself, attended by his friends
and the leading officers of the allies. [2] Having surveyed the
fortifications, he prepared to lead off his troops, and at that moment
a deserter came to inform him that the Assyrians intended to attack as
soon as he began to withdraw, for they had inspected his forces from
the walls and considered them very weak. This was not surprising, for
the circuit of the city was so enormous that it was impossible to
surround it without seriously thinning the lines. [3] When Cyrus heard
of their intention, he took up his post in the centre of his troops
with his own staff round him and sent orders to the infantry for the
wings to double back on either side, marching past the stationary
centre of the line, until they met in the rear exactly opposite
himself. [4] Thus the men in front were immediately encouraged by the
doubling of their depth, and those who retired were equally cheered,
for they saw that the others would encounter the enemy first. The two
wings being united, the power of the whole force was strengthened,
those behind being protected by those in front and those in front
supported by those behind. [5] When the phalanx was thus folded back
on itself, both the front and the rear ranks were formed of picked
men, a disposition that seemed calculated to encourage valour and
check flight. On the flanks, the cavalry and the light infantry were
drawn nearer and nearer to the commander as the line contracted. [6]
When the whole phalanx was in close order, they fell back from the
walls, slowly, facing the foe, until they were out of range; then they
turned, marched a few paces, and then wheeled round again to the left,
and halted, facing the walls, but the further they got the less often
they paused, until, feeling themselves secure, they quickened their
pace and went off in an uninterrupted march until they reached their
quarters.

[7] When they were encamped, Cyrus called a council of his officers
and said, "My friends and allies, we have surveyed the city on every
side, and for my part I fail to see any possibility of taking by
assault walls so lofty and so strong: on the other hand, the greater
the population the more quickly must they yield to hunger, unless they
come out to fight. If none of you have any other scheme to suggest, I
propose that we reduce them by blockade."

[8] Then Chrysantas spoke:

"Does not the river flow through the middle of the city, and it is not
at least a quarter of a mile in width?"

"To be sure it is," answered Gobryas, "and so deep that the water
would cover two men, one standing on the other's shoulders; in fact
the city is even better protected by its river than by its walls."

[9] At which Cyrus said, "Well, Chrysantas, we must forego what is
beyond our power: but let us measure off at once the work for each of
us, set to, and dig a trench as wide and as deep as we can, that we
may need as few guards as possible."

[10] Thereupon Cyrus took his measurements all round the city, and,
leaving a space on either bank of the river large enough for a lofty
tower, he had a gigantic trench dug from end to end of the wall, his
men heaping up the earth on their own side. [11] Then he set to work
to build his towers by the river. The foundations were of palm-trees,
a hundred feet long and more--the palm-tree grows to a greater height
than that, and under pressure it will curve upwards like the spine of
an ass beneath a load. [12] He laid these foundations in order to give
the impression that he meant to besiege the town, and was taking
precautions so that the river, even if it found its way into his
trench, should not carry off his towers. Then he had other towers
built along the mound, so as to have as many guard-posts as possible.
[13] Thus his army was employed, but the men within the walls laughed
at his preparations, knowing they had supplies to last them more than
twenty years. When Cyrus heard that, he divided his army into twelve,
each division to keep guard for one month in the year. [14] At this
the Babylonians laughed louder still, greatly pleased at the idea of
being guarded by Phrygians and Lydians and Arabians and Cappadocians,
all of whom, they thought, would be more friendly to themselves than
to the Persians.

[15] However by this time the trenches were dug. And Cyrus heard that
it was a time of high festival in Babylon when the citizens drink and
make merry the whole night long. As soon as the darkness fell, he set
his men to work. [16] The mouths of the trenches were opened, and
during the night the water poured in, so that the river-bed formed a
highway into the heart of the town.

[17] When the great stream had taken to its new channel, Cyrus ordered
his Persian officers to bring up their thousands, horse and foot
alike, each detachment drawn up two deep, the allies to follow in
their old order. [18] They lined up immediately, and Cyrus made his
own bodyguard descend into the dry channel first, to see if the bottom
was firm enough for marching. [19] When they said it was, he called a
council of all his generals and spoke as follows:

[20] "My friends, the river has stepped aside for us; he offers us a
passage by his own high-road into Babylon. We must take heart and
enter fearlessly, remembering that those against whom we are to march
this night are the very men we have conquered before, and that too
when they had their allies to help them, when they were awake, alert,
and sober, armed to the teeth, and in their battle order. [21]
To-night we go against them when some are asleep and some are drunk,
and all are unprepared: and when they learn that we are within the
walls, sheer astonishment will make them still more helpless than
before. [22] If any of you are troubled by the thought of volleys from
the roofs when the army enters the city, I bid you lay these fears
aside: if our enemies do climb their roofs we have a god to help us,
the god of Fire. Their porches are easily set aflame, for the doors
are made of palm-wood and varnished with bitumen, the very food of
fire. [23] And we shall come with the pine-torch to kindle it, and
with pitch and tow to feed it. They will be forced to flee from their
homes or be burnt to death. [24] Come, take your swords in your hand:
God helping me, I will lead you on. Do you," he said, turning to
Gadatas and Gobryas, "show us the streets, you know them; and once we
are inside, lead us straight to the palace."

[25] "So we will," said Gobryas and his men, "and it would not
surprise us to find the palace-gates unbarred, for this night the
whole city is given over to revelry. Still, we are sure to find a
guard, for one is always stationed there."

"Then," said Cyrus, "there is no time for lingering; we must be off at
once and take them unprepared."

[26] Thereupon they entered: and of those they met some were struck
down and slain, and others fled into their houses, and some raised the
hue and cry, but Gobryas and his friends covered the cry with their
shouts, as though they were revellers themselves. And thus, making
their way by the quickest route, they soon found themselves before the
king's palace. [27] Here the detachment under Gobryas and Gadatas
found the gates closed, but the men appointed to attack the guards
rushed on them as they lay drinking round a blazing fire, and closed
with them then and there. [28] As the din grew louder and louder,
those within became aware of the tumult, till, the king bidding them
see what it meant, some of them opened the gates and ran out. [29]
Gadatas and his men, seeing the gates swing wide, darted in, hard on
the heels of the others who fled back again, and they chased them at
the sword's point into the presence of the king.

[30] They found him on his feet, with his drawn scimitar in his hand.
By sheer weight of numbers they overwhelmed him: and not one of his
retinue escaped, they were all cut down, some flying, others snatching
up anything to serve as a shield and defending themselves as best they
could. [31] Cyrus sent squadrons of cavalry down the different roads
with orders to kill all they found in the street, while those who knew
Assyrian were to warn the inhabitants to stay indoors under pain of
death. [32] While they carried out these orders, Gobryas and Gadatas
returned, and first they gave thanks to the gods and did obeisance
because they had been suffered to take vengeance on their unrighteous
king, and then they fell to kissing the hands and feet of Cyrus,
shedding tears of joy and gratitude. [33] And when it was day and
those who held the heights knew that the city was taken and the king
slain, they were persuaded to surrender the citadel themselves. [34]
Cyrus took it over forthwith, and sent in a commandant and a garrison,
while he delivered the bodies of the fallen to their kinsfolk for
burial, and bade his heralds make proclamation that all the citizens
must deliver up their arms: wherever weapons were discovered in any
house all the inmates would be put to death. So the arms were
surrendered, and Cyrus had them placed in the citadel for use in case
of need. [35] When all was done he summoned the Persian priests and
told them the city was the captive of his spear and bade them set
aside the first-fruits of the booty as an offering to the gods and
mark out land for sacred demesnes. Then he distributed the houses and
the public buildings to those whom he counted his partners in the
exploit; and the distribution was on the principle accepted, the best
prizes to the bravest men: and if any thought they had not received
their deserts they were invited to come and tell him. [36] At the same
time he issued a proclamation to the Babylonians, bidding them till
the soil and pay the dues and render willing service to those under
whose rule they were placed. As for his partners the Persians, and
such of his allies as elected to remain with him, he gave them to
understand they were to treat as subjects the captives they received.

[37] After this Cyrus felt that the time was come to assume the style
and manner that became a king: and he wished this to be done with the
goodwill and concurrence of his friends and in such a way that,
without seeming ungracious, he might appear but seldom in public and
always with a certain majesty. Therefore he devised the following
scheme. At break of day he took his station at some convenient place,
and received all who desired speech with him, and then dismissed them.
[38] The people, when they heard that he gave audience, thronged to
him in multitudes, and in the struggle to gain access there was much
jostling and scheming and no little fighting. [39] His attendants did
their best to divide the suitors, and introduce them in some order,
and whenever any of his personal friends appeared, thrusting their way
through the crowd, Cyrus would stretch out his hand and draw them to
his side and say, "Wait, my friends, until we have finished with this
crowd, and then we can talk at our ease." So his friends would wait,
but the multitude would pour on, growing greater and greater, until
the evening would fall before there had been a moment's leisure for
his friends. [40] All that Cyrus could do then was to say, "Perhaps,
gentlemen, it is a little late this evening and time that we broke up.
Be sure to come early to-morrow. I am very anxious myself to speak
with you." With that his friends were only too glad to be dismissed,
and made off without more ado. They had done penance enough, fasting
and waiting and standing all day long. [41] So they would get to rest
at last, but the next morning Cyrus was at the same spot and a much
greater concourse of suitors round him than before, already assembled
long before his friends arrived. Accordingly Cyrus had a cordon of
Persian lancers stationed round him, and gave out that no one except
his personal friends and the generals were to be allowed access, and
as soon as they were admitted he said:

[42] "My friends, we cannot exclaim against the gods as though they
had failed to fulfil our prayers. They have granted all we asked. But
if success means that a man must forfeit his own leisure and the good
company of all his friends, why, to that kind of happiness I would
rather bid farewell. [43] Yesterday," he added, "I make no doubt you
observed yourselves that from early dawn till late evening I never
ceased listening to petitioners, and to-day you see this crowd before
us, larger still than yesterday's, ready with business for me. [44] If
this must be submitted to, I calculate that what you will get of me
and I of you will be little enough, and what I shall get of myself
will simply be nothing at all. Further," he added, "I foresee another
absurd consequence. [45] I, personally, have a feeling towards you
which I need not state, but, of that audience yonder, scarcely one of
them do I know at all, and yet they are all prepared to thrust
themselves in front of you, transact their business, and get what they
want out of me before any of you have a chance. I should have thought
it more suitable myself that men of that class, if they wanted
anything from me, should pay some court to you, my friends, in the
hopes of an introduction. [46] Perhaps you will ask why I did not so
arrange matters from the first, instead of always appearing in public.
Because in war it is the first business of a commander not to be
behindhand in knowing what ought to be done and seeing that it is
done, and the general who is seldom seen is apt to let things slip.
[47] But to-day, when war with its insatiable demands is over, I feel
as if I had some claim myself to rest and refreshment. I am in some
perplexity, however, as to how I can arrange matters so that all goes
well, not only with you and me, but also with those whom we are bound
to care for. Therefore I seek your advice and counsel, and I would be
glad to learn from any of you the happiest solution."

[48] Cyrus paused, and up rose Artabazus the Mede, who had claimed to
be his kinsman, and said:

"You did well, Cyrus, to open this matter. Years ago, when you were
still a boy, from the very first I longed to be your friend, but I saw
you did not need me, and so I shrank from approaching you. [49] Then
came a lucky moment when you did have need of me to be your good
messenger among the Medes with the order from Cyaxares, and I said to
myself that if I did the work well, if I really helped you, I might
become your comrade and have the right to talk with you as often as I
wished. [50] Well, the work was done, and done so as to win your
praise. After that the Hyrcanians joined us, the first friends we
made, when we were hungry and thirsty for allies, and we loved them so
much we almost carried them about with us in our arms wherever we
went. Then the enemy's camp was taken, and I scarcely think you had
the leisure to trouble your head with me--oh, I quite forgave you.
[51] The next thing was that Gobryas became your friend, and I had to
take my leave, and after him Gadatas, and by that time it was a real
task to get hold of you. Then came the alliances with the Sakians, and
the Cadousians, and no doubt you had to pay them court; if they danced
attendance on you, you must dance attendance on them. [52] So that
there I was, back again at my starting-point, and yet all the while,
as I saw you busy with horses and chariots and artillery, I consoled
myself by thinking, 'when he is done with this he will have a little
leisure for me.' And then came the terrible news that the whole world
was gathering in arms against us; I could not deny that these were
important matters, but still I felt certain, if all went well, a time
would come at last when you need not grudge me your company, and we
should be together to my heart's content, you and I. [53] Now, the day
has come; we have conquered in the great battle; we have taken Sardis
and Babylon; the world is at our feet, and yesterday, by Mithras!
unless I had used my fists a hundred times, I swear I could never have
got near you at all. Well, you grasped my hand and gave me greeting,
and bade me wait beside you, and there I waited, the cynosure of every
eye, the envy of every man, standing there all day long, without a
scrap to eat or a drop to drink. [54] So now, if any way can be found
by which we who have served you longest can get the most of you, well
and good: but, if not, pray send me as your messenger once more, and
this time I will tell them they can all leave you, except those who
were your friends of old."

[55] This appeal set them all laughing, Cyrus with the rest. Then
Chrysantas the Persian stood up and spoke as follows:

"Formerly, Cyrus, it was natural and right that you should appear in
public, for the reasons you have given us yourself, and also because
we were not the folk you had to pay your court to. We did not need
inviting: we were with you for our own sakes. It was necessary to win
over the masses by every means, if they were to share our toils and
our dangers willingly. [56] But now you have won them, and not them
alone; you have it in your power to gain others, and the moment has
come when you ought to have a house to yourself. What would your
empire profit you if you alone were left without hearth or home? Man
has nothing more sacred than his home, nothing sweeter, nothing more
truly his. And do you not think," he added, "that we ourselves would
be ashamed if we saw you bearing the hardships of the camp while we
sat at home by our own firesides? Should we not feel we had done you
wrong, and taken advantage of you?"

[57] When Chrysantas had spoken thus, many others followed him, and
all to the same effect. And so it came about that Cyrus entered the
palace, and those in charge brought the treasures from Sardis thither,
and handed them over. And Cyrus when he entered sacrificed to Hestia,
the goddess of the Hearth, and to Zeus the Lord, and to any other gods
named by the Persian priests.

[58] This done, he set himself to regulate the matters that remained.
Thinking over his position, and the attempt he was making to govern an
enormous multitude, preparing at the same time to take up his abode in
the greatest of all famous cities, but yet a city that was as hostile
to him as a city could be, pondering all this, he concluded that he
could not dispense with a bodyguard for himself. [59] He knew well
enough that a man can most easily be assassinated at his meals, or in
his bath, or in bed, or when he is asleep, and he asked himself who
were most to be trusted of those he had about him. A man, he believed,
can never be loyal or trustworthy who is likely to love another more
than the one who requires his guardianship. [60] He knew that men with
children, or wives, or favourites in whom they delight, must needs
love them most: while eunuchs, who are deprived of all such dear ones,
would surely make most account of him who could enrich them, or help
them if they were injured, or crown them with honour. And in the
conferring of such benefits he was disposed to think he could outbid
the world. [61] Moreover the eunuch, being degraded in the eyes of
other men, is driven to seek the assistance of some lord and master.
Without some such protection there is not a man in the world who would
not think he had the right to over-reach a eunuch: while there was
every reason to suppose that the eunuch would be the most faithful of
all servants. [62] As for the customary notion that the eunuch must be
weak and cowardly, Cyrus was not disposed to accept it. He studied the
indications to be observed in animals: a vicious horse, if gelded,
will cease to bite and be restive, but he will charge as gallantly as
ever; a bull that has been cut will become less fierce and less
intractable, but he will not lose his strength, he will be as good as
ever for work; castration may cure a dog of deserting his master, but
it will not ruin him as a watch-dog or spoil him for the chase. [63]
So, too, with men; when cut off from this passion, they become
gentler, no doubt, but not less quick to obey, not less daring as
horsemen, not less skilful with the javelin, not less eager for
honour. [64] In war and in the chase they show plainly enough that the
fire of ambition is still burning in their hearts. And they have stood
the last test of loyalty in the downfall of their masters. No men have
shown more faithfulness than eunuchs when ruin has fallen on their
lords. [65] In bodily strength, perhaps, the eunuchs seem to be
lacking, but steel is a great leveller, and makes the weak man equal
to the strong in war. Holding this in mind, Cyrus resolved that his
personal attendants, from his doorkeepers onwards, should be eunuchs
one and all.

[66] This guard, however, he felt was hardly sufficient against the
multitude of enemies, and he asked himself whom he could choose among
the rest. [67] He remembered how his Persians led the sorriest of
lives at home owing to their poverty, working long and hard on the
niggard soil, and he felt sure they were the men who would most value
the life at his court. [68] Accordingly he selected ten thousand
lancers from among them, to keep guard round the palace, night and
day, whenever he was at home, and to march beside him whenever he went
abroad. [69] Moreover, he felt that Babylon must always have an
adequate garrison, whether he was in the country or not, and therefore
he stationed a considerable body of troops in the city; and he bade
the Babylonians provide their pay, his object being to make the
citizens helpless, and therefore humble and submissive. [70] This
royal guard that he established there, and the city guard for Babylon,
survive to this day unaltered.

Lastly, as he pondered how the whole empire was to be kept together,
and possibly another added to it, he felt convinced that his
mercenaries did not make up for the smallness of their numbers by
their superiority to the subject peoples. Therefore he must keep
together those brave warriors, to whom with heaven's help the victory
was due, and he must take all care that they did not lose their
valour, hardihood, and skill. [71] To avoid the appearance of
dictating to them and to bring it about that they should see for
themselves it was best to stay with him and remember their valour and
their training, he called a council of the Peers and of the leading
men who seemed to him most worthy of sharing their dangers and their
rewards. [72] And when they were met he began:

"Gentlemen, my friends and allies, we owe the utmost thanks to the
gods because they have given us what we believed that we deserved. We
are masters to-day of a great country and a good; and those who till
it will support us; we have houses of our own, and all the furniture
that is in them is ours. [73] For you need not think that what you
hold belongs to others. It is an eternal law the wide world over, that
when a city is taken in war, the citizens, their persons, and all
their property fall into the hands of the conquerors. It is not by
injustice, therefore, that you hold what you have taken, rather it is
through your own human kindness that the citizens are allowed to keep
whatever they do retain.

[74] "Yet I foresee that if we betake ourselves to the life of
indolence and luxury, the life of the degenerate who think that labour
is the worst of evils and freedom from toil the height of happiness,
the day will come, and speedily, when we shall be unworthy of
ourselves, and with the loss of honour will come the loss of wealth.
[75] Once to have been valiant is not enough; no man can keep his
valour unless he watch over it to the end. As the arts decay through
neglect, as the body, once healthy and alert, will grow weak through
sloth and indolence, even so the powers of the spirit, temperance,
self-control, and courage, if we grow slack in training, fall back
once more to rottenness and death. [76] We must watch ourselves; we
must not surrender to the sweetness of the day. It is a great work,
methinks, to found an empire, but a far greater to keep it safe. To
seize it may be the fruit of daring and daring only, but to hold it is
impossible without self-restraint and self-command and endless care.
[77] We must not forget this; we must train ourselves in virtue from
now henceforward with even greater diligence than before we won this
glory, remembering that the more a man possesses, the more there are
to envy him, to plot against him, and be his enemies, above all when
the wealth he wins and the services he receives are yielded by
reluctant hands. But the gods, we need not doubt, will be upon our
side; we have not triumphed through injustice; we were not the
aggressors, it was we who were attacked and we avenged ourselves. [78]
The gods are with us, I say; but next to that supreme support there is
a defence we must provide out of our own powers alone; and that is the
righteous claim to rule our subjects because we are better men than
they. Needs must that we share with our slaves in heat and cold and
food and drink and toil and slumber, and we must strive to prove our
superiority even in such things as these, and first in these. [79] But
in the science of war and the art of it we can admit no share; those
whom we mean to make our labourers and our tributaries can have no
part in that; we will set ourselves to defraud them there; we know
that such exercises are the very tools of freedom and happiness, given
by the gods to mortal men. We have taken their arms away from our
slaves, and we must never lay our own aside, knowing well that the
nearer the sword-hilt the closer the heart's desire. So. Does any man
ask himself what profit he has gained from the fulfilment of his
dreams, if he must still endure, still undergo hunger and thirst and
toil and trouble and care? Let him learn the lesson that a man's
enjoyment of all good things is in exact proportion to the pains he
has undergone to gain them. Toil is the seasoning of delight; without
desire and longing, no dish, however costly, could be sweet. [81] Yes,
if some spirit were to set before us what men desire most, and we were
left to add for ourselves that final touch of sweetness, I say that we
could only gain above the poorest of the poor in so far as we could
bring hunger for the most delicious foods, and thirst for the richest
wines, and weariness to make us woo the deepest slumber. [82]
Therefore, we must strain every nerve to win and to keep manhood and
nobleness; so that we may gain that satisfaction which is the sweetest
and the best, and be saved from the bitterest of sorrows; since to
fail of good altogether is not so hard as to lose the good that has
once been ours. [83] And let us ask ourselves what excuse we could
offer for being unworthy of our past. Shall we say it is because we
have won an empire? Surely it is hardly fitting that the ruler should
be baser than the ruled. Or is it that we seem to be happier to-day
than heretofore? Is cowardice, then, an adjunct of happiness? Or is it
simply because we have slaves and must punish them if they do wrong?
But by what right can a man, who is bad himself, punish others for
badness or stupidity? [84] Remember, too, that we have arranged for
the maintenance of a whole multitude, to guard our persons and our
houses, and it would be shameful for us to depend for safety on the
weapons of others and refuse to carry weapons for ourselves. Surely we
ought to know that there can be no defence so strong as a man's own
gallantry. Courage should be our companion all our days. For if virtue
leave us, nothing else whatever can go well with us. [85] What, then,
would I have you do? How are we to remember our valour and train our
skill? Gentlemen, I have nothing novel to suggest; at home in Persia
the Peers spend their days at the public buildings and here we should
do the same. Here we are the men of rank and honour, as we are there,
and we should hold to the same customs. You must keep your eyes on me
and watch whether I am diligent in my duty, and I shall give heed to
you, and honour him who trains himself in what is beautiful and brave.
[86] And here too let us educate our sons, if sons are born to us. We
cannot but become better ourselves if we strive to set the best
example we can to our children, and our children could hardly grow up
to be unworthy, even if they wished, when they see nothing base before
them, and hear nothing shameful, but live in the practice of all that
is beautiful and good."


NOTES

C1. Notice the epic tone now adopted, or rather swum into, or rather
which floats the writer up of its own motion.

C1.2 ff. On the whole this description of the battle is, for Xenophon,
obscure.

C1.5-6. Xenophon, Artist. This military criticism and technical
discussion juxtaposed to the epic prelude and the epic sequel is a
clever device enough. We are pleased.

C1.8-9. Final injunctions somewhat obscure, I think.

C1.24 ff. The epic and Homeric vein.

C1.33. The Egyptians have the advantage. This is noticeable in
reference to Cyrus' criticisms of their arms before battle. That is
not a slip, but a dramatic touch on the part of the author, I think.
And Cyrus is speaking of cavalry there, and anticipates the result.

C1.34 fin. A singular feature this in ancient battles. Is it simply
and solely Oriental, or general, and Hellenic also? Has it any
analogue nowadays anywhere? Probably with Egyptian troops in the
Soudan it has (hgd. 1884).

C2.6-7. The archic man through an act of bad discipline makes good
discipline more acceptable.

C2.13. The civilised method of dealing with a conquered city. Instead
of pillage and rapine, an indemnity, which will bring in to the
conquerors wealth, and yet not destroy the arts of the population,
which are the fountain-heads of beauty. || Modern. So the archic man
asserts his superiority once more.

C2.24. Is this also Xenophon's view? If so, it throws light on his
theory of rank and caste.

C3.2. Curious Cyrus should be so little suspicious of Abradatas'
death, is it not? Because the victory was not bloodless. Notice, too,
how little is said of the bloodshed; that is Hellenic as well as
Xenophontine, I fancy.

C3.7. Something epic in all this. Cf. Archilles sacrificing at the
tomb of Patroklos.

C3.8 ff. The pathos of the situation and the /Eironeia/ at its
maximum. "Euripidean" touches throughout.

C3.16. [This is bracketed in most editions, no doubt rightly, as an
interpolation. It was not translated in Mr. Dakyns' manuscript, but
his marginal note is characteristic, and evidently he would have
translated the section in a footnote. It may be rendered thus: "It is
said that a monument was raised above the eunuchs and is in existence
to this day. On the upper slab the names of the husband and the wife
are written in Syrian letters, and below are three other slabs,
inscribed 'To the chamberlains.'"]

C3.16. Interesting, especially if of later insertion, and perhaps
given the historical basis of the story in some monument on the
Pactolus, known to Xenophon. I wish a new Schliemann would find it.
hgd.

C4. Semi-historical? The version is to be found, I think, in C4.2,
which is the /pièce justicative/. The episode itself is full of
humour, as good as a play: Xenophon has seen these duplicities often.
Brer Fox outwitted by Brer Rabbit.

C4.4. Can these rival fastnesses of the Carians be identified? All
this country is well known to Xenophon (/vide Hellenica/, III. c. 4,
etc.).

C4.6. Beautiful renewal of the peaceful arts, festivals, and merry-
makings after the internecine party strife.

C4.9. This again is a district Xenophon is well acquainted with. Has
he one eye on the old insurrection against Persia, /tempore/
Histiaeus, and another on the new arrangements, /tempore/ Antalcidas?

C4.12-13. Croesus and his bills of lading. Some humour. It also brings
out the archic man in opposition to the shop-keeper man of the mere
business type. But still the bills of lading are needed. Croesus only
doesn't "twig" the right persons to check. It's the opposition between
Despot and true Ruler.

C5.9. Cyrus has an idea, the nature of which we shall discover later.

C5.15. Belshazzar's feast, /vide/ Daniel, cf. Hdt. Why plural, "the
trenches"? Is Xenophon obscure? His obscurity is mostly this: he
expects his reader intelligently to follow him.

C5.32. Jars somewhat on our feelings, perhaps, in its thirst for
revenge: but cf. the feeling against the assassins of Lord Frederick
Cavendish and Mr. Burke. [Written at the time of the Phoenix Park
murders.]

C5.37. Is a turning-point in the rise of the archic man (and yet
hardly yet, but at C5.58 we shall come to bodyguards and eunuchs). At
this highest pinnacle of {arkhe} Cyrus desires to furnish himself as
befits a king. It is an historical difficulty which Xenophon has to
get over or round, or is Xenophon himself in the same condemnation, so
to speak? Does he also desire his archic man to be got up in a manner
befitting royalty at a certain date? Consider.

C5.42-47. These sections pose the difficulty well, and it is a
difficulty, and no mistake.

C5.42 ff.  Xenophon-Hellenic theory of life. The leisure to invite
one's own soul and see one's friends which is needed to make life
worth living, versus /negotia/, /negotia/, /negotia/. How far are we
to be consciously self-regarding? Cyrus versus Buddha. The Hellenic
hero is not equal to absolute non-self-regarding devotion to mere
work. The Buddha might be.

C5.48. Perhaps nothing is cleverer in the neat and skilful mosaic work
of this composition than the fitting-in here of Artabazus' personal
view with the--at last necessary--impersonal or public theory of
leadership. It is pretty also that Artabazus should at length get his
reward, and humorous that he doesn't, after all, get it in the old
form.

C5.49 ff. He keenly remembers each tantalizing moment of approach and
separation. A splendid speech of the humorous type. Xenophon himself
must be credited with so much fun, and real fun it is.

C5.56 ff. Curious on this page (a) Xenophon's domestic hearth theory
without which {arkhe} is a tinkling cymbal and empire no burthen to be
borne. His feeling for the sweetness of home || modern. In this the
secret of his happiness, || hgd. (b) His /justification/ or /raison
d'être/ explanation of the eunuch system. Why doesn't he point out its
hollowness also? Not from any lack of sympathy with this barren
mankind. Cf. Gadatas. I think this all logically follows if the
{arkhon} is to rule political enemies as well as friends: to do so
{epistamenos} ["asian expert"] some strange devices must be resorted
to--what think you, Dakyns?

C5.58. The need of a bodyguard. The dragon-fly must wing his flight in
armour cased: that is the law of his development. So Cyrus must be in
the end an ideal "tyrannus," the one spoken of by Simonides the poet
to Hiero [/vide/ the dialogue /Hiero/, and the notes thereto in Mr.
Dakyns' translation, Vol. III.].

C5.64. The faithfulness of the eunuch has its parallel in that of the
old negro slave.

C5.67. These are the sort of fellows Xenophon would have chosen
himself, I take it. Again the historical basis has to be taken account
of. Xenophon has to explain to himself the existence of their body and
how the archic man came to invent it. Throughout we must compare the
/Hiero/ for Xenophon's own political theory apart from his romantic
and philosophical interest in Cyrus.

C5.69. Not a pleasant picture of subject and ruling race. Cf. the
Austrians in Italy.

C5.73. The Hellenic || the modern theory, but more rudely expressed.
The conquerors right to the land he has taken, and what Cyrus proceeds
to say is quite up to the modern mark.

C5.74. Of course this is precisely what the Persians as they
degenerated did come to, nor did the good example of the archic man
nor his precepts nor his institutions save them.

C5.77-79. "Military" theory of virtue: almost barbaric (/ex mea
sententia/ hgd.). But Xenophon is not absolutely = Cyrus.

C5.80 ff. This is the Socratico-Xenophontine hedonism-and-stoicism
combined.

C5.82 ff. A noble sermon on the need of straining every nerve to
virtuous training. Splendidly rhetorical and forceful.

C5.84. Cyrus (i.e. Xenophon) is aware of the crisis he and his are
going through. If externalism has to be adopted to hedge royalty,
still a further inner change is demanded: there must be a
corresponding spiritual growth.

C5.86. One of the noblest sayings in all Xenophon. The one somehow
which touches me most. The best way to improve ourselves is to see
that we set our boys the best examples.


BOOK VIII

[C.1] Such were the words of Cyrus; and Chrysantas rose up after him,
saying, "Gentlemen, this is not the first time I have had occasion to
observe that a good ruler differs in no respect from a good father.
Even as a father takes thought that blessings may never fail his
children, so Cyrus would commend to us the ways by which we can
preserve our happiness. And yet, on one point, it seemed to me he had
spoken less fully than he might; and I will try to explain it for the
benefit of those who have not learnt it. [2] I would have you ask
yourselves, was ever a hostile city captured by an undisciplined
force? Did ever an undisciplined garrison save a friendly town? When
discipline was gone, did ever an army conquer? Is ever disaster nearer
than when each solider thinks about his private safety only? Nay, in
peace as in war, can any good be gained if men will not obey their
betters? What city could be at rest, lawful, and orderly? What
household could be safe? What ship sail home to her haven? [3] And we,
to what do we owe our triumph, if not to our obedience? We obeyed; we
were ready to follow the call by night and day; we marched behind our
leader, ranks that nothing could resist; we left nothing half-done of
all we were told to do. If obedience is the one path to win the
highest good, remember it is also the one way to preserve it. [4] Now
in the old days, doubtless, many of us ruled no one else, we were
simply ruled. But to-day you find yourselves rulers, one and all of
you, some over many and some over few. And just as you would wish your
subjects to obey you, so we must obey those who are set over us. Yet
there should be this difference between ourselves and slaves; a slave
renders unwilling service to his lord, but we, if we claim to be
freemen, must do of our own free will that which we see to be the
best. And you will find," he added, "that even when no single man is
ruler, that city which is most careful to obey authority is the last
to bow to the will of her enemies. [5] Let us listen to the words of
Cyrus. Let us gather round the public buildings and train ourselves,
so that we may keep our hold on all we care for, and offer ourselves
to Cyrus for his noble ends. Of one thing we may be sure: Cyrus will
never put us to any service which can make for his own good and not
for ours. Our needs are the same as his, and our foes the same."

[6] When Chrysantas had said his say, many others followed to support
him, Persians and allies alike, and it was agreed that the men of rank
and honour should be in attendance continually at the palace gates,
ready for Cyrus to employ, until he gave them their dismissal. That
custom is still in force, and to this day the Asiatics under the Great
King wait at the door of their rulers. [7] And the measures that Cyrus
instituted to preserve his empire, as set forth in this account, are
still the law of the land, maintained by all the kings who followed
him. [8] Only as in other matters, so here; with a good ruler, the
government is pure; with a bad one, corrupt. Thus it came about that
the nobles of Cyrus and all his honourable men waited at his gates,
with their weapons and their horses, according to the common consent
of the gallant men who had helped to lay the empire at his feet.

[9] Then Cyrus turned to other matters, and appointed various
overseers: he had receivers of revenue, controllers of finance,
ministers of works, guardians of property, superintendents of the
household. Moreover, he chose managers for his horses and his dogs,
men who could be trusted to keep the creatures in the best condition
and ready for use at any moment. [10] But when it came to those who
were to be his fellow-guardians for the commonwealth, he would not
leave the care and the training of these to others; he regarded that
as his own personal task. He knew, if he were ever to fight a battle,
he would have to choose his comrades and supporters, the men on his
right hand and left, from these and these alone; it was from them he
must appoint his officers for horse and foot. [11] If he had to send
out a general alone it would be from them that one must be sent: he
must depend on them for satraps and governors over cities and nations;
he would require them for ambassadors, and an embassy was, he knew,
the best means for obtaining what he wanted without war. [12] He
foresaw that nothing could go well if the agents in his weightiest
affairs were not what they ought to be, while, if they were,
everything would prosper. This charge, therefore, he took upon his own
shoulders, and he was persuaded that the training he demanded of
others should also be undergone by himself. No man could rouse others
to noble deeds if he fell short of what he ought to be himself. [13]
The more he pondered the matter, the more he felt the need of leisure,
if he were to deal worthily with the highest matters. It was, he felt,
impossible to neglect the revenues, in view of the enormous funds
necessary for so vast an empire, yet he foresaw that if he was always
to be occupied with the multitude of his possessions he would never
have time to watch over the safety of the whole. [14] As he pondered
how he could compass both objects, the prosperity of the finances and
the leisure he required, the old military organisation came into his
mind. He remembered how the captains of ten supervised the squads of
ten, and were supervised themselves by the company-captains, and they
by the captains of the thousands, and these by the captains of ten
thousand, and thus even with hundreds of thousands not a man was left
without supervision, and when the general wished to employ his troops
one order to the captains of ten thousand was enough. [15] On this
principle Cyrus arranged his finances and held his departments
together; in this way, by conferring with a few officers he could keep
the whole system under his control, and actually have more leisure for
himself than the manager of a single household or the master of a
single ship. Finally, having thus ordered his own affairs, he taught
those about him to adopt the same system.

[16] Accordingly, having gained the leisure he needed for himself and
his friends, he could devote himself to his work of training his
partners and colleagues. In the first place he dealt with those who,
enabled as they were to live on the labour of others, yet failed to
present themselves at the palace; he would send for them and seek them
out, convinced that attendance would be wholesome for them; they would
be unwilling to do anything base or evil in the presence of their king
and under the eye of their noblest men; those who were absent were so
through self-indulgence or wrong-doing or carelessness. [17] And I
will now set forth how he brought them to attend. He would go to one
of his most intimate friends and bid him lay hands on the property of
the offender, asserting that it was his own. Then of course the
truants would appear at once crying out that they had been robbed.
[18] But somehow for many days Cyrus could never find leisure to hear
their complaints, and when he did listen he took care to defer
judgment for many more. [19] This was one way he had of teaching them
to attend; another was to assign the lightest and most profitable
tasks to those who were punctual, and a third to give nothing whatever
to the offenders. [20] But the most effective of all, for those who
paid no heed to gentler measures, was to deprive the truant of what he
possessed and bestow it on him who would come when he was needed. By
this process Cyrus gave up a useless friend and gained a serviceable
one. To this day the king sends for and seeks out those who do not
present themselves when they should.

[21] Such was his method with the truants; with those who came forward
he felt, since he was their rightful leader, that he could best incite
them to noble deeds by trying to show that he himself had all the
virtues that became a man. [22] He believed that men do grow better
through written laws, and he held that the good ruler is a living law
with eyes that see, inasmuch as he is competent to guide and also to
detect the sinner and chastise him. [23] Thus he took pains to show
that he was the more assiduous in his service to the gods the higher
his fortunes rose. It was at this time that the Persian priests, the
Magians, were first established as an order, and always at break of
day Cyrus chanted a hymn and sacrificed to such of the gods as they
might name. [24] And the ordinances he established service to this day
at the court of the reigning king. These were the first matters in
which the Persians set themselves to copy their prince; feeling their
own fortune would be the higher if they did reverence to the gods,
following the man who was fortune's favourite and their own monarch.
At the same time, no doubt, they thought they would please Cyrus by
this. [25] On his side Cyrus looked on the piety of his subjects as a
blessing to himself, reckoning as they do who prefer to sail in the
company of pious men rather than with those who are suspected of
wicked deeds, and he reckoned further that if all his partners were
god-fearing, they would be the less prone to crime against each other
or against himself, for he knew he was the benefactor of his fellows.
[26] And by showing plainly his own deep desire never to be unfair to
friend or fellow-combatant or ally, but always to fix his eyes on
justice and rectitude, he believed he could induce others to keep from
base actions and walk in the paths of righteousness. [27] And he would
bring more modesty, he hoped, into the hearts of all men if it were
plain that he himself reverenced all the world and would never say a
shameful word to any man or woman or do a shameful deed. [28] He
looked for this because he saw that, apart from kings and governors
who may be supposed to inspire fear, men will reverence the modest and
not the shameless, and modesty in women will inspire modesty in the
men who behold them. [29] And his people, he thought, would learn to
obey if it were plain that he honoured frank and prompt obedience even
above virtues that made a grander show and were harder to attain. [30]
Such was his belief, and his practice went with it to the end. His own
temperance and the knowledge of it made others more temperate. When
they saw moderation and self-control in the man who above all others
had licence to be insolent, lesser men were the more ready to abjure
all insolence of their own. [31] But there was this difference, Cyrus
held, between modesty and self-control: the modest man will do nothing
shameful in the light of day, but the man of self-control nothing
base, not even in secret. [32] Self-restrain, he believed, would best
be cultivated if he made men see in himself one who could not be
dragged from the pursuit of virtue by the pleasure of the moment, one
who chose to toil first for the happy-hearted joys that go hand-in-
hand with beauty and nobleness. [33] Thus, being the man he was, he
established at his gates a stately company, where the lower gave place
to the higher, and they in their turn showed reverence to each other,
and courtesy, and perfect harmony. Among them all there was never a
cry of anger to be heard, nor a burst of insolent laughter; to look at
them was to know that they lived for honour and loveliness.

[34] Such was the life at the palace-gates, and to practise his nobles
in martial exercises he would lead them out to the hunt whenever he
thought it well, holding the chase to be the best training for war and
the surest way to excellence in horsemanship. [35] A man learns to
keep his seat, no matter what the ground may be, as he follows the
flying quarry, learns to hurl and strike on horseback in his eagerness
to bring down the game and win applause. [36] And here, above all, was
the field in which to inure his colleagues to toil and hardship and
cold and heat and hunger and thirst. Thus to this day the Persian
monarch and his court spend their leisure in the chase. [37] From all
that has been said, it is clear Cyrus was convinced that no one has a
right to rule who is not superior to his subjects, and he held that by
imposing such exercises as these on those about him, he would lead
them to self-control and bring to perfection the art and discipline of
war. [38] Accordingly he would put himself at the head of the hunting-
parties and take them out himself unless he was bound to stay at home,
and, if he was, he would hunt in his parks among the wild creatures he
had reared. He would never touch the evening meal himself until he had
sweated for it, nor give his horses their corn until they had been
exercised, and he would invite his own mace-bearers to join him in the
chase. [39] Therefore he excelled in all knightly accomplishments, he
and those about him, because of their constant practice. Such was the
example he set before his friends. But he also kept his eye on others,
and would single out those who worshipped noble deeds, and reward them
with gifts, and high commands, and seats at festivals, and every kind
of honour. And thus their hearts were filled with ambition, and every
man longed to outdo his fellows in the eyes of Cyrus.

[40] But we seem to learn also that Cyrus thought it necessary for the
ruler not only to surpass his subjects by his own native worth, but
also to charm them through deception and artifice. At any rate he
adopted the Median dress, and persuaded his comrades to do likewise;
he thought it concealed any bodily defect, enhancing the beauty and
stature of the wearer. [41] The shoe, for instance, was so devised
that a sole could be added without notice, and the man would seem
taller than he really was. So also Cyrus encouraged the use of
ointments to make the eyes more brilliant and pigments to make the
skin look fairer. [42] And he trained his courtiers never to spit or
blow the nose in public or turn aside to stare at anything; they were
to keep the stately air of persons whom nothing can surprise. These
were all means to one end; to make it impossible for the subjects to
despise their rulers.

[43] Thus he moulded the men he considered worthy of command by his
own example, by the training he gave them, and by the dignity of his
own leadership. But the treatment of those he prepared for slavery was
widely different. Not one of them would he incite to any noble toil,
he would not even let them carry arms, and he was careful that they
should never lack food or drink in any manly sort. [44] When the
beaters drove the wild creatures into the plain he would allow food to
be brought for the servants, but not for the free men; on a march he
would lead the slaves to the water-springs as he led the beasts of
burden. Or when it was the hour of breakfast he would wait himself
till they had taken a snatch of food and stayed their wolfish hunger;
and the end of it was they called him their father even as the nobles
did, because he cared for them, but the object of his care was to keep
them slaves for ever.

[45] Thus he secured the safety of the Persian empire. He himself, he
felt sure, ran no danger from the massages of the conquered people; he
saw they had no courage, no unity, and no discipline, and, moreover,
not one of them could ever come near him, day or night. [46] But there
were others whom he knew to be true warriors, who carried arms, and
who held by one another, commanders of horse and foot, many of them
men of spirit, confident, as he could plainly see, of their own power
to rule, men who were in close touch with his own guards, and many
of them in constant intercourse with himself; as indeed was essential
if he was to make any use of them at all. It was from them that danger
was to be feared; and that in a thousand ways. [47] How was he to
guard against it? He rejected the idea of disarming them; he thought
this unjust, and that it would lead to the dissolution of the empire.
To refuse them admission into his presence, to show them his distrust,
would be, he considered, a declaration of war. [48] But there was one
method, he felt, worth all the rest, an honourable method and one that
would secure his safety absolutely; to win their friendship if he
could, and make them more devoted to himself than to each other. I
will now endeavour to set forth the methods, so far as I conceive
them, by which he gained their love.

