She had stretched her means and her credit to the utmost in regard
to her wardrobe, and was aware that she had never been so well
equipped since those early days of her career in which her father
and mother had thought that her beauty, assisted by a generous
expenditure, would serve to dispose of her without delay. A
generous expenditure may be incurred once even by poor people, but
cannot possibly be maintained over a dozen years. Now she had taken
the matter into her own hands and had done that which would be
ruinous if not successful. She was venturing her all upon the
die,--with the prospect of drowning herself on the way out to
Patagonia should the chances of the game go against her. She forgot
nothing. She could hardly hope for more than one day's hunting and
yet that had been provided for as though she were going to ride with
the hounds through all the remainder of the season.

When she reached Mistletoe there were people going and coming every
day, so that an arrival was no event. She was kissed by her uncle
and welcomed with characteristic coldness by her aunt, then allowed
to settle in among the other guests as though she had been there
all the winter. Everybody knew that she was a Trefoil and her
presence therefore raised no question. The Duchess of Omnium was
among the guests. The Duchess knew all about her and vouchsafed to
her the smallest possible recognition. Lady Chiltern had met her
before, and as Lady Chiltern was always generous, she was gracious
to Arabella. She was sorry to see Lady Drummond, because she
connected Lady Drummond with the Foreign Office and feared that the
conversation might be led to Patagonia and its new minister. She
contrived to squeeze her uncle's hand and to utter a word of warm
thanks,--which his grace did not perfectly understand. The girl was
his niece and the Duke had an idea that he should be kind to the
family of which he was the head. His brother's wife had become
objectionable to him, but as to the girl, if she wanted a home for
a week or two, he thought it to be his duty to give it to her.

Mistletoe is an enormous house with a frontage nearly a quarter of
a mile long, combining as it does all the offices, coach houses,
and stables. There is nothing in England more ugly or perhaps more
comfortable. It stands in a huge park which, as it is quite flat,
never shows its size and is altogether unattractive. The Duke
himself was a hospitable, easy man who was very fond of his dinner
and performed his duties well; but could never be touched by any
sentiment. He always spent six months in the country, in which he
acted as landlord to a great crowd of shooting, hunting, and
flirting visitors, and six in London, in which he gave dinners and
dined out and regularly took his place in the House of Lords
without ever opening his mouth. He was a grey-haired comely man of
sixty, with a large body and a wonderful appetite. By many who
understood the subject he was supposed to be the best amateur judge
of wine in England. His son Lord Mistletoe was member for the
county and as the Duke had no younger sons he was supposed to be
happy at all points. Lord Mistletoe, who had a large family of his
own, lived twenty miles off,--so that the father and son could meet
pleasantly without fear of quarrelling.

During the first evening Arabella did contrive to make herself very
agreeable. She was much quieter than had been her wont when at
Mistletoe before, and though there were present two or three very
well circumstanced young men she took but little notice of them.
She went out to dinner with Sir Jeffrey Bunker, and made herself
agreeable to that old gentleman in a remarkable manner. After
dinner, something having been said of the respectable old game
called cat's cradle, she played it to perfection with Sir Jeffrey,
till her aunt thought that she must have been unaware that Sir
Jeffrey had a wife and family. She was all smiles and all
pleasantness, and seemed to want no other happiness than what the
present moment gave her. Nor did she once mention Lord Rufford's
name.

On the next morning after breakfast her aunt sent for her to come
up-stairs. Such a thing had never happened to her before. She could
not recollect that, on any of those annual visits which she had
made to Mistletoe for more years than she now liked to think of,
she had ever had five minutes' conversation alone with her aunt. It
had always seemed that she was to be allowed to come and go by
reason of her relationship, but that she was to receive no special
mark of confidence or affection. The message was whispered into her
ear by her aunt's own woman as she was listening with great
attention to Lady Drummond's troubles in regard to her nursery
arrangements. She nodded her head, heard a few more words from Lady
Drummond, and then, with a pretty apology and a statement made so
that all should hear her, that her aunt wanted her, followed the
maid up-stairs. "My dear," said her aunt, when the door was closed,
"I want to ask you whether you would like me to ask Mr. Morton to
come here while you are with us?" A thunderbolt at her feet could
hardly have surprised or annoyed her more. If there was one thing
that she wanted less than another it was the presence of the
Paragon at Mistletoe. It would utterly subvert everything and rob
her of every chance. With a great effort she restrained all emotion
and simply shook her head. She did it very well, and betrayed
nothing. "I ask," said the Duchess, "because I have been very glad
to hear that you are engaged to marry him. Lord Drummond tells me
that he is a most respectable young man."

"Mr. Morton will be so much obliged to Lord Drummond."

"And I thought that if it were so, you would be glad that he should
meet you here. I could manage it very well, as the Drummonds are
here, and Lord Drummond would be glad to meet him."

They had not been above a minute or two together, and Arabella had
been called upon to expend her energy in suppressing any expression
of her horror; but still, by the time that she was called on to
speak, she had fabricated her story. "Thanks, aunt; it is so good
of you; and if everything was going straight, there would be
nothing of course that I should like so much."

"You are engaged to him?"

"Well; I was going to tell you. I dare say it is not his fault; but
papa and mamma and the lawyers think that he is not behaving well
about money;--settlements and all that. I suppose it will all come
right; but in the meantime perhaps I had better not meet him."

"But you were engaged to him?"

This had to be answered without pause. "Yes," said Arabella; "I was
engaged to him."

"And he is going out almost immediately?"

"He is going, I know."

"I suppose you will go with him?"

This was very hard. She could not say that she certainly was not
going with him. And yet she had to remember that her coming
campaign with Lord Rufford must be carried on in part beneath her
aunt's eyes. When she had come to Mistletoe she had fondly hoped
that none of the family there would know anything about Mr. Morton.
And now she was called upon to answer these horrid questions
without a moment's notice! "I don't think I shall go with him,
aunt; though I am unable to say anything certain just at present.
If he behaves badly of course the engagement must be off."

"I hope not. You should think of it very seriously. As for money,
you know, you have none of your own, and I am told that he has a
very nice property in Rufford. There is a neighbour of his coming
here to-morrow, and perhaps he knows him."

"Who is the neighbour, aunt?" asked Arabella, innocently.

"Lord Rufford. He is coming to shoot. I will ask him about the
property."

"Pray don't mention my name, aunt. It would be so unpleasant if
nothing were to come of it. I know Lord Rufford very well."

"Know Lord Rufford very well!"

"As one does know men that one meets about"

"I thought it might settle everything if we had Mr. Morton here."

"I couldn't meet him, aunt; I couldn't indeed. Mamma doesn't think
that he is behaving well." To the Duchess condemnation from Lady
Augustus almost amounted to praise. She felt sure that Mr. Morton
was a worthy man who would not probably behave badly, and though
she could not unravel the mystery, and certainly had no suspicion
in regard to Lord Rufford, she was sure that there was something
wrong. But there was nothing more to be said at present. After what
Arabella had told her Mr. Morton could not be asked there to meet
her niece. But all the slight feeling of kindness to the girl which
had been created by the tidings of so respectable an engagement
were at once obliterated from the Duchess's bosom. Arabella, with
many expressions of thanks and a good-humoured countenance, left
the room, cursing the untowardness of her fate which would let
nothing run smooth.

Lord Rufford was to come. That at any rate was now almost certain.
Up to the present she had doubted, knowing the way in which such
men will change their engagements at the least caprice. But the
Duchess expected him on the morrow. She had prepared the way for
meeting him as an old friend without causing surprise, and had
gained that step. But should she succeed, as she hoped, in exacting
continued homage from the man, homage for the four or five days of
his sojourn at Mistletoe,--this must be carried on with the
knowledge on the part of many in the house that she was engaged to
that horrid Patagonian Minister! Was ever a girl called upon to
risk her entire fate under so many disadvantages?

When she went up to dress for dinner on the day of his expected
arrival Lord Rufford had not come. Since the interview in her
aunt's room she had not heard his name mentioned. When she came
into the drawing-room, a little late, he was not there. "We won't
wait, Duchess," said the Duke to his wife at three minutes past
eight. The Duke's punctuality at dinner-time was well known, and
everybody else was then assembled. Within two minutes after the
Duke's word dinner was announced, and a party numbering about
thirty walked away into the dinner-room. Arabella, when they were
all settled, found that there was a vacant seat next herself. If
the man were to come, fortune would have favoured her in that.

The fish and soup had already disappeared and the Duke was wakening
himself to eloquence on the first entree when Lord Rufford entered
the room. "There never were trains so late as yours, Duchess," he
said, "nor any part of the world in which hired horses travel so
slowly. I beg the Duke's pardon, but I suffer the less because I
know his Grace never waits for anybody."

"Certainly not," said the Duke, "having some regard for my friends'
dinners."

"And I find myself next to you," said Lord Rufford as he took his
seat. "Well; that is more than I deserve."


CHAPTER X

How Things were arranged


"Jack is here," said Lord Rufford, as soon as the fuss of his late
arrival had worn itself away.

"I shall be proud to renew my acquaintance."

"Can you come to-morrow?"

"Oh yes," said Arabella, rapturously.

"There are difficulties, and I ought to have written to you about
them. I am going with the Fitzwilliam." Now Mistletoe was in
Lincolnshire, not very far from Peterborough, not very far from
Stamford, not very far from Oakham. A regular hunting man like Lord
Rufford knew how to compass the difficulties of distance in all
hunting countries. Horses could go by one train or overnight, and
he could follow by another. And a post chaise could meet him here
or there. But when a lady is added, the difficulty is often
increased fivefold.

"Is it very far?" asked Arabella.

"It is a little far. I wonder who are going from here?"

"Heaven only knows. I have passed my time in playing cat's cradle
with Sir Jeffrey Bunker for the amusement of the company, and in
confidential communications with my aunt and Lady Drummond. I
haven't heard hunting mentioned."

"Have you anything on wheels going across to Holcombe Cross
to-morrow, Duke?" asked Lord Rufford. The Duke said that he did not
know of anything on wheels going to Holcombe Cross. Then a hunting
man who had heard the question said that he and another intended to
travel by train to Oundle. Upon this Lord Rufford turned round and
looked at Arabella mournfully.

"Cannot I go by train to Oundle?" she asked.

"Nothing on earth so jolly if your pastors and masters and all that
will let you."

"I haven't got any pastors and masters."

"The Duchess!" suggested Lord Rufford.

"I thought all that kind of nonsense was over," said Arabella.

"I believe a great deal is over. You can do many things that your
mother and grandmother couldn't do; but absolute freedom,--what you
may call universal suffrage,--hasn't come yet, I fear. It's twenty
miles by road, and the Duchess would say something awful if I were
to propose to take you in a post chaise."

"But the railway!"

"I'm afraid that would be worse. We couldn't ride back, you know,
as we did at Rufford. At the best it would be rather a rough and
tumble kind of arrangement. I'm afraid we must put it off. To tell
you the truth I'm the least bit in the world afraid of the
Duchess."

"I am not at all," said Arabella angrily.

Then Lord Rufford ate his dinner and seemed to think that that
matter was settled. Arabella knew that he might have hunted
elsewhere,--that the Cottesmore would be out in their own county
within twelve miles of them, and that the difficulty of that ride
would be very much less. The Duke might have been persuaded to send
a carriage that distance. But Lord Rufford cared more about the
chance of a good run than her company! For a while she was sulky;--
for a little while, till she remembered how ill she could afford to
indulge in such a feeling. Then she said a demure word or two to
the gentleman on the other side of her who happened to be a
clergyman, and did not return to the hunting till Lord Rufford had
eaten his cheese. "And is that to be the end of Jack as far as I'm
concerned?"

"I have been thinking about it ever since. This is Thursday."

"Not a doubt about it."

"To-morrow will be Friday and the Duke has his great shooting on
Saturday. There's nothing within a hundred miles of us on Saturday.
I shall go with the Pytchley if I don't shoot, but I shall have to
get up just when other people are going to bed. That wouldn't suit
you."

"I wouldn't mind if I didn't go to bed at all."

"At any rate it wouldn't suit the Duchess. I had meant to go away
on Sunday. I hate being anywhere on Sunday except in a railway
carriage. But if I thought the Duke would keep me till Tuesday
morning we might manage Peltry on Monday. I meant to have got back
to Surbiton's on Sunday and have gone from there."

"Where is Peltry?"

"It's a Cottesmore meet,--about five miles this Side of Melton."

"We could ride from here."

"It's rather far for that, but we could talk over the Duke to send
a carriage. Ladies always like to see a meet, and perhaps we could
make a party. If not we must put a good face on it and go in
anything we can get. I shouldn't fear the Duchess so much for
twelve miles as I should for twenty."

"I don't mean to let the Duchess interfere with me," said Arabella
in a whisper.

That evening Lord Rufford was very good-natured and managed to
arrange everything. Lady Chiltern and another lady said that they
would be glad to go to the meet, and a carriage or carriages were
organised. But nothing was said as to Arabella's hunting because
the question would immediately be raised as to her return to
Mistletoe in the evening. It was, however, understood that she was
to have a place in the carriage.

Arabella had gained two things. She would have her one day's
hunting, and she had secured the presence of Lord Rufford at
Mistletoe for Sunday. With such a man as his lordship it was almost
impossible to find a moment for confidential conversation. He
worked so hard at his amusements that he was as bad a lover as a
barrister who has to be in Court all day,--almost as bad as a
sailor who is always going round the world. On this evening it was
ten o'clock before the gentlemen came into the drawing-room, and
then Lord Rufford's time was spent in arranging the party for the
meet on Monday. When the ladies went up to bed Arabella had had no
other opportunity than what Fortune had given her at dinner.

And even then she had been watched. That juxtaposition at the
dinner-table had come of chance and had been caused by Lord
Rufford's late arrival. Old Sir Jeffrey should have been her
neighbour, with the clergyman on the other side, an arrangement
which Her Grace had thought safe with reference to the rights of
the Minister to Patagonia. The Duchess, though she was at some
distance down the table, had seen that her niece and Lord Rufford
were intimate, and remembered immediately what had been said
up-stairs. They could not have talked as they were then talking,--
sometimes whispering as the Duchess could perceive very well,--
unless there had been considerable former intimacy. She began
gradually to understand various things;--why Arabella Trefoil had
been so anxious to come to Mistletoe just at this time, why she had
behaved so unlike her usual self before Lord Rufford's arrival, and
why she had been so unwilling to have Mr. Morton invited. The
Duchess was in her way a clever woman and could see many things.
She could see that though her niece might be very anxious to marry
Lord Rufford, Lord Rufford might indulge himself in a close
intimacy with the girl without any such intention on his part. And,
as far as the family was concerned, she would have been quite
contented with the Morton alliance. She would have asked Morton now
only that it would be impossible that he should come in time to be
of service. Had she been consulted in the first instance she would
have put her veto on that drive to the meet: but she had heard
nothing about it until Lady Chiltern had said that she would go.
The Duchess of Omnium had since declared that she also would go,
and there were to be two carriages. But still it never occurred to
the Duchess that Arabella intended to hunt. Nor did Arabella intend
that she should know it till the morning came.

The Friday was very dull. The hunting men of course had gone before
Arabella came down to breakfast. She would willingly have got up at
seven to pour out Lord Rufford's tea, had that been possible; but,
as it was, she strolled into the breakfast room at half-past ten.
She could see by her aunt's eye and hear in her voice that she was
in part detected; and that she would do herself no further service
by acting the good girl; and she therefore resolutely determined to
listen to no more twaddle. She read a French novel which she had
brought with her, and spent as much of the day as she could in her
bedroom. She did not see Lord Rufford before dinner, and at dinner
sat between Sir Jeffrey and an old gentleman out of Stamford who
dined at Mistletoe that evening. "We've had no such luck to-night,"
Lord Rufford said to her in the drawing-room.

"The old dragon took care of that," replied Arabella.

"Why should the old dragon think that I'm dangerous?"

"Because--; I can't very well tell you why, but I dare say you
know."

"And do you think I am dangerous?"

"You're a sort of a five-barred gate," said Arabella laughing. "Of
course there is a little danger, but who is going to be stopped by
that?"

He could make no reply to this because the Duchess called him away
to give some account to Lady Chiltern about Goarly and the U.R.U.,
Lady Chiltern's husband being a master of hounds and a great
authority on all matters relating to hunting. "Nasty old dragon!"
Arabella said to herself when she was thus left alone.

The Saturday was the day of the great shooting and at two o'clock
the ladies went out to lunch with the gentlemen by the side of the
wood. Lord Rufford had at last consented to be one of the party.
With logs of trees, a few hurdles, and other field appliances, a
rustic banqueting hall was prepared and everything was very nice.
Tons of game had been killed, and tons more were to be killed after
luncheon. The Duchess was not there and Arabella contrived so to
place herself that she could be waited upon by Lord Rufford, or
could wait upon him. Of course a great many eyes were upon her, but
she knew how to sustain that. Nobody was present who could dare to
interfere with her. When the eating and drinking were over she
walked with him to his corner by the next covert, not heeding the
other ladies; and she stood with him for some minutes after the
slaughter had begun. She had come to feel that the time was
slipping between her fingers and that she must say something
effective. The fatal word upon which everything would depend must
be spoken at the very latest on their return home on Monday, and
she was aware that much must probably be said before that. "Do we
hunt or shoot tomorrow?" she said.

"To-morrow is Sunday."

"I am quite aware of that, but I didn't know whether you could live
a day without sport."

"The country is so full of prejudice that I am driven to Sabbatical
quiescence."

"Take a walk with me to-morrow," said Arabella.

"But the Duchess," exclaimed Lord Rufford in a stage whisper. One
of the beaters was so near that he could not but have heard;--but
what does a beater signify?

"H'mh'm the Duchess! You be at the path behind the great
conservatory at half-past three and we won't mind the Duchess."
Lord Rufford was forced to ask for many other particulars as to the
locality and then promised that he would be there at the time
named.


CHAPTER XI

"You are so severe"


On the next morning Arabella went to church as did of course a
great many of the party. By remaining at home she could only have
excited suspicion. The church was close to the house, and the
family pew consisted of a large room screened off from the rest of
the church, with a fire-place of its own,--so that the labour of
attending divine service was reduced to a minimum. At two o'clock
they lunched, and that amusement lasted nearly an hour. There was
an afternoon service at three in attending which the Duchess was
very particular. The Duke never went at that time nor was it
expected that any of the gentlemen would do so; but women are
supposed to require more church than men, and the Duchess rather
made it a point that at any rate the young ladies staying in the
house should accompany her. Over the other young ladies there her
authority could only be that of influence, but such authority
generally sufficed. From her niece it might be supposed that she
would exact obedience, and in this instance she tried it. "We start
in five minutes," she said to Arabella as that young lady was
loitering at the table.

"Don't wait for me; aunt, I'm not going," said Arabella boldly.

"I hope you will come to church with us," said the Duchess sternly.

"Not this afternoon."

"Why not, Arabella?"

"I never do go to church twice on Sundays. Some people do, and some
people don't. I suppose that's about it."

"I think that all young women ought to go to church on Sunday
afternoon unless there is something particular to prevent them."
Arabella shrugged her shoulders and the Duchess stalked angrily
away.

"That makes me feel so awfully wicked," said the Duchess of Omnium,
who was the only other lady then left in the room. Then she got up
and went out and Arabella of course followed her. Lord Rufford had
heard it all but had stood at the window and said nothing. He had
not been to church at all, and was quite accustomed to the idea
that as a young nobleman who only lived for pleasure he was
privileged to be wicked. Had the Duchess of Mayfair been blessed
with a third daughter fit for marriage she would not have thought
of repudiating such a suitor as Lord Rufford because he did not go
to church.

When the house was cleared Arabella went upstairs and put on her
hat. It was a bright beautiful winter's day, not painfully cold
because the air was dry, but still a day that warranted furs and a
muff. Having prepared herself she made her way alone to a side door
which led from a branch of the hall on to the garden terrace, and
up and down that she walked two or three times,--so that any of the
household that saw her might perceive that she had come out simply
for exercise. At the end of the third turn instead of coming back
she went on quickly to the conservatory and took the path which led
round to the further side. There was a small lawn here fitted for
garden games, and on the other end of it an iron gate leading to a
path into the woods. At the further side of the iron gate and
leaning against it, stood Lord Rufford smoking a cigar. She did not
pause a moment but hurried across the lawn to join him. He opened
the gate and she passed through. "I'm not going to be done by a
dragon," she said as she took her place alongside of him.

"Upon my, word, Miss Trefoil, I don't think I ever knew a human
being with so much pluck as you have got"

"Girls have to have pluck if they don't mean to be sat upon;--a
great deal more than men. The idea of telling me that I was to go
to church as though I were twelve years old!"

"What would she say if she knew that you were walking here with
me?"

"I don't care what she'd say. I dare say she walked with somebody
once;--only I should think the somebody must have found it very
dull."

"Does she know that you're to hunt to-morrow?"

"I haven't told her and don't mean. I shall just come down in my
habit and hat and say nothing about it. At what time must we
start?"

"The carriages are ordered for half-past nine. But I'm afraid you
haven't clearly before your eyes all the difficulties which are
incidental to hunting."

"What do you mean?"

"It looks as like a black frost as anything I ever saw in my life."

"But we should go?"

"The horses won't be there if there is a really hard frost. Nobody
would stir. It will be the first question I shall ask the man when
he comes to me, and if there have been seven or eight degrees of
frost I shan't get up."

"How am I to know?"

"My man shall tell your maid. But everybody will soon know all
about it. It will alter everything."

"I think I shall go mad."

"In white satin?"

"No;--in my habit and hat. It will be the hardest thing, after all!
I ought to have insisted on going to Holcombe Cross on Friday. The
sun is shining now. Surely it cannot freeze."

"It will be uncommonly ill-bred if it does."

But, after all, the hunting was not the main point. The hunting had
been only intended as an opportunity; and if that were to be
lost,--in which case Lord Rufford would no doubt at once leave
Mistletoe,--there was the more need for using the present hour, the
more for using even the present minute. Though she had said that
the sun was shining, it was the setting sun, and in another half
hour the gloom of the evening would be there. Even Lord Rufford
would not consent to walk about with her in the dark. "Oh, Lord
Rufford," she said, "I did so look forward to your giving me
another lead." Then she put her hand upon his arm and left it
there.

"It would have been nice," said he, drawing her hand a little on,
and remembering as he did so his own picture of himself on the
cliff with his sister holding his coat-tails.

"If you could possibly know," she said, "the condition I am in."

"What condition?"

"I know that I can trust you."

"Oh dear, yes. If you mean about telling, I never tell anything."

"That's what I do mean. You remember that man at your place?"

"What man? Poor Caneback?"

"Oh dear no! I wish they could change places because then he could
give me no more trouble."

"That's wishing him to be dead, whoever he is."

"Yes. Why should he persecute me? I mean that man we were staying
with at Bragton."

"Mr. Morton?"

"Of course I do. Don't you remember your asking me about him, and
my telling you that I was not engaged to him?"

"I remember that"

"Mamma and this horrid old Duchess here want me to marry him.
They've got an idea that he is going to be ambassador at Pekin or
something very grand, and they're at me day and night"

"You needn't take him unless you like him."

"They do make me so miserable!" And then she leaned heavily upon
his arm. He was a man who could not stand such pressure as this
without returning it. Though he were on the precipice, and though
he must go over, still he could not stand it. "You remember that
night after the ball?"

"Indeed I do."

"And you too had asked me whether I cared for that horrid man."

"I didn't see anything horrid. You had been staying at his house
and people had told me. What was I to think?"

"You ought to have known what to think. There; let me go,"--for now
he had got his arm round her waist. "You don't care for me a bit. I
know you don't. It would be all the same to you whom I married;--or
whether I died."

"You don't think that, Bella?" He fancied that he had heard her
mother call her Bella, and that the name was softer and easier than
the full four syllables. It was at any rate something for her to
have gained.

"I do think it. When I came here on purpose to have a skurry over
the country with you, you went away to Holcombe Cross though you
could have hunted here, close in the neighbourhood. And now you
tell me there will be a frost to-morrow."

"Can I help that, darling?"

"Darling! I ain't your darling. You don't care a bit for me. I
believe you hope there'll be a frost." He pressed her tighter, but
laughed as he did so. It was evidently a joke to him;--a pleasant
joke no doubt. "Leave me alone, Lord Rufford. I won't let you, for
I know you don't love me." Very suddenly he did leave his hold of
her and stood erect with his hands in his pockets, for the rustle
of a dress was heard. It was still daylight, but the light was dim
and the last morsel of the grandeur of the sun had ceased to be
visible through the trees. The church-going people had been
released, and the Duchess having probably heard certain tidings,
had herself come to take a walk in the shrubbery behind the
conservatory. Arabella had probably been unaware that she and her
companion by a turn in the walks were being brought back towards
the iron gate. As it was they met the Duchess face to face.

Lord Rufford had spoken the truth when he had said that he was a
little afraid of the Duchess. Such was his fear that at the moment
he hardly knew what he was to say. Arabella had boasted when she
had declared that she was not at all afraid of her aunt;--but she
was steadfastly minded that she would not be cowed by her fears.
She had known beforehand that she would have occasion for much
presence of mind, and was prepared to exercise it at a moment's
notice. She was the first to speak. "Is that you, aunt? you are out
of church very soon."

"Lord Rufford," said the Duchess, "I don't think this is a proper
time for walking out."

"Don't you, Duchess? The air is very nice."

"It is becoming dark and my niece had better return to the house
with me. Arabella, you can come this way. It is just as short as
the other. If you go on straight, Lord Rufford, it will take you to
the house." Of course Lord Rufford went on straight and of course
Arabella had to turn with her aunt. "Such conduct as this is
shocking," began the Duchess.

"Aunt, let me tell you."

"What can you tell me?"

"I can tell you a great deal if you will let me. Of course I am
quite prepared to own that I did not intend to tell you anything."

"I can well believe that"

"Because I could hardly hope for your sympathy. You have never
liked me."

"You have no right to say that"

"I don't do it in the way of finding fault. I don't know why you
should. But I have been too much afraid of you to tell you my
secrets. I must do so now because you have found me walking with
Lord Rufford. I could not otherwise excuse myself."

"Is he engaged to marry you?"

"He has asked me"

"No!"

"But he has, aunt. You must be a little patient and let me tell it
you all. Mamma did make up an engagement between me and Mr. Morton
at Washington."

"Did you know Lord Rufford then?"

"I knew him, but did not think he was behaving quite well. It is
very hard sometimes to know what a man means. I was angry when I
went to Washington. He has told me since that he loves me,--and has
offered."

"But you are engaged to marry the other man."

"Nothing on earth shall make me marry Mr. Morton. Mamma did it, and
mamma now has very nearly broken it off because she says he is very
shabby about money. Indeed it is broken off. I bad told him so even
before Lord Rufford had proposed to me."

"When did he propose and where?"

"At Rufford. We were staying there in November."

"And you asked to come here that you might meet him?"

"Just so. Was that strange? Where could I be better pleased to meet
him than in my uncle's house?"

"Yes;--if you had told us all this before."

"Perhaps I ought; but you are so severe, I did not dare. Do not
turn against me now. My uncle could not but like that his niece
should marry Lord Rufford."

"How can I turn against you if it is settled? Lord Rufford can do
as he pleases. Has he told your father,--or your mother?"

"Mamma knows it."

"But not from him?" asked the Duchess.

Arabella paused a moment but hardly a moment before she answered.
It was hard upon her that she should have to make up her mind on
matters of such importance with so little time for consideration.
"Yes," she said; "mamma knows it from him. Papa is so very
indifferent about everything that Lord Rufford has not spoken to
him."

"If so, it will be best that the Duke should speak to him."

There was another pause, but hardly long enough to attract notice.
"Perhaps so," she said; "but not quite yet. He is so peculiar, so
touchy. The Duke is not quite like my father and he would think
himself suspected."

"I cannot imagine that if he is in earnest."

"That is because you do not know him as I do. Only think where I
should be if I were to lose him!"

"Lose him!"

"Oh, aunt, now that you know it I do hope that you will be my
friend. It would kill me if he were to throw me over."

"But why should he throw you over if he proposed to you only last
month?"

"He might do it if he thought that he were interfered with. Of
course I should like my uncle to speak to him, but not quite
immediately: If he were to say that he had changed his mind, what
could I do, or what could my uncle do?"

"That would be very singular conduct."

"Men are so different now, aunt. They give themselves so much more
latitude. A man has only to say that he has changed his mind and
nothing ever comes of it."

"I have never been used to such men, my dear."

"At any rate do not ask the Duke to speak to him to-day. I will
think about it and perhaps you will let me see you to-morrow, after
we all come in." To this the Duchess gravely assented. "And I hope
you won't be angry because you found me walking with him, or
because I did not go to church. It is everything to me. I am sure,
dear aunt, you will understand that" To this the Duchess made
no reply, and they both entered the house together. What became of
Lord Rufford neither of them saw.

Arabella when she regained her room thought that upon the whole
fortune had favoured her by throwing her aunt in her way. She had,
no doubt, been driven to tell a series of barefaced impudent
lies,--lies of such a nature that they almost made her own hair
stand on end as she thought of them;--but they would matter nothing
if she succeeded; and if she failed in this matter she did not care
much what her aunt thought of her. Her aunt might now do her a good
turn; and some lies she must have told;--such had been the
emergencies of her position! As she thought of it all she was glad
that her aunt had met her; and when Lord Rufford was summoned to
take her out to dinner on that very Sunday,--a matter as to which
her aunt managed everything herself,--she was immediately aware
that her lies had done her good service.

"This was more than I expected," Lord Rufford said when they were
seated.

"She knew that she had overdone it when she sent you away in that
cavalier way," replied Arabella, "and now she wants to show that
she didn't mean anything."


CHAPTER XII

The Day at Peltry


The Duchess did tell the Duke the whole story about Lord Rufford
and Arabella that night,--as to which it may be said that she also
was false. But according to her conscience there were two ways of
telling such a secret. As a matter of course she told her husband
everything. That idle placid dinner-loving man was in truth
consulted about each detail of the house and family; but the secret
was told to him with injunctions that he was to say nothing about
it to any one for twenty-four hours. After that the Duchess was of
opinion that he should speak to Lord Rufford. "What could I say to
him?" asked the Duke. "I'm not her father."

"But your brother is so indifferent"

"No doubt. But that gives me no authority. If he does mean to marry
the girl he must go to her father; or it is possible that he might
come to me. But if he does not mean it, what can I do?" He
promised, however, that he would think of it.

It was still dark night, or the morning was dark as night, when
Arabella got out of bed and opened her window. The coming of a
frost now might ruin her. The absence of it might give her
everything in life that she wanted. Lord Rufford had promised her a
tedious communication through servants as to the state of the
weather. She was far too energetic, far too much in earnest, to
wait for that. She opened the window and putting out her hand she
felt a drizzle of rain. And the air, though the damp from it seemed
to chill her all through, was not a frosty air. She stood there a
minute so as to be sure and then retreated to her bed.

Fortune was again favouring her;--but then how would it be if it
should turn to hard rain? In that case Lady Chiltern and the other
ladies certainly would not go, and how in such case should she get
herself conveyed to the meet? She would at any rate go down in her
hat and habit and trust that somebody would provide for her. There
might be much that would be disagreeable and difficult, but hardly
anything could be worse than the necessity of telling such lies as
those which she had fabricated on the previous afternoon.

She had been much in doubt whether her aunt had or had not believed
her. That the belief was not a thorough belief she was almost
certain. But then there was the great fact that after the story had
been told she had been sent out to dinner leaning on Lord Rufford's
arm. Unless her aunt had believed something that would not have
taken place. And then so much of it was true. Surely it would be
impossible that he should not propose after what had occurred! Her
aunt was evidently alive to the advantage of the marriage, to the
advantage which would accrue not to her, Arabella, individually,
but to the Trefoils generally. She almost thought that her aunt
would not put spokes in her wheel for this day. She wished now that
she had told her aunt that she intended to hunt, so that there need
not be any surprise.

She slept again and again looked out of the window. It rained a
little but still there were hours in which the rain might cease.
Again she slept and at eight her maid brought her word that there
would be hunting. It did rain a little but very little. Of course
she would dress herself in riding attire.

At nine o'clock she walked into the breakfast parlour properly
equipped for the day's sport. There were four or five men there in
red coats and top boots, among whom Lord Rufford was conspicuous.
They were just seating themselves at the breakfast table, and her
aunt was already in her place. Lady Chiltern had come into the room
with herself, and at the door had spoken some good-natured words of
surprise. "I did not know that you were a sportswoman, Miss
Trefoil." "I do ride a little when I am well mounted," Arabella had
said as she entered the room. Then she collected herself, and
arranged her countenance, and endeavoured to look as though she
were doing the most ordinary thing in the world. She went round the
room and kissed her aunt's brow. This she had not done on any other
morning; but then on other mornings she had been late. "Are you
going to ride?" said the Duchess.

"I believe so, aunt."

"Who is giving you a horse?"

"Lord Rufford is lending me one. I don't think even his good-nature
will extend to giving away so perfect an animal. I know him well
for I rode him when I was at Rufford." This she said so that all
the room should hear her.

"You need not be afraid, Duchess," said Lord Rufford. "He is quite
safe"

"And his name is Jack," said Arabella laughing as she took her
place with a little air of triumph. "Lord Rufford offered to let me
have him all the time I was here, but I didn't know whether you
would take me in so attended."

There was not one who heard her who did not feel that she spoke as
though Lord Rufford were all her own. Lord Rufford felt it himself
and almost thought he might as well turn himself round and bid his
sister and Miss Penge let him go. He must marry some day and why
should not this girl do as well as any one else? The Duchess did
not approve of young ladies hunting. She certainly would not have
had her niece at Mistletoe had she expected such a performance. But
she could not find fault now. There was a feeling in her bosom
that if there were an engagement it would be cruel to cause
obstructions. She certainly could not allow a lover in her house
for her husband's niece without having official authenticated
knowledge of the respectability of the lover; but the whole thing
had come upon her so suddenly that she was at a loss what to do or
what to say. It certainly did not seem to her that Arabella was in
the least afraid of being found out in any untruth. If the girl
were about to become Lady Rufford then it would be for Lord Rufford
to decide whether or no she should hunt. Soon after this the Duke
came in and he also alluded to his niece's costume and was informed
that she was to ride one of Lord Rufford's horses. "I didn't hear
it mentioned before," said the Duke. "He'll carry Miss Trefoil
quite safely," said Lord Rufford who was at the moment standing
over a game pie on the sideboard. Then the subject was allowed to
drop.

At half-past nine there was no rain, and the ladies were so nearly
punctual that the carriages absolutely started at ten. Some of the
men rode on; one got a seat on the carriage; and Lord Rufford drove
himself and a friend in a dog-cart, tandem. The tandem was off
before the carriages, but Lord Rufford assured them that he would
get the master to allow them a quarter of an hour. Arabella
contrived to say one word to him. "If you start without me I'll
never speak to you again." He nodded and smiled; but perhaps
thought that if so it might be as well that he should start without
waiting for her.

At the last moment the Duchess had taken it into her head that she
too would go to the meet. No doubt she was actuated by some feeling
in regard to her niece; but it was not till Arabella was absolutely
getting on to Jack at the side of the carriage,--under the auspices
of Jack's owner,--that the idea occurred to her Grace that there
would be a great difficulty as to the return home. "Arabella, how
do you mean to get back?" she asked.

"That will be all right, aunt," said Arabella.

"I will see to that," said Lord Rufford.

The gracious but impatient master of the hounds had absolutely
waited full twenty minutes for the Duchess's party; and was not
minded to wait a minute longer for conversation. The moment that
the carriages were there the huntsmen had started so that there was
an excuse for hurry. Lord Rufford as he was speaking got on to his
own horse, and before the Duchess could expostulate they were away.
There was a feeling of triumph in Arabella's bosom as she told
herself that she had at any rate secured her day's hunting in spite
of such heart-breaking difficulties.

The sport was fairly good. They had twenty minutes in the morning
and a kill. Then they drew a big wood during which they ate their
lunch and drank their sherry. In the big wood they found a fox but
could not do anything with him. After that they came on a third in
a stubble field and ran him well for half an hour, when he went to
ground. It was then three o'clock; and as the days were now at the
shortest the master declined to draw again. They were then about
sixteen miles from Mistletoe, and about ten from Stamford where
Lord Rufford's horses were standing. The distance from Stamford to
Mistletoe was eight. Lord Rufford proposed that they should ride to
Stamford and then go home in a hired carriage. There seemed indeed
to be no other way of getting home without taking three tired
horses fourteen miles out of their way. Arabella made no objection
whatever to the arrangement. Lord Rufford did in truth make a
slight effort,--the slightest possible,--to induce a third person
to join their party. There was still something pulling at his
coat-tail, so that there might yet be a chance of saving him from
the precipice. But he failed. The tired horseman before whom the
suggestion was casually thrown out, would have been delighted to
accept it, instead of riding all the way to Mistletoe; but he did
not look upon it as made in earnest. Two, he knew, were company and
three none.

The hunting field is by no means a place suited for real
love-making. Very much of preliminary conversation may be done there
in a pleasant way, and intimacies may be formed. But when lovers
have already walked with arms round each other in a wood, riding
together may be very pleasant but can hardly be ecstatic. Lord
Rufford might indeed have asked her to be Lady R. while they were
breaking up the first fox, or as they loitered about in the big
wood;--but she did not expect that. There was no moment during the
day's sport in which she had a right to tell herself that he was
misbehaving because he did not so ask her. But in a post chaise it
would be different.

At the inn at Stamford the horses were given up, and Arabella
condescended to take a glass of cherry brandy. She had gone through
a long day; it was then half-past four, and she was not used to be
many hours on horseback. The fatigue seemed to her to be very much
greater than it had been when she got back to Rufford immediately
after the fatal accident. The ten miles along the road, which had
been done in little more than an hour, had almost overcome her. She
had determined not to cry for mercy. as the hard trot went on. She
had passed herself off as an accustomed horsewoman, and having done
so well across the country, would not break down coming home. But,
as she got into the carriage, she was very tired. She could almost
have cried with fatigue;--and yet she told herself that now,--
now,--must the work be done. She would perhaps tell him that she
was tired. She might even assist her cause by her languor; but,
though she should die for it, she would not waste her precious
moments by absolute rest. "May I light a cigar?" he said as he
got in.

"You know you may. Wherever I may be with you do you think that I
would interfere with your gratifications?"

"You are the best girl in all the world," he said as he took out
his case and threw himself back in the corner."

"Do you call that a long day?" she asked when he had lit his cigar.

"Not very long."

"Because I am so tired."

"We came home pretty sharp. I thought it best not to shock her
Grace by too great a stretch into the night. As it is you will have
time to go to bed for an hour or two before you dress. That's what
I do when I am in time. You'll be right as a trivet then."

"Oh; I'm right now,--only tired. It was very nice."

"Pretty well. We ought to have killed that last fox. And why on
earth we made nothing of that fellow in Gooseberry Grove I couldn't
understand. Old Tony would never have left that fox alive above
ground. Would you like to go to sleep?"

"O dear no."

"Afraid of gloves?" said he, drawing nearer to her. They might pull
him as they liked by his coat-tails but as he was in a post chaise
with her he must make himself agreeable. She shook her head and
laughed as she looked at him through the gloom. Then of course he
kissed her.

"Lord Rufford, what does this mean?"

"Don't you know what it means?"

"Hardly."

"It means that I think you the jolliest girl out. I never liked
anybody so well as I do you."

"Perhaps you never liked anybody," said she.

"Well;--yes, I have; but I am not going to boast of what fortune
has done for me in that way. I wonder whether you care for me?"

"Do you want to know?"

"I should like to know that you did."

"Because you have never asked me."

"Am I not asking you now, Bella?"

"There are different ways of asking,--but there is only one way
that will get an answer from me. No;--no. I will not have it. I
have allowed too much to you already. Oh, I am so tired." Then she
sank back almost into his arms,--but recovered herself very
quickly. "Lord Rufford," she said, "if you are a man of honour let
there be an end of this. I am sure you do not wish to make me
wretched."

"I would do anything to make you happy."

"Then tell me that you love me honestly, sincerely, with all your
heart,--and I shall be happy."

"You know I do."

"Do you? Do you?" she said, and then she flung herself on to his
shoulder, and for a while she seemed to faint. For a few minutes
she lay there and as she was lying she calculated whether it would
be better to try at this moment to drive him to some clearer
declaration, or to make use of what he had already said without
giving him an opportunity of protesting that he had not meant to
make her an offer of marriage. He had declared that he loved her
honestly and with his whole heart. Would not that justify her in
setting her uncle at him? And might it not be that the Duke would
carry great weight with him;--that the Duke might induce him to
utter the fatal word though she, were she to demand it now, might
fail? As she thought of it all she affected to swoon, and almost
herself believed that she was swooning. She was conscious but
hardly more than conscious that he was kissing her;--and yet her
brain was at work. She felt that he would be startled, repelled,
perhaps disgusted were she absolutely to demand more from him now.
"Oh, Rufford;--oh, my dearest," she said as she woke up, and with
her face close to his, so that he could look into her eyes and see
their brightness even through the gloom. Then she extricated
herself from his embrace with a shudder and a laugh. "You would
hardly believe how tired I am," she said putting out her ungloved
hand. He took it and drew her to him and there she sat in his arms
for the short remainder of the journey.

They were now in the park, and as the lights of the house came in
sight he gave her some counsel. "Go up to your room at once,
dearest, and lay down."

"I will. I don't think I could go in among them. I should fall."

"I will see the Duchess and tell her that you are all right, but
very tired. If she goes up to you had better see her."

"Oh, yes. But I had rather not."

"She'll be sure to come. And, Bella, Jack must be yours now."

"You are joking."

"Never more serious in my life. Of course he must remain with me
just at present, but he is your horse." Then, as the carriage was
stopping, she took his hand and kissed it.

She got to her room as quickly as possible; and then, before she
had even taken off her hat, she sat down to think of it all,--
sending her maid away meanwhile to fetch her a cup of tea. He must
have meant it for an offer. There had at any rate been enough to
justify her in so taking it. The present he had made to her of the
horse could mean nothing else. Under no other circumstances would
it be possible that she should either take the horse or use him.
Certainly it was an offer, and as such she would instruct her uncle
to use it. Then she allowed her imagination to revel in thoughts of
Rufford Hall, of the Rufford house in town, and a final end to all
those weary labours which she would thus have brought to so
glorious a termination.


CHAPTER XIII

Lord Rufford wants to see a Horse


Lord Rufford had been quite right about the Duchess. Arabella had
only taken off her hat and was drinking her tea when the Duchess
came up to her. "Lord Rufford says that you were too tired to come
in," said the Duchess.

"I am tired, aunt;--very tired. But there is nothing the matter
with me. We had to ride ever so far coming home and it was that
knocked up.

"It was very bad, your in a post chaise, Arabella."

"Why was it bad, aunt? I thought it very nice."

"My dear, it shouldn't have been done. You ought to have known
that. I certainly wouldn't have had you here had I thought that
there would be anything of the kind."

"It is going to be all right," said Arabella laughing.

According to her Grace's view of things it was not and could not be
made "all right." It would not have been all right were the girl to
become Lady Rufford to-morrow. The scandal, or loud reproach due to
evil doings, may be silenced by subsequent conduct. The merited
punishment may not come visibly. But nothing happening after could
make it right that a young lady should come home from hunting in a
post chaise alone with a young unmarried man. When the Duchess
first heard it she thought what would have been her feelings if
such a thing had been suggested in reference to one of her own
daughters! Lord Rufford had come to her in the drawing-room and had
told her the story in a quiet pleasant manner,--merely saying that
Miss Trefoil was too much fatigued to show herself at the present
moment. She had thought from his manner that her niece's story had
been true. There was a cordiality and apparent earnestness as to
the girl's comfort which seemed to be compatible with the story.
But still she could hardly understand that Lord Rufford should wish
to have it known that he travelled about the country in such a
fashion with the girl he intended to marry. But if it were true,
then she must look after her niece. And even if it were not true,--
in which case she would never have the girl at Mistletoe again,--
yet she could not ignore her presence in the house. It was now the
18th of January. Lord Rufford was to go on the following day, and
Arabella on the 20th. The invitation had not been given so as to
stretch beyond that. If it could be at once decided,--declared by
Lord Rufford to the Duke,--that the match was to be a match, then
the invitation should be renewed, Arabella should be advised to put
off her other friends, and Lord Rufford should be invited to come
back early in the next month and spend a week or two in the proper
fashion with his future bride. All that had been settled between
the Duke and the Duchess. So much should be done for the sake of
the family. But the Duke had not seen his way to asking Lord
Rufford any question.

The Duchess must now find out the truth if she could,--so that if
the story were false she might get rid of the girl and altogether
shake her off from the Mistletoe roof tree. Arabella's manner was
certainly free from any appearance of hesitation or fear. "I don't
know about being all right," said the Duchess. "It cannot be right
that you should have come home with him alone in a hired carriage."

"Is a hired carriage wickeder than a private one?"

"If a carriage had been sent from here for you, it would have been
different;--but even then he should not have come with you."

"But he would I'm sure;--and I should have asked him. What;--the
man I'm engaged to marry! Mayn't he sit in a carriage with me?"

The Duchess could not explain herself, and thought that she had
better drop that topic. "What does he mean to do now, Arabella?"

"What does who mean, aunt?"

"Lord Rufford."

"He means to marry me. And he means to go from here to Mr.
Surbiton's to-morrow. I don't quite understand the question."

"And what do you mean to do?"

"I mean to marry him. And I mean to join mamma in London on
Wednesday. I believe we are to go to the Connop Green's the next
day. Mr. Connop Green is a sort of cousin of mamma;--but they are
odious people."

"Who is to see Lord Rufford? However, my dear, if you are very
tired, I will leave you now."

"No, aunt. Stay a moment if you will be so very kind. I am tired;
but if I were twice as tired I would find strength to talk about
this. If my uncle would speak to Lord Rufford at once I should take
it as the very kindest thing he could do. I could not send him to
my uncle; for, after all, one's uncle and one's father are not the
same. I could only refer him to papa. But if the Duke would speak
to him!"

"Did he renew his offer to-day?"

"He has done nothing else but renew it ever since he has been in
the carriage with me. That's the plain truth. He made his offer at
Rufford. He renewed it in the wood yesterday;--and he repeated it
over and over again as we came home to-day. It may have been very
wrong, but so it was." Miss Trefoil must have thought that kissing
and proposing were the same thing. Other young ladies have,
perhaps, before now made such a mistake. But this young lady had
had much experience and should have known better.

"Lord Rufford had better perhaps speak to your uncle."

"Will you tell him so, aunt?"

The Duchess thought about it for a moment. She certainly could not
tell Lord Rufford to speak to the Duke without getting the Duke's
leave to tell him so. And then, if all this were done, and Lord
Rufford were to assure the Duke that the young lady had made a
mistake, how derogatory would all that be to the exalted quiescence
of the house of Mayfair! She thoroughly wished that her niece were
out of the house; for though she did believe the story, her belief
was not thorough. "I will speak to your uncle," she said. "And now
you had better go to sleep."

"And, dear aunt, pray excuse me at dinner. I have been so excited,
so flurried, and so fatigued, that I fear I should make a fool of
myself if I attempted to come down. I should get into a swoon,
which would be dreadful. My maid shall bring me a bit of something
and a glass of sherry, and you shall find me in the drawing-room
when you come out" Then the Duchess went, and Arabella was left
alone to take another view of the circumstances of the campaign.

Though there were still infinite dangers, yet she could hardly wish
that anything should be altered. Should Lord Rufford disown her,
which she knew to be quite possible, there would be a general
collapse and the world would crash over her head. But she had
known, when she took this business in hand, that as success would
open Elysium to her, so would failure involve her in absolute ruin.
She was determined that she would mar nothing now by cowardice, and
having so resolved, and having fortified herself with perhaps two
glasses of sherry, she went down to the drawing-room a little
before nine, and laid herself out upon a sofa till the ladies
should come in.

Lord Rufford had gone to bed, as was his wont on such occasions,
with orders that he should be called to dress for dinner at
half-past seven. But as he laid himself down he made up his
mind that, instead of sleeping, he would give himself up to thinking
about Arabella Trefoil. The matter was going beyond a joke, and
would require some thinking. He liked her well enough, but was
certainly not in love with her. I doubt whether men ever are in love
with girls who throw themselves into their arms. A man's love, till
it has been chastened and fastened by the feeling of duty which
marriage brings with it, is instigated mainly by the difficulty of
pursuit. "It is hardly possible that anything so sweet as that
should ever be mine; and yet, because I am a man, and because it is
so heavenly sweet, I will try." That is what men say to themselves,
but Lord Rufford had had no opportunity of saying that to himself
in regard to Miss Trefoil. The thing had been sweet, but not
heavenly sweet; and he had never for a moment doubted the
possibility. Now at any rate he would make up his mind. But,
instead of doing so, he went to sleep, and when he got up he was
ten minutes late, and was forced, as he dressed himself, to think
of the Duke's dinner instead of Arabella Trefoil.

The Duchess before dinner submitted herself and all her troubles at
great length to the Duke, but the Duke could give her no
substantial comfort. Of course it had all been wrong. He supposed
that they ought not to have been found walking together in the dark
on Sunday afternoon. The hunting should not have been arranged
without sanction; and the return home in the hired carriage had no
doubt been highly improper. But what could he do? If the marriage
came off it would be all well. If not, this niece must not be
invited to Mistletoe again. As to speaking to Lord Rufford, he did
not quite see how he was to set about it. His own girls had been
married in so very different a fashion! He could imagine nothing so
disagreeable as to have to ask a gentleman his intentions. Parental
duty might make it necessary when a daughter had not known how to
keep her own position intact; but here there was no parental duty.
If Lord Rufford would speak to him, then indeed there would be no
difficulty. At last he told his wife that, if she could find an
opportunity of suggesting to the young Lord that, he might perhaps
say a word to the young lady's uncle without impropriety, if she
could do this in a light easy way, so as to run no peril of a
scene,--she might do so.

When the two duchesses and all the other ladies came out into the
drawing-room, Arabella was found upon the sofa. Of course she
became the centre of a little interest for a few minutes, and the
more so, as her aunt went up to her and made some inquiries. Had
she had any dinner? Was she less fatigued? The fact of the improper
return home in the post chaise had become generally known, and
there were some there who would have turned a very cold shoulder to
Arabella had not her aunt noticed her. Perhaps there were some who
had envied her Jack, and Lord Rufford's admiration, and even the
post chaise. But as long as her aunt countenanced her it was not
likely that any one at Mistletoe would be unkind to her. The
Duchess of Omnium did indeed remark to Lady Chiltern that she
remembered something of the same kind happening to the same girl
soon after her own marriage. As the Duchess had now been married a
great many years this was unkind,--but it was known that when the
Duchess of Omnium did dislike any one, she never scrupled to show
it. "Lord Rufford is about the silliest man of his day," she said
afterwards to the same lady; "but there is one thing which I do not
think even he is silly enough to do."

It was nearly ten o'clock when the gentlemen came into the room and
then it was that the Duchess,--Arabella's aunt,--must find the
opportunity of giving Lord Rufford the hint of which the Duke had
spoken. He was to leave Mistletoe on the morrow and might not
improbably do so early. Of all women she was the steadiest, the
most tranquil, the least abrupt in her movements. She could not
pounce upon a man, and nail him down, and say what she had to say,
let him be as unwilling as he might to hear it. At last, however,
seeing Lord Rufford standing alone,--he had then just left the sofa
on which Arabella was still lying,--without any apparent effort she
made her way up to his side. "You had rather a long day," she said.

"Not particularly, Duchess."

"You had to come home so far!"

"About the average distance. Did you think it a hard day, Maurice?"
Then he called to his aid a certain Lord Maurice St. John, a
hard-riding and hard-talking old friend of the Trefoil family who
gave the Duchess a very clear account of all the performance, during
which Lord Rufford fell into an interesting conversation with Mrs.
Mulready, the wife of the neighbouring bishop.

After that the Duchess made another attempt. "Lord Rufford," she
said, "we should be so glad if you would come back to us the first
week in February. The Prices will be here and the Mackenzies,
and--."

"I am pledged to stay with my sister till the fifth, and on the
sixth Surbiton and all his lot come to me. Battersby, is it not the
sixth that you and Surbiton come to Rufford?"

"I rather think it is," said Battersby.

"I wish it were possible. I like Mistletoe so much. It's so
central."

"Very well for hunting;--is it not, Lord Rufford?" But that horrid
Captain Battersby did not go out of the way.

"I wonder whether Lady Chiltern would do me a favour," said Lord
Rufford stepping across the room in search of that lady. He might
be foolish, but when the Duchess of Omnium declared him to be the
silliest man of the day I think she used a wrong epithet. The
Duchess was very patient and intended to try again, but on that
evening she got no opportunity.

Captain Battersby was Lord Rufford's particular friend on this
occasion and had come over with him from Mr. Surbiton's house.
"Bat," he said as they were sitting close to each other in the
smoking-room that night, "I mean to make an early start tomorrow."

"What;--to get to Surbiton's?"

"I've got something to do on the way. I want to look at a horse at
Stamford."

"I'll be off with you."

"No;--don't do that. I'll go in my own cart. I'll make my man get
hold of my groom and manage it somehow. I can leave my things and
you can bring them. Only say to-morrow that I was obliged to go."

"I understand."

"Heard something, you know, and all that kind of thing. Make my
apologies to the Duchess. In point of fact I must be in Stamford at
ten."

"I'll manage it all," said Captain Battersby, who made a very
shrewd guess at the cause which drew his friend to such an
uncomfortable proceeding. After that Lord Rufford went to his room
and gave a good deal of trouble that night to some of the servants
in reference to the steps which would be necessary to take him out
of harm's way before the Duchess would be up on the morrow.

Arabella when she heard of the man's departure on the following
morning, which she luckily did from her own maid, was for some time
overwhelmed by it. Of course the man was running away from her.
There could be no doubt of it. She had watched him narrowly on the
previous evening, and had seen that her aunt had tried in vain to
speak to him. But she did not on that account give up the game. At
any rate they had not found her out at Mistletoe. That was
something. Of course it would have been infinitely better for her
could he have been absolutely caught and nailed down before he left
the house; but that was perhaps more than she had a right to
expect. She could still pursue him; still write to him;--and at
last, if necessary, force her father to do so. But she must trust
now chiefly to her own correspondence.

"He told me, aunt, the last thing last night that he was going,"
she said.

"Why did you not mention it?"

"I thought he would have told you. I saw him speaking to you. He
had received some telegram about a horse. He's the most flighty man
in the world about such things. I am to write to him before I leave
this to-morrow." Then the Duchess did not believe a word of the
engagement. She felt at any rate certain that if there was an
engagement, Lord Rufford did not mean to keep it.


CHAPTER XIV

The Senator is badly treated


When these great efforts were being made by Arabella Trefoil at
Mistletoe, John Morton was vacillating in an unhappy mood between
London and Bragton. It may be remembered that an offer was made to
him as to the purchase of Chowton Farm. At that time the Mistletoe
party was broken up, and Miss Trefoil was staying with her mother
at the Connop Greens. By the morning post on the next day he
received a note from the Senator in which Mr. Gotobed stated that
business required his presence at Dillsborough and suggested that
he should again become a guest at Bragton for a few days. Morton
was so sick of his own company and so tired of thinking of his own
affairs that he was almost glad to welcome the Senator. At any rate
he had no means of escaping, and the Senator came. The two men were
alone at the house and the Senator was full of his own wrongs as
well as those of Englishmen in general. Mr. Bearside had written to
him very cautiously, but pressing for an immediate remittance of 25
pounds, and explaining that the great case could not be carried on
without that sum of money. This might have been very well as being
open to the idea that the Senator had the option of either paying
the money or of allowing the great case to be abandoned, but that
the attorney in the last paragraph of his letter intimated that the
Senator would be of course aware that he was liable for the whole
cost of the action be it what it might. He had asked a legal friend
in London his opinion, and the legal friend had seemed to think
that perhaps he was liable. What orders he had given to Bearside he
had given without any witness, and at any rate had already paid a
certain sum. The legal friend, when he heard all that Mr. Gotobed
was able to tell him about Goarly, had advised the Senator to
settle with Bearside, taking a due receipt and having some person
with him when he did so. The legal friend had thought that a small
sum of money would suffice. "He went so far as to suggest," said
the Senator with indignant energy, "that if I contested my
liability to the man's charges, the matter would go against me
because I had interfered in such a case on the unpopular side. I
should think that in this great country I should find justice
administered on other terms than that." Morton attempted to explain
to him that his legal friend had not been administering justice but
only giving advice. He had, so Morton told him, undoubtedly taken
up the case of one blackguard, and in urging it had paid his money
to another. He had done so as a foreigner,--loudly proclaiming as
his reason for such action that the man he supported would be
unfairly treated unless he gave his assistance. Of course he could
not expect sympathy. "I want no sympathy," said the Senator;--"I
only want justice." Then the two gentlemen had become a little
angry with each other. Morton was the last man in the world to have
been aggressive on such a matter; but with the Senator it was
necessary either to be prostrate or to fight.

But with Mr. Gotobed such fighting never produced ill blood. It was
the condition of his life, and it must be supposed that he liked
it. On the next morning he did not scruple to ask his host's advice
as to what he had better do, and they agreed to walk across to
Goarly's house and to ascertain from the man himself what he
thought or might have to say about his own case. On their way they
passed up the road leading to Chowton Farm, and at the gate leading
into the garden they found Larry Twentyman standing. Morton shook
hands with the young farmer and introduced the Senator. Larry was
still woe-begone though he endeavoured to shake off his sorrows and
to appear to be gay. "I never see much of the man," he said when
they told him that they were going across to call upon his
neighbour, "and I don't know that I want to."

"He doesn't seem to have much friendship among you all," said the
Senator.

"Quite as much as he deserves, Mr. Gotobed," replied Larry. The
Senator's name had lately become familiar as a household word in
Dillsborough, and was, to tell the truth, odious to such men as
Larry Twentyman. "He's a thundering rascal, and the only place fit
for him in the county is Rufford gaol. He's like to be there soon,
I think."

"That's what provokes me," said the Senator. "You think he's a
rascal, Mister."

"I do."

"And because you take upon yourself to think so you'd send him to
Rufford gaol! There was one gentleman somewhere about here told me
he ought to be hung, and because I would not agree with him he got
up and walked away from me at table, carrying his provisions with
him. Another man in the next field to this insulted me because I
said I was going to see Goarly. The clergyman in Dillsborough and
the hotelkeepers were just as hard upon me. But you see, Mister,
that what we want to find out is whether Goarly or the Lord has the
right of it in this particular case."

"I know which has the right without any more finding out," said
Larry. "The shortest way to his house is by the ride through the
wood, Mr. Morton. It takes you out on his land on the other side.
But I don't think you'll find him there. One of my men told me that
he had made himself scarce." Then he added as the two were going
on, "I should like to have just a word with you, Mr. Morton. I've
been thinking of what you said, and I know it was kind. I'll take a
month over it. I won't talk of selling Chowton till the end of
February;--but if I feel about it then as I do now I can't stay."

"That's right, Mr. Twentyman;--and work hard, like a man, through
the month. Go out hunting, and don't allow yourself a moment for
moping."

"I will," said Larry, as he retreated to the house, and then he
gave directions that his horse might be ready for the morrow.

They went in through the wood, and the Senator pointed out the spot
at which Bean the gamekeeper had been so insolent to him. He could
not understand, he said, why he should be treated so roughly, as
these men must be aware that he had nothing to gain himself. "If I
were to go into Mickewa," said Morton, "and interfere there with
the peculiarities of the people as you have done here, it's my
belief that they'd have had the eyes out of my head long before
this."

"That only shows that you don't know Mickewa," said the Senator.
"Its people are the most law-abiding population on the face of the
earth."

They passed through the wood, and a couple of fields brought them
to Goarly's house. As they approached it by the back the only live
thing they saw was the old goose which had been so cruelly deprived
of her companions and progeny. The goose was waddling round the
dirty pool, and there were to be seen sundry ugly signs of a poor
man's habitation, but it was not till they had knocked at the
window as well as the door that Mrs. Goarly showed herself. She
remembered the Senator at once and curtseyed to him; and when
Morton introduced himself she curtseyed again to the Squire of
Bragton. When Goarly was asked for she shook her head and declared
that she knew nothing about him. He had been gone, she said, for
the last week, and had left no word as to whither he was going;--
nor had he told her why. "Has he given up his action against Lord
Rufford?" asked the Senator.

"Indeed then, sir, I can't tell you a word about it."

"I've been told that he has taken Lord Rufford's money."

"He ain't 'a taken no money as I've seed, sir. I wish he had, for
money's sore wanted here, and if the gen'leman has a mind to be
kind-hearted--" Then she intimated her own readiness to take any
contribution to the good cause which the Senator might be willing
to make at that moment. But the Senator buttoned up his breeches
pockets with stern resolution. Though he still believed Lord
Rufford to be altogether wrong, he was beginning to think that the
Goarlys were not worthy his benevolence. As she came to the door
with them and accompanied them a few yards across the field she
again told the tragic tale of her goose;--but the Senator had not
another word to say to her.

On that same day Morton drove Mr. Gotobed into Dillsborough and
consented to go with him to Mr. Bearside's office. They found the
attorney at home, and before anything was said as to payment they
heard his account of the action. If Goarly had consented to take
any money from Lord Rufford he knew nothing about it. As far as he
was aware the action was going on. Ever so many witnesses must be
brought from a distance who had seen the crop standing and who
would have no bias against the owner,--as would be the case with
neighbours, such as Lawrence Twentyman. Of course it was not easy
to oppose such a man as Lord Rufford and a little money must be
spent. Indeed such, he said, was his interest in the case that he
had already gone further than he ought to have done out of his own
pocket. Of course they would be successful,--that is if the matter
were carried on with spirit, and then the money would all come back
again. But just at present a little money must be spent. "I don't
mean to spend it," said the Senator.

"I hope you won't stick to that, Mr. Gotobed."

"But I shall, sir. I understand from your letter that you look to
me for funds."

"Certainly I do, Mr. Gotobed; because you told me to do so."

"I told you nothing of the kind, Mr. Bearside."

"You paid me 15 pounds on account, Mr. Gotobed."

"I paid you 15 pounds certainly."

"And told me that more should be coming as it was wanted. Do you
think I should have gone on for such a man as Goarly,--a fellow
without a shilling,--unless he had some one like you to back him?
It isn't likely. Now, Mr. Morton, I appeal to you."

"I don't suppose that my friend has made himself liable for your
bill because he paid you 15 pounds with the view of assisting
Goarly," said Morton.

"But he said that he meant to go on, Mr. Morton, He said that
plain, and I can swear it. Now, Mr, Gotobed, you just say out like
an honest man whether you didn't give me to understand that you
meant to go on."

"I never employed you or made myself responsible for your bill."

"You authorized me, distinctly,--most distinctly, and I shall stick
to it. When a gentleman comes to a lawyer's office and pays his
money and tells that lawyer as how he means to see the case out,--
explaining his reasons as you did when you said all that against
the landlords and squires and nobility of this here country,--why
then that lawyer has a right to think that that gentleman is his
mark."

"I thought you were employed by Mr. Scrobby," said Morton, who had
heard much of the story by this time.

"Then, Mr. Morton, I must make bold to say that you have heard
wrong. I know nothing of Mr. Scrobby and don't want. There ain't
nothing about the poisoning of that fox in this case of ours.
Scrobby and Goarly may have done that, or Scrobby and Goarly may be
as innocent as two babes unborn for aught I know or care. Excuse
me, Mr. Morton, but I have to be on my p's and q's I see. This is a
case for trespass and damage against Lord Rufford in which we ask
for 40s. an acre. Of course there is expenses. There's my own time.
I ain't to be kept here talking to you two gentlemen for nothing, I
suppose. Well; this gentleman comes to me and pays me 15 pounds to
go on. I couldn't have gone on without something. The gentleman saw
that plain enough. And he told me he'd see me through the rest of
it"

"I said nothing of the kind, sir."

"Very well. Then we must put it to a jury. May I make bold to ask
whether you are going out of the country all at once?"

"I shall be here for the next two months, at least"

"Happy to hear it, Sir, and have no doubt it will all be settled
before that time--amiable or otherwise. But as I am money out of
pocket I did hope you would have paid me something on account
to-day."

Then Mr. Gotobed made his offer, informing Mr. Bearside that he had
brought his friend, Mr. Morton, with him in order that there might
be a witness. "I could see that, sir, with half an eye," said the
attorney unabashed. He was willing to pay Mr. Bearside a further
sum of ten pounds immediately to be quit of the affair, not because
he thought that any such sum was due, but because he wished to free
himself from further trouble in the matter. Mr. Bearside hinted in
a very cavalier way that 20 pounds might be thought of. A further
payment of 20 pounds would cover the money he was out of pocket.
But this proposition Mr. Gotobed indignantly refused, and then left
the office with his friend. "Wherever there are lawyers there will
be rogues," said the Senator, as soon as he found himself in the
street. "It is a noble profession, that of the law; the finest
perhaps that the work of the world affords; but it gives scope and
temptation for roguery. I do not think, however, that you would
find anything in America so bad as that"

"Why did you go to him without asking any questions?"

"Of whom was I to ask questions? When I took up Goarly's case he
had already put it into this man's hands."

"I am sorry you should be troubled, Mr. Gotobed; but, upon my word,
I cannot say but what it serves you right."

"That is because you are offended with me. I endeavoured to protect
a poor man against a rich man, and that in this country is cause of
offence."

After leaving the attorney's office they called on Mr. Mainwaring
the rector, and found that he knew, or professed to know, a great
deal more about Goarly, than they had learned from Bearside.
According to his story Nickem, who was clerk to Mr. Masters, had
Goarly in safe keeping somewhere. The rector indeed was acquainted
with all the details. Scrobby had purchased the red herrings and
strychnine, and had employed Goarly to walk over by night to
Rufford and fetch them. The poison at that time had been duly
packed in the herrings. Goarly had done this and had, at Scrobby's
instigation, laid the bait down in Dillsborough Wood. Nickem was
now at work trying to learn where Scrobby had purchased the poison,
as it was feared that Goarly's evidence alone would not suffice to
convict the man. But if the strychnine could be traced and the
herrings, then there would be almost a certainty of punishing
Scrobby.

"And what about Goarly?" asked the Senator.

"He would escape of course," said the rector. "He would get a
little money and after such an experience would probably become a
good friend to fox-hunting."

"And quite a respectable man!" The rector did not guarantee this
but seemed to think that there would at any rate be promise of
improved conduct. "The place ought to be too hot to hold him!"
exclaimed the Senator indignantly. The rector seemed to think it
possible that he might find it uncomfortable at first, in which
case he would sell the land at a good price to Lord Rufford and
every one concerned would have been benefited by the transaction,--
except Scrobby for whom no one would feel any pity.

The two gentlemen then promised to come and dine with the rector on
the following day. He feared he said that he could not make up a
party as there was, he declared,--nobody in Dillsborough. "I never
knew such a place," said the rector. "Except old Nupper, who is
there? Masters is a very decent fellow himself, but he has got out
of that kind of thing;--and you can't ask a man without asking his
wife. As for clergymen, I'm sick of dining with my own cloth and
discussing the troubles of sermons. There never was such a place as
Dillsborough." Then he whispered a word to the Squire. Was the
Squire unwilling to meet his cousin Reginald Morton? Things were
said and people never knew what was true and what was false. Then
John Morton declared that he would be very happy to meet his
cousin.


CHAPTER XV

Mr. Mainwaring's little Dinner


The company at the rector's house consisted of the Senator, the two
Mortons, Mr. Surtees the curate, and old Doctor Nupper. Mrs.
Mainwaring was not well enough to appear, and the rector therefore
was able to indulge himself in what he called a bachelor party. As
a rule he disliked clergymen, but at the last had been driven to
invite his curate because he thought six a better number than five
for joviality. He began by asking questions as to the Trefoils
which were not very fortunate. Of course he had heard that Morton
was to marry Arabella Trefoil, and though he made no direct
allusion to the fact, as Reginald had done, he spoke in that bland
eulogistic tone which clearly showed his purpose. "They went with
you to Lord Rufford's, I was told."

"Yes;--they did."

"And now they have left the neighbourhood. A very clever young
lady, Miss Trefoil;--and so is her mother, a very clever woman."
The Senator, to whom a sort of appeal was made, nodded his assent.
"Lord Augustus, I believe, is a brother of the Duke of Mayfair?"

"Yes, he is," said Morton. "I am afraid we are going to have frost
again." Then Reginald Morton was sure that the marriage would never
take place.

"The Trefoils are a very distinguished family," continued the
rector. "I remember the present Duke's father when he was in the
cabinet, and knew this man almost intimately when we were at
Christchurch together. I don't think this Duke ever took a
prominent part in politics."

"I don't know that he ever did," said Morton.

"Dear, dear, how tipsy he was once driving back to Oxford with me
in a gig. But he has the reputation of being one of the best
landlords in the country now."

"I wonder what it is that gives a man the reputation of being a
good landlord. Is it foxes?" asked the Senator. The rector
acknowledged with a smile that foxes helped. "Or does it mean that
he lets his land below the value? If so, he certainly does more
harm than good, though he may like the popularity which he is rich
enough to buy."

"It means that he does not exact more than his due," said the
rector indiscreetly.

"When I hear a man so highly praised for common honesty I am of
course led to suppose that dishonesty in his particular trade is
the common rule. The body of English landlords must be exorbitant
tyrants when one among them is so highly eulogised for taking no
more than his own." Luckily at that moment dinner was announced,
and the exceptional character of the Duke of Mayfair was allowed to
drop.

Mr. Mainwaring's dinner was very good and his wines were
excellent,--a fact of which Mr. Mainwaring himself was much better
aware than any of his guests. There is a difficulty in the giving
of dinners of which Mr. Mainwaring and some other hosts have become
painfully aware. What service do you do to any one in pouring your
best claret down his throat, when he knows no difference between
that and a much more humble vintage, your best claret which you
feel so sure you cannot replace? Why import canvas-back ducks for
appetites which would be quite as well satisfied with those out of
the next farm-yard? Your soup, which has been a care since
yesterday, your fish, got down with so great trouble from Bond
Street on that very day, your saddle of mutton, in selecting which
you have affronted every butcher in the neighbourhood, are all
plainly thrown away! And yet the hospitable hero who would fain
treat his friends as he would be treated himself can hardly arrange
his dinners according to the palates of his different guests; nor
will he like, when strangers sit at his board, to put nothing
better on his table than that cheaper wine with which needful
economy induces him to solace himself when alone. I,--I who write
this,--have myself seen an honoured guest deluge with the pump my,
ah! so hardly earned, most scarce and most peculiar vintage! There
is a pang in such usage which some will not understand, but which
cut Mr. Mainwaring to the very soul. There was not one among them
there who appreciated the fact that the claret on his dinner table
was almost the best that its year had produced. It was impossible
not to say a word on such a subject at such a moment;--though our
rector was not a man who usually lauded his own viands. "I think
you will find that claret what you like, Mr. Gotobed," he said.
"It's a '57 Mouton, and judges say that it is good."

"Very good indeed," said the Senator. "In the States we haven't got
into the way yet of using dinner clarets." It was as good as a play
to see the rector wince under the ignominious word. "Your great
statesman added much to your national comfort when he took the duty
off the lighter kinds of French wines."

The rector could not stand it. He hated light wines. He hated cheap
things in general. And he hated Gladstone in particular. "Nothing,"
said he, "that the statesman you speak of ever did could make such
wine as that any cheaper. I am sorry, Sir, that you don't perceive
the difference."

"In the matter of wine," said the Senator, "I don't think that I
have happened to come across anything so good in this country as
our old Madeiras. But then, sir, we have been fortunate in our
climate. The English atmosphere is not one in which wine seems to
reach its full perfection." The rector heaved a deep sigh as he
looked up to the ceiling with his hands in his trowsers-pockets. He
knew, or thought that he knew, that no one could ever get a glass
of good wine in the United States. He knew, or thought that he
knew, that the best wine in the world was brought to England. He
knew, or thought he knew, that in no other country was wine so well
understood, so diligently sought for, and so truly enjoyed as in
England. And he imagined that it was less understood and less
sought for and less enjoyed in the States than in any other
country. He did not as yet know the Senator well enough to fight
with him at his own table, and could only groan and moan and look
up at the ceiling. Doctor Nupper endeavoured to take away the sting
by smacking his lips, and Reginald Morton, who did not in truth
care a straw what he drank, was moved to pity and declared the
claret to be very fine. "I have nothing to say against it," said
the Senator, who was not in the least abashed.

But when the cloth was drawn, for the rector clung so lovingly to
old habits that he delighted to see his mahogany beneath the wine
glasses,--a more serious subject of dispute arose suddenly, though
perhaps hardly more disagreeable. "The thing in England," said the
Senator, "which I find most difficult to understand, is the matter
of what you call Church patronage."

"If you'll pass half an hour with Mr. Surtees to-morrow morning,
he'll explain it all to you," said the rector, who did not like
that any subject connected with his profession should be mooted
after dinner.

"I should be delighted," said Mr. Surtees.

"Nothing would give me more pleasure," said the Senator; "but what
I mean is this;--the question is, of course, one of paramount
importance."

"No doubt it is," said the deluded rector.

"It is very necessary to get good doctors."

"Well, yes, rather;--considering that all men wish to live." That
observation, of course, came from Doctor Nupper.

"And care is taken in employing a lawyer,--though, after my
experience of yesterday, not always, I should say, so much care as
is needful. The man who wants such aid looks about him and gets the
best doctor he can for his money, or the best lawyer. But here in
England he must take the clergyman provided for him."

"It would be very much better for him if he did," said the rector.

"A clergyman at any rate is supposed to be appointed; and that
clergyman he must pay."

"Not at all," said the rector. "The clergy are paid by the wise
provision of former ages."

"We will let that pass for the present," said the Senator. "There
he is, however he may be paid. How does he get there?" Now it was
the fact that Mr. Mainwaring's living had been bought for him with
his wife's money,--a fact of which Mr. Gotobed was not aware, but
which he would hardly have regarded had he known it. "How does he
get there?"

"In the majority of cases the bishop puts him there," said Mr.
Surtees.

"And how is the bishop governed in his choice? As far as I can
learn the stipends are absurdly various, one man getting 100
pounds a year for working like a horse in a big town, and another
1000 pounds for living an idle life in a luxurious country house.
But the bishop of course gives the bigger plums to the best men.
How is it then that the big plums find their way so often to the
sons and sons-in-law and nephews of the bishops?"

"Because the bishop has looked after their education and
principles," said the rector.

"And taught them how to choose their wives," said the Senator with
imperturbable gravity.

"I am not the son of a bishop, sir," exclaimed the rector.

"I wish you had been, sir, if it would have done you any good. A
general can't make his son a colonel at the age of twenty-five, or
an admiral his son a first lieutenant, or a judge his a Queen's
Counsellor,--nor can the head of an office promote his to be a
chief secretary. It is only a bishop can do this;--I suppose
because a cure of souls is so much less important than the charge
of a ship or the discipline of twenty or thirty clerks."

"The bishops don't do it," said the rector fiercely.

"Then the statistics which have been put into my hands belie them.
But how is it with those the bishops don't appoint? There seems to
me to be such a complication of absurdities as to defy
explanation."

"I think I could explain them all," said Mr. Surtees mildly.

"If you can do so satisfactorily, I shall be very glad to hear it,"
continued the Senator, who seemed in truth to be glad to hear no
one but himself. "A lad of one-and-twenty learns his lessons so
well that he has to be rewarded at his college, and a part of his
reward consists in his having a parish entrusted to him when he is
forty years old, to which he can maintain his right whether he be
in any way trained for such work or no. Is that true?"

"His collegiate education is the best training he can have," said
the rector.

"I came across a young fellow the other day," continued the
Senator, "in a very nice house, with 700 pounds a year, and learned
that he had inherited the living because he was his father's second
son. Some poor clergyman had been keeping it ready for him for the
last fifteen years and had to turn out as soon as this young spark
could be made a clergyman."

"It was his father's property," said the rector, "and the poor man
had had great kindness shown him for those fifteen years"

"Exactly;--his father's property! And this is what you call a cure
of souls! And another man had absolutely had his living bought for
him by his uncle, just as he might have bought him a farm. He
couldn't have bought him the command of a regiment or a small
judgeship. In those matters you require capacity. It is only when
you deal with the Church that you throw to the winds all ideas of
fitness. `Sir,' or `Madam,' or perhaps, `my little dear, you are
bound to come to your places in Church and hear me expound the Word
of God because I have paid a heavy sum of money for the privilege
of teaching you, at the moderate salary of 600 pounds a year!'"

Mr. Surtees sat aghast, with his mouth open, and knew not how to
say a word. Doctor Nupper rubbed his red nose. Reginald Morton
attempted some suggestion about the wine which fell wretchedly
flat. John Morton ventured to tell his friend that he did not
understand the subject. "I shall be most happy to be instructed,"
said the Senator.

"Understand it!" said the rector, almost rising in his chair to
rebuke the insolence of his guest--"He understands nothing about
it, and yet he ventures to fall foul with unmeasured terms on an
establishment which has been brought to its present condition by
the fostering care of perhaps the most pious set of divines that
ever lived, and which has produced results with which those of no
other Church can compare!"

"Have I represented anything untruly?" asked the Senator.

"A great deal, sir."

"Only put me right, and no man will recall his words more readily.
Is it not the case that livings in the Church of England can be
bought and sold?"

"The matter is one, Sir," said the rector, "which cannot be
discussed in this manner. There are two clergymen present to whom
such language is distasteful; as it is also I hope to the others
who are all members of the Church of England. Perhaps you will
allow me to request that the subject may be changed." After that
conversation flagged and the evening was by no means joyous. The
rector certainly regretted that his '57 claret should have been
expended on such a man. "I don't think," said he when John Morton
had taken the Senator away, "that in my whole life before I ever
met such a brute as that American Senator."


CHAPTER XVI

Persecution


There was great consternation in the attorney's house after the
writing of the letter to Lawrence Twentyman. For twenty-four hours
Mrs. Masters did not speak to Mary, not at all intending to let her
sin pass with such moderate punishment as that, but thinking during
that period that as she might perhaps induce Larry to ignore the
letter and look upon it as though it were not written, it would be
best to say nothing till the time should come in which the lover
might again urge his suit. But when she found on the evening of the
second day that Larry did not come near the place she could control
herself no longer, and accused her step-daughter of ruining
herself, her father, and the whole family. "That is very unfair,
mamma," Mary said. "I have done nothing. I have only not done that
which nobody had a right to ask me to do."

"Right indeed! And who are you with your rights? A decent
well-behaved young man with five or six hundred a year has no right
to ask you to be his wife! All this comes of you staying with an
old woman with a handle to her name."

It was in vain that Mary endeavoured to explain that she had not
alluded to Larry when she declared that no one had a right to ask
her to do it. She had, she said, always thanked him for his good
opinion of her, and had spoken well of him whenever his name was
mentioned. But it was a matter on which a young woman was entitled
to judge for herself, and no one had a right to scold her because
she could not love him. Mrs. Masters hated such arguments, despised
this rodomontade about love, and would have crushed the girl into
obedience could it have been possible. "You are an idiot," she
said, "an ungrateful idiot; and unless you think better of it
you'll repent your folly to your dying day. Who do you think is to
come running after a moping slut like you?" Then Mary gathered
herself up and left the room, feeling that she could not live in
the house if she were to be called a slut.

Soon after this Larry came to the attorney and got him to come out
into the street and to walk with him round the churchyard. It was
the spot in Dillsborough in which they would most certainly be left
undisturbed. This took place on the day before his proposition for
the sale of Chowton Farm. When he got the attorney into the
churchyard he took out Mary's letter and in speechless agony handed
it to the attorney. "I saw it before it went," said Masters putting
it back with his hand:

"I suppose she means it?" asked Larry.

"I can't say to you but what she does, Twentyman. As far as I know
her she isn't a girl that would ever say anything that she didn't
mean."

"I was sure of that. When I got it and read it, it was just as
though some one had come behind me and hit me over the head with a
wheel-spoke. I couldn't have ate a morsel of breakfast if I knew I
wasn't to see another bit of food for four-and-twenty hours."

"I knew you would feel it, Larry."

"Feel it! Till it came to this I didn't think of myself but what I
had more strength. It has knocked me about till I feel all over
like drinking."

"Don't do that, Larry."

"I won't answer for myself what I'll do. A man sets his heart on a
thing,--just on one thing,--and has grit enough in him to be sure
of himself that if he can get that nothing shall knock him over.
When that thoroughbred mare of mine slipped her foal who can say I
ever whimpered. When I got pleuro among the cattle I killed a'most
the lot of 'em out of hand, and never laid awake a night about it.
But I've got it so heavy this time I can't stand it. You don't
think I have any chance, Mr. Masters?"

"You can try of course. You're welcome to the house."

"But what do you think? You must know her."

"Girls do change their minds."

"But she isn't like other girls. Is she now? I come to you because
I sometimes think Mrs. Masters is a little hard on her. Mrs.
Masters is about the best friend I have. There isn't anybody more
on my side than she is. But I feel sure of this;--Mary will never
be drove."

"I don't think she will, Larry."

"She's got a will of her own as well as another."

"No man alive ever had a better daughter."

"I'm sure of that, Mr. Masters; and no man alive 'll ever have a
better wife. But she won't be drove. I might ask her again, you
think?"

"You certainly have my leave."

"But would it be any good? I'd rather cut my throat and have done
with it than go about teasing her because her parents let me come
to her." Then there was a pause during which they walked on, the
attorney feeling that he had nothing more to say. "What I want to
know," said Larry, "is this. Is there anybody else?"

That was just the point on which the attorney himself was
perplexed. He had asked Mary that question, and her silence had
assured him that it was so. Then he had suggested to her the name
of the only probable suitor that occurred to him; and she had
repelled the idea in a manner that had convinced him at once. There
was some one, but Mr. Surtees was not the man. There was some one,
he was sure, but he had not been able to cross-examine her on the
subject. He had, since that, cudgelled his brain to think who that
some one might be, but had not succeeded in suggesting a name even
to himself. That of Reginald Morton, who hardly ever came to the
house and whom he regarded as a silent, severe, unapproachable man,
did not come into his mind. Among the young ladies of Dillsborough
Reginald Morton was never regarded as even a possible lover. And
yet there was assuredly some one. "If there is any one else I think
you ought to tell me," continued Larry.

"It is quite possible."

"Young Surtees, I suppose."

"I do not say there is anybody; but if there be anybody I do not
think it is Surtees."

"Who else then?"

"I cannot say, Larry. I know nothing about it."

"But there is some one?"

"I do not say so. You ask me and I tell you all I know."

Again they walked round the churchyard in silence and the attorney
began to be anxious that the interview might be over. He hardly
liked to be interrogated about the state of his daughter's heart,
and yet he had felt himself bound to tell what he knew to the man
who had in all respects behaved well to him. When they had returned
for the third or fourth time to the gate by which they had entered
Larry spoke again. "I suppose I may as well give it up."

"What can I say?"

"You have been fair enough, Mr. Masters. And so has she. And so has
everybody. I shall just get away as quick as I can, and go and hang
myself. I feel above bothering her any more. When she sat down to
write a letter like that she must have been in earnest"

"She certainly was in earnest, Larry."

"What's the use of going on after that? Only it is so hard for a
fellow to feel that everything is gone. It is just as though the
house was burnt down, or I was to wake in the morning and find that
the land didn't belong to me."

"Not so bad as that, Larry."

"Not so bad, Mr. Masters! Then you don't know what it is I'm
feeling. I'd let his lordship or Squire Morton have it all, and go
in upon it as a tenant at 30s. an acre, so that I could take her
along with me. I would, and sell the horses and set to and work in
my shirt-sleeves. A man could stand that. Nobody wouldn't laugh at
me then. But there's an emptiness now here that makes me sick all
through, as though I hadn't got stomach left for anything." Then
poor Larry put his hand upon his heart and hid his face upon the
churchyard wall. The attorney made some attempt to say a kind word
to him, and then, leaving him there, slowly made his way back to
his office.

We already know what first step Larry took with the intention of
running away from his cares. In the house at Dillsborough things
were almost as bad as they were with him. Over and over again Mrs.
Masters told her husband that it was all his fault, and that if he
had torn the letter when it was showed to him, everything would
have been right by the end of the two months. This he bore with
what equanimity he could, shutting himself up very much in his
office, occasionally escaping for a quarter of an hour of ease to
his friends at the Bush, and eating his meals in silence. But when
he became aware that his girl was being treated with cruelty,--that
she was never spoken to by her stepmother without harsh words, and
that her sisters were encouraged to be disdainful to her, then his
heart rose within him and he rebelled. He declared aloud that Mary
should not be persecuted, and if this kind of thing were continued
he would defend his girl let the consequences be what they might.

"What are you going to defend her against?" asked his wife.

"I won't have her ill-used because she refuses to marry at your
bidding."

"Bah! You know as much how to manage a girl as though you were an
old maid yourself. Cocker her up and make her think that nothing is
good enough for her! Break her spirit, and make her come round, and
teach her to know what it is to have an honest man's house offered
to her. If she don't take Larry Twentyman's she's like to have none
of her own before long." But Mr. Masters would not assent to this
plan of breaking his girl's spirit, and so there was continual war
in the place and every one there was miserable.

Mary herself was so unhappy that she convinced herself that it was
necessary that some change should be made. Then she remembered Lady
Ushant's offer of a home, and not only the offer, but the old
lady's assurance that to herself such an arrangement, if possible,
would be very comfortable. She did not suggest to herself that she
would leave her father's home for ever and always; but it might be
that an absence of some months might relieve the absolute misery of
their present mode of living. The effect on her father was so sad
that she was almost driven to regret that he should have taken her
own part. Her stepmother was not a bad woman; nor did Mary even now
think her to be had. She was a hardworking, painstaking wife, with
a good general idea of justice. In the division of puddings and
pies and other material comforts of the household she would deal
evenly between her own children and her step-daughter. She had not
desired to send Mary away to an inadequate home, or with a
worthless husband. But when the proper home and the proper man were
there she was prepared to use any amount of hardship to secure
these good things to the family generally. This hardship Mary could
not endure, nor could Mary's father on her behalf, and therefore
Mary prepared a letter to Lady Ushant in which, at great length,
she told her old friend the whole story. She spoke as tenderly as
was possible of all concerned, but declared that her stepmother's
feelings on the subject were so strong that every one in the house
was made wretched. Under these circumstances,--for her father's
sake if only for that,--she thought herself bound to leave the
house. "It is quite impossible," she said, "that I should do as
they wish me. That is a matter on which a young woman must judge
for herself. If you could have me for a few months it would perhaps
all pass by. I should not dare to ask this but for what you said
yourself; and, dear Lady Ushant, pray remember that I do not want
to be idle. There are a great many things I can do; and though I
know that nothing can pay for kindness, I might perhaps be able not
to be a burden." Then she added in a postscript--"Papa is
everything that is kind;--but then all this makes him so
miserable!"

When she had kept the letter by her for a day she showed it to her
father, and by his consent it was sent. After much consultation it
was agreed between them that nothing should be said about it to
Mrs. Masters till the answer should come; and that, should the
answer be favourable, the plan should be carved out in spite of any
domestic opposition. In this letter Mary told as accurately as she
could the whole story of Larry's courtship, and was very clear in
declaring that under no possible circumstances could she encourage
any hope. But of course she said not a word as to any other man or
as to any love on her side. "Have you told her everything?" said
her father as he closed the letter.

"Yes, papa;--everything that there is to be told." Then there arose
within his own bosom an immense desire to know that secret, so that
if possible he might do something to relieve her pain;--but he
could not bring himself to ask further questions.

Lady Ushant on receiving the letter much doubted what she ought to
do. She acknowledged at once Mary's right to appeal to her; and
assured herself that the girl's presence would be a comfort and a
happiness to herself. If Mary were quite alone in the world Lady
Ushant would have been at once prepared to give her a home. But she
doubted as to the propriety of taking the girl from her own family.
She doubted even whether it would not be better that Mary should be
left within the influence of Larry Twentyman's charms. A
settlement, an income, and assured comforts for life are very
serious things to all people who have reached Lady Ushant's age.
And then she had a doubt within her own mind whether Mary might not
be debarred from accepting this young man by some unfortunate
preference for Reginald Morton. She had seen them together and had
suspected something of the truth before it had glimmered before the
eyes of any one in Dillsborough. Had Reginald been so inclined Lady
Morton would have been very glad to see him marry Mary Masters. For
both their sakes she would have preferred such a match to one with
the owner of Chowton Farm. But she did not think that Reginald
himself was that way minded, and she fancied that poor Mary might
be throwing away her prosperity in life were she to wait for
Reginald's love. Larry Twentyman was at any rate sure;--and perhaps
it might be unwise to separate the girl from her lover.

In her doubt she determined to refer the case to Reginald himself,
and instead of writing to Mary she wrote to him. She did not send
him Mary's letter,--which would, she felt, have been a breach of
faith; nor did she mention the name of Larry Twentyman. But she
told him that Mary had proposed to come to Cheltenham for a long
visit because there were disturbances at home,--which disturbances
had arisen from her rejection of a certain suitor. Lady Ushant said
a great deal as to the inexpediency of fostering family quarrels,
and suggested that Mary might perhaps have been a little impetuous.
The presence of this lover could hardly do her much injury. These
were not days in which young women were forced to marry men. What
did he, Reginald Morton, think about it? He was to remember that as
far as she herself was concerned, she dearly loved Mary Masters and
would be delighted to have her at Cheltenham; and, so remembering,
he was to see the attorney, and Mary herself, and if necessary Mrs.
Masters;--and then to report his opinion to Cheltenham.

Then, fearing that her nephew might be away for a day or two, or
that he might not be able to perform his commission instantly, and
thinking that Mary might be unhappy if she received no immediate
reply to such a request as hers had been, Lady Ushant by the same
post wrote to her young friend as follows;--

Dear Mary,

Reginald will go over and see your father about your proposition.
As far as I myself am concerned nothing would give me so much
pleasure. This is quite sincere. But the matter is in other
respects very important. Of course I have kept your letter all to
myself, and in writing to Reginald I have mentioned no names.

                        Your affectionate friend,
                             Margaret Ushant.


CHAPTER XVII

"Particularly proud of you"


Arabella Trefoil left her uncle's mansion on the day after her
lover's departure, certainly not in triumph, but with somewhat
recovered spirits. When she first heard that Lord Rufford was
gone,--that he had fled away as it were in the middle of the night
without saying a word to her, without a syllable to make good the
slight assurances of his love that had been given to her in the
post carriage, she felt that she was deserted and betrayed. And
when she found herself altogether neglected on the following day,
and that the slightly valuable impression which she had made on her
aunt was apparently gone, she did for half an hour think in earnest
of the Paragon and Patagonia. But after a while she called to mind
all that she knew of great efforts successfully made in opposition
to almost overwhelming difficulties. She had heard of forlorn
hopes, and perhaps in her young days had read something of Caesar
still clinging to his Commentaries as he struggled in the waves.
This was her forlorn hope, and she would be as brave as any soldier
of them all. Lord Rufford's embraces were her Commentaries, and let
the winds blow and the waves roll as they might she would still
cling to them. After lunch she spoke to her aunt with great
courage,--as the Duchess thought with great effrontery. "My uncle
wouldn't speak to Lord Rufford before he went?"

"How could he speak to a man who ran away from his house in that
way?"

"The running away, as you call it, aunt, did not take place till
two days after I had told you all about it. I thought he would have
done as much as that for his brother's daughter."

"I don't believe in it at all," said the Duchess sternly.

"Don't believe in what, aunt? You don't mean to say that you don't
believe that Lord Rufford has asked me to be his wife!" Then she
paused, but the Duchess absolutely lacked the courage to express
her conviction again. "I don't suppose it signifies much,"
continued Arabella, "but of course it would have been something to
me that Lord Rufford should have known that the Duke was anxious
for my welfare. He was quite prepared to have assured my uncle of
his intentions."

"Then why didn't he speak himself?"

"Because the Duke is not my father. Really, aunt, when I hear you
talk of his running away I do feel it to be unkind. As if we didn't
all know that a man like that goes and comes as he pleases. It was
just before dinner that he got the message, and was he to run round
and wish everybody good-bye like a schoolgirl going to bed?"

The Duchess was almost certain that no message had come, and from
various little things which she had observed and from tidings which
had reached her, very much doubted whether Arabella had known
anything of his intended going. She too had a maid of her own who
on occasions could bring information. But she had nothing further
to say on the subject. If Arabella should ever become Lady Rufford
she would of course among other visitors be occasionally received
at Mistletoe. She could never be a favourite, but things would to a
certain degree have rectified themselves. But if, as the Duchess
expected, no such marriage took place, then this ill-conducted
niece should never be admitted within the house again.

Later on in the afternoon, some hours after it became dusk,
Arabella contrived to meet her aunt in the hall with a letter in
her hand, and asked where the letter-box was. She knew where to
deposit her letters as well as did the Duchess herself; but she
desired an opportunity of proclaiming what she had done. "I am
writing to Lord Rufford. Perhaps as I am in your house I ought to
tell you what I have done."

"The letter-box is in the billiard-room, close to the door," said
the Duchess passing on. Then she added as she went, "The post for
to-day has gone already."

"His Lordship will have to wait a day for his letter. I dare say it
won't break his heart," said Arabella, as she turned away to the
billiard-room.

All this had been planned; and, moreover, she had so written her
letter that if her magnificent aunt should condescend to tamper
with it all that was in it should seem to corroborate her own
story. The Duchess would have considered herself disgraced if ever
she had done such a thing;--but the niece of the Duchess did not
quite understand that this would be so. The letter was as follows:

Mistletoe, 19th Jany. 1875.

Dearest R.,

Your going off like that was, after all, very horrid. My aunt thinks
that you were running away from me. I think that you were running away
from her. Which was true? In real earnest I don't for a moment think
that either I or the Duchess had anything to do with it, and that you
did go because some horrid man wrote and asked you. I know you don't
like being bound by any of the conventionalities. I hope there is such
a word, and that if not, you'll understand it just the same.

Oh, Peltry,--and oh, Jack,--and oh, that road back to Stamford! I
am so stiff that I can't sit upright, and everybody is cross to me,
and everything is uncomfortable. What horrible things women are!
There isn't one here, not even old Lady Rumpus, who hasn't an
unmarried daughter left in the world, who isn't jealous of me,
because--because--. I must leave you to guess why they all hate me
so! And I'm sure if you had given Jack to any other woman I should
hate her, though you may give every horse you have to any man that
you please. I wonder whether I shall have another day's hunting
before it is all over. I suppose not. It was almost by a miracle
that we managed yesterday--only fancy--yesterday! It seems to be an
age ago!

Pray, pray, pray write to me at once,--to the Connop Greens, so
that I may get a nice, soft, pleasant word directly I get among
those nasty, hard, unpleasant people. They have lots of money, and
plenty of furniture, and I dare say the best things to eat and
drink in the world,--but nothing else. There will be no Jack; and
if there were, alas, alas, no one to show me the way to ride him.

I start to-morrow, and as far as I understand, shall have to make
my way into Hampshire all by myself, with only such security as my
maid can give me. I shall make her go in the same carriage and
shall have the gratification of looking at her all the way. I
suppose I ought not to say that I will shut my eyes and try to
think that somebody else is there.

Good-bye dear, dear, dear R. I shall be dying for a letter from
you. Yours ever with all my heart.  A.

P.S. I shall write you such a serious epistle when I get to the
Greens.

This was not such a letter as she thought that her aunt would
approve; but it was, she fancied, such as the Duchess would believe
that she would write to her lover. And if it were allowed to go on
its way it would make Lord Rufford feel that she was neither
alarmed nor displeased by the suddenness of his departure. But it
was not expected to do much good. It might produce some short,
joking, half-affectionate reply, but would not draw from him that
serious word which was so necessary for the success of her scheme.
Therefore she had told him that she intended to prepare a serious
missile. Should this pleasant little message of love miscarry, the
serious missile would still be sent, and the miscarriage would
occasion no harm.

But then further plans were necessary. It might be that Lord
Rufford would take no notice of the serious missile,--which she
thought very probable. Or it might be that he would send back a
serious reply, in which he would calmly explain to her that she had
unfortunately mistaken his sentiments;--which she believed would be
a stretch of manhood beyond his reach. But in either case she would
be prepared with the course which she would follow. In the first
she would begin by forcing her father to write to him a letter
which she herself would dictate. In the second she would set the
whole family at him as far as the family were within her reach.
With her cousin Lord Mistletoe, who was only two years older than
herself, she had always held pleasant relations. They had been
children together, and as they had grown up the young Lord had
liked his pretty cousin. Latterly they had seen each other but
rarely, and therefore the feeling still remained. She would tell
Lord Mistletoe her whole story,--that is the story as she would
please to tell it,--and implore his aid. Her father should be
driven to demand from Lord Rufford an execution of his alleged
promises. She herself would write such a letter to the Duke as an
uncle should be unable not to notice. She would move heaven and
earth as to her wrongs. She thought that if her friends would stick
to her, Lord Rufford would be weak as water in their hands. But it
must be all done immediately,--so that if everything failed she
might be ready to start to Patagonia some time in April. When she
looked back and remembered that it was hardly more than two months
since she had been taken to Rufford Hall by Mr. Morton she could
not accuse herself of having lost any time.

In London she met her mother,--as to which meeting there had been
some doubt,--and underwent the tortures of a close examination. She
had thought it prudent on this occasion to tell her mother
something, but not to tell anything quite truly. "He has proposed
to me," she said.

"He has!" said Lady Augustus, holding up her hands almost in awe.

"Is there anything so wonderful in that?"

"Then it is all arranged. Does the Duke know it?"

"It is not all arranged by any means, and the Duke does know it.
Now, mamma, after that I must decline to answer any more questions.
I have done this all myself, and I mean to continue it in the same
way."

"Did he speak to the Duke? You will tell me that."

"I will tell you nothing."

"You will drive me mad, Arabella."

"That will be better than your driving me mad just at present. You
ought to feel that I have a great deal to think of."

"And have not I?"

"You can't help me;--not at present."

"But he did propose,--in absolute words?"

"Mamma, what a goose you are! Do you suppose that men do it all now
just as it is done in books? 'Miss Arabella Trefoil, will you do
me the honour to become my wife?' Do you think that Lord Rufford
would ask the question in that way?"

"It is a very good way."

"Any way is a good way that answers the purpose. He has proposed,
and I mean to make him stick to it"

"You doubt then?"

"Mamma, you are so silly! Do you not know what such a man is well
enough to be sure that he'll change his mind half-a-dozen times if
he can? I don't mean to let him; and now, after that, I won't say
another word."

"I have got a letter here from Mr. Short saying that something must
be fixed about Mr. Morton." Mr. Short was the lawyer who had been
instructed to prepare the settlements.

"Mr. Short may do whatever he likes," said Arabella. There were
very hot words between them that night in London, but the mother
could obtain no further information from her daughter.

That serious epistle had been commenced even before Arabella had
left Mistletoe; but the composition was one which required great
care, and it was not completed and copied and recopied till she had
been two days in Hampshire. Not even when it was finished did she
say a word to her mother about it. She had doubted much as to the
phrases which in such an emergency she ought to use, but she
thought it safer to trust to herself than to her mother. In writing
such a letter as that posted at Mistletoe she believed herself to
be happy. She could write it quickly, and understood that she could
convey to her correspondent some sense of her assumed mood. But her
serious letter would, she feared, be stiff and repulsive. Whether
her fears were right the reader shall judge,--for the letter when
written was as follows:

Marygold Place, Basingstoke,
Saturday.

My Dear Lord Rufford,

You will I suppose have got the letter that I wrote before I left
Mistletoe, and which I directed to Mr. Surbiton's. There was not
much in it,--except a word or two as to your going and as to my
desolation, and just a reminiscence of the hunting. There was no
reproach that you should have left me without any farewell, or that
you should have gone so suddenly, after saying so much, without
saying more. I wanted you to feel that you had made me very happy,
and not to feel that your departure in such a way had robbed me of
part of the happiness.

It was a little bad of you, because it did of course leave me to
the hardness of my aunt; and because all the other women there
would of course follow her. She had inquired about our journey
home, that dear journey home, and I had of course told her,--well I
had better say it out at once; I told her that we were engaged.
You, I am sure, will think that the truth was best. She wanted to
know why you did not go to the Duke. I told her that the Duke was
not my father; but that as far as I was concerned the Duke might
speak to you or not as he pleased. I had nothing to conceal. I am
very glad he did not, because he is pompous, and you would have
been bored. If there is one thing I desire more than another it is
that nothing belonging to me shall ever be a bore to you. I hope I
may never stand in the way of anything that will gratify you,--as I
said when you lit that cigar. You will have forgotten, I dare say.
But, dear Rufford,--dearest; I may say that, mayn't I?--say
something, or do something to make me satisfied. You know what I
mean;--don't you? It isn't that I am a bit afraid myself. I don't
think so little of myself, or so badly of you. But I don't like
other women to look at me as though I ought not to be proud of
anything. I am proud of everything; particularly proud of you,--and
of Jack.

Now there is my serious epistle, and I am sure that you will answer
it like a dear, good, kind-hearted, loving-lover. I won't be afraid
of writing the word, nor of saying that I love you with all my
heart, and that I am always your own
                             Arabella.

She kept the letter till the Sunday, thinking that she might have
an answer to that written from Mistletoe, and that his reply might
alter its tone, or induce her to put it aside altogether; but when
on Sunday morning none came, her own was sent. The word in it which
frightened herself was the word "engaged." She tried various other
phrases, but declared to herself at last that it was useless to
"beat about the bush." He must know the light in which she was
pleased to regard those passages of love which she had permitted so
that there might be no mistake. Whether the letter would be to his
liking or not, it must be of such a nature that it would certainly
draw from him an answer on which she could act. She herself did not
like the letter; but, considering her difficulties, we may own that
it was not much amiss.


CHAPTER XVIII

Lord Rufford makes up his Mind


As it happened, Lord Rufford got the two letters together, the
cause of which was as follows.

When he ran away from Mistletoe, as he certainly did, he had
thought much about that journey home in the carriage, and was quite
aware that he had made an ass of himself. As he sat at dinner on
that day at Mistletoe his neighbour had said some word to him in
joke as to his attachment to Miss Trefoil, and after the ladies had
left the room another neighbour of the other sex had hoped that he
had had a pleasant time on the road. Again, in the drawing-room it
had seemed to him that he was observed. He could not refrain from
saying a few words to Arabella as she lay on the sofa. Not to do so
after what had occurred would have been in itself peculiar. But
when he did so, some other man who was near her made way for him,
as though she were acknowledged to be altogether his property. And
then the Duchess had striven to catch him, and lead him into
special conversation. When this attempt was made he decided that he
must at once retreat,--or else make up his mind to marry the young
lady. And therefore he retreated.

He breakfasted that morning at the inn at Stamford, and as he
smoked his cigar afterwards, he positively resolved that he would
under no circumstances marry Arabella Trefoil. He was being hunted
and run down, and, with the instinct of all animals that are
hunted, he prepared himself for escape. It might be said, no doubt
would be said, that he behaved badly. That would be said because it
would not be open to him to tell the truth. The lady in such a case
can always tell her story, with what exaggeration she may please to
give, and can complain. The man never can do so. When inquired
into, he cannot say that he has been pursued. He cannot tell her
friends that she began it, and in point of fact did it all. "She
would fall into my arms; she would embrace me; she persisted in
asking me whether I loved her!" Though a man have to be shot for
it, or kicked for it, or even though he have to endure perpetual
scorn for it, he cannot say that, let it be ever so true. And yet
is a man to be forced into a marriage which he despises? He would
not be forced into the marriage,--and the sooner he retreated the
less would be the metaphorical shooting and kicking and the real
scorn. He must get out of it as best he could;--but that he would
get out of it he was quite determined.

That afternoon he reached Mr. Surbiton's house, as did also Captain
Battersby, and his horses, grooms, and other belongings. When there
he received a lot of letters, and among others one from Mr.
Runciman, of the Bush, inquiring as to a certain hiring of rooms
and preparation for a dinner or dinners which had been spoken of in
reference to a final shooting decreed to take place in the
neighbourhood of Dillsborough in the last week of January. Such
things were often planned by Lord Rufford, and afterwards forgotten
or neglected. When he declared his purpose to Runciman, he had not
intended to go to Mistletoe, nor to stay so long with his friend
Surbiton. But now he almost thought that it would be better for him
to be back at Rufford Hall, where at present his sister was staying
with her husband, Sir George Penwether.

In the evening of the second or third day his old friend Tom
Surbiton said a few words to him which had the effect of sending
him back to Rufford. They had sat out the rest of the men who
formed the party and were alone in the smoking-room. "So you're
going to marry Miss Trefoil," said Tom Surbiton, who perhaps of all
his friends was the most intimate.

"Who says so?"

"I am saying so at present"

"You are not saying it on your own authority. You have never seen
me and Miss Trefoil in a room together."

"Everybody says so. of course such a thing cannot be arranged
without being talked about"

"It has not been arranged."

"If you don't mean to have it arranged, you had better look to it.
I am speaking in earnest, Rufford. I am not going to give up
authorities. Indeed if I did I might give up everybody. The very
servants suppose that they know it, and there isn't a groom or
horseboy about who isn't in his heart congratulating the young lady
on her promotion."

"I'll tell you what it is, Tom."

"Well;--what is it?"

"If this had come from any other man than yourself I should quarrel
with him. I am not engaged to the young lady, nor have I done
anything to warrant anybody in saying so."

"Then I may contradict it."

"I don't want you either to contradict it or affirm it. It would be
an impertinence to the young lady if I were to instruct any one to
contradict such a report. But as a fact I am not engaged to marry
Miss Trefoil, nor is there the slightest chance that I ever shall
be so engaged." So saying he took up his candlestick and walked
off.

Early on the next morning he saw his friend and made some sort of
laughing apology for his heat on the previous evening. "It is so
d-- hard when these kind of things are said because a man has lent
a young lady a horse. However, Tom, between you and me the thing is
a lie."

"I am very glad to hear it," said Tom.

"And now I want you to come over to Rufford on the twenty-eighth."
Then he explained the details of his proposed party, and got his
friend to promise that he would come. He also made it understood
that he was going home at once. There were a hundred things, he
said, which made it necessary. So the horses and grooms and servant
and portmanteaus were again made to move, and Lord Rufford left his
friend on that day and went up to London on his road to Rufford.

He was certainly disturbed in his mind, foreseeing that there might
be much difficulty in his way. He remembered with fair accuracy all
that had occurred during the journey from Stamford to Mistletoe. He
felt assured that up to that time he had said nothing which could
be taken to mean a real declaration of love. All that at Rufford
had been nothing. He had never said a word which could justify the
girl in a hope. In the carriage she had asked him whether he loved
her, and he had said that he did. He had also declared that he
would do anything in his power to make her happy. Was a man to be
bound to marry a girl because of such a scene as that? There was,
however, nothing for him to do except to keep out of the girl's
way. If she took any steps, then he must act. But as he thought of
it, he swore to himself that nothing should induce him to marry
her.

He remained a couple of days in town and reached Rufford Hall on
the Monday, just a week from the day of that fatal meet at Peltry.
There he found Sir George and his sister and Miss Penge, and spent
his first evening in quiet. On the Tuesday he hunted with the
U.R.U., and made his arrangements with Runciman. He invited Hampton
to shoot with him. Surbiton and Battersby were coming, and his
brother-in-law. Not wishing to have less than six guns he asked
Hampton how he could make up his party. "Morton doesn't shoot," he
said, "and is as stiff as a post." Then he was told that John
Morton was supposed to be very ill at Bragton. "I'm sick of both
the Botseys," continued the lord, thinking more of his party than
of Mr. Morton's health. "Purefoy is still sulky with me because he
killed poor old Caneback." Then Hampton suggested that if he would
ask Lawrence Twentyman it might be the means of saving that
unfortunate young man's life. The story of his unrequited love was
known to every one at Dillsborough and it was now told to Lord
Rufford. "He is not half a bad fellow," said Hampton, "and quite as
much like a gentleman as either of the Botseys."

"I shall be delighted to save the life of so good a man on such
easy terms," said the lord. Then and there, with a pencil, on the
back of an old letter, he wrote a line to Larry asking him to shoot
on next Saturday and to dine with him afterwards at the Bush.

That evening on his return home he found both the letters from
Arabella. As it happened he read them in the order in which they
had been written, first the laughing letter, and then the one that
was declared to be serious. The earlier of the two did not annoy
him much. It contained hardly more than those former letters which
had induced him to go to Mistletoe. But the second letter opened up
her entire strategy. She had told the Duchess that she was engaged
to him, and the Duchess of course would have told the Duke. And now
she wrote to him asking him to acknowledge the engagement in black
and white. The first letter he might have ignored. He might have
left it unanswered without gross misconduct. But the second letter,
which she herself had declared to be a serious epistle, was one
which he could not neglect. Now had come his difficulty. What must
he do? How should he answer it? Was it imperative on him to write
the words with his own hand? Would it be possible that he should
get his sister to undertake the commission? He said nothing about
it to any one for four and twenty hours; but he passed those hours
in much discomfort. It did seem so hard to him that because he had
been forced to carry a lady home from hunting in a post chaise,
that he should be driven to such straits as this? The girl was
evidently prepared to make a fight of it. There would be the Duke
and the Duchess and that prig Mistletoe, and that idle ass Lord
Augustus, and that venomous old woman her mother, all at him. He
almost doubted whether a shooting excursion in Central Africa or a
visit to the Pampas would not be the best thing for him. But still,
though he should resolve to pass five years among the Andes, he
must answer the lady's letter before he went.

Then he made up his mind that he would tell everything to his
brother-in-law, as far as everything can be told in such a matter.
Sir George was near fifty, full fifteen years older than his wife,
who was again older than her brother. He was a man of moderate
wealth, very much respected, and supposed to be possessed of almost
infinite wisdom. He was one of those few human beings who seem
never to make a mistake. Whatever he put his hand to came out
well;--and yet everybody liked him. His brother-in-law was a little
afraid of him, but yet was always glad to see him. He kept an
excellent house in London, but having no country house of his own
passed much of his time at Rufford Hall when the owner was not
there. In spite of the young peer's numerous faults Sir George was
much attached to him, and always ready to help him in his
difficulties. "Penwether," said the Lord, "I have got myself into
an awful scrape."

"I am sorry to hear it. A woman, I suppose,"

"Oh, yes. I never gamble, and therefore no other scrape can be
awful. A young lady wants to marry me"

"That is not unnatural."

"But I am quite determined, let the result be what it may, that I
won't marry the young lady."

"That will be unfortunate for her, and the more so if she has a
right to expect it. Is the young lady Miss Trefoil?"

"I did not mean to mention any name, till I was sure it might be
necessary. But it is Miss Trefoil."

"Eleanor had told me something of it"

"Eleanor knows nothing about this, and I do not ask you to tell
her. The young lady was here with her mother,--and for the matter
of that with a gentleman to whom she was certainly engaged; but
nothing particular occurred here. That unfortunate ball was going
on when poor Caneback was dying. But I met her since that at
Mistletoe."

"I can hardly advise, you know, unless you tell me everything."

Then Lord Rufford began. "These kind of things are sometimes deuced
hard upon a man. Of course if a man were a saint or a philosopher
or a Joseph he wouldn't get into such scrapes,--and perhaps every
man ought to be something of that sort. But I don't know how a man
is to do it, unless it's born with him."

"A little prudence I should say."

"You might as well tell a fellow that it is his duty to be six feet
high"

"But what have you said to the young lady,--or what has she said to
you?"

"There has been a great deal more of the latter than the former. I
say so to you, but of course it is not to be said that I have said
so. I cannot go forth to the world complaining of a young lady's
conduct to me. It is a matter in which a man must not tell the
truth."

"But what is the truth?"

"She writes me word to say that she has told all her friends that I
am engaged to her, and kindly presses me to make good her
assurances by becoming so."

"And what has passed between you?"

"A fainting fit in a carriage and half-a-dozen kisses."

"Nothing more?"

"Nothing more that is material. Of course one cannot tell it all
down to each mawkish word of humbugging sentiment. There are her
letters, and what I want you to remember is that I never asked her
to be my wife, and that no consideration on earth shall induce me
to become her husband. Though all the duchesses in England were to
persecute me to the death I mean to stick to that."

Then Sir George read the letters and handed them back. "She seems
to me," said he, "to have more wit about her than any of the family
that I have had the honour of meeting."

"She has wit enough,--and pluck too."

"You have never said a word to her to encourage these hopes"

"My dear Penwether, don't you know that if a man with a large
income says to a girl like that that the sun shines he encourages
hope. I understand that well enough. I am a rich man with a title,
and a big house, and a great command of luxuries. There are so many
young ladies who would also like to be rich, and to have a title,
and a big house, and a command of luxuries! One sometimes feels
oneself like a carcase in the midst of vultures."

"Marry after a proper fashion, and you'll get rid of all that."

"I'll think about it, but in the meantime what can I say to this
young woman? When I acknowledge that I kissed ham, of course I
encouraged hopes."

"No doubt"

"But St. Anthony would have had to kiss this young woman if she had
made her attack upon him as she did on me; and after all a kiss
doesn't go for everything. These are things, Penwether, that must
not be inquired into too curiously. But I won't marry her though it
were a score of kisses. And now what must I do?" Sir George said
that he would take till the next morning to think about it,--
meaning to make a draft of the reply which he thought his
brother-in-law might best send to the lady.


CHAPTER XIX

It cannot be Arranged


When Reginald Morton received his aunt's letter he understood from
it more than she had intended. Of course the man to whom allusion
was made was Mr. Twentyman; and of course the discomfort at. home
had come from Mrs. Masters' approval of that suitor's claim.
Reginald, though he had seen but little of the inside of the
attorney's household, thought it very probable that the stepmother
would make the girl's home very uncomfortable for her. Though he
knew well all the young farmer's qualifications as a husband,--
namely that he was well to do in the world and bore a good
character for honesty and general conduct,--still he thoroughly,
nay heartily approved of Mary's rejection of the man's hand. It
seemed to him to be sacrilege that such a one should have given to
him such a woman. There was, to his thinking, something about Mary
Masters that made it altogether unfit that she should pass her life
as the mistress of Chowton Farm, and he honoured her for the
persistence of her refusal. He took his pipe and went out into the
garden in order that he might think of it all as he strolled round
his little domain.

But why should he think so much about it? Why should he take so
deep an interest in the matter? What was it to him whether Mary
Masters married after her kind, or descended into what he felt to
be an inferior manner of life? Then he tried to tell himself what
were the gifts in the girl's possession which made her what she
was, and he pictured her to himself, running over all her
attributes. It was not that she specially excelled in beauty. He
had seen Miss Trefoil as she was being driven about the
neighbourhood, and having heard much of the young lady as the
future wife of his own cousin, had acknowledged to himself that she
was very handsome. But he had thought at the same time that under
no possible circumstances could he have fallen in love with Miss
Trefoil. He believed that he did not care much for female beauty,
and yet he felt that he could sit and look at Mary Masters by the
hour together. There was a quiet even composure about her, always
lightened by the brightness of her modest eyes, which seemed to
tell him of some mysterious world within, which was like the unseen
loveliness that one fancies to be hidden within the bosom of
distant mountains. There was a poem to be read there of surpassing
beauty, rhythmical and eloquent as the music of the spheres, if it
might only be given to a man to read it. There was an absence, too,
of all attempt at feminine self-glorification which he did not
analyse but thoroughly appreciated. There was no fussy
amplification of hair, no made-up smiles, no affectation either in
her good humour or her anger, no attempt at effect in her gait, in
her speech, or her looks. She seemed to him to be one who had
something within her on which she could feed independently of the
grosser details of the world to which it was her duty to lend her
hand. And then her colour charmed his eyes. Miss Trefoil was white
and red; white as pearl powder and red as paint. Mary Masters, to
tell the truth, was brown. No doubt that was the prevailing colour,
if one colour must be named. But there was so rich a tint of young
life beneath the surface, so soft but yet so visible an assurance
of blood and health and spirit, that no one could describe her
complexion by so ugly a word without falsifying her gifts. In all
her movements she was tranquil, as a noble woman should be. Even
when she had turned from him with some anger at the bridge, she had
walked like a princess. There was a certainty of modesty about her
which was like a granite wall or a strong fortress. As he thought
of it all he did not understand how such a one as Lawrence
Twentyman should have dared to ask her to be his wife,--or should
even have wished it.

We know what were her feelings in regard to himself, how she had
come to look almost with worship on the walls within which he
lived; but he had guessed nothing of this. Even now, when he knew
that she had applied to his aunt in order that she might escape
from her lover, it did not occur to him that she could care for
himself. He was older than she, nearly twenty years older, and even
in his younger years, in the hard struggles of his early life, had
never regarded himself as a man likely to find favour with women.
There was in his character much of that modesty for which he gave
her such infinite credit. Though he thought but little of most of
those around him, he thought also but little of himself. It would
break his heart to ask and be refused; but he could, he fancied,
live very well without Mary Masters. Such, at any rate, had been
his own idea of himself hitherto; and now, though he was driven to
think much of her, though on the present occasion he was forced to
act on her behalf, he would not tell himself that he wanted to take
her for his wife. He constantly assured himself that he wanted no
wife, that for him a solitary life would be the best. But yet it
made him wretched when he reflected that some man would assuredly
marry Mary Masters. He had heard of that excellent but empty-head
young man Mr. Surtees. When the idea occurred to him he found
himself reviling Mr. Surtees as being of all men the most puny, the
most unmanly, and the least worthy of marrying Mary Masters. Now
that Mr. Twentyman was certainly disposed of, he almost became
jealous of Mr. Surtees.

It was not till three or four o'clock in the afternoon that he went
out on his commission to the attorney's house, having made up his
mind that he would do everything in his power to facilitate Mary's
proposed return to Cheltenham. He asked first for Mr. Masters and
then for Miss Masters, and learned that they were both out
together. But he had been desired also to see Mrs. Masters, and on
inquiring for her was again shown into the grand drawing-room. Here
he remained a quarter of an hour while the lady of the house was
changing her cap and apron, which he spent in convincing himself
that this house was altogether an unfit residence for Mary. In the
chamber in which he was standing it was clear enough that no human
being ever lived. Mary's drawing-room ought to be a bower in which
she at least might pass her time with books and music and pretty
things around her. The squalor of the real living room might be
conjectured from the untouched cleanliness of this useless sanctum.
At last the lady came to him and welcomed him with very grim
courtesy. As a client of her husband he was very well;--but as a
nephew of Lady Ushant he was injurious. It was he who had carried
Mary away to Cheltenham where she had been instigated to throw her
bread-and-butter into the fire,--as Mrs. Masters expressed it,--by
that pernicious old woman Lady Ushant. "Mr. Masters is out
walking," she said. Reginald clearly understood by the contempt
which she threw almost unconsciously into her words that she did
not approve of her husband going out walking at such an hour.

"I had a message for him--and also for you. My aunt, Lady Ushant,
is very anxious that your daughter Mary should return to her at
Cheltenham for a while." The proposition to Mrs. Masters' thinking
was so monstrous, and was at the same time so unexpected, that it
almost took away her breath. At any rate she stood for a moment
speechless. "My aunt is very fond of your daughter," he continued,
"and if she can be spared would be delighted to have her. Perhaps
she has written to Miss Masters, but she has asked me to come over
and see if it can be arranged."

"It cannot be arranged," said Mrs. Masters. "Nothing of the kind
can be arranged."

"I am sorry for that"

"It is only disturbing the girl, and upsetting her, and filling her
head full of nonsense. What is she to do at Cheltenham? This is her
home and here she had better be." Though things had hitherto gone
very badly, though Larry Twentyman had not shown himself since the
receipt of the letter, still Mrs. Masters had not abandoned all
hope. She was fixed in opinion that if her husband were joined with
her they could still, between them, so break the girl's spirit as
to force her into a marriage. "As for letters," she continued, "I
don't know anything about them. There may have been letters but if
so they have been kept from me. "She was so angry that she could
not even attempt to conceal her wrath.

"Lady Ushant thinks--" began the messenger.

"Oh yes, Lady Ushant is very well of course. Lady Ushant is your
aunt, Mr. Morton, and I haven't anything to say against her. But
Lady Ushant can't do any good to that girl. She has got her bread
to earn, and if she won't do it one way then she must do it
another. She's obstinate and pigheaded, that's the truth of it. And
her father's just as bad. He has taken her out now merely because
she likes to be idle, and to go about thinking herself a fine lady.
Lady Ushant doesn't do her any good at all by cockering her up."

"My aunt, you know, saw very much of her when she was young."

"I know she did, Mr. Morton; and all that has to be undone,--and I
have got the undoing of it. Lady Ushant is one thing and her papa's
business is quite another. At any rate if I have my say she'll not
go to Cheltenham any more. I don't mean to be uncivil to you, Mr.
Morton, or to say anything as oughtn't to be said of your aunt. But
when you can't make people anything but what they are, it's my
opinion that it's best to leave them alone. Good day to you, sir,
and I hope you understand what it is that I mean."

Then Morton retreated and went down the stairs, leaving the lady in
possession of her own grandeur. He had not quite understood what
she had meant, and was still wondering at the energy of her
opposition. when he met Mary herself at the front door. Her father
was not with her, but his retreating form was to be seen entering
the portal of the Bush. "Oh, Mr. Morton!" exclaimed Mary surprised
to have the house-door opened for her by him.

"I have come with a message from my aunt"

"She told me that you would do so."

"Lady Ushant would of course be delighted to have you if it could
be arranged."

"Then Lady Ushant will be disappointed," said Mrs. Masters who had
descended the stairs. "There has been something going on behind my
back."

"I wrote to Lady Ushant," said Mary.

"I call that sly and deceitful;--very sly and very deceitful. If I
know it you won't stir out of this house to go to Cheltenham. I
wonder Lady Ushant would go to put you up in that way against those
you're bound to obey."

"I thought Mrs. Masters had been told," said Reginald.

"Papa did know that I wrote," said Mary.

"Yes;--and in this way a conspiracy is to be made up in the House!
If she goes to Cheltenham I won't stay here. You may tell Lady
Ushant that I say that. I'm not going to be one thing one day and
another, and to be made a tool of all round." By this time Dolly
and Kate had cone down from the upper regions and were standing
behind their mother. "What do you two do there, standing gaping
like fools," said the angry mother. "I suppose your father has gone
over to the public-house again. That, miss, is what comes from your
pig headiness. Didn't I tell you that you were ruining everybody
belonging to you?" Before all this was over Reginald Morton had
escaped, feeling that he could do no good to either side by
remaining a witness to such a scene. He must take some other
opportunity of finding the attorney and of learning from him
whether he intended that his daughter should be allowed to accept
Lady Ushant's invitation.

Poor Mary as she shrunk into the house was nearly heartbroken. That
such things should be at all was very dreadful, but that the scene
should have taken place in the presence of Reginald Morton was an
aggravation of the misery which nearly overwhelmed her. How could
she make him understand whence had arisen her stepmother's anger
and that she herself had been neither sly nor deceitful nor
pigheaded?


CHAPTER XX

"But there is some one"


When Mr. Masters had gone across to the Bush his purpose had
certainly been ignoble, but it had had no reference to brandy and
water. And the allusion made by Mrs. Masters to the probable ruin
which was to come from his tendencies in that direction had been
calumnious, for she knew that the man was not given to excess in
liquor. But as he approached his own house he bethought himself
that it would not lead to domestic comfort if he were seen
returning from his walk with Mary, and he had therefore made some
excuse as to the expediency of saying a word to Runciman whom he
espied at his own door. He said his word to Runciman, and so
loitered away perhaps a quarter of an hour, and then went back to
his office. But his wife had kept her anger at burning heat and
pounced upon him before he had taken his seat. Sundown was there
copying, sitting with his eyes intent on the board before him as
though he were quite unaware of the sudden entrance of his master's
wife. She in her fury did not regard Sundown in the least, but at
once commenced her attack. "What is all this, Mr. Masters," she
said, "about Lady Ushant and going to Cheltenham? I won't have any
going to Cheltenham and that's flat" Now the attorney had
altogether made up his mind that his daughter should go to
Cheltenham if her friend would receive her. Whatever might be the
consequences, they must be borne. But he thought it best to say
nothing at the first moment of the attack, and simply turned his
sorrowful round face in silence up to the partner of all his cares
and the source of so many of them. "There have been letters,"
continued the lady;--"letters which nobody has told me nothing
about. That proud peacock from Hoppet Hall has been here, as though
he had nothing to do but carry Mary away about the country just as
he pleased. Mary won't go to Cheltenham with him nor yet without
him;--not if I am to remain here."

"Where else should you remain, my dear?" asked the attorney.

"I'd sooner go into the workhouse than have all this turmoil.
That's where we are all likely to go if you pass your time between
walking about with that minx and the public-house opposite." Then
the attorney was aware that he had been watched, and his spirit
began to rise within him. He looked at Sundown, but the man went on
copying quicker than ever.

"My dear," said Mr. Masters, "you shouldn't talk in that way before
the clerk. I wanted to speak to Mr. Runciman, and, as to the
workhouse, I don't know that there is any more danger now than
there has been for the last twenty years."

"It's alway's off and on as far as I can see. Do you mean to send
that girl to Cheltenham?"

"I rather think she had better go--for a time."

"Then I shall leave this house and go with my girls to Norrington."
Now this threat, which had been made before, was quite without
meaning. Mrs. Masters' parents were both dead, and her brother, who
had a large family, certainly would not receive her. "I won't
remain here, Mr. Masters, if I ain't to be mistress of my own
house. What is she to go to Cheltenham for, I should like to know?"

Then Sundown was desired by his wretched employer to go into the
back settlement and the poor man prepared himself for the battle as
well as he could. "She is not happy here," he said.

"Whose fault is that? Why shouldn't she be happy? Of course you
know what it means. She has got round you because she wants to be a
fine lady. What means have you to make her a fine lady? If you was
to die to-morrow what would there be for any of 'em? My little bit
of money is all gone. Let her stay here and be made to marry
Lawrence Twentyman. That's what I say."

"She will never marry Mr. Twentyman."

"Not if you go on like this she won't. If you'd done your duty by
her like a real father instead of being afraid of her when she puts
on her tantrums; she'd have been at Chowton Farm by this time."

It was clear to him that now was the time not to be afraid of his
wife when she put on her tantrums,--or at any rate, to appear not
to be afraid. "She has been very unhappy of late."

"Oh, unhappy! She's been made more of than anybody else in this
house."

"And a change will do her good. She has my permission to go;--and
go she shall!" Then the word had been spoken.

"She shall!"

"It is very much for the best. While she is here the house is made
wretched for us all."

"It'll be wretcheder yet; unless it would make you happy to see me
dead on the threshold,--which I believe it would. As for her, she's
an ungrateful, sly, wicked slut"

"She has done nothing wicked that I know of."

"Not writing to that old woman behind my back?"

"She told me what she was doing and showed me the letter."

"Yes; of course. The two of you were in it. Does that make it any
better? I say it was sly and wicked; and you were sly and wicked as
well as she. She has got the better of you, and now you are going
to send her away from the only chance she'll ever get of having a
decent home of her own over her head."

"There's nothing more to be said about it, my dear. She'll go to
Lady Ushant" Having thus pronounced his dictum with all the marital
authority he was able to assume he took his hat and sallied forth.
Mrs. Masters, when she was left alone, stamped her foot and hit the
desk with a ruler that was lying there. Then she went up-stairs and
threw herself on her bed in a paroxysm of weeping and wailing.

Mr. Masters, when he closed his door, looked up the street and down
the street and then again went across to the Bush. Mr. Runciman was
still there, and was standing with a letter in his hand, while one
of the grooms from Rufford Hall was holding a horse beside him.
"Any answer, Mr. Runciman?" said the groom.

"Only to tell his lordship that everything will be ready for him.
You'd better go through and give the horse a feed of corn, and get
a bit of something to eat and a glass of beer yourself." The man
wasn't slow to do as he was bid;--and in this way the Bush had
become very popular with the servants of the gentry around the
place. "His lordship is to be here from Friday to Sunday with a
party, Mr. Masters."

"Oh, indeed."

"For the end of the shooting. And who do you think he has asked to
be one of the party?"

"Not Mr. Reginald?"

"I don't think they ever spoke in their lives. Who but Larry
Twentyman!"

"No!"

"It'll be the making of Larry. I only hope he won't cock his beaver
too high."

"Is he coming?"

"I suppose so. He'll be sure to come. His Lordship only tells me
that there are to be six of 'em on Saturday and five on Friday
night. But the lad there knew who they all were. There's Mr.
Surbiton and Captain Battersby and Sir George are to come over with
his lordship from Rufford. And young Mr. Hampton is to join them
here, and Larry Twentyman is to shoot with them on Saturday and
dine afterwards. Won't those two Botseys be jealous; that's all?"

"It only shows what they think of Larry," said the attorney.

"Larry Twentyman is a very good fellow," said the landlord. "I
don't know a better fellow round Dillsborough, or one who is more
always on the square. But he's weak. You know him as well as I, Mr.
Masters."

"He's not so weak but what he can keep what he's got."

"This'll be the way to try him. He'd melt away like water into sand
if he were to live for a few weeks with such men as his Lordship's
friends. I suppose there's no chance of his taking a wife home to
Chowton with him?" The attorney shook his head. "That'd be the
making of him, Mr. Masters; a good girl like that who'd keep him at
home. If he takes it to heart he'll burst out somewhere and spend a
lot of money."

The attorney declined Mr. Runciman's offer of a glass of beer and
slowly made his way round the corner of the inn by Hobb's gate to
the front door of Hoppet Hall. Then he passed on to the churchyard,
still thinking of the misery of his position. When he reached the
church he turned back, still going very slowly, and knocked at the
door of Hoppet Hall. He was shown at once by Reginald's old
housekeeper up to the library, and there in a few minutes he was
joined by the master of the house. "I was over looking for you an
hour or two ago," said Reginald.

"I heard you were there, Mr. Morton, and so I thought I would come
to you. You didn't see Mary?"

"I just saw her,--but could hardly say much. She had written to my
aunt about going to Cheltenham."

"I saw the letter before she sent it, Mr. Morton."

"So she told me. My aunt would be delighted to have her, but it
seems that Mrs. Masters does not wish her to go."

"There is some trouble about it, Mr. Morton;--but I may as well
tell you at once that I wish her to go. She would be better for
awhile at Cheltenham with such a lady as your aunt than she can be
at home. Her stepmother and she cannot agree on a certain point. I
dare say you know what it is, Mr. Morton?"

"In regard, I suppose, to Mr. Twentyman?"

"Just that. Mrs. Masters thinks that Mr. Twentyman would make an
excellent husband. And so do I. There's nothing in the world
against him, and as compared with me he's a rich man. I couldn't
give the poor girl any fortune, and he wouldn't want any. But money
isn't everything."

"No indeed."

"He's an industrious steady young man too, and he has had my word
with him all through. But I can't compel my girl to marry him if
she don't like him. I can't even try to compel her. She's as good a
girl as ever stirred about a house."

"I can well believe that"

"And nothing would take such a load off me as to know that she was
going to be well married. But as she don't like the young man well
enough, I won't have her hardly used."

"Mrs. Masters perhaps is hard to her."

"God forbid I should say anything against my wife. I never did, and
I won't now. But Mary will be better away; and if Lady Ushant will
be good enough to take her, she shall go."

"When will she be ready, Mr. Masters?"

"I must ask her about that;--in a week perhaps, or ten days."

"She is quite decided against the young man?"

"Quite. At the bidding of all of us she said she'd take two months
to think of it. But before the time was up she wrote to him to say
it could never be. It quite upset my wife; because it would have
been such an excellent arrangement"

Reginald wished to learn more but hardly knew how to ask the father
questions. Yet, as he had been trusted so far, he thought that he
might be trusted altogether. "I must own," he said, "that I think
that Mr. Twentyman would hardly be a fit husband for your
daughter."

"He is a very good young man."

"Very likely;--but she is something more than a very good young
woman. A young lady with her gifts will be sure to settle well in
life some day." The attorney shook his head. He had lived long
enough to see many young ladies with good gifts find it difficult
to settle in life; and perhaps that mysterious poem which Reginald
found in Mary's eyes was neither visible nor audible to Mary's
father. "I did hear," said Reginald, "that Mr. Surtees--"

"There's nothing in that."

"Oh, indeed. I thought that perhaps as she is so determined not to
do as her friends would wish, that there might be something else."
He said this almost as a question, looking close into the
attorney's eyes as he spoke.

"It is always possible," said Mr. Masters.

"But you don't think there is anybody?"

"It is very hard to say, Mr. Morton."

"You don't expect anything of that sort?"

Then the attorney broke forth into sudden confidence. "To tell the
truth then, Mr. Morton, I think there is somebody, though who it is
I know as little as the baby unborn. She sees nobody here at
Dillsborough to be intimate with. She isn't one of those who would
write letters or do anything on the sly."

"But there is some one?"

"She told me as much herself. That is, when I asked her she would
not deny it. Then I thought that perhaps it might be somebody at
Cheltenham."

"I think not. She was there so short a time, Mr. Morton; and Lady
Ushant would be the last person in the world to let such a thing as
that go on without telling her parents. I don't think there was any
one at Cheltenham. She was only there a month."

"I did fancy that perhaps that was one reason why she should want
to go back."

"I don't believe it. I don't in the least believe it," said
Reginald enthusiastically. "My aunt would have been sure to have
seen it. It would have been impossible without her knowledge. But
there is somebody?"

"I think so, Mr. Masters;--and if she does go to Cheltenham perhaps
Lady Ushant had better know." To this Reginald agreed, or half
agreed. It did not seem to him to be of much consequence what might
be done at Cheltenham. He felt certain that the lover was not
there. And yet who was there at Dillsborough? He had seen those
young Botseys about. Could it possibly be one of them? And during
the Christmas vacation the rector's scamp of a son had been home
from Oxford; to whom Mary Masters had barely spoken. Was it young
Mainwaring? Or could it be possible that she had turned an eye of
favour on Dr. Nupper's elegantly-dressed assistant. There was
nothing too monstrous for him to suggest to himself as soon as the
attorney had left him.

But there was a young man in Dillsborough,--one man at any rate
young enough to be a lover,--of whom Reginald did not think; as to
whom, had his name been suggested as that of the young man to whom
Mary's heart had been given, he would have repudiated such a
suggestion with astonishment and anger. But now, having heard this
from the girl's father, he was again vexed, and almost as much
disgusted as when he had first become aware that Larry Twentyman
was a suitor for her hand. Why should he trouble himself about a
girl who was ready to fall in love with the first man that she saw
about the place? He tried to pacify himself by some such question
as this, but tried in vain.


CHAPTER XXI

The Dinner at the Bush


Here is the letter which at his brother-in-law's advice Lord
Rufford wrote to Arabella:

Rufford, 3 February, 1875.

My Dear Miss Trefoil,

It is a great grief to me that I should have to answer your letter
in a manner that will I fear not be satisfactory to you. I can only
say that you have altogether mistaken me if you think that I have
said anything which was intended as an offer of marriage. I cannot
but be much flattered by your good opinion. I have had much
pleasure from our acquaintance, and I should have been glad if it
could have been continued. But I have had no thoughts of marriage.
If I have said a word which has, unintentionally on my part, given
rise to such an idea I can only beg your pardon heartily. If I were
to add more after what I have now said perhaps you would take it as
impertinence.

                         Yours most sincerely,
                                Rufford.

He had desired to make various additions and suggestions which
however had all been disallowed by Sir George Penwether. He had
proposed among other things to ask her whether he should keep Jack
for her for the remainder of the season or whether he should send
the horse elsewhere, but Sir George would not allow a word in the
letter about Jack. "You did give her the horse then?" he asked.

"I had hardly any alternative as the things went. She would have
been quite welcome to the horse if she would have let me alone
afterwards."

"No doubt; but when young gentlemen give young ladies horses--"

"I know all about it, my dear fellow. Pray don't preach more than
you can help. Of course I have been an infernal ass. I know all
that. But as the horse is hers--"

"Say nothing about the horse. Were she to ask for it of course she
could have it; but that is not likely."

"And you think I had better say nothing else."

"Not a word. Of course it will be shown to all her friends and may
possibly find its way into print. I don't know what steps such a
young lady may be advised to take. Her uncle is a man of honour.
Her father is an ass and careless about everything. Mistletoe will
not improbably feel himself bound to act as though he were her
brother. They will, of course, all think you to be a rascal,--and
will say so."

"If Mistletoe says so I'll horsewhip him."

"No you won't, Rufford. You will remember that this woman is a
woman, and that a woman's friends are bound to stand up for her.
After all your hands are not quite clean in the matter."

"I am heavy enough on myself Penwether. I have been a fool and I
own it. But I have done nothing unbecoming a gentleman." He was
almost tempted to quarrel with his brother-in-law, but at last he
allowed the letter to be sent just as Sir George had written it,
and then tried to banish the affair from his mind for the present
so that he might enjoy his life till the next hostile step should
be taken by the Trefoil clan.

When Larry Twentyman received the lord's note, which was left at
Chowton Farm by Hampton's groom, he was in the lowest depth of
desolation. He had intended to hunt that day in compliance with
John Morton's advice, but had felt himself quite unable to make the
effort. It was not only that he had been thrown over by Mary
Masters, but that everybody knew that he had been thrown over. If
he had kept the matter secret, perhaps he might have borne it; but
it is so hard to bear a sorrow of which all one's neighbours are
conscious. When a man is reduced by poverty to the drinking of beer
instead of wine, it is not the loss of the wine that is so heavy on
him as the consciousness that those around him are aware of the
reason. And he is apt to extend his idea of this consciousness to a
circle that is altogether indifferent of the fact. That a man
should fail in his love seems to him to be of all failures the most
contemptible, and Larry thought that there would not be one in the
field unaware of his miserable rejection. In spite of his mother's
prayers he had refused to go, and had hung about the farm all day.

Then there came to him Lord Rufford's note. It had been quite
unexpected, and a month or two before, when his hopes had still
been high in regard to Mary Masters, would have filled him with
delight. It was the foible of his life to be esteemed a gentleman,
and his poor ambition to be allowed to live among men of higher
social standing than himself. Those dinners of Lord Rufford's at
the Bush had been a special grief to him. The young lord had been
always courteous to him in the field, and he had been able, as he
thought, to requite such courtesy by little attentions in the way
of game preserving. If pheasants from Dillsborough Wood ate
Goarly's wheat, so did they eat Larry Twentyman's barley. He had a
sportsman's heart, above complaint as to such matters, and had
always been neighbourly to the lord. No doubt pheasants and hares
were left at his house whenever there was shooting in the
neighbourhood, which to his mother afforded great consolation. But
Larry did not care for the pheasants and hares. Had he so pleased
he could have shot them on his own land; but he did not preserve,
and, as a good neighbour, he regarded the pheasants and hares as
Lord Rufford's property. He felt that he was behaving as a
gentleman as well as a neighbour, and that he should be treated as
such. Fred Botsey had dined at the Bush with Lord Rufford, and
Larry looked on Fred as in no way better than himself.

Now at last the invitation had come. He was asked to a day's
shooting and to dine with the lord and his party at the inn. How
pleasant would it be to give a friendly nod to Runciman as he went
into the room, and to assert afterwards in Botsey's hearing
something of the joviality of the evening. Of course Hampton would
be there as Hampton's servant had brought the note, and he was very
anxious to be on friendly terms with Mr. Hampton. Next to the lord
himself there was no one in the hunt who carried his head so high
as young Hampton.

But there arose to him the question whether all this had not
arrived too late! Of what good is it to open up the true delights
of life to a man when you have so scotched and wounded him that he
has no capability left of enjoying anything? As he sat lonely with
his pipe in his mouth he thought for a while that he would decline
the invitation. The idea of selling Chowton Farm and of
establishing himself at some Antipodes in which the name of Mary
Masters should never have been heard, was growing upon him. Of what
use would the friendship of Lord Rufford be to him at the other
side of the globe?

At last, however, the hope of giving that friendly nod to Runciman
overcame him, and he determined to go. He wrote a note, which
caused him no little thought, presenting his compliments to Lord
Rufford and promising to meet his lordship's party at Dillsborough
Wood.

The shooting went off very well and Larry behaved himself with
propriety. He wanted the party to come in and lunch, and had given
sundry instructions to his mother on that head. But they did not
remain near to his place throughout the day, and his efforts in
that direction were not successful. Between five and six he went
home, and at half-past seven appeared at the Bush attired in his
best. He never yet had sat down with a lord, and his mind misgave
him a little; but he had spirit enough to look about for
Runciman,--who, however, was not to be seen.

Sir George was not there, but the party had been made up, as
regarded the dinner, by the addition of Captain Glomax, who had
returned from hunting. Captain Glomax was in high glee, having
had,--as he declared,--the run of the season. When a Master has
been deserted on any day by the choice spirits of his hunt he is
always apt to boast to them that he had on that occasion the run of
the season. He had taken a fox from Impington right across to
Hogsborough, which, as every one knows, is just on the borders of
the U.R.U., had then run him for five miles into Lord Chiltern's
country, and had killed him in the centre of the Brake Hunt, after
an hour and a half, almost without a check. "It was one of those
straight things that one doesn't often see now-a-days," said
Glomax.

"Any pace?" asked Lord Rufford.

"Very good, indeed, for the first forty minutes. I wish you had all
been there. It was better fun I take it than shooting rabbits."

Then Hampton put the Captain through his facings as to time and
distance and exact places that had been passed, and ended by
expressing an opinion that he could have kicked his hat as fast on
foot. Whereupon the Captain begged him to try, and hinted that he
did not know the country. In answer to which Hampton offered to bet
a five-pound note that young Jack Runce would say that the pace had
been slow. Jack was the son of the old farmer whom the Senator had
so disgusted, and was supposed to know what he was about on a
horse. But Glomax declined the bet saying that he did not care a --
for Jack Runce. He knew as much about pace as any farmer, or for
the matter of that any gentleman, in Ufford or Rufford, and the
pace for forty minutes had been very good. Nevertheless all the
party were convinced that the "thing" had been so slow that it had
not been worth riding to;--a conviction which is not uncommon with
gentlemen when they have missed a run. In all this discussion poor
Larry took no great part though he knew the country as well as any
one. Larry had not as yet got over the awe inspired by the lord in
his black coat.

Perhaps Larry's happiest moment in the evening was when Runciman
himself brought in the soup, for at that moment Lord Rufford put
his hand on his shoulder and desired him to sit down,--and Runciman
both heard and saw it. And at dinner, when the champagne had been
twice round, he became more comfortable. The conversation got upon
Goarly, and in reference to that matter he was quite at home. "It's
not my doing," said Lord Rufford. "I have instructed no one to keep
him locked up."

"It's a very good job from all that I can hear," said Tom Surbiton.

"All I did was to get Mr. Masters here to take up the case for me,
and I learned from him to-day that the rascal had already agreed to
take the money I offered. He only bargains that it shall be paid
into his own hands,--no doubt desiring to sell the attorney he has
employed."

"Bearside has got his money from the American Senator, my Lord,"
said Larry.

"They may fight it out among them. I don't care who gets the money
or who pays it as long as I'm not imposed upon."

"We must proceed against that man Scrobby," said Glomax with all
the authority of a Master.

"You'll never convict him on Goarly's evidence," said the Lord.

Then Larry could give them further information. Nickem had positively
traced the purchase of the red herrings. An old woman in Rufford was
ready to swear that she herself had sold them to Mrs. Scrobby. Tom
Surbiton suggested that the possession of red herrings was not of itself
a crime. Hampton thought that it was corroborative. Captain Batsby
wanted to know whether any of the herrings were still in existence, so
that they could be sworn to. Glomax was of opinion that villainy of so
deep a dye could not have taken place in any other hunting country in
England.

"There's been strychnine put down in the Brake too," said Hampton.

"But not in cartloads," said the Master.

"I rather think," said Larry, "that Nickem knows where the
strychnine was bought. That'll make a clear case of it. Hanging
would be too good for such a scoundrel" This was said after the
third glass of champagne, but the opinion was one which was well
received by the whole company. After that the Senator's conduct was
discussed, and they all agreed that in the whole affair that was
the most marvellous circumstance. "They must be queer people over
there," said Larry.

"Brutes!" said Glomax. "They once tried a pack of hounds somewhere
in one of the States, but they never could run a yard."

There was a good deal of wine drank, which was not unusual at Lord
Rufford's dinners. Most of the company were seasoned vessels, and
none of them were much the worse for what they drank. But the
generous wine got to Larry's heart, and perhaps made his brain a
little soft. Lord Rufford remembering what had been said about the
young man's misery tried to console him by attention; and as the
evening wore on, and when the second cigars had been lit all round,
the two were seated together in confidential conversation at a
corner of the table: "Yes, my lord; I think I shall hook it," said
Larry. "Something has occurred that has made the place not quite so
comfortable to me; and as it is all my own I think I shall sell
it."

"We should miss you immensely in the hunt," said Lord Rufford, who
of course knew what the something was.

"It's very kind of you to say so, my lord. But there are things
which may make a man go."

"Nothing serious, I hope."

"Just a young woman, my lord. I don't want it talked about, but I
don't mind mentioning it to you."

"You should never let those troubles touch you so closely," said
his lordship, whose own withers at this moment were by no means
unwrung.

"I dare say not. But if you feel it, how are you to help it? I
shall do very well when I get away. Chowton Farm is not the only
spot in the world."

"But a man so fond of hunting as you are!"

"Well;--yes. I shall miss the hunting, my lord,--shan't I? If Mr.
Morton don't buy the place I should like it to go to your lordship.
I offered it to him first because it came from them."

"Quite right. By-the-bye, I hear that Mr. Morton is very ill."

"So I heard," said Larry. "Nupper has been with him, I know, and I
fancy they have sent for somebody from London. I don't know that he
cares much about the land. He thinks more of the foreign parts he's
always in. I don't believe we should fall out about the price, my
lord." Then Lord Rufford explained that he would not go into that
matter just at present, but that if the place were in the market he
would certainly like to buy it. He, however, did as John Morton had
done before, and endeavoured to persuade the poor fellow that he
should not alter the whole tenor of his life because a young lady
would not look at him.

"Good night, Mr. Runciman," said Larry as he made his way
down-stairs to the yard. "We've had an uncommon pleasant evening."

"I'm glad you've enjoyed yourself, Larry." Larry thought that his
Christian name from the hotel keeper's lips had never sounded so
offensively as on the present occasion.


CHAPTER XXII

Miss Trefoil's Decision


Lord Rufford's letter reached Arabella at her cousin's house, in
due course, and was handed to her in the morning as she came down
to breakfast. The envelope bore his crest and coronet, and she was
sure that more than one pair of eyes had already seen it. Her
mother had been in the room some time before her, and would of
course know that the letter was from Lord Rufford. An indiscreet
word or two had been said in the hearing of Mrs. Connop Green,--as
to which Arabella had already scolded her mother most vehemently,
and Mrs. Connop Green too would probably have seen the letter, and
would know that it had come from the lover of whom boasts had been
made. The Connop Greens would be ready to worship Arabella down to
the very soles of her feet if she were certainly,--without a
vestige of doubt,--engaged to be the wife of Lord Rufford. But
there had been so many previous mistakes! And they, too, had heard
of Mr. John Morton. They too were a little afraid of Arabella
though she was undoubtedly the niece of a Duke.

She was aware now,--as always,--how much depended on her personal
bearing; but this was a moment of moments! She would fain have kept
the letter, and have opened it in the retirement of her own room.
She knew its terrible importance, and was afraid of her own
countenance when she should read it. All the hopes of her life were
contained in that letter. But were she to put it in her pocket she
would betray her anxiety by doing so. She found herself bound to
open it and read it at once,--and she did open it and read it.

After all it was what she had expected. It was very decided, very
short, very cold, and carrying with it no sign of weakness. But it
was of such a letter that she had thought when she resolved that
she would apply to Lord Mistletoe, and endeavour to put the whole
family of Trefoil in arms. She had been,--so she had assured
herself,--quite sure that that kind, loving response which she had
solicited, would not be given to her. But yet the stern fact, now
that it was absolutely in her hands, almost overwhelmed her. She
could not restrain the dull dead look of heart-breaking sorrow
which for a few moments clouded her face,--a look which took away
all her beauty, lengthening her cheeks, and robbing her eyes of
that vivacity which it was the task of her life to assume. "Is
anything the matter, my dear?" asked Mrs. Connop Green.

Then she made a final effort,--an heroic effort. "What do you
think, mamma?" she said, paying no attention to her cousin's
inquiry.

"What is it, Arabella?"

"Jack got some injury that day at Peltry, and is so lame that they
don't know whether he'll ever put his foot to the ground again"

"Poor fellow," said Mr. Green. "Who is Jack?"

"Jack is a horse, Mr. Green; and such a horse that one cannot but
be sorry for him. Poor Jack! I don't know any Christian whose
lameness would be such a nuisance."

"Does Lord Rufford write about his horses?" asked Mrs. Connop
Green, thus betraying that knowledge as to the letter which she had
obtained from the envelope.

"If you must know all the truth about it," said Arabella, "the
horse is my horse, and not Lord Rufford's. And as he is the only
horse I have got, and as he's the dearest horse in all the world,
you must excuse my being a little sorry about him. Poor Jack!"
After that the breakfast was eaten and everybody in the room
believed the story of the horse's lameness--except Lady Augustus.

When breakfast and the loitering after breakfast were well over, so
that she could escape without exciting any notice, she made her way
up to her bedroom. In a few minutes,--so that again there should be
nothing noticeable,--her mother followed her. But her door was
locked. "It is I, Arabella," said her mother.

"You can't come in at present, I am busy."

"But Arabella."

"You can't come in at present, mamma." Then Lady Augustus slowly
glided away to her own room and there waited for tidings.

The whole form of the girl's face was altered when she was alone.
Her features in themselves were not lovely. Her cheeks and chin
were heavy. Her brow was too low, and her upper lip too long. Her
nose and teeth were good, and would have been very handsome had
they belonged to a man. Her complexion had always been good till it
had been injured by being improved,--and so was the carriage of her
head and the outside lines of her bust and figure, and her large
eyes, though never soft, could be bright and sparkle. Skill had
done much for her and continued effort almost more. But now the
effort was dropped and that which skill had done turned against
her. She was haggard, lumpy, and almost hideous in her bewildered
grief.

Had there been a word of weakness in the short letter she might
have founded upon it some hope. It did not occur to her that he had
had the letter written for him, and she was astonished at its curt
strength. How could he dare to say that she had mistaken him? Had
she not lain in his arms while he embraced her? How could he have
found the courage to say that he had had no thought of marriage
when he had declared to her that he loved her? She must have known
that she had hunted him as a fox is hunted;--and yet she believed
that she was being cruelly ill-used. For a time all that dependence
on Lord Mistletoe and her uncle deserted her. What effect could
they have on a man who would write such a letter as that? Had she
known that the words were the words of his brother-in-law, even
that would have given her some hope.

But what should she do? Whatever steps she took she must take at
once. And she must tell her mother. Her mother's help would be
necessary to her now in whatever direction she might turn her mind.
She almost thought that she would abandon him without another word.
She had been strong in her reliance on family aid till the time for
invoking it had come; but now she believed that it would be
useless. Could it be that such a man as this would be driven into
marriage by the interference of Lord Mistletoe! She would much like
to bring down some punishment on his head; but in doing so she
would cut all other ground from under her own feet. There were
still open to her Patagonia and the Paragon.

She hated the Paragon, and she recoiled with shuddering from the
idea of Patagonia. But as for hating,--she hated Lord Rufford most.
And what was there that she loved? She tried to ask herself some
question even as to that. There certainly was no man for whom she
cared a straw; nor had there been for the last six or eight years.
Even when he was kissing her she was thinking of her built-up hair,
of her pearl powder, her paint, and of possible accidents and
untoward revelations. The loan of her lips had been for use only,
and not for any pleasure which she had even in pleasing him. In her
very swoon she had felt the need of being careful at all points. It
was all labour, and all care,--and, alas, alas, all disappointment!

But there was a future through which she must live. How might she
best avoid the misfortune of poverty for the twenty, thirty, or
forty years which might be accorded to her? What did it matter whom
or what she hated? The housemaid probably did not like cleaning
grates; nor the butcher killing sheep; nor the sempstress stitching
silks. She must live. And if she could only get away from her
mother that in itself would be something. Most people were
distasteful to her, but no one so much as her mother. Here in
England she knew that she was despised among the people with whom
she lived. And now she would be more despised than ever. Her uncle
and aunt, though she disliked them, had been much to her. It was
something,--that annual visit to Mistletoe, though she never
enjoyed it when she was there. But she could well understand that
after such a failure as this, after such a game, played before
their own eyes in their own house, her uncle and her aunt would
drop her altogether. She had played this game so boldly that there
was no retreat. Would it not therefore be better that she should
fly altogether?

There were a time on that morning in which she had made up her mind
that she would write a most affectionate letter to Morton, telling
him that her people had now agreed to his propositions as to
settlement, and assuring him that from henceforward she would be
all his own. She did think that were she to do so she might still
go with him to Patagonia. But, if so, she must do it at once. The
delay had already been almost too long. In that case she would not
say a word in reply to Lord Rufford, and would allow all that to be
as though it had never been. Then again there arose to her mind the
remembrance of Rufford Hall, of all the glories, of the triumph
over everybody. Then again there was the idea of a "forlorn hope."
She thought that she could have brought herself to do it, if only
death would have been the alternative of success when she had
resolved to make the rush.

It was nearly one when she went to her mother and even then she was
undecided. But the joint agony of the solitude and the doubts had
been too much for her and she found herself constrained to seek a
counsellor. "He has thrown you over," said Lady Augustus as soon as
the door was closed.

"Of course he has," said Arabella walking up the room, and again
playing her part even before her mother.

"I knew it would be so."

"You knew nothing of the kind, mamma, your saying so is simply an
untruth. It was you who put me up to it."

"Arabella, that is false."

"It wasn't you, I suppose, who made me throw over Mr. Morton and
Bragton."

"Certainly not."

"That is so like you, mamma. There isn't a single thing that you do
or say that you don't deny afterwards." These little compliments
were so usual among them that at the present moment they excited no
great danger. "There's his letter. I suppose you had better read
it." And she chucked the document to her mother.

"It is very decided," said Lady Augustus.

"It is the falsest, the most impudent, and the most scandalous
letter that a man ever wrote to a woman. I could horsewhip him for
it myself if I could get near him."

"Is it all over, Arabella?"

"All over! What questions you do ask, mamma! No. It is not all
over. I'll stick to him like a leech. He proposed to me as plainly
as any man ever did to any woman. I don't care what people may say
or think. He hasn't heard the last of me; and so he'll find." And
thus in her passion she made up her mind that she would not yet
abandon the hunt.

"What will you do, my dear?"

"What will I do? How am I to say what I will do? If I were standing
near him with a knife in my hand I would stick it into his heart. I
would! Mistaken him! Liar! They talk of girls lying; but what girl
would lie like that?"

"But something must be done"

"If papa were not such a fool as he is, he could manage it all for
me," said Arabella dutifully. "I must see my father and I must
dictate a letter for him. Where is papa?"

"In London, I suppose."

"You must come up to London with me tomorrow. We shall have to go
to his club and get him out. It must be done immediately; and then
I must see Lord Mistletoe, and I will write to the Duke."

"Would it not be better to write to your papa?" said Lady Augustus,
not liking the idea of being dragged away so quickly from
comfortable quarters.

"No; it wouldn't. If you won't go I shall, and you must give me
some money. I shall write to Lord Rufford too."

And so it was at last decided, the wretched old woman being dragged
away up to London on some excuse which the Connop Greens were not
sorry to accept. But on that same afternoon Arabella wrote to Lord
Rufford:

Your letter has amazed me. I cannot understand it. It seems to be
almost impossible that it should really have come from you. How can
you say that I have mistaken you? There has been no mistake. Surely
that letter cannot have been written by you.

Of course I have been obliged to tell my father everything.
                               Arabella.

On the following day at about four in the afternoon the mother and
daughter drove up to the door of Graham's Club in Bond Street, and
there they found Lord Augustus. With considerable difficulty he was
induced to come down from the whist room, and was forced into the
brougham. He was a handsome fat man, with a long grey beard, who
passed his whole life in eating, drinking, and playing whist, and
was troubled by no scruples and no principles. He would not cheat
at cards because it was dangerous and ungentlemanlike, and if
discovered would lead to his social annihilation; but as to paying
money that he owed to tradesmen, it never occurred to him as being
a desirable thing as long as he could get what he wanted without
doing so. He had expended his own patrimony and his wife's fortune,
and now lived on an allowance made to him by his brother. Whatever
funds his wife might have not a shilling of them ever came from
him. When he began to understand something of the nature of the
business on hand, he suggested that his brother, the Duke, could do
what was desirable infinitely better than he could. "He won't think
anything of me," said Lord Augustus.

"We'll make him think something," said Arabella sternly. "You must
do it, papa. They'd turn you out of the club if they knew that you
had refused." Then he looked up in the brougham and snarled at her.
"Papa, you must copy the letter and sign it."

"How am I to know the truth of it all?" he asked.

"It is quite true," said Lady Augustus. There was very much more of
it, but at last he was carried away bodily, and in his daughter's
presence he did write and sign the following letter;--

My Lord,

I have heard from my daughter a story which has surprised me very
much. It appears that she has been staying with you at Rufford
Hall, and again at Mistletoe, and that while at the latter place
you proposed marriage to her. She tells me with heart-breaking
concern that you have now repudiated your own proposition,--not
only once made but repeated. Her condition is most distressing. She
is in all respects your Lordship's equal. As her father I am driven
to ask you what excuse you have to make, or whether she has
interpreted you aright.

                    I have the honour to be,
                      Your very humble servant,
                        Augustus Trefoil.


CHAPTER XXIII

"In these Days one can't make a Man marry"


This was going on while Lord Rufford was shooting in the
neighbourhood of Dillsborough; and when the letter was being put
into its envelope at the lodgings in Orchard Street, his Lordship
was just sitting down to dinner with his guests at the Bush. At the
same time John Morton was lying ill at Bragton;--a fact of which
Arabella was not aware.

The letter from Lord Augustus was put into the post on Saturday
evening; but when that line of action was decided upon by Arabella
she was aware that she must not trust solely to her father. Various
plans were fermenting in her brain; all, or any of which, if
carried out at all, must be carried out at the same time and at
once. There must be no delay, or that final chance of Patagonia
would be gone. The leader of a forlorn hope, though he be ever so
resolved to die in the breach, still makes some preparation for his
escape. Among her plans the first in order was a resolution to see
Lord Mistletoe whom she knew to be in town. Parliament was to meet
in the course of the next week and he was to move the address.
There had been much said about all this at Mistletoe from which she
knew that he was in London preparing himself among the gentlemen at
the Treasury. Then she herself would write to the Duke. She thought
that she could concoct a letter that would move even his heart. She
would tell him that she was a daughter of the house of Trefoil, and
"all that kind of thing." She had it distinctly laid down in her
mind. And then there was another move which she would make before
she altogether threw up the game. She would force herself into Lord
Rufford's presence and throw herself into his arms,--at his feet if
need be,--and force him into compliance. Should she fail, then she,
too, had an idea what a raging woman could do. But her first step
now must be with her cousin Mistletoe. She would not write to the
Duke till she had seen her cousin.

Lord Mistletoe when in London lived at the family house in
Piccadilly, and thither early on the Sunday morning she sent a note
to say that she especially wished to see her cousin and would call
at three o'clock on that day. The messenger brought back word that
Lord Mistletoe would be at home, and exactly at that hour the hired
brougham stopped at the door. Her mother had wished to accompany
her but she had declared that if she could not go alone she would
not go at all. In that she was right; for whatever favour the young
heir to the family honours might retain for his fair cousin, who
was at any rate a Trefoil, he had none for his uncle's wife. She
was shown into his own sitting-room on the ground floor, and then
he immediately joined her. "I wouldn't have you shown upstairs," he
said, "because I understand from your note that you want to see me
in particular."

"That is so kind of you."

Lord Mistletoe was a young man about thirty, less in stature than
his father or uncle, but with the same handsome inexpressive face.
Almost all men take to some line in life. His father was known as a
manager of estates; his uncle as a whist-player; he was minded to
follow the steps of his grandfather and be a statesman. He was
eaten up by no high ambition but lived in the hope that by
perseverance he might live to become a useful Under Secretary, and
perhaps, ultimately, a Privy Seal. As he was well educated and
laborious, and had no objection to sitting for five hours together
in the House of Commons with nothing to do and sometimes with very
little to hear, it was thought by his friends that he would
succeed. "And what is it I can do?" he said with that affable smile
to which he had already become accustomed as a government
politician.

"I am in great trouble," said Arabella, leaving her hand for a
moment in his as she spoke.

"I am sorry for that. What sort of trouble?" He knew that his uncle
and his aunt's family were always short of money, and was already
considering to what extent he would go in granting her petition.

"Do you know Lord Rufford?"

"Lord Rufford! Yes;--I know him; but very slightly. My father knows
him very much better than I do."

"I have just been at Mistletoe, and he was there. My story is so
hard to tell. I had better out with it at once. Lord Rufford has
asked me to be his wife."

"The deuce he has! It's a very fine property and quite
unembarrassed."

"And now he repudiates his engagement" Upon hearing this the young
lord's face became very long. He also had heard something of the
past life of his handsome cousin, though he had always felt kindly
to her. "It was not once only."

"Dear me! I should have thought your father would be the proper
person."

"Papa has written;--but you know what papa is."

"Does the Duke know of it,--or my mother?"

"It partly went on at Mistletoe. I would tell you the whole story
if I knew how." Then she did tell him her story, during the
telling of which he sat profoundly silent. She had gone to stay
with Lady Penwether at Lord Rufford's house, and then he had first
told her of his love. Then they had agreed to meet at Mistletoe,
and she had begged her aunt to receive her. She had not told her
aunt at once, and her aunt had been angry with her because they had
walked together. Then she had told everything to the Duchess and
had begged the Duchess to ask the Duke to speak to Lord Rufford. At
Mistletoe Lord Rufford had twice renewed his offer,--and she had
then accepted him. But the Duke had not spoken to him before he
left the place. She owned that she thought the Duchess had been a
little hard to her. Of course she did not mean to complain, but the
Duchess had been angry with her because she had hunted. And now, in
answer to the note from herself, had come a letter from Lord
Rufford in which he repudiated the engagement. "I only got it
yesterday and I came at once to you. I do not think you will see
your cousin treated in that way without raising your hand. You will
remember that I have no brother?"

"But what can I do?" asked Lord Mistletoe. She had taken great
trouble with her face, so that she was able to burst out into
tears. She had on a veil which partly concealed her. She did not
believe in the effect of a pocket handkerchief, but sat with her
face half averted. "Tell him what you think about it," she said.

"Such engagements, Arabella," he said, "should always be
authenticated by a third party. It is for that reason that a girl
generally refers her lover to her father before she allows herself
to be considered as engaged."

"Think what my position has been! I wanted to refer him to my uncle
and asked the Duchess."

"My mother must have had some reason. I'm sure she must. There
isn't a woman in London knows how such things should be done better
than my mother. I can write to Lord Rufford and ask him for an
explanation; but I do not see what good it would do."

"If you were in earnest about it he would be--afraid of you."

"I don't think he would in the least. If I were to make a noise
about it, it would only do you harm. You wouldn't wish all the
world to know that he had--jilted me! I don't care what the world
knows. Am I to put up with such treatment as that and do nothing?
Do you like to see your cousin treated in that way?"

"I don't like it at all. Lord Rufford is a good sort of man in his
way, and has a large property. I wish with all my heart that it had
come off all right; but in these days one can't make a man marry.
There used to be the alternative of going out and being shot at;
but that is over now."

"And a man is to do just as he pleases?"

"I am afraid so. If a man is known to have behaved badly to a girl,
public opinion will condemn him."

"Can anything be worse than this treatment of me?" Lord Mistletoe
could not tell her that he had alluded to absolute knowledge and
that at present he had no more than her version of the story;--or
that the world would require more than that before the general
condemnation of which he had spoken would come. So he sat in
silence and shook his head. "And you think that I should put up
with it quietly!"

"I think that your father should see the man." Arabella shook her
head contemptuously. "If you wish it I will write to my mother."

"I would rather trust to my uncle."

"I don't know what he could do;--but I will write to him if you
please."

"And you won't see Lord Rufford?"

He sat silent for a minute or two during which she pressed him over
and over again to have an interview with her recreant lover,
bringing up all the arguments that she knew, reminding him of their
former affection for each other, telling him that she had no
brother of her own, and that her own father was worse than useless
in such a matter. A word or two she said of the nature of the prize
to be gained, and many words as to her absolute right to regard
that prize as her own. But at last he refused. "I am not the person
to do it," he said. "Even if I were your brother I should not be
so,--unless with the view of punishing him for his conduct;--in
which place the punishment to you would be worse than any I could
inflict on him. It cannot be good that any young lady should have
her name in the mouths of all the lovers of gossip in the country."

She was going to burst out at him in her anger, but before the
words were out of her mouth she remembered herself. She could not
afford to make enemies and certainly not an enemy of him. "Perhaps,
then," she said, "you had better tell your mother all that I have
told you. I will write to the Duke myself."

And so she left him, and as she returned to Orchard Street in the
brougham, she applied to him every term of reproach she could bring
to mind. He was selfish, and a coward, and utterly devoid of all
feeling of family honour. He was a prig, and unmanly, and false. A
real cousin would have burst out into a passion and have declared
himself ready to seize Lord Rufford by the throat and shake him
into instant matrimony. But this man, through whose veins water was
running instead of blood, had no feeling, no heart, no capability
for anger! Oh, what a vile world it was! A little help,--so very
little,--would have made everything straight for her! If her aunt
had only behaved at Mistletoe as aunts should behave, there would
have been no difficulty. In her misery she thought that the world
was more cruel to her than to any other person in it.

On her arrival at home she was astounded by a letter that she found
there,--a letter of such a nature that it altogether drove out of
her head the purpose which she had of writing to the Duke on that
evening. The letter was from John Morton and now reached her
through the lawyer to whom it had been sent by private hand for
immediate delivery. It ran as follows:

Dearest Arabella,

I am very ill,--so ill that Dr. Fanning who has come down from
London, has, I think, but a poor opinion of my case. He does not
say that it is hopeless,--and that is all. I think it right to tell
you this, as my affection for you is what it always has been. If
you wish to see me, you and your mother had better come to Bragton
at once. You can telegraph. I am too weak to write more.

                         Yours most affectionately,
                                 John Morton.

P.S. There is nothing infectious.

"John Morton is dying," she almost screamed out to her mother.

"Dying!"

"So he says. Oh, what an unfortunate wretch I am! Everything that
touches me comes to grief. Then she burst out into a flood of true
unfeigned tears.

"It won't matter so much," said Lady Augustus, "if you mean to
write to the Duke and go on with this other--affair."

"Oh, mamma, how can you talk in that way?"

"Well; my dear; you know--"

"I am heartless. I know that. But you are ten times worse. Think
how I have treated him!"

"I don't want him to die, my dear; but what can I say? I can't do
him any good. It is all in God's hands, and if he must die--why, it
won't make so much difference to you. I have looked upon all that
as over for a long time."

"It is not over. After all he has liked me better than any of them.
He wants me to go to Bragton."

"That of course is out of the question."

"It is not out of the question at all. I shall go."

"Arabella!"

"And you must go with me, mamma."

"I will do no such thing," said Lady Augustus, to whom the idea of
Bragton was terrible.

"Indeed you must. He has asked me to go, and I shall do it. You can
hardly let me go alone."

"And what will you say to Lord Rufford?"

"I don't care for Lord Rufford. Is he to prevent my going where I
please?"

"And your father,--and the Duke,--and the Duchess! How can you go
there after all that you have been doing since you left?"

"What do I care for the Duke and the Duchess. It has come to that,
that I care for no one. They are all throwing me over. That little
wretch Mistletoe will do nothing. This man really loved me. He has
never treated me badly. Whether he live or whether he die, he has
been true to me." Then she sat and thought of it all. What would
Lord Rufford care for her father's letter? If her cousin Mistletoe
would not stir in her behalf what chance had she with her uncle?
And, though she had thoroughly despised her cousin, she had
understood and had unconsciously believed much that he had said to
her. "In these days one can't make a man marry!" What horrid days
they were! But John Morton would marry her to-morrow if he were
well,--in spite of all her ill usage! Of course he would die and so
she would again be overwhelmed; but yet she would go and see him.
As she determined to do so there was something even in her hard
callous heart softer than the love of money and more human than the
dream of an advantageous settlement in life.


CHAPTER XXIV

The Senator's second Letter


In the mean time our friend the Senator, up in London, was much
distracted in his mind, finding no one to sympathise with him in
his efforts, conscious of his own rectitude of purpose, always
brave against others, and yet with a sad doubt in his own mind
whether it could be possible that he should always be right and
everybody around him wrong.

Coming away from Mr. Mainwaring's dinner he had almost quarrelled
with John Morton, or rather John Morton had altogether quarrelled
with him. On their way back from Dillsborough to Bragton the
minister elect to Patagonia had told him, in so many words, that he
had misbehaved himself at the clergyman's house. "Did I say
anything that was untrue?" asked the Senator--"Was I inaccurate in
my statements? If so no man alive will be more ready to recall what
he has said and to ask for pardon." Mr. Morton endeavoured to
explain to him that it was not his statements which were at fault
so much as the opinions based on them and the language in which
those opinions were given. But the Senator could not be made to
understand that a man had not a right to his opinions, and a right
also to the use of forcible language as long as he abstained from
personalities. "It was extremely personal,--all that you said about
the purchase of livings," said Morton. "How was I to know that?"
rejoined the Senator. "When in private society I inveigh against
pickpockets I cannot imagine, sir, that there should be a
pickpocket in the company." As the Senator said this he was
grieving in his heart at the trouble he had occasioned, and was
almost repenting the duties he had imposed on himself; but, yet,
his voice was bellicose and antagonistic. The conversation was
carried on till Morton found himself constrained to say that though
he entertained great personal respect for his guest he could not go
with him again into society. He was ill at the time,--though
neither he himself knew it nor the Senator. On the next morning Mr.
Gotobed returned to London without seeing his host, and before the
day was over Mr. Nupper was at Morton's bedside. He was already
suffering from gastric fever.

The Senator was in truth unhappy as he returned to town. The
intimacy between him and the late Secretary of Legation at his
capital had arisen from a mutual understanding between them that
each was to be allowed to see the faults and to admire the virtues
of their two countries, and that conversation between them was to
be based on the mutual system. But nobody can, in truth, endure to
be told of shortcomings,--either on his own part or on that of his
country. He himself can abuse himself, or his country; but he
cannot endure it from alien lips. Mr. Gotobed had hardly said a
word about England which Morton himself might not have said,--but
such words coming from an American had been too much even for the
guarded temper of an unprejudiced and phlegmatic Englishman. The
Senator as he returned alone to London understood something of
this,--and when a few days later he heard that the friend who had
quarrelled with him was ill, he was discontented with himself and
sore at heart.

But he had his task to perform, and he meant to perform it to the
best of his ability. In his own country he had heard vehement abuse
of the old land from the lips of politicians, and had found at the
same time almost on all sides great social admiration for the
people so abused. He had observed that every Englishman of
distinction was received in the States as a demigod, and that some
who were not very great in their own land had been converted into
heroes in his. English books were read there; English laws were
obeyed there; English habits were cultivated, often at the expense
of American comfort. And yet it was the fashion among orators to
speak of the English as a worn-out, stupid and enslaved people. He
was a thoughtful man and all this had perplexed him;--so that he
had obtained leave from his State and from Congress to be absent
during a part of a short Session, and had come over determined to
learn as much as he could. Everything he heard and almost
everything he saw offended him at some point. And, yet in the midst
of it all, he was conscious that he was surrounded by people who
claimed and made good their claims to superiority. What was a lord,
let him be ever so rich and have ever so many titles? And yet, even
with such a popinjay as Lord Rufford, he himself felt the lordship.
When that old farmer at the hunt breakfast had removed himself and
his belongings to the other side of the table the Senator, though
aware of the justice of his cause, had been keenly alive to the
rebuke. He had expressed himself very boldly at the rector's house
at Dillsborough, and had been certain that not a word of real
argument had been possible in answer to him. But yet he left the
house with a feeling almost of shame, which had grown into real
penitence before he reached Bragton. He knew that he had already
been condemned by Englishmen as ill-mannered, ill-conditioned and
absurd. He was as much alive as any man to the inward distress of
heart which such a conviction brings with it to all sensitive
minds. And yet he had his purpose and would follow it out. He was
already hard at work on the lecture which he meant to deliver
somewhere in London before he went back to his home duties, and had
made it known to the world at large that he meant to say some sharp
things of the country he was visiting.

Soon after his return to town he was present at the opening of
Parliament, Mr. Mounser Green of the Foreign Office having seen
that he was properly accommodated with a seat. Then he went down to
the election of a member of Parliament in the little borough of
Quinborough. It was unfortunate for Great Britain, which was on its
trial, and unpleasant also for the poor Senator who had appointed
himself judge, that such a seat should have fallen vacant at that
moment. Quinborough was a little town of 3,000 inhabitants
clustering round the gates of a great Whig Marquis, which had been
spared,--who can say why?--at the first Reform Bill, and having but
one member had come out scatheless from the second. Quinborough
still returned its one member with something less than 500
constituents, and in spite of household suffrage and the ballot had
always returned the member favoured by the Marquis. This nobleman,
driven no doubt by his conscience to make some return to the
country for the favour shown to his family, had always sent to
Parliament some useful and distinguished man who without such
patronage might have been unable to serve his country. On the
present occasion a friend of the people,--so called,--an unlettered
demagogue such as is in England in truth distasteful to all
classes, had taken himself down to Quinborough as a candidate in
opposition to the nobleman's nominee. He had been backed by all the
sympathies of the American Senator who knew nothing of him or his
unfitness, and nothing whatever of the patriotism of the Marquis.
But he did know what was the population and what the constituency
of Liverpool, and also what were those of Quinborough. He supposed
that he knew what was the theory of representation in England, and
he understood correctly that hitherto the member for Quinborough
had been the nominee of that great lord. These things were horrid
to him. There was to his thinking a fiction,--more than fiction, a
falseness,--about all this which not only would but ought to bring
the country prostrate to the dust. When the working-man's
candidate, whose political programme consisted of a general
disbelief in all religions, received--by ballot!--only nine votes
from those 500 voters, the Senator declared to himself that the
country must be rotten to the core. It was not only that Britons
were slaves,--but that they "hugged their chains." To the gentleman
who assured him that the Right Honble. -- -- would make a much
better member of Parliament than Tom Bobster the plasterer from
Shoreditch he in vain tried to prove that the respective merits of
the two men had nothing to do with the question. It had been the
duty of those 500 voters to show to the world that in the exercise
of a privilege entrusted to them for the public service they had
not been under the dictation of their rich neighbour. Instead of
doing so they had, almost unanimously, grovelled in the dust at
their rich neighbour's feet. "There are but one or two such places
left in all England," said the gentleman. "But those one or two,"
answered the Senator, "were wilfully left there by the Parliament
which represented the whole nation."

Then, quite early in the Session, immediately after the voting of
the address, a motion had been made by the Government of the day
for introducing household suffrage into the counties. No one knew
the labour to which the Senator subjected himself in order that he
might master all these peculiarities,--that he might learn how men
became members of Parliament and how they ceased to be so, in what
degree the House of Commons was made up of different elements, how
it came to pass, that though there was a House of Lords, so many
lords sat in the lower chamber. All those matters which to ordinary
educated Englishmen are almost as common as the breath of their
nostrils, had been to him matter of long and serious study. And as
the intent student, who has zealously buried himself for a week
among commentaries and notes, feels himself qualified to question
Porson and to Be-Bentley Bentley, so did our Senator believe, while
still he was groping among the rudiments, that he had all our
political intricacies at his fingers' ends. When he heard the
arguments used for a difference of suffrage in the towns and
counties, and found that even they who were proposing the change
were not ready absolutely to assimilate the two and still held that
rural ascendency,--feudalism as he called it,--should maintain
itself by barring a fraction of the House of Commons from the votes
of the majority, he pronounced the whole thing to be a sham. The
intention was, he said, to delude the people. "It is all coming,"
said the gentleman who was accustomed to argue with him in those
days. He spoke in a sad vein, which was in itself distressing to
the Senator. "Why should you be in such a hurry?" The Senator
suggested that if the country delayed much longer this imperative
task of putting its house in order, the roof would have fallen in
before the repairs were done. Then he found that this gentleman
too, avoided his company, and declined to sit with him any more in
the Gallery of the House of Commons.

Added to all this was a private rankling, sore in regard to Goarly
and Bearside. He had now learned nearly all the truth about Goarly,
and had learned also that Bearside had known the whole when he had
last visited that eminent lawyer's office. Goarly had deserted his
supporters and had turned evidence against Scrobby, his partner in
iniquity. That Goarly was a rascal the Senator had acknowledged. So
far the general opinion down in Rufford had been correct. But he
could get nobody to see,--or at any rate could get nobody to
acknowledge,--that the rascality of Goarly had had nothing to do
with the question as he had taken it up. The man's right to his own
land,--his right to be protected from pheasants and foxes, from
horses and hounds,--was not lessened by the fact that he was a poor
ignorant squalid dishonest wretch. Mr. Gotobed had now received a
bill from Bearside for 42l. 7s. 9d. for costs in the case, leaving
after the deduction of 15l. already paid a sum of 27l. 7s. 9d.
stated to be still due. And this was accompanied by an intimation
that as he, Mr. Gotobed, was a foreigner soon about to leave the
country, Mr. Bearside must request that his claim might be settled
quite at once. No one could be less likely than our Senator to
leave a foreign country without paying his bills. He had quarrelled
with Morton,--who also at this time was too ill to have given him
much assistance. Though he had become acquainted with half
Dillsborough, there was nobody there to whom he could apply. Thus
he was driven to employ a London attorney, and the London attorney
told him that he had better pay Bearside;--the Senator remembering
at the time that he would also have to pay the London attorney for
his advice. He gave this second lawyer authority to conclude the
matter, and at last Bearside accepted 20 pounds. When the London
attorney refused to take anything for his trouble, the Senator felt
such conduct almost as an additional grievance. In his existing
frame of mind he would sooner have expended a few more dollars than
be driven to think well of anything connected with English law.

It was immediately after he had handed over the money in
liquidation of Bearside's claim that he sat down to write a further
letter to his friend and correspondent Josiah Scroome. His letter
was not written in the best of tempers; but still, through it all,
there was a desire to be just, and an anxiety to abstain from the
use of hard phrases. The letter was as follows;--

Fenton's Hotel, St. James' Street, London,
Feb. 12, 187-.

My Dear Sir,

Since I last wrote I have had much to trouble me and little perhaps
to compensate me for my trouble. I told you, I think, in one of my
former letters that wherever I went I found myself able to say what
I pleased as to the peculiarities of this very peculiar people. I
am not now going to contradict what I said then. Wherever I go I do
speak out, and my eyes are still in my head and my head is on my
shoulders. But I have to acknowledge to myself that I give offence.
Mr. Morton, whom you knew at the British Embassy in Washington,--
and who I fear is now very ill,--parted from me, when last I saw
him, in anger because of certain opinions I had expressed in a
clergyman's house, not as being ill-founded but as being
antagonistic to the clergyman himself. This I feel to be
unreasonable. And in the neighbourhood of Mr. Morton's house, I
have encountered the ill will of a great many, not for having
spoken untruth, for that I have never heard alleged, but because I
have not been reticent in describing the things which I have seen.

I told you, I think, that I had returned to Mr. Morton's
neighbourhood with the view of defending an oppressed man against
the power of the lord who was oppressing him. Unfortunately for me
the lord, though a scapegrace, spends his money freely and is a
hospitable kindly-hearted honest fellow; whereas the injured victim
has turned out to be a wretched scoundrel. Scoundrel though he is,
he has still been ill used; and the lord, though good-natured, has
been a tyrant. But the poor wretch has thrown me over and sold
himself to the other side and I have been held up to ignominy by
all the provincial newspapers. I have also had to pay through the
nose 175 dollars for my quixotism--a sum which I cannot very well
afford. This money I have lost solely with the view of defending
the weak, but nobody with whom I have discussed the matter seems to
recognise the purity of my object. I am only reminded that I have
put myself into the same boat with a rascal.

I feel from day to day how thoroughly I could have enjoyed a
sojourn in this country if I had come here without any line of duty
laid down for myself. Could I have swum with the stream and have
said yes or no as yes or no were expected, I might have revelled in
generous hospitality. Nothing can be pleasanter than the houses
here if you will only be as idle as the owners of them. But when
once you show them that you have an object, they become afraid of
you. And industry,--in such houses as I now speak of, is a crime.
You are there to glide through the day luxuriously in the house,--
or to rush through it impetuously on horseback or with a gun if you
be a sportsman. Sometimes, when I have asked questions about the
most material institutions of the country, I have felt that I was
looked upon with absolute loathing. This is disagreeable.

And yet I find it more easy in this country to sympathise with the
rich than with the poor. I do not here describe my own actual
sympathies, but only the easiness with which they might be evoked.
The rich are at any rate pleasant. The poor are very much the
reverse. There is no backbone of mutiny in them against the
oppression to which they are subjected; but only the whining of a
dog that knows itself to be a slave and pleads with his soft paw
for tenderness from his master; or the futile growlings of the
caged tiger who paces up and down before his bars and has long ago
forgotten to attempt to break them. They are a long-suffering race,
who only now and then feel themselves stirred up to contest a point
against their masters on the basis of starvation. 'We. won't work
but on such and such terms, and, if we cannot get them, we will lie
down and die.' That I take it is the real argument of a strike. But
they never do lie down and die. If one in every parish, one in
every county, would do so, then the agricultural labourers of the
country might live almost as well as the farmers' pigs.

I was present the other day at the opening of Parliament. It was a
very grand ceremony, though the Queen did not find herself well
enough to do her duty in person. But the grandeur was everything. A
royal programme was read from the foot of the throne, of which even
I knew all the details beforehand, having read them in the
newspapers. Two opening speeches were then made by two young
lords,--not after all so very young,--which sounded like lessons
recited by schoolboys. There was no touch of eloquence,--no
approach to it. It was clear that either of them would have been
afraid to attempt the idiosyncrasy of passionate expression. But
they were exquisitely dressed and had learned their lessons to a
marvel. The flutter of the ladies' dresses, and the presence of the
peers, and the historic ornamentation of the house were all very
pleasant; but they reminded me of a last year's nut, of which the
outside appearance has been mellowed and improved by time,--but the
fruit inside has withered away and become tasteless.

Since that I have been much interested with an attempt,--a further
morsel of cobbling, which is being done to improve the representation
of the people. Though it be but cobbling, if it be in the right
direction one is glad of it. I do not know how far you may have studied
the theories and system of the British House of Commons, but, for
myself, I must own that it was not till the other day that I was aware
that, though it acts together as one whole, it is formed of two
distinct parts. The one part is sent thither from the towns by
household suffrage; and, this, which may be said to be the healthier of
the two as coming more directly from the people, is nevertheless
disfigured by a multitude of anomalies. Population hardly bears upon
the question. A town with 15,000 inhabitants has two members,--whereas
another with 400,000 has only three, and another with 50,000 has one.
But there is worse disorder than this. In the happy little village of
Portarlington 200 constituents choose a member among them, or have one
chosen for them by their careful lord; whereas in the great city of
London something like 25,000 registered electors only send four to
Parliament. With this the country is presumed to be satisfied. But in
the counties, which by a different system send up the other part of the
House, there exists still a heavy property qualification for voting.
There is, apparent to all, a necessity for change here;--but the change
proposed is simply a reduction of the qualification, so that the rural
labourer, whose class is probably the largest, as it is the poorest, in
the country,--is still disfranchised, and will remain so, unless it be
his chance to live within the arbitrary line of some so-called borough.
For these boroughs, you must know, are sometimes strictly confined to
the aggregations of houses which constitute the town, but sometimes
stretch out their arms so as to include rural districts. The divisions
I am assured were made to suit the aspirations of political magnates
when the first Reform Bill was passed! What is to be expected of a
country in which such absurdities are loved and sheltered?

I am still determined to express my views on these matters before I
leave England, and am with great labour preparing a lecture on the
subject. I am assured that I shall not be debarred from my
utterances because that which I say is unpopular. I am told that as
long as I do not touch Her Majesty or Her Majesty's family, or the
Christian religion,--which is only the second Holy of Holies,--I
may say anything. Good taste would save me from the former offence,
and my own convictions from the latter. But my friend who so
informs me doubts whether many will come to hear me. He tells me
that the serious American is not popular here, whereas the joker is
much run after. Of that I must take my chance. In all this I am
endeavouring to do a duty,--feeling every day more strongly my own
inadequacy. Were I to follow my own wishes I should return by the
next steamer to my duties at home.

                   Believe me to be,
                     Dear Sir,
                       With much sincerity,
                         Yours truly,
                           Elias Gotobed.


CHAPTER XXV

Providence interferes


The battle was carried on very fiercely in Mr. Masters' house in
Dillsborough, to the misery of all within it; but the conviction
gained ground with every one there that Mary was to be sent to
Cheltenham for some indefinite time. Dolly and Kate seemed to think
that she was to go, never to return. Six months, which had been
vaguely mentioned as the proposed period of her sojourn, was to
them almost as indefinite as eternity. The two girls had been
intensely anxious for the marriage, wishing to have Larry for a
brother, looking forward with delight to their share in the
unrestricted plenteousness of Chowton Farm, longing to be allowed
to consider themselves at home among the ricks and barns and wide
fields; but at this moment things had become so tragic that they
were cowed and unhappy,--not that Mary should still refuse Larry
Twentyman, but that she should be going away for so long a time.
They could quarrel with their elder sister while the assurance was
still with them that she would be there to forgive them;--but now
that she was going away and that it had come to be believed by both
of them that poor Lawrence had no chance, they were sad and
downhearted. In all that misery the poor attorney had the worst of
it. Mary was free from her stepmother's zeal and her stepmother's
persecution at any rate at night; but the poor father was hardly
allowed to sleep. For Mrs. Masters never gave up her game as
altogether lost. Though she might be driven alternately into
towering passion and prostrate hysterics, she would still come
again to the battle. A word of encouragement would, she said, bring
Larry Twentyman back to his courtship, and that word might be
spoken, if Mary's visit to Cheltenham were forbidden. What did the
letter signify, or all the girl's protestations? Did not everybody
know how self-willed young women were; but how they could be
brought round by proper usage? Let Mary once be made to understand
that she would not be allowed to be a fine lady, and then she would
marry Mr. Twentyman quick enough. But this "Ushanting," this
journeying to Cheltenham in order that nothing might be done, was
the very way to promote the disease! This Mrs. Masters said in
season and out of season, night and day, till the poor husband
longed for his daughter's departure, in order that that point might
at any rate be settled. In all these disputes he never quite
yielded. Though his heart sank within him he was still firm. He
would turn his back to his wife and let her run on with her
arguments without a word of answer,--till at last he would bounce
out of bed and swear that if she did not leave him alone he would
go and lock himself into the office and sleep with his head on the
office desk.

Mrs. Masters was almost driven to despair;--but at last there came
to her a gleam of hope, most unexpectedly. It had been settled that
Mary should make her journey on Friday the 12th February and that
Reginald Morton was again to accompany her. This in itself was to
Mrs. Masters an aggravation of the evil which was being done. She
was not in the least afraid of Reginald Morton; but this attendance
on Mary was in the eyes of her stepmother a cockering of her up, a
making a fine lady of her, which was in itself of all things the
most pernicious. If Mary must go to Cheltenham, why could she not
go by herself, second class, like any other young woman? "Nobody
would eat her,"--Mrs. Masters declared. But Reginald was firm in
his purpose of accompanying her. He had no objection whatever to
the second class if Mr. Masters preferred it. But as he meant to
make the journey on the same day of course they would go together.
Mr. Masters said that he was very much obliged. Mrs. Masters
protested that it was all trash from beginning to the end.

Then there came a sudden disruption to all these plans, and a
sudden renewal of her hopes to Mrs. Masters which for one half day
nearly restored her to good humour. Lady Ushant wrote to postpone
the visit because she herself had been summoned to Bragton. Her
letter to Mary, though affectionate, was very short. Her
grand-nephew John, the head of the family, had expressed a desire
to see her, and with that wish she was bound to comply. Of course,
she said, she would see Mary at Bragton; or if that were not
possible, she herself would come into Dillsborough. She did not
know what might be the length of her visit, but when it was over
she hoped that Mary would return with her to Cheltenham. The old
lady's letter to Reginald was much longer; because in that she had
to speak of the state of John Morton's health,--and of her surprise
that she should be summoned to his bedside. Of course she would
go,--though she could not look forward with satisfaction to a
meeting with the Honble. Mrs. Morton. Then she could not refrain
from alluding to the fact that if "anything were to happen" to John
Morton, Reginald himself would be the Squire of Bragton. Reginald
when he received this at once went over to the attorney's house,
but he did not succeed in seeing Mary. He learned, however, that
they were all aware that the journey had been postponed.

To Mrs. Masters it seemed that all this had been a dispensation of
Providence. Lady Ushant's letter had been received on the Thursday
and Mrs. Masters at once found it expedient to communicate with
Larry Twentyman. She was not excellent herself at the writing of
letters, and therefore she got Dolly to be the scribe. Before the
Thursday evening the following note was sent to Chowton Farm;

Dear Larry,

Pray come and go to the club with father on Saturday. We haven't
seen you for so long! Mother has got something to tell you.

                    Your affectionate friend,
                              Dolly.

When this was received the poor man was smoking his moody pipe in
silence as he roamed about his own farmyard in the darkness of the
night. He had not as yet known any comfort and was still firm in
his purpose of selling the farm. He had been out hunting once or
twice but fancied that people looked at him with peculiar eyes. He
could not ride, though he made one or two forlorn attempts to break
his neck. He did not care in the least whether they found or not;
and when Captain Glomax was held to have disgraced himself
thoroughly by wasting an hour in digging out and then killing a
vixen, he had not a word to say about it. But, as he read Dolly's
note, there came back something of life into his eyes. He had
forsworn the club, but would certainly go when thus invited. He
wrote a scrawl to Dolly, "I'll come," and, having sent it off by
the messenger, tried to trust that there might yet be ground for
hope. Mrs. Masters would not have allowed Dolly to send such a
message without good reason.

On the Friday Mrs. Masters could not abstain from proposing that
Mary's visit to Cheltenham should be regarded as altogether out of
the question. She had no new argument to offer,--except this last
interposition of Providence in her favour. Mr. Masters said that he
did not see why Mary should not return with Lady Ushant. Various
things, however, might happen. John Morton might die, and then who
could tell whether Lady Ushant would ever return to Cheltenham? In
this way the short-lived peace soon came to an end, especially as
Mrs. Masters endeavoured to utilize for general family purposes
certain articles which had been purchased with a view to Mary's
prolonged residence away from home. This was resented by the
attorney, and the peace was short-lived.

On the Saturday Larry came, to the astonishment of Mr. Masters, who
was still in his office at half-past seven. Mrs. Masters at once
got hold of him and conveyed him away into the sacred drawing-room.
"Mary is not going," she said.

"Not going to Cheltenham!"

"It has all been put off. She shan't go at all if I can help it."

"But why has it been put off, Mrs. Masters?"

"Lady Ushant is coming to Bragton. I suppose that poor man is
dying."

"He is very ill certainly."

"And if anything happens there who can say what may happen anywhere
else? Lady Ushant will have something else except Mary to think of,
if her own nephew comes into all the property."

"I didn't know she was such friends with the Squire as that"

"Well;--there it is. Lady Ushant is coming to Bragton and Mary is
not going to Cheltenham." This she said as though the news must be
of vital importance to Larry Twentyman. He stood for awhile
scratching his head as he thought of it. At last it appeared to him
that Mary's continual residence in Dillsborough would of itself
hardly assist him. "I don't see, Mrs. Masters, that that will make
her a bit kinder to me."

"Larry, don't you be a coward,--nor yet soft."

"As for coward, Mrs. Masters, I don't know--"

"I suppose you really do love the girl."

"I do;--I think I've shown that."

"And you haven't changed your mind?"

"Not a bit"

"That's why I speak open to you. Don't you be afraid of her. What's
the letter which a girl like that writes? When she gets tantrums
into her head of course she'll write a letter."

"But there's somebody else, Mrs. Masters.

"Who says so? I say there ain't nobody;--nobody. If anybody tells
you that it's only just to put you off. It's just poetry and books
and rubbish. She wants to be a fine lady."

"I'll make her a lady."

"You make her Mrs. Twentyman, and don't you be made by any one to
give it up. Go to the club with Mr. Masters now, and come here just
the same as usual. Come to-morrow and have a gossip with the girls
together and show that you can keep your pluck up. That's the way
to win her." Larry did go to the club and did think very much of it
as he walked home. He had promised to come on the Sunday afternoon,
but he could not bring himself to believe in that theory of books
and poetry put forward by Mrs. Masters. Books and poetry would not
teach a girl like Mary to reject her suitor if she really loved
him.


CHAPTER XXVI

Lady Ushant at Bragton


On the Sunday Larry came into Dillsborough and had "his gossip with
the girls" according to order;--but it was not very successful.
Mrs. Masters who opened the door for him instructed him in a
special whisper "to talk away just as though he did not care a fig
for Mary." He made the attempt manfully,--but with slight effect.
His love was too genuine, too absorbing, to leave with him the
power which Mrs. Masters assumed him to have when she gave him such
advice. A man cannot walk when he has broken his ankle-bone, let
him be ever so brave in the attempt. Larry's heart was so weighed
that he could not hide the weight. Dolly and Kate had also received
hints and struggled hard to be merry. In the afternoon a walk was
suggested, and Mary complied; but when an attempt was made by the
younger girls to leave the lover and Mary together, she resented it
by clinging closely to Dolly;--and then all Larry's courage
deserted him. Very little good was done on the occasion by Mrs.
Masters' manoeuvres.

On the Monday morning, in compliance with a request made by Lady
Ushant, Mary walked over to Bragton to see her old friend. Mrs.
Masters had declared the request to be very unreasonable. "Who is
to walk five miles and back to see an old woman like that?" To this
Mary had replied that the distance across the fields to Bragton was
only four miles and that she had often walked it with her sisters
for the very pleasure of the walk. "Not in weather like this," said
Mrs. Masters. But the day was well enough. Roads in February are
often a little wet, but there was no rain falling. "I say it's
unreasonable," said Mrs. Masters. "If she can't send a carriage she
oughtn't to expect it." This coming from Mrs. Masters, whose great
doctrine it was that young women ought not to be afraid of work,
was so clearly the effect of sheer opposition that Mary disdained
to answer it. Then she was accused of treating her stepmother with
contempt.

She did walk to Bragton, taking the path by the fields and over the
bridge, and loitering for a few minutes as she leant upon the rail.
It was there and there only that she had seen together the two men
who between them seemed to cloud all her life,--the man whom she
loved and the man who loved her. She knew now,--she thought that
she knew quite well,--that her feelings for Reginald Morton were of
such a nature that she could not possibly become the wife of any
one else. But had she not seen him for those few minutes on this
spot, had he not fired her imagination by telling her of his desire
to go back with her over the sites which they had seen together
when she was a child, she would not, she thought, have been driven
to make to herself so grievous a confession. In that case it might
have been that she would have brought herself to give her hand to
the suitor of whom all her friends approved. And then with infinite
tenderness she thought of all Larry's virtues,--and especially of
that great virtue in a woman's eyes, the constancy of his devotion
to herself. She did love him,--but with a varied love,--a love
which was most earnest in wishing his happiness, which would have
been desirous of the closest friendship if only nothing more were
required. She swore to herself a thousand times that she did not
look down upon him because he was only a farmer, that she did not
think herself in any way superior to him. But it was impossible
that she should consent to be his wife. And then she thought of the
other man,--with feelings much less kind. Why had he thrust himself
upon her life and disturbed her? Why had he taught her to think
herself unfit to mate with this lover who was her equal? Why had he
assured her that were she to do so her old friends would be
revolted? Why had he exacted from her a promise,--a promise which
was sacred to her,--that she would not so give herself away? Yes;--
the promise was certainly sacred; but he had been cold and cruel in
forcing it from her lips. What business was it of his? Why should
he have meddled with her? In the shallow streamlet of her lowly
life the waters might have glided on, slow but smoothly, had he not
taught them to be ambitious of a rapider, grander course. Now they
were disturbed by mud, and there could be no pleasure in them.

She went on over the bridge, and round by the shrubbery to the hall
door which was opened to her by Mrs. Hopkins. Yes, Lady Ushant was
there;--but the young Squire was very ill and his aunt was then
with him. Mr. Reginald was in the library. Would Miss Masters be
shown in there, or would she go up to Lady Ushant's own room? Of
course she replied that she would go up-stairs and there wait for
Lady Ushant.

When she was found by her friend she was told at length the story
of all the circumstances which had brought Lady Ushant to Bragton.
When John Morton had first been taken ill,--before any fixed idea
of danger had occurred to himself or to others,--his grandmother
had come to him. Then, as he gradually became weaker he made
various propositions which were all of them terribly distasteful to
the old woman. In the first place he had insisted on sending for
Miss Trefoil. Up to this period Mary Masters had hardly heard the
name of Miss Trefoil, and almost shuddered as she was at once
immersed in all these family secrets. "She is to be here
to-morrow," said Lady Ushant.

"Oh dear,--how sad!"

"He insists upon it, and she is coming. She was here before, and it
now turns out that all the world knew that they were engaged. That
was no secret, for everybody had heard it"

"And where is Mrs. Morton now?" Then Lady Ushant went on with her
story. The sick man had insisted on making his will and had
declared his purpose of leaving the property to his cousin
Reginald. As Lady Ushant said, there was no one else to whom he
could leave it with any propriety;--but this had become matter for
bitter contention between the old woman and her grandson.

"Who did she think should have it?" asked Mary.

"Ah;--that I don't know. That he has never told me. But she has had
the wickedness to say,--oh,--such things of Reginald. I knew all
that before;---but that she should repeat them now, is terrible. I
suppose she wanted it for some of her own people. But it was so
horrible you know,--when he was so ill! Then he said that he should
send for me, so that what is left of the family might be together.
After that she went away in anger. Mrs. Hopkins says that she did
not even see him the morning she left Bragton."

"She was always high-tempered," said Mary.

"And dictatorial beyond measure. She nearly broke my poor dear
father's heart. And then she left the house because he would not
shut his doors against Reginald's mother. And now I hardly know
what I am to do here, or what I must say to this young lady when
she comes to-morrow."

"Is she coming alone?"

"We don't know. She has a mother, Lady Augustus Trefoil, but
whether Lady Augustus will accompany her daughter we have not
heard. Reginald says certainly not, or they would have told us so.
You have seen Reginald?"

"No, Lady Ushant."

"You must see him. He is here now. Think what a difference it will
make to him."

"But Lady Ushant,--is he so bad?"

"Dr. Fanning almost says that there is no hope. This poor young
woman that is coming;--what am I to say to her? He has made his
will. That was done before I came. I don't know why he shouldn't
have sent for your father, but he had a gentleman down from town. I
suppose he will leave her something; but it is a great thing that
Bragton should remain in the family. Oh dear, oh dear,--if any one
but a Morton were to be here it would break my heart. Reginald is
the only one left now of the old branch. He's getting old and he
ought to marry. It is so serious when there's an old family
property."

"I suppose he will--only--"

"Yes; exactly. One can't even think about it while this poor young
man is lying so ill. Mrs. Morton has been almost like his mother,
and has lived upon the Bragton property,--absolutely lived upon
it,--and now she is away from him because he chooses to do what he
likes with his own. Is it not awful? And she would not put her foot
in the house if she knew that Reginald was here. She told Mrs.
Hopkins as much, and she said that she wouldn't so much as write a
line to me. Poor fellow; he wrote it himself. And now he thinks so
much about it. When Dr. Fanning went back to London yesterday I
think he took some message to her."

Mary remained there till lunch was announced but refused to go down
into the parlour, urging that she was expected home for dinner.
"And there is no chance for Mr. Twentyman?" asked Lady Ushant. Mary
shook her head. "Poor man! I do feel sorry for him as everybody
speaks so well of him. Of course, my dear, I have nothing to say
about it. I don't think girls should ever be in a hurry to marry,
and if you can't love him--"

"Dear Lady Ushant, it is quite settled."

"Poor young man! But you must go and see Reginald." Then she was
taken into the library and did see Reginald. Were she to avoid
him,--specially,--she would tell her tale almost as plainly as
though she were to run after him. He greeted her kindly, almost
affectionately, expressing his extreme regret that his visit to
Cheltenham should have been postponed and a hope that she would be
much at Bragton. "The distance is so great, Reginald," said Lady
Ushant.

"I can drive her over. It is a long walk, and I had made up my mind
to get Runciman's little phaeton. I shall order it for to-morrow if
Miss Masters will come." But Miss Masters would not agree to this.
She would walk over again some day as she liked the walk, but no
doubt she would only be in the way if she were to come often.

"I have told her about Miss Trefoil," said Lady Ushant. "You know,
my dear, I look upon you almost as one of ourselves because you
lived here so long. But perhaps you had better postpone coming
again till she has gone."

"Certainly, Lady Ushant"

"It might be difficult to explain. I don't suppose she will stay
long. Perhaps she will go back the same day. I am sure I shan't
know what to say to her. But when anything is fixed I will send you
in word by the postman."

Reginald would have walked back with her across the bridge but that
he had promised to go to his cousin immediately after lunch. As it
was he offered to accompany her a part of the way, but was stopped
by his aunt, greatly to Mary's comfort. He was now more beyond her
reach than ever,--more utterly removed from her. He would probably
become Squire of Bragton, and she, in her earliest days, had heard
the late Squire spoken of as though he were one of the potentates
of the earth. She had never thought it possible; but now it was
less possible than ever. There was something in his manner to her
almost protective, almost fatherly,--as though he had some
authority over her. Lady Ushant had authority once, but he had
none. In every tone of his voice she felt that she heard an
expression of interest in her welfare, but it was the interest
which a grown-up person takes in a child, or a superior in an
inferior. Of course he was her superior, but yet the tone of his
voice was distasteful to her. As she walked back to Dillsborough
she told herself that she would not go again to Bragton without
assuring herself that he was not there.

When she reached home many questions were asked of her, but she
told nothing of the secrets of the Morton family which had been so
openly confided to her. She would only say that she was afraid that
Mr. John Morton was very ill.


CHAPTER XXVII

Arabella again at Bragton


Arabella Trefoil had adhered without flinching to the purpose she
had expressed of going down to Bragton to see the sick man. And yet
at that very time she was in the midst of her contest with Lord
Rufford. She was aware that a correspondence was going on between
her father and the young lord and that her father had demanded an
interview. She was aware also that the matter had been discussed at
the family mansion in Piccadilly, the Duke having come to London
for the purpose, and that the Duke and his brother, who hardly ever
spoke to each other, had absolutely had a conference. And this
conference had had results. The Duke had not himself consented to
interfere, but he had agreed to a compromise proposed by his son.
Lord Augustus should be authorised to ask Lord Rufford to meet him
in the library of the Piccadilly mansion,--so that there should be
some savour of the dukedom in what might be done and said there.
Lord Rufford would by the surroundings be made to feel that in
rejecting Arabella he was rejecting the Duke and all the Mayfair
belongings, and that in accepting her he would be entitled to
regard himself as accepting them all. But by allowing thus much the
Duke would not compromise himself,--nor the Duchess, nor Lord
Mistletoe. Lord Mistletoe, with that prudence which will certainly
in future years make him a useful assistant to some minister of the
day, had seen all this, and so it had been arranged.

But, in spite of these doings, Arabella had insisted on complying
with John Morton's wish that she go down and visit him in his bed
at Bragton. Her mother, who in these days was driven almost to
desperation by her daughter's conduct, tried her best to prevent
the useless journey, but tried in vain. "Then," she said in wrath
to Arabella, "I will tell your father, and I will tell the Duke,
and I will tell Lord Rufford that they need not trouble themselves
any further." "You know, mamma, that you will do nothing of the
kind," said Arabella. And the poor woman did do nothing of the
kind. "What is it to them whether I see the man or not?" the girl
said. "They are not such fools as to suppose that because Lord
Rufford has engaged himself to me now I was never engaged to any
one before. There isn't one of them doesn't know that you had made
up an engagement between us and had afterwards tried to break it
off." When she heard this the unfortunate mother raved, but she
raved in vain. She told her daughter that she would not supply her
with money for the expenses of her journey, but her daughter
replied that she would have no difficulty in finding her way to a
pawn shop. "What is to be got by it?" asked the unfortunate mother.
In reply to this Arabella would say, "Mamma, you have no heart;--
absolutely none. You ought to manoeuvre better, than you do, for
your feelings never stand in your way for a moment" All this had to
be borne, and the old woman was forced at last not only to yield
but to promise that she would accompany her daughter to Bragton. "I
know how all this will end," she said to Arabella. "You will have
to go your way and I must go mine." "Just so," replied the
daughter. "I do not often agree with you, mamma; but I do there
altogether."

Lady Augustus was absolutely at a loss to understand what were the
motives and what the ideas which induced her daughter to take the
journey. If the man were to die no good could come of it. If he
were to live then surely that love which had induced him to make so
foolish a petition would suffice to ensure the marriage, if the
marriage should then be thought desirable. But, at the present
moment, Arabella was still hot in pursuit of Lord Rufford; to whom
this journey, as soon as it should be known to him, would give the
easiest mode of escape! How would it be possible that they two
should get out at the Dillsborough Station and be taken to Bragton
without all Rufford knowing it. Of course there would be hymns sung
in praise of Arabella's love and constancy, but such hymns would be
absolutely ruinous to her. It was growing clear to Lady Augustus
that her daughter was giving up the game and becoming frantic as
she thought of her age, her failure, and her future. If so it would
be well that they should separate.

On the day fixed a close carriage awaited them at the Dillsborough
Station. They arrived both dressed in black and both veiled,--and
with but one maid between them, This arrangement had been made with
some vague idea of escaping scrutiny rather than from economy. They
had never hitherto been known to go anywhere without one apiece.
There were no airs on the station now as on that former occasion,--
no loud talking; not even a word spoken. Lady Augustus was asking
herself why,--why she should have been put into so lamentable a
position, and Arabella was endeavouring to think what she would say
to the dying man.

She did think that he was dying. It was not the purport of her
present visit to strengthen her position by making certain of the
man's hand should he live. When she said that she was not as yet
quite so hard-hearted as her mother, she spoke the truth. Something
of regret, something of penitence had at times crept over her in
reference to her conduct to this man. He had been very unlike
others on whom she had played her arts. None of her lovers, or mock
lovers, had been serious and stern and uncomfortable as he. There
had been no other who had ever attempted to earn his bread. To her
the butterflies of the world had been all in all, and the working
bees had been a tribe apart with which she was no more called upon
to mix than is my lady's spaniel with the kennel hounds. But the
chance had come. She had consented to exhibit her allurements
before a man of business and the man of business had at once sat at
her feet. She had soon repented,--as the reader has seen. The
alliance had been distasteful to her. She had found that the man's
ways were in no wise like her ways,--and she had found also that
were she to become his wife, he certainly would not change. She had
looked about for a means of escape,--but as she did so she had
recognized the man's truth. No doubt he had been different from the
others, less gay in his attire, less jocund in his words, less
given to flattery and sport and gems and all the little
wickednesses which she had loved. But they, those others had, one
and all, struggled to escape from her. Through all the gems and
mirth and flattery there had been the same purpose. They liked the
softness of her hand, they liked the flutter of her silk, they
liked to have whispered in their ears the bold words of her
practised raillery. Each liked for a month or two to be her special
friend. But then, after that, each had deserted her as had done the
one before; till in each new alliance she felt that such was to be
her destiny, and that she was rolling a stone which would never
settle itself, straining for waters which would never come lip
high. But John Morton, after once saying that he loved her, had
never tired, had never wished to escape. He had been so true to his
love, so true to his word, that he had borne from her usage which
would have fully justified escape had escape been to his taste. But
to the last he had really loved her, and now, on his death bed, he
had sent for her to come to him. She would not be coward enough to
refuse his request. "Should he say anything to you about his will
don't refuse to hear him, because it may be of the greatest
importance," Lady Augustus whispered to her daughter as the
carriage was driven up to the front door.

It was then four o'clock, and it was understood that the two ladies
were to stay that one night at Bragton, a letter having been
received by Lady Ushant that morning informing her that the mother
as well as the daughter was coming. Poor Lady Ushant was almost
beside herself,--not knowing what she would do with the two women,
and having no one in the house to help her. Something she had heard
of Lady Augustus, but chiefly from Mrs. Hopkins who certainly had
not admired her master's future mother-in-law. Nor had Arabella
been popular; but of her Mrs. Hopkins had only dared to say that
she was very handsome and "a little upstartish." How she was to
spend the evening with them Lady Ushant could not conceive,--it
having been decided, in accordance with the doctor's orders, that
the interview should not take place till the next morning. When
they were shown in Lady Ushant stood just within the drawing-room
door and muttered a few words as she gave her hand to each. "How is
he?" asked Arabella, throwing up her veil boldly, as soon as the
door was closed. Lady Ushant only shook her head. "I knew it would
be so. It is always so with anything I care for."

"She is so distressed, Lady Ushant," said the mother, "that she
hardly knows what she does." Arabella shook her head. "It is so,
Lady Ushant"

"Am I to go to him now?" said Arabella. Then the old lady explained
the doctor's orders, and offered to take them to their rooms.
"Perhaps I might say a word to you alone? I will stay here if you
will go with mamma." And she did stay till Lady Ushant came down to
her. "Do you mean to say it is certain," she asked,--certain that
he must--die?"

"No;--I do not say that"

"It is possible that he may recover?"

"Certainly it is possible. What is not possible with God?"

"Ah;--that means that he will die." Then she sat herself down and
almost unconsciously took off her bonnet and laid it aside. Lady
Ushant, then looking into her face for the first time, was at a
loss to understand what she had heard of her beauty. Could it be
the same girl of whom Mrs. Hopkins had spoken and of whose
brilliant beauty Reginald had repeated what he had heard? She was
haggard, almost old, with black lines round her eyes. There was
nothing soft or gracious in the tresses of her hair. When Lady
Ushant had been young men had liked hair such as was that of Mary
Masters. Arabella's yellow locks,--whencesoever they might have
come,--were rough and uncombed. But it was the look of age, and the
almost masculine strength of the lower face which astonished Lady
Ushant the most. "Has he spoken to you about me?" she said.

"Not to me." Then Lady Ushant went on to explain that though she
was there now as the female representative of the family she had
never been so intimate with John Morton as to admit of such
confidence as that suggested.

"I wonder whether he can love me," said the girl.

"Assuredly he does, Miss Trefoil. Why else should he send for you?"

"Because he is an honest man. I hardly think that he can love me
much. He was to have been my husband, but he will escape that. If I
thought that he would live I would tell him that he was free."

"He would not want to be free."

"He ought to want it. I am not fit for him. I have come here, Lady
Ushant, because I want to tell him the truth."

"But you love him?" Arabella made no answer, but sat looking
steadily into Lady Ushant's face. "Surely you do love him."

"I do not know. I don't think I did love him,--though now I may. It
is so horrible that he should die, and die while all this is going
on. That softens one you know. Have you ever heard of Lord
Rufford?"

"Lord Rufford;--the young man?"

"Yes;--the young man."

"Never particularly. I knew his father."

"But not this man? Mr. Morton never spoke you of him."

"Not a word."

"I have been engaged to him since I became engaged to your nephew."

"Engaged to Lord Rufford,--to marry him?"

"Yes;--indeed."

"And will you marry him?"

"I cannot say. I tell you this, Lady Ushant, because I must tell
somebody in this house. I have behaved very badly to Mr. Morton,
and Lord Rufford is behaving as badly to me."

"Did John know of this?"

"No;--but I meant to tell him. I determined that I would tell him
had he lived. When he sent for me I swore that I would tell him. If
he is dying,--how can I say it?" Lady Ushant sat bewildered,
thinking over it, understanding nothing of the world in which this
girl had lived, and not knowing now how things could have been as
she described them. It was not as yet three months since, to her
knowledge, this young woman had been staying at Bragton as the
affianced bride of the owner of the house,--staying there with her
own mother and his grandmother,--and now she declared that since
that time she had become engaged to another man and that that other
man had already jilted her! And yet she was here that she might
make a deathbed parting with the man who regarded himself as her
affianced husband. "If I were sure that he were dying, why should I
trouble him?" she said again.

Lady Ushant found herself utterly unable to give any counsel to
such a condition of circumstances. Why should she be asked? This
young woman had her mother with her. Did her mother know all this,
and nevertheless bring her daughter to the house of a man who had
been so treated! "I really do not know what to say," she replied at
last.

"But I was determined that I would tell some one. I thought that
Mrs. Morton would have been here." Lady Ushant shook her head. "I
am glad she is not, because she was not civil to me when I was here
before. She would have said hard things to me,--though not perhaps
harder than I have deserved. I suppose I may still see him
to-morrow."

"Oh yes; he expects it"

"I shall not tell him now. I could not tell him if I thought he
were dying. If he gets better you must tell him all."

"I don't think I could do that, Miss Trefoil."

"Pray do;--pray do. I call upon you to tell him everything."

"Tell him that you will be married to Lord Rufford?"

"No;--not that. If Mr. Morton were well to-morrow I would have
him,--if he chose after what I have told you."

"You do love him then?"

"At any rate I like no one better."

"Not the young lord?"

"No! why should I like him? He does not love me. I hate him. I
would marry Mr. Morton tomorrow, and go with him to Patagonia, or
anywhere else,--if he would have me after hearing what I have
done." Then she rose from her chair; but before she left the room
she said a word further. "Do not speak a word to my mother about
this. Mamma knows nothing of my purpose. Mamma only wants me to
marry Lord Rufford, and to throw Mr. Morton over. Do not tell
anyone else, Lady Ushant; but if he is ever well enough then you
must tell him." After that she went, leaving Lady Ushant in the
room astounded by the story she had heard.


VOLUME III


CHAPTER I

"I have told him Everything."


That evening was very long and very sad to the three ladies
assembled in the drawing-room at Bragton Park, but it was probably
more so to Lady Augustus than the other two. She hardly spoke to
either of them; nor did they to her; while a certain amount of
conversation in a low tone was carried on between Lady Ushant and
Miss Trefoil. When Arabella came down to dinner she received a
message from the sick man. He sent his love, and would so willingly
have seen her instantly,--only that the doctor would not allow it.
But he was so glad,--so very glad that she had come! This Lady
Ushant said to her in a whisper, and seemed to say it as though she
had heard nothing of that frightful story which had been told to
her not much more than an hour ago. Arabella did not utter a word
in reply, but put out her hand, secretly as it were, and grasped
that of the old lady to whom she had told the tale of her later
intrigues. The dinner did not keep them long, but it was very
grievous to them all. Lady Ushant might have made some effort to be
at least a complaisant hostess to Lady Augustus had she not heard
this story,--had she not been told that the woman, knowing her
daughter to be engaged to John Morton, had wanted her to marry Lord
Rufford. The story having come from the lips of the girl herself
had moved some pity in the old woman's breast in regard to her; but
for Lady Augustus she could feel nothing but horror.

In the evening Lady Augustus sat alone, not even pretending to open
a book or to employ her fingers. She seated herself on one side of
the fire with a screen in her hand, turning over such thoughts in
her mind as were perhaps customary to her. Would there ever come a
period to her misery, an hour of release in which she might be in
comfort ere she died? Hitherto from one year to another, from one
decade to the following, it had all been struggle and misery,
contumely and contempt. She thought that she had done her duty by
her child, and her child hated and despised her. It was but the
other day that Arabella had openly declared that in the event of
her marriage she would not have her mother as a guest in her own
house. There could be no longer hope for triumph and glory;--but
how might she find peace so that she might no longer be driven
hither and thither by this ungrateful tyrant child? Oh, how hard
she had worked in the world, and how little the world had given her
in return!

Lady Ushant and Arabella sat at the other side of the fire, at some
distance from it, on a sofa, and carried on a fitful conversation
in whispers, of which a word would now and then reach the ears of
the wretched mother. It consisted chiefly of a description of the
man's illness, and of the different sayings which had come from the
doctors who had attended him. It was marvellous to Lady Augustus,
as she sat there listening, that her daughter should condescend to
take an interest in such details. What could it be to her now how
the fever had taken him, or why or when? On the very next day, the
very morning on which she would go and sit,---ah so uselessly,--by
the dying man's bedside, her father was to meet Lord Rufford at the
ducal mansion in Piccadilly to see if anything could be dome in
that quarter! It was impossible that she should really care whether
John Morton's lease of life was to be computed at a week's purchase
or at that of a month! And yet Arabella sat there asking sick-room
questions and listening to sickroom replies as though her very
nature had been changed. Lady Augustus heard her daughter inquire
what food the sick man took, and then Lady Ushant at great length
gave the list of his nourishment. What sickening hypocrisy! thought
Lady Augustus.

Lady Augustus must have known her daughter well; and yet if was not
hypocrisy. The girl's nature, which had become thoroughly evil from
the treatment it had received, was not altered. Such sudden changes
do not occur more frequently than other miracles. But zealously as
she had practised her arts she had not as yet practised them long
enough not to be cowed by certain outward circumstances. There were
moments when she still heard in her imagination the sound of that
horse's foot as it struck the skull of the unfortunate fallen
rider;--and now the prospect of the death of this man whom she had
known so intimately and who had behaved so well to her, to whom her
own conduct had been so foully false,--for a time brought her back
to humanity. But Lady Augustus had got beyond that and could not at
all understand it.

By nine they had all retired for the night. It was necessary that
Lady Ushant should again visit her nephew, and the mother and
daughter went to their own rooms. "I cannot in the least make out
what you are doing," said Lady Augustus in her most severe voice.

"I dare say not, mamma."

"I have been brought here, at a terrible sacrifice--"

"Sacrifice! What sacrifice? You are as well here as anywhere else."

"I say I have been brought here at a terrible sacrifice for no
purpose whatever. What use is it to be? And then you pretend to
care what this poor man is eating and drinking and what physic he
is taking when, the last time you were in his company, you wouldn't
so much as look at him for fear you should make another man
jealous."

"He was not dying then."

"Psha!"

"Oh yes. I know all that. I do feel a little ashamed of myself when
I am almost crying for him,"

"As if you loved him!"

"Dear mamma, I do own that it is foolish. Having listened to you on
these subjects for a dozen years at least I ought to have got rid
of all that. I don't suppose I do love him. Two or three weeks ago
I almost thought I loved Lord Rufford, and now I am quite sure that
I hate him. But if I heard tomorrow that he had broken his neck out
hunting, I ain't sure but what I should feel something. But he
would not send for me as this man has done."

"It was very impertinent"

"Perhaps it was ill-bred, as he must have suspected something as to
Lord Rufford. However we are here now."

"I will never allow you to drag me anywhere again."

"It will be for yourself to judge of that. If I want to go
anywhere, I shall go. What's the good of quarrelling? You know that
I mean to have my way."

The next morning neither Lady Augustus nor Miss Trefoil came down
to breakfast, but at ten o'clock Arabella was ready, as appointed,
to be taken into the sick man's bedroom. She was still dressed in
black but had taken some trouble with her face and hair. She
followed Lady Ushant in, and silently standing by the bedside put
her hand upon that of John Morton which was laying outside on the
bed. "I will leave you now, John," said Lady Ushant retiring, "and
come again in half an hour,"

"When I ring," he said.

"You mustn't let him talk for more than that," said the old lady to
Arabella as she went.

It was more than an hour afterwards when Arabella crept into her
mother's room, during which time Lady Ushant had twice knocked at
her nephew's door and had twice been sent away. "It is all over,
mamma!" she said.

Lady Augustus looked into her daughter's eyes and saw that she had
really been weeping. "All over!"

"I mean for me,--and you. We have only got to go away."

"Will he die?"

"It will make no matter though he should live for ever. I have told
him everything. I did not mean to do it because I thought that he
would be weak; but he has been strong enough for that"

"What have you told him?"

"Just everything--about you and Lord Rufford and myself,--and what
an escape he had had not to marry me. He understands it all now."

"It is a great deal more than I do."

"He knows that Lord Rufford has been engaged to me." She clung to
this statement so vehemently that she had really taught herself to
believe that it was so.

"Well!"

"And he knows also how his lordship is behaving to me. Of course he
thinks that I have deserved it. Of course I have deserved it. We
have nothing to do now but to go back to London."

"You have brought me here all the way for that"

"Only for that! As the man was dying I thought that I would be
honest just for once. Now. that I have told him I don't believe
that he will die. He does not look to be so very ill."

"And you have thrown away that chance!"

"Altogether. You didn't like Bragton you know, and therefore it
can't matter to you."

"Like it!"

"To be sure you would have got rid of me had I gone to Patagonia.
But he will not go to Patagonia now even if he gets well; and so
there was nothing to be gained. The carriage is to be here at two
to take us to the station and you may as well let Judith come and
put the things up."

Just before they took their departure Lady Ushant came to Arabella
saying that Mr. Morton wanted to speak one other word to her before
she went. So she returned to the room and was again left alone at
the man's bedside. "Arabella," he said, "I thought that I would
tell you that I have forgiven everything."

"How can you have forgiven me? There are things which a man cannot
forgive."

"Give me your hand,"' he said,--and she gave him her hand. "I do
forgive it all. Even should I live it would be impossible that we
should be man and wife."

"Oh yes."

"But nevertheless I love you. Try,--try to be true to some one."

"There is no truth left in me, Mr. Morton. I should not dishonour
my husband if I had one, but still I should be a curse to him. I
shall marry some day I suppose, and I know it will be so. I wish I
could change with you,--and die."

"You are unhappy now."

"Indeed I am. I am always unhappy. I do not think you can tell what
it is to be so wretched. But I am glad that you have forgiven me."
Then she stooped down and kissed his hand. As she did so he touched
her brow with his hot lips, and then she left him again. Lady
Ushant was waiting outside the door. "He knows it all," said
Arabella. "You need not trouble yourself with the message I gave
you. The carriage is at the door. Good-bye. You need not come down.
Mamma will not expect it." Lady Ushant, hardly knowing how she
ought to behave, did not go down. Lady Augustus and her daughter
got into Mr. Runciman's carriage without any farewells, and were
driven back from the park to the Dillsborough Station. To poor Lady
Ushant the whole thing had been very terrible. She sat silent and
unoccupied the whole of that evening wondering at the horror of
such a history. This girl had absolutely dared to tell the dying
man all her own disgrace,--and had travelled down from London to
Bragton with the purpose of doing so! When next she crept into the
sick-room she almost expected that her nephew would speak to her on
the subject; but he only asked whether that sound of wheels which
he heard beneath his window had come from the carriage which had
taken them away, and then did not say a further word of either Lady
Augustus or her daughter.

"And what do you mean to do now?" said Lady Augustus as the train
approached the London terminus.

"Nothing."

"You have given up Lord Rufford?"

"Indeed I have not"

"Your journey to Bragton will hardly help you much with him."

"I don't want it to help me at all. What have I done that Lord
Rufford can complain of? I have not abandoned Lord Rufford for the
sake of Mr. Morton. Lord Rufford ought only to be too proud if he
knew it all."

"Of course he could make use of such an escapade as this?"

"Let him try. I have not done with Lord Rufford yet, and so I can
tell him. I shall be at the Duke's in Piccadilly to-morrow
morning."

"That will be impossible, Arabella."

"They shall see whether it is impossible. I have got beyond caring
very much what people say now. I know the kind of way papa would be
thrown over if there is no one there to back him. I shall be there
and I will ask Lord Rufford to his face whether we did not become
engaged when we were at Mistletoe."

"They won't let you in."

"I'll find a way to make my way in. I shall never be his wife. I
don't know that I want it. After all what's the good of living with
a man if you hate each other,--or living apart like you and papa?"

"He has income enough for anything!" exclaimed Lady Augustus,
shocked at her daughter's apparent blindness.

"It isn't that I'm thinking of, but I'll have my revenge on him.
Liar! To write and say that I had made a mistake! He had not the
courage to get out of it when we were together; but when he had run
away in the night, like a thief, and got into his own house, then
he could write and say that I had made a mistake! I have sometimes
pitied men when I have seen girls hunting them down, but upon my
word they deserve it!" This renewal of spirit did something to
comfort Lady Augustus. She had begun to fear that her daughter, in
her despair, would abandon altogether the one pursuit of her
life;--but it now seemed that there was still some courage left for
the battle.

That night nothing more was said, but Arabella applied all her mind
to the present condition of her circumstances. Should she or should
she not go to the House in Piccadilly on the following morning? At
last she determined that she would not do so, believing that should
her father fail she might make a better opportunity for herself
afterwards. At her uncle's house she would hardly have known where
or how to wait for the proper moment of her appearance. "So you are
not going to Piccadilly," said her mother on the following morning.

"It appears not," said Arabella.


CHAPTER II

"Now what have you got to say?"


It may be a question whether Lord Augustus Trefoil or Lord Rufford
looked forward to the interview which was to take place at the
Duke's mansion with the greater dismay. The unfortunate father
whose only principle in life had been that of avoiding trouble
would have rather that his daughter should have been jilted a score
of times than that he should have been called upon to interfere
once. There was in this demand upon him a breach of a silent but
well-understood compact. His wife and daughter had been allowed to
do just what they pleased and to be free of his authority, upon an
understanding that they were never to give him any trouble. She
might have married Lord Rufford, or Mr. Morton, or any other man
she might have succeeded in catching, and he would not have
troubled her either before or after her marriage. But it was not
fair that he should be called upon to interfere in her failures.
And what was he to say to this young lord? Being fat and old and
plethoric he could not be expected to use a stick and thrash the
young lord. Pistols were gone,--a remembrance of which fact perhaps
afforded some consolation. Nobody now need be afraid of anybody,
and the young lord would not be afraid of him. Arabella declared
that there had been an engagement. The young lord would of course
declare that there had been none. Upon the whole he was inclined to
believe it most probable that his daughter was lying. He did not
think it likely that Lord Rufford should have been such a fool. As
for taking Lord Rufford by the back of his neck and shaking him
into matrimony, he knew that that would be altogether out of his
power. And then the hour was so wretchedly early. It was that
little fool Mistletoe who had named ten o'clock,--a fellow who took
Parliamentary papers to bed with him, and had a blue book brought
to him every morning at half-past seven with a cup of tea. By ten
o'clock Lord Augustus would not have had time to take his first
glass of soda and brandy preparatory to the labour of getting into
his clothes. But he was afraid of his wife and daughter, and
absolutely did get into a cab at the door of his lodgings in Duke
Street, St. James', precisely at a quarter past ten. As the Duke's
house was close to the corner of Clarges Street the journey he had
to make was not long.

Lord Rufford would not have agreed to the interview but that it was
forced upon him by his brother-in-law. "What good can it do?" Lord
Rufford had asked. But his brother-in-law had held that that was a
question to be answered by the other side. In such a position Sir
George thought that he was bound to concede as much as this,--in fact
to concede almost anything short of marriage. "He can't do the girl any
good by talking," Lord Rufford had said. Sir George assented to this,
but nevertheless thought that any friend deputed by her should be
allowed to talk, at any rate once. "I don't know what he'll say. Do you
think he'll bring a big stick?" Sir George who knew Lord Augustus did
not imagine that a stick would be brought. "I couldn't hit him, you
know. He's so fat that a blow would kill him." Lord Rufford wanted his
brother-in-law to go with him; but Sir George assured him that this was
impossible. It was a great bore. He had to go up to London all
alone,--in February, when the weather was quite open and hunting was
nearly coming to an end. And for what? Was it likely that such a man as
Lord Augustus should succeed in talking him into marrying any girl?
Nevertheless he went, prepared to be very civil, full of sorrow at the
misunderstanding, but strong in his determination not to yield an inch.
He arrived at the mansion precisely at ten o'clock and was at once
shown into a back room on the ground floor. He saw no one but a very
demure old servant who seemed to look upon him as one who was sinning
against the Trefoil family in general, and who shut the door upon him,
leaving him as it were in prison. He was so accustomed to be the
absolute master of his own minutes and hours that he chafed greatly as
he walked up and down the room for what seemed to him the greater part
of a day. He looked repeatedly at his watch, and at half-past ten
declared to himself that if that fat old fool did not come within two
minutes he would make his escape.

"The fat old fool" when he reached the house asked for his nephew
and endeavoured to persuade Lord Mistletoe to go with him to the
interview. But Lord Mistletoe was as firm in refusing as had been
Sir George Penwether. "You are quite wrong," said the young man
with well-informed sententious gravity. "I could do nothing to help
you. You are Arabella's father and no one can plead her cause but
yourself." Lord Augustus dropped his eyebrows over his eyes as this
was said. They who knew him well and had seen the same thing done
when his partner would not answer his call at whist or had led up
to his discard were aware that the motion was tantamount to a very
strong expression of disgust. He did not, however, argue the matter
any further, but allowed himself to be led away slowly by the same
solemn servant. Lord Rufford had taken up his hat preparatory to
his departure when Lord Augustus was announced just five minutes
after the half hour.

When the elder man entered the room the younger one put down his
hat and bowed. Lord Augustus also bowed and then stood for a few
moments silent with his fat hands extended on the round table in
the middle of the room. "This is a very disagreeable kind of thing,
my Lord," he said.

"Very disagreeable, and one that I lament above all things,"
answered Lord Rufford:

"That's all very well;--very well indeed;--but, damme, what's the
meaning of it all? That's what I want to ask. What's the meaning of
it all?" Then he paused as though he had completed the first part
of his business,--and might now wait awhile till the necessary
explanation had been given. But Lord Rufford did not seem disposed
to give any immediate answer. He shrugged his shoulders, and,
taking up his hat, passed his hand once or twice round the nap.
Lord Augustus opened his eyes very wide as he waited and looked at
the other man; but it seemed that the other man had nothing to say
for himself. "You don't mean to tell me, I suppose, that what my
daughter says isn't true."

"Some unfortunate mistake, Lord Augustus;--most unfortunate."

"Mistake be--." He stopped himself before the sentence was
completed, remembering that such an interview should be conducted
on the part of him, as father, with something of dignity. "I don't
understand anything about mistakes. Ladies don't make mistakes of
that kind. I won't hear of mistakes." Lord Rufford again shrugged
his shoulders. "You have engaged my daughter's affections."

"I have the greatest regard for Miss Trefoil."

"Regard be--." Then again he remembered himself. "Lord Rufford,
you've got to marry her. That's the long and the short of it"

"I'm sure I ought to be proud."

"So you ought"

"But--"

"I don't know the meaning of but, my Lord. I want to know what you
mean to do."

"Marriage isn't in my line at all"

"Then what the d-- business have you to go about and talk to a girl
like that? Marriage not in your line? Who cares for your line? I
never heard such impudence in all my life. You get yourself engaged
to a young lady of high rank and position and then you say that--
marriage isn't in your line." Upon that he opened his eyes still
wider, and glared upon the offender wrathfully.

"I can't admit that I was ever engaged to Miss Trefoil."

"Didn't you make love to her?"

The poor victim paused a moment before he answered this question,
thereby confessing his guilt before he denied it. "No, my Lord; I
don't think I ever did."

"You don't think! You don't know whether you asked my daughter to
marry you or not! You don't think you made love to her!"

"I am sure I didn't ask her to marry me."

"I am sure you did. And now what have you got to say?" Here there
was another shrug of the shoulders. "I suppose you think because
you are a rich man that you may do whatever you please. But you'll
have to learn the difference. You must be exposed, Sir."

"I hope for the lady's sake that as little as possible may be said
of it."

"D-- the--!" Lord Augustus in his assumed wrath was about to be
very severe on his daughter, but he checked himself again. "I'm not
going to stop here talking all day," he said. "I want to hear your
explanation and then I shall know how to act." Up to this time he
had been standing, which was unusual with him. Now he flung himself
into an armchair.

"Really, Lord Augustus, I don't know what I've got to say. I admire
your daughter exceedingly. I was very much honoured when she and
her mother came to my house at Rufford. I was delighted to be able
to show her a little sport. It gave me the greatest satisfaction
when I met her again at your brother's house. Coming home from
hunting we happened to be thrown together. It's a kind of thing
that will occur, you know. The Duchess seemed to think a great deal
of it; but what can one do? We could have had two post chaises, of
course,--only one doesn't generally send a young lady alone. She
was very tired and fainted with the fatigue. That I think is about
all."

"But,--damme, Sir, what did you say to her?" Lord Rufford again
rubbed the nap of his hat. "What did you say to her first of all,
at your own house?"

"A poor fellow was killed out hunting and everybody was talking
about that. Your daughter saw it herself."

"Excuse me, Lord Rufford, if I say that that's what we used to call
shuffling, at school. Because a man broke his neck out hunting--"

"It was a kick on the head, Lord Augustus."

"I don't care where he was kicked. What has that to do with your
asking my daughter to be your wife?"

"But I didn't"

"I say you did,--over and over again." Here Lord Augustus got out
of his chair, and made a little attempt to reach the recreant
lover;--but he failed and fell back again into his armchair. "It
was first at Rufford, and then you made an appointment to meet her
at Mistletoe. How do you explain that?"

"Miss Trefoil is very fond of hunting."

"I don't believe she ever went out hunting in her life before she
saw you. You mounted her,--and gave her a horse,--and took her
out,--and brought her home. Everybody at Mistletoe knew all about
it. My brother and the Duchess were told of it. It was one of those
things that are plain to everybody as the nose on your face. What
did you say to her when you were coming home in that post chaise?"

"She was fainting."

"What has that to do with it? I don't care whether she fainted or
not. I don't believe she fainted at all. When she got into that
carriage she was engaged to you, and when she got out of it she was
engaged ever so much more. The Duchess knew all about it. Now what
have you got to say?" Lord Rufford felt that he had nothing to say.
"I insist upon having an answer."

"It's one of the most unfortunate mistakes that ever were made."

"By G--!" exclaimed Lord Augustus, turning his eyes up against the
wall, and appealing to some dark ancestor who hung there. "I never
heard of such a thing in all my life; never!"

"I suppose I might as well go now," said Lord Rufford after a
pause.

"You may go to the D--, Sir,--for the present" Then Lord Rufford
took his departure leaving the injured parent panting with his
exertions. As Lord Rufford went away he felt that that difficulty
had been overcome with much more ease than he had expected. He
hardly knew what it was that he had dreaded, but he had feared
something much worse than that. Had an appeal been made to his
affections he would hardly have known how to answer. He remembered
well that he had assured the lady that he loved her, and had a
direct question been asked him on that subject he would not have
lied. He must have confessed that such a declaration had been made
by him. But he had escaped that. He was quite sure that he had
never uttered a hint in regard to marriage, and he came away from
the Duke's house almost with an assurance that he had done nothing
that was worthy of much blame.

Lord Augustus looked at his watch, rang the bell, and ordered a
cab. He must now go and see his daughter, and then he would have
done with the matter--for ever. But as he was passing through the
hall his nephew caught hold of him and took him back into the room.
"What does he say for himself?" asked Lord Mistletoe.

"I don't know what he says. Of course he swears that he never spoke
a word to her."

"My mother saw him paying her the closest attention."

"How can I help that? What can I do? Why didn't your mother pin him
then and there? Women can always do that kind of thing if they
choose."

"It is all over, then?"

"I can't make a man marry if he won't. He ought to be thrashed
within an inch of his life. But if one does that kind of thing the
police are down upon one. All the same, I think the Duchess might
have managed it if she had chosen." After that he went to the
lodgings in Orchard Street, and there repeated his story. "I have
done all I can," he said, "and I don't mean to interfere any
further. Arabella should know how to manage her own affairs."

"And you don't mean to punish him?" asked the mother.

"Punish him! How am I to punish him? If I were to throw a decanter
at his head, what good would that do?"

"And you mean to say that she must put up with it?" Arabella was
sitting by as these questions were asked.

"He says that he never said a word to her. Whom am I to believe?"

"You did believe him, papa?"

"Who said so, Miss? But I don't see why his word isn't as good as
yours. There was nobody to hear it, I suppose. Why didn't you get
it in writing, or make your uncle fix him at once? If you mismanage
your own affairs I can't put them right for you."

"Thank you, papa. I am so much obliged to you. You come back and
tell me that every word he says is to be taken for gospel, and that
you don't believe a word I have spoken. That is so kind of you! I
suppose he and you will be the best friends in the world now. But I
don't mean to let him off in that way. As you won't help me, I must
help myself."

"What did you expect me to do?"

"Never to leave him till you had forced him to keep his word. I
should have thought that you would have taken him by the throat in
such a cause. Any other father would have done so."

"You are an impudent, wicked girl, and I don't believe he was ever
engaged to you at all," said Lord Augustus as he took his leave.

"Now you have made your father your enemy," said the mother.

"Everybody is my enemy," said Arabella. "There are no such things
as love and friendship. Papa pretends that he does not believe me,
just because he wants to shirk the trouble. I suppose you'll say
you don't believe me next."


CHAPTER III

Mrs. Morton returns


A few days after that on which Lady Augustus and her daughter left
Bragton old Mrs. Morton returned to that place. She had gone away
in very bitterness of spirit against her grandson in the early days
of his illness. For some period antecedent to that there had been
causes for quarrelling. John Morton had told her that he had been
to Reginald's house, and she, in her wrath, replied that he had
disgraced himself by doing so. When those harsh words had been
forgotten, or at any rate forgiven, other causes of anger had
sprung up. She had endeavoured to drive him to repudiate Arabella
Trefoil, and in order that she might do so effectually had
contrived to find out something of Arabella's doings at Rufford and
at Mistletoe. Her efforts in this direction had had an effect
directly contrary to that which she had intended. There had been
moments in which Morton had been willing enough to rid himself of
that burden. He had felt the lady's conduct in his own house, and
had seen it at Rufford. He, too, had heard something of Mistletoe.
But the spirit within him was aroused at the idea of dictation, and
he had been prompted to contradict the old woman's accusation
against his intended bride, by the very fact that they were made by
her. And then she threatened him. If he did these things,--if he
would consort with an outcast from the family such as Reginald
Morton, and take to himself such a bride as Arabella Trefoil, he
could never more be to her as her child. This of course was
tantamount to saying that she would leave her money to some one
else,--money which, as he well knew, had all been collected from
the Bragton property. He had ever been to her as her son, and yet
he was aware of a propensity on her part to enrich her own noble
relatives with her hoards,--a desire from gratifying which she had
hitherto been restrained by conscience. Morton had been anxious
enough for his grandmother's money, but, even in the hope of
receiving it, would not bear indignity beyond a certain point. He
had therefore declared it to be his purpose to marry Arabella
Trefoil, and because he had so declared he had almost brought
himself to forgive that young lady's sins against him. Then, as his
illness became serious, there arose the question of disposing of
the property in the event of his death. Mrs. Morton was herself
very old, and was near her grave. She was apt to speak of herself
as one who had but a few days left to her in this world. But, to
her, property was more important than life or death;--and rank
probably more important than either. She was a brave, fierce,
evil-minded, but conscientious old woman,--one, we may say, with
very bad lights indeed, but who was steadfastly minded to walk by
those lights, such as they were. She did not scruple to tell her
grandson that it was his duty to leave the property away from his
cousin Reginald, nor to allege as a reason for his doing so that in
all probability Reginald Morton was not the legitimate heir of his
great-grandfather, Sir Reginald. For such an assertion John Morton
knew there was not a shadow of ground. No one but this old woman
had ever suspected that the Canadian girl whom Reginald's father
had brought with him to Bragton had been other than his honest
wife;--and her suspicions had only come from vague assertions, made
by herself in blind anger till at last she had learned to believe
them. Then, when in addition to this, he asserted his purpose of
asking Arabella Trefoil to come to him at Bragton, the cup of her
wrath was overflowing, and she withdrew from the house altogether.
It might be that he was dying. She did in truth believe that he was
dying. But there were things more serious to her than life or
death. Should she allow him to trample upon all her feelings
because he was on his death-bed,--when perhaps in very truth he
might not be on his death-bed at all? She, at any rate, was near
her death,--and she would do her duty. So she packed up her
things--to the last black skirt of an old gown, so that every one
at Bragton might know that it was her purpose to come back no more.
And she went away.

Then Lady Ushant came to take her place, and with Lady Ushant came
Reginald Morton. The one lived in the house and the other visited
it daily. And, as the reader knows, Lady Augustus came with her
daughter. Mrs. Morton, though she had gone,--for ever,--took care
to know of the comings and goings at Bragton. Mrs. Hopkins was
enjoined to write to her and tell her everything; and though Mrs.
Hopkins with all her heart took the side of Lady Ushant and
Reginald, she had never been well inclined to Miss Trefoil.
Presents too were given and promises were made; and Mrs. Hopkins,
not without some little treachery, did from time to time send to
the old lady a record of what took place at Bragton. Arabella came
and went, and Mrs. Hopkins thought that her coming had not led to
much. Lady Ushant was always with Mr. John,--such was the account
given by Mrs. Hopkins;--and the general opinion was that the
squire's days were numbered.

Then the old woman's jealousy was aroused, and, perhaps, her heart
was softened. It was still hard black winter, and she was living
alone in lodgings in London. The noble cousin, a man nearly as old
as herself whose children she was desirous to enrich, took but
little notice of her, nor would she have been Nappy had she lived
with him. Her life had been usually solitary,--with little breaks
to its loneliness occasioned by the visits to England of him whom
she had called her child. That this child should die before her,
should die in his youth, did not shock her much. Her husband had
done so, and her own son, and sundry of her noble brothers and
sisters. She was hardened against death. Life to her had never been
joyous, though the trappings of life were so great in her eyes. But
it broke her heart that her child should die in the arms of another
old woman who had always been to her as an enemy. Lady Ushant, in
days now long gone by but still remembered as though they were
yesterday, had counselled the reception of the Canadian female. And
Lady Ushant, when the Canadian female and her husband were dead,
had been a mother to the boy whom she, Mrs. Morton, would so fain
have repudiated altogether. Lady Ushant had always been "on the
other side;" and now Lady Ushant was paramount at Bragton.

And doubtless there was some tenderness, though Mrs. Morton was
unwilling to own even to herself that she was moved by any such
feeling. If she had done her duty in counselling him to reject both
Reginald Morton and Arabella Trefoil,--as to which she admitted no
doubt in her own mind;--and if duty had required her to absent
herself when her counsel was spurned, then would she be weak and
unmindful of duty should she allow any softness of heart to lure
her back again. It was so she reasoned. But still some softness was
there; and when she heard that Miss Trefoil had gone, and that her
visit had not, in Mrs. Hopkins's opinion, "led to much," she wrote
to say that she would return. She made no request and clothed her
suggestion in no words of tenderness; but simply told her grandson
that she would come back--as the Trefoils had left him.

And she did come. When the news were first told to Lady Ushant by
the sick man himself, that Lady proposed that she should at once go
back to Cheltenham. But when she was asked whether her animosity to
Mrs. Morton was so great that she could not consent to remain under
the same roof, she at once declared that she had no animosity
whatsoever. The idea of animosity running over nearly half a
century was horrible to her; and therefore, though she did in her
heart of hearts dread the other old woman, she consented to stay.
"And what shall Reginald do?" she asked. John Morton had thought
about this too, and expressed a wish that Reginald should come
regularly,--as he had come during the last week or two.

It was just a week from the day on which the Trefoils had gone that
Mrs. Morton was driven up to the door in Mr. Runciman's fly. This
was at four in the afternoon, and had the old woman looked out of
the fly window she might have seen Reginald making his way by the
little path to the bridge which led back to Dillsborough. It was at
this hour that he went daily, and he had not now thought it worth
his while to remain to welcome Mrs. Morton. And she might also have
seen, had she looked out, that with him was walking a young woman.
She would not have known Mary Masters; but had she seen them both,
and had she known the young woman, she would have declared in her
pride that they were fit associates. But she saw nothing of this,
sitting there behind her veil, thinking whether she might still do
anything, and if so; what she might do to avert the present evil
destination of the Bragton estate. There was an honourable nephew
of her own,--or rather a great-nephew,--who might easily take the
name, who would so willingly take the name! Or if this were
impracticable, there was a distant Morton, very distant, whom she
had never seen and certainly did not love, but who was clearly a
Morton, and who would certainly be preferable to that enemy of
forty years' standing. Might there not be some bargain made? Would
not her dying grandson be alive to the evident duty of enriching
the property and leaving behind him a wealthy heir? She could
enrich the property and make the heir wealthy by her money.

"How is he?" That of course was the first question when Mrs.
Hopkins met her in the hall. Mrs. Hopkins only shook her head and
said that perhaps he had taken his food that day a little better
than on the last. Then there was a whisper, to which Mrs. Hopkins
whispered back her answer. Yes,--Lady Ushant was in the house,--was
at this moment in the sick man's room. Mr. Reginald was not staying
there,--had never stayed there,--but came every day. He had only
just left. "And is he to come still?" asked Mrs. Morton with wrath
in her eyes. Mrs. Hopkins did not know but was disposed to think
that Mr. Reginald would come every day. Then Mrs. Morton went up to
her own room,--and while she prepared herself for her visit to the
sick room Lady Ushant retired. She had a cup of tea, refusing all
other refreshment, and then, walking erect as though she had been
forty instead of seventy-five, she entered her grandson's chamber
and took her old place at his bedside.

Nothing was then said about Arabella, nor, indeed, at any future
time was her name mentioned between them;--nor was anything then
said about the future fate of the estate. She did not dare to bring
up the subject at once, though, on the journey down from London,
she had determined that she would do so. But she was awed by his
appearance and by the increased appanages of his sick-bed. He
spoke, indeed, of the property, and expressed his anxiety that
Chowton Farm should be bought, if it came into market. He thought
that the old acres should be redeemed, if the opportunity arose,--
and if the money could be found. "Chowton Farm!" exclaimed the old
woman, who remembered well the agony which had attended the
alienation of that portion of the Morton lands.

"It may be that it will be sold."

"Lawrence Twentyman sell Chowton Farm! I thought he was well off."
Little as she had been at Bragton she knew all about Chowton
Farm,--except that its owner was so wounded by vain love as to be
like a hurt deer. Her grandson did not tell her all the story, but
explained to her that Lawrence Twentyman, though not poor, had
other plans of life and thought of leaving the neighbourhood. She,
of course, had the money; and as she believed that land was the one
proper possession for an English gentleman of ancient family, she
doubtless would have been willing to buy it had she approved of the
hands into which it would fall. It seemed to him that it was her
duty to do as much for the estate with which all her fortune had
been concerned. "Yes," she said; "it should be bought,--if other
things suited. We will talk of it to-morrow, John." Then he spoke
of his mission to Patagonia and of his regret that it should be
abandoned. Even were he ever to be well again his strength would
return to him too late for this purpose. He had already made known
to the Foreign Office his inability to undertake that service. But
she could perceive that he had not in truth abandoned his hopes of
living, for he spoke much of his ambition as to the public service.
The more he thought of it, he said, the more certain he became that
it would suit him better to go on with his profession than to live
the life of a country squire in England. And yet she could see the
change which had taken place since she was last there and was aware
that he was fading away from day to day.

It was not till they were summoned to dine together that she saw
Lady Ushant. Very many years had passed since last they were
together, and yet neither seemed to the other to be much changed.
Lady Ushant was still soft, retiring, and almost timid; whereas
Mrs. Morton showed her inclination to domineer even in the way in
which she helped herself to salt. While the servant was with them
very little was said on either side. There was a word or two from
Mrs. Morton to show that she considered herself the mistress
there,--and a word from the other lady proclaiming that she had no
pretensions of that kind. But after dinner in the little
drawing-room they were more communicative. Something of course was
said as to the health of the invalid. Lady Ushant was not the woman
to give a pronounced opinion on such a subject. She used doubtful,
hesitating words, and would in one minute almost contradict what
she had said in the former. But Mrs. Morton was clever enough to
perceive that Lady Ushant was almost without hope. Then she made a
little speech with a fixed purpose. "It must be a great trouble to
you, Lady Ushant, to be so long away from home."

"Not at all," said Lady Ushant in perfect innocence. "I have
nothing to bind me anywhere."

"I shall think it my duty to remain here now,--till the end."

"I suppose so. He has always been almost the same to you as your
own."

"Quite so; quite the same. He is my own." And yet,--she left him in
his illness! She, too, had heard something from Mrs. Hopkins of the
temper in which Mrs. Morton had last left Bragton. "But you are not
bound to him in that way."

"Not in that way certainly."

"In no way, I may say. It was very kind of you to come when
business made it imperative on me to go to town, but I do not think
we can call upon you for further sacrifice."

"It is no sacrifice, Mrs. Morton." Lady Ushant was as meek as a
worm, but a worm will turn. And though innocent, she was quick
enough to perceive that at this, their first meeting, the other old
woman was endeavouring to turn her out of the house.

"I mean that it can hardly be necessary to call upon you to give up
your time."

"What has an old woman to do with her time, Mrs. Morton?"

Hitherto Mrs. Morton had smiled. The smile indeed had been grim,
but it had been intended to betoken outward civility. Now there
came a frown upon her brow which was more grim and by no means
civil. "The truth is that at such a time one who is almost a
stranger--"

"I am no stranger," said Lady Ushant.

"You had not seen him since he was an infant"

"My name was Morton as is his, and my dear father was the owner of
this house. Your husband, Mrs. Morton, was his grandfather and my
brother. I will allow no one to tell me that I am a stranger at
Bragton. I have lived here many more years than you."

"A stranger to him, I meant. And now that he is ill--"

"I shall stay with him--till he desires me to go away. He asked me
to stay and that is quite enough." Then she got up and left the
room with more dignity;--as also she had spoken with more
earnestness,--than Mrs. Morton had given her credit for possessing.
After that the two ladies did not meet again till the next day.


CHAPTER IV

The two old Ladies


On the next morning Mrs. Morton did not come down to breakfast, but
sat alone upstairs nursing her wrath. During the night she had made
up her mind to one or two things. She would never enter her
grandson's chambers when Lady Ushant was there. She would not speak
to Reginald Morton, and should he come into her presence while she
was at Bragton she would leave the room. She would do her best to
make the house, in common parlance, "too hot" to hold that other
woman. And she would make use of those words which John had spoken
concerning Chowton Farm as a peg on which she might hang her
discourse in reference to his will. If in doing all this she should
receive that dutiful assistance which she thought that he owed
her,--then she should stand by his bed-side, and be tender to him,
and nurse him to the last as a mother would nurse a child. But if,
as she feared, he were headstrong in disobeying, then she would
remember that her duty to her family, if done with a firm purpose,
would have lasting results, while his life might probably be an
affair of a few weeks,--or even days.

At about eleven Lady Ushant was with her patient when a message was
brought by Mrs. Hopkins. Mrs. Morton wished to see her grandson and
desired to know whether it would suit him that she should come now.
"Why not?" said the sick man, who was sitting up in his bed. Then
Lady Ushant collected her knitting and was about to depart. "Must
you go because she is coming?" Morton asked. Lady Ushant, shocked
at the necessity of explaining to him the ill feeling that existed,
said that perhaps it would be best. "Why should it be best?" Lady
Ushant shook her head, and smiled, and put her hand upon the
counterpane,--and retired. As she passed the door of her rival's
room she could see the black silk dress moving behind the partly
open door, and as she entered her own she heard Mrs. Morton's steps
upon the corridor. The place was already almost "too hot" for her.
Anything would be better than scenes like this in the house of a
dying man.

"Need my aunt have gone away?" he asked after the first greeting.

"I did not say so."

"She seemed to think that she was not to stay."

"Can I help what she thinks, John?" Of course she feels that she
is--"

"Is what?"

"An interloper--if I must say it"

"But I have sent for her, and I have begged her to stay."

"Of course she can stay if she wishes. But, dear John, there must
be much to be said between you and me which,--which cannot interest
her; or which, at least, she ought not to hear." He did not
contradict this in words, feeling himself to be too weak, for
contest; but within his own mind he declared that it was not so.
The things which interested him now were as likely to interest his
great-aunt as his grandmother, and to be as fit for the ears of the
one as for those of the other.

An hour had passed after this during which she tended him, giving
him food and medicine, and he had slept before she ventured to
allude to the subject which was nearest to her heart. "John," she
said at last, "I have been thinking about Chowton Farm."

"Well."

"It certainly should be bought"

"If the man resolves on selling it."

"Of course; I mean that. How much would it be?" Then he mentioned
the sum which Twentyman had named, saying that he had inquired and
had been told that the price was reasonable. "It is a large sum of
money, John."

"There might be a mortgage for part of it"

"I don't like mortgages. The property would not be yours at all if
it were mortgaged, as soon as bought. You would pay 5 per cent. for
the money and only get 3 per cent from the land." The old lady
understood all about it.

"I could pay it off in two years," said the sick man.

"There need be no paying off, and no mortgage, if I did it I almost
believe I have got enough to do it." He knew very well that she had
much more than enough. "I think more of this property than of
anything in the world, my dear."

"Chowton Farm could be yours, you know."

"What should I do with Chowton Farm? I shall probably be in my
grave before the slow lawyer would have executed the deeds." And I
in mine, thought he to himself, before the present owner has quite
made up his mind to part with his land. "What would a little place
like that do for me? But in my father-in-law's time it was part of
the Bragton property. He sold it to pay the debts of a younger son,
forgetting, as I thought, what he owed to the estate;--"It had in
truth been sold on behalf of the husband of this old woman who was
now complaining. "And if it can be recovered it is our duty to get
it back again. A property like this should never be lessened. It is
in that way that the country is given over to shopkeepers and
speculators and is made to be like France or Italy. I quite think
that Chowton Farm should be bought. And though I might die before
it was done, I would find the money."

"I knew what your feeling would be."

"Yes, John. You could not but know it well. But--" Then she paused
a moment, looking into his face. "But I should wish to know what
would become of it--eventually."

"If it were yours you could do what you pleased with it."

"But it would be yours."

"Then it would go with the rest of the property."

"To whom would it go? We have all to die, my dear, and who can say
whom it may please the Almighty to take first?"

"In this house, ma'am, every one can give a shrewd guess. I know my
own condition. If I die without children of my own every acre I
possess will go to the proper heir. Thinking as you do, you ought
to agree with me in that."

"But who is the proper heir?"

"My cousin Reginald. Do not let us contest it, ma'am. As certainly
as I lie here he will have Bragton when I am gone."

"Will you not listen to me, John?"

"Not about that. How could I die in peace were I to rob him?"

"It is all your own,--to do as you like with."

"It is all my own, but not to do as I like with. With your
feelings, with your ideas, how can you urge me to such an
injustice?"

"Do I want it for myself? I do not even want it for any one
belonging to me. There is your cousin Peter."

"If he were the heir he should have it,--though I know nothing of
him and believe him to be but a poor creature and very unfit to
have the custody of a family property."

"But he is his father's son."

"I will believe nothing of that," said the sick man raising himself
in his bed. "It is a slander; it is based on no evidence
whatsoever. No one even thought of it but you."

"John, is that the way to speak to me?"

"It is the way to speak of an assertion so injurious." Then he fell
back again on his pillows and she sat by his bedside for a full
half hour speechless, thinking of it all. At the end of that time
she had resolved that she would not yet give it up. Should he
regain his health and strength,--and she would pray fervently night
and day that God would be so good to him,--then everything would be
well. Then he would marry and have children, and Bragton would
descend in the right line. But were it to be ordained otherwise,
should it be God's will that he must die, then, as he grew weaker,
he would become more plastic in her hands, and she might still
prevail. At present he was stubborn with the old stubbornness, and
would not see with her eyes. She would bide her time and be careful
to have a lawyer ready. She turned it all over in her mind, as she
sat there watching him in his sleep. She knew of no one but Mr.
Masters whom she distrusted as being connected with the other side
of the family,--whose father had made that will by which the
property in Dillsborough had been dissevered from Bragton. But Mr.
Masters would probably obey instructions if they were given to him
definitely.

She thought of it all and then went down to lunch. She did not dare
to refuse altogether to meet the other woman lest such resolve on
her part might teach those in the house to think that Lady Ushant
was the mistress. She took her place at the head of the table and
interchanged a few words with her grandson's guest,--which of
course had reference to his health. Lady Ushant was very ill able
to carry on a battle of any sort and was willing to show her
submission in everything,--unless she were desired to leave the
house. While they were still sitting at table, Reginald Morton
walked into the room. It had been his habit to do so regularly for
the last week. A daily visitor does not wait to have himself
announced. Reginald had considered the matter and had determined
that he would follow his practice just as though Mrs. Morton were
not there. If she were civil to him then would he be very courteous
to her. It had never occurred to him to expect conduct such as that
with which she greeted him. The old woman got up and looked at him
sternly. "My nephew, Reginald," said Lady Ushant, supposing that
some introduction might be necessary. Mrs. Morton gathered the
folds of her dress together and without a word stalked out of the
room. And yet she believed,--she could not but believe,--that her
grandson was on his deathbed in the room, above!

"O Reginald, what are we to?" said Lady Ushant.

"Is she like that to you?"

"She told me last night that I was a stranger, and that I ought to
leave the house."

"And what did you say?"

"I told her I should stay while he wished me to stay. But it is all
so terrible, that I think I had better go."

"I would not stir a step--on her account."

"But why should she be so bitter? I have done nothing to offend
her. It is more than half of even my long lifetime since I saw her.
She is nothing; but I have to think of his comfort. I suppose she
is good to him; and though he may bid me stay such scenes as this
in the house must be a trouble to him." Nevertheless Reginald was
strong in opinion that Lady Ushant ought not to allow herself to be
driven away, and declared his own purpose of coming daily as had of
late been his wont.

Soon after this Reginald was summoned to go upstairs and he again
met the angry woman in the passage, passing her of course without a
word. And then Mary came to see her friend, and she also
encountered Mrs. Morton, who was determined that no one should come
into that house without her knowledge. "Who is that young woman?"
said Mrs. Morton to the old housekeeper.

"That is Miss Masters, my Lady."

"And who is Miss Masters,--and why does she come here at such a
time as this?"

"She is the daughter of Attorney Masters, my Lady. It was she as
was brought up here by Lady Ushant"

"Oh,--that young person."

"She's come here generally of a day now to see her ladyship."

"And is she taken up to my grandson?"

"Oh dear, no, my Lady. She sits with Lady Ushant for an hour or so
and then goes back with Mr. Reginald."

"Oh--that is it, is it? The house is made use of for such purposes
as that!"

"I don't think there is an purposes, my Lady," said Mrs. Hopkins,
almost roused to indignation, although she was talking to the
acknowledged mistress of the house whom she always called "my
lady."

Lady Ushant told the whole story to her young friend, bitterly
bewailing her position. "Reginald tells me not to go, but I do not
think that I can stand it. I should not mind the quarrel so much,--
only that he is so ill."

"She must be a very evil-minded person."

"She was always arrogant and always hard. I can remember her just
the same; but that was so many years ago. She left Bragton then
because she could not banish his mother from the house. But to bear
it all in her heart so long is not like a human being;--let alone a
woman. What did he say to you going home yesterday?"

"Nothing, Lady Ushant"

"Does he know that it will all be his if that poor young man should
die? He never speaks to me as if he thought of it"

"He would certainly not speak to me about it. I do not think he
thinks of it. He is not like that."

"Men do consider such things. And they are only cousins; and they
have never known each other! Oh, Mary!"

"What are you thinking of, Lady Ushant?"

"Men ought not to care for money or position, but they do. If he
comes here, all that I have will be yours."

"Oh, Lady Ushant!"

"It is not much but it will be enough."

"I do not want to hear about such things now."

"But you ought to be told. Ah, dear;--if it could be as I wish!"
The imprudent, weak-minded, loving old woman longed to hear a tale
of mutual love,--longed to do something which should cause such a
tale to be true on both sides. And yet she could not quite bring
herself to express her wish either to the man or to the woman.

Poor Mary almost understood it, but was not quite sure of her
friend's meaning. She was, however, quite sure that if such were
the wish of Lady Ushant's heart, Lady Ushant was wishing in vain.
She had twice walked back to Dillsborough with Reginald Morton, and
he had been more sedate, more middle-aged, less like a lover than
ever. She knew now that she might safely walk with him, being sure
that he was no more likely to talk of love than would have been old
Dr. Nupper had she accepted the offer which he had made her of a
cast in his gig. And now that Reginald would probably become Squire
of Bragton it was more impossible than ever. As Squire of Bragton
he would seek some highly born bride, quite out of her way, whom
she could never know. And then she would see neither him--nor
Bragton any more. Would it not have been better that she should
have married Larry Twentyman and put an end to so many troubles
beside her own?

Again. she walked back with him to Dillsborough, passing as they
always did across the little bridge. He seemed to be very silent as
he went, more so than usual,--and as was her wont with him she only
spoke to him when he addressed her. It was only when he got out on
the road that he told her what was on his mind. "Mary," he said,
"how will it be with me if that poor fellow dies?"

"In what way, Mr. Morton?"

"All that place will be mine. He told me so just now."

"But that would be of course."

"Not at all. He might give it to you if he pleased. He could not
have an heir who would care for it less. But it is right that it
should be so. Whether it would suit my taste or not to live as
Squire of Bragton,--and I do not think it would suit my taste
well,--it ought to be so. I am the next, and it will be my duty."

"I am sure you do not want him to die."

"No, indeed. If I could save him by my right hand,--if I could save
him by my life, I would do it."

"But of all lives it must surely be the best."

"Do you think so? What is such a one likely to do? But then what do
I do, as it is? It is the sort of life you would like,--if you were
a man."

"Yes,--if I were a man," said Mary. Then he again relapsed into
silence and hardly spoke again till he left her at her father's
door.


CHAPTER V

The Last Effort


When Mary reached her home she was at once met by her stepmother in
the passage with tidings of importance. "He is up-stairs in the
drawing-room," said Mrs. Masters. Mary whose mind was laden with
thoughts of Reginald Morton asked who was the he. "Lawrence
Twentyman," said Mrs. Masters. "And now, my dear, do, do think of
it before you go to him." There was no anger now in her
stepmother's face, but entreaty and almost love. She had not called
Mary "my dear" for many weeks past,--not since that journey to
Cheltenham. Now she grasped the girl's hand as she went on with her
prayer. "He is so good and so true! And what better can there be
for you? With your advantages, and Lady Ushant, and all that, you
would be quite the lady at Chowton. Think of your father and
sisters; what a good you could do them! And think of the respect
they all have for him, dining with Lord Rufford the other day and
all the other gentlemen. It isn't only that he has got plenty to
live on, but he knows how to keep it as a man ought. He's sure to
hold up his head and be as good a squire as any of 'em." This was a
very different tale;--a note altogether changed! It must not be
said that the difference of the tale and the change of the note
affected Mary's heart; but her stepmother's manner to her did
soften her. And then why should she regard herself or her own
feelings? Like others she had thought much of her own happiness,
had made herself the centre of her own circle, had, in her
imagination, built castles in the air and filled them according to
her fancy. But her fancies had been all shattered into fragments;
not a stone of her castles was standing; she had told herself
unconsciously that there was no longer a circle and no need for a
centre. That last half-hour which she had passed with Reginald
Morton on the road home had made quite sure that which had been
sure enough before. He was not altogether out of her reach,
thinking only of the new duties which were coming to him. She would
never walk with him again; never put herself in the way of
indulging some fragment of an illusory hope. She was nothing now,
nothing even to herself. Why should she not give herself and her
services to this young man if the young man chose to take her as
she was? It would be well that she should do something in the
world. Why should she not look after his house, and mend his
shirts, and reign over his poultry yard? In this way she would be
useful, and respected by all,--unless perhaps by the man she loved.
"Mary, say that you will think of it once more," pleaded Mrs.
Masters.

"I may go up-stairs,--to my own room?"

"Certainly; do;--go up and smooth your hair. I will tell him that
you are coming to him. He will wait. But he is so much in earnest
now,--and so sad,--that I know he will not come again."

Then Mary went up-stairs, determined to think of it. She began at
once, woman-like, to smooth her hair as her stepmother had
recommended, and to remove the dust of the road from her face and
dress. But not the less was she thinking of it the while. Could she
do it, how much pain would be spared even to herself! How much that
was now bitter as gall in her mouth would become,--not sweet,--but
tasteless. There are times in one's life in which the absence of
all savour seems to be sufficient for life in this world. Were she
to do this thing she thought that she would have strength to banish
that other man from her mind,--and at last from her heart. He would
be there, close to her, but of a different kind and leading a
different life. Mrs. Masters had told her that Larry would be as
good a squire as the best of them; but it should be her care to
keep him and herself in their proper position, to teach him the
vanity of such aspirations. And the real squire opposite, who would
despise her,--for had he not told her that she would be despicable
if she married this man,--would not trouble her then. They might
meet on the roads, and there would be a cold question or two as to
each other's welfare, and a vain shaking of hands,--but they would
know nothing and care for nothing as to each other's thoughts. And
there would come some stately dame who hearing how things had been
many years ago, would perhaps--. But no;--the stately dame should
be received with courtesy, but there should be no patronising. Even
in these few minutes up-stairs she thought much of the stately dame
and was quite sure that she would endure no patronage from Bragton.

She almost thought that she could do it. There were hideous ideas
afflicting her soul dreadfully, but which she strove to banish. Of
course she could not love him,--not at first. But all those who
wished her to marry him, including himself, knew that;--and still
they wished her to marry him. How could that be disgraceful which
all her friends desired? Her father, to whom she was, as she knew
well, the very apple of his eye, wished her to marry this man;--and
yet her father knew that her heart was elsewhere. Had not women
done it by hundreds, by thousands, and had afterwards performed
their duties well as mothers and wives. In other countries, as she
had read, girls took the husbands found for them by their parents
as a matter of course. As she left the room, and slowly crept
down-stairs, she almost thought she would do it. She almost
thought;--but yet, when her hand was on the lock, she could not
bring herself to say that it should be so.

He was not dressed as usual. In the first place, there was a round hat
on the table, such as men wear in cities. She had never before seen
such a hat with him except on a Sunday. And he wore a black cloth coat,
and dark brown pantaloons, and a black silk handkerchief. She observed
it all, and thought that he had not changed for the better. As she
looked into his face, it seemed to her more common,--meaner than
before. No doubt he was good-looking,--but his good-looks were almost
repulsive to her. He had altogether lost his little swagger;--but he
had borne that little swagger well, and in her presence it had never
been offensive. Now he seemed as though he had thrown aside all the old
habits of his life, and was pining to death from the loss of them.
"Mary," he said, "I have come to you,--for the last time. I thought I
would give myself one more chance, and your father told me that I might
have it" He paused, as though expecting an answer. But she had not yet
quite made up her mind. Had she known her mind, she would have answered
him frankly. She was quite resolved as to that. If she could once bring
herself to give him her hand, she would not coy it for a moment. "I
will be your wife, Larry." That was the form on which she had
determined, should she find herself able to yield. But she had not
brought herself to it as yet. "If you can take me, Mary, you
will,--well,--save me from lifelong misery, and make the man who loves
you the best-contented and the happiest man in England."

"But, Larry, I do not love you"

"I will make you love me. Good usage will make a wife love her
husband. Don't you think you can trust me?"

"I do believe that I can trust you for everything good."

"Is that nothing?"

"It is a great deal, Larry, but not enough;--not enough to bring
together a man and woman as husband and wife. I would sooner marry
a man I loved, though I knew he would ill-use me."

"Would you?"

"To marry either would be wrong."

"I sometimes think, dearest, that if I could talk better I should
be better able to persuade you."

"I sometimes think you talk so well that I ought to be persuaded;--
but I can't. It is not lack of talking."

"What is it, then?"

