the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


THE HOLLOW NEEDLE

FURTHER ADVENTURES OF ARSENE LUPIN

BY

MAURICE LEBLANC

AUTHOR OF

"ARSENE LUPIN," "THE BLONDE LADY," ETC.


TRANSLATED BY ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS


CONTENTS

    I. The Shot
   II. Isidore Beautrelet, Sixth-form Schoolboy
  III. The Corpse
   IV. Face to Face
    V. On the Track
   VI. An Historic Secret
  VII. The Treatise of the Needle
 VIII. From Caesar to Lupin
   IX. Open, Sesame!
    X. The Treasures of the Kings of France


ILLUSTRATIONS

Valmeras loved Raymonde's melancholy charm

She put the gun to her shoulder, calmly took aim and fired

Two huge letters, each perhaps a foot long, appeared cut in relief
in the granite of the floor

"We're going now. What do you think of my cockle-shell, Beautrelet?"


THE HOLLOW NEEDLE


CHAPTER ONE

THE SHOT


Raymonde listened. The noise was repeated twice over, clearly enough
to be distinguished from the medley of vague sounds that formed the
great silence of the night and yet too faintly to enable her to tell
whether it was near or far, within the walls of the big country-
house, or outside, among the murky recesses of the park.

She rose softly. Her window was half open: she flung it back wide.
Odo's guide, it appeared, was not privileged to conduct him through
the state apartments of the palace, and the little boy had now
been four days under the ducal roof without catching so much as a
glimpse of his sovereign and cousin. The very next morning, however,
Vanna swept him from his trundle-bed with the announcement that he
was to be received by the Duke that day, and that the tailor was
now waiting to try on his court dress.

He found his mother propped against her pillows, drinking chocolate,
feeding her pet monkey and giving agitated directions to the
maidservants on their knees before the open carriage-trunks. Her
excellency informed Odo that she had that moment received an express
from his grandfather, the old Marquess di Donnaz; that they were
to start next morning for the castle of Donnaz, and that he was to
be presented to the Duke as soon as his Highness had risen from
dinner.

A plump purse lay on the coverlet, and her countenance wore an air
of kindness and animation which, together with the prospect of
wearing a court dress and travelling to his grandfather's castle
in the mountains, so worked on Odo's spirits that, forgetting the
abate's instructions, he sprang to her with an eager caress.

"Child, child," was her only rebuke; and she added, with a tap on
his cheek: "It is lucky I shall have a sword to protect me."

Long before the hour Odo was buttoned into his embroidered coat and
waistcoat.

He would have on the sword at once, and when they sat down to dinner,
though his mother pressed him to eat with more concern than she had
before shown, it went hard with him to put his weapon aside, and
he cast longing eyes at the corner where it lay.

At length a chamberlain summoned them and they set out down the
corridors, attended by two servants.

They saw him pass near the old chapel and turn toward a little door
in the wall. The door must have been open, for the man disappeared
suddenly from view and they failed to hear the usual grating of the
hinges.

"He came from the drawing room," whispered Suzanne.

"No, the stairs and the hall would have brought him out more to the
left--Unless--"

The same idea struck them both. They leant out. Below them, a ladder
stood against the front of the house, resting on the first floor. A
glimmer lit up the stone balcony. And another man, who was also
carrying something, bestrode the baluster, slid down the ladder and
ran away by the same road as the first.

Suzanne, scared to the verge of swooning, fell on her knees,
stammering:

"Let us call out--let us call for help--"

"Who would come? Your father--and if there are more of them left--
and they throw themselves upon him--?"

"Then--then--we might call the servants--Your bell rings on their
floor."

"Yes--yes--perhaps, that's better. If only they come in time!"

Raymonde felt for the electric push near her bed and pressed it with
her finger. They heard the bell ring upstairs and had an impression
that its shrill sound must also reach any one below.

They waited. The silence became terrifying and the very breeze no
longer shook the leaves of the shrubs.

"I'm frightened--frightened," said Suzanne.

And, suddenly, from the profound darkness below them, came the sound
of a struggle, a crash of furniture overturned, words, exclamations
and then, horrible and ominous, a hoarse groan, the gurgle of a man
who is being murdered--

Raymonde leapt toward the door. Suzanne clung desperately to her
arm:

"No--no--don't leave me--I'm frightened--"

Raymonde pushed her aside and darted down the corridor, followed by
Suzanne, who staggered from wall to wall, screaming as she went.
Raymonde reached the staircase, flew down the stairs, flung herself
upon the door of the big drawing room and stopped short, rooted to
the threshold, while Suzanne sank in a heap by her side. Facing
them, at three steps' distance, stood a man, with a lantern in his
hand. He turned it upon the two girls, blinding them with the light,
stared long at their pale faces, and then, without hurrying, with
the calmest movements in the world, took his cap, picked up a scrap
of paper and two bits of straw, removed some footmarks from the
carpet, went to the balcony, turned to the girls, made them a deep
bow and disappeared.

Suzanne was the first to run to the little boudoir which separated
the big drawing-room from her father's bedroom. But, at the
entrance, a hideous sight appalled her. By the slanting rays of the
moon, she saw two apparently lifeless bodies lying close to each
other on the floor. She leaned over one of them:

"Father!--Father!--Is it you? What has happened to you?" she cried,
distractedly.

After a moment, the Comte de Gesvres moved. In a broken voice, he
said:

"Don't be afraid--I am not wounded--Daval?--Is he alive?--The
knife?--The knife?--"

Two men-servants now arrived with candles. Raymonde flung herself
down before the other body and recognized Jean Daval, the count's
private secretary. A little stream of blood trickled from his neck.
His face already wore the pallor of death.

Then she rose, returned to the drawing room, took a gun that hung in
a trophy of arms on the wall and went out on the balcony. Not more
than fifty or sixty seconds had elapsed since the man had set his
foot on the top rung of the ladder. He could not, therefore, be very
far away, the more so as he had taken the precaution to remove the
ladder, in order to prevent the inmates of the house from using it.
And soon she saw him skirting the remains of the old cloister. She
put the gun to her shoulder, calmly took aim and fired. The man
fell.

"That's done it! That's done it!" said one of the servants. "We've
got this one. I'll run down."

"No, Victor, he's getting up.... You had better go down by the
staircase and make straight for the little door in the wall. That's
the only way he can escape."

Victor hurried off, but, before he reached the park, the man fell
down again. Raymonde called the other servant:

"Albert, do you see him down there? Near the main cloister?--"

"Yes, he's crawling in the grass. He's done for--"

"Watch him from here."

"There's no way of escape for him. On the right of the ruins is the
open lawn--"

"And, Victor, do you guard the door, on the left," she said, taking
up her gun.

"But, surely, you are not going down, miss?"

"Yes, yes," she said, with a resolute accent and abrupt movements;
"let me be--I have a cartridge left--If he stirs--"

She went out. A moment later, Albert saw her going toward the ruins.
He called to her from the window:

"He's dragged himself behind the cloister. I can't see him. Be
careful, miss--"

Raymonde went round the old cloisters, to cut off the man's retreat,
and Albert soon lost sight of her. After a few minutes, as he did
not see her return, he became uneasy and, keeping his eye on the
ruins, instead of going down by the stairs he made an effort to
reach the ladder. When he had succeeded, he scrambled down and ran
straight to the cloisters near which he had seen the man last.
Thirty paces farther, he found Raymonde, who was searching with
Victor.

"Well?" he asked.

"There's no laying one's hands on him," replied Victor.

"The little door?"

"I've been there; here's the key."

"Still--he must--"

"Oh, we've got him safe enough, the scoundrel--He'll be ours in ten
minutes."

The farmer and his son, awakened by the shot, now came from the farm
buildings, which were at some distance on the right, but within the
circuit of the walls. They had met no one.

"Of course not," said Albert. "The ruffian can't have left the
ruins--We'll dig him out of some hole or other."

They organized a methodical search, beating every bush, pulling
aside the heavy masses of ivy rolled round the shafts of the
columns. They made sure that the chapel was properly locked and that
none of the panes were broken. They went round the cloisters and
examined every nook and corner. The search was fruitless.

There was but one discovery: at the place where the man had fallen
under Raymonde's gun, they picked up a chauffeur's cap, in very soft
buff leather; besides that, nothing.

        *       *       *       *       *

The gendarmerie of Ouville-la-Riviere were informed at six o'clock
in the morning and at once proceeded to the spot, after sending an
express to the authorities at Dieppe with a note describing the
circumstances of the crime, the imminent capture of the chief
criminal and "the discovery of his headgear and of the dagger with
which the crime had been committed."

At ten o'clock, two hired conveyances came down the gentle slope
that led to the house. One of them, an old-fashioned calash,
contained the deputy public prosecutor and the examining magistrate,
accompanied by his clerk. In the other, a humble fly, were seated
two reporters, representing the Journal de Rouen and a great Paris
paper.

The old chateau came into view--once the abbey residence of the
priors of Ambrumesy, mutilated under the Revolution, both restored
by the Comte de Gesvres, who had now owned it for some twenty years.
It consists of a main building, surmounted by a pinnacled clock-
tower, and two wings, each of which is surrounded by a flight of
steps with a stone balustrade. Looking across the walls of the park
and beyond the upland supported by the high Norman cliffs, you catch
a glimpse of the blue line of the Channel between the villages of
Sainte-Marguerite and Varengeville.

Here the Comte de Gesvres lived with his daughter Suzanne, a
delicate, fair-haired, pretty creature, and his niece Raymonde de
Saint-Veran, whom he had taken to live with him two years before,
when the simultaneous death of her father and mother left Raymonde
an orphan. Life at the chateau was peaceful and regular. A few
neighbors paid an occasional visit. In the summer, the count took
the two girls almost every day to Dieppe. He was a tall man, with a
handsome, serious face and hair that was turning gray. He was very
rich, managed his fortune himself and looked after his extensive
estates with the assistance of his secretary, Jean Daval.

Immediately upon his arrival, the examining magistrate took down the
first observations of Sergeant Quevillon of the gendarmes. The
capture of the criminal, imminent though it might be, had not yet
been effected, but every outlet of the park was held. Escape was
impossible.

The little company next crossed the chapter-hall and the refectory,
both of which are on the ground floor, and went up to the first
story. They at once remarked the perfect order that prevailed in the
drawing room. Not a piece of furniture, not an ornament but appeared
to occupy its usual place; nor was there any gap among the ornaments
or furniture. On the right and left walls hung magnificent Flemish
tapestries with figures. On the panels of the wall facing the
windows were four fine canvases, in contemporary frames,
representing mythological scenes. These were the famous pictures by
Rubens which had been left to the Comte de Gesvres, together with
the Flemish tapestries, by his maternal uncle, the Marques de
Bobadilla, a Spanish grandee.

M. Filleul remarked:

"If the motive of the crime was theft, this drawing room, at any
rate, was not the object of it."

"You can't tell!" said the deputy, who spoke little, but who, when
he did, invariably opposed the magistrate's views.

"Why, my dear sir, the first thought of a burglar would be to carry
off those pictures and tapestries, which are universally renowned."

"Perhaps there was no time."

"We shall see."

At that moment, the Comte de Gesvres entered, accompanied by the
doctor. The count, who did not seem to feel the effects of the
attack to which he had been subjected, welcomed the two officials.
Then he opened the door of the boudoir.

This room, which no one had been allowed to enter since the
discovery of the crime, differed from the drawing room inasmuch as
it presented a scene of the greatest disorder. Two chairs were
overturned, one of the tables smashed to pieces and several objects
--a traveling-clock, a portfolio, a box of stationery--lay on the
floor. And there was blood on some of the scattered pieces of note-
paper.

The doctor turned back the sheet that covered the corpse. Jean
Daval, dressed in his usual velvet suit, with a pair of nailed boots
on his feet, lay stretched on his back, with one arm folded beneath
him. His collar and tie had been removed and his shirt opened,
revealing a large wound in the chest.

"Death must have been instantaneous," declared the doctor. "One blow
of the knife was enough."

"It was, no doubt, the knife which I saw on the drawing-room
mantelpiece, next to a leather cap?" said the examining magistrate.

"Yes," said the Comte de Gesvres, "the knife was picked up here. It
comes from the same trophy in the drawing room from which my niece,
Mlle. de Saint-Veran, snatched the gun. As for the chauffeur's cap,
that evidently belongs to the murderer."

M. Filleul examined certain further details in the room, put a few
questions to the doctor and then asked M. de Gesvres to tell him
what he had seen and heard. The count worded his story as follows:

"Jean Daval woke me up. I had been sleeping badly, for that matter,
with gleams of consciousness in which I seemed to hear noises, when,
suddenly opening my eyes, I saw Daval standing at the foot of my
bed, with his candle in his hand and fully dressed--as he is now,
for he often worked late into the night. He seemed greatly excited
and said, in a low voice: 'There's some one in the drawing room.' I
heard a noise myself. I got up and softly pushed the door leading to
this boudoir. At the same moment, the door over there, which opens
into the big drawing room, was thrown back and a man appeared who
leaped at me and stunned me with a blow on the temple. I am telling
you this without any details, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, for
the simple reason that I remember only the principal facts, and that
these facts followed upon one another with extraordinary swiftness."

"And after that?--"

"After that, I don't know--I fainted. When I came to, Daval lay
stretched by my side, mortally wounded."

"At first sight, do you suspect no one?"

"No one."

"You have no enemy?"

"I know of none."

"Nor M. Daval either?"

"Daval! An enemy? He was the best creature that ever lived. M. Daval
was my secretary for twenty years and, I may say, my confidant; and
I have never seen him surrounded with anything but love and
friendship."

"Still, there has been a burglary and there has been a murder: there
must be a motive for all that."

"The motive? Why, it was robbery pure and simple."

"Robbery? Have you been robbed of something, then?"

"No, nothing."

"In that case--?"

"In that case, if they have stolen nothing and if nothing is
missing, they at least took something away."

"What?"

"I don't know. But my daughter and my niece will tell you, with
absolute certainty, that they saw two men in succession cross the
park and that those two men were carrying fairly heavy loads."

"The young ladies--"

"The young ladies may have been dreaming, you think? I should be
tempted to believe it, for I have been exhausting myself in
inquiries and suppositions ever since this morning. However, it is
easy enough to question them."

The two cousins were sent for to the big drawing room. Suzanne,
still quite pale and trembling, could hardly speak. Raymonde, who
was more energetic, more of a man, better looking, too, with the
golden glint in her brown eyes, described the events of the night
and the part which she had played in them.

"So I may take it, mademoiselle, that your evidence is positive?"

"Absolutely. The men who went across the park were carrying things
away with them."

"And the third man?"

"He went from here empty-handed."

"Could you describe him to us?"

"He kept on dazzling us with the light of his lantern. All that I
could say is that he is tall and heavily built."

"Is that how he appeared to you, mademoiselle?" asked the
magistrate, turning to Suzanne de Gesvres.

"Yes--or, rather, no," said Suzanne, reflecting. "I thought he was
about the middle height and slender."

M. Filleul smiled; he was accustomed to differences of opinion and
sight in witnesses to one and the same fact:

"So we have to do, on the one hand, with a man, the one in the
drawing room, who is, at the same time, tall and short, stout and
thin, and, on the other, with two men, those in the park, who are
accused of removing from that drawing room objects--which are still
here!"

M. Filleul was a magistrate of the ironic school, as he himself
would say. He was also a very ambitious magistrate and one who did
not object to an audience nor to an occasion to display his tactful
resource in public, as was shown by the increasing number of persons
who now crowded into the room. The journalists had been joined by
the farmer and his son, the gardener and his wife, the indoor
servants of the chateau and the two cabmen who had driven the flies
from Dieppe.

M. Filleul continued:

"There is also the question of agreeing upon the way in which the
third person disappeared. Was this the gun you fired, mademoiselle,
and from this window?"

"Yes. The man reached the tombstone which is almost buried under the
brambles, to the left of the cloisters."

"But he got up again?"

"Only half. Victor ran down at once to guard the little door and I
followed him, leaving the second footman, Albert, to keep watch
here."

Albert now gave his evidence and the magistrate concluded:

"So, according to you, the wounded man was not able to escape on the
left, because your fellow-servant was watching the door, nor on the
right, because you would have seen him cross the lawn. Logically,
therefore, he is, at the present moment, in the comparatively
restricted space that lies before our eyes."

"I am sure of it."

"And you, mademoiselle?"

"Yes."

"And I, too," said Victor.

The deputy prosecutor exclaimed, with a leer:

"The field of inquiry is quite narrow. We have only to continue the
search commenced four hours ago."

"We may be more fortunate."

M. Filleul took the leather cap from the mantel, examined it and,
beckoning to the sergeant of gendarmes, whispered:

"Sergeant, send one of your men to Dieppe at once. Tell him to go to
Maigret, the hatter, in the Rue de la Barre, and ask M. Maigret to
tell him, if possible, to whom this cap was sold."

The "field of inquiry," in the deputy's phrase, was limited to the
space contained between the house, the lawn on the right and the
angle formed by the left wall and the wall opposite the house, that
is to say, a quadrilateral of about a hundred yards each way, in
which the ruins of Ambrumesy, the famous mediaeval monastery, stood
out at intervals.

They at once noticed the traces left by the fugitive in the trampled
grass. In two places, marks of blackened blood, now almost dried up,
were observed. After the turn at the end of the cloisters, there was
nothing more to be seen, as the nature of the ground, here covered
with pine-needles, did not lend itself to the imprint of a body.
But, in that case, how had the wounded man succeeded in escaping the
eyes of Raymonde, Victor and Albert? There was nothing but a few
brakes, which the servants and the gendarmes had beaten over and
over again, and a number of tombstones, under which they had
explored. The examining magistrate made the gardener, who had the
key, open the chapel, a real gem of carving, a shrine in stone which
had been respected by time and the revolutionaries, and which, with
the delicate sculpture work of its porch and its miniature
population of statuettes, was always looked upon as a marvelous
specimen of the Norman-Gothic style. The chapel, which was very
simple in the interior, with no other ornament than its marble
altar, offered no hiding-place. Besides, the fugitive would have had
to obtain admission. And by what means?

The inspection brought them to the little door in the wall that
served as an entrance for the visitors to the ruins. It opened on a
sunk road running between the park wall and a copsewood containing
some abandoned quarries. M. Filleul stooped forward: the dust of the
road bore marks of anti-skid pneumatic tires. Raymonde and Victor
remembered that, after the shot, they had seemed to hear the throb
of a motor-car.

The magistrate suggested:

"The man must have joined his confederates."

"Impossible!" cried Victor. "I was here while mademoiselle and
Albert still had him in view."

"Nonsense, he must be somewhere! Outside or inside: we have no
choice!"

"He is here," the servants insisted, obstinately.

The magistrate shrugged his shoulders and went back to the house in
a more or less sullen mood. There was no doubt that it was an
unpromising case. A theft in which nothing had been stolen; an
invisible prisoner: what could be less satisfactory?

It was late. M. de Gesvres asked the officials and the two
journalists to stay to lunch. They ate in silence and then M.
Filleul returned to the drawing room, where he questioned the
servants. But the sound of a horse's hoofs came from the courtyard
and, a moment after, the gendarme who had been sent to Dieppe
entered.

"Well, did you see the hatter?" exclaimed the magistrate, eager at
last to obtain some positive information.

"I saw M. Maigret. The cap was sold to a cab-driver."

"A cab-driver!"

"Yes, a driver who stopped his fly before the shop and asked to be
supplied with a yellow-leather chauffeur's cap for one of his
customers. This was the only one left. He paid for it, without
troubling about the size, and drove off. He was in a great hurry."

"What sort of fly was it?"

"A calash."

"And on what day did this happen?"

"On what day? Why, to-day, at eight o'clock this morning."

"This morning? What are you talking about?"

"The cap was bought this morning."

"But that's impossible, because it was found last night in the park.
If it was found there, it must have been there; and, consequently,
it must have been bought before."

"The hatter told me it was bought this morning."

There was a moment of general bewilderment. The nonplussed
magistrate strove to understand. Suddenly, he started, as though
struck with a gleam of light:

"Fetch the cabman who brought us here this morning! The man who
drove the calash! Fetch him at once!"

The sergeant of gendarmes and his subordinate ran off to the
stables. In a few minutes, the sergeant returned alone.

"Where's the cabman?"

"He asked for food in the kitchen, ate his lunch and then--"

"And then--?"

"He went off."

"With his fly?"

"No. Pretending that he wanted to go and see a relation at Ouville,
he borrowed the groom's bicycle. Here are his hat and greatcoat."

"But did he leave bare-headed?"

"No, he took a cap from his pocket and put it on."

"A cap?"

"Yes, a yellow leather cap, it seems."

"A yellow leather cap? Why, no, we've got it here!"

"That's true, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, but his is just like
it."

The deputy sniggered:

"Very funny! Most amusing! There are two caps--One, the real one,
which constituted our only piece of evidence, has gone off on the
head of the sham flyman! The other, the false one, is in your hands.
Oh, the fellow has had us nicely!"

"Catch him! Fetch him back!" cried M. Filleul. "Two of your men on
horseback, Sergeant Quevillon, and at full speed!"

"He is far away by this time," said the deputy.

"He can be as far as he pleases, but still we must lay hold of him."

"I hope so; but I think, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that your
efforts should be concentrated here above all. Would you mind
reading this scrap of paper, which I have just found in the pocket
of the coat?"

"Which coat?"

"The driver's."

And the deputy prosecutor handed M. Filleul a piece of paper, folded
in four, containing these few words written in pencil, in a more or
less common hand:

"Woe betide the young lady, if she has killed the governor!"

The incident caused a certain stir.

"A word to the wise!" muttered the deputy. "We are now forewarned."

"Monsieur le Comte," said the examining magistrate, "I beg you not
to be alarmed. Nor you either, mademoiselle. This threat is of no
importance, as the police are on the spot. We shall take every
precaution and I will answer for your safety. As for you, gentlemen.
I rely on your discretion. You have been present at this inquiry,
thanks to my excessive kindness toward the Press, and it would be
making me an ill return--"

He interrupted himself, as though an idea had struck him, looked at
the two young men, one after the other, and, going up to the first,
asked:

"What paper do you represent, sir?"

"The Journal de Rouen."

"Have you your credentials?"

"Here."

The card was in order. There was no more to be said. M. Filleul
turned to the other reporter:

"And you, sir?"

"I?"

"Yes, you: what paper do you belong to?"

"Why, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, I write for a number of
papers--all over the place--"

"Your credentials?"

"I haven't any."

"Oh! How is that?"

"For a newspaper to give you a card, you have to be on its regular
staff."

"Well?"

"Well, I am only an occasional contributor, a free-lance. I send
articles to this newspaper and that. They are published or declined
according to circumstances."

"In that case, what is your name? Where are your papers?"

"My name would tell you nothing. As for papers, I have none."

"You have no paper of any kind to prove your profession!"

"I have no profession."

"But look here, sir," cried the magistrate, with a certain asperity,
"you can't expect to preserve your incognito after introducing
yourself here by a trick and surprising the secrets of the police!"

"I beg to remark, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that you asked me
nothing when I came in, and that therefore I had nothing to say.
Besides, it never struck me that your inquiry was secret, when
everybody was admitted--including even one of the criminals!"

He spoke softly, in a tone of infinite politeness. He was quite a
young man, very tall, very slender and dressed without the least
attempt at fashion, in a jacket and trousers both too small for him.
He had a pink face like a girl's, a broad forehead topped with
close-cropped hair, and a scrubby and ill-trimmed fair beard. His
bright eyes gleamed with intelligence. He seemed not in the least
embarrassed and wore a pleasant smile, free from any shade of
banter.

M. Filleul looked at him with an aggressive air of distrust. The two
gendarmes came forward. The young man exclaimed, gaily:

"Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, you clearly suspect me of being an
accomplice. But, if that were so, would I not have slipped away at
the right moment, following the example of my fellow-criminal?"

"You might have hoped--"

"Any hope would have been absurd. A moment's reflection, Monsieur le
Juge d'Instruction, will make you agree with me that, logically
speaking--"

M. Filleul looked him straight in the eyes and said, sharply:

"No more jokes! Your name?"

"Isidore Beautrelet."

"Your occupation?"

"Sixth-form pupil at the Lycee Janson-de-Sailly."

M. Filleul opened a pair of startled eyes.

"What are you talking about? Sixth-form pupil--"

"At the Lycee Janson, Rue de la Pompe, number--"

"Oh, look here," exclaimed M. Filleul, "you're trying to take me in!
This won't do, you know; a joke can go too far!"

"I must say, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that your astonishment
surprises me. What is there to prevent my being a sixth-form pupil
at the Lycee Janson? My beard, perhaps? Set your mind at ease: my
beard is false!"

Isidore Beautrelet pulled off the few curls that adorned his chin,
and his beardless face appeared still younger and pinker, a genuine
schoolboy's face. And, with a laugh like a child's, revealing his
white teeth:

"Are you convinced now?" he asked. "Do you want more proofs? Here,
you can read the address on these letters from my father: 'To
Monsieur Isidore Beautrelet, Indoor Pupil, Lycee Janson-de-Sailly.'"

Convinced or not, M. Filleul did not look as if he liked the story.
He asked, gruffly:

"What are you doing here?"

"Why--I'm--I'm improving my mind."

"There are schools for that: yours, for instance."

"You forget, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that this is the
twenty-third of April and that we are in the middle of the Easter
holidays."

"Well?"

"Well, I have every right to spend my holidays as I please."

"Your father--"

"My father lives at the other end of the country, in Savoy, and he
himself advised me to take a little trip on the North Coast."

"With a false beard?"

"Oh, no! That's my own idea. At school, we talk a great deal about
mysterious adventures; we read detective stories, in which people
disguise themselves; we imagine any amount of terrible and intricate
cases. So I thought I would amuse myself; and I put on this false
beard. Besides, I enjoyed the advantage of being taken seriously and
I pretended to be a Paris reporter. That is how, last night, after
an uneventful period of more than a week, I had the pleasure of
making the acquaintance of my Rouen colleague; and, this morning,
when he heard of the Ambrumesy murder, he very kindly suggested that
I should come with him and that we should share the cost of a fly."

Isidore Beautrelet said all this with a frank and artless simplicity
of which it was impossible not to feel the charm. M. Filleul
himself, though maintaining a distrustful reserve, took a certain
pleasure in listening to him. He asked him, in a less peevish tone:

"And are you satisfied with your expedition?"

"Delighted! All the more as I had never been present at a case of
the sort and I find that this one is not lacking in interest."

"Nor in that mysterious intricacy which you prize so highly--"

"And which is so stimulating, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction! I know
nothing more exciting than to see all the facts coming up out of the
shadow, clustering together, so to speak, and gradually forming the
probable truth."

"The probable truth! You go pretty fast, young man! Do you suggest
that you have your little solution of the riddle ready?"

"Oh, no!" replied Beautrelet, with a laugh.

"Only--it seems to me that there are certain points on which it is
not impossible to form an opinion; and others, even, are so precise
as to warrant--a conclusion."

"Oh, but this is becoming very curious and I shall get to know
something at last! For I confess, to my great confusion, that I know
nothing."

"That is because you have not had time to reflect, Monsieur le Juge
d'Instruction. The great thing is to reflect. Facts very seldom fail
to carry their own explanation!"

"And, according to you, the facts which we have just ascertained
carry their own explanation?"

"Don't you think so yourself? In any case, I have ascertained none
besides those which are set down in the official report."

"Good! So that, if I were to ask you which were the objects stolen
from this room--"

"I should answer that I know."

"Bravo! My gentleman knows more about it than the owner himself. M.
de Gesvres has everything accounted for: M. Isidore Beautrelet has
not. He misses a bookcase in three sections and a life-size statue
which nobody ever noticed. And, if I asked you the name of the
murderer?"

"I should again answer that I know it."

All present gave a start. The deputy and the journalist drew nearer.
M. de Gesvres and the two girls, impressed by Beautrelet's tranquil
assurance, listened attentively.

"You know the murderer's name?"

"Yes."

"And the place where he is concealed, perhaps?"

"Yes."

M. Filleul rubbed his hands.

"What a piece of luck! This capture will do honor to my career. And
can you make me these startling revelations now?"

"Yes, now--or rather, if you do not mind, in an hour or two, when I
shall have assisted at your inquiry to the end."

"No, no, young man, here and now, please." At that moment Raymonde
de Saint-Veran, who had not taken her eyes from Isidore Beautrelet
since the beginning of this scene, came up to M. Filleul:

"Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction--"

"Yes, mademoiselle?"

She hesitated for two or three seconds, with her eyes fixed on
Beautrelet, and then, addressing M. Filleul:

"I should like you to ask monsieur the reason why he was walking
yesterday in the sunk road which leads up to the little door."

It was an unexpected and dramatic stroke. Isidore Beautrelet
appeared nonplussed:

"I, mademoiselle? I? You saw me yesterday?"

Raymonde remained thoughtful, with her eyes upon Beautrelet, as
though she were trying to settle her own conviction, and then said,
in a steady voice:

"At four o'clock in the afternoon, as I was crossing the wood, I met
in the sunk road a young man of monsieur's height, dressed like him
and wearing a beard cut in the same way--and I received a very clear
impression that he was trying to hide."

"And it was I?"

"I could not say that as an absolute certainty, for my recollection
is a little vague. Still--still, I think so--if not, it would be an
unusual resemblance--"

M. Filleul was perplexed. Already taken in by one of the
confederates, was he now going to let himself be tricked by this
self-styled schoolboy? Certainly, the young man's manner spoke in
his favor; but one can never tell!

"What have you to say, sir?"

"That mademoiselle is mistaken, as I can easily show you with one
word. Yesterday, at the time stated, I was at Veules."

"You will have to prove it, you will have to. In any case, the
position is not what it was. Sergeant, one of your men will keep
monsieur company."

Isidore Beautrelet's face denoted a keen vexation.

"Will it be for long?"

"Long enough to collect the necessary information."

"Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, I beseech you to collect it with
all possible speed and discretion."

"Why?"

"My father is an old man. We are very much attached to each other--
and I would not have him suffer on my account."

The more or less pathetic note in his voice made a bad impression on
M. Filleul. It suggested a scene in a melodrama. Nevertheless, he
promised:

"This evening--or to-morrow at latest, I shall know what to think."

The afternoon was wearing on. The examining magistrate returned to
the ruins of the cloisters, after giving orders that no unauthorized
persons were to be admitted, and patiently, methodically, dividing
the ground into lots which were successively explored, himself
directed the search. But at the end of the day he was no farther
than at the start; and he declared, before an army of reporters who,
during that time, had invaded the chateau:

"Gentlemen, everything leads us to suppose that the wounded man is
here, within our reach; everything, that is, except the reality, the
fact. Therefore, in our humble opinion, he must have escaped and we
shall find him outside."

By way of precaution, however, he arranged, with the sergeant of
gendarmes, for a complete watch to be kept over the park and, after
making a fresh examination of the two drawing rooms, visiting the
whole of the chateau and surrounding himself with all the necessary
information, he took the road back to Dieppe, accompanied by the
deputy prosecutor.

        *       *       *       *       *

Night fell. As the boudoir was to remain locked, Jean Daval's body
had been moved to another room. Two women from the neighborhood sat
up with it, assisted by Suzanne and Raymonde. Downstairs, young
Isidore Beautrelet slept on the bench in the old oratory, under the
watchful eye of the village policeman, who had been attached to his
person. Outside, the gendarmes, the farmer and a dozen peasants had
taken up their position among the ruins and along the walls.

All was still until eleven o'clock; but, at ten minutes past eleven,
a shot echoed from the other side of the house.

"Attention!" roared the sergeant. "Two men remain here: you,
Fossier--and you, Lecanu--The others at the double!"

They all rushed forward and ran round the house on the left. A
figure was seen to make away in the dark. Then, suddenly, a second
shot drew them farther on, almost to the borders of the farm. And,
all at once, as they arrived, in a band, at the hedge which lines
the orchard, a flame burst out, to the right of the farmhouse, and
other names also rose in a thick column. It was a barn burning,
stuffed to the ridge with straw.

"The scoundrels!" shouted the sergeant. "They've set fire to it.
Have at them, lads! They can't be far away!"

But the wind was turning the flames toward the main building; and it
became necessary, before all things, to ward off the danger. They
all exerted themselves with the greater ardor inasmuch as M. de
Gesvres, hurrying to the scene of the disaster, encouraged them with
the promise of a reward. By the time that they had mastered the
flames, it was two o'clock in the morning. All pursuit would have
been vain.

"We'll look into it by daylight," said the sergeant. "They are sure
to have left traces: we shall find them."

"And I shall not be sorry," added M. de Gesvres, "to learn the
reason of this attack. To set fire to trusses of straw strikes me as
a very useless proceeding."

"Come with me, Monsieur le Comte: I may be able to tell you the
reason."

Together they reached the ruins of the cloisters. The sergeant
called out:

"Lecanu!--Fossier!"

The other gendarmes were already hunting for their comrades whom
they had left standing sentry. They ended by finding them at a few
paces from the little door. The two men were lying full length on
the ground, bound and gagged, with bandages over their eyes.

"Monsieur le Comte," muttered the sergeant, while his men were being
released; "Monsieur le Comte, we have been tricked like children."

"How so?"

"The shots--the attack on the barn--the fire--all so much humbug to
get us down there--a diversion. During that time they were tying up
our two men and the business was done."

"What business?"

"Carrying off the wounded man, of course!"

"You don't mean to say you think--?"

"Think? Why, it's as plain as a pikestaff! The idea came to me ten
minutes ago--but I'm a fool not to have thought of it earlier. We
should have nabbed them all." Quevillon stamped his foot on the
ground, with a sudden attack of rage. "But where, confound it, where
did they go through? Which way did they carry him off? For, dash it
all, we beat the ground all day; and a man can't hide in a tuft of
grass, especially when he's wounded! It's witchcraft, that's what it
is!--"

Nor was this the last surprise awaiting Sergeant Quevillon. At dawn,
when they entered the oratory which had been used as a cell for
young Isidore Beautrelet, they realized that young Isidore
Beautrelet had vanished.

On a chair slept the village policeman, bent in two. By his side
stood a water-bottle and two tumblers. At the bottom of one of those
tumblers a few grains of white powder.

On examination, it was proved, first, that young Isidore Beautrelet
had administered a sleeping draught to the village policeman;
secondly, that he could only have escaped by a window situated at a
height of seven or eight feet in the wall; and lastly--a charming
detail, this--that he could only have reached this window by using
the back of his warder as a footstool.


CHAPTER TWO

ISIDORE BEAUTRELET, SIXTH-FORM SCHOOLBOY


From the Grand Journal.

LATEST NEWS

DOCTOR DELATTRE KIDNAPPED 
A MAD PIECE OF CRIMINAL DARING

At the moment of going to press, we have received an item of news
which we dare not guarantee as authentic, because of its very
improbable character. We print it, therefore, with all reserve.

Yesterday evening, Dr. Delattre, the well-known surgeon, was
present, with his wife and daughter, at the performance of Hernani
at the Comedie Francaise. At the commencement of the third act, that
is to say, at about ten o'clock, the door of his box opened and a
gentleman, accompanied by two others, leaned over to the doctor and
said to him, in a low voice, but loud enough for Mme. Delattre to
hear:

"Doctor, I have a very painful task to fulfil and I shall be very
grateful to you if you will make it as easy for me as you can."

"Who are you, sir?"

"M. Thezard, commissary of police of the first district; and my
instructions are to take you to M. Dudouis, at the prefecture."

"But--"

"Not a word, doctor, I entreat you, not a movement--There is some
regrettable mistake; and that is why we must act in silence and not
attract anybody's attention. You will be back, I have no doubt,
before the end of the performance."

The doctor rose and went with the commissary. At the end of the
performance, he had not returned. Mme. Delattre, greatly alarmed,
drove to the office of the commissary of police. There she found the
real M. Thezard and discovered, to her great terror, that the
individual who had carried off her husband was an impostor.

Inquiries made so far have revealed the fact that the doctor stepped
into a motor car and that the car drove off in the direction of the
Concorde.

Readers will find further details of this incredible adventure in
our second edition.

        *       *       *       *       *

Incredible though it might be, the adventure was perfectly true.
Besides, the issue was not long delayed and the Grand Journal, while
confirming the story in its midday edition, described in a few lines
the dramatic ending with which it concluded:

THE STORY ENDS

AND

GUESS-WORK BEGINS

Dr. Delattre was brought back to 78, Rue Duret, at nine o'clock this
morning, in a motor car which drove away immediately at full speed.

No. 78, Rue Duret, is the address of Dr. Delattre's clinical
surgery, at which he arrives every morning at the same hour. When we
sent in our card, the doctor, though closeted with the chief of the
detective service, was good enough to consent to receive us.

"All that I can tell you," he said, in reply to our questions, "is
that I was treated with the greatest consideration. My three
companions were the most charming people I have ever met,
exquisitely well-mannered and bright and witty talkers: a quality
not to be despised, in view of the length of the journey."

"How long did it take?"

"About four hours and as long returning."

"And what was the object of the journey?"

"I was taken to see a patient whose condition rendered an immediate
operation necessary."

"And was the operation successful?"

"Yes, but the consequences may be dangerous. I would answer for the
patient here. Down there--under his present conditions--"

"Bad conditions?"

"Execrable!--A room in an inn--and the practically absolute
impossibility of being attended to."

"Then what can save him?"

"A miracle--and his constitution, which is an exceptionally strong
one."

"And can you say nothing more about this strange patient?"

"No. In the first place, I have taken an oath; and, secondly, I have
received a present of ten thousand francs for my free surgery. If I
do not keep silence, this sum will be taken from me."

"You are joking! Do you believe that?"

"Indeed I do. The men all struck me as being very much in earnest."

This is the statement made to us by Dr. Delattre. And we know, on
the other hand, that the head of the detective service, in spite of
all his insisting, has not yet succeeded in extracting any more
precise particulars from him as to the operation which he performed,
the patient whom he attended or the district traversed by the car.
It is difficult, therefore, to arrive at the truth.

        *       *       *       *       *

This truth, which the writer of the interview confessed himself
unable to discover, was guessed by the more or less clear-sighted
minds that perceived a connection with the facts which had occurred
the day before at the Chateau d'Ambrumesy, and which were reported,
down to the smallest detail, in all the newspapers of that day.
There was evidently a coincidence to be reckoned with in the
disappearance of a wounded burglar and the kidnapping of a famous
surgeon.

The judicial inquiry, moreover, proved the correctness of the
hypothesis. By following the track of the sham flyman, who had fled
on a bicycle, they were able to show that he had reached the forest
of Arques, at some ten miles' distance, and that from there, after
throwing his bicycle into a ditch, he had gone to the village of
Saint-Nicolas, whence he had dispatched the following telegram:


  A. L. N., Post-office 45, Paris. 

  Situation desperate. Operation urgently necessary. 
  Send celebrity by national road fourteen.


The evidence was undeniable. Once apprised the accomplices in Paris
hastened to make their arrangements. At ten o'clock in the evening
they sent their celebrity by National Road No. 14, which skirts the
forest of Arques and ends at Dieppe. During this time, under cover
of the fire which they themselves had caused, the gang of burglars
carried off their leader and moved him to an inn, where the
operation took place on the arrival of the surgeon, at two o'clock
in the morning.

About that there was no doubt. At Pontoise, at Gournay, at Forges,
Chief-inspector Ganimard, who was sent specially from Paris, with
Inspector Folenfant, as his assistant, ascertained that a motor car
had passed in the course of the previous night. The same on the road
from Dieppe to Ambrumesy. And, though the traces of the car were
lost at about a mile and a half from the chateau, at least a number
of footmarks were seen between the little door in the park wall and
the abbey ruins. Besides, Ganimard remarked that the lock of the
little door had been forced.

So all was explained. It remained to decide which inn the doctor had
spoken of: an easy piece of work for a Ganimard, a professional
ferret, a patient old stager of the police. The number of inns is
limited and this one, given the condition of the wounded man, could
only be one quite close to Ambrumesy. Ganimard and Sergeant
Quevillon set to work. Within a circle of five hundred yards, of a
thousand yards, of fifteen hundred yards, they visited and ransacked
everything that could pass for an inn. But, against all expectation,
the dying man persisted in remaining invisible.

Ganimard became more resolved than ever. He came back to sleep at
the chateau, on the Saturday night, with the intention of making his
personal inquiry on the Sunday. On Sunday morning, he learned that,
during the night, a posse of gendarmes had seen a figure gliding
along the sunk road, outside the wall. Was it an accomplice who had
come back to investigate? Were they to suppose that the leader of
the gang had not left the cloisters or the neighborhood of the
cloisters?

That night, Ganimard openly sent the squad of gendarmes to the farm
and posted himself and Folenfant outside the walls, near the little
door.

A little before midnight, a person passed out of the wood, slipped
between them, went through the door and entered the park. For three
hours, they saw him wander from side to side across the ruins,
stooping, climbing up the old pillars, sometimes remaining for long
minutes without moving. Then he went back to the door and again
passed between the two inspectors.

Ganimard caught him by the collar, while Folenfant seized him round
the body. He made no resistance of any kind and, with the greatest
docility, allowed them to bind his wrists and take him to the house.
But, when they attempted to question him, he replied simply that he
owed them no account of his doings and that he would wait for the
arrival of the examining magistrate. Thereupon, they fastened him
firmly to the foot of a bed, in one of the two adjoining rooms which
they occupied.

At nine o'clock on Monday morning, as soon as M. Filleul had
arrived, Ganimard announced the capture which he had made. The
prisoner was brought downstairs. It was Isidore Beautrelet.

"M. Isidore Beautrelet!" exclaimed M. Filleul with an air of
rapture, holding out both his hands to the newcomer. "What a
delightful surprise! Our excellent amateur detective here! And at
our disposal too! Why, it's a windfall!--M. Chief-inspector, allow
me to introduce to you M. Isidore Beautrelet, a sixth-form pupil at
the Lycee Janson-de-Sailly."

Ganimard seemed a little nonplussed. Isidore made him a very low
bow, as though he were greeting a colleague whom he knew how to
esteem at his true value, and, turning to M. Filleul:

"It appears, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that you have received
a satisfactory account of me?"

All had white turbans. The snapshot reproduced in the illustration
shows the Amir accompanied by the Governor of Baku just stepping on
board.

There is a regular mail service twice a week in summer, from
April to the end of October, and once a week in winter, on the
Caspian between Baku and Enzeli in Persia, the Russian
Government paying a subsidy to the Kavkas and Mercury Steam
Navigation Company for the purpose of conveying passengers, mails
(and, in the event of war, troops) into Persia and back.

There are also a number of coasting steamers constantly plying
between the various ports on the Caspian both on the Russian and
Persian coast.

The hurricane having abated there was a prospect of a fair voyage
and the probability of landing at Enzeli in Persia, so when the
Tuesday came I went on board the old rickety paddle-steamer (no
less than forty-five years old) which was to convey me to that port.

She was one of the Mercury-Caucasus Co. fleet, and very dirty she
was, too.

It is perhaps right to mention that for the first time in Russia,
purposeless rudeness and insolence came to my notice on the
part of the ticket officials of the Mercury line. They behaved like
stupid children, and were absolutely incompetent to do the work which
had been entrusted to them.

They were somewhat surprised when I took them to task and made them
"sit up."

Having found that they had played the fool with the wrong man they
instantly became very meek and obliging. It is nevertheless a great
pity that the Mercury Company should employ men of this kind who,
for some aim of their own, annoy passengers, both foreign and
Russian, and are a disgrace to the Company and their country.

On board ship the captain, officers and stewards were extremely
civil.
Nearly all the captains of the Caspian steamers were
Norwegian or from Finland, and were jolly fellows. The cabins were
very much inhabited, so much so that it was difficult to sleep in
them at all.

Insects so voracious and in such quantities and variety were in
full possession of the berths, that they gave one as lively a night
as it is possible for mortals to have.

Fortunately the journey was not a long one, and having duly departed
at midnight from Baku I reached Lenkoran the next day, with its
picturesque background of mountains and thickly-wooded
country. This spot is renowned for tiger-shooting.

Our next halt was at Astara, where there were a number of wooden
sheds and drinking saloons,--a dreadful place, important only because
on the Perso-Russian boundary line formed by the river of the same
name.

We landed here a number of police officers, who were met by a
deputation of some fifty Persian-looking men, who threw their arms
round their necks and in turn lustily kissed them on both cheeks.

It was a funny sight.
When we got on board again after a couple of hours on shore the wind
rose and we tossed about considerably. Another sleepless night on
the "living" mattress in the bunk, and early in the morning we
reached the Persian port of Enzeli.

CHAPTER IV

The Port of Enzeli--Troublesome landing--Flat-bottomed boats--A
special permit--Civility of officials--Across the Murd-ap
lagoon--Piri-Bazaar--A self-imposed golden rule--Where our stock
came from--The drive to Resht--The bazaar--The native shops and
foreign goods--Ghilan's trade--The increase in trade--British and
Russian competitions--Sugar--Tobacco--Hotels--The British Consulate--The
Governor's palace--H.E.

Salare Afkham--A Swiss hotel--Banks.

One calls Enzeli a "port" _pour façon de parler_, for Persia has
no harbours at all on the Caspian sea.

Enzeli, Meshed-i-Sher or Astrabad, the three principal landing
places on the Persian coast, have no shelter for ships, which have
to lie a good distance out at sea while passengers and cargo are
transhipped by the Company's steam launch or--in rough weather--by
rowing boats.

In very rough weather it is impossible to effect a landing at
all, and--this is a most frequent occurrence on the treacherous
Caspian--after reaching one's journey's end one has to go all the
way back to the starting point and begin afresh.

There are people who have been compelled to take the journey four
or five times before they could land, until the violent storms which
often rage along the Persian coast had completely subsided and
allowed the flimsy steam-launch at Enzeli to come out to meet the
steamers, lying about a mile outside.

We had passengers on board who had been unable to land on the
previous journey, and were now on their second attempt to set foot
in Persia.

We were rolling a good deal when we cast anchor, and after waiting
some hours we were informed that it was too rough for the steam-launch
to come out.

The captain feared that he must put to sea again, as the wind was
rising and he was afraid to remain so near the coast.

Two rowing boats eventually came out, and with some considerable
exertion of the rowers succeeded in getting near the steamer.

I immediately chartered one, and after a good deal of see-saw and
banging and knocking and crackling of wood alongside the steamer,
my baggage and I were transhipped into the flat-bottomed boat. Off
we rowed towards the shore, getting drenched each time that the
boat dipped her nose into the sea.

The narrow entrance of the Enzeli bay is blocked by a sand-bar.

The water is here very shallow, only about six feet deep. Riding on
the top of the breakers was quite an experience, and we occasionally
shipped a good deal of water.

We, however, landed safely and had to pay pretty dearly for the
convenience.

The boatmen do not run the risk of going out for nothing, and when
they do, take every advantage of passengers who employ them. I was
fortunate to get off by giving a backshish of a few _tomans_
(dollars), but there are people who have been known to pay three,
four and even five pounds sterling to be conveyed on shore.

Here, too, thanks to the civility of the Persian Ambassador in
London, I had a special permit for my firearms, instruments, etc.,
and met with the greatest courtesy from the Belgian and Persian
officers in the Customs.

It is necessary to have one's passport in order, duly _visé_
by the Persian Consul in London, or else a delay might occur at
Enzeli.

There is a lighthouse at Enzeli, the Customs buildings and a small
hotel.
From this point a lagoon, the Murd-ap has to be crossed, either by the
small steam-launch or by rowing boat. As there seemed to be some
uncertainty about the departure of the launch, and as I had a good
deal of luggage, I preferred the latter way.

Eight powerful men rowed with all their might at the prospect of a
good backshish; and we sped along at a good pace on the placid
waters of the lagoon, in big stretches of open water, now skirting
small islands, occasionally through narrow canals, the banks of
which were covered with high reeds and heavy, tropical, confused,
untidy vegetation.

The air was still and stifling--absolutely unmoved, screened as it
was on all sides by vegetation.

The sailors sang a monotonous cadence, and the boat glided along
for some three hours until we arrived at the mouth of the Piri
river, hardly wide enough for a couple of boats to go through
simultaneously, and so shallow that rowing was no longer practicable.

The men jumped off, tied the towing rope that hung from the mast
to their belts, and ran along the banks of the Piri river, the water
of which was almost stagnant.

An hour or so later we suddenly came upon a number of boats jammed
together in the miniature harbour of Piri Bazaar--a pool of putrid
water a few feet in circumference.

As the boat gradually approached, a stone-paved path still separated
from you by a thick wide layer of filthy mud wound its way to the
few miserable sheds--the bazaar--up above. A few trays of grapes,
some Persian bread, some earthenware pottery of the cheapest kind,
are displayed in the shop fronts--and that is all of the
Piri-Bazaar. On landing at Enzeli one hears so much of Piri-Bazaar
that one gets to imagine it a big, important place,--and as it is,
moreover, practically the first really typical Persian place at
which one touches, the expectations are high.

Upon arrival there one's heart sinks into one's boots, and one's
boots sink deep into black stinking mud as one takes a very long--yet
much too short--jump from the boat on to what one presumes to be
_terra firma_.

With boots clogged and heavy with filth, a hundred people like
ravenous birds of prey yelling in your ears (and picking your
pockets if they have a chance), with your luggage being mercilessly
dragged in the mud, with everybody demanding backshish on all sides,
tapping you on the shoulder or pulling your coat,--thus one lands
in real Persia.

In the country of Iran one does not travel for pleasure
nor is there any pleasure in travelling. For study and interest,
yes. There is plenty of both everywhere.

Personally, I invariably make up my mind when I start for the East
that no matter what happens I will on no account get out of temper,
and this self-imposed rule--I must admit--was never, in all my
travels, tried to the tantalising extent that it was in the country
of the Shah.

The Persian lower classes--particularly in places where they have
come in contact with Europeans--are well-nigh intolerable.

There is nothing that they will not do to annoy you in every possible
way, to extort backshish from you.

In only one way do Persians in this respect differ from other
Orientals.

The others usually try to obtain money by pleasing you and being
useful and polite, whereas the Persian adopts the quicker, if
not safer, method of bothering you and giving you trouble to such
an unlimited degree that you are compelled to give something in order
to get rid of him. And in a country where no redress can be obtained
from the police, where laws do not count, and where the lower
classes are as corrupt and unscrupulous as they are in the more
civilised parts of Persia (these remarks do not apply to the parts
where few or no Europeans have been) the only way to save one's
self from constant worry and repressed anger--so bad for one's
health--is to make up one's mind at once to what extent one is
prepared to be imposed upon, and leave the country after.

That is to say, if one does not wish to adopt the only other and
more attractive alternative of inflicting summary justice on
two-thirds of the natives one meets,--too great an exertion, to be
sure, in so hot a climate.

They say that Persia is the country that our stock came from. It is
quite possible, and if so we are indeed to be congratulated upon
having morally improved so much since, or the Persians to be condoled
with on their sad degeneration. The better classes, however, are very
different, as we shall see later.

Personally, I adopted the first method suggested above, the easier
of the two, and I deliberately put by what I thought was a fair sum
to be devoted exclusively to extortion.

On leaving the country several months later, much to my astonishment
I found that I had not been imposed upon half as much as I
expected, although I had stayed in Persia double the time I had
intended.

Maybe this can be accounted for by my having spent most of my time
in parts not so much frequented by Europeans. Indeed, if the
Persian is to-day the perfidious individual he is, we have to a
great extent only ourselves to blame for making him so.

Keeping my temper under control, and an eye on my belongings, I
next hired a carriage to convey me to the town of Resht, seven miles
distant.

In damp heat, that made one's clothes moist and unpleasant, upon a
road muddy to such an extent that the wheels sank several inches
in it and splashed the passenger all over, we galloped through thick
vegetation and patches of agriculture, and entered the city of Resht.

Through the narrow winding streets of the bazaar we slowed down
somewhat in some places, the carriage almost touching the walls of
the street on both sides.

The better houses possess verandahs with banisters painted blue,
while the walls of the buildings are generally white.

One is struck by the great number of shoe shops in the bazaar,
displaying true Persian shoes with pointed turned-up toes,--then
by the brass and copper vessel shops, the ancient and extremely
graceful shapes of the vessels and amphoras being to this date
faithfully preserved and reproduced.

More pleasing still to the eye are the fruit shops, with huge trays
of water-melons, cucumbers, figs, and heaps of grapes.

The latter are, nevertheless, not so very tasty to the palate and
do not compare with the delicate flavour of the Italian or Spanish
grapes.

Somewhat incongruous and out-of-place, yet more numerous than truly
Persian shops, are the semi-European stores, with cheap glass
windows displaying inside highly dangerous-looking kerosene lamps,
badly put together tin goods, soiled enamel tumblers and plates,
silvered glass balls for ceiling decoration, and the vilest oleographs
that the human mind can devise, only matched by the vileness of the
frames.

Small looking-glasses play an important part in these displays, and
occasionally a hand sewing-machine.

Tinned provisions, wine and liquor shops are numerous, but unfortunate
is the man who may have to depend upon them for his food.

The goods are the remnants of the oldest stocks that have gradually
drifted, unsold, down to Baku, and have eventually been shipped over
for the Persian market where people do not know any better.

Resht is the chief city in the Ghilan province.

Ghilan's trade in piece-goods is about two-thirds in the hands
of Russia, while one-third (or even less) is still retained by
England,--Manchester goods. This cannot well be helped, for there
is no direct route from Great Britain to Resht, and all British
goods must come through Bagdad, Tabriz, or Baku.

The two first routes carry most of the trade, which consists
principally of shirtings, prints, cambrics, mulls, nainsooks, and
Turkey-reds, which are usually put down as of Turkish origin, whereas
in reality they come from Manchester, and are merely re-exported,
mainly from Constantinople, by native firms either in direct traffic
or in exchange for goods received.

One has heard a great deal of the enormous increase in trade in
Persia during the last couple of years or so. The increase has not
been in the trade itself, but in the collection of Customs
dues, which is now done in a regular and business like fashion by
competent Belgian officials, instead of by natives, to whom the
various collecting stations were formerly farmed out.

It will not be very easy for the British trader to compete successfully
with the Russian in northern Persia, for that country, being
geographically in such close proximity, can transport her cheaply
made goods at a very low cost into Iran.

Also the Russian Government allows enormous advantages to her own
traders with Persia in order to secure the Persian market, and to
develop her fast-increasing industrial progress,--advantages which
British traders do not enjoy.

Still, considering all the difficulties British trade has
to contend with in order to penetrate, particularly into Ghilan, it
is extraordinary how some articles, like white Manchester shirtings,
enjoy practically a monopoly, being of a better quality than similar
goods sent by Russia, Austria, Hungary, Germany, Italy or Holland.

Loaf sugar, which came at one time almost entirely from France, has
been cut out by Russian sugar, which is imported in large quantities
and eventually finds its way all over Persia. It is of inferior
quality, but very much cheaper than sugar of French manufacture,
and is the chief Russian import into Ghilan.

Tobacco comes principally from Turkey and Russia. In going
on with our drive through the bazaar we see it sold in the tiny
tobacco shops, where it is tastily arranged in heaps on square
pieces of blue paper, by the side of Russian and Turkish cigarettes.

[Illustration: Persian Wrestling.]

And now for the Resht Hotels. Here is an Armenian hotel--European
style.

From the balcony signs and gesticulations and shouts in English,
French, and Russian endeavour to attract the passer-by--a youth
even rushes to the horses and stops them in order to induce the
traveller to alight and put up at the hostelry; but after a long
discussion, on we go, and slowly wind our way through the intricate
streets crowded with men and women and children--all grumbling and
making some remark as one goes by.

At one point a circle of people squatting in the middle of a road
round a pile of water-melons, at huge slices of which they each bit
lustily, kept us waiting some time, till they moved themselves and
their melons out of the way for the carriage to pass.

Further on a soldier or two in rags lay sleeping flat on the shady
side of the road, with his pipe (kalian) and his sword lying by his
side. Boys were riding wildly on donkeys and frightened women
scrambled away or flattened themselves against the side walls
of the street, while the hubs of the wheels shaved and greased their
ample black silk or cotton trousers made in the shape of sacks, and
the horses' hoofs splashed them all over with mud. The women's
faces were covered with a white cloth reaching down to the
waist. Here, too, as in China, the double basket arrangement on a
long pole swung across the shoulders was much used for conveying
loads of fruit and vegetables on men's shoulders;--but least
picturesque of all were the well-to-do people of the strong sex,
in short frock-coats pleated all over in the skirt.

One gets a glimpse of a picturesque blue-tiled pagoda-like roof with
a cylindrical column upon it, and at last we emerge into a
large quadrangular square, with European buildings to the west
side.

A little further the British flag flies gaily in the wind above H.M.'s
Consulate. Then we come upon a larger building, the Palace
of the Governor, who, to save himself the trouble and expense of
having sentries at the entrances, had life-size representations of
soldiers with drawn swords painted on the wall. They are not all
represented wearing the same uniform, as one would expect with a
guard of that kind, but for variety's sake some have red coats,
with plenty of gold braiding on them, and blue trousers, the others
blue coats and red trousers.

One could not honestly call the building a beautiful one, but in
its unrestored condition it is quite picturesque and quaint.

It possesses a spacious verandah painted bright blue, and two windows
at each side with elaborate ornamentations similarly coloured red
and blue. A red-bordered white flag with the national lion in the
centre floats over the Palace, and an elaborate castellated
archway, with a repetition of the Persian Lion on either side,
stands in front of the main entrance in the square of the Palace.

So also do four useful kerosene lamp-posts.

The telegraph office is to the right of the Palace with a pretty
garden in front of it.

Your men have never left the ruins. And where could they have
moved him to? At most, a few hundred yards away, for one doesn't let
a dying man travel--and then you would have found him. No, I tell
you, he is there. His friends would never have removed him from the
safest of hiding-places. It was there that they brought the doctor,
while the gendarmes were running to the fire like children."

"But how is he living? How will he keep alive? To keep alive you
need food and drink."

"I can't say. I don't know. But he is there, I will swear it. He is
there, because he can't help being there. I am as sure of it as if I
saw as if I touched him. He is there."

With his finger outstretched toward the ruins, he traced in the air
a little circle which became smaller and smaller until it was only a
point. And that point his two companions sought desperately, both
leaning into space, both moved by the same faith in Beautrelet and
quivering with the ardent conviction which he had forced upon them.
Yes, Arsene Lupin was there. In theory and in fact, he was there:
neither of them was now able to doubt it.

And there was something impressive and tragic in knowing that the
famous adventurer was lying in some dark shelter, below the ground,
helpless, feverish and exhausted.

"And if he dies?" asked M. Filleul, in a low voice.

"If he dies," said Beautrelet, "and if his accomplices are sure of
it, then see to the safety of Mlle. de Saint-Veran. Monsieur le Juge
d'Instruction, for the vengeance will be terrible."

        *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later and in spite of the entreaties of M. Filleul,
who would gladly have made further use of this fascinating
auxiliary, Isidore Beautrelet, whose holidays ended that day, went
off by the Dieppe Road. He stepped from the train in Paris at five
o'clock and, at eight o'clock, returned to the Lycee Janson together
with his schoolfellows.

Ganimard, after a minute, but utterly useless exploration of the
ruins of Ambrumesy, returned to Paris by the fast night-train. On
reaching his apartment in the Rue Pergolese, he found an express
letter awaiting him:

        *       *       *       *       *

Monsieur l'Inspecteur Principal:

Finding that I had a little time to spare at the end of the day, I
have succeeded in collecting a few additional particulars which are
sure to interest you.

Arsene Lupin has been living in Paris for twelve months under the
name of Etienne de Vaudreix. It is a name which you will often come
across in the society notes or the sporting columns of the
newspapers. He is a great traveler and is absent for long periods,
during which, by his own account, he goes hunting tigers in Bengal
or blue foxes in Siberia. He is supposed to be in business of some
kind, although nobody is able to say for certain what his business
is.

His present address is 38, Rue Marbeuf; and I will call your
attention to the fact that the Rue Marbeuf is close to Post-office
Number 45. Since Thursday the twenty-third of April, the day before
the burglary at Ambrumesy, there has been no news at all of Etienne
de Vaudreix.

With very many thanks for the kindness which you have shown me,
believe me to be,
   Monsieur l'Inspecteur Principal,
       Yours sincerely,
         ISIDORE BEAUTRELET.

P.S.--Please on no account think that it cost me any great trouble
to obtain this information. On the very morning of the crime, while
M. Filleul was pursuing his examination before a few privileged
persons, I had the fortunate inspiration to glance at the runaway's
cap, before the sham flyman came to change it. The hatter's name was
enough, as you may imagine, to enable me to find the clue that led
to the identification of the purchaser and his address.

        *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, Ganimard called at 36, Rue Marbeuf. After
questioning the concierge, he made him open the door of the ground-
floor flat on the right, a very comfortable apartment, elegantly
furnished, in which, however, he discovered nothing beyond some
cinders in the fireplace. Two friends had come, four days earlier,
to burn all compromising papers.

But, just as he was leaving, Ganimard passed the postman, who was
bringing a letter for M. de Vaudreix. That afternoon, the public
prosecutor was informed of the case and ordered the letter to be
given up. It bore an American postmark and contained the following
lines, in English:

        *       *       *       *       *

DEAR SIR:

I write to confirm the answer which I gave your representative. As
soon as you have M. de Gesvres's four pictures in your possession,
you can forward them as arranged.

You may add the rest, if you are able to succeed, which I doubt.

An unexpected business requires my presence in Europe and I shall
reach Paris at the same time as this letter. You will find me at the
Grand Hotel.

Yours faithfully,

EPHRAIM B. HARLINGTON.

        *       *       *       *       *

That same day, Ganimard applied for a warrant and took Mr. E. B.
Harlington, an American citizen, to the police-station, on a charge
of receiving and conspiracy.

        *       *       *       *       *

Thus, within the space of twenty-four hours, all the threads of the
plot had been unraveled, thanks to the really unforeseen clues
supplied by a schoolboy of seventeen. In twenty-four hours, what had
seemed inexplicable became simple and clear. In twenty-four hours,
the scheme devised by the accomplices to save their leader was
baffled; the capture of Arsene Lupin, wounded and dying, was no
longer in doubt, his gang was disorganized, the address of his
establishment in Paris and the name which he assumed were known and,
for the first time, one of his cleverest and most carefully
elaborated feats was seen through before he had been able to ensure
its complete execution.

An immense clamor of astonishment, admiration and curiosity arose
among the public. Already, the Rouen journalist, in a very able
article, had described the first examination of the sixth-form
pupil, laying stress upon his personal charm, his simplicity of
manner and his quiet assurance. The indiscretions of Ganimard and M.
Filleul, indiscretions to which they yielded in spite of themselves,
under an impulse that proved stronger than their professional pride,
suddenly enlightened the public as to the part played by Isidore
Beautrelet in recent events. He alone had done everything. To him
alone the merit of the victory was due.

The excitement was intense. Isidore Beautrelet awoke to find himself
a hero; and the crowd, suddenly infatuated, insisted upon the
fullest information regarding its new favorite. The reporters were
there to supply it. They rushed to the assault of the Lycee Janson-
de-Sailly, waited for the day-boarders to come out after schoolhours
and picked up all that related, however remotely, to Beautrelet. It
was in this way that they learned the reputation which he enjoyed
among his schoolfellows, who called him the rival of Holmlock
Shears. Thanks to his powers of logical reasoning, with no further
data than those which he was able to gather from the papers, he had,
time after time, proclaimed the solution of very complicated cases
long before they were cleared up by the police.

It had become a game at the Lycee Janson to put difficult questions
and intricate problems to Beautrelet; and it was astonishing to see
with what unhesitating and analytical power and by means of what
ingenious deductions he made his way through the thickest darkness.
Ten days before the arrest of Jorisse, the grocer, he showed what
could be done with the famous umbrella. In the same way, he declared
from the beginning, in the matter of the Saint-Cloud mystery, that
the concierge was the only possible murderer.

But most curious of all was the pamphlet which was found circulating
among the boys at the school, a typewritten pamphlet signed by
Beautrelet and manifolded to the number of ten copies. It was
entitled, ARSENE LUPIN AND HIS METHOD, SHOWING IN HOW FAR THE LATTER
IS BASED UPON TRADITION AND IN HOW FAR ORIGINAL. FOLLOWED BY A
COMPARISON BETWEEN ENGLISH HUMOR AND FRENCH IRONY.

It contained a profound study of each of the exploits of Arsene
Lupin, throwing the illustrious burglar's operations into
extraordinary relief, showing the very mechanism of his way of
setting to work, his special tactics, his letters to the press, his
threats, the announcement of his thefts, in short, the whole bag of
tricks which he employed to bamboozle his selected victim and throw
him into such a state of mind that the victim almost offered himself
to the plot contrived against him and that everything took place, as
it were, with his own consent.

And the work was so just, regarded as a piece of criticism, so
penetrating, so lively and marked by a wit so clever and, at the
same time, so cruel that the lawyers at once passed over to his
side, that the sympathy of the crowd was summarily transferred from
Lupin to Beautrelet and that, in the struggle engaged upon between
the two, the schoolboy's victory was loudly proclaimed in advance.

Be this as it may, both M. Filleul and the Paris public prosecutor
seemed jealously to reserve the possibility of this victory for him.
On the one hand, they failed to establish Mr. Harlington's identity
or to furnish a definite proof of his connection with Lupin's gang.
Confederate or not, he preserved an obstinate silence. Nay, more,
after examining his handwriting, it was impossible to declare that
he was the author of the intercepted letter. A Mr. Harlington,
carrying a small portmanteau and a pocket-book stuffed with bank-
notes, had taken up his abode at the Grand Hotel: that was all that
could be stated with certainty.

On the other hand, at Dieppe, M. Filleul lay down on the positions
which Beautrelet had won for him. He did not move a step forward.
Around the individual whom Mlle. de Saint-Veran had taken for
Beautrelet, on the eve of the crime, the same mystery reigned as
heretofore. The same obscurity also surrounded everything connected
with the removal of the four Rubens pictures. What had become of
them? And what road had been taken by the motor car in which they
were carried off during the night?

Evidence of its passing was obtained at Luneray at Yerville, at
Yvetot and at Caudebec-en-Caux, where it must have crossed the Seine
at daybreak in the steam-ferry. But, when the matter came to be
inquired into more thoroughly, it was stated that the motor car was
an uncovered one and that it would have been impossible to pack four
large pictures into it unobserved by the ferryman.

It was very probably the same car; but then the question cropped up
again: what had become of the four Rubenses?

These were so many problems which M. Filleul unanswered. Every day,
his subordinates searched the quadrilateral of the ruins. Almost
every day, he came to direct the explorations. But between that and
discovering the refuge in which Lupin lay dying--if it were true
that Beautrelet's opinion was correct--there was a gulf fixed which
the worthy magistrate did not seem likely to cross.

And so it was natural that they should turn once more to Isidore
Beautrelet, as he alone had succeeded in dispelling shadows which,
in his absence, gathered thicker and more impenetrable than ever.
Why did he not go on with the case? Seeing how far he had carried
it, he required but an effort to succeed.

The question was put to him by a member of the staff of the Grand
Journal, who had obtained admission to the Lycee Janson by assuming
the name of Bernod, the friend of Beautrelet's father. And Isidore
very sensibly replied:

"My dear sir, there are other things besides Lupin in this world,
other things besides stories about burglars and detectives. There
is, for instance, the thing which is known as taking one's degree.
Now I am going up for my examination in July. This is May. And I
don't want to be plucked. What would my worthy parent say?"

"But what would he say if you delivered Arsene Lupin into the hands
of the police?"

"Tut! There's a time for everything. In the next holidays--"

"Whitsuntide?"

"Yes--I shall go down on Saturday the sixth of June by the first
train."

"And, on the evening of that Saturday, Lupin will be taken."

"Will you give me until the Sunday?" asked Beautrelet, laughing.

"Why delay?" replied the journalist, quite seriously.

This inexplicable confidence, born of yesterday and already so
strong, was felt with regard to the young man by one and all, even
though, in reality, events had justified it only up to a certain
point. No matter, people believed in him! Nothing seemed difficult
to him. They expected from him what they were entitled to expect at
most from some phenomenon of penetration and intuition, of
experience and skill. That day of the sixth of June was made to
sprawl over all the papers. On the sixth of June, Isidore Beautrelet
would take the fast train to Dieppe: and Lupin would be arrested on
the same evening.

"Unless he escapes between this and then," objected the last
remaining partisans of the adventurer.

"Impossible! Every outlet is watched."

"Unless he has succumbed to his wounds, then," said the partisans,
who would have preferred their hero's death to his capture.

And the retort was immediate:

"Nonsense! If Lupin were dead, his confederates would know it by
now, and Lupin would be revenged. Beautrelet said so!"

        *       *       *       *       *

And the sixth of June came. Half a dozen journalists were looking
out for Isidore at the Gare Saint-Lazare. Two of them wanted to
accompany him on his journey. He begged them to refrain.

He started alone, therefore, in a compartment to himself. He was
tired, thanks to a series of nights devoted to study, and soon fell
asleep. He slept heavily. In his dreams, he had an impression that
the train stopped at different stations and that people got in and
out. When he awoke, within sight of Rouen, he was still alone. But,
on the back of the opposite seat, was a large sheet of paper,
fastened with a pin to the gray cloth. It bore these words:

  "Every man should mind his own business. Do you mind yours.
  If not, you must take the consequences."

"Capital!" he exclaimed, rubbing his hands with delight. "Things are
going badly in the adversary's camp. That threat is as stupid and
vulgar as the sham flyman's. What a style! One can see that it
wasn't composed by Lupin."

The train threaded the tunnel that precedes the old Norman city. On
reaching the station, Isidore took a few turns on the platform to
stretch his legs. He was about to re-enter his compartment, when a
cry escaped him. As he passed the bookstall, he had read, in an
absent-minded way, the following lines on the front page of a
special edition of the Journal de Rouen; and their alarming sense
suddenly burst upon him:

        *       *       *       *       *

STOP-PRESS NEWS

We hear by telephone from Dieppe that the Chateau d'Ambrumesy was
broken into last night by criminals, who bound and gagged Mlle. de
Gesvres and carried off Mlle. de Saint-Veran. Traces of blood have
been seen at a distance of five hundred yards from the house and a
scarf has been found close by, which is also stained with blood.
There is every reason to fear that the poor young girl has been
murdered.

        *       *       *       *       *

Isidore Beautrelet completed his journey to Dieppe without moving a
limb. Bent in two, with his elbows on his knees and his hands
plastered against his face, he sat thinking.

At Dieppe, he took a fly. At the door of Ambrumesy, he met the
examining magistrate, who confirmed the horrible news.

"You know nothing more?" asked Beautrelet.

"Nothing. I have only just arrived."

At that moment, the sergeant of gendarmes came up to M. Filleul and
handed him a crumpled, torn and discolored piece of paper, which he
had picked up not far from the place where the scarf was found. M.
Filleul looked at it and gave it to Beautrelet, saying:

"I don't suppose this will help us much in our investigations."

Isidore turned the paper over and over. It was covered with figures,
dots and signs and presented the exact appearance reproduced below:

[Illustration: drawing of an outline of paper with writing and
drawing on it--numbers, dots, some letters, signs and symbols,
something like...

   2.1.1..2..2.1..1..
   1...2.2.   2.43.2..2.
   .45..2.4...2..2.4..2
   D DF square 19F+44triangle357triangle
   13.53..2   ..25.2

]


CHAPTER THREE

THE CORPSE


At six o'clock in the evening, having finished all he had to do, M.
Filluel, accompanied by M. Bredoux, his clerk, stood waiting for the
carriage which was to take him back to Dieppe. He seemed restless,
nervous. Twice over, he asked:

"You haven't seen anything of young Beautrelet, I suppose?"

"No, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, I can't say I have."

"Where on earth can he be? I haven't set eyes on him all day!"

Suddenly, he had an idea, handed his portfolio to Bredoux, ran round
the chateau and made for the ruins. Isidore Beautrelet was lying
near the cloisters, flat on his face, with one arm folded under his
head, on the ground carpeted with pine-needles. He seemed drowsing.

"Hullo, young man, what are you doing here? Are you asleep?"

"I'm not asleep. I've been thinking."

"Ever since this morning?"

"Ever since this morning."

"It's not a question of thinking! One must see into things first,
study facts, look for clues, establish connecting links. The time
for thinking comes after, when one pieces all that together and
discovers the truth."

"Yes, I know.--That's the usual way, the right one, I dare say.--
Mine is different.--I think first, I try, above all, to get the
general hang of the case, if I may so express myself. Then I imagine
a reasonable and logical hypothesis, which fits in with the general
idea. And then, and not before, I examine the facts to see if they
agree with my hypothesis."

"That's a funny method and a terribly complicated one!"

"It's a sure method, M. Filleul, which is more than can be said of
yours."

"Come, come! Facts are facts."

"With your ordinary sort of adversary, yes. But, given an enemy
endowed with a certain amount of cunning, the facts are those which
he happens to have selected. Take the famous clues upon which you
base your inquiry: why, he was at liberty to arrange them as he
liked. And you see where that can lead you, into what mistakes and
absurdities, when you are dealing with a man like Arsene Lupin.
Holmlock Shears himself fell into the trap."

"Arsene Lupin is dead."

"No matter. His gang remains and the pupils of such a master are
masters themselves."

M. Filleul took Isidore by the arm and, leading him away:

"Words, young man, words. Here is something of more importance.
Listen to me. Ganimard is otherwise engaged at this moment and will
not be here for a few days. On the other hand, the Comte de Gesvres
has telegraphed to Holmlock Shears, who has promised his assistance
next week. Now don't you think, young man, that it would be a
feather in our cap if we were able to say to those two celebrities,
on the day of their arrival, 'Awfully sorry, gentlemen, but we
couldn't wait. The business is done'?"

It was impossible for M. Filleul to confess helplessness with
greater candor. Beautrelet suppressed a smile and, pretending not to
see through the worthy magistrate, replied:

"I confess. Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that, if I was not
present at your inquiry just now, it was because I hoped that you
would consent to tell me the results. May I ask what you have
learned?"

"Well, last night, at eleven o'clock, the three gendarmes whom
Sergeant Quevillon had left on guard at the chateau received a note
from the sergeant telling them to hasten with all speed to Ouville,
where they are stationed. They at once rode off, and when they
arrived at Ouville--"

"They discovered that they had been tricked, that the order was a
forgery and that there was nothing for them to do but return to
Ambrumesy."

"This they did, accompanied by Sergeant Quevillon. But they were
away for an hour and a half and, during this time, the crime was
committed."

"In what circumstances?"

"Very simple circumstances, indeed. A ladder was removed from the
farm buildings and placed against the second story of the chateau. A
pane of glass was cut out and a window opened. Two men, carrying a
dark lantern, entered Mlle. de Gesvres's room and gagged her before
she could cry out. Then, after binding her with cords, they softly
opened the door of the room in which Mlle. de Saint-Veran was
sleeping. Mlle. de Gesvres heard a stifled moan, followed by the
sound of a person struggling. A moment later, she saw two men
carrying her cousin, who was also bound and gagged. They passed in
front of her and went out through the window. Then Mlle. de Gesvres,
terrified and exhausted, fainted."

"But what about the dogs? I thought M. de Gesvres had bought two
almost wild sheep-dogs, which were let loose at night?"

"They were found dead, poisoned."

"By whom? Nobody could get near them."

"It's a mystery. The fact remains that the two men crossed the ruins
without let or hindrance and went out by the little door which we
have heard so much about. They passed through the copsewood,
following the line of the disused quarries. It was not until they
were nearly half a mile from the chateau, at the foot of the tree
known as the Great Oak, that they stopped--and executed their
purpose."

"If they came with the intention of killing Mlle. de Saint-Veran,
why didn't they murder her in her room?"

"I don't know. Perhaps the incident that settled their determination
only occurred after they had left the house. Perhaps the girl
succeeded in releasing herself from her bonds. In my opinion, the
scarf which was picked up was used to fasten her wrists. In any
case, the blow was struck at the foot of the Great Oak. I have
collected indisputable proofs--"

"But the body?"

"The body has not been found, but there is nothing excessively
surprising in that. As a matter of fact, the trail which I followed
brought me to the church at Varengeville and the old cemetery
perched on the top of the cliff. From there it is a sheer precipice,
a fall of over three hundred feet to the rocks and the sea below. In
a day or two, a stronger tide than usual will cast up the body on
the beach."

"Obviously. This is all very simple."

"Yes, it is all very simple and doesn't trouble me in the least.
Lupin is dead, his accomplices heard of it and, to revenge
themselves, have killed Mlle. de Saint-Veran. These are facts which
did not even require checking. But Lupin?"

"What about him?"

"What has become of him? In all probability, his confederates
removed his corpse at the same time that they carried away the girl;
but what proof have we? None at all. Any more than of his staying in
the ruins, or of his death, or of his life. And that is the real
mystery, M. Beautrelet. The murder of Mlle. Raymonde solves nothing.
On the contrary, it only complicates matters. What has been
happening during the past two months at the Chateau d'Ambrumesy? If
we don't clear up the riddle, young man, others will give us the go-
by."

"On what day are those others coming?"

"Wednesday--Tuesday perhaps--"

Beautrelet seemed to be making an inward calculation and then
declared:

"Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, this is Saturday. I have to be back
at school on Monday evening. Well, if you will have the goodness to
be here at ten o'clock exactly on Monday morning, I will try to give
you the key to the riddle."

"Really, M. Beautrelet--do you think so? Are you sure?"

"I hope so, at any rate."

"And where are you going now?"

"I am going to see if the facts consent to fit in with the general
theory which I am beginning to perceive."

"And if they don't fit in?"

"Well, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction," said Beautrelet, with a
laugh, "then it will be their fault and I must look for others
which, will prove more tractable. Till Monday, then?"

"Till Monday."

A few minutes later, M. Filleul was driving toward Dieppe, while
Isidore mounted a bicycle which he had borrowed from the Comte de
Gesvres and rode off along the road to Yerville and Caudebec-en-
Caux.

There was one point in particular on which the young man was anxious
to form a clear opinion, because this just appeared to him to be the
enemy's weakest point. Objects of the size of the four Rubens
pictures cannot be juggled away. They were bound to be somewhere.
Granting that it was impossible to find them for the moment, might
one not discover the road by which they had disappeared?

What Beautrelet surmised was that the four pictures had undoubtedly
been carried off in the motor car, but that, before reaching
Caudebec, they were transferred to another car, which had crossed
the Seine either above Caudebec or below it. Now the first horse-
boat down the stream was at Quillebeuf, a greatly frequented ferry
and, consequently, dangerous. Up stream, there was the ferry-boat at
La Mailleraie, a large, but lonely market-town, lying well off the
main road.

By midnight, Isidore had covered the thirty-five or forty miles to
La Mailleraie and was knocking at the door of an inn by the
waterside. He slept there and, in the morning, questioned the
ferrymen.

They consulted the counterfoils in the traffic-book. No motor-car
had crossed on Thursday the 23rd of April.

"A horse-drawn vehicle, then?" suggested Beautrelet. "A cart? A
van?"

"No, not either."

Isidore continued his inquiries all through the morning. He was on
the point of leaving for Quillebeuf, when the waiter of the inn at
which he had spent the night said:

"I came back from my thirteen days' training on the morning of which
you are speaking and I saw a cart, but it did not go across."

"Really?"

"No, they unloaded it onto a flat boat, a barge of sorts, which was
moored to the wharf."

"And where did the cart come from?"

"Oh, I knew it at once. It belonged to Master Vatinel, the carter."

"And where does he live?"

"At Louvetot."

Beautrelet consulted his military map. The hamlet of Louvetot lay
where the highroad between Yvetot and Caudebec was crossed by a
little winding road that ran through the woods to La Mailleraie.

Not until six o'clock in the evening did Isidore succeed in
discovering Master Vatinel, in a pothouse. Master Vatinel was one of
those artful old Normans who are always on their guard, who distrust
strangers, but who are unable to resist the lure of a gold coin or
the influence of a glass or two:

"Well, yes, sir, the men in the motor car that morning had told me
to meet them at five o'clock at the crossroads. They gave me four
great, big things, as high as that. One of them went with me and we
carted the things to the barge."

"You speak of them as if you knew them before."

"I should think I did know them! It was the sixth time they were
employing me."

Isidore gave a start:

"The sixth time, you say? And since when?"

"Why every day before that one, to be sure! But it was other things
then--great blocks of stone--or else smaller, longish ones, wrapped
up in newspapers, which they carried as if they were worth I don't
know what. Oh, I mustn't touch those on any account!--But what's the
matter? You've turned quite white."

"Nothing--the heat of the room--"

Beautrelet staggered out into the air. The joy, the surprise of the
discovery made him feel giddy. He went back very quietly to
Varengeville, slept in the village, spent an hour at the mayor's
offices with the school-master and returned to the chateau. There he
found a letter awaiting him "care of M. le Comte de Gesvres." It
consisted of a single line:

"Second warning. Hold your tongue. If not--"

"Come," he muttered. "I shall have to make up my mind and take a few
precautions for my personal safety. If not, as they say--"

It was nine o'clock. He strolled about among the ruins and then lay
down near the cloisters and closed his eyes.

"Well, young man, are you satisfied with the results of your
campaign?"

It was M. Filleul.

"Delighted, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction."

"By which you mean to say--?"

"By which I mean to say that I am prepared to keep my promise--in
spite of this very uninviting letter."

He showed the letter to M. Filleul.

"Pooh! Stuff and nonsense!" cried the magistrate. "I hope you won't
let that prevent you--"

"From telling you what I know? No, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction. I
have given my word and I shall keep it. In less than ten minutes,
you shall know--a part of the truth."

"A part?"

"Yes, in my opinion, Lupin's hiding-place does not constitute the
whole of the problem. Far from it. But we shall see later on."

"M. Beautrelet, nothing that you do could astonish me now. But how
were you able to discover--?"

"Oh, in a very natural way! In the letter from old man Harlington to
M. Etienne de Vaudreix, or rather to Lupin--"

"The intercepted letter?"

"Yes. There is a phrase which always puzzled me. After saying that
the pictures are to be forwarded as arranged, he goes on to say,
'You may add THE REST, if you are able to succeed, which I doubt.'"

"Yes, I remember."

"What was this 'rest'? A work of art, a curiosity? The chateau
contains nothing of any value besides the Rubenses and the
tapestries. Jewelry? There is very little and what there is of it is
not worth much. In that case, what could it be?--On the other hand,
was it conceivable that people so prodigiously clever as Lupin
should not have succeeded in adding 'the rest,' which they
themselves had evidently suggested? A difficult undertaking, very
likely; exceptional, surprising, I dare say; but possible and
therefore certain, since Lupin wished it."

"And yet he failed: nothing has disappeared."

"He did not fail: something has disappeared."

"Yes, the Rubenses--but--"

"The Rubenses and something besides--something which has been
replaced by a similar thing, as in the case of the Rubenses;
something much more uncommon, much rarer, much more valuable than
the Rubenses."

"Well, what? You're killing me with this procrastination!"

While talking, the two men had crossed the ruins, turned toward the
little door and were now walking beside the chapel. Beautrelet
stopped:

"Do you really want to know, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction?"

"Of course, I do."

Beautrelet was carrying a walking-stick, a strong, knotted stick.
Suddenly, with a back stroke of this stick, he smashed one of the
little statues that adorned the front of the chapel.

"Why, you're mad!" shouted M. Filleul, beside himself, rushing at
the broken pieces of the statue. "You're mad! That old saint was an
admirable bit of work--"

"An admirable bit of work!" echoed Isidore, giving a whirl which
brought down the Virgin Mary.

M. Filleul took hold of him round the body:

"Young man, I won't allow you to commit--"

A wise man of the East came toppling to the ground, followed by a
manger containing the Mother and Child. . . .

"If you stir another limb, I fire!"

The Comte de Gesvres had appeared upon the scene and was cocking his
revolver. Beautrelet burst out laughing:

"That's right, Monsieur le Comte, blaze away!--Take a shot at them,
as if you were at a fair!--Wait a bit--this chap carrying his head
in his hands--"

St. John the Baptist fell, shattered to pieces.

"Oh!" shouted the count, pointing his revolver. "You young vandal!--
Those masterpieces!"

"Sham, Monsieur le Comte!"

"What? What's that?" roared M. Filleul, wresting the Comte de
Gesvres's weapon from him.

"Sham!" repeated Beautrelet. "Paper-pulp and plaster!"

"Oh, nonsense! It can't be true!"

"Hollow plaster, I tell you! Nothing at all!"

The count stooped and picked up a sliver of a statuette.

"Look at it, Monsieur le Comte, and see for yourself: it's plaster!
Rusty, musty, mildewed plaster, made to look like old stone--but
plaster for all that, plaster casts!--That's all that remains of
your perfect masterpiece!--That's what they've done in just a few
days!-That's what the Sieur Charpenais who copied the Rubenses,
prepared a year ago." He seized M. Filleul's arm in his turn. "What
do you think of it, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction? Isn't it fine?
Isn't it grand? Isn't it gorgeous? The chapel has been removed! A
whole Gothic chapel collected stone by stone! A whole population of
statues captured and replaced by these chaps in stucco! One of the
most magnificent specimens of an incomparable artistic period
confiscated! The chapel, in short, stolen! Isn't it immense? Ah,
Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, what a genius the man is!"

"You're allowing yourself to be carried away, M. Beautrelet."

"One can't be carried away too much, monsieur, when one has to do
with people like that. Everything above the average deserves our
admiration. And this man soars above everything. There is in his
flight a wealth of imagination, a force and power, a skill and
freedom that send a thrill through me!"

"Pity he's dead," said M. Filleul, with a grin. "He'd have ended by
stealing the towers of Notre-Dame."

Isidore shrugged his shoulders:

"Don't laugh, monsieur. He upsets you, dead though he may be."

"I don't say not, I don't say not, M. Beautrelet, I confess that I
feel a certain excitement now that I am about to set eyes on him--
unless, indeed, his friends have taken away the body."

"And always admitting," observed the Comte de Gesvres, "that it was
really he who was wounded by my poor niece."

"It was he, beyond a doubt, Monsieur le Comte," declared Beautrelet;
"it was he, believe me, who fell in the ruins under the shot fired
by Mlle. de Saint-Veran; it was he whom she saw rise and who fell
again and dragged himself toward the cloisters to rise again for the
last time--this by a miracle which I will explain to you presently--
to rise again for the last time and reach this stone shelter--which
was to be his tomb."

And Beautrelet struck the threshold of the chapel with his stick.

"Eh? What?" cried M. Filleul, taken aback. "His tomb?--Do you think
that that impenetrable hiding-place--"

"It was here--there," he repeated.

"But we searched it."

"Badly."

"There is no hiding-place here," protested M. de Gesvres. "I know
the chapel."

"Yes, there is, Monsieur le Comte. Go to the mayor's office at
Varengeville, where they have collected all the papers that used to
be in the old parish of Ambrumesy, and you will learn from those
papers, which belong to the eighteenth century, that there is a
crypt below the chapel. This crypt doubtless dates back to the Roman
chapel, upon the site of which the present one was built."

"But how can Lupin have known this detail?" asked M. Filleul.

"In a very simple manner: because of the works which he had to
execute to take away the chapel."

"Come, come, M. Beautrelet, you're exaggerating. He has not taken
away the whole chapel. Look, not one of the stones of this top
course has been touched."

"Obviously, he cast and took away only what had a financial value:
the wrought stones, the sculptures, the statuettes, the whole
treasure of little columns and carved arches. He did not trouble
about the groundwork of the building itself. The foundations
remain."

"Therefore, M. Beautrelet, Lupin was not able to make his way into
the crypt."

At that moment, M. de Gesvres, who had been to call a servant,
returned with the key of the chapel. He opened the door. The three
men entered. After a short examination Beautrelet said:

"The flag-stones on the ground have been respected, as one might
expect. But it is easy to perceive that the high altar is nothing
more than a cast. Now, generally, the staircase leading to the crypt
opens in front of the high altar and passes under it."

"What do you conclude?"

"I conclude that Lupin discovered the crypt when working at the
altar."

The count sent for a pickaxe and Beautrelet attacked the altar. The
plaster flew to right and left. He pushed the pieces aside as he
went on.

"By Jove!" muttered M. Filleul, "I am eager to know--"

"So am I," said Beautrelet, whose face was pale with anguish.

He hurried his blows. And, suddenly, his pickaxe, which, until then,
had encountered no resistance, struck against a harder material and
rebounded. There was a sound of something falling in; and all that
remained of the altar went tumbling into the gap after the block of
stone which had been struck by the pickaxe. Beautrelet bent forward.
A puff of cold air rose to his face. He lit a match and moved it
from side to side over the gap:

"The staircase begins farther forward than I expected, under the
entrance-flags, almost. I can see the last steps, there, right at
the bottom."

"Is it deep?"

"Three or four yards. The steps are very high--and there are some
missing."

"It is hardly likely," said M. Filleul, "that the accomplices can
have had time to remove the body from the cellar, when they were
engaged in carrying off Mlle. de Saint-Veran--during the short
absence of the gendarmes. Besides, why should they?--No, in my
opinion, the body is here."

A servant brought them a ladder. Beautrelet let it down through the
opening and fixed it, after groping among the fallen fragments.
Holding the two uprights firmly:

"Will you go down, M. Filleul?" he asked.

The magistrate, holding a candle in his hand, ventured down the
ladder. The Comte de Gesvres followed him and Beautrelet, in his
turn, placed his foot on the first rung.

Mechanically, he counted eighteen rungs, while his eyes examined the
crypt, where the glimmer of the candle struggled against the heavy
darkness. But, at the bottom, his nostrils were assailed by one of
those foul and violent smells which linger in the memory for many a
long day. And, suddenly, a trembling hand seized him by the
shoulder.

"Well, what is it?"

"B-beautrelet," stammered M. Filleul. "B-beau-trelet--"

He could not get a word out for terror.

"Come, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, compose yourself!"

"Beautrelet--he is there--"

"Eh?"

"Yes--there was something under the big stone that broke off the
altar--I pushed the stone--and I touched--I shall never--shall never
forget.--"

"Where is it?"

"On this side.--Don't you notice the smell?--And then look--see."

He took the candle and held it towards a motionless form stretched
upon the ground.

"Oh!" exclaimed Beautrelet, in a horror-stricken tone.

The three men bent down quickly. The corpse lay half-naked, lean,
frightful. The flesh, which had the greenish hue of soft wax,
appeared in places through the torn clothes. But the most hideous
thing, the thing that had drawn a cry of terror from the young man's
lips, was the head, the head which had just been crushed by the
block of stone, the shapeless head, a repulsive mass in which not
one feature could be distinguished.

Beautrelet took four strides up the ladder and fled into the
daylight and the open air.

M. Filleul found him again lying flat on the around, with his hands
glued to his face:

"I congratulate you, Beautrelet," he said. "In addition to the
discovery of the hiding-place, there are two points on which I have
been able to verify the correctness of your assertions. First of
all, the man on whom Mlle. de Saint-Veran fired was indeed Arsene
Lupin, as you said from the start. Also, he lived in Paris under the
name of Etienne de Vaudreix. If you are called to serve Him in the
world, the journey on which you are now starting may lead you to
the throne of Pianura; but even so," he went on, "there is this I
would have you remember: that should this dignity come to you it
may come as a calamity rather than a joy; for when God confers
earthly honours on a child of His predilection, He sometimes deigns
to render them as innocuous as misfortune; and my chief prayer for
you is that you should be raised to this eminence, it may be at a
moment when such advancement seems to thrust you in the dust."

The words burned themselves into Odo's heart like some mystic writing
on the walls of memory, long afterward to start into fiery meaning.

At the time he felt only that the priest spoke with a power and dignity
no human authority could give; and for a moment all the stored
influences of his faith reached out to him from the dimly-gleaming
altar.

The next sun rose on a new world.

He was to set out at daylight, and dawn found him at the
casement, footing it in thought down the road as yet undistinguishable
in a dying glimmer of stars. Bruno was to attend him to Turin; but
one of the women presently brought word that the old huntsman's
rheumatism had caught him in the knee, and that the Marquess,
resolved not to delay his grandson's departure, had chosen Cantapresto
as the boy's companion.

The courtyard, when Odo descended, fairly bubbled with the voluble
joy of the fat soprano, who was giving directions to the servants,
receiving commissions and instructions from the aunts, assuring
everybody of his undying devotion to the heir-presumptive of Pianura,
and citing impressive instances of the responsibilities with which
the great of the earth had formerly entrusted him.

As a companion for Odo the abate was clearly not to Don Gervaso's
taste; but he stood silent, turning the comment of a cool eye on
the soprano's protestations, and saying only, as Cantapresto swept
the company into the circle of an obsequious farewell:--"Remember,
signor abate, it is to your cloth this business is entrusted."

The abate's answer was a rush of purple to the forehead; but Don
Gervaso imperturbably added, "And you lie but one night on the road."

Meanwhile the old Marquess, visibly moved, was charging Odo to
respect his elders and superiors, while in the same breath warning
him not to take up with the Frenchified notions of the court, but
to remember that for a lad of his condition the chief virtues were
a tight seat in the saddle, a quick hand on the sword and a slow
tongue in counsel.

"Mind your own business," he concluded, "and see that others mind
theirs."

The Marchioness thereupon, with many tears, hung a scapular about
Odo's neck, bidding him shun the theatre and be regular at confession;
one of the canonesses reminded him not to omit a visit to the chapel
of the Holy Winding-sheet, while the other begged him to burn a
candle for her at the Consolata; and the servants pressed forward
to embrace and bless their little master.

Day was high by this, and as the Marquess's travelling-chariot rumbled
down the valley the shadows seemed to fly before it. Odo at first lay
numb; but presently his senses woke to the call of the
brightening landscape. The scene was such as Salvator might have
painted: wild blocks of stone heaped under walnut-shade; here
the white plunge of water down a wall of granite, and there, in
bluer depths, a charcoal burner's hut sending up its spiral
of smoke to the dark raftering of branches.

Though it was but a few hours since Odo had travelled from Oropa,
years seemed to have passed over him, and he saw the world with a new
eye. Each sound and scent plucked at him in passing: the roadside
started into detail like the foreground of some minute Dutch painter;
every pendent mass of fern, dark dripping rock, late tuft of
harebell called out to him: "Look well, for this is your last sight
of us!"

His first sight too, it seemed: since he had lived through twelve
Italian summers without sense of the sun-steeped quality of atmosphere
that, even in shade, gives each object a golden salience.

He was conscious of it now only as it suggested fingering a missal
stiff with gold-leaf and edged with a swarming diversity of buds
and insects.

The carriage moved so slowly that he was in no haste to turn the
pages; and each spike of yellow foxglove, each clouding of butterflies
about a patch of speedwell, each quiver of grass over a hidden
thread of moisture, became a marvel to be thumbed and treasured.

From this mood he was detached by the next bend of the road. The way,
hitherto winding through narrow glens, now swung to a ledge
overhanging the last escarpment of the mountains; and far below,
the Piedmontese plain unrolled to the southward its interminable
blue-green distances mottled with forest.

A sight to lift the heart; for on those sunny reaches Ivrea,
Novara, Vercelli lay like sea-birds on a summer sea.

It was the future unfolding itself to the boy; dark forests, wide
rivers, strange cities and a new horizon: all the mystery of the
coming years figured to him in that great plain stretching away to
the greater mystery of heaven.

To all this Cantapresto turned a snoring countenance. The lively air
of the hills, the good fare of Donnaz, and the satisfaction, above
all, of rolling on cushions over a road he had thought to trudge on
foot, had lapped the abate in Capuan slumber. The midday halt aroused
him. The travellers rested at an inn on the edge of the hills,
and here Cantapresto proved to his charge that, as he phrased it,
his belly had as short a memory for food as his heart for injuries.

A flask of Asti put him in the talking mood, and as they drove on he
regaled Odo with a lively picture of the life on which he was about
to enter.

"You are going," said he, "to one of the first cities of Europe;
one that has all the beauty and elegance of the French capital
without its follies and excesses.

Turin is blessed with a court where good manners and a fine tone
are more highly prized than the extravagances of genius; and I
have heard it said of his Majesty that he was delighted to see his
courtiers wearing the French fashions outside their heads, provided
they didn't carry the French ideas within.

You are too young, doubtless, cavaliere, to have heard of the
philosophers who are raising such a pother north of the Alps: a
set of madmen that, because their birth doesn't give them the
entree of Versailles, are preaching that men should return to a state
of nature, great ladies suckle their young like animals,
and the peasantry own their land like nobles.

Luckily you'll hear little of this infectious talk in Turin: the
King stamps out the philosophers like vermin or packs them off to
splutter their heresies in Milan or Venice.

But to a nobleman mindful of the privileges of his condition there
is no more agreeable sojourn in Europe. The wines are delicious,
the women--er--accomplished--and though the sbirri may hug one
a trifle close now and then, why, with money and discretion, a
friend or two in the right quarters, and the wit to stand well with
the Church, there's no city in Europe where a man may have pleasanter
sins to confess."

The carriage, by this, was descending the last curves above the
valley, and before them, in a hollow of the hills, blinked the
warm shimmer of maize and vine, like some bright vintage brimming
its cup.

The soprano waved a convivial hand.

"Look," he cried, "what Nature has done for this happy region! Where
herself has spread the table so bountifully, should her children
hang back from the feast?

I vow, cavaliere, if the mountains were built for hermits and
ascetics, then the plain was made level for dancing, banqueting and
the pleasures of the villeggiatura.

If God had meant us to break our teeth on nuts and roots, why did
He hang the vine with fruit and draw three crops of wheat from this
indulgent soil? I protest when I look on such a scene as
this, it is sufficient incentive to lowliness to remember that the
meek shall inherit the earth!"

This mood held Cantapresto till his after-dinner sleep overtook
him; and when he woke again the chariot was clattering across the
bridge of Chivasso.

The Po rolled its sunset crimson between flats that seemed dull and
featureless after the broken scenery of the hills; but beyond the
bridge rose the towers and roofs of the town, with its cathedral-front
catching the last slant of light. In the streets dusk had fallen
and a lamp flared under the arch of the inn before which the
travellers halted.

Odo's head was heavy, and he hardly noticed the figures thronging
the caffe into which they were led; but presently there rose a shout
of "Cantapresto!"

and a ring of waving arms and flashing teeth encircled his companion.

These appendages belonged to a troop of men and women, some masked
and in motley, others in discoloured travel-stained garments, who
pressed about the soprano with cries of joyous recognition.

He was evidently an old favourite of the band, for a duenna in
tattered velvet fell on his neck with genial unreserve, a pert
soubrette caught him by the arm the duenna left free, and a terrific
Matamor with a nose like a scimitar slapped him on the back with a
tin sword.

Odo's glimpse of the square at Oropa told him that here was a band of
strolling players such as Cantapresto had talked of on the ride
back to Donnaz. Don Gervaso's instructions and the old Marchioness's
warning against the theatre were present enough in the boy's mind
to add a touch of awe to the curiosity with which he observed these
strange objects of the Church's reprobation.

They struck him, it must be owned, as more pitiable than alarming,
for the duenna's toes were coming through her shoes, and one or two
of the children who hung on the outskirts of the group looked as
lean and hungry under their spangles as the foundling-girl of
Pontesordo.

Spite of this they seemed a jolly crew, and ready (at Cantapresto's
expense) to celebrate their encounter with the ex-soprano in unlimited
libations of Asti and Val Pulicello.

The singer, however, hung back with protesting gestures.

"Gently, then, gently, dear friends--dear companions!

When was it we parted?

In the spring of the year--and we meet now in the late summer.
As the seasons change so do our conditions: if the spring is a season
of folly, then is the harvest-time the period for reflection.
When we last met I was a strolling poet, glad to serve your gifted
company within the scope of my talents--now, ladies and gentlemen,
now"--he drew himself up with pride--"now you behold in me the
governor and friend of the heir-presumptive of Pianura."

Cries of incredulity and derision greeted this announcement, and
one of the girls called out laughingly, "Yet you have the same old
cassock to your back!"

"And the same old passage from your mouth to your belly," added an
elastic Harlequin, reaching an arm across the women's shoulders.
"Come, Cantapresto, we'll help you line it with good wine, to the
health of his most superlatively serene Highness, the
heir-presumptive of Pianura; and where is that fabulous personage,
by the way?"
Odo at this retreated hastily behind the soprano; but a pretty girl
catching sight of him, he found himself dragged into the centre
of the company, who hailed him with fantastic obeisances.

Supper meanwhile was being laid on the greasy table down the middle
of the room.

The Matamor, who seemed the director
 of the troupe, thundered out his orders
 for maccaroni, fried eels and sausages;
 the inn-servants flanked the plates with wine-flasks and lumps of
black bread, and in a moment the hungry comedians, thrusting Odo
into a high seat at the head of the table, were falling on the
repast with a prodigious clatter of cutlery.

Of the subsequent incidents of the feast--the banter of the younger
women, the duenna's lachrymose confidences, the incessant interchange
of theatrical jargon and coarse pleasantry--there remained to Odo
but a confused image, obscured by the smoke of guttering candles,
the fumes of wine and the stifling air of the low-ceilinged tavern.

Even the face of the pretty girl who had dragged him from his
concealment, and who now sat at his side, plying him with sweets from
her own plate, began to fade into the general blur; and his last
impression was of Cantapresto's figure dilating to immense proportions
at the other end of the table, as the soprano rose with shaking
wine-glass to favour the company with a song.

The chorus, bursting forth in response, surged over Odo's drowning
senses, and he was barely aware, in the tumult of noise and lights,
of an arm slipped about him, a softly-heaving pillow beneath his
head, and the gradual subsidence into dark delicious peace.

So, on the first night of his new life, the heir-presumptive of Pianura
fell asleep with his head in a dancing-girl's breast.

1.8.

The travellers were to journey by Vettura from Chivasso to Turin;
and when Odo woke next morning the carriage stood ready in the
courtyard.

Cantapresto, mottled and shamefaced, with his bands awry and an air
of tottering dignity, was gathering their possessions together, and
the pretty girl who had pillowed Odo's slumbers now knelt by his
bed and laughingly drew on his stockings.

She was a slim brown morsel, not much above his age, with a glance
that flitted like a bird, and round shoulders slipping out of her
kerchief.

A wave of shyness bathed Odo to the forehead as their eyes met: he
hung his head stupidly and turned away when she fetched the comb
to dress his hair.

His toilet completed, she called out to the abate to go below and see
that the cavaliere's chocolate was ready; and as the door closed she
turned and kissed Odo on the lips.

"Oh, how red you are!" she cried laughing. "Is that the first kiss
you've ever had? Then you'll remember me when you're Duke of
Pianura--Mirandolina of Chioggia, the first girl you ever kissed!"

She was pulling his collar straight while she talked, so that he
could not get away from her.

"You will remember me, won't you?" she persisted. "I shall
be a great actress by that time, and you'll appoint me prima amorosa
to the ducal theatre of Pianura, and throw me a diamond bracelet
from your Highness's box and make all the court ladies ready to
poison me for rage!" She released his collar and dropped away
from him. "Ah, no, I shall be a poor strolling player, and you a
great prince," she sighed, "and you'll never, never think of me
again; but I shall always remember that I was the first girl you
ever kissed!"

She hung back in a dazzle of tears, looking so bright and tender
that Odo's bashfulness melted like a spring frost.

"I shall never be Duke," he cried, "and I shall never forget you!"
And with that he turned and kissed her boldly and then bolted down
the stairs like a hare. And all that day he scorched and froze
with the thought that perhaps she had been laughing at him.

Cantapresto was torpid after the feast, and Odo detected in him an
air of guilty constraint. The boy was glad enough to keep silence,
and they rolled on without speaking through the wide glowing
landscape.

Already the nearness of a great city began to make itself
felt. The bright champaign was scattered over with farm-houses, their
red-tiled pigeon-cots and their granges latticed with openwork
terra-cotta pleasantly breaking the expanse of maize and mulberry;
villages lay along the banks of the canals intersecting the plain;
and the hills beyond the Po were planted with villas and monasteries.

All the afternoon they drove between umbrageous parks and under the
walls of terraced vineyards.

It was a region of delectable shade, with glimpses here and there
of gardens flashing with fountains and villa roofs decked with statues
and vases; and at length, toward sunset, a bend of the road brought
them out on a fair-spreading city, so flourishing in buildings,
so beset with smiling hills, that Odo, springing from his seat,
cried out in sheer joy of the spectacle.

They had still the suburbs to traverse; and darkness was falling
when they entered the gates of Turin.

This brought the fresh amazement of wide lamplit streets, clean and
bright as a ball-room, lined with palaces and filled with well-dressed
loungers: officers in the brilliant Sardinian uniforms, fine gentlemen
in French tie-wigs and narrow-sleeved coats, merchants hurrying
home from business, ecclesiastics in high-swung carriages, and young
bloods dashing by in their curricles.

The tables before the coffee-houses were thronged with idlers
taking their chocolate and reading the gazettes; and here and there
the arched doorway of a palace showed some gay party supping al
fresco in a garden hung with lamps.

The flashing of lights and the noise of the streets roused Cantapresto,
who sat up with a sudden assumption of dignity.

"Ah, cavaliere," said he, "you now see a great city, a famous city,
a city aptly called 'the Paris of Italy.' Nowhere else shall you
find such well-lit streets, such fair pavements, shops so full of
Parisian wares, promenades so crowded with fine carriages and horses.

What a life a young gentleman may lead here! The court is hospitable,
society amiable, the theatres are the best-appointed in Italy."

Here Cantapresto paused with a deprecating cough.

"Only one thing is necessary," he went on, "to complete enjoyment of
the fruits of this garden of Eden; and that is"--he coughed
again--"discretion.

His Majesty, cavaliere, is a father to his subjects; the Church
is their zealous mother; and between two such parents, and the
innumerable delegates of their authority, why, you may fancy, sir,
that a man has to wear his eyes on all sides of his head.

Delattre,
who continued to plead professional secrecy and refused to give
evidence, nevertheless confessed to his intimate friends--who lost
no time in blabbing--that he really had been taken to a crypt to
attend a wounded man whom his confederates introduced to him by the
name of Arsene Lupin. And, as the corpse of Etienne de Vaudreix was
found in that same crypt and as the said Etienne de Vaudreix was
none other than Arsene Lupin--as the official examination went to
show--all this provided an additional proof, if one were needed, of
the identity of Arsene Lupin and the wounded man. Therefore, with
Lupin dead and Mlle. de Saint-Veran's body recognized by the curb-
bracelet on her wrist, the tragedy was finished.

It was not. Nobody thought that it was, because Beautrelet had said
the contrary. Nobody knew in what respect it was not finished, but,
on the word of the young man, the mystery remained complete. The
evidence of the senses did not prevail against the statement of a
Beautrelet. There was something which people did not know, and of
that something they were convinced that he was in position to supply
a triumphant explanation.

It is easy, therefore, to imagine the anxiety with which, at first,
people awaited the bulletins issued by the two Dieppe doctors to
whose care the Comte de Gesvres entrusted his patient; the distress
that prevailed during the first few days, when his life was thought
to be in danger; and the enthusiasm of the morning when the
newspapers announced that there was no further cause for fear. The
least details excited the crowd. People wept at the thought of
Beautrelet nursed by his old father, who had been hurriedly summoned
by telegram, and they also admired the devotion of Mlle. Suzanne de
Gesvres, who spent night after night by the wounded lad's bedside.

Next came a swift and glad convalescence. At last, the public were
about to know! They would know what Beautrelet had promised to
reveal to M. Filleul and the decisive words which the knife of the
would-be assassin had prevented him from uttering! And they would
also know everything, outside the tragedy itself, that remained
impenetrable or inaccessible to the efforts of the police.

With Beautrelet free and cured of his wound, one could hope for some
certainty regarding Harlington, Arsene Lupin's mysterious
accomplice, who was still detained at the Sante prison. One would
learn what had become, after the crime, of Bredoux the clerk, that
other accomplice, whose daring was really terrifying.

With Beautrelet free, one could also form a precise idea concerning
the disappearance of Ganimard and the kidnapping of Shears. How was
it possible for two attempts of this kind to take place? Neither the
English detectives nor their French colleagues possessed the
slightest clue on the subject. On Whit-Sunday, Ganimard did not come
home, nor on the Monday either, nor during the five weeks that
followed. In London, on Whit-Monday, Holmlock Shears took a cab at
eight o'clock in the evening to drive to the station. He had hardly
stepped in, when he tried to alight, probably feeling a presentiment
of danger. But two men jumped into the hansom, one on either side,
flung him back on the seat and kept him there between them, or
rather under them. All this happened in sight of nine or ten
witnesses, who had no time to interfere. The cab drove off at a
gallop. And, after that, nothing. Nobody knew anything.

Perhaps, also, Beautrelet would be able to give the complete
explanation of the document, the mysterious paper to which. Bredoux,
the magistrate's clerk, attached enough importance to recover it,
with blows of the knife, from the person in whose possession it was.
The problem of the Hollow Needle it was called, by the countless
solvers of riddles who, with their eyes bent upon the figures and
dots, strove to read a meaning into them. The Hollow Needle! What a
bewildering conjunction of two simple words! What an
incomprehensible question was set by that scrap of paper, whose very
origin and manufacture were unknown! The Hollow Needle! Was it a
meaningless expression, the puzzle of a schoolboy scribbling with
pen and ink on the corner of a page? Or were they two magic words
which could compel the whole great adventure of Lupin the great
adventurer to assume its true significance? Nobody knew.

But the public soon would know. For some days, the papers had been
announcing the approaching arrival of Beautrelet. The struggle was
on the point of recommencing; and, this time, it would be implacable
on the part of the young man, who was burning to take his revenge.
And, as it happened, my attention, just then, was drawn to his name,
printed in capitals. The Grand Journal headed its front page with
the following paragraph:

        *       *       *       *       *

WE HAVE PERSUADED

M. ISIDORE BEAUTRELET

TO GIVE US THE FIRST RIGHT OF PRINTING HIS REVELATIONS. TO-MORROW,
TUESDAY, BEFORE THE POLICE THEMSELVES ARE INFORMED, THE Grand
Journal WILL PUBLISH THE WHOLE TRUTH OF THE AMBRUMESY MYSTERY.

        *       *       *       *       *

"That's interesting, eh? What do you think of it, my dear chap?"

I started from my chair. There was some one sitting beside me, some
one I did not know. I cast my eyes round for a weapon. But, as my
visitor's attitude appeared quite inoffensive, I restrained myself
and went up to him.

He was a young man with strongly-marked features, long, fair hair
and a short, tawny beard, divided into two points. His dress
suggested the dark clothes of an English clergyman; and his whole
person, for that matter, wore an air of austerity and gravity that
inspired respect.

"Who are you?" I asked. And, as he did not reply, I repeated, "Who
are you? How did you get in? What are you here for?"

He looked at me and said:

"Don't you know me?"

"No--no!"

"Oh, that's really curious! Just search your memory--one of your
friends--a friend of a rather special kind--however--"

I caught him smartly by the arm:

"You lie! You lie! No, you're not the man you say you are--it's not
true."

"Then why are you thinking of that man rather than another?" he
asked, with a laugh.

Oh, that laugh! That bright and clear young laugh, whose amusing
irony had so often contributed to my diversion! I shivered. Could it
be?

"No, no," I protested, with a sort of terror. "It cannot be."

"It can't be I, because I'm dead, eh?" he retorted. "And because you
don't believe in ghosts." He laughed again. "Am I the sort of man
who dies? Do you think I would die like that, shot in the back by a
girl? Really, you misjudge me! As though I would ever consent to
such a death as that!"

"So it is you!" I stammered, still incredulous and yet greatly
excited. "So it is you! I can't manage to recognize you."

"In that case," he said, gaily, "I am quite easy. If the only man to
whom I have shown myself in my real aspect fails to know me to-day,
then everybody who will see me henceforth as I am to-day is bound
not to know me either, when he sees me in my real aspect--if,
indeed, I have a real aspect--"

I recognized his voice, now that he was no longer changing its tone,
and I recognized his eyes also and the expression of his face and
his whole attitude and his very being, through the counterfeit
appearance in which he had shrouded it:

"Arsene Lupin!" I muttered.

"Yes, Arsene Lupin!" he cried, rising from his chair. "The one and
only Arsene Lupin, returned from the realms of darkness, since it
appears that I expired and passed away in a crypt! Arsene Lupin,
alive and kicking, in the full exercise of his will, happy and free
and more than ever resolved to enjoy that happy freedom in a world
where hitherto he has received nothing but favors and privileges!"

It was my turn to laugh:

"Well, it's certainly you, and livelier this time than on the day
when I had the pleasure of seeing you, last year--I congratulate
you."

I was alluding to his last visit, the visit following on the famous
adventure of the diadem, [Footnote: Arsene Lupin, play in three acts
and four scenes, by Maurice Leblanc and Francis de Croisset.] his
interrupted marriage, his flight with Sonia Kirchnoff and the
Russian girl's horrible death. On that day, I had seen an Arsene
Lupin whom I did not know, weak, down-hearted, with eyes tired with
weeping, seeking for a little sympathy and affection.

"Be quiet," he said. "The past is far away."

"It was a year ago," I observed.

"It was ten years ago," he declared. "Arsene Lupin's years count for
ten times as much as another man's."

I did not insist and, changing the conversation:

"How did you get in?"

"Why, how do you think? Through the door, of course. Then, as I saw
nobody, I walked across the drawing room and out by the balcony, and
here I am."

"Yes, but the key of the door--?"

"There are no doors for me, as you know. I wanted your flat and I
came in."

"It is at your disposal. Am I to leave you?"

"Oh, not at all! You won't be in the way. In fact, I can promise you
an interesting evening."

"Are you expecting some one?"

"Yes. I have given him an appointment here at ten o'clock." He took
out his watch. "It is ten now. If the telegram reached him, he ought
to be here soon."

The front-door bell rang.

"What did I tell you? No, don't trouble to get up: I'll go."

With whom on earth could he have made an appointment? And what sort
of scene was I about to assist at: dramatic or comic? For Lupin
himself to consider it worthy of interest, the situation must be
somewhat exceptional.

He returned in a moment and stood back to make way for a young man,
tall and thin and very pale in the face.

Without a word and with a certain solemnity about his movements that
made me feel ill at ease. Lupin switched on all the electric lamps,
one after the other, till the room was flooded with light. Then the
two men looked at each other, exchanged profound and penetrating
glances, as if, with all the effort of their gleaming eyes, they
were trying to pierce into each other's souls.

It was an impressive sight to see them thus, grave and silent. But
who could the newcomer be?

I was on the point of guessing the truth, through his resemblance to
a photograph which had recently appeared in the papers, when Lupin
turned to me:

"My dear chap, let me introduce M. Isidore Beautrelet." And,
addressing the young man, he continued, "I have to thank you, M.
Beautrelet, first, for being good enough, on receipt of a letter
from me, to postpone your revelations until after this interview
and, secondly, for granting me this interview with so good a grace."

Beautrelet smiled:

"Allow me to remark that my good grace consists, above all, in
obeying your orders. The threat which you made to me in the letter
in question was the more peremptory in being aimed not at me, but at
my father."

"My word," said Lupin laughing, "we must do the best we can and make
use of the means of action vouchsafed to us. I knew by experience
that your own safety was indifferent to you, seeing that you
resisted the arguments of Master Bredoux. There remained your
father--your father for whom you have a great affection--I played on
that string."

"And here I am," said Beautrelet, approvingly.

I motioned them to be seated. They consented and Lupin resumed, in
that tone of imperceptible banter which is all his own:

"In any case, M. Beautrelet, if you will not accept my thanks, you
will at least not refuse my apologies."

"Apologies! Bless my soul, what for?"

"For the brutality which Master Bredoux showed you."

"I confess that the act surprised me. It was not Lupin's usual way
of behaving. A stab--"

"I assure you I had no hand in it. Bredoux is a new recruit. My
friends, during the time that they had the management of our
affairs, thought that it might be useful to win over to our cause
the clerk of the magistrate himself who was conducting the inquiry."

"Your friends were right."

"Bredoux, who was specially attached to your person, was, in fact,
most valuable to us. But, with the ardor peculiar to any neophyte
who wishes to distinguish himself, he pushed his zeal too far and
thwarted my plans by permitting himself, on his own initiative, to
strike you a blow."

"Oh, it was a little accident!"

"Not at all, not at all! And I have reprimanded him severely! I am
bound, however, to say in his favor that he was taken unawares by
the really unexpected rapidity of your investigation. If you had
only left us a few hours longer, you would have escaped that
unpardonable attempt."

"And I should doubtless have enjoyed the enormous advantage of
undergoing the same fate as M. Ganimard and Mr. Holmlock Shears?"

"Exactly," said Lupin, laughing heartily. "And I should not have
known the cruel terrors which your wound caused me. I have had an
atrocious time because of it, believe me, and, at this moment, your
pallor fills me with all the stings of remorse. Can you ever forgive
me?"

"The proof of confidence which you have shown me in delivering
yourself unconditionally into my hands--it would have been so easy
for me to bring a few of Ganimard's friends with me--that proof of
confidence wipes out everything."

Was he speaking seriously? I confess frankly that I was greatly
perplexed. The struggle between the two men was beginning in a
manner which I was simply unable to understand. I had been present
at the first meeting between Lupin and Holmlock Shears, in the cafe
near the Gare Montparnesse, [Footnote: Arsene Lupin versus Holmlock
Shears, by Maurice Leblanc.] and I could not help recalling the
haughty carriage of the two combatants, the terrific clash of their
pride under the politeness of their manners, the hard blows which
they dealt each other, their feints, their arrogance.

Here, it was quite different. Lupin, it is true, had not changed; he
exhibited the same tactics, the same crafty affability. But what a
strange adversary he had come upon! The minarets are not very
high, some thirty-five feet above the roof of the Mesjid, or
about seventy-five feet from the ground. The whole structure, of
bricks and mud, is--barring the dangerous crack--still in good
preservation. On the outside, the minarets are tiled in a graceful,
geometrical transverse pattern of dark and light blue.

A visit to the sacred shrine of the quivering minarets has
miraculous powers--say the Persians--of curing all diseases or
protecting one against them, hence the pilgrimage of a great number
of natives afflicted with all sorts of complaints. Beggars in swarms
are at the entrance waiting, like hungry mosquitoes, to pounce
upon the casual visitor or customary pleasure-seeker of Isfahan,
for whom this spot is a favourite resort.

CHAPTER XXXIII
Isfahan the commercial heart of Persia--Dangers of maps in
argument--Bandar Abbas--The possibility of a Russian railway to
Bandar Abbas--Bandar Abbas as a harbour--The caravan road to Bandar
Abbas--Rates of transport--Trade--British and Russian influence--Shipping--A
Russian line of steamers--Customs under Belgian officials--Lingah--Its
exports and imports.

Isfahan is for England the most important city, politically and
commercially, in Western Persia.

It is the central point from which roads radiate to all parts of
the Shah's Empire.

It is the commercial heart, as it were, of Persia, and the future
preponderance of Russian or British influence in Isfahan will
settle the balance in favour of one or the other of the two countries
and the eventual preponderance in the whole of Western Iran.

Khorassan and Sistan stand on quite a different footing, being
severed from the West by the great Salt Desert, and must be set
apart for the moment and dealt with specially.

[Illustration: The Quivering Minarets near Isfahan.]

A reliable map ought to be consulted in order to understand
the question properly, but it should be remembered that it is ever
dangerous to base arguments on maps alone in discussing either
political or commercial matters.

Worse still is the case when astoundingly incorrect maps such
as are generally manufactured in England are in the hands of people
unfamiliar with the real topography and resources of a country.

To those who have travelled it is quite extraordinary what an
appalling mass of nonsensical rubbish can be supplied to the public
by politicians, by newspaper penny-a-liners, and by home royal
geographo-parasites at large, who base their arguments on such
unsteady foundation.

It is quite sufficient for some people to open an atlas and place
their fingers on a surface of cobalt blue paint in order to select
strategical harbours, point out roads upon which foreign armies can
invade India, trade routes which ought to be adopted in preference
to others, and so on, regardless of sea-depth, currents, winds,
shelter, and climatic conditions.

In the case of roads for invading armies, such small trifles as
hundreds of miles of desert, impassable mountain ranges, lack of
water, and no fuel, are never considered!

These are only small trifles that do not signify--as they are
not marked on the maps--the special fancy of the cartographer for
larger or smaller type in the nomenclature making cities and
villages more or less important to the student, or the excess of
ink upon one river course rather than another, according to the
cartographer's humour, making that river quite navigable, notwithstanding
that in reality there may not be a river nor a city nor village at
all.

We have flaming examples of this in our Government maps of
Persia.

I myself have had an amusing controversy in some of the London
leading papers with no less a person than the Secretary of a prominent
Geographical Society, who assured the public that certain well-known
peaks did not exist because he could not find them (they happened
to be there all the same) on his map!

Such other trifles as the connecting of lakes by imaginary rivers
to maintain the reputation of a scientific impostor, or the building
of accurate maps (_sic_) from badly-taken photographs--the direction
of which was not even recorded by the distinguished photographers--are
frauds too commonly perpetrated on the innocent public by certain
so-called scientific societies, to be here referred to.

Although these frauds are treated lightly, the harm they do to those
who take them seriously and to the public at large, who are always
ready blindly to follow anybody with sufficient bounce, is enormous.

Without going into minor details, let us take the burning question
of the fast-expanding Russian influence in the south of Persia.

We are assured that Russia wishes an outlet in the Persian Gulf,
and suspicions are strong that her eye is set on Bandar Abbas.

On the map it certainly appears a most heavenly spot for a harbour,
and we hear from scribblers that it can be made into a strong naval
base and turned into a formidable position.

The trade from Meshed and Khorassan and Teheran, Isfahan, Yezd, and
Kerman is with equal theoretical facility switched on to this place.

Even allowing that Russia should obtain a concession of this place--a
most unlikely thing to be asked for or conceded while Persia remains
an independent country--matters would not be as simple for Russia
as the man in the street takes them to be.

It would first of all be necessary to construct a railway connecting
the Trans-Caspian line with Bandar Abbas, a matter of enormous
expense and difficulty, and likely enough never to be a profitable
financial enterprise.

The political importance is dubious. A long railway line unguarded
in a foreign country could but be of little practical value.
It must be remembered that Persia is a very thinly populated
country, with vast tracts of land, such as the Salt Desert, almost
absolutely uninhabited, and where the construction of such a railway
would involve serious difficulties, owing to the lack of water for
several months of the year, intense heat, shifting sands, and in
some parts sudden inundations during the short rainy season.

Moreover, Bandar Abbas itself, although ideally situated on the
maps, is far from being an ideal harbour.

The water is shallow, and there is no safe shelter; the heat
unbearable and unhealthy. At enormous expense, of course,
this spot, like almost any other spot on any coast, could be turned
into a fair artificial harbour. The native town itself--if it can
be honoured with such a name--consists of a few miserable mud
houses, with streets in which one sinks in filth and mud. The inhabitants
are the most miserable and worst ruffians in Persia, together with
some Hindoos.

There is a European community of less than half-a-dozen souls.

The _British India_ and other coasting steamers touch here, and
therefore this has been made the starting-point for caravans to
Kerman and Yezd and Sistan _via_ Bam.

But for Isfahan and Teheran the more direct and shorter route _via_
Bushire is selected.

The caravan road from Bandar Abbas to Kerman and Yezd is extremely
bad and unsafe.

Several times of late the track has been blocked, and caravans robbed.
During 1900, and since that date, the risk of travelling on the
road seems to have increased, and as it is useless for Persians
to try and obtain protection or compensation from their own
Government the traffic not only has been diverted when possible
to other routes, principally Bushire, but the rates for transport
of goods inland had at one time become almost prohibitive. In
the summer of 1900, it cost 18 tomans (about £3 9_s._) to convey
900 lbs.
weight as far as Yezd, but in the autumn the charges rose to 56
tomans (about £10 13_s._) or more than three times as much for the
same weight of goods.

Eventually the rates were brought down to 22 tomans, but only for
a short time, after which they fluctuated again up to 28 tomans.

It was with the greatest difficulty that loading camels could be
obtained at all, owing to the deficiency of exports, and this partly
accounted for the extortionate prices demanded.

An English gentleman whom I met in Kerman told me that it was only
at great expense and trouble that he was able to procure camels to
proceed from Bandar Abbas to Kerman, and even then he had to leave
all his luggage behind to follow when other animals could be
obtained.

According to statistics furnished by the British Vice-Consul, the
exports of 1900 were half those of 1899, the exact figures being
£202,232 for 1899; £102,671 for 1900.

Opium, which had had the lead by far in previous years, fell from
£48,367 to £4,440.

Raw cotton, however, not only held its own but rose to a value of
£18,692 from £6,159 the previous year.

In the years 1888, 1889, 1890, and 1891 the exports of raw
cotton were abnormal, and rose to about £35,000 in 1890, the highest
record during the decade from 1888 to 1897.

Large quantities of henna and opium are also exported from this
spot, as it is the principal outlet of the Kerman and Yezd districts,
but the trade may be said to be almost entirely in British hands
at present, and Russian influence so far is infinitesimal.

We find that, next to opium, fruit and vegetables, especially dates,
constitute a large part of the export, then wool, drugs and spices,
salt, carpets and woollen fabrics, piece goods, silk (woven), seeds,
skins and tanned leather, wheat and cereals, and cotton raw and
manufactured.

Perfumery--rose-water--was largely exported from 1891 to 1896. The
exportation of tobacco seems to decrease, although it is now
beginning to look up again a little.

Dyes and colouring substances are also exported.

The value of imports is very nearly double that of the exports.

Cotton goods have the lead by a long way, then come tea, and piece
goods, loaf-sugar, powdered sugar, indigo, metals, wheat and cereals,
spices, drugs, wool and woollen fabrics, jute fabrics, cheap cutlery,
coffee, tobacco, mules, horses, donkeys, etc., in the succession
enumerated.

It is pleasant to find that the shipping increases yearly at Bandar
Abbas, and that, second only to Persian vessels, the number of
British sailing vessels entering Bandar Abbas in 1900 was nearly
double (48) of the previous year (28).

Steamers were in the proportion of 101 to 64.

Although in number of sailing vessels the Persians have the priority,
because of the great number of small crafts, the total tonnage of
the Persian vessels was 5,320 tons against 75,440 tons in 1899, and
139,164 tons in 1900 British.

Turkish steamers occasionally ply to Bandar Abbas and Muscat and
also Arab small sailing crafts.

It is rather curious to note that in 1899 the imports into Bandar
Abbas came entirely from India, Great Britain and France, and in a
small measure from Muscat, Zanzibar, the Arab Coast, Bahrain and
Persian ports, whereas the following year, 1900, the imports from
India fell to less than half their previous value, from £435,261
to £204,306, and from the United Kingdom there was a diminution
from £86,197 to £69,597; whereas France doubled hers in 1900 and
other countries entered into competition.

The Chinese Empire, curiously enough, was the strongest, to the value
of £18,419, presumably with teas, and Austria-Hungary £10,509.
Germany and Turkey imported to the value of some £2,174 and £2,147
respectively.

Belgium £2,254, Java £7,819, Mauritius £3,564, Muscat £692, the
Canaries £637, America £600, and Arabia £494.

Japan contributed to the amount of £305, Sweden £273, Italy £82, and
Switzerland the modest sum of £8.

A most significant point is that Russia, with all her alleged aims
and designs, only contributed to the small amount of £572. Nothing
was exported from Bandar Abbas to Russia.

It would appear from this that at least commercially Russia's
position at Bandar Abbas was not much to be feared as late as 1900.
Since then a Russian line of steamers has been established
from the Black Sea to the Persian Gulf ports, but I have no
accurate statistics at hand.

It is said not to be a financial success.

The establishment of Customs under Belgian officials in 1900 caused
some trouble at first, and may have been responsible for a portion
of the falling-off in trade, but it is now agreed by everybody that
the system is carried on in a fair and honest manner, preferable
to the extortionate fashion employed by the former speculators who
farmed out the Customs.

I rather doubt whether Russia's aim is even directed towards Lingah,
to the south-west of Bandar Abbas, as has been supposed by others.

Although this port would afford a deeper and better anchorage and
a breakwater, it has the same difficulties of approach by land from
Russia as Bandar Abbas--in fact, greater ones, being further south.

Lingah is a more prosperous port than Bandar Abbas, its exports
being roughly two-thirds larger than those of Bandar Abbas, and
its imports one-third in excess.

In value the export and import of pearls form the chief item, next
come wheat and cotton.

Very little tea is disembarked at Lingah, but dates and firearms
were landed in considerable quantities, especially in 1897.
Coffee and tobacco were more in demand here than at Bandar Abbas,
and metals were largely imported. White sea-shells found their way
in huge quantities to Beluchistan, where the women use them for
decorating their persons. Bangles and necklaces are made with them,
and neck-bands for the camels, horses and mules, as well as ornamentations
on the saddle bags. With these two exceptions the imports and
exports of Lingah are made up of larger quantities of articles
similar to those brought to and from Bandar Abbas.

CHAPTER XXXIV
Mahommerah--Where Russia's aims are directed--Advantages of Mahommerah--The
navigation of the Karun River--Traffic--Rates on the Ahwaz-Isfahan
track--The Government's attitude--Wheat--Russian influence--Backhtiari
Chiefs--Up and down river trade--Gum--Cotton goods--Sugar--Caravan
route--Steamers--Disadvantages of a policy of drift--Russian
enterprise.

So much for Bandar Abbas and Lingah.

I will not touch on Bushire, too well known to English people, but
Mahommerah may have a special interest to us, and also to Russia. It
is rather curious to note that it has never struck the British
politician nor the newspaper writer that Russia's aims, based
usually on sound and practical knowledge, might be focussed on this
port, which occupies the most favourable position in the Persian
Gulf for Russia's purposes.

Even strategically it is certainly as good as Bandar Abbas, while
commercially its advantages over the latter port are a thousandfold
greater.

These advantages are a navigable river, through fertile country, instead
of an almost impassable, waterless desert, and a distance as the crow
flies from Russian territory to Mahommerah one-third shorter than
from Bandar Abbas. A railway through the most populated and richest
part of Persia could easily be constructed to Ahwaz. The climate is
healthy though warm.

Another most curious fact which seems almost incredible is that the
British Government, through ignorance or otherwise, by a policy of
drift may probably be the cause of helping Russia to reap the benefit
of British enterprise on the Karun River, in the development of
which a considerable amount of British capital has already been sunk.

The importance, political and commercial, of continuing the
navigation of the Karun River until it does become a financial
success--which it is bound to be as soon as the country all round
it is fully developed--is too obvious for me to write at length
upon it, but it cannot be expected that a private company should
bear the burden and loss entirely for the good of the mother country
without any assistance from the home Government.

The British firm, who run the steamers, with much insight and
praiseworthy enterprise improved the existing caravan track from
Isfahan to Ahwaz on the Karun River, the point up to which the river
is navigable by steamers not drawing more than four feet. They built
two fine suspension bridges, one over the Karun at Godar-i-Balutak
and the other, the Pul-Amarat (or Built-bridge) constructed on the
side of an ancient masonry bridge.

The track has thus been rendered very easy and every assistance was
offered to caravans, while a regular service of river steamers plied
from Mahommerah to Ahwaz, to relieve the traffic by water. The s.s.
_Blosse Lynch_, 250 tons, was sent up at first, but was too large,
so the s.s. _Malamir_, 120 tons, was specially built for the Karun
navigation.

Matters were very prosperous at first, until many obstacles came
in the way.

The road has been open to traffic some three years.

The first year traffic was healthy and strong, but the second year,
owing to famine in Arabistan, the traffic suddenly dropped and
nothing would induce muleteers to travel by that route. Although
they were offered as much as 100 (£2) to 110 krans (£2 4_s._) per
load from Isfahan to Ahwaz, a distance of 17 stages--277 miles--they
preferred to take 70 krans (£1 9_s._ 2_d._) to Bushire, a journey
of about 30 stages, over a distance of 510 miles.

The caravan men in Persia are curious people to deal with, and it
takes a very long time to imbue their minds with new ideas.

In the case of the Ahwaz road it was partly conservatism and fear
instigated by the Mullahs that prevented their taking loads to the
steamers.

It was fully expected that the route could not pay its way for at
least five years from its inauguration, and the British Government--which
at that time seemed to understand the value of the undertaking--agreed
to give in equal shares with the Government of India a collective
guarantee against losses up to £3,000 for the first two years, then
of £2,000 for five years.

For some unaccountable reason the Government of India, which the
scheme mostly concerned, dropped out, and the guarantee was further
reduced to £1,000 payable by the home Government only.

As a result of this the steamers have been run since at a considerable
loss, and had it not been for the patriotism of Lynch Brothers, and
the prospects to which they still cling of a successful issue, the
navigation of the Karun would have already come to an untimely end.

The principal article of export of any importance was wheat, grown in
enormous quantities in the fertile plains of Arabistan; and were
its export legal, the export of grain would be infinitely greater
than the whole of the present imports.

But the Persian Government unfortunately prohibited the export of
grain from Persia, nominally to allay and prevent famine in the
country, in fact to enrich local governors by permitting illicit
export.

Consequently, the peasants could not sell their produce in the
open market and had to sell it, accepting what they could get from
speculators at about half the actual value. This led to the
discontinuance of the cultivation of wheat. When for three years the
exportation of grain was permitted, the acreage under cultivation
was enormous and yielded very large returns, but as soon as
the prohibition was set in force it dwindled year by year until it
became approximately the fifth part of what it originally was.
On the top of all this a severe drought occurred and a famine
resulted.

Instructed by Lupin, with a few movements
she binds up the wound with his handkerchief, to avoid the marks
which the blood would leave. Then, with the aid of the key which he
gives her, she opens the door of the chapel. He enters, supported by
the girl. She locks the door again and walks away. Albert arrives.

If the chapel had been visited at that moment or at least during the
next few minutes, before Lupin had had time to recover his strength,
to raise the flagstone and disappear by the stairs leading to the
crypt, he would have been taken. But this visit did not take place
until six hours later and then only in the most superficial way. As
it is, Lupin is saved; and saved by whom? By the girl who very
nearly killed him.

Thenceforth, whether she wishes it or no, Mlle. de Saint-Veran is
his accomplice. Not only is she no longer able to give him up, but
she is obliged to continue her work, else the wounded man will
perish in the shelter in which she has helped to conceal him.
Therefore she continues.

For that matter, if her feminine instinct makes the task a
compulsory one, it also makes it easy. She is full of artifice, she
foresees and forestalls everything. It is she who gives the
examining magistrate a false description of Arsene Lupin (the reader
will remember the difference of opinion on this subject between the
cousins). It is she, obviously, who, thanks to certain signs which I
do not know of, suspects an accomplice of Lupin's in the driver of
the fly. She warns him. She informs him of the urgent need of an
operation. It is she, no doubt, who substitutes one cap for the
other. It is she who causes the famous letter to be written in which
she is personally threatened. How, after that, is it possible to
suspect her?

It is she, who at that moment when I was about to confide my first
impressions to the examining magistrate, pretends to have seen me,
the day before, in the copsewood, alarms M. Filleul on my score and
reduces me to silence: a dangerous move, no doubt, because it
arouses my attention and directs it against the person who assails
me with an accusation which I know to be false; but an efficacious
move, because the most important thing of all is to gain time and
close my lips.

Lastly, it is she who, during forty days, feeds Lupin, brings him
his medicine (the chemist at Ouville will produce the prescriptions
which he made up for Mlle. de Saint-Veran), nurses him, dresses his
wound, watches over him AND CURES HIM.

Here we have the first of our two problems solved, at the same time
that the Ambrumesy mystery is set forth. Arsene Lupin found, close
at hand, in the chateau itself, the assistance which was
indispensable to him in order, first, not to be discovered and,
secondly, to live.

He now lives. And we come to the second problem, corresponding with
the second Ambrumesy mystery, the study of which served me as a
conducting medium. Why does Lupin, alive, free, at the head of his
gang, omnipotent as before, why does Lupin make desperate efforts,
efforts with which I am constantly coming into collision, to force
the idea of his death upon the police and the public?

We must remember that Mlle. de Saint-Veran was a very pretty girl.
The photographs reproduced in the papers after her disappearance
give but an imperfect notion of her beauty. That follows which was
bound to follow. Lupin, seeing this lovely girl daily for five or
six weeks, longing for her presence when she is not there, subjected
to her charm and grace when she is there, inhaling the cool perfume
of her breath when she bends over him, Lupin becomes enamored of his
nurse. Gratitude turns to love, admiration to passion. She is his
salvation, but she is also the joy of his eyes, the dream of his
lonely hours, his light, his hope, his very life.

He respects her sufficiently not to take advantage of the girl's
devotion and not to make use of her to direct his confederates.
There is, in fact, a certain lack of decision apparent in the acts
of the gang. But he loves her also, his scruples weaken and, as
Mlle. de Saint-Veran refuses to be touched by a love that offends
her, as she relaxes her visits when they become less necessary, as
she ceases them entirely on the day when he is cured--desperate,
maddened by grief, he takes a terrible resolve. He leaves his lair,
prepares his stroke and, on Saturday the sixth of June, assisted by
his accomplices, he carries off the girl.

This is not all. The abduction must not be known. All search, all
surmises, all hope, even, must be cut short. Mlle. de Saint-Veran
must pass for dead. There is a mock murder: proofs are supplied for
the police inquiries. There is doubt about the crime, a crime, for
that matter, not unexpected, a crime foretold by the accomplices, a
crime perpetrated to revenge the chief's death. And, through this
very fact--observe the marvelous ingenuity of the conception--
through this very fact, the belief in this death is, so to speak,
stimulated.

It is not enough to suggest a belief; it is necessary to compel a
certainty. Lupin foresees my interference. I am sure to guess the
trickery of the chapel. I am sure to discover the crypt. And, as the
crypt will be empty, the whole scaffolding will come to the ground.

THE CRYPT SHALL NOT BE EMPTY.

In the same way, the death of Mlle. de Saint-Veran will not be
definite, unless the sea gives up her corpse.

THE SEA SHALL GIVE UP THE CORPSE OF MLLE. DE SAINT-VERAN.

The difficulty is tremendous. The double obstacle seems
insurmountable. Yes, to any one but Lupin, but not to Lupin.

As he had foreseen, I guess the trickery of the chapel, I discover
the crypt and I go down into the lair where Lupin has taken refuge.
His corpse is there!

Any person who had admitted the death of Lupin as possible would
have been baffled. But I had not admitted this eventuality for an
instant (first, by intuition and, secondly, by reasoning). Pretense
thereupon became useless and every scheme vain. I said to myself at
once that the block of stone disturbed by the pickaxe had been
placed there with a very curious exactness, that the least knock was
bound to make it fall and that, in falling, it must inevitably
reduce the head of the false Arsene Lupin to pulp, in such a way as
to make it utterly irrecognizable.

Another discovery: half an hour later, I hear that the body of Mlle.
de Saint-Veran has been found on the rocks at Dieppe--or rather a
body which is considered to be Mlle. de Saint-Veran's, for the
reason that the arm has a bracelet similar to one of that young
lady's bracelets. This, however, is the only mark of identity, for
the corpse is irrecognizable.

Thereupon I remember and I understand. A few days earlier, I
happened to read in a number of the Vigie de Dieppe that a young
American couple staying at Envermeu had committed suicide by taking
poison and that their bodies had disappeared on the very night of
the death. I hasten to Envermeu. The story is true, I am told,
except in so far as concerns the disappearance, because the brothers
of the victims came to claim the corpses and took them away after
the usual formalities. The name of these brothers, no doubt, was
Arsene Lupin & Co.

Consequently, the thing is proved. We know why Lupin shammed the
murder of the girl and spread the rumor of his own death. He is in
love and does not wish it known. And, to reach his ends, he shrinks
from nothing, he even undertakes that incredible theft of the two
corpses which he needs in order to impersonate himself and Mlle. de
Saint-Veran. In this way, he will be at ease. No one can disturb
him. No one will ever suspect the truth which he wishes to suppress.

No one? Yes--three adversaries, at the most, might conceive doubts:
Ganimard, whose arrival is hourly expected; Holmlock Shears, who is
about to cross the Channel; and I, who am on the spot. This
constitutes a threefold danger. He removes it. He kidnaps Ganimard.
He kidnaps Holmlock Shears. He has me stabbed by Bredoux.

One point alone remains obscure. Why was Lupin so fiercely bent upon
snatching the document about the Hollow Needle from me? He surely
did not imagine that, by taking it away, he could wipe out from my
memory the text of the five lines of which it consists! Then why?
Did he fear that the character of the paper itself, or some other
clue, could give me a hint?

Be that as it may, this is the truth of the Ambrumesy mystery. I
repeat that conjecture plays a certain part in the explanation which
I offer, even as it played a great part in my personal
investigation. But, if one waited for proofs and facts to fight
Lupin, one would run a great risk either of waiting forever or else
of discovering proofs and facts carefully prepared by Lupin, which
would lead in a direction immediately opposite to the object in
view. I feel confident that the facts, when they are known, will
confirm my surmise in every respect.

        *       *       *       *       *

So Isidore Beautrelet, mastered for a moment by Arsene Lupin,
distressed by the abduction of his father and resigned to defeat,
Isidore Beautrelet, in the end, was unable to persuade himself to
keep silence. The truth was too beautiful and too curious, the
proofs which he was able to produce were too logical and too
conclusive for him to consent to misrepresent it. The whole world
was waiting for his revelations. He spoke.

        *       *       *       *       *

On the evening of the day on which his article appeared, the
newspapers announced the kidnapping of M. Beautrelet, senior.
Isidore was informed of it by a telegram from Cherbourg, which
reached him at three o'clock.


CHAPTER FIVE

ON THE TRACK


Young Beautrelet was stunned by the violence of the blow. As a
matter of fact, although, in publishing his article, he had obeyed
one of those irresistible impulses which make a man despise every
consideration of prudence, he had never really believed in the
possibility of an abduction. His precautions had been too thorough.
The friends at Cherbourg not only had instructions to guard and
protect Beautrelet the elder: they were also to watch his comings
and goings, never to let him walk out alone and not even to hand him
a single letter without first opening it. No, there was no danger.
Lupin, wishing to gain time, was trying to intimidate his adversary.

The blow, therefore, was almost unexpected; and Isidore, because he
was powerless to act, felt the pain of the shock during the whole of
the remainder of the day. One idea alone supported him: that of
leaving Paris, going down there, seeing for himself what had
happened and resuming the offensive.

He telegraphed to Cherbourg. He was at Saint-Lazare a little before
nine. A few minutes after, he was steaming out of the station in the
Normandy express.

It was not until an hour later, when he mechanically unfolded a
newspaper which he had bought on the platform, that he became aware
of the letter by which Lupin indirectly replied to his article of
that morning:

        *       *       *       *       *

To the Editor of the Grand Journal.

SIR: I cannot pretend but that my modest personality, which would
certainly have passed unnoticed in more heroic times, has acquired a
certain prominence in the dull and feeble period in which we live.
But there is a limit beyond which the morbid curiosity of the crowd
cannot go without becoming indecently indiscreet. If the walls that
surround our private lives be not respected, what is to safeguard
the rights of the citizen?

Will those who differ plead the higher interest of truth? An empty
pretext in so far as I am concerned, because the truth is known and
I raise no difficulty about making an official confession of the
truth in writing. Yes, Mlle. de Saint-Veran is alive. Yes, I love
her. Yes, I have the mortification not to be loved by her. Yes, the
results of the boy Beautrelet's inquiry are wonderful in their
precision and accuracy. Yes, we agree on every point. There is no
riddle left. There is no mystery. Well, then, what?

Injured to the very depths of my soul, bleeding still from cruel
wounds, I ask that my more intimate feelings and secret hopes may no
longer be delivered to the malevolence of the public. I ask for
peace, the peace which I need to conquer the affection of Mlle. de
Saint-Veran and to wipe out from her memory the thousand little
injuries which she has had to suffer at the hands of her uncle and
cousin--this has not been told--because of her position as a poor
relation. Mlle. de Saint-Veran will forget this hateful past. All
that she can desire, were it the fairest jewel in the world, were it
the most unattainable treasure, I shall lay at her feet. She will be
happy. She will love me.

But, if I am to succeed, once more, I require peace. That is why I
lay down my arms and hold out the olive-branch to my enemies--while
warning them, with every magnanimity on my part, that a refusal on
theirs might bring down upon them the gravest consequences.

One word more on the subject of Mr. Harlington. This name conceals
the identity of an excellent fellow, who is secretary to Cooley, the
American millionaire, and instructed by him to lay hands upon every
object of ancient art in Europe which it is possible to discover.
His evil star brought him into touch with my friend Etienne de
Vaudreix, ALIAS Arsene Lupin, ALIAS myself. He learnt, in this way,
that a certain M. de Gesvres was willing to part with four pictures
by Rubens, ostensibly on the condition that they were replaced by
copies and that the bargain to which he was consenting remained
unknown. My friend Vaudreix also undertook to persuade M. de Gesvres
to sell his chapel. The negotiations were conducted with entire good
faith on the side of my friend Vaudreix and with charming
ingenuousness on the side of Mr. Harlington, until the day when the
Rubenses and the carvings from the chapel were in a safe place and
Mr. Harlington in prison. There remains nothing, therefore, to be
done but to release the unfortunate American, because he was content
to play the modest part of a dupe; to brand the millionaire Cooley,
because, for fear of possible unpleasantness, he did not protest
against his secretary's arrest; and to congratulate my friend
Etienne de Vaudreix, because he is revenging the outraged morality
of the public by keeping the hundred thousand francs which he was
paid on account by that singularly unattractive person, Cooley.

Pray, pardon the length of this letter and permit me to be, Sir,

Your obedient servant,

ARSENE LUPIN.

        *       *       *       *       *

Isidore weighed the words of this communication as minutely,
perhaps, as he had studied the document concerning the Hollow
Needle. He went on the principle, the correctness of which was
easily proved, that Lupin had never taken the trouble to send one of
his amusing letters to the press without absolute necessity, without
some motive which events were sure, sooner or later, to bring to
light.

What was the motive for this particular letter? For what hidden
reason was Lupin confessing his love and the failure of that love?
Was it there that Beautrelet had to seek, or in the explanations
regarding Mr. Harlington, or further still, between the lines,
behind all those words whose apparent meaning had perhaps no other
object than to suggest some wicked, perfidious, misleading little
idea?

For hours, the young man, confined to his compartment, remained
pensive and anxious. The letter filled him with mistrust, as though
it had been written for his benefit and were destined to lead him,
personally, into error. For the first time and because he found
himself confronted not with a direct attack, but with an ambiguous,
indefinable method of fighting, he underwent a distinct sensation of
fear. And, when he thought of his good old, easy-going father,
kidnapped through his fault, he asked himself, with a pang, whether
he was not mad to continue so unequal a contest. Was the result not
certain? Had Lupin not won the game in advance?

It was but a short moment of weakness. When he alighted from his
compartment, at six o'clock in the morning, refreshed by a few
hours' sleep, he had recovered all his confidence.

On the platform, Froberval, the dockyard clerk who had given
hospitality to M. Beautrelet, senior, was waiting for him,
accompanied by his daughter Charlotte, an imp of twelve or thirteen.

"Well?" cried Isidore.

The worthy man beginning to moan and groan, he interrupted him,
dragged him to a neighboring tavern, ordered coffee and began to put
plain questions, without permitting the other the slightest
digression:

"My father has not been carried off, has he? It was impossible."

"Impossible. Still, he has disappeared."

"Since when?"

"We don't know."

"What!"

"No. Yesterday morning, at six o'clock, as I had not seen him come
down as usual, I opened his door. He was gone."

"But was he there on the day before, two days ago?"

"Yes. On the day before yesterday, he did not leave his room. He was
a little tired; and Charlotte took his lunch up to him at twelve and
his dinner at seven in the evening."

"So it was between seven o'clock in the evening, on the day before
yesterday, and six o'clock on yesterday morning that he
disappeared?"

"Yes, during the night before last. Only--"

"Only what?"

"Well, it's like this: you can't leave the arsenal at night."

"Do you mean that he has not left it?"

"That's impossible! My friends and I have searched the whole naval
harbor."

"Then he has left it!"

"Impossible, every outlet is guarded!"

Beautrelet reflected and then said:

"What next?"

"Next, I hurried to the commandant's and informed the officer in
charge."

"Did he come to your house?"

"Yes; and a gentleman from the public prosecutor's also. They
searched all through the morning; and, when I saw that they were
making no progress and that there was no hope left, I telegraphed to
you."

"Was the bed disarranged in his room?"

"No."

"Nor the room disturbed in any way?"

"No. I found his pipe in its usual place, with his tobacco and the
book which he was reading. There was even this little photograph of
yourself in the middle of the book, marking the page."

"Let me see it."

Froberval passed him the photograph. Beautrelet gave a start of
surprise. He had recognized himself in the snapshot, standing, with
his two hands in his pockets, on a lawn from which rose trees and
ruins.

Froberval added:

"It must be the last portrait of yourself which you sent him. Look,
on the back, you will see the date, 3 April, the name of the
photographer, R. de Val, and the name of the town, Lion--Lion-sur-
Mer, perhaps."

Isidore turned the photograph over and read this little note, in his
own handwriting:

"R. de Val.--3.4--Lion."

He was silent for a few minutes and resumed:

"My father hadn't shown you that snapshot yet?"

"No--and that's just what astonished me when I saw it yesterday--for
your father used so often to talk to us about you."

There was a fresh pause, greatly prolonged. Froberval muttered:

"I have business at the workshop. We might as well go in--"

He was silent. Isidore had not taken his eyes from the photograph,
was examining it from every point of view. At last, the boy asked:

"Is there such a thing as an inn called the Lion d'Or at a short
league outside the town?"

"Yes, about a league from here."

"On the Route de Valognes, is it?"

"Yes, on the Route de Valognes."

"Well, I have every reason to believe that this inn was the head-
quarters of Lupin's friends. It was from there that they entered
into communication with my father."

"What an idea! Your father spoke to nobody. He saw nobody."

"He saw nobody, but they made use of an intermediary."

"What proof have you?"

"This photograph."

"But it's your photograph!"

"It's my photograph, but it was not sent by me. I was not even aware
of its existence. It was taken, without my knowledge, in the ruins
of Ambrumesy, doubtless by the examining-magistrate's clerk, who, as
you know, was an accomplice of Arsene Lupin's."

"And then?"

"Then this photograph became the passport, the talisman, by means of
which they obtained my father's confidence."

"But who? Who was able to get into my house?"

"I don't know, but my father fell into the trap. They told him and
he believed that I was in the neighborhood, that I was asking to see
him and that I was giving him an appointment at the Golden Lion."

"But all this is nonsense! How can you assert--?"

"Very simply. They imitated my writing on the back of the photograph
and specified the meeting-place: Valognes Road, 3 kilometres 400,
Lion Inn. My father came and they seized him, that's all."

"Very well," muttered Froberval, dumbfounded, "very well. I admit
it--things happened as you say--but that does not explain how he was
able to leave during the night."

"He left in broad daylight, though he waited until dark to go to the
meeting-place."

"But, confound it, he didn't leave his room the whole of the day
before yesterday!"

"There is one way of making sure: run down to the dockyard,
Froberval, and look for one of the men who were on guard in the
afternoon, two days ago.--Only, be quick, if you wish to find me
here."

"Are you going?"

"Yes, I shall take the next train back."

"What!--Why, you don't know--your inquiry--"

"My inquiry is finished. I know pretty well all that I wanted to
know. I shall have left Cherbourg in an hour."

Froberval rose to go. He looked at Beautrelet with an air of
absolute bewilderment, hesitated a moment and then took his cap:

"Are you coming, Charlotte?"

"No," said Beautrelet, "I shall want a few more particulars. Leave
her with me. Besides, I want to talk to her. I knew her when she was
quite small."

Froberval went away. Beautrelet and the little girl remained alone
in the tavern smoking room. A few minutes passed, a waiter entered,
cleared away some cups and left the room again. The eyes of the
young man and the child met; and Beautrelet placed his hand very
gently on the little girl's hand. She looked at him for two or three
seconds, distractedly, as though about to choke. Then, suddenly
hiding her head between her folded arms, she burst into sobs.

He let her cry and, after a while, said:

"It was you, wasn't it, who did all the mischief, who acted as go-
between? It was you who took him the photograph? You admit it, don't
you? And, when you said that my father was in his room, two days
ago, you knew that it was not true, did you not, because you
yourself had helped him to leave it--?"

She made no reply. He asked:

"Why did you do it? They offered you money, I suppose--to buy
ribbons with a frock--?"

He uncrossed Charlotte's arms and lifted up her head. He saw a poor
little face all streaked with tears, the attractive, disquieting,
mobile face of one of those little girls who seem marked out for
temptation and weakness.

"Come," said Beautrelet, "it's over, we'll say no more about it. I
will not even ask you how it happened. Only you must tell me
everything that can be of use to me.--Did you catch anything--any
remark made by those men? How did they carry him off?"

She replied at once:

"By motor car. I heard them talking about it--"

"And what road did they take?"

"Ah, I don't know that!"

"Didn't they say anything before you--something that might help us?"

"No--wait, though: there was one who said, 'We shall have no time to
lose--the governor is to telephone to us at eight o'clock in the
morning--'"

"Where to?"

"I can't say.--I've forgotten--"

"Try--try and remember. It was the name of a town, wasn't it?"

"Yes--a name--like Chateau--"

"Chateaubriant?--Chateau-Thierry?--"

"No-no--"

"Chateauroux?"

"Yes, that was it--Chateauroux--"

Beautrelet did not wait for her to complete her sentence. Already he
was on his feet and, without giving a thought to Froberval, without
even troubling about the child, who stood gazing at him in
stupefaction, he opened the door and ran to the station:

"Chateauroux, madame--a ticket for Chateauroux--"

"Over Mans and Tours?" asked the booking-clerk.

"Of course--the shortest way. Shall I be there for lunch?"

"Oh, no!"

"For dinner? Bedtime--?"

"Oh, no! For that, you would have to go over Paris. The Paris
express leaves at nine o'clock. You're too late--"

It was not too late. Beautrelet was just able to catch the train.

"Well," said Beautrelet, rubbing his hands, "I have spent only two
hours or so at Cherbourg, but they were well employed."

He did not for a moment think of accusing Charlotte of lying. Weak,
unstable, capable of the worst treacheries, those petty natures also
obey impulses of sincerity; and Beautrelet had read in her
affrighted eyes her shame for the harm which she had done and her
delight at repairing it in part. He had no doubt, therefore, that
Chateauroux was the other town to which Lupin had referred and where
his confederates were to telephone to him.

On his arrival in Paris, Beautrelet took every necessary precaution
to avoid being followed. He felt that it was a serious moment. He
was on the right road that was leading him to his father: one act of
imprudence might ruin all.

He went to the flat of one of his schoolfellows and came out, an
hour later, irrecognizable, rigged out as an Englishman of thirty,
in a brown check suit, with knickerbockers, woolen stockings and a
cap, a high-colored complexion and a red wig. He jumped on a bicycle
laden with a complete painter's outfit and rode off to the Gare
d'Austerlitz.

He slept that night at Issoudun. The next morning, he mounted his
machine at break of day. At seven o'clock, he walked into the
Chateauroux post-office and asked to be put on to Paris. As he had
to wait, he entered into conversation with the clerk and learnt
that, two days before, at the same hour, a man dressed for motoring
had also asked for Paris.

The proof was established. He waited no longer.

By the afternoon, he had ascertained, from undeniable evidence, that
a limousine car, following the Tours road, had passed through the
village of Buzancais and the town of Chateauroux and had stopped
beyond the town, on the verge of the forest. At ten o'clock, a hired
gig, driven by a man unknown, had stopped beside the car and then
gone off south, through the valley of the Bouzanne. There was then
another person seated beside the driver. As for the car, it had
turned in the opposite direction and gone north, toward Issoudun.

Beautrelet easily discovered the owner of the gig, who, however, had
no information to supply. He had hired out his horse and trap to a
man who brought them back himself next day.

Lastly, that same evening, Isidore found out that the motor car had
only passed through Issoudun, continuing its road toward Orleans,
that is to say, toward Paris.

From all this, it resulted, in the most absolute fashion, that M.
Beautrelet was somewhere in the neighborhood. If not, how was it
conceivable that people should travel nearly three hundred miles
across France in order to telephone from Chateauroux and next to
return, at an acute angle, by the Paris road?

This immense circuit had a more definite object: to move M.
Beautrelet to the place assigned to him.

"And this place is within reach of my hand," said Isidore to
himself, quivering with hope and expectation. "My father is waiting
for me to rescue him at ten or fifteen leagues from here. He is
close by. He is breathing the same air as I."

He set to work at once. Taking a war-office map, he divided it into
small squares, which he visited one after the other, entering the
farmhouses making the peasants talk, calling on the schoolmasters,
the mayors, the parish priests, chatting to the women. It seemed to
him that he must attain his end without delay and his dreams grew
until it was no longer his father alone whom he hoped to deliver,
but all those whom Lupin was holding captive: Raymonde de Saint-
Veran, Ganimard, Holmlock Shears, perhaps, and others, many others;
and, in reaching them, he would, at the same time, reach Lupin's
stronghold, his lair, the impenetrable retreat where he was piling
up the treasures of which he had robbed the wide world.

But, after a fortnight's useless searching, his enthusiasm ended by
slackening and he very soon lost confidence. Because success was
slow in appearing, from one day to the next, almost, he ceased to
believe in it; and, though he continued to pursue his plan of
investigations, he would have felt a real surprise if his efforts
had led to the smallest discovery.

More days still passed by, monotonous days of discouragement. He
read in the newspapers that the Comte de Gesvres and his daughter
had left Ambrumesy and gone to stay near Nice. He also learnt that
Harlington had been released, that gentleman's innocence having
become self-obvious, in accordance with the indications supplied by
Arsene Lupin.

Isidore changed his head-quarters, established himself for two days
at the Chatre, for two days at Argenton. The result was the same.

Just then, he was nearly throwing up the game. Evidently, the gig in
which his father had been carried off could only have furnished a
stage, which had been followed by another stage, furnished by some
other conveyance. And his father was far away.

He was thinking of leaving, when, one Monday morning, he saw, on the
envelope of an unstamped letter, sent on to him from Paris, a
handwriting that set him trembling with emotion. So great was his
excitement that, for some minutes, he dared not open the letter, for
fear of a disappointment. His hand shook. Was it possible? Was this
not a trap laid for him by his infernal enemy?

He tore open the envelope. It was indeed a letter from his father,
written by his father himself. The handwriting presented all the
peculiarities, all the oddities of the hand which he knew so well.

He read:

        *       *       *       *       *

Will these lines ever reach you, my dear son? I dare not believe it.

During the whole night of my abduction, we traveled by motor car;
then, in the morning, by carriage. I could see nothing. My eyes were
bandaged. The castle in which I am confined should be somewhere in
the midlands, to judge by its construction and the vegetation in the
park. The room which I occupy is on the second floor: it is a room
with two windows, one of which is almost blocked by a screen of
climbing glycines. In the afternoon, I am allowed to walk about the
park, at certain hours, but I am kept under unrelaxing observation.

I am writing this letter, on the mere chance of its reaching you,
and fastening it to a stone. Perhaps, one day, I shall be able to
throw it over the wall and some peasant will pick it up.

But do not be distressed about me. I am treated with every
consideration.

Your old father, who is very fond of you and very sad to think of
the trouble he is giving you,

BEAUTRELET.

        *       *       *       *       *

Isidore at once looked at the postmarks. They read, "Cuzion, Indre."

The Indre! The department which he had been stubbornly searching for
weeks!

He consulted a little pocket-guide which he always carried. Cuzion,
in the canton of Eguzon--he had been there too.

For prudence's sake, he discarded his personality as an Englishman,
which was becoming too well known in the district, disguised himself
as a workman and made for Cuzion. It was an unimportant village. He
would easily discover the sender of the letter.

For that matter, chance served him without delay:

"A letter posted on Wednesday last?" exclaimed the mayor, a
respectable tradesman in whom he confided and who placed himself at
his disposal. "Listen, I think I can give you a valuable clue: on
Saturday morning, Gaffer Charel, an old knife-grinder who visits all
the fairs in the department, met me at the end of the village and
asked, 'Monsieur le maire, does a letter without a stamp on it go
all the same?' 'Of course,' said I. 'And does it get there?'
'Certainly. Only there's double postage to pay on it, that's all the
difference.'"

"And where does he live?"

"He lives over there, all alone--on the slope--the hovel that comes
next after the churchyard.--Shall I go with you?"

It was a hovel standing by itself, in the middle of an orchard
surrounded by tall trees. As they entered the orchard, three magpies
flew away with a great splutter and they saw that the birds were
flying out of the very hole in which the watch-dog was fastened. And
the dog neither barked nor stirred as they approached.

Beautrelet went up in great surprise. The brute was lying on its
side, with stiff paws, dead.

They ran quickly to the cottage. The door stood open. They entered.
At the back of a low, damp room, on a wretched straw mattress, flung
on the floor itself, lay a man fully dressed.

"Gaffer Charel!" cried the mayor. "Is he dead, too?"

The old man's hands were cold, his face terribly pale, but his heart
was still beating, with a faint, slow throb, and he seemed not to be
wounded in any way.

They tried to resuscitate him and, as they failed in their efforts,
Beautrelet went to fetch a doctor. The doctor succeeded no better
than they had done. The old man did not seem to be suffering. He
looked as if he were just asleep, but with an artificial slumber, as
though he had been put to sleep by hypnotism or with the aid of a
narcotic.

In the middle of the night that followed, however, Isidore, who was
watching by his side, observed that the breathing became stronger
and that his whole being appeared to be throwing off the invisible
bonds that paralyzed it.

At daybreak, he woke up and resumed his normal functions: ate, drank
and moved about. But, the whole day long, he was unable to reply to
the young man's questions and his brain seemed as though still
numbed by an inexplicable torpor.

The next day, he asked Beautrelet:

"What are you doing here, eh?"

It was the first time that he had shown surprise at the presence of
a stranger beside him.

Gradually, in this way, he recovered all his faculties. He talked.
He made plans. But, when Beautrelet asked him about the events
immediately preceding his sleep, he seemed not to understand.

And Beautrelet felt that he really did not understand. He had lost
the recollection of all that had happened since the Friday before.
It was like a sudden gap in the ordinary flow of his life. He
described his morning and afternoon on the Friday, the purchases he
had made at the fair, the meals he had taken at the inn. Then--
nothing--nothing more. He believed himself to be waking on the
morrow of that day.

It was horrible for Beautrelet. The truth lay there, in those eyes
which had seen the walls of the park behind which his father was
waiting for him, in those hands which had picked up the letter, in
that muddled brain which had recorded the whereabouts of that scene,
the setting, the little corner of the world in which the play had
been enacted. And from those hands, from that brain he was unable to
extract the faintest echo of the truth so near at hand!

Oh, that impalpable and formidable obstacle, against which all his
efforts hurled themselves in vain, that obstacle built up of silence
and oblivion! How clearly it bore the mark of Arsene Lupin! He
alone, informed, no doubt, that M. Beautrelet had attempted to give
a signal, he alone could have struck with partial death the one man
whose evidence could injure him. It was not that Beautrelet felt
himself to be discovered or thought that Lupin, hearing of his
stealthy attack and knowing that a letter had reached him, was
defending himself against him personally. But what an amount of
foresight and real intelligence it displayed to suppress any
possible accusation on the part of that chance wayfarer! Nobody now
knew that within the walls of a park there lay a prisoner asking for
help.

Nobody? Yes, Beautrelet. Gaffer Charel was unable to speak. Very
well. But, at least, one could find out which fair the old man had
visited and which was the logical road that he had taken to return
by. And, along this road, perhaps it would at last be possible to
find--

Isidore, as it was, had been careful not to visit Gaffer Charel's
hovel except with the greatest precautions and in such a way as not
to give an alarm. He now decided not to go back to it. He made
inquiries and learnt that Friday was market-day at Fresselines, a
fair-sized town situated a few leagues off, which could be reached
either by the rather winding highroad or by a series of short cuts.

On the Friday, he chose the road and saw nothing that attracted his
attention, no high walled enclosure, no semblance of an old castle.

He lunched at an inn at Fresselines and was on the point of leaving
when he saw Gaffer Charel arrive and cross the square, wheeling his
little knife-grinding barrow before him. He at once followed him at
a good distance.

The old man made two interminable waits, during which he ground
dozens of knives. Then, at last, he went away by a quite different
road, which ran in the direction of Crozant and the market-town of
Eguzon.

Beautrelet followed him along this road. But he had not walked five
minutes before he received the impression that he was not alone in
shadowing the old fellow. A man was walking along between them,
stopping at the same time as Charel and starting off again when he
did, without, for that matter, taking any great precautions against
being seen.

"He is being watched," thought Beautrelet. "Perhaps they want to
know if he stops in front of the walls--"

His heart beat violently. The event was at hand.

The three of them, one behind the other, climbed up and down the
steep slopes of the country and arrived at Crozant, famed for the
colossal ruins of its castle. There Charel made a halt of an hour's
duration. Next he went down to the riverside and crossed the bridge.

But then a thing happened that took Beautrelet by surprise. The
other man did not cross the river. He watched the old fellow move
away and, when he had lost sight of him, turned down a path that
took him right across the fields.

Beautrelet hesitated for a few seconds as to what course to take,
and then quietly decided. He set off in pursuit of the man.

"He has made sure," he thought, "that Gaffer Charel has gone
straight ahead. That is all he wanted to know and so he is going--
where? To the castle?"

He was within touch of the goal. He felt it by a sort of agonizing
gladness that uplifted his whole being.

The man plunged into a dark wood overhanging the river and then
appeared once more in the full light, where the path met the
horizon.

When Beautrelet, in his turn, emerged from the wood, he was greatly
surprised no longer to see the man. He was seeking him with his eyes
when, suddenly, he gave a stifled cry and, with a backward spring,
made for the line of trees which he had just left. On his right, he
had seen a rampart of high walls, flanked, at regular distances, by
massive buttresses.

It was there! It was there! Those walls held his father captive! He
had found the secret place where Lupin confined his victim.

He dared not quit the shelter which the thick foliage of the wood
afforded him. Slowly, almost on all fours, he bore to the right and
in this way reached the top of a hillock that rose to the level of
the neighboring trees. The walls were taller still. Nevertheless, he
perceived the roof of the castle which they surrounded, an old Louis
XIII. roof, surmounted by very slender bell-turrets arranged corbel-
wise around a higher steeple which ran to a point.

Beautrelet did no more that day. He felt the need to reflect and to
prepare his plan of attack without leaving anything to chance. He
held Lupin safe; and it was for Beautrelet now to select the hour
and the manner of the combat.

He walked away.

Near the bridge, he met two country-girls carrying pails of milk. He
asked:

"What is the name of the castle over there, behind the trees?"

"That's the Chateau de l'Aiguille, sir."

He had put his question without attaching any importance to it. The
answer took away his breath:

"The Chateau de l'Aiguille?--Oh!--But in what department are we? The
Indre?"

"Certainly not. The Indre is on the other side of the river. This
side, it's the Creuse."

Isidore saw it all in a flash. The Chateau de l'Aiguille! The
department of the Creuse! L'AIGUILLE CREUSE! The Hollow Needle! The
very key to the document! Certain, decisive, absolute victory!

Without another word, he turned his back on the two girls and went
his way, tottering like a drunken man.


CHAPTER SIX

AN HISTORIC SECRET


Beautrelet's resolve was soon taken: he would act alone. To inform
the police was too dangerous. Apart from the fact that he could only
offer presumptions, he dreaded the slowness of the police, their
inevitable indiscretions, the whole preliminary inquiry, during
which Lupin, who was sure to be warned, would have time to effect a
retreat in good order.

At eight o'clock the next morning, with his bundle under his arm, he
left the inn in which he was staying near Cuzion, made for the
nearest thicket, took off his workman's clothes, became once more
the young English painter that he had been and went to call on the
notary at Eguzon, the largest place in the immediate neighborhood.

He said that he liked the country and that he was thinking of taking
up his residence there, with his relations, if he could find a
suitable house.

The notary mentioned a number of properties. Beautrelet took note of
them and let fall that some one had spoken to him of the Chateau de
l'Aiguille, on the bank of the Creuse.

"Oh, yes, but the Chateau de l'Aiguille, which has belonged to one
of my clients for the last five years, is not for sale."

"He lives in it, then?"

"He used to live in it, or rather his mother did. But she did not
care for it; found the castle rather gloomy. So they left it last
year."

"And is no one living there at present?"

"Yes, an Italian, to whom my client let it for the summer season:
Baron Anfredi."

"Oh, Baron Anfredi! A man still young, rather grave and solemn-
looking--?"

"I'm sure I can't say.--My client dealt with him direct. There was
no regular agreement, just a letter--"

"But you know the baron?"

In this mood there was no more help to be obtained from Don Gervaso
than from the Marquess. Odo's last days at Donnaz were clouded
by a sense of the deep estrangement between himself and that life
of which the outward aspect was so curiously unchanged.

His past seemed to look at him with unrecognising eyes, to bar the
door against his knock; and he rode away saddened by that sense of
isolation which follows the first encounter with a forgotten self.

At Ivrea the sight of Cantapresto and the travelling-carriage
roused him as from a waking dream. Here, at his beck were the genial
realities of life, embodied, humorously enough, in the bustling
figure which for so many years had played a kind of comic accompaniment
to his experiences.

Cantapresto was in a fever of expectation.

To set forth on the road again, after nine years of well-fed monotony,
and under conditions so favourable to his physical well-being, was
to drink the wine of romance from a golden cup.

Odo was at the age when the spirit lies as naturally open to the
variations of mood as a lake to the shifting of the breeze; and
Cantapresto's exuberant humour, and the novel details of their
travelling equipment, had soon effaced the graver influences of
Donnaz.
Life stretched before him alluring and various as the open road;
and his pulses danced to the tune of the postillion's whip as the
carriage rattled out of the gates.

It was a bright morning and the plain lay beneath them like a planted
garden, in all the flourish and verdure of June; but the roads being
deep in mire, and unrepaired after the ravages of the winter,
it was past noon before they reached the foot of the hills.

Here matters were little better, for the highway was ploughed deep
by the wheels of the numberless vans and coaches journeying from one
town to another during the Whitsun holidays, so that even a young
gentleman travelling post must resign himself to a plebeian rate
of progression.

Odo at first was too much pleased with the novelty of the scene to
quarrel with any incidental annoyances; but as the afternoon wore
on the way began to seem long, and he was just giving utterance to
his impatience when Cantapresto, putting his head out of the window,
announced in a tone of pious satisfaction that just ahead of them
were a party of travellers in far worse case than themselves.

Odo, leaning out, saw that, a dozen yards ahead, a modest chaise
of antique pattern had in fact come to grief by the roadside.

He called to his postillion to hurry forward, and they were soon
abreast of the wreck, about which several people were grouped in
anxious colloquy.

Odo sprang out to offer his services; but as he alit he felt Cantapresto's
hand on his sleeve.

"Cavaliere," the soprano whispered, "these are plainly people of no
condition, and we have yet a good seven miles to Vercelli, where
all the inns will be crowded for the Whitsun fair.

Believe me, it were better to go forward."

Odo advanced without heeding this admonition; but a moment later
he had almost regretted his action; for in the centre of the group
about the chaise stood the two persons whom, of all the world, he
was at that moment least wishful of meeting.

2.7.

It was in fact Vivaldi who, putting aside the knot of idlers
about the chaise, stepped forward at Odo's approach. The
philosopher's countenance was perturbed, his travelling-coat
spattered with mud, and his daughter, hooded and veiled, clung to
him with an air of apprehension that smote Odo to the heart.

He caught a blush of recognition beneath her veil; and as he drew near
she raised a finger to her lip and faintly shook her head.

The mute signal reassured him.

"I see, sir," said he, turning courteously to Vivaldi, "that you
are in a bad plight, and I hope that I or my carriage may be of
service to you."

He ventured a second glance at Fulvia, but she had turned aside
and was inspecting the wheel of the chaise with an air of the
most disheartening detachment.

Vivaldi, who had returned Odo's greeting without any sign of ill-will,
bowed slightly and seemed to hesitate a moment.

"Our plight, as you see," he said, "is indeed a grave one; for the
wheel has come off our carriage and my driver here tells me there
is no smithy this side Vercelli, where it is imperative we should
lie tonight.

I hope, however," he added, glancing down the road, "that with all
the traffic now coming and going we may soon be overtaken by some
vehicle that will carry us to our destination."

He spoke calmly, but it was plain some pressing fear underlay his
composure, and the nature of the emergency was but too clear to Odo.

"Will not my carriage serve you?" he hastily rejoined. "I am for
Vercelli, and if you will honour me with your company we can go
forward at once."
Fulvia, during this exchange of words, had affected to be engaged
with the luggage, which lay in a heap beside the chaise; but at
this point she lifted her head and shot a glance at her father from
under her black travelling-hood.

Vivaldi's constraint increased.

"This, sir," said he, "is a handsome offer, and one for which I thank
you; but I fear our presence may incommode you and the additional
weight of our luggage perhaps delay your progress. I have little fear
but some van or waggon will overtake us before nightfall; and
should it chance otherwise," he added with a touch of irresistible
pedantry, "why, it behoves us to remember that we shall be none the
worse off, since the sage is independent of circumstances."

Odo could hardly repress a smile.

"Such philosophy, sir, is admirable in principle, but in practice
hardly applicable to a lady unused to passing her nights in a
rice-field.

The region about here is notoriously unhealthy and you will surely not
expose your daughter to the risk of remaining by the roadside or
of finding a lodging in some peasant's hut."

Vivaldi drew himself up.

"My daughter," said he, "has been trained to face graver emergencies
with an equanimity I have no fear of putting to the touch--'the
calm of a mind blest in the consciousness of its virtue'; and were
it not that circumstances are somewhat pressing--" he broke off and
glanced at Cantapresto, who was fidgeting about Odo's carriage or
talking in undertones with the driver of the chaise.

"Come, sir," said Odo urgently, "Let my servants put your luggage
up and we'll continue this argument on the road."
Vivaldi again paused. "Sir," he said at length, "will you first
step aside with me a moment?"

he led Odo a few paces down the road.

"I make no pretence," he went on when they were out of Cantapresto's
hearing, "of concealing from you that this offer comes very opportune
to our needs, for it is urgent we should be out of Piedmont by
tomorrow.

But before accepting a seat in your carriage, I must tell you
that you offer it to a proscribed man; since I have little reason
to doubt that by this time the sbirri are on my track."
It was impossible to guess from Vivaldi's manner whether he suspected
Odo of being the cause of his misadventure; and the young man,
though flushing to the forehead, took refuge in the thought of
Fulvia's signal and maintained a self-possessed silence.

"The motive of my persecution," Vivaldi continued, "I need hardly
explain to one acquainted with my house and with the aims and
opinions of those who frequent it.

We live, alas, in an age when it is a moral offence to seek enlightenment,
a political crime to share it with others. I have long foreseen
that any attempt to raise the condition of my countrymen must end
in imprisonment or flight; and though perhaps to have suffered the
former had been a more impressive vindication of my views, why,
sir, the father at the last moment overruled the philosopher, and
thinking of my poor girl there, who but for me stands alone in the
world, I resolved to take refuge in a state where a man may work
for the liberty of others without endangering his own."

        Odo had listened with rising eagerness.

Was not here an opportunity, if not to atone, at least to give
practical evidence of his contrition?

"What you tell me sir," he exclaimed, "cannot but increase my zeal
to serve you. Here is no time to palter. I am on my way to
Lombardy, which, from what you say, I take to be your destination
also; and if you and your daughter will give me your company across
the border I think you need fear no farther annoyance from the
police, since my passports, as the Duke of Pianura's cousin, cover
any friends I choose to take in my company."

"Why, sir," said Vivaldi, visibly moved by the readiness of the response,
"here is a generosity so far in excess of our present needs
that it encourages me to accept the smaller favour of travelling
with you to Vercelli. There we have friends with whom we shall
be safe for the night, and soon after sunrise I hope we may be
across the border."

Odo at once followed up his advantage by pointing out that it was on
the border that difficulties were most likely to arise; but after
a few moments of debate Vivaldi declared he must first take
counsel with his daughter, who still hung like a mute interrogation
on the outskirts of their talk.

After a few words with her, he returned to Odo. "My daughter," said
he, "whose good sense puts my wisdom to the blush, wishes me first
to enquire if you purpose returning to Turin; since in that case,
as she points out, your kindness might result in annoyances to
which we have no right to expose you."
Odo coloured.

"Such considerations, I beg your daughter to believe, would not weigh
with me an instant; but as I am leaving Piedmont for two years
I am not so happy as to risk anything by serving you."

Vivaldi on this assurance at once consented to accept a seat in his
carriage as far as Boffalora, the first village beyond the Sardinian
frontier. It was agreed that at Vercelli Odo was to set down his
companions at an inn whence, alone and privately, they might
gain their friend's house; that on the morrow at daybreak he was
to take them up at a point near the convent of the Umiliati, and
that thence they were to push forward without a halt for Boffalora.

This agreement reached, Odo was about to offer Fulvia a hand to the
carriage when an unwelcome thought arrested him.

"I hope, sir," said he, again turning to Vivaldi, and blushing
furiously as he spoke, "that you feel assured of my discretion; but
I ought perhaps to warn you that my companion yonder, though the
good-naturedest fellow alive, is not one to live long on good terms
with a secret, whether his own or another's."

"I am obliged to you," said Vivaldi, "for the hint; but my daughter
and I are like those messengers who, in time of war, learn to carry
their despatches beneath their tongues.

You may trust us not to betray ourselves; and your friend may, if
he chooses, suppose me to be travelling to Milan to act as governor
to a young gentleman of quality."

The Professor's luggage had by this been put on Odo's carriage,
and the latter advanced to Fulvia. He had drawn a favourable
inference from the concern she had shown for his welfare; but to
his mortification she merely laid two reluctant finger tips in his
hand and took her seat without a word of thanks or so much as a
glance at her rescuer.

This unmerited repulse, and the constraint occasioned by Cantapresto's
presence, made the remainder of the drive interminable.

Even the Professor's apposite reflections on rice-growing and the
culture of the mulberry did little to shorten the way; and when at
length the bell-towers of Vercelli rose in sight Odo felt the relief
of a man who has acquitted himself of a tedious duty.

He had looked forward with the most romantic anticipations to the
outcome of this chance encounter with Fulvia; but the unforgiving
humour which had lent her a transitory charm now became as disfiguring
as some physical defect; and his heart swelled with the defiance
of youthful disappointment.

It was near the angelus when they entered the city.

Just within the gates Odo set down his companions, who took leave
of him, the one with the heartiest expressions of gratitude, the
other with a hurried inclination of her veiled head.

Thence he drove on to the Three Crowns, where he designed to lie.

The streets were still crowded with holiday-makers and decked out
with festal hangings. Tapestries and silken draperies adorned the
balconies of the houses, innumerable tiny lamps framed the doors
and windows, and the street-shrines were dressed with a profusion
of flowers; while every square and open space in the city was crowded
with booths, with the tents of ambulant comedians and dentists, and
with the outspread carpets of snake-charmers, posture-makers and
jugglers.

Among this mob of quacks and pedlars circulated other fantastic
figures, the camp-followers of the army of hucksters: dwarfs and
cripples, mendicant friars, gypsy fortune-tellers, and the itinerant
reciters of Ariosto and Tasso. With these mingled the towns-people
in holiday dress, the well-to-do farmers and their wives, and a
throng of nondescript idlers, ranging from the servants of the
nobility pushing their way insolently through the crowd, to those
sinister vagabonds who lurk, as it were, in the interstices of every
concourse of people.

It was not long before the noise and animation about him had
dispelled Odo's ill-humour. The world was too fair to be darkened
by a girl's disdain, and a reaction of feeling putting him in tune
with the humours of the market-place, he at once set forth on foot
to view the city.

It was now near sunset and the day's decline irradiated the stately
front of the Cathedral, the walls of the ancient Hospital that faced
it, and the groups gathered about the stalls and platforms obstructing
the square.

Even in his travelling-dress Odo was not a figure to pass unnoticed,
and he was soon assailed by laughing compliments on his looks and
invitations to visit the various shows concealed behind the flapping
curtains of the tents.

There were enough pretty faces in the crowd to justify such
familiarities, and even so modest a success was not without solace
to his vanity.

He lingered for some time in the square, answering the banter of
the blooming market-women, inspecting the filigree-ornaments from
Genoa, and watching a little yellow bitch in a hooped petticoat and
lappets dance the furlana to the music of an armless fiddler who
held the bow in his teeth.

As he turned from this show Odo's eye was caught by a handsome girl
who, on the arm of a dashing cavalier in somewhat shabby velvet,
was cheapening a pair of gloves at a neighbouring stall.

The girl, who was masked, shot a dark glance at Odo from under her
three-cornered Venetian hat; then, tossing down a coin, she gathered
up the gloves and drew her companion away.

The manoeuvre was almost a challenge, and Odo was about to take it
up when a pretty boy in a Scaramouch habit, waylaying him with
various graceful antics, thrust a play-bill in his hand; and on
looking round he found the girl and her gallant had disappeared.

The play-bill, with a wealth of theatrical rhetoric, invited Odo
to attend the Performance to be given that evening at the Philodramatic
Academy by the celebrated Capo Comico Tartaglia of Rimini and his
world-renowned company of Comedians, who, in the presence of the
aristocracy of Vercelli, were to present a new comedy entitled "Le
Gelosie di Milord Zambo," with an Intermezzo of singing and dancing
by the best Performers of their kind.

Dusk was already falling, and Odo, who had brought no letters to
the gentry of Vercelli, where he intended to stay but a night, began
to wonder how he should employ his evening.

He had hoped to spend it in Vivaldi's company, but the Professor
not having invited him, he saw no prospect but to return to the inn
and sup alone with Cantapresto.

In the doorway of the Three Crowns he found the soprano awaiting
him.
Cantapresto, who had been as mute as a fish during the afternoon's
drive, now bustled forward with a great show of eagerness.

"What poet was it," he cried, "that paragoned youth to the Easter
sunshine, which, wherever it touches, causes a flower to spring
up?

Here we are scarce alit in a strange city, and already a messenger
finds the way to our inn with a most particular word from his lady
to the Cavaliere Odo Valsecca." And he held out a perfumed billet
sealed with a flaming dart.

Odo's heart gave a leap at the thought that the letter might be
from Fulvia; but on breaking the seal he read these words, scrawled
in an unformed hand:--
"Will the Cavaliere Valsecca accept from an old friend, who desires
to renew her acquaintance with him, the trifling gift of a side-box
at Don Tartaglia's entertainment this evening?"

Vexed at his credulity, Odo tossed the invitation to Cantapresto;
but a moment later, recalling the glance of the pretty girl in the
market-place, he began to wonder if the billet might not be the
prelude to a sufficiently diverting adventure.

It at least offered a way of passing the evening; and after a
hurried supper he set out with Cantapresto for the Philodramatic
Academy.

It was late when they entered their box, and several masks were already
capering before the footlights, exchanging lazzi with the townsfolk
in the pit, and addressing burlesque compliments to the quality
in the boxes.

The theatre seemed small and shabby after those of Turin, and there
was little in the old-fashioned fopperies of a provincial audience
to interest a young gentleman fresh from the capital. Odo looked about
for any one resembling the masked beauty of the market-place; but
he beheld only ill-dressed dowagers and matrons, or ladies of the
town more conspicuous for their effrontery than for their charms.

The main diversion of the evening was by this begun. It was a comedy
in the style of Goldoni's early pieces, representing the actual
life of the day, but interspersed with the antics of the masks,
to whose improvised drolleries the people still clung. A terrific
Don Spavento in cloak and sword played the jealous English nobleman,
Milord Zambo, and the part of Tartaglia was taken by the manager, one
of the best-known interpreters of the character in Italy.

Tartaglia was the guardian of the prima amorosa, whom the enamoured
Briton pursued; and in the Columbine, when she sprang upon the
stage with a pirouette that showed her slender ankles and embroidered
clocks, Odo instantly recognised the graceful figure and killing
glance of his masked beauty.

Her face, which was now uncovered, more than fulfilled the promise of
her eyes, being indeed as arch and engaging a countenance as ever
flashed distraction across the foot-lights.

She was greeted with an outburst of delight that cost her a sour
glance from the prima amorosa, and presently the theatre was ringing
with her improvised sallies, uttered in the gay staccato of the
Venetian dialect. There was to Odo something perplexingly familiar
in this accent and in the light darting movements of her little
head framed in a Columbine's ruff, with a red rose thrust behind
one ear; but after a rapid glance about the house she appeared to
take no notice of him and he began to think it must be to some one
else he owed his invitation.

From this question he was soon diverted by his increasing enjoyment
of the play.

It was not indeed a remarkable example of its kind, being crudely
enough put together, and turning on a series of ridiculous and
disconnected incidents; but to a taste formed on the frigid elegancies
of Metastasio and the French stage there was something refreshing
in this plunge into the coarse homely atmosphere of the old popular
theatre.

Extemporaneous comedies were no longer played in the great cities,
and Odo listened with surprise to the swift thrust and parry, the
inexhaustible flow of jest and repartee, the readiness with which
the comedians caught up each other's leads, like dancers whirling
without a false step through the mazes of some rapid contradance.

So engaged was he that he no longer observed the Columbine save as
a figure in this flying reel; but presently a burst of laughter
fixed his attention and he saw that she was darting across the stage
pursued by Milord Zambo, who, furious at the coquetries of his
betrothed, was avenging himself by his attentions to the Columbine.

Half way across, her foot caught and she fell on one knee. Zambo
rushed to the rescue; but springing up instantly, and feigning to
treat his advance as a part of the play, she cried out with a
delicious assumption of outraged dignity:--
"Not a step farther, villain!

Know that it is sacrilege for a common mortal to embrace one who
has been kissed by his most illustrious Highness the Heir-presumptive
of Pianura!"

"Mirandolina of Chioggia!"

sprang to Odo's lips. At the same instant the Columbine turned
about and swept him a deep curtsey, to the delight of the audience,
who had no notion of what was going forward, but were in the humour
to clap any whim of their favourite's; then she turned and darted
off the stage, and the curtain fell on a tumult of applause.

Odo had hardly recovered from his confusion when the door of the box
opened and the young Scaramouch he had seen in the market-place
peeped in and beckoned to Cantapresto.

The soprano rose with alacrity, leaving Odo alone in the dimly-lit
box, his mind agrope in a labyrinth of memories.

A moment later Cantapresto returned with that air of furtive relish
that always proclaimed him the bearer of a tender message.

The one he now brought was to the effect that the Signorina Miranda
Malmocco, justly renowned as one of the first Columbines of Italy,
had charged him to lay at the Cavaliere Valsecca's feet her excuses
for the liberty she had taken with his illustrious name, and to
entreat that he would show his magnanimity by supping with her after
the play in her room at the Three Crowns--a request she was emboldened
to make by the fact that she was lately from Pianura, and could
give him the last news of the court.

The message chimed with Odo's mood, and the play over he hastened
back to the inn with Cantapresto, and bid the landlord send to the
Signorina Miranda's room whatever delicacies the town could provide.

Odo on arriving that afternoon had himself given orders that his
carriage should be at the door the next morning an hour before
sunrise; and he now repeated these instructions to Cantapresto,
charging him on his life to see that nothing interfered with their
fulfilment.

The soprano objected that the hour was already late, and that they
could easily perform the day's journey without curtailing their
rest; but on Odo's reiteration of the order he resigned himself,
with the remark that it was a pity old age had no savings-bank for
the sleep that youth squandered.

2.8.

It was something of a disappointment to Odo, on entering the Signorina
Miranda's room, to find that she was not alone. Engaged in feeding
her pet monkey with sugar-plums was the young man who had given
her his arm in the Piazza.

This gentleman, whom she introduced to Odo as her cousin and
travelling companion, the Count of Castelrovinato, had the same air
of tarnished elegance as his richly-laced coat and discoloured
ruffles.

He seemed, however, of a lively and obliging humour, and Mirandolina
observed with a smile that she could give no better notion of his
amiability than by mentioning that he was known among her friends
as the Cavaliere Frattanto.

This praise, Odo thought, seemed scarcely to the cousin's liking;
but he carried it off with the philosophic remark that it is the
mortar between the bricks that holds the building together.

"At present," said Mirandolina laughing, "he is engaged in propping
up a ruin; for he has fallen desperately in love with our prima
amorosa, a lady who lost her virtue under the Pharaohs, but whom,
for his sake, I have been obliged to include in our little supper."

This, it was clear, was merely a way of palliating the Count's
infatuation for herself; but he took the second thrust as good-naturedly
as the first, remarking that he had been bred for an archeologist
and had never lost his taste for the antique.

Among his papers was found a sheet in his handwriting, in which he
did not speak of the book snatched from the flames, but gave a
summary of the earlier chapters. It referred to a secret which was
known to the Kings of England, which was lost by them when the crown
passed from the poor fool, Henry VI., to the Duke of York, which was
revealed to Charles VII., King of France, by Joan of Arc and which,
becoming a State secret, was handed down from sovereign to sovereign
by means of a letter, sealed anew on each occasion, which was found
in the deceased monarch's death-bed with this superscription: "For
the King of France."

This secret concerned the existence and described the whereabouts of
a tremendous treasure, belonging to the kings, which increased in
dimensions from century to century.

One hundred and fourteen years later, Louis XVI., then a prisoner in
the Temple, took aside one of the officers whose duty it was to
guard the royal family, and asked:

"Monsieur, had you not an ancestor who served as a captain under my
predecessor, the Great King?"

"Yes, sire."

"Well, could you be relied upon--could you be relied upon--"

He hesitated. The officer completed the sentence:

"Not to betray your Majesty! Oh, sire!--"

"Then listen to me."

He took from his pocket a little book of which he tore out one of
the last pages. But, altering his mind:

"No, I had better copy it--"

He seized a large sheet of paper and tore it in such a way as to
leave only a small rectangular space, on which he copied five lines
of dots, letters and figures from the printed page. Then, after
burning the latter, he folded the manuscript sheet in four, sealed
it with red wax, and gave it to the officer.

"Monsieur, after my death, you must hand this to the Queen and say
to her, 'From the King, madame--for Your Majesty and for your son.'
If she does not understand--"

"If she does not understand, sire--"

"You must add, 'It concerns the secret, the secret of the Needle.'
The Queen will understand."

When he had finished speaking, he flung the book into the embers
glowing on the hearth.

He ascended the scaffold on the 21st of January.

It took the officer several months, in consequence of the removal of
the Queen to the Conciergerie, before he could fulfil the mission
with which he was entrusted. At last, by dint of cunning intrigues,
he succeeded, one day, in finding himself in the presence of Marie
Antoinette.

Speaking so that she could just hear him, he said:

"Madame, from the late King, your husband, for Your Majesty and your
son."

And he gave her the sealed letter.

She satisfied herself that the jailers could not see her, broke the
seals, appeared surprised at the sight of those undecipherable lines
and then, all at once, seemed to understand.

She smiled bitterly and the officer caught the words:

"Why so late?"

She hesitated. Where should she hide this dangerous document? At
last, she opened her book of hours and slipped the paper into a sort
of secret pocket contrived between the leather of the binding and
the parchment that covered it.

"Why so late?" she had asked.

It is, in fact, probable that this document, if it could have saved
her, came too late, for, in the month of October next, Queen Marie
Antoinette ascended the scaffold in her turn.

Now the officer, when going through his family papers, came upon his
ancestor's manuscript. From that moment, he had but one idea, which
was to devote his leisure to elucidating this strange problem. He
read all the Latin authors, studied all the chronicles of France and
those of the neighboring countries, visited the monasteries,
deciphered account-books, cartularies, treaties; and, in this way,
succeeded in discovering certain references scattered over the ages.

In Book III of Caesar's Commentaries on the Gallic War (MS. edition,
Alexandria), it is stated that, after the defeat of Veridovix by G.
Titullius Sabinus, the chief of the Caleti was brought before Caesar
and that, for his ransom, he revealed the secret of the Needle--

The Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, between Charles the Simple and
Rollo, the chief of the Norse barbarians, gives Rollo's name
followed by all his titles, among which we read that of Master of
the Secret of the Needle.

The Saxon Chronicle (Gibson's edition, page 134), speaking of
William the Conqueror, says that the staff of his banner ended in a
steel point pierced with an eye, like a needle.

In a rather ambiguous phrase in her examination, Joan of Arc admits
that she has still a great secret to tell the King of France. To
which her judges reply, "Yes, we know of what you speak; and that,
Joan, is why you shall die the death."

Philippe de Comines mentions it in connection with Louis XI., and,
later, Sully in connection with Henry IV.: "By the virtue of the
Needle!" the good king sometimes swears.

Between these two, Francis I., in a speech addressed to the notables
of the Havre, in 1520, uttered this phrase, which has been handed
down in the diary of a Honfleur burgess; "The Kings of France carry
secrets that often decide the conduct of affairs and the fate of
towns."

All these quotations, all the stories relating to the Iron Mask, the
captain of the guards and his descendant, I have found to-day in a
pamphlet written by this same descendant and published in the month
of June, 1815, just before or just after the battle of Waterloo, in
a period, therefore, of great upheavals, in which the revelations
which it contained were likely to pass unperceived.

What is the value of this pamphlet? Nothing, you will tell me, and
we must attach no credit to it. And this is the impression which I
myself would have carried away, if it had not occurred to me to open
Caesar's Commentaries at the chapter given. What was my astonishment
when I came upon the phrase quoted in the little book before me! And
it was the same thing with the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, with
the Saxon Chronicle, with the examination of Joan of Arc, in short,
with all that I have been able to verify up to the present.

Lastly, there is an even more precise fact related by the author of
the pamphlet of 1815. During the French campaign, he being then an
officer under Napoleon, his horse dropped dead, one evening, and he
rang at the door of a castle where he was received by an old knight
of St. Louis. And, in the course of conversation with the old man,
he learnt that this castle, standing on the bank of the Creuse, was
called the Chateau de l'Aiguille, that it had been built and
christened by Louis XIV., and that, by his express order, it was
adorned with turrets and with a spire which represented the Needle.
As its date it bore, it must still bear, the figure 1680.

1680! One year after the publication of the book and the
imprisonment of the Iron Mask! Everything was now explained: Louis
XIV., foreseeing that the secret might be noised abroad, had built
and named that castle so as to offer the quidnuncs a natural
explanation of the ancient mystery. The Hollow Needle! A castle with
pointed bell-turrets standing on the bank of the Creuse and
belonging to the King. People would at once think that they had the
key to the riddle and all enquiries would cease.

The calculation was just, seeing that, more than two centuries
later, M. Beautrelet fell into the trap. And this, Sir, is what I
was leading up to in writing this letter. If Lupin, under the name
of Anfredi, rented from M. Valmeras the Chateau de l'Aiguille on the
bank of the Creuse; if, admitting the success of the inevitable
investigations of M. Beautrelet, he lodged his two prisoners there,
it was because he admitted the success of the inevitable researches
made by M. Beautrelet and because, with the object of obtaining the
peace for which he had asked, he laid for M. Beautrelet precisely
what we may call the historic trap of Louis XIV.

And hence we come to this undeniable conclusion, that he, Lupin, by
his unaided lights, without possessing any other facts than those
which we possess, managed by means of the witchcraft of a really
extraordinary genius, to decipher the undecipherable document; and
that he, Lupin, the last heir of the Kings of France, knows the
royal mystery of the Hollow Needle!

        *       *       *       *       *

Here ended the letter. But, for some minutes, from the passage that
referred to the Chateau de l'Aiguille onward, it was not
Beautrelet's but another voice that read it aloud. Realizing his
defeat, crushed under the weight of his humiliation, Isidore had
dropped the newspaper and sunk into his chair, with his face buried
in his hands.

Panting, shaken with excitement by this incredible story, the crowd
had come gradually nearer and was now pressing round.

With a thrill of anguish, they waited for the words which he would
say in reply, the objections which he would raise.

He did not stir.

Valmeras gently uncrossed his hands and raised his head.

Isidore Beautrelet was weeping.


CHAPTER SEVEN

THE TREATISE OF THE NEEDLE


It is four o'clock in the morning. Isidore has not returned to the
Lycee Janson. He has no intention of returning before the end of the
war of extermination which he has declared against Lupin. This much
he swore to himself under his breath, while his friends drove off
with him, all faint and bruised, in a cab.

A mad oath! An absurd and illogical war! What can he do, a single,
unarmed stripling, against that phenomenon of energy and strength?
On which side is he to attack him? He is unassailable. Where to
wound him? He is invulnerable. Where to get at him? He is
inaccessible.

Four o'clock in the morning. Isidore has again accepted his
schoolfellow's hospitality. Standing before the chimney in his
bedroom, with his elbows flat on the mantel-shelf and his two fists
under his chin, he stares at his image in the looking-glass. He is
not crying now, he can shed no more tears, nor fling himself about
on his bed, nor give way to despair, as he has been doing for the
last two hours and more. He wants to think, to think and understand.

And he does not remove his eyes from those same eyes reflected in
the glass, as though he hoped to double his powers of thought by
contemplating his pensive image, as though he hoped to find at the
back of that mirrored Beautrelet the unsolvable solution of what he
does not find within himself.

He stands thus until six o'clock, and, little by little, the
question presents itself to his mind with the strictness of an
equation, bare and dry and cleared of all the details that
complicate and obscure it.

Yes, he has made a mistake. Yes, his reading of the document is all
wrong. The word aiguille does not point to the castle on the Creuse.
Also, the word demoiselles cannot be applied to Raymonde de Saint-
Veran and her cousin, because the text of the document dates back
for centuries.

Therefore, all must be done over again, from the beginning.

How?

One piece of evidence alone would be incontestible: the book
published under Louis XIV. Now of those hundred copies printed by
the person who was presumed to be the Man with the Iron Mask only
two escaped the flames. One was purloined by the captain of the
guards and lost. The other was kept by Louis XIV., handed down to
Louis XV., and burnt by Louis XVI. But a copy of the essential page,
the page containing the solution of the problem, or at least a
cryptographic solution, was conveyed to Marie Antoinette, who
slipped it into the binding of her book of hours. What has become of
this paper? Is it the one which Beautrelet has held in his hands and
which Lupin recovered from him through Bredoux, the magistrate's
clerk? Or is it still in Marie Antoinette's book of hours? And the
question resolves itself into this: what has become of the Queen's
book of hours?

        *       *       *       *       *

After taking a short rest, Beautrelet consulted his friend's father,
an old and experienced collector, who was often called upon
officially to give an expert opinion and who had quite lately been
invited to advise the director of one of our museums on the drawing
up of the catalogue.

"Marie Antoinette's book of hours?" he exclaimed. "Why, the Queen
left it to her waiting-woman, with secret instructions to forward it
to Count Fersen. After being piously preserved in the count's
family, it has been, for the last five years, in a glass case--"

"A glass case?"

"In the Musee Carnavalet, quite simply."

"When will the museum be open?"

"At twenty minutes from now, as it is every morning."

        *       *       *       *       *

Isidore and his friend jumped out of a cab at the moment when the
doors of Madame de Sevigne's old mansion were opening.

"Hullo! M. Beautrelet!"

A dozen voices greeted his arrival. To his great surprise, he
recognized the whole crowd of reporters who were following up "the
mystery of the Hollow Needle." And one of them exclaimed:

"Funny, isn't it, that we should all have had the same idea? Take
care, Arsene Lupin may be among us!"

They entered the museum together. The director was at once informed,
placed himself entirely at their disposal, took them to the glass
case and skewed them a poor little volume, devoid of all ornament,
which certainly had nothing royal about it. Nevertheless, they were
overcome by a certain emotion at the sight of this object which the
Queen had touched in those tragic days, which her eyes, red with
tears, had looked upon--And they dared not take it and hunt through
it: it was as though they feared lest they should be guilty of a
sacrilege--

"Come, M. Beautrelet, it's your business!"

He took the book with an anxious gesture. The description
corresponded with that given by the author of the pamphlet. Outside
was a parchment cover, dirty, stained and worn in places, and under
it, the real binding, in stiff leather. With what a thrill
Beautrelet felt for the hidden pocket! Was it a fairy tale? Or would
he find the document written by Louis XVI. and bequeathed by the
queen to her fervent admirer?

At the first page, on the upper side of the book, there was no
receptacle.

"Nothing," he muttered.

"Nothing," they echoed, palpitating with excitement.

But, at the last page, forcing back the book a little, he at once
saw that the parchment was not stuck to the binding. He slipped his
fingers in between--there was something--yes, he felt something--a
paper--

"Oh!" he gasped, in an accent almost of pain. "Here--is it
possible?"

"Quick, quick!" they cried. "What are you waiting for?"

He drew out a sheet folded in two.

"Well, read it!--There are words in red ink--Look!--it might be
blood--pale, faded blood--Read it!--"

        *       *       *       *       *

He read:

To you, Fersen. For my son. 16 October, 1793.

MARIE ANTOINETTE.

        *       *       *       *       *

And suddenly Beautrelet gave a cry of stupefaction. Under the
queen's signature there were--there were two words, in black ink,
underlined with a flourish--two words:

ARSENE LUPIN.

All, in turns, took the sheet of paper and the same cry escaped from
the lips of all of them:

"Marie Antoinette!--Arsene Lupin!"

A great silence followed. That double signature: those two names
coupled together, discovered hidden in the book of hours; that relic
in which the poor queen's desperate appeal had slumbered for more
than a century: that horrible date of the 16th of October, 1793, the
day on which the Royal head fell: all of this was most dismally and
disconcertingly tragic.

"Arsene Lupin!" stammered one of the voices, thus emphasizing the
scare that underlay the sight of that demoniacal name at the foot of
the hallowed page.

"Yes, Arsene Lupin," repeated Beautrelet. "The Queen's friend was
unable to understand her desperate dying appeal. He lived with the
keepsake in his possession which the woman whom he loved had sent
him and he never guessed the reason of that keepsake. Lupin
discovered everything, on the other hand--and took it."

"Took what?"

"The document, of course! The document written by Louis XVI.; and it
is that which I held in my hands. The same appearance, the same
shape, the same red seals. I understand why Lupin would not leave me
a document which I could turn to account by merely examining the
paper, the seals and so on."

"And then?"

"Well, then, since the document is genuine, since I have, with my
own eyes, seen the marks of the red seals, since Marie Antoinette
herself assures me, by these few words in her hand, that the whole
story of the pamphlet, as printed by M. Massiban, is correct,
because a problem of the Hollow Needle really exists, I am now
certain to succeed."

"But how? Whether genuine or not, the document is of no use to you
if you do not manage to decipher it, because Louis XVI. destroyed
the book that gave the explanation."

"Yes, but the other copy, which King Louis XVI.'s captain of the
guards snatched from the flames, was not destroyed."

"How do you know?"

"Prove the contrary."

After uttering this defiance, Beautrelet was silent for a time and
then, slowly, with his eyes closed, as though trying to fix and sum
up his thoughts, he said:

"Possessing the secret, the captain of the guards begins by
revealing it bit by bit in the journal found by his descendant. Then
comes silence. The answer to the riddle is withheld. Why? Because
the temptation to make use of the secret creeps over him little by
little and he gives way to it. A proof? His murder. A further proof?
The magnificent jewel found upon him, which he must undoubtedly have
taken from some royal treasure the hiding-place of which, unknown to
all, would just constitute the mystery of the Hollow Needle. Lupin
conveyed as much to me; Lupin was not lying."

"Then what conclusion do you draw, Beautrelet?"

"I draw this conclusion, my friends, that it be a good thing to
advertise this story as much as possible, so that people may know,
through all the papers, that we are looking for a book entitled The
Treatise of the Needle. It may be fished out from the back shelves
of some provincial library."

The paragraph was drawn up forthwith; and Beautrelet set to work at
once, without even waiting for it to produce a result. A first scent
suggested itself: the murder was committed near Gaillon. He went
there that same day. Certainly, he did not hope to reconstruct a
crime perpetrated two hundred years ago. But, all the same, there
are crimes that leave traces in the memories, in the traditions of a
countryside. They are recorded in the local chronicles. One day,
some provincial archaeologist, some lover of old legends, some
student of the minor incidents of the life of the past makes them
the subject of an article in a newspaper or of a communication to
the academy of his departmental town.

Beautreiet saw three or four of these archaeologists. With one of
them in particular, an old notary, he examined the prison records,
the ledgers of the old bailiwicks and the parish registers. There
was no entry referring to the murder of a captain of the guards in
the seventeenth century.

He refused to be discouraged and continued his search in Paris,
where the magistrate's examination might have taken place. His
efforts came to nothing.

But the thought of another track sent him off in a fresh direction.
Was there no chance of finding out the name of that captain whose
descendant served in the armies of the Republic and was quartered in
the Temple during the imprisonment of the Royal family? By dint of
patient working, he ended by making out a list in which two names at
least presented an almost complete resemblance: M. de Larbeyrie,
under Louis XIV., and Citizen Larbrie, under the Terror.

This already was an important point. He stated it with precision in
a note which he sent to the papers, asking for any information
concerning this Larbeyrie or his descendants.

It was M. Massiban, the Massiban of the pamphlet, the member of the
Institute, who replied to him:

        *       *       *       *       *

SIR:

Allow me to call your attention to the following passage of
Voltaire, which I came upon in his manuscript of Le Siecle de Louis
XIV. (Chapter XXV: Particularites et anecdotes du regne). The
passage has been suppressed in all the printed editions:

"I have heard it said by the late M. de Caumartin, intendant of
finance, who was a friend of Chamillard the minister, that the King
one day left hurriedly in his carriage at the news that M. de
Larbeyrie had been murdered and robbed of some magnificent jewels.
He seemed greatly excited and repeated:

"'All is lost--all is lost--'

"In the following year, the son of this Larbeyrie and his daughter,
who had married the Marquis de Velines, were banished to their
estates in Provence and Brittany. We cannot doubt that there is
something peculiar in this."


I, in my turn, will add that we can doubt it all the less inasmuch
as M. de Chamillard, according to Voltaire, WAS THE LAST MINISTER
WHO POSSESSED THE STRANGE SECRET OF THE IRON MASK.

You will see for yourself, Sir, the profit that can be derived from
this passage and the evident link established between the two
adventures. As for myself, I will not venture to imagine any very
exact surmise as regards the conduct, the suspicions, and the
apprehensions of Louis XIV. in these circumstances; but, on the
other hand, seeing that M. de Larbeyrie left a son, who was probably
the grandfather of Larbrie the citizen-officer, and also a daughter,
is it not permissible to suppose that a part of the papers left by
Larbeyrie came to the daughter and that among these papers was the
famous copy which the captain of the guards saved from the flames?

I have consulted the Country-house Year-book. There is a Baron de
Velines living not far from Rennes. Could he be a descendant of the
marquis? At any rate, I wrote to him yesterday, on chance, to ask if
he had not in his possession a little old book bearing on its title-
page the word aiguille; and I am awaiting his reply.

It would give me the greatest pleasure to talk of all these matters
with you. If you can spare the time, come and see me.

I am, Sir, etc., etc.

P.S.--Of course, I shall not communicate these little discoveries to
the press. Now that you are near the goal, discretion is essential.

        *       *       *       *       *

Beautrelet absolutely agreed. He even went further: to two
journalists who were worrying him that morning he gave the most
fanciful particulars as to his plans and his state of mind.

In the afternoon, he hurried round to see Massiban, who lived at 17,
Quai Voltaire. To his great surprise, he was told that M. Massiban
had gone out of town unexpectedly, leaving a note for him in case he
should call. Isidore opened it and read:

     I have received a telegram which gives me
     some hope. So I am leaving town and shall sleep
     at Rennes. You might take the evening train and,
     without stopping at Rennes, go on to the little
     station of Velines. We would meet at the castle,
     which is two miles and a half from the station.

The programme appealed to Beautrelet, and especially the idea that
he would reach the castle at almost the same time as Massiban, for
he feared some blunder on the part of that inexperienced man. He
went back to his friend and spent the rest of the day with him. In
the evening, he took the Brittany express and got out at Velines as
six o'clock in the morning.

He did the two and a half miles, between bushy woods, on foot. He
could see the castle, perched on a height, from a distance: it was a
hybrid edifice, a mixture of the Renascence and Louis Philippe
styles, but it bore a stately air, nevertheless, with its four
turrets and its ivy-mantled draw-bridge.

Isidore felt his heart beat as he approached. Was he really nearing
the end of his race? Did the castle contain the key to the mystery?

He was not without fear. It all seemed too good to be true; and he
asked himself if he was not once more acting in obedience to some
infernal plan contrived by Lupin, if Massiban was not for instance,
a tool in the hands of his enemy. He burst out laughing:

"Tut, tut, I'm becoming absurd! One would really think that Lupin
was an infallible person who foresees everything, a sort of divine
omnipotence against whom nothing can prevail! Dash it all, Lupin
makes his mistakes; Lupin, too, is at the mercy of circumstances;
Lupin has an occasional slip! And it is just because of his slip in
losing the document that I am beginning to have the advantage of
him. Everything starts from that. And his efforts, when all is said,
serve only to repair the first blunder."

And blithely, full of confidence, Beautrelet rang the bell.

"Yes, sir?" said the servant who opened the door.

"Can I see the Baron de Velines?"

And he gave the man his card.

"Monsieur le baron is not up yet, but, if monsieur will wait--"

"Has not some one else been asking for him, a gentleman with a white
beard and a slight stoop?" asked Beautrelet, who knew Massiban's
appearance from the photographs in the newspapers.

"Yes, the gentleman came about ten minutes ago; I showed him into
the drawing room. If monsieur will come this way--"

The interview between Massiban and Beautrelet was of the most
cordial character. Isidore thanked the old man for the first-rate
information which he owed to him and Massiban expressed his
admiration for Beautrelet in the warmest terms. Then they exchanged
impressions on the document, on their prospects of discovering the
book; and Massiban repeated what he had heard at Rennes regarding M.
de Velines. The baron was a man of sixty, who had been left a
widower many years ago and who led a very retired life with his
daughter, Gabrielle de Villemon. This lady had just suffered a cruel
blow through the loss of her husband and her eldest son, both of
whom had died as the result of a motor-car accident.

"Monsieur le baron begs the gentlemen to be good enough to come
upstairs."

The servant led the way to the first floor, to a large, bare-walled
room, very simply furnished with desks, pigeon-holes and tables
covered with papers and account-books.

The baron received them very affably and with the volubility often
displayed by people who live too much alone. They had great
difficulty in explaining the object of their visit.

"Oh, yes, I know, you wrote to me about it, M. Massiban. It has
something to do with a book about a needle, hasn't it, a book which
is supposed to have come down to me from my ancestors?"

"Just so."

"I may as well tell you that my ancestors and I have fallen out.
They had funny ideas in those days. I belong to my own time. I have
broken with the past."

"Yes," said Beautrelet, impatiently, "but have you no recollection
of having seen the book?--"

"Certainly, I said so in my telegram," he exclaimed, addressing M.
Massiban, who, in his annoyance, was walking up and down the room
and looking out of the tall windows. "Certainly--or, at least, my
daughter thought she had seen the title among the thousands of books
that lumber up the library, upstairs--for I don't care about reading
myself--I don't even read the papers. My daughter does, sometimes,
but only when there is nothing the matter with Georges, her
remaining son! As for me, as long as my tenants pay their rents and
my leases are kept up--! You see my account-books: I live in them,
gentlemen; and I confess that I know absolutely nothing whatever
about that story of which you wrote to me in your letter, M.
Massiban--"

Isidore Beautrelet, nerve-shattered at all this talk, interrupted
him bluntly:

"I beg your pardon, monsieur, but the book--"

"My daughter has looked for it. She looked for it all day
yesterday."

"Well?"

"Well, she found it; she found it a few hours ago. When you
arrived--"

"And where is it?"

"Where is it? Why, she put it on that table--there it is--over
there--"

Isidore gave a bound. At one end of the table, on a muddled heap of
papers, lay a little book bound in red morocco. He banged his fist
down upon it, as though he were forbidding anybody to touch it--and
also a little as though he himself dared not take it up.

"Well!" cried Massiban, greatly excited.

"I have it--here it is--we're there at last!"

"But the title--are you sure?--"

"Why, of course: look!"

"Are you convinced? Have we mastered the secret at last?"

"The front page--what does the front page say?"

"Read: The Whole Truth now first exhibited. One hundred copies
printed by myself for the instruction of the Court."

"That's it, that's it," muttered Massiban, in a hoarse voice. "It's
the copy snatched from the flames! It's the very book which Louis
XIV. condemned."

They turned over the pages. The first part set forth the
explanations given by Captain de Larbeyrie in his journal.

"Get on, get on!" said Beautrelet, who was in a hurry to come to the
solution.

"Get on? What do you mean? Not at all! We know that the Man with the
Iron Mask was imprisoned because he knew and wished to divulge the
secret of the Royal house of France. But how did he know it? And why
did he wish to divulge it? Lastly, who was that strange personage? A
half-brother of Louis XIV., as Voltaire maintained, or Mattioli, the
Italian minister, as the modern critics declare? Hang it, those are
questions of the very first interest!"

"Later, later," protested Beautrelet, feverishly turning the pages,
as though he feared that the book would fly out of his hands before
he had solved the riddle.

"But--" said Massiban, who doted on historical details.

"We have plenty of time--afterward--let's see the explanation first--"

Suddenly Beautrelet stopped. The document! In the middle of a left-
hand page, his eyes saw the five mysterious lines of dots and
figures! He made sure, with a glance, that the text was identical
with that which he had studied so long; the same arrangement of the
signs, the same intervals that permitted of the isolation of the
word demoiselles and the separation of the two words aiguille and
creuse.

A short note preceded it:

All the necessary indications, it appears, were reduced by King
Louis XIII. into a little table which I transcribe below.

Here followed the table of dots and figures.

Then came the explanation of the document itself. Beautrelet read,
in a broken voice:

        *       *       *       *       *

As will be seen, this table, even after we have changed the figures
into vowels, affords no light. One might say that, in order to
decipher the puzzle, we must first know it. It is, at most, a clue
given to those who know the paths of the labyrinth.

Let us take this clue and proceed. I will guide you.

The fourth line first. The fourth line contains measurements and
indications. By complying with the indications and noting the
measurements set down, we inevitably attain our object, on
condition, be it understood, that we know where we are and whither
we are going, in a word, that we are enlightened as to the real
meaning of the Hollow Needle. This is what we may learn from the
first three lines. The first is so conceived to revenge myself on
the King; I had warned him, for that matter--

        *       *       *       *       *

Beautrelet stopped, nonplussed.

"What? What is it?" said Massiban.

"The words don't make sense."

"No more they do," replied Massiban. "'The first is so conceived to
revenge myself on the King--' What can that mean?"

"Damn!" yelled Beautrelet.

"Well?"

"Torn! Two pages! The next two pages! Look at the marks!"

He trembled, shaking with rage and disappointment. Massiban bent
forward.

"It is true--there are the ends of two pages left, like bookbinders'
guards. The marks seem pretty fresh. They've not been cut, but torn
out--torn out with violence. Look, all the pages at the end of the
book have been rumpled."

"But who can have done it? Who?" moaned Isidore, wringing his hands.
"A servant? An accomplice?"

"All the same, it may date back to a few months since," observed
Massiban.

"Even so--even so--some one must have hunted out and taken the book
--Tell me, monsieur," cried Beautrelet, addressing the baron, "is
there no one whom you suspect?"

"We might ask my daughter."

"Yes--yes--that's it--perhaps she will know."

M. de Velines rang for the footman. A few minutes later, Mme. de
Villemon entered. She was a young woman, with a sad and resigned
face. Beautrelet at once asked her:

"You found this volume upstairs, madame, in the library?"

"Yes, in a parcel of books that had not been uncorded."

"And you read it?"

"Yes, last night."

"When you read it, were those two pages missing? Try and remember:
the two pages following this table of figures and dots?"

"No, certainly not," she said, greatly astonished. "There was no
page missing at all."

"Still, somebody has torn--"

"But the book did not leave my room last night."

"And this morning?"

"This morning, I brought it down here myself, when M. Massiban's
arrival was announced."

"Then--?"

"Well, I don't understand--unless--but no."

"What?"

"Georges--my son--this morning--Georges was playing with the book."

She ran out headlong, accompanied by Beautrelet, Massiban and the
baron. The child was not in his room. They hunted in every
direction. At last, they found him playing behind the castle. But
those three people seemed so excited and called him so peremptorily
to account that he began to yell aloud.

Everybody ran about to right and left. The servants were questioned.
It was an indescribable tumult. And Beautrelet received the awful
impression that the truth was ebbing away from him, like water
trickling through his fingers.

He made an effort to recover himself, took Mme. de Villemon's arm,
and, followed by the baron and Massiban, led her back to the drawing
room and said:

"The book is incomplete. Very well. There are two pages torn out;
but you read them, did you not, madame?"

"Yes."

"You know what they contained?"

"Yes."

"Could you repeat it to us?"

"Certainly. I read the book with a great deal of curiosity, but
those two pages struck me in particular because the revelations were
so very interesting."

"Well, then, speak madame, speak, I implore you! Those revelations
are of exceptional importance. Speak, I beg of you: minutes lost are
never recovered. The Hollow Needle--"

"Oh, it's quite simple. The Hollow Needle means--"

At that moment, a footman entered the room:

"A letter for madame."

"Oh, but the postman has passed!"

"A boy brought it."

Mme. de Villemon opened the letter, read it, and put her hand to her
heart, turning suddenly livid and terrified, ready to faint.

The paper had slipped to the floor. Beautrelet picked it up and,
without troubling to apologize, read:

  Not a word! If you say a word, your son will
  never wake again.

"My son--my son!" she stammered, too weak even to go to the
assistance of the threatened child.

Beautrelet reassured her:

"It is not serious--it's a joke. Come, who could be interested?"

"Unless," suggested Massiban, "it was Arsene Lupin."

Beautrelet made him a sign to hold his tongue. He knew quite well,
of course, that the enemy was there, once more, watchful and
determined; and that was just why he wanted to tear from Mme. de
Villemon the decisive words, so long awaited, and to tear them from
her on the spot, that very moment:

"I beseech you, madame, compose yourself. We are all here. There is
not the least danger."

Would she speak? He thought so, he hoped so. She stammered out a few
syllables. But the door opened again. This time, the nurse entered.
She seemed distraught:

"M. Georges--madame--M. Georges--!"

Suddenly, the mother recovered all her strength. Quicker than any of
them, and urged by an unfailing instinct, she rushed down the
staircase, across the hall and on to the terrace. There lay little
Georges, motionless, on a wicker chair.

"Well, what is it? He's asleep!--"

"He fell asleep suddenly, madame," said the nurse. "I tried to
prevent him, to carry him to his room. But he was fast asleep and
his hands--his hands were cold."

"Cold!" gasped the mother. "Yes--it's true. Oh dear, oh dear--IF HE
ONLY WAKES UP!"

Beautrelet put his hand in his trousers pocket, seized the butt of
his revolver, cocked it with his forefinger, then suddenly produced
the weapon and fired at Massiban.

Massiban, as though he were watching the boy's movements, had
avoided the shot, so to speak, in advance. But already Beautrelet
had sprung upon him, shouting to the servants:

"Help! It's Lupin!"

Massiban, under the weight of the impact, fell back into one of the
wicker chairs. In a few seconds, he rose, leaving Beautrelet
stunned, choking; and, holding the young man's revolver in his
hands:

"Good!--that's all right!--don't stir--you'll be like that for two
or three minutes--no more. But, upon my word, you took your time to
recognize me! Was my make-up as old Massiban so good as all that?"

He was now standing straight up on his legs, his body squared, in a
formidable attitude, and he grinned as he looked at the three
petrified footmen and the dumbfounded baron:

"Isidore, you've missed the chance of a lifetime. If you hadn't told
them I was Lupin, they'd have jumped on me. And, with fellows like
that, what would have become of me, by Jove, with four to one
against me?"

He walked up to them:

"Come, my lads, don't be afraid--I shan't hurt you. Wouldn't you
like a sugar-stick apiece to screw your courage up? Oh, you, by the
way, hand me back my hundred-franc note, will you? Yes, yes, I know
you! You're the one I bribed just now to give the letter to your
mistress. Come hurry, you faithless servant."

He took the blue bank-note which the servant handed him and tore it
into tiny shreds:

"The price of treachery! It burns my fingers."

He took off his hat and, bowing very low before Mme. de Villemon:

"Will you forgive me, madame? The accidents of life--of mine
especially--often drive one to acts of cruelty for which I am the
first to blush. But have no fear for your son: it's a mere prick, a
little puncture in the arm which I gave him while we were
questioning him. In an hour, at the most, you won't know that it
happened. Once more, all my apologies. But I had to make sure of
your silence." He bowed again, thanked M. de Velines for his kind
hospitality, took his cane, lit a cigarette, offered one to the
baron, gave a circular sweep with his hat and, in a patronizing
tone, said to Beautrelet:

"Good-bye, baby."

And he walked away quietly, puffing the smoke of his cigarette into
the servants' faces.

Beautrelet waited for a few minutes. Mme. de Villemon, now calmer,
was watching by her son. He went up to her, with the intention of
making one last appeal to her. Their eyes met. He said nothing. He
had understood that she would never speak now, whatever happened.
There, once more, in that mother's brain, the secret of the Hollow
Needle lay buried as deeply as in the night of the past.

Then he gave up and went away.

It was half-past ten. There was a train at eleven-fifty. He slowly
followed the avenue in the park and turned into the road that led to
the station.

"Well, what do you say to that?"

It was Massiban, or rather Lupin, who appeared out of the wood
adjoining the road.

"Was it pretty well contrived, or was it not? Is your old friend
great on the tight-rope, or is he not? I'm sure that you haven't got
over it, eh, and that you're asking yourself whether the so-called
Massiban, member of the Academy of Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres,
ever existed. But, of course, he exists. I'll even show him to you,
if you're good. But, first, let me give you back your revolver.
You're looking to see if it's loaded? Certainly, my lad. There are
five charges left, one of which would be enough to send me ad
patres.--Well, so you're putting it in your pocket? Quite right. I
prefer that to what you did up there.--A nasty little impulse, that,
of yours!--Still, you're young, you suddenly see--in a flash!--that
you've once more been done by that confounded Lupin and that he is
standing there in front of you, at three steps from you--and bang!
You fire!--I'm not angry with you, bless your little heart! To prove
it, I offer you a seat in my 100 h.p. car. Will that suit you?"

He put his fingers to his mouth and whistled.

The contrast was delicious between the venerable appearance of this
elderly Massiban and the schoolboy ways and accent which Lupin was
putting on. Beautrelet could not help laughing.

"He's laughed! He's laughed!" cried Lupin, jumping for joy. "You
see, baby, what you fall short in is the power of smiling; you're a
trifle serious for your age. You're a very likeable boy, you have a
charming candor and simplicity--but you have no sense of humor." He
placed himself in front of him. "Look here, bet you I make you cry!
Do you know how I was able to follow up all your inquiry, how I knew
of the letter Massiban wrote you and his appointment to meet you
this morning at the Chateau de Velines? Through the prattle of your
friend, the one you're staying with. You confide in that idiot and
he loses no time, but goes and tells everything to his best girl.
And his best girl has no secrets for Lupin.--What did I tell you?
I've made you feel, anyhow; your eyes are quite wet!--Friendship
betrayed: that upsets you, eh? Upon my word, you're wonderful! I
could take you in my arms and hug you! You always wear that look of
astonishment which goes straight to my heart.--I shall never forget
the other evening at Gaillon, when you consulted me.--Yes, I was the
old notary!--But why don't you laugh, youngster? As I said, you have
no sense of a joke. Look here, what you want is--what shall I call
it?--imagination, imaginative impulse. Now, I'm full of imaginative
impulse."

A motor was heard panting not far off. Lupin seized Beautrelet
roughly by the arm and in a cold voice, looking him straight in the
eyes:

"You're going to keep quiet now, aren't you? You can see there's
nothing to be done. Then what's the use of wasting your time and
energy? There are plenty of highway robbers in the world. Run after
them and let me be--if not!--It's settled, isn't it?"

He shook him as though to enforce his will upon him. Then he
grinned:

"Fool that I am! You leave me alone? You're not one of those who let
go! Oh, I don't know what restrains me! In half a dozen turns of the
wrist, I could have you bound and gagged--and, in two hours, safe
under lock and key, for some months to come. And then I could twist
my thumbs in all security, withdraw to the peaceful retreat prepared
for me by my ancestors, the Kings of France, and enjoy the treasures
which they have been good enough to accumulate for me. But no, it is
doomed that I must go on blundering to the end. I can't help it, we
all have our weaknesses--and I have one for you. Besides, it's not
done yet. From now until you put your finger into the hollow of the
Needle, a good deal of water will flow under the bridges. Dash it
all, it took me ten days! Me! Lupin! You will want ten years, at
least! There's that much distance between us, after all!"

The motor arrived, an immense closed car. Lupin opened the door and
Beautreiet gave a cry. There was a man inside and that man was
Lupin, or rather Massiban. Suddenly understanding, he burst out
laughing. Lupin said:

"Don't be afraid, he's sound asleep. I promised that you should see
him. Do you grasp the situation now? At midnight, I knew of your
appointment at the castle. At seven in the morning, I was there.
When Massiban passed, I had only to collect him--give him a tiny
prick with a needle--and the thing--was done. Sleep old chap, sleep
away. We'll set you down on the slope. That's it--there--capital--
right in the sun, then you won't catch cold--good! And our hat in
our hand.--Spare a copper, kind gentleman!--Oh. my dear old
Massiban, so you were after Arsene Lupin!"

It was really a huge joke to see the two Massibans face to face, one
asleep with his head on his chest, the other seriously occupied in
paying him every sort of attention and respect:

"Pity a poor blind man! There, Massiban, here's two sous and my
visiting-card. And now, my lads, off we go at the fourth speed. Do
you hear, driver? You've got to do seventy-five miles an hour. Jump
in, Isidore. There's a full sitting of the Institute to-day, and
Massiban is to read a little paper, on I don't know what, at half-
past three. Well, he'll read them his little paper. I'll dish them
up a complete Massiban, more real than the real one, with my own
ideas, on the lacustrine inscriptions. I don't have an opportunity
of lecturing at the Institute ever day!--Faster, chauffeur: we're
only doing seventy-one and a half!--Are you afraid? Remember you're
with Lupin!--Ah, Isidore, and then people say that life is
monotonous! Why, life's an adorable thing, my boy; only one has to
know--and I know--. Wasn't it enough to make a man jump out of his
skin for joy, just now, at the castle, when you were chattering with
old Velines and I, up against the window, was tearing out the pages
of the historic book? And then, when you were questioning the Dame
de Villemon about the Hollow Needle! Would she speak? Yes, she
would--no, she wouldn't--yes--no. It gave me gooseflesh, I assure
you.--If she spoke, I should have to build up my life anew, the
whole scaffolding was destroyed.--Would the footman come in time?
Yes--no--there he is.--But Beautrelet will unmask me! Never! He's
too much of a flat! Yes, though--no--there, he's done it--no, he
hasn't--yes--he's eyeing me--that's it--he's feeling for his
revolver!--Oh, the delight of it!--Isidore, you're talking too much,
you'll hurt yourself!--Let's have a snooze, shall we?--I'm dying of
sleep.--Good night."

Beautrelet looked at him. He seemed almost asleep already. He slept.

The motor-car, darting through space, rushed toward a horizon that
was constantly reached and as constantly retreated. There was no
impression of towns, villages, fields or forests; simply space,
space devoured, swallowed up.

Beautrelet looked at his traveling companion, for a long time, with
eager curiosity and also with a keen wish to fathom his real
character through the mask that covered it. And he thought of the
circumstances that confined them, like that, together, in the close
contact of that motor car. But, after the excitement and
disappointment of the morning, tired in his turn, he too fell
asleep.

When he woke, Lupin was reading. Beautrelet leant over to see the
title of the book. It was the Epistolae ad Lucilium of Seneca the
philosopher.


CHAPTER EIGHT

FROM CAESAR TO LUPIN


Dash it all, it took me ten days! Me! Lupin!

You will want ten years, at least!--

These words, uttered by Lupin after leaving the Chateau de Velines,
had no little influence on Beautrelet's conduct.

Though very calm in the main and invariably master of himself,
Lupin, nevertheless, was subject to moments of exaltation, of a more
or less romantic expansiveness, at once theatrical and good-humored,
when he allowed certain admissions to escape him, certain imprudent
speeches which a boy like Beautrelet could easily turn to profit.

Rightly or wrongly, Beautrelet read one of these involuntary
admissions into that phrase. He was entitled to conclude that, if
Lupin drew a comparison between his own efforts and Beautrelet's in
pursuit of the truth about the Hollow Needle, it was because the two
of them possessed identical means of attaining their object, because
Lupin had no elements of success different from those possessed by
his adversary. The chances were alike. Now, with the same chances,
the same elements of success, the same means, ten days had been
enough for Lupin.

What were those elements, those means, those chances? They were
reduced, when all was said, to a knowledge of the pamphlet published
in 1815, a pamphlet which Lupin, no doubt, like Massiban, had found
by accident and thanks to which he had succeeded in discovering the
indispensable document in Marie Antoinette's book of hours.

Therefore, the pamphlet and the document were the only two
fundamental facts upon which Lupin had relied. With these he had
built up the whole edifice. He had had no extraneous aid. The study
of the pamphlet and the study of the document--full stop--that was
all.

Well, could not Beautrelet confine himself to the same ground? What
was the use of an impossible struggle? What was the use of those
vain investigations, in which, even supposing that he avoided the
pitfalls that were multiplied under his feet, he was sure, in the
end, to achieve the poorest of results?

His decision was clear and immediate; and, in adopting it, he had
the happy instinct that he was on the right path. He began by
leaving his Janson-de-Sailly schoolfellow, without indulging in
useless recriminations, and, taking his portmanteau with him, went
and installed himself, after much hunting about, in a small hotel
situated in the very heart of Paris. This hotel he did not leave for
days. At most, he took his meals at the table d'hote. The rest of
the time, locked in his room, with the window-curtains close-drawn,
he spent in thinking.

"Ten days," Arsene Lupin had said.

Beautrelet, striving to forget all that he had done and to remember
only the elements of the pamphlet and the document, aspired eagerly
to keep within the limit of those ten days. However the tenth day
passed and the eleventh and the twelfth; but, on the thirteenth day,
a gleam lit up his brain and, very soon, with the bewildering
rapidity of those ideas which develop in us like miraculous plants,
the truth emerged, blossomed, gathered strength. On the evening of
the thirteenth day, he certainly did not know the answer to the
problem, but he knew, to a certainty, one of the methods which Lupin
had, beyond a doubt, employed.

It was a very simple method, hinging on this one question: Is there
a link of any sort uniting all the more or less important historic
events with which the pamphlet connects the mystery of the Hollow
Needle?

The great diversity of these events made the question difficult to
answer. Still, the profound examination to which Beautrelet applied
himself ended by pointing to one essential characteristic which was
common to them all. Each one of them, without exception, had
happened within the boundaries of the old kingdom of Neustria, which
correspond very nearly with those of our present-day Normandy. All
the heroes of the fantastic adventure are Norman, or become Norman,
or play their part in the Norman country.

What a fascinating procession through the ages! What a rousing
spectacle was that of all those barons, dukes and kings, starting
from such widely opposite points to meet in this particular corner
of the world! Beautrelet turned the pages of history at haphazard:
it was Rolf, or Rou, or Rollo, first Duke of Normandy, who was
master of the secret of the Needle, according to the treaty of
Saint-Clair-sur-Epte!

It was William the Conqueror, Duke of Normandy and King of England,
whose bannerstaff was pierced like a needle!

It was at Rouen that the English burnt Joan of Arc, mistress of the
secret!

And right at the beginning of the adventure, who is that chief of
the Caleti who pays his ransom to Caesar with the secret of the
Needle but the chief of the men of the Caux country, which lies in
the very heart of Normandy?

The supposition becomes more definite. The field narrows. Rouen, the
banks of the Seine, the Caux country: it really seems as though all
roads lead in that direction. Now, doctoring a camel is not an easy
matter, for one cannot work on his imagination as doctors do on human
beings. When a camel is ill, he is really ill. There was no mistake
about the symptoms of his complaint, and after a consultation
Sadek, Mahommed and I agreed that a strong solution of salt and
water should be administered, which was easier said than done.

While the poor brute lay with his long neck stretched upon the
sand, moaning, groaning and breathing heavily, we mixed a bag of
salt--all we had--with half a bucket of water, and after endless
trouble--for our patient was most recalcitrant--poured the contents
down his throat.

[Illustration: Interior of Rest House, Mukak.]
[Illustration: The Rest House at Sahib Chah.]
We had some moments of great anxiety, for the animal was taken with
a fit.

He fell on his side, his legs quivered three or four times, and for
one moment we really thought our remedy had killed him. The medicine,
however, had the desired effect, and about an hour later the camel
was again as lively as a cricket, and we were able to continue.

The reader may perhaps gauge what the loss of a camel would have
been when he is told that between Sher-i-Nasrya, Sistan, and Nushki--a
journey of some 500 miles--neither camels nor any other mode of
conveyance are, under ordinary circumstances, to be procured.

We passed a conical hill, by the roadside, which had thick deposits
of gypsum on the south-east side of its base, while on the
north-west side the process of petrification of the sand was fully
illustrated.

The thin surface layer when moist gets baked by the sun, and thus
begins its process of solidification; then another layer of sand
is deposited on it by the wind and undergoes the same process,
forming the thin, horizontal strata so common in the section of all
these hills.

The lower strata get gradually harder and harder, but those nearer
the surface can be easily crumbled into sand again by pressure between
one's fingers.

These were the main altitudes registered on the day's march: Plain,
3,220 feet; 16 miles from Mukak, 3,200 feet; while a mile and a half
further we had gone as low as 2,500 feet on a wide plain with
undulations.

The rocky mountain, when seen edgewise from a distance, had
appeared like a tower; now, on approaching it on its broad side,
its silhouette altered its semblance into that of an elongated
crouching lion.

Great quantities of gypsum could be seen in layers under the sand
and fragments that covered the surface. In places the ground was quite
white as if with snow.

The track, until we had passed the isolated "lion" mountain (about
20 miles from Mukak), maintained a direction of east, east-south-east,
and south-east, but about a mile further, it turned sharply northwards
in a bed of soft sand, between sand mounds to the north-east and a
sand bank facing north, the top of which, full of humps, was not
unlike a crocodile's back.

To the right we had an open space where one got a view of the desert
and mountains to the south, and then we wended our way, in
zig-zag, among sand hills bearing no unusual characteristics,
and travelled across a very sandy plain with clusters of _regheth_
here and there.

This was one of the worst bits of the Robat-Nushki road. The sand
was troublesome and the track absolutely obliterated by it in this
portion.

Twenty-three miles, 660 yards from Mukak we arrived at Sahib
Chah, a spot which no traveller is ever likely to forget, especially
if a few drops of water from one of the wells are tasted.

When the road was made it was very difficult to find drinkable water
in this part, and this well--renowned all over Beluchistan and
Sistan for its magic powers--has up to the present time been the
only successful attempt; but I understand from Captain Webb-Ware,
who is in charge of the road, that he hopes to find or has found
water further north, on the other side of the hill range, and that
in future the traveller will be spared the good fortune of visiting
this heavenly spot.

Most attractive iron troughs had been brought here and placed near the
four wells, and up-to-date wooden windlasses had been erected on
the edge of each well--conveniences that were not quite so common
at the stations we had already passed.
"I'm burning! I'm burning!" muttered the boy, gasping under the
truth, which came to him in a mighty series of shocks and took away
his breath.

The checks encountered on the first few days, did not discourage
him. He had a firm and profound belief in the correctness of the
supposition that was guiding him. It was bold, perhaps, and
extravagant; no matter: it was worthy of the adversary pursued. The
supposition was on a level with the prodigious reality that bore the
name of Lupin. With a man like that, of what good could it be to
look elsewhere than in the domain of the enormous, the exaggerated,
the superhuman?

Jumieges, the Mailleraye, Saint-Wandrille, Caudebec, Tancarville,
Quillebeuf were places filled with his memories. How often he must
have contemplated the glory of their Gothic steeples or the splendor
of their immense ruins!

But the Havre, the neighborhood of the Havre drew Isidore like a
beacon-fire.

"The kings of France carry secrets that often decide the fate of
towns!"

Cryptic words which, suddenly, for Beautrelet, shone bright with
clearness! Was this not an exact statement of the reasons that
determined Francis I. to create a town on this spot and was not the
fate of the Havre-de-Grace linked with the very secret of the
Needle?

"That's it, that's it," stammered Beautrelet, excitedly. "The old
Norman estuary, one of the essential points, one of the original
centres around which our French nationality was formed, is completed
by those two forces, one in full view, alive, known to all, the new
port commanding the ocean and opening on the world; the other dim
and obscure, unknown and all the more alarming, inasmuch as it is
invisible and impalpable. A whole side of the history of France and
of the royal house is explained by the Needle, even as it explains
the whole story of Arsene Lupin. The same sources of energy and
power supply and renew the fortunes of kings and of the adventurer."

Beautrelet ferreted and snuffed from village to village, from the
river to the sea, with his nose in the wind, his ears pricked,
trying to compel the inanimate things to surrender their deep
meaning. Ought this hill-slope to be questioned? Or that forest? Or
the houses of this hamlet? Or was it among the insignificant phrases
spoken by that peasant yonder that he might hope to gather the one
little illuminating word?

One morning, he was lunching at an inn, within sight of Honfleur,
the old city of the estuary. Opposite him was sitting one of those
heavy, red-haired Norman horse-dealers who do the fairs of the
district, whip in hand and clad in a long smock-frock. After a
moment, it seemed to Beautrelet that the man was looking at him with
a certain amount of attention, as though he knew him or, at least,
was trying to recognize him.

"Pooh," he thought, "there's some mistake: I've never seen that
merchant before, nor he me."

As a matter of fact, the man appeared to take no further interest in
him. He lit his pipe, called for coffee and brandy, smoked and
drank.

When Beautrelet had finished his meal, he paid and rose to go. A
group of men entered just as he was about to leave and he had to
stand for a few seconds near the table at which the horse-dealer
sat. He then heard the man say in a low voice:

"Good-afternoon, M. Beautrelet."

Without hesitation, Isidore sat down beside the man and said:

"Yes, that is my name--but who are you? How did you know me?"

"That's not difficult--and yet I've only seen your portrait in the
papers. But you are so badly--what do you call it in French--so
badly made-up."

He had a pronounced foreign accent and Beautrelet seemed to
perceive, as he looked at him, that he too wore a facial disguise
that entirely altered his features.

"Who are you?" he repeated. "Who are you?"

The stranger smiled:

"Don't you recognize me?"

"No, I never saw you before."

"Nor I you. But think. The papers print my portrait also--and pretty
often. Well, have you got it?"

"No."

"Holmlock Shears."

It was an amusing and, at the same time, a significant meeting. The
boy at once saw the full bearing of it. After an exchange of
compliments, he said to Shears:

"I suppose that you are here--because of 'him'?"

"Yes."

"So--so--you think we have a chance--in this direction."

"I'm sure of it."

Beautrelet's delight at finding that Shears's opinion agreed with
his own was not unmingled with other feelings. If the Englishman
attained his object, it meant that, at the very best, the two would
share the victory; and who could tell that Shears would not attain
it first?

"Have you any proofs? Any clues?"

"Don't be afraid," grinned the Englishman, who understood his
uneasiness. "I am not treading on your heels. With you, it's the
document, the pamphlet: things that do not inspire me with any great
confidence."

"And with you?"

"With me, it's something different."

"Should I be indiscreet, if--?"

"Not at all. You remember the story of the coronet, the story of the
Duc de Charmerac?" [Footnote: Arsene Lupin, play in four acts, by
Maurice Leblanc and Francis de Croisset.]

"Yes."

"You remember Victoire, Lupin's old foster-mother, the one whom my
good friend Ganimard allowed to escape in a sham prison-van?"

"Yes."

"I have found Victoire's traces. She lives on a farm, not far from
National Road No. 25. National Road No. 25 is the road from the
Havre to Lille. Through Victoire I shall easily get at Lupin."

"It will take long."

"No matter! I have dropped all my cases. This is the only one I care
about. Between Lupin and me, it's a fight--a fight to the death."

He spoke these words with a sort of ferocity that betrayed all his
bitterness at the humiliations which he had undergone, all his
fierce hatred of the great enemy who had tricked him so cruelly.

"Go away, now," he whispered, "we are observed. It's dangerous. But
mark my words: on the day when Lupin and I meet face to face, it
will be--it will be tragic."

Beautrelet felt quite reassured on leaving Shears: he need not fear
that the Englishman would gain on him. And here was one more proof
which this chance interview had brought him: the road from the Havre
to Lille passes through Dieppe! It is the great seaside road of the
Caux country, the coast road commanding the Channel cliffs! And it
was on a farm near this road that Victoire was installed, Victoire,
that is to say, Lupin, for one did not move without the other, the
master without the blindly devoted servant.

"I'm burning! I'm burning!" he repeated to himself. "Whenever
circumstances bring me a new element of information, it confirms my
supposition. On the one hand, I have the absolute certainty of the
banks of the Seine; on the other, the certainty of the National
Road. The two means of communication meet at the Havre, the town of
Francis I., the town of the secret. The boundaries are contracting.
The Caux country is not large; and, even so, I have only the western
portion of the Caux country to search."

He set to work with renewed stubbornness:

"Anything that Lupin has found," he kept on saying to himself,
"there is no reason for my not finding."

Certainly, Lupin had some great advantage over him, perhaps a
thorough acquaintance with the country, a precise knowledge of the
local legends, or less than that, a memory: invaluable advantages
these, for he, Beautrelet, knew nothing, was totally ignorant of the
country, which he had first visited at the time of the Ambrumesy
burglary and then only rapidly, without lingering.

But what did it matter? Though he had to devote ten years of his
life to this investigation, he would carry it to a successful issue.
Lupin was there. He could see him, he could feel him there. He
expected to come upon him at the next turn of the road, on the skirt
of the next wood, outside the next village. And, though continually
disappointed, he seemed to find in each disappointment a fresh
reason for persisting.

Often, he would fling himself on the slope by the roadside and
plunge into wild examination of the copy of the document which he
always carried on him, a copy, that is to say, with vowels taking
the place of the figures:

e . a . a . . e . . e . a . . a . .
 a . . . e . e .     . e . oi . e . . e .
 . ou . . e . o . . . e . . e . o . . e


[Illustration: drawing of an outline of paper with writing and
drawing on it--numbers, dots, some letters, signs and symbols...]

ai . ui . . e           . . eu . e

Often, also, according to his habit, he would lie down flat on his
stomach in the tall grass and think for hours. He had time enough.
The future belonged to him.

With wonderful patience, he tramped from the Seine to the sea, and
from the sea to the Seine, going gradually farther, retracing his
steps and never quitting the ground until, theoretically speaking,
there was not a chance left of gathering the smallest particle upon
it.

He studied and explored Montivilliers and Saint-Romani and Octeville
and Gonneville and Criquetot.

At night, he knocked at the peasants' doors and asked for a lodging.
After dinner, they smoked together and chatted. He made them tell
him the stories which they told one another on the long winter
nights. And he never omitted to insinuate, slily:

"What about the Needle? The legend of the Hollow Needle? Don't you
know that?"

"Upon my word, I don't--never heard of it--"

"Just think--an old wives' tale--something that has to do with a
needle. An enchanted needle, perhaps.--I don't know--"

Nothing. No legend, no recollection. And the next morning he walked
blithely away again.

One day, he passed through the pretty village of Saint-Jouin, which
overlooks the sea, and descending among the chaos of rocks that have
slipped from cliffs, he climbed up to the tableland and went in the
direction of the dry valley of Bruneval, Cap d'Antifer and the
little creek of Belle-Plage. He was walking gaily and lightly,
feeling a little tired, perhaps, but glad to be alive, so glad,
even, that he forgot Lupin and the mystery of the Hollow Needle and
Victoire and Shears, and interested himself in the sight of nature:
the blue sky, the great emerald sea, all glittering in the sunshine.

Some straight slopes and remains of brick walls, in which he seemed
to recognize the vestiges of a Roman camp, interested him. Then his
eyes fell upon a sort of little castle, built in imitation of an
ancient fort, with cracked turrets and Gothic windows. It stood on a
jagged, rugged, rising promontory, almost detached from the cliff. A
barred gate, flanked by iron hand-rails and bristling spikes,
guarded the narrow passage.

Beautrelet succeeded in climbing over, not without some difficulty.
Over the pointed door, which was closed with an old rusty lock, he
read the words:

FORT DE FREFOSSE

He did not attempt to enter, but, turning to the right, after going
down a little slope, he embarked upon a path that ran along a ridge
of land furnished with a wooden handrail. Right at the end was a
cave of very small dimensions, forming a sort of watch-tower at the
point of the rock in which it was hollowed out, a rock falling
abruptly into the sea.

There was just room to stand up in the middle of the cave.
Multitudes of inscriptions crossed one another on the walls. An
almost square hole, cut in the stone, opened like a dormer window on
the land side, exactly opposite Fort Frefosse, the crenellated top
of which appeared at thirty or forty yards' distance.

Beautrelet threw off his knapsack and sat down. He had had a hard
and tiring day. He fell asleep for a little. Then the cool wind that
blew inside the cave woke him up. He sat for a few minutes without
moving, absent-minded, vague-eyed. He tried to reflect, to recapture
his still torpid thoughts. And, as he recovered his consciousness,
he was on the point of rising, when he received the impression that
his eyes, suddenly fixed, suddenly wide-open, saw--

A thrill shook him from head to foot. His hands clutched
convulsively and he felt the beads of perspiration forming at the
roots of his hair:

"No, no," he stammered. "It's a dream, an hallucination. Let's look:
it's not possible!"

He plunged down on his knees and stooped over. Two huge letters,
each perhaps a foot long, appeared cut in relief in the granite of
the floor. Those two letters, clumsily, but plainly carved, with
their corners rounded and their surface smoothed by the wear and
tear of centuries, were a D and an F.

D and F! Oh, bewildering miracle! D and F: just two letters of the
document! Oh, Beautrelet had no need to consult it to bring before
his mind that group of letters in the fourth line, the line of the
measurements and indications! He knew them well! They were inscribed
for all time at the back of his pupils, encrusted for good and all
in the very substance of his brain!

He rose to his feet, went down the steep road, climbed back along
the old fort, hung on to the spikes of the rail again, in order to
pass, and walked briskly toward a shepherd whose flock was grazing
some way off on a dip in the tableland:

"That cave, over there--that cave--"

His lips trembled and he tried to find the words that would not
come. The shepherd looked at him in amazement. At last, Isidore
repeated:

"Yes, that cave--over there--to the right of the fort. Has it a
name?"

"Yes, I should think so. All the Etretat folk like to call it the
Demoiselles."

"What?--What?--What's that you say?"

"Why, of course--it's the Chambre des Demoiselles."

Isidore felt like flying at his throat, as though all the truth
lived in that man and he hoped to get it from him at one swoop, to
tear it from him.

The Demoiselles! One of the words, one of the only three known words
of the document!

A whirlwind of madness shook Beautrelet where he stood. And it rose
all around him, blew upon him like a tempestuous squall that came
from the sea, that came from the land, that came from every
direction and whipped him with great lashes of the truth.

He understood. The document appeared to him in its real sense. The
Chambre des Demoiselles--Etretat--

"That's it," he thought, his brain filled with light, "it must be
that. But why didn't I guess earlier?"

He said to the shepherd, in a low voice:

"That will do--go away--you can go--thank you."

The man, not knowing what to think, whistled to his dog and went.

Left alone, Beautrelet returned to the fort. He had almost passed it
when, suddenly, he dropped to the ground and lay cowering against a
piece of wall. And, wringing his hands, he thought:

"I must be mad! If 'he' were to see me! Or his accomplices! I've
been moving about for an hour--!"

He did not stir another limb.

The sun went down. Little by little, the night mingled with the day,
blurring the outline of things.

Then, with little imperceptible movements, flat on his stomach,
gliding, crawling, he crept along one of the points of the
promontory to the extreme edge of the cliff.

He reached it. Stretching out his hands, he pushed aside some tufts
of grass and his head appeared over the precipice.

Opposite him, almost level with the cliff, in the open sea rose an
enormous rock, over eighty yards high, a colossal obelisk, standing
straight on its granite base, which showed at the surface of the
water, and tapering toward the summit, like the giant tooth of a
monster of the deep. "The last time, I shook him off with the message
that you would be there before him."
"Be where?"
"At the Valentino; but that was an hour ago!"
Odo slipped from the saddle.

"I must dress first. Call a chair; or no--write a letter for me
first.

Let Antonio carry it."
The ex-soprano, wheezing under the double burden of flesh and
consequence, had painfully laboured after Odo up the high
stone flights to that young gentleman's modest lodgings, and they
stood together in a study lined with books and hung with prints
and casts from the antique.

Odo threw off his dusty coat and called the servant to remove his
boots.

"Will you read the lady's letters, cavaliere?" Cantapresto asked,
obsequiously offering them on a lacquered tray.

"No--no: write first. Begin 'My angelic lady'--"
"You began the last letter in those terms, cavaliere," his scribe
reminded him with suspended pen.

"The devil! Well, then--wait. 'Throned goddess'--"
"You ended the last letter with 'throned goddess.'"

"Curse the last letter! Why did you send it?" Odo sprang up and slipped
his arms into the dress-tunic his servant had brought him. "Write
anything. Say that I am suddenly summoned by--"
"By the Count Alfieri?" Cantapresto suggested.

"Count Alfieri? Is he here? He has returned?"
"He arrived an hour ago, cavaliere. He sent you this Moorish
scimitar with his compliments.

I understand he comes recently from Spain."

"Imbecile, not to have told me before!

Quick, Antonio--my gloves, my sword."

Odo, flushed and animated, buckled his sword-belt with impatient
hands. "Write anything--anything to free my evening. Tomorrow
morning--tomorrow morning I shall wait on the lady. Let Antonio carry
her a nosegay with my compliments.

Did you see him Cantapresto? Was he in good health? Does he sup at
home? He left no message? Quick, Antonio, a chair!" he cried with
his hand on the door.

Odo had acquired, at twenty-two, a nobility of carriage not
incompatible with the boyish candour of his gaze, and becomingly set
off by the brilliant dress-uniform of a lieutenant in one of
the provincial regiments.

He was tall and fair, and a certain languor of complexion,
inherited from his father's house, was corrected in him by the
vivacity of the Donnaz blood. This now sparkled in his grey
eye, and gave a glow to his cheek, as he stepped across the threshold,
treading on a sprig of cherry-blossom that had dropped unnoticed
to the floor.

Cantapresto, looking after him, caught sight of the
flowers and kicked them aside with a contemptuous toe.

"I sometimes think he botanises," he murmured with a shrug. "The
Lord knows what queer notions he gets out of all these books!"

2.2.

As an infusion of fresh blood to Odo were Alfieri's meteoric returns
to Turin.

Life moved languidly in the strait-laced city, even to a young
gentleman a-tiptoe for adventure and framed to elicit it as the
hazel-wand draws water. Not that vulgar distractions were lacking.
The town, as Cantapresto had long since advised him, had its secret
leniencies, its posterns opening on clandestine pleasure; but there
was that in Odo which early turned him from such cheap counterfeits
of living.

He accepted the diversions of his age, but with a clear sense of their
worth; and the youth who calls his pleasures by their true name
has learned the secret of resisting them.

Alfieri's coming set deeper springs in motion. His follies and
extravagances were on a less provincial scale than those of Odo's
daily associates.

The breath of a freer life clung to him and his allusions were
so many glimpses into a larger world. His political theories were
but the enlargement of his private grievances, but the mere play of
criticism on accepted institutions was an exercise more novel and
exhilirating than the wildest ride on one of his half-tamed
thorough-breds. Still chiefly a man of pleasure, and the slave, as
always, of some rash infatuation, Alfieri was already shaking off
the intellectual torpor of his youth; and the first stirrings of
his curiosity roused an answering passion in Odo. Their tastes were
indeed divergent, for to that external beauty which was to Odo the
very bloom of life, Alfieri remained insensible; while of its
imaginative counterpart, its prolongation in the realm of thought
and emotion, he had but the most limited conception. But his love
of ringing deeds woke the chivalrous strain in Odo, and his vague
celebration of Liberty, that unknown goddess to whom altars were
everywhere building, chimed with the other's scorn of oppression
and injustice.Old Merovingian gold
sous, glittering crown-pieces, doubloons, ducats, florins, guineas;
and the precious stones and the diamonds; and all the jewels and all
the ornaments: everything is there. Who could discover it? Who could
ever learn the impenetrable secret of the Needle? Nobody.

And Lupin becomes that sort of really disproportionate being whom we
know, that miracle incapable of explanation so long as the truth
remains in the shadow. Infinite though the resources of his genius
be, they cannot suffice for the mad struggle which he maintains
against society. He needs other, more material resources. He needs a
sure place of retreat, he needs the certainty of impunity, the peace
that allows of the execution of his plans.

Without the Hollow Needle, Lupin is incomprehensible, a myth, a
character in a novel, having no connection with reality.

Master of the secret--and of such a secret!--he becomes simply a man
like another, but gifted with the power of wielding in a superior
manner the extraordinary weapon with which destiny has endowed him.

        *       *       *       *       *

So the Needle was hollow.

It remained to discover how one obtained access to it.

From the sea, obviously. There must be, on the side of the offing,
some fissure where boats could land at certain hours of the tide.

But on the side of the land?

Beautrelet lay until ten o'clock at night hanging over the
precipice, with his eyes riveted on the shadowy mass formed by the
pyramid, thinking and pondering with all the concentrated effort of
his mind.

Then he went down to Etretat, selected the cheapest hotel, dined,
went up to his room and unfolded the document.

It was the merest child's play to him now to establish its exact
meaning. He at once saw that the three vowels of the word Etretat
occurred in the first line, in their proper order and at the
necessary intervals. This first line now read as follows:

e . a . a .. etretat . a ..

What words could come before Etretat? Words, no doubt, that referred
to the position of the Needle with regard to the town. Now the
Needle stood on the left, on the west--He ransacked his memory and,
recollecting that westerly winds are called vents d'aval on the
coast and that the nearest porte was known as the Porte d'Aval, he
wrote down:

"En aval d'Etretat . a .."

"No more than I have worked myself," said Giannozzo sulkily; "and
as for its being hungry, why should it fare better than its
masters?"
Their words had called out of the house a lean bent woman, whose
shrivelled skin showed through the rents in her unbleached shift.

At sight of Odo she pushed Giannozzo aside and hurried forward to
ask how she might serve the gentleman.

"With supper and a bed, my good Filomena," said Odo; and she flung
herself at his feet with a cry.

La Chambre des Demoiselles. Sous le Fort de
Frefosse. L'Aiguille creuse."

These were the four great formulas, the essential and general
formulas which you had to know. By means of them, you turned en
aval, that is to say, below or west of Etretat, entered the Chambre
des Demoiselles, in all probability passed under Fort Frefosse and
thus arrived at the Needle.

How? By means of the indications and measurements that constituted
the fourth line:

[Illustration: drawing of an outline of paper with writing and
drawing on it--numbers, dots, some letters, signs and symbols...]

These were evidently the more special formulas to enable you to find
the outlet through which you made your way and the road that led to
the Needle.

Beautrelet at once presumed--and his surmise was no more than the
logical consequence of the document--that, if there really was a
direct communication between the land and the obelisk of the Needle,
the underground passage must start from the Chambre des Demoiselles,
pass under Fort Frefosse, descend perpendicularly the three hundred
feet of cliff and, by means of a tunnel contrived under the rocks of
the sea, end at the Hollow Needle.

Which was the entrance to the underground passage? Did not the two
letters D and F, so plainly cut, point to it and admit to it, with
the aid, perhaps, of some ingenious piece of mechanism?

The whole of the next morning, Isidore strolled about Etretat and
chatted with everybody he met, in order to try and pick up useful
information. At last, in the afternoon, he went up the cliff.
Disguised as a sailor, he had made himself still younger and, in a
pair of trousers too short for him and a fishing jersey, he looked a
mere scape-grace of twelve or thirteen.

As soon as he entered the cave, he knelt down before the letters.
Here a disappointment awaited him. It was no use his striking them,
pushing them, manipulating them in every way: they refused to move.
And it was not long, in fact, before he became aware that they were
really unable to move and that, therefore, they controlled no
mechanism.

And yet--and yet they must mean something! Inquiries which he had
made in the village went to show that no one had ever been able to
explain their existence and that the Abbe Cochet, in his valuable
little book on Etretat, [Footnote: Les Origines d'Etretat. The Abbe
Cochet seems to conclude, in the end, that the two letters are the
initials of a passer-by. The revelations now made prove the fallacy
of the theory.] had also tried in vain to solve this little puzzle.
But Isidore knew what the learned Norman archaeologist did not know,
namely, that the same two letters figured in the document, on the
line containing the indications. Was it a chance coincidence:
Impossible. Well, then--?

An idea suddenly occurred to him, an idea so reasonable, so simple
that he did not doubt its correctness for a second. Were not that D
and that F the initials of the two most important words in the
document, the words that represented--together with the Needle--the
essential stations on the road to be followed: the Chambre des
Demoiselles and Fort Frefosse: D for Demoiselles, F for Frefosse:
the connection was too remarkable to be a mere accidental fact.

In that case, the problem stood thus: the two letters D F represent
the relation that exists between the Chambre des Demoiselles and
Fort Frefosse, the single letter D, which begins the line,
represents the Demoiselles, that is to say, the cave in which you
have to begin by taking up your position, and the single letter F,
placed in the middle of the line, represents Frefosse, that is to
say, the probable entrance to the underground passage.

Between these various signs, are two more: first, a sort of
irregular rectangle, marked with a stripe in the left bottom corner,
and, next, the figure 19, signs which obviously indicate to those
inside the cave the means of penetrating beneath the fort.

The shape of this rectangle puzzled Isidore. Was there around him,
on the walls of the cave, or at any rate within reach of his eyes,
an inscription, anything whatever, affecting a rectangular shape?

He looked for a long time and was on the point of abandoning that
particular scent when his eyes fell upon the little opening, pierced
in the rock, that acted as a window to the chamber.

Now the edges of this opening just formed a rectangle: corrugated,
uneven, clumsy, but still a rectangle; and Beautrelet at once saw
that, by placing his two feet on the D and the F carved in the stone
floor--and this explained the stroke that surmounted the two letters
in the document--he found himself at the exact height of the window!

He took up his position in this place and gazed out. The window
looking landward, as we know, he saw, first, the path that connected
the cave with the land, a path hung between two precipices; and,
next, he caught sight of the foot of the hillock on which the fort
stood. To try and see the fort, Beautrelet leaned over to the left
and it was then that he understood the meaning of the curved stripe,
the comma that marked the left bottom corner in the document: at the
bottom on the left-hand side of the window, a piece of flint
projected and the end of it was curved like a claw. It suggested a
regular shooter's mark. And, when a man applied his eye to this
mark, he saw cut out, on the slope of the mound facing him, a
restricted surface of land occupied almost entirely by an old brick
wall, a remnant of the original Fort Frefosse or of the old Roman
oppidum built on this spot.

Beautrelet ran to this piece of wall, which was, perhaps, ten yards
long. It was covered with grass and plants. There was no indication
of any kind visible. And yet that figure 19?

He returned to the cave, took from his pocket a ball of string and a
tape-measure, tied the string to the flint corner, fastened a pebble
at the nineteenth metre and flung it toward the land side. The
pebble at most reached the end of the path.

"Idiot that I am!" thought Beautrelet. "Who reckoned by metres in
those days? The figure 19 means 19 fathoms [Footnote: The toise, or
fathom, measured 1.949 metres.--Translator's Note.] or nothing!"

Having made the calculation, he ran out the twine, made a knot and
felt about on the piece of wall for the exact and necessarily one
point at which the knot, formed at 37 metres from the window of the
Demoiselles, should touch the Frefosse wall. In a few moments, the
point of contact was established. With his free hand, he moved aside
the leaves of mullein that had grown in the interstices. A cry
escaped him. The knot, which he held pressed down with his fore-
finger, was in the centre of a little cross carved in relief on a
brick. And the sign that followed on the figure 19 in the document
was a cross!

It needed all his will-power to control the excitement with which he
was overcome. Hurriedly, with convulsive fingers, he clutched the
cross and, pressing upon it, turned it as he would have turned the
spokes of a wheel. The brick heaved. He redoubled his effort; it
moved no further. Then, without turning, he pressed harder. He at
once felt the brick give way. And, suddenly, there was the click of
a bolt that is released, the sound of a lock opening and, on the
right of the brick, to the width of about a yard, the wall swung
round on a pivot and revealed the orifice of an underground passage.

Like a madman, Beautrelet seized the iron door in which the bricks
were sealed, pulled it back, violently and closed it. Astonishment,
delight, the fear of being surprised convulsed his face so as to
render it unrecognizable. He beheld the awful vision of all that had
happened there, in front of that door, during twenty centuries; of
all those people, initiated into the great secret, who had
penetrated through that issue: Celts, Gauls, Romans, Normans,
Englishmen, Frenchmen, barons, dukes, kings--and, after all of them,
Arsene Lupin--and, after Lupin, himself, Beautrelet. He felt that
his brain was slipping away from him. His eyelids fluttered. He fell
fainting and rolled to the bottom of the slope, to the very edge of
the precipice.

        *       *       *       *       *

His task was done, at least the task which he was able to accomplish
alone, with his unaided resources.

That evening, he wrote a long letter to the chief of the detective
service, giving a faithful account of the results of his
investigations and revealing the secret of the Hollow Needle. He
asked for assistance to complete his work and gave his address.

While waiting for the reply, he spent two consecutive nights in the
Chambre des Demoiselles. He spent them overcome with fear, his
nerves shaken with a terror which was increased by the sounds of the
night. At every moment, he thought he saw shadows approach in his
direction. People knew of his presence in the cave--they were
coming--they were murdering him!

His eyes, however, staring madly before them, sustained by all the
power of his will, clung to the piece of wall.

On the first night, nothing stirred; but, on the second, by the
light of the stars and a slender crescent-moon, he saw the door open
and figures emerge from the darkness: he counted two, three, four,
five of them.

It seemed to him that those five men were carrying fairly large
loads. He followed them for a little way. They cut straight across
the fields to the Havre road; and he heard the sound of a motor car
driving away.

He retraced his steps, skirting a big farm. But, at the turn of the
road that ran beside it, he had only just time to scramble up a
slope and hide behind some trees. More men passed--four, five men--
all carrying packages. And, two minutes later, another motor
snorted.

This time, he had not the strength to return to his post; and he
went back to bed.

When he woke and had finished dressing, the hotel waiter brought him
a letter. He opened it. It contained Ganimard's card.

"At last!" cried Beautrelet, who, after so hard a campaign, was
really feeling the need of a comrade-in-arms.

He ran downstairs with outstretched hands. Ganimard took them,
looked at him for a moment and said:

"You're a fine fellow, my lad!"

"Pooh!" he said. "Luck has served me."

"There's no such thing as luck with 'him,'" declared the inspector,
who always spoke of Lupin in a solemn tone and without mentioning
his name.

He sat down:

"So we've got him!"

"Just as we've had him twenty times over," said Beautrelet,
laughing.

"Yes, but to-day--"

"To-day, of course, the case is different. We know his retreat, his
stronghold, which means, when all is said, that Lupin is Lupin. He
can escape. The Etretat Needle cannot."

"Why do you suppose that he will escape?" asked Ganimard, anxiously.

"Why do you suppose that he requires to escape?" replied Beautrelet.
"There is nothing to prove that he is in the Needle at present. Last
night, eleven of his men left it. He may be one of the eleven."

Ganimard reflected:

"You are right. The great thing is the Hollow Needle. For the rest,
let us hope that chance will favor us. And now, let us talk."

He resumed his serious voice, his self-important air and said:

"My dear Beautrelet, I have orders to recommend you to observe the
most absolute discretion in regard to this matter."

"Orders from whom?" asked Beautrelet, jestingly. "The prefect of
police?"

"Higher than that."

"The prime minister?"

"Higher."

"Whew!"

Ganimard lowered his voice:

"Beautrelet, I was at the Elysee last night. They look upon this
matter as a state secret of the utmost gravity. There are serious
reasons for concealing the existence of this citadel--reasons of
military strategy, in particular. It might become a revictualling
centre, a magazine for new explosives, for lately-invented
projectiles, for anything of that sort: the secret arsenal of
France, in fact."

"But how can they hope to keep a secret like this? In the old days,
one man alone held it: the king. To-day, already, there are a good
few of us who know it, without counting Lupin's gang."

"Still, if we gained only ten years', only five years' silence!
Those five years may be--the saving of us."

"But, in order to capture this citadel, this future arsenal, it will
have to be attacked, Lupin must be dislodged. And all this cannot be
done without noise."

"Of course, people will guess something, but they won't know.
Besides, we can but try."

"All right. What's your plan?"

"Here it is, in two words. To begin with, you are not Isidore
Beautrelet and there's no question of Arsene Lupin either. You are
and you remain a small boy of Etretat, who, while strolling about
the place, caught some fellows coming out of an underground passage.
This makes you suspect the existence of a flight of steps which cuts
through the cliff from top to bottom."

"Yes, there are several of those flights of steps along the coast.
For instance, to the right of Etretat, opposite Benouville, they
showed me the Devil's Staircase, which every bather knows. And I say
nothing of the three or four tunnels used by the fishermen."

"So you will guide me and one-half of my men. I shall enter alone,
or accompanied, that remains to be seen. This much is certain, that
the attack must be delivered that way. If Lupin is not in the
Needle, we shall fix up a trap in which he will be caught sooner or
later. If he is there--"

"If he is there, he will escape from the Needle by the other side,
the side overlooking the sea."

"In that case, he will at once be arrested by the other half of my
men."

"Yes, but if, as I presume, you choose a moment when the sea is at
low ebb, leaving the base of the Needle uncovered, the chase will be
public, because it will take place before all the men and women
fishing for mussels, shrimps and shell-fish who swarm on the rocks
round about."

"That is why I just mean to select the time when the sea is full."

"In that case, he will make off in a boat."

"Ah, but I shall have a dozen fishing-smacks, each of which will be
commanded by one of my men, and we shall collar him--"

"If he doesn't slip through your dozen smacks, like a fish through
the meshes."

"All right, then I'll sink him."

"The devil you will! Shall you have guns?"

"Why, of course! There's a torpedo-boat at the Havre at this moment.
A telegram from me will bring her to the Needle at the appointed
hour."

"How proud Lupin will be! A torpedo-boat! Well, M. Ganimard, I see
that you have provided for everything. We have only to go ahead.
When do we deliver the assault?"

"To-morrow."

"At night?"

"No, by daylight, at the flood-tide, as the clock strikes ten in the
morning."

"Capital."

        *       *       *       *       *

Under his show of gaiety, Beautrelet concealed a real anguish of
mind. He did not sleep until the morning, but lay pondering over the
most impracticable schemes, one after the other.

Ganimard had left him in order to go to Yport, six or seven miles
from Etretat, where, for prudence's sake, he had told his men to
meet him, and where he chartered twelve fishing smacks, with the
ostensible object of taking soundings along the coast.

At a quarter to ten, escorted by a body of twelve stalwart men, he
met Isidore at the foot of the road that goes up the cliff.

At ten o'clock exactly, they reached the skirt of wall. It was the
decisive moment.

At ten o'clock exactly.

"Why, what's the matter with you, Beautrelet?" jeered Ganimard.
"You're quite green in the face!"

"It's as well you can't see yourself, Ganimard," the boy retorted.
"One would think your last hour had come!"

They both had to sit down and Ganimard swallowed a few mouthfuls of
rum.

"It's not funk," he said, "but, by Jove, this is an exciting
business! Each time that I'm on the point of catching him, it takes
me like that in the pit of the stomach. A dram of rum?"

"No."

"And if you drop behind?"

"That will mean that I'm dead."

"B-r-r-r-r! However, we'll see. And now, open, sesame! No danger of
our being observed, I suppose?"

"No. The Needle is not so high as the cliff, and, besides, there's a
bend in the ground where we are."

Beautrelet went to the wall and pressed upon the brick. The bolt was
released and the underground passage came in sight.

By the gleam of the lanterns which they lit, they saw that it was
cut in the shape of a vault and that both the vaulting and the floor
itself were entirely covered with bricks.

They walked for a few seconds and, suddenly, a staircase appeared.
Beautrelet counted forty-five brick steps, which the slow action of
many footsteps had worn away in the middle.

"Blow!" said Ganimard, holding his head and stopping suddenly, as
though he had knocked against something.

"What is it?"

"A door."

"Bother!" muttered Beautrelet, looking at it. "And not an easy one
to break down either. It's just a solid block of iron."

"We are done," said Ganimard. "There's not even a lock to it."

"Exactly. That's what gives me hope."

"Why?"

"A door is made to open; and, as this one has no lock, that means
that there is a secret way of opening it."

"And, as we don't know the secret--"

"I shall know it in a minute."

"How?"

"By means of the document. The fourth line has no other object but
to solve each difficulty as and when it crops up. And the solution
is comparatively easy, because it's not written with a view to
throwing searchers off the scent, but to assisting them."

"Comparatively easy! I don't agree with you," cried Ganimard, who
had unfolded the document. "The number 44 and a triangle with a dot
in it: that doesn't tell us much!"

"Yes, yes, it does! Look at the door. You see it's strengthened, at
each corner, with a triangular slab of iron; and the slabs are fixed
with big nails. Take the left-hand bottom slab and work the nail in
the corner: I'll lay ten to one we've hit the mark."

"You've lost your bet," said Ganimard, after trying.

"Then the figure 44 must mean--"

In a low voice, reflecting as he spoke, Beautrelet continued:

"Let me see--Ganimard and I are both standing on the bottom step of
the staircase--there are 45. Why 45, when the figure in the document
is 44? A coincidence? No. In all this business, there is no such
thing as a coincidence, at least not an involuntary one. Ganimard,
be so good as to move one step higher up. That's it, don't leave
this forty-fourth step. And now I will work the iron nail. And the
trick's done, or I'll eat my boots!"

The heavy door turned on its hinges. A fairly spacious cavern
appeared before their eyes.

"We must be exactly under Fort Frefosse," said Beautrelet. "We have
passed through the different earthy layers by now. There will be no
more brick. We are in the heart of the solid limestone."

The room was dimly lit by a shaft of daylight that came from the
other end. Going up to it, they saw that it was a fissure in the
cliff, contrived in a projecting wall and forming a sort of
observatory. In front of them, at a distance of fifty yards, the
impressive mass of the Needle loomed from the waves. On the right,
quite close, was the arched buttress of the Porte d'Aval and, on the
left, very far away, closing the graceful curve of a large inlet,
another rocky gateway, more imposing still, was cut out of the
cliff; the Manneporte, [Footnote: Magna porta.] which was so wide
and tall that a three-master could have passed through it with all
sail set. Behind and everywhere, the sea.

"I don't see our little fleet," said Beautrelet.

"I know," said Ganimard. "The Porte d'Aval hides the whole of the
coast of Etretat and Yport. But look, over there, in the offing,
that black line, level with the water--"

"Well?"

"That's our fleet of war, Torpedo-boat No. 25. With her there, Lupin
is welcome to break loose--if he wants to study the landscape at the
bottom of the sea."

A baluster marked the entrance to the staircase, near the fissure.
They started on their way down. From time to time, a little window
pierced the wall of the cliff; and, each time, they caught sight of
the Needle, whose mass seemed to them to grow more and more
colossal.

A little before reaching high-water level, the windows ceased and
all was dark.

Isidore counted the steps aloud. At the three hundred and fifty-
eight, they emerged into a wider passage, which was barred by
another iron door strengthened with slabs and nails.

"We know all about this," said Beautrelet. "The document gives us
357 and a triangle dotted on the right. We have only to repeat the
performance."

The second door obeyed like the first. A long, a very long tunnel
appeared, lit up at intervals by the gleam of a lantern swung from
the vault. The walls oozed moisture and drops of water fell to the
ground, so that, to make walking easier a regular pavement of planks
had been laid from end to end.

"We are passing under the sea," said Beautrelet. "Are you coming,
Ganimard?"

Without replying, the inspector ventured into the tunnel, followed
the wooden foot-plank and stopped before a lantern, which he took
down.

"The utensils may date back to the Middle Ages, but the lighting is
modern," he said. "Our friends use incandescent mantles."

He continued his way. The tunnel ended in another and a larger cave,
with, on the opposite side, the first steps of a staircase that led
upward.

"It's the ascent of the Needle beginning," said Ganimard. "This is
more serious."

But one of his men called him:

"There's another flight here, sir, on the left."

And, immediately afterward, they discovered a third, on the right.

"The deuce!" muttered the inspector. "This complicates matters. If
we go by this way, they'll make tracks by that."

"Shall we separate?" asked Beautrelet.

"No, no--that would mean weakening ourselves. It would be better for
one of us to go ahead and scout."

"I will, if you like--"

"Very well, Beautrelet, you go. I will remain with my men--then
there will be no fear of anything. There may be other roads through
the cliff than that by which we came and several roads also through
the Needle. But it is certain that, between the cliff and the
Needle, there is no communication except the tunnel. Therefore they
must pass through this cave. And so I shall stay here till you come
back. Go ahead, Beautrelet, and be prudent: at the least alarm,
scoot back again."

Isidore disappeared briskly up the middle staircase. At the
thirtieth step, a door, an ordinary wooden door, stopped him. He
seized the handle turned it. The door was not locked.

He entered a room that seemed to him very low owing to its immense
size. Lit by powerful lamps and supported by squat pillars, with
long vistas showing between them, it had nearly the same dimensions
as the Needle itself. It was crammed with packing cases and
miscellaneous objects--pieces of furniture, oak settees, chests,
credence-tables, strong-boxes--a whole confused heap of the kind
which one sees in the basement of an old curiosity shop.

On his right and left, Beautrelet perceived the wells of two
staircases, the same, no doubt, that started from the cave below. He
could easily have gone down, therefore, and told Ganimard. But a new
flight of stairs led upward in front of him and he had the curiosity
to pursue his investigations alone.

Thirty more steps. A door and then a room, not quite so large as the
last, Beautrelet thought. And again, opposite him, an ascending
flight of stairs.

Thirty steps more. A door. A smaller room.

Beautrelet grasped the plan of the works executed inside the Needle.
It was a series or rooms placed one above the other and, therefore,
gradually decreasing in size. They all served as store-rooms.

In the fourth, there was no lamp. A little light filtered in through
clefts in the walls and Beautrelet saw the sea some thirty feet
below him.

At that moment, he felt himself so far from Ganimard that a certain
anguish began to take hold of him and he had to master his nerves
lest he should take to his heels. No danger threatened him, however,
and the silence around him was even so great that he asked himself
whether the whole Needle had not been abandoned by Lupin and his
confederates.

"I shall not go beyond the next floor," he said to himself.

Thirty stairs again and a door. This door was lighter in
construction and modern in appearance. He pushed it open gently,
quite prepared for flight. There was no one there. But the room
differed from the others in its purpose. There were hangings on the
walls, rugs on the floor. Two magnificent sideboards, laden with
gold and silver plate, stood facing each other. The little windows
contrived in the deep, narrow cleft were furnished with glass panes.

In the middle of the room was a richly-decked table, with a lace-
edged cloth, dishes of fruits and cakes, champagne in decanters and
flowers, heaps of flowers.

Three places were laid around the table.

Beautrelet walked up. On the napkins were cards with the names of
the party. He read first:

"Arsene Lupin."

"Mme. Arsene Lupin."

He took up the third card and started back with surprise. It bore
his own name:

"Isidore Beautrelet!"


CHAPTER TEN

THE TREASURES OF THE KINGS OF FRANCE


A curtain was drawn back.

"Good morning, my dear Beautrelet, you're a little late. Lunch was
fixed for twelve. However, it's only a few minutes--but what's the
matter? Don't you know me? Have I changed so much?"

In the course of his fight with Lupin, Beautrelet had met with many
surprises and he was still prepared, at the moment of the final
catastrophe, to experience any number of further emotions; but the
shock which he received this time was utterly unexpected. It was not
astonishment, but stupefaction, terror. The man who stood before
him, the man whom the brutal force of events compelled him to look
upon as Arsene Lupin, was--Valmeras! Valmeras, the owner of the
Chateau de l'Aiguille! Valmeras, the very man to whom he had applied
for assistance against Arsene Lupin! Valmeras, his companion on the
expedition to Crozant! Valmeras, the plucky friend who had made
Raymonde's escape possible by felling one of Lupin's accomplices, or
pretending to fell him, in the dusk of the great hall! And Valmeras
was Lupin!

"You--you--So it's you!" he stammered.

"Why not?" exclaimed Lupin. "Did you think that you knew me for good
and all because you had seen me in the guise of a clergyman or under
the features of M. Massiban? Alas, when a man selects the position
in society which I occupy, he must needs make use of his little
social gifts! If Lupin were not able to change himself, at will,
into a minister of the Church of England or a member of the Academy
of Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres, it would be a bad lookout for
Lupin! Now Lupin, the real Lupin, is here before you, Beautrelet!
Take a good look at him."

"But then--if it's you--then--Mademoiselle--"

"Yes, Beautrelet, as you say--"

He again drew back the hanging, beckoned and announced:

"Mme. Arsene Lupin."

"Ah," murmured the lad, confounded in spite of everything, "Mlle. de
Saint-Veran!"

"No, no," protested Lupin. "Mme. Arsene Lupin, or rather, if you
prefer, Mme. Louis Valmeras, my wedded wife, married to me in
accordance with the strictest forms of law; and all thanks to you,
my dear Beautrelet."

He held out his hand to him.

"All my acknowledgements--and no ill will on your side, I trust?"

Strange to say, Beautrelet felt no ill will at all, no sense of
humiliation, no bitterness. He realized so strongly the immense
superiority of his adversary that he did not blush at being beaten
by him. He pressed the offered hand.

"Luncheon is served, ma'am."

A butler had placed a tray of dishes on the table.

"You must excuse us, Beautrelet: my chef is away and we can only
give you a cold lunch."

Beautrelet felt very little inclined to eat. He sat down, however,
and was enormously interested in Lupin's attitude. How much exactly
did he know? Was he aware of the danger he was running? Was he
ignorant of the presence of Ganimard and his men?

And Lupin continued:

"Yes, thanks to you, my dear friend. Certainly, Raymonde and I loved
each other from the first. Just so, my boy--Raymonde's abduction,
her imprisonment, were mere humbug: we loved each other. But neither
she nor I, when we were free to love, would allow a casual bond at
the mercy of chance, to be formed between us. The position,
therefore, was hopeless for Lupin. Fortunately, it ceased to be so
if I resumed my identity as the Louis Valmeras that I had been from
a child. It was then that I conceived the idea, as you refused to
relinquish your quest and had found the Chateau de l'Aiguille, of
profiting by your obstinacy."

"And my silliness."

"Pooh! Any one would have been caught as you were!"

"So you were really able to succeed because I screened you and
assisted you?"

"Of course! How could any one suspect Valmeras of being Lupin, when
Valmeras was Beautrelet's friend and after Valmeras had snatched
from Lupin's clutches the girl whom Lupin loved? And how charming it
was! Such delightful memories! The expedition to Crozant! The
bouquets we found! My pretended love letter to Raymonde! And, later,
the precautions which I, Valmeras, had to take against myself,
Lupin, before my marriage! And the night of your great banquet,
Beautrelet, when you fainted in my arms! Oh, what memories!"

There was a pause. Beautrelet watched Raymonde. She had listened to
Lupin without saying a word and looked at him with eyes in which he
read love, passion and something else besides, something which the
lad could not define, a sort of anxious embarrassment and a vague
sadness. But Lupin turned his eyes upon her and she gave him an
affectionate smile. Their hands met over the table.

"What do you say to the way I have arranged my little home,
Beautrelet?" cried Lupin. "There's a style about it, isn't there? I
don't pretend that it's as comfortable as it might be. And yet, some
have been quite satisfied with it; and not the least of mankind,
either!--Look at the list of distinguished people who have owned the
Needle in their time and who thought it an honor to leave a mark of
their sojourn."

On the walls, one below the other, were carved the following names:

JULIUS CAESAR
CHARLEMAGNE ROLLO
WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR
RICHARD COEUR-DE-LEON
LOUIS XI.
FRANCIS I.
HENRY IV.
LOUIS XIV.
ARSENE LUPIN

"Whose name will figure after ours?" he continued. "Alas, the list
is closed! From Caesar to Lupin--and there it ends. Soon the
nameless mob will come to visit the strange citadel. And to think
that, but for Lupin, all this would have remained for ever unknown
to men! Ah Beautrelet, what a feeling of pride was mine on the day
when I first set foot on this abandoned soil. To have found the lost
secret and become its master, its sole master! To inherit such an
inheritance! To live in the Needle, after all those kings!--"

He was interrupted by a gesture of his wife's. She seemed greatly
agitated.

"There is a noise," she said. "Underneath us.--You can hear it."

"It's the lapping of the water," said Lupin.

"No, indeed it's not. I know the sound of the waves. This is
something different."

"What would you have it be, darling?" said Lupin, smiling. "I
invited no one to lunch except Beautrelet." And, addressing the
servant, "Charolais, did you lock the staircase doors behind the
gentleman?"

"Yes, sir, and fastened the bolts."

Lupin rose:

"Come, Raymonde, don't shake like that. Why, you're quite pale!"

He spoke a few words to her in an undertone, as also to the servant,
drew back the curtain and sent them both out of the room.

The noise below grew more distinct. It was a series of dull blows,
repeated at intervals. Beautrelet thought:

"Ganimard has lost patience and is breaking down the doors."

Lupin resumed the thread of his conversation, speaking very calmly
and as though he had really not heard:

"By Jove, the Needle was badly damaged when I succeeded in
discovering it! One could see that no one had possessed the secret
for more than a century, since Louis XVI. and the Revolution. The
tunnel was threatening to fall in. The stairs were in a shocking
state. The water was trickling in from the sea. I had to prop up and
strengthen and rebuild the whole thing."

Beautrelet could not help asking:

"When you arrived, was it empty?"

"Very nearly. The kings did not use the Needle, as I have done, as a
warehouse."

"As a place of refuge, then?"

"Yes, no doubt, in times of invasion and during the civil wars. But
its real destination was to be--how shall I put it?--the strong-room
or the bank of the kings of France."

The sound of blows increased, more distinctly now. Ganimard must
have broken down the first door and was attacking the second. There
was a short silence and then more blows, nearer still. It was the
third door. Two remained.

Through one of the windows, Beautrelet saw a number of fishing-
smacks sailing round the Needle and, not far away, floating on the
waters like a great black fish, the torpedo-boat.

"What a row!" exclaimed Lupin. "One can't hear one's self speak!
Let's go upstairs, shall we? It may interest you to look over the
Needle."

They climbed to the floor above, which was protected, like the
others, by a door which Lupin locked behind him.

"My picture gallery," he said.

The walls were covered with canvases on which Beautrelet recognized
the most famous signatures. There were Raphael's Madonna of the
Agnus Dei, Andrea del Sarto's Portrait of Lucrezia Fede, Titian's
Salome, Botticelli's Madonna and Angels and numbers of Tintorettos,
Carpaccios, Rembrandts, Velasquez.

"What fine copies!" said Beautrelet, approvingly.

Lupin looked at him with an air of stupefaction:

"What! Copies! You must be mad! The copies are in Madrid, my dear
fellow, in Florence, Venice, Munich, Amsterdam."

"Then these--"

"Are the original pictures, my lad, patiently collected in all the
museums of Europe, where I have replaced them, like an honest man,
with first-rate copies."

"But some day or other--"

"Some day or other, the fraud will be discovered? Well, they will
find my signature on each canvas--at the back--and they will know
that it was I who have endowed my country with the original
masterpieces. After all, I have only done what Napoleon did in
Italy.--Oh, look, Beautrelet: here are M. de Gesvres's four
Rubenses!--"

The knocking continued within the hollow of the Needle without
ceasing.

"I can't stand this!" said Lupin. "Let's go higher."

A fresh staircase. Black precipitous rocks in vertical strata, splitting into long
slabs and blocks, were to be seen along the mountain range to the
South.

We had made another double march on that day, and reached Mall in
the middle of the night.

Padag to Kuchaki Chah, 13 miles, 756 yards; Kuchaki Chah to Mall, 15
miles, 1,154 yards. Total, 29 miles, 150 yards.

It was freezing hard, thermometer 28° Fahrenheit, and the wind
bitterly cold.

My men felt it very much and so did my camels, which all became
ill.

We left Mall again very early the following morning, as I
intended to proceed direct to Nushki.

There were two tracks here to Nushki, the old and the new.

The old track went in a straight line and was in consequence some miles
shorter; the new track more or less follows the foot of the mountain
range, probably taking this course for the convenience of the several
Beluch villages to be found in the Nushki plain.

The rocky mountain range to the south got lower as we approached
Nushki, and was then crossed by another low range extending from
north to south while the longer and higher range stretched from
north-north-east to south-south-west.

A few miles from Nushki we came across some most peculiar and very
deep cracks in the earth's crust. One could plainly see that they
were not caused by the erosion of water, but by a commotion such
as an earthquake.

In fact, we came, soon after, to a place where the whole sandy plateau
had actually collapsed, and when we stood on the edge of the portion
which still remained unchanged, we could see it end abruptly in
perpendicular cliffs.

What was the evident continuation of the valley lay now some
hundred or more feet below its former level. In this lower valley
there were a number of Beluch villages.

This crack and depression extends for no less than 120 miles, according
to Major MacMahon, who in 1896 went, I believe, along its entire
length into Afghan territory, and he describes it as "a well-defined,
broad line of deep indentations, in places as clearly defined
as a deep railway cutting. Springs of water are to be found along its
course. The crack extends north from Nushki along the foot of the
Sarlat range, and then diagonally across the Khwajah Amran range,
cutting the crest of the main range near its highest peak and crossing
the Lora River. A well-marked indentation was traceable at the edge
of the plain near Murghachaman, some 18 miles north of Chaman."

MacMahon states that the Beluch themselves attribute it to three
different earthquakes, of which accounts have been handed down
by their fathers, and at the time of which deep fissures appeared
that have subsequently extended. Major MacMahon adds that this crack
marks the line of a gigantic geological fault, with sedimentary rocks
to the east of it and igneous rocks to the west, and he believes,
rightly, I think, that the length of this fault line exceeds that
of any other fault line yet discovered.

On the upper plateau on which we travelled tamarisks altogether
disappeared for the last twenty miles or so, and _tagaz_ shrubs,
varying from one to six feet high, were practically the only plant
we saw.

In the underlying plain tamarisk was most plentiful.

Facing us on the mountain side a white cliff could be seen from a
a long distance, with a most regular row of double black marks which
looked exactly like windows.

On approaching Nushki we saw some patches of cultivation (wheat)--quite
a novelty to us, being the first crops of any extent we had seen
since leaving Sistan--and near at hand an old Beluch fort, of which
a photograph is given in the illustration.

The fort possessed a picturesque composite old tower, partly
quadrangular, partly cylindrical.

We reached Nushki at night (31 miles, 1,320 yards from Mall).

CHAPTER XXXIX
A new city--The Bungalow--Numerous Beluch villages--Nomads--Beluch
architecture--Weaving looms--Implements--Beluch diet--Cave dwellers
of Nushki--Beluch dress--Children--The salaam of the chiefs--An
impressive sight--The Kwajah Mahommed Ziarat--Shah Hussein's Ziarat
and its legend--A convenient geographical site.

On arriving at this new city, with actual streets and people
moving about in them, shops, etc., it seemed to me at first almost
as good as if I had arrived back in London again.

The Bungalow, on a prominent hill 75 feet above the plain, was simply
and nicely furnished, and was most comfortable in every way. From
it one obtained a fine panoramic view of the small town and the
neighbouring country with the many Beluch villages scattered
about.

North, two miles off, was Mengal, a village of about 300 houses and
1,500 people; west lay Jumaldini (2½ miles distant), 200 houses,
6-700 inhabitants; north-west, Badini in two blocks, one belonging
to Alun Khan, the other jointly to Khaian Khan and Adal Khan: 200
houses collectively, 400 to 500 people.

Little Badal Khan Karez, with only 30 houses, stood to the south-west.

The population of these villages is formed of the tribes called
_Barechis_ and _Rashkhanis_, the people of Badini and Jumaldini being
entirely Rashkhanis. The Barechis formerly inhabited Afghanistan,
but migrated to the Nushki district three generations ago.

Bagag (south-west) is a village generally inhabited by Mandais, a
branch of the Jumaldini Rashkhanis.

Two big villages are to be found south, and they are called
_Batto_, which means "mixture," owing to the populations being
composed of Rashkhanis, Mingals, Samalaris, Kharanis, and other
minor tribes; and south of Batto are two more villages (east and
west respectively of each other).

The one east is Harunis, a separate tribe from either the Rashkhanis
and the Mingals, who follow the head chief Rind. The second
village (west) is Ahmed Val, inhabited by Ahmed Zai Mingals.
Besides these villages, the remainder of the population is of
nomads.

It may have been noticed that regarding the village of Bagag I
said that "generally" it was inhabited by Mandais. Certain villages
are inhabited by certain tribes during the summer, the people
migrating for the winter months, and other tribes come in for the
winter and vacate their quarters in the summer.

The Beluch is not much burdened with furniture and can do this
without inconvenience.

The crops grown consist of wheat, barley and _jowari_ (millet).
Where good grazing is obtainable the younger folks are sent out with
sheep, horses and camels.

Almost each tribe has a different style of architecture for its
dwellings. Those near Nushki are usually rectangular in shape, domed
over with matting covered with plaster.

The only opening is the door, with a small porch over it. Wooden
pillars are necessary to support the central portion of the dome
(semi-cylindrical), which is never higher than from five to eight
feet.

The mangers for the horses, which form an annexe to each dwelling--in
fact, these mangers are more prominent than the dwellings
themselves--are cylindrical mud structures eight or nine feet high,
with a hole cut into them on one side to allow the horse's head to
get at the barley contained in the hollowed lower portion.

[Illustration: Beluch Huts and Weaving Loom.]
[Illustration: Cave Dwellers, Nushki.]
The weaving looms are the largest and principal articles of furniture
one notices--not inside, but outside the houses.

The illustration shows how the cloth and threads are kept in
tension, from every side, in a primitive but most effective manner.
The women work with extraordinary rapidity and with no pattern before
them, beating each transverse thread home by means of an iron comb
held in the hand.

The pattern on the cloths is of a primitive kind, generally sets
of parallel lines crossing one another at right angles.

In the same photograph two Beluch dwellings can be seen, with matting
showing through the thatch. In many villages, however, the walls
of the houses are made of sun-dried bricks, and only the roof is
made of a mat plastered over with mud. In either case the Beluch
seems to have a liking for crawling rather than walking into his
house, for the doorway is invariably very low--4½ to 5 feet high.

One is generally sorry to peep into a Beluch dwelling, but
I felt it a sort of duty to see what there was to be seen.
Nothing! or almost nothing. A large wooden bowl, a stone grinding
wheel with a wooden handle to grind wheat into flour, a wooden
drinking cup or an occasional tin enamelled one, of foreign
importation, a matchlock, and that was all. In some of the smarter
dwellings, such as the houses of chiefs, a few additional articles
were to be found, such as a _badni_--a sort of jar for taking water--flat
stones which are made red hot for baking bread, some occasional
big brass dishes--_tash_--used on grand occasions--such as wedding
dinners; and a _deg_ or two or large brass pots.

Nearly every household, however, possesses one or more _khwa_ or
skins for water, and a large _kasa_, made either of metal or wood,
into which broth is poured during meals.

Occasionally in a corner of the hut a small table is to be seen,
on which are placed all the family's clothing, blankets, _darris_
or carpets, and _lihaf_ or mattresses.

These carpets, or rather rugs, are generally spread when receiving
an honoured guest.

The Beluch diet is wholesome but simple. They are fond of plenty
of meat when they can get it, which is not often, and they generally
have to be satisfied with dry bread.

The woman who can make the largest and thinnest bread is much
honoured among the Beluch.

When they do obtain meat it is generally boiled and made into a
soup called _be-dir_, which in the Brahui language really means
"salt water," to express "flavoured water."

Milk and _ghi_ are dainties seldom indulged in and, being Mussulmans,
the Beluch imbibe no intoxicants, but are smokers of strong bitter
tobacco.

It is not uncommon for lambs, sheep and calves to share the homes
and some of the meals of their masters.

Perhaps the most peculiar folks at Nushki are the cave dwellers,
who live in abject misery in holes eroded by water in the cliffs
near the river.
When I visited them most were half-naked and trembling with cold.

A few rags answered the purpose of blankets.

The only articles of furniture and comfort were a primitive pipe
moulded out of mud--the _chilam_ or the _gaddu_ as it is called by
the Kakars--which occupied a prominent place in the dwelling, and
a musical instrument placed in a receptacle in the wall of the cave.

At the entrance of the cave a wall had been built for protection
against the wind and water.

In another dwelling an _assah_ or long iron rod, like a crutch, the
emblem of fakirs, was noticeable, and by its side an empty
"potted-tongue" tin with a wire attached to it--an article which
was made to answer to a great many uses.

This cave had a small store place for food, a drinking cup, and the
wooden vessel--another emblem of fakirs--in which charitable people
deposit money for the support of these poor wretches.

The dress of the better class Beluch men consists of a _khuss_,
or sort of loose shirt reaching below the knees, and the enormous
trousers falling in ample folds, but fitting tight at the ankle. At
an angle on the head they wear a conical padded cap, embroidered in
gold or silver, inside a great turban of white muslin. They also wear
shawls or long scarves thrown over the shoulders in a fashion not
unlike our Highlanders.

Either shoes with turned-up toes are worn or else sandals.
Felt coats or sheep-skins are donned in winter, while the richer
people wear handsome coats and waistcoats of cloth embroidered in
gold or silver.

   The chiefs possess most beautiful and expensive
   clothes.
   
   The women of the poorer classes are garbed in a
   short petticoat, usually red or blue, and a loose shirt.

A long cloth, not unlike a chudder, is thrown over the head, and
is kept tight round the forehead by a band.

It is fashionable to let it drag on the ground behind. Women generally
go about barefooted.

Better class ladies wear similar clothes but of better material,
and often richly embroidered.

Occasionally they put on large trousers like Persian women.

The hair is either left to flow loose at the sides of the head,
or is tied into a knot behind.

Necklaces, ear-rings, nose-rings, bracelets and armlets are worn;
white shells of all sizes from the Persian Gulf, as well as glass
beads, playing a very important part in women's ornaments.
Bracelets cut out of a large white sea-shell are common.

Beluch children are rather quaint, with little skull caps, much
decorated with silver coins, one of which larger than the others
hangs directly over the forehead.

The poor little mites are further burdened with ear-rings, bracelets
and heavy necklaces of glass beads. Mothers seem tenderly fond of
their children.

I was much delighted on the morning of January 29th to find that
all the chiefs of the neighbouring tribes, garbed in their
gaudy robes, had come with their retinues to pay their salaams to
me.

I heard the buzzing noise of a crowd approaching up the hill, and
on looking out of the bungalow window beheld a most picturesque
sight.

A tall, long-haired figure in a brilliant long gown of red velvet,
with gold embroideries in front and back, walked slowly a-head,
followed by a cluster of venerable old men, some in long yellow
skin _poshteens_, others in smart waistcoats covered with gold and
silver embroidery.

All wore huge turbans with gold embroidered conical caps inside.

Behind them came a mass of armed men with swords and rifles.

On reaching the bungalow, fearing that I should still be asleep,
they became silent, and as I watched them unseen from behind
the blinds I do not believe that I have ever in my life gazed upon
such a fine, dignified, manly lot of fellows anywhere. They seated
themselves in a perfect circle, some twenty yards in diameter, directly
outside the bungalow, carpets having been spread where the chiefs
were to be accommodated.

The chiefs sat together, and the soldiers and followers--over
150--with guns, matchlocks and Snider rifles, squatted down in two
semicircles at their sides.

An opening was left large enough for me to enter the ring, and
when I approached all respectfully rose and salaamed, and the chiefs,
coming forward in turn, shook me heartily by the hand with the usual
long Beluch salutation, each bowing low as he did so. Sitting in
the centre of the circle on a carpet, which had been spread for
me, I addressed them in a few words, which they seemed to appreciate,
and each chief answered back in a simple, straightforward and most
thoughtful, gentlemanly manner.

Mahommed Ali, the leading chief, in a red velvet coat, was the Mingal
Sardar of the three powerful tribes, Jumaldini, Badini, and Mingal,
and by his side sat Kaim Khan with his shield and sword, the second
Sardar of the neighbourhood and brother of the Jumaldini Sardar.

Jan Beg, who sat on the left hand side of the chief Sardar, was a thin
tall man, and Alam Khan, a splendid old fellow with a fine inlaid
sword, can be seen standing in the photograph reproduced in the
illustration.

The last of the principal five Badini chiefs was a comparatively
young man of black complexion, long jet black curly hair, and
garbed in a gaudy poshteen, sword and belt.

His name was Kasin Khan.

Then there was Kadar Bakhsh, uncle of the present Mingal Sardar, a
man most useful to the British Government, and beside him his brother,
Attar Khan.

Gauher Khan, nephew of the Mingal Sardar, was a picturesque young
man with heavily embroidered black coat and a black turban.

He carried his sword in his hand.

As one looked round the circle it was really a most impressive and
picturesque sight--colours of all sorts dazzling in the sunlight.

Among the other most important men were Adal Khan (cousin of the
Badini chief), a very old fellow, curved from age; and Bai Khan,
his cousin, who looked somewhat stronger; Kaiser Khan, a
smart young fellow with curly hair, black coat and trousers,
was the son of the Jumaldini chief, and a young fellow of weak
constitution, by name Abdullah Aziz, was son and heir of the Badini
Sardar.

[Illustration: A Badini Sardar.]
[Illustration: The Salaam of the Beluch Sardars at Nushki.

(Sardar Alam Khan standing.)]
Sherdil and Mehrullah Khan, with elaborately embroidered coats and
Snider rifles, sat among the elect, and the others were soldiers
and followers, but a fine lot of fellows indeed, all the same.

When the formal reception broke up I showed them my repeating
rifles, revolvers and various instruments, which interested them
greatly; and the leading chiefs having been entertained to tea,
they eventually departed after repeated salaams.

Although the Beluch and the Afghan shake hands on arrival, they
seldom do so on departing, the handshake being for them an outward
sign to express the joy of seeing a friend.

On surveying the neighbourhood from our high point of vantage at the
bungalow, we found plenty to interest the observer. To the north and
north-west directly below the hill could be seen a graveyard in two
sections, the tombs being very high above ground, with prismatic
tops of white stones, whereas the bases were of black pebbles.

The tombs in the graveyard to the north-west were in bad preservation.
There was at this spot a well known Ziarat called Kwajah Mahommed,
and the British Government has given much pleasure to the natives
by sanctioning a "mufi" or remission of revenue for ever of all the
land belonging to this Ziarat in order to provide for the support of
it.

The people of the district are extremely religious, and they have
erected Mesjids and Ziarats on every possible hill in the
neighbourhood.

The most interesting is the Shah-Hussein Ziarat, which has a curious
legend of its own. They say, that when the Arabs attacked Shah-Hussein,
he killed all his enemies by merely praying to God. With their heads,
which suddenly turned into solid stone, he built the Ziarat. The tomb
is made, in fact, of round stones, some of enormous size, evidently
worn into that shape by water, but the natives firmly believe
that they are petrified heads of Arabs!

Nushki is most conveniently situated in a large valley with mountains
sheltering it from the north, north-east, east, south-east, south,
south-south-west, but from south-south-west to north there is a
stretch of open flat desert (the _Registan_, or "country of sand")
as far as the eye can see.

To the south of the bungalow is a hill range stretching from
north-north-east to south-south-west, and suddenly broken by the
valley, through which runs the stream which, then proceeding along
the Nushki plain from east to west, turns in a graceful curve round
the western side of the hill on which the bungalow is situated, and
proceeds across the desert in a north-north-west direction, where,
having supplied several villages and irrigated their fields, it
eventually exhausts itself in the desert.

A broad river bed can be noticed on the east side of and parallel with
the above hill range.

The east side of these hills has been much worn by water action;
so much so that actual holes and caves in the soft strata of sand
and gravel have been corroded by the water, and these holes, as we
have seen, are now inhabited by destitute Beluch.

CHAPTER XL

The fast growing city of Nushki--The Tashil--the Tashildar--Beluch
law--Hospital--Pneumonia and consumption--Lawn tennis--The Nushki
Bazaar--Satisfactory trade returns--The projected Quetta-Nushki
Railway--A great future for Nushki--An extension to Sistan
necessary--Also a telegraph--Preferable routes for a railway to
Sistan--From Nushki to Kishingi--A curious Mesjid--Mudonek Ateng
Mountain--A fast of twenty-five days--The Chiltan and Takatu Mts.

--The Gurghena tribe--Huts and tents--Beluch hospitality--Villages.

Let us take a walk through the fast growing city of Nushki. Half a
dozen years ago there was next to nothing here, but now we have a
beautiful _Tashil_--a large walled enclosure, with a portico all
round inside and circular towers at the four corners.

The actual Tashil office, occupying the north-east corner, has a
most business-like appearance, with handsome iron despatch-boxes,
clocks that mark each a different time, but look most imposing all
the same, and folio-documents folded in two and carefully arranged
in piles upon the floor by the side of wise-looking clerks squatting
in their midst.

The Tashildar himself, Sardar Mahommed Yuzaf Khan Popalzai, is a
much respected man of Afghan birth, of the Bamezi Popalzai Durranis,
or descendants of the tribe reigning in Cabul before Mahommed Zeis
took the throne, when his ancestors and the Saddo Zeis were forcibly
banished from the country.

[Illustration: The New City of Nushki. (overlooking the Tashil
Buildings.)]
The Tashildar, a most intelligent officer, seems to understand the
Beluch chiefs thoroughly, treats them with extreme consideration--in
private life dealing with them as honoured guests, and politically
as Government subjects who must adhere to their loyalty to the King.

There are also within the Tashil wall a post and telegraph office
and a treasury, a neat little red brick building, with strong iron
gates and huge padlocks.
And, suddenly, a shadow glided over
their heads.

"The attack is about to take place. The fleet is investing the
Needle. But, hollow as the Needle is, I don't see how they propose
to enter it."

He took up the speaking tube:

"Don't leave the bottom, Charolais. Where are we going? Why, I told
you: to Port-Lupin. And at full speed, do you hear? We want water to
land by--there's a lady with us."

They skimmed over the rocky bed. The seaweed stood up on end like a
heavy, dark vegetation and the deep currents made it wave
gracefully, stretching and billowing like floating hair.

Another shadow, a longer one.

"That's the torpedo-boat," said Lupin. "We shall hear the roar of
the guns presently. What will Duguay-Trouin do? Bombard the Needle?
Think of what we're missing, Beautrelet, by not being present at the
meeting of Duguay-Trouin and Ganimard! The juncture of the land and
naval forces! Hi, Charolais, don't go to sleep, my man!"

They were moving very fast, for all that. The rocks had been
succeeded by sand-fields and then, almost at once, they saw more
rocks, which marked the eastern extremity of Etretat, the Porte
d'Amont. Fish fled at their approach. One of them, bolder than the
rest, fastened on to a porthole and looked at the occupants of the
saloon with its great, fixed, staring eyes.

"That's better," cried Lupin. "We're going now. What do you think of
my cockle-shell, Beautrelet? Not so bad, is she? Do you remember the
story of the Seven of Hearts, [Footnote: The Exploits of Arsene
Lupin. By Maurice Leblanc. VI: The Seven of Hearts.] the wretched
end of Lacombe, the engineer, and how, after punishing his
murderers, I presented the State with his papers and his plans for
the construction of a new submarine: one more gift to France? Well,
among the plans, I kept those of a submersible motor boat and that
is how you come to have the honor of sailing in my company."

He called to Charolais:

"Take us up, Charolais--there's no danger now--"

They shot up to the surface and the glass skylight emerged above the
water.

They were a mile from the coast, out of sight, therefore, and
Beautrelet was now able to realize more fully at what a headlong
pace they were traveling. First Fecamp passed before them, then all
the Norman seaside places: Saint-Pierre, the Petits--Dalles,
Veulettes, Saint-Valery, Veules, Quiberville. Lupin kept on jesting
and Isidore never wearied of watching and listening to him, amazed
as he was at the man's spirits, at his gaiety, his mischievous ways,
his careless chaff, his delight in life.

He also noticed Raymonde. The young woman sat silent, nestling up
against the man she loved. She had taken his hands between her own
and kept on raising her eyes to him; and Beautrelet constantly
observed that her hands were twitching and that the wistful sadness
of her eyes increased. And, each time, it was like a dumb and
sorrowful reply to Lupin's sallies. One would have thought that his
frivolous words, his sarcastic outlook on life, caused her physical
pain.

"Hush!" she whispered. "It's defying destiny to laugh--so many
misfortunes can reach us still!"

Opposite Dieppe, they had to dive lest they should be seen by the
fishing-craft. And twenty minutes later, they shot at an angle
toward the coast and the boat entered a little submarine harbor
formed by a regular gap between the rocks, drew up beside a jetty
and rose gently to the surface.

Lupin announced:

"Port-Lupin!"

The spot, situated at sixteen miles from Dieppe and twelve from the
Treport and protected, moreover, by the two landslips of cliff, was
absolutely deserted. A fine sand carpeted the rounded slope of the
tiny beach.

"Jump on shore, Beautrelet--Raymonde, give me your hand. You,
Charolais, go back to the Needle, see what happens between Ganimard
and Duguay-Trouin and come back and tell me at the end of the day.
The thing interests me tremendously."

Beautrelet asked himself with a certain curiosity how they were
going to get out of this hemmed-in creek which was called Port-
Lupin, when, at the foot of the cliff, he saw the uprights of an
iron ladder.

"Isidore," said Lupin, "if you knew your geography and your history,
you would know that we are at the bottom of the gorge of Parfonval,
in the parish of Biville. More than a century ago, on the night of
the twenty-third of August, 1803, Georges Cadoudal and six
accomplices, who had landed in France with the intention of
kidnapping the first consul, Bonaparte, scrambled up to the top by
the road which I will show you. Since then, this road has been
demolished by landslips. But Louis Valmeras, better known by the
name of Arsene Lupin, had it restored at his own expense and bought
the farm of the Neuvillette, where the conspirators spent the first
night and where, retired from business and withdrawing from the
affairs of this world, he means to lead the life of a respectable
country squire with his wife and his mother by his side. The
gentleman-burglar is dead! Long live the gentleman-farmer!"

After the ladder came a sort of gully, an abrupt ravine hollowed
out, apparently, by the rains, at the end of which they laid hold of
a makeshift staircase furnished with a hand-rail. As Lupin
explained, this hand-rail had been placed where it was in the stead
of the estamperche, a long rope fastened to stakes, by which the
people of the country, in the old days, used to help themselves down
when going to the beach.

After a painful climb of half an hour, they emerged on the
tableland, not far from one of those little cabins, dug out of the
soil itself, which serve as shelters for the excisemen. And, as it
happened, two minutes later, at a turn in the path, one of these
custom-house officials appeared.

He drew himself up and saluted.

Lupin asked:

"Any news, Gomel?"

"No, governor."

"You've met no one at all suspicious-looking?"

"No, governor--only--"

"What?"

"My wife--who does dressmaking at the Neuvillette--"

"Yes, I know--Cesarine--my mother spoke of her. Well?"

"It seems a sailor was prowling about the village this morning."

"What sort of face had he?"

"Not a natural face--a sort of Englishman's face."

"Ah!" said Lupin, in a tone preoccupied. "And you have given
Cesarine orders--"

"To keep her eyes open. Yes, governor."

"Very well. Keep a lookout for Charolais's return in two or three
hours from now. If there's anything, I shall be at the farm."

He walked on and said to Beautrelet:

"This makes me uneasy--is it Shears? Ah, if it's he, in his present
state of exasperation, I have everything to fear!"

He hesitated a moment: "I wonder if we hadn't better turn back. Yes,
I have a nasty presentiment of evil."

Gently undulating plains stretched before them as far as the eye
could see. A little to the left, a series of handsome avenues of
trees led to the farm of the Neuvillette, the buildings of which
were now in view. It was the retreat which he had prepared, the
haven of rest which he had promised Raymonde. Was he, for the sake
of an absurd idea, to renounce happiness at the very moment when it
seemed within his reach?

He took Isidore by the arm and, calling his attention to Raymonde,
who was walking in front of them:

"Look at her. When she walks, her figure has a little swing at the
waist which I cannot see without quivering. But everything in her
gives me that thrill of emotion and love: her movements and her
repose, her silence and the sound of her voice. I tell you, the mere
fact that I am walking in the track of her footsteps makes me feel
in the seventh heaven. Ah, Beautrelet, will she ever forget that I
was once Lupin? Shall I ever be able to wipe out from her memory the
past which she loathes and detests?" He mastered himself and, with
obstinate assurance. "She will forget!" he declared. "She will
forget, because I have made every sacrifice for her sake. I have
sacrificed the inviolable sanctuary of the Hollow Needle, I have
sacrificed my treasures, my power, my pride--I will sacrifice
everything--I don't want to be anything more--but just a man in
love--and an honest man, because she can only love an honest man.
After all, why should I not be honest? It is no more degrading than
anything else!"

The quip escaped him, so to speak, unawares. His voice remained
serious and free of all chaff. And he muttered, with restrained
violence:

"Ah, Beautrelet, you see, of all the unbridled joys which I have
tasted in my adventurous life, there is not one that equals the joy
with which her look fills me when she is pleased with me. I feel
quite weak then, and I should like to cry--" Was he crying?
Beautrelet had an intuition that his eyes were wet with tears. Tears
in Lupin's eyes!--Tears of love!

They were nearing an old gate that served as an entrance to the
farm. Lupin stopped for a moment and stammered:

"Why am I afraid?--I feel a sort of weight on my chest. Is the
adventure of the Hollow Needle not over? Has destiny not accepted
the issue which I selected?"

Raymonde turned round, looking very anxious.

"Here comes Cesarine. She's running."

The exciseman's wife was hurrying from the farm as fast as she
could. Lupin rushed up to her:

"What is it? What has happened? Speak!"

Choking, quite out of breath, Cesarine stuttered:

"A man--I saw a man this morning!

"A man--I saw a man in the sitting-room."

"The Englishman of this morning?"

"Yes--but in a different disguise."

"Did he see you?"

"No. He saw your mother. Mme. Valmeras caught him as he was just
going away."

"Well?"

"He told her that he was looking for Louis Valmeras, that he was a
friend of yours."

"Then?"

"The madame said that her son had gone abroad--for years."

"And he went away?"

"No, he made signs through the window that overlooks the plain--as
if he were calling to some one."

Lupin seemed to hesitate. A loud cry tore the air. Raymonde moaned:

"It's your mother--I recognize--"

He flung himself upon her and, dragging her away, in a burst of
fierce passion:

"Come--let us fly--you first."

But, suddenly, he stopped, distraught, overcome:

"No, I can't do it--it's too awful. Forgive me--Raymonde--that poor
woman down there--Stay here. Beautrelet, don't leave her."

He darted along the slope that surrounds the farm, turned and
followed it, at a run, till he came to the gate that opens on the
plain.

Raymonde, whom Beautrelet had been unable to hold back, arrived
almost as soon as he did; and Beautrelet, hiding behind the trees,
saw, in the lonely walk that led from the farm to the gate, three
men, of whom one, the tallest, went ahead, while the two others were
holding by the arms a woman who tried to resist and who uttered
moans of pain.

The daylight was beginning to fade. Nevertheless, Beautrelet
recognized Holmlock Shears. The woman seemed of a certain age. Her
livid features were set in a frame of white hair.

They all four came up.

They reached the gate. Shears opened one of the folding leaves.

Then Lupin strode forward and stood in front of him.

The encounter appeared all the more terrible inasmuch as it was
silent, almost solemn.

For long moments, the two enemies took each other's measure with
their eyes. An equal hatred distorted the features of both of them.
Neither moved.

Then Lupin spoke, in a voice of terrifying calmness:

"Tell your men to leave that woman alone."

"No."

It was as though both of them feared to engage in the supreme
struggle, as though both were collecting all their strength. And
there were no words wasted this time, no insults, no bantering
challenges. Silence, a deathlike silence.

Mad with anguish, Raymonde awaited the issue of the duel. Beautrelet
had caught her arms and was holding her motionless.

After a second, Lupin repeated:

"Order your men to leave that woman alone."

"No."

Lupin said:

"Listen, Shears--"

But he interrupted himself, realizing the silliness of the words. In
the face of that colossus of pride and will-power which called
itself Holmlock Shears, of what use were threats?

Resolved upon the worst, suddenly he put his hand to his jacket
pocket. The Englishman anticipated his movement and, leaping upon
his prisoner, thrust the barrel of his revolver within two inches of
her temple:

"If you stir a limb, I fire!"

At the same time his two satellites drew their weapons and aimed
them at Lupin.

Lupin drew himself up, stifled the rage within him and, coolly, with
his hands in his pockets and his breast exposed to the enemy, began
once more:

"Shears, for the third time, let that woman be--"

The Englishman sneered:

"I have no right to touch her, I suppose? Come, come, enough of this
humbug! Your name isn't Valmeras any more than it's Lupin: you stole
the name just as you stole the name of Charmerace. And the woman
whom you pass off as your mother is Victoire, your old accomplice,
the one who brought you up--" [FOOTNOTE: Arsene Lupin, play in four
acts, by Maurice Leblanc and Francis de Croisset.]

Shears made a mistake. Carried away by his longing for revenge, he
glanced across at Raymonde, whom these revelations filled with
horror. Lupin took advantage of his imprudence. With a sudden
movement, he fired.

"Damnation!" bellowed Shears, whose arm, pierced by a bullet, fell
to his side. And, addressing his men, "Shoot, you two! Shoot him
down!"

But already Lupin was upon them: and not two seconds had elapsed
before the one on the right was sprawling on the ground, with his
chest smashed, while the other, with his jaw broken, fell back
against the gate.

"Hurry up, Victoire. Tie them down. And now, Mr. Englishman, it's
you and I."

He ducked with an oath:

"Ah, you scoundrel!"

Shears had picked up his revolver with his left hand and was taking
aim at him.

A shot--a cry of distress--Raymonde had flung herself between the
two men, facing the Englishman. She staggered back, brought her hand
to her neck, drew herself up, spun round on her heels and fell at
Lupin's feet.

"Raymonde!--Raymonde!"

He threw himself upon her, took her in his arms and pressed her to
him.

"Dead--" he said.

There was a moment of stupefaction. Shears seemed confounded by his
own act. Victoire stammered:

"My poor boy--my poor boy--"

Beautrelet went up to the young woman and stooped to examine her.
Lupin repeated:

"Dead--dead--"

He said it in a reflective tone, as though he did not yet
understand. But his face became hollow, suddenly transformed,
ravaged by grief. And then he was seized with a sort of madness,
made senseless gestures, wrung his hands, stamped his feet, like a
child that suffers more than it is able to bear.

"You villain!" he cried, suddenly, in an access of hatred.

And, flinging Shears back with a formidable blow, he took him by the
throat and dug his twitching fingers into his flesh.

The Englishman gasped, without even struggling.

"My boy--my boy--" said Victoire, in a voice of entreaty.

Beautrelet ran up. But Lupin had already let go and stood sobbing
beside his enemy stretched upon the ground.

O pitiful sight! Beautrelet never forgot its tragic horror, he who
knew all Lupin's love for Raymonde and all that the great adventurer
had sacrificed of his own being to bring a smile to the face of his
well-beloved.

Night began to cover the field of battle with a shroud of darkness.
The three Englishmen lay bound and gagged in the tall grass. Distant
songs broke the vast silence of the plain. It was the farm-hands
returning from their work.

Lupin drew himself up. He listened to the monotonous voices. Then he
glanced at the happy homestead of the Neuvillette, where he had
hoped to live peacefully with Raymonde. Then he looked at her, the
poor, loving victim, whom love had killed and who, all white, was
sleeping her last, eternal sleep.

Odo walked on, listening, and again he heard the step, and again
turned to find himself alone.

He tried to fancy that his ear had tricked him; but he knew too
much of the subtle methods of Italian espionage not to feel a secret
uneasiness.

"Good-bye, Beautrelet," he said.

And, bearing his precious and awful burden followed by his old
servant, silent and fierce he turned toward the sea and plunged into
the darkness of the night.

THE END