Transcribed by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk


THE BOOK OF DREAMS AND GHOSTS


PREFACE TO THE NEW IMPRESSION


Since the first edition of this book appeared (1897) a considerable
number of new and startling ghost stories, British, Foreign and
Colonial, not yet published, have reached me.  Second Sight abounds.
Crystal Gazing has also advanced in popularity.  For a singular series
of such visions, in which distant persons and places, unknown to the
gazer, were correctly described by her, I may refer to my book, The
Making of Religion (1898).  A memorial stone has been erected on the
scene of the story called "The Foul Fords" (p. 269), so that tale is
likely to endure in tradition.

July, 1899.


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


The chief purpose of this book is, if fortune helps, to entertain
people interested in the kind of narratives here collected.  For the
sake of orderly arrangement, the stories are classed in different
grades, as they advance from the normal and familiar to the undeniably
startling.  At the same time an account of the current theories of
Apparitions is offered, in language as free from technicalities as
possible.  According to modern opinion every "ghost" is a
"hallucination," a false perception, the perception of something which
is not present.

It has not been thought necessary to discuss the psychological and
physiological processes involved in perception, real or false.  Every
"hallucination" is a perception, "as good and true a sensation as if
there were a real object there.  The object happens _not_ to be there,
that is all." {0a}  We are not here concerned with the visions of
insanity, delirium, drugs, drink, remorse, or anxiety, but with
"sporadic cases of hallucination, visiting people only once in a
lifetime, which seems to be by far the most frequent type".  "These,"
says Mr. James, "are on any theory hard to understand in detail.  They
are often extraordinarily complete; and the fact that many of them are
reported as _veridical_, that is, as coinciding with real events, such
as accidents, deaths, etc., of the persons seen, is an additional
complication of the phenomenon." {0b}  A ghost, if seen, is undeniably
so far a "hallucination" that it gives the impression of the presence
of a real person, in flesh, blood, and usually clothes.  No such
person in flesh, blood, and clothes, is actually there.  So far, at
least, every ghost is a hallucination, "_that_" in the language of
Captain Cuttle, "you may lay to," without offending science, religion,
or common-sense.  And that, in brief, is the modern doctrine of
ghosts.

The old doctrine of "ghosts" regarded them as actual "spirits" of the
living or the dead, freed from the flesh or from the grave.  This
view, whatever else may be said for it, represents the simple
philosophy of the savage, which may be correct or erroneous.  About
the time of the Reformation, writers, especially Protestant writers,
preferred to look on apparitions as the work of deceitful devils, who
masqueraded in the aspect of the dead or living, or made up phantasms
out of "compressed air".  The common-sense of the eighteenth century
dismissed all apparitions as "dreams" or hoaxes, or illusions caused
by real objects misinterpreted, such as rats, cats, white posts,
maniacs at large, sleep-walkers, thieves, and so forth.  Modern
science, when it admits the possibility of occasional hallucinations
in the sane and healthy, also admits, of course, the existence of
apparitions.  These, for our purposes, are hallucinatory appearances
occurring in the experience of people healthy and sane.  The
difficulty begins when we ask whether these appearances ever have any
provoking mental cause outside the minds of the people who experience
them--any cause arising in the minds of others, alive or dead.  This
is a question which orthodox psychology does not approach, standing
aside from any evidence which may be produced.

This book does not pretend to be a convincing, but merely an
illustrative collection of evidence.  It may, or may not, suggest to
some readers the desirableness of further inquiry; the author
certainly does not hope to do more, if as much.

It may be urged that many of the stories here narrated come from
remote times, and, as the testimony for these cannot be rigidly
studied, that the old unauthenticated stories clash with the analogous
tales current on better authority in our own day.  But these ancient
legends are given, not as evidence, but for three reasons:  first,
because of their merit as mere stories; next, because several of them
are now perhaps for the first time offered with a critical discussion
of their historical sources; lastly, because the old legends seem to
show how the fancy of periods less critical than ours dealt with such
facts as are now reported in a dull undramatic manner.  Thus (1) the
Icelandic ghost stories have peculiar literary merit as simple
dramatic narratives.  (2) Every one has heard of the Wesley ghost, Sir
George Villiers's spectre, Lord Lyttelton's ghost, the Beresford
ghost, Mr. Williams's dream of Mr. Perceval's murder, and so forth.
But the original sources have not, as a rule, been examined in the
ordinary spirit of calm historical criticism, by aid of a comparison
of the earliest versions in print or manuscript.  (3) Even ghost
stories, as a rule, have some basis of fact, whether fact of
hallucination, or illusion, or imposture.  They are, at lowest, "human
documents".  Now, granting such facts (of imposture, hallucination, or
what you will), as our dull, modern narratives contain, we can regard
these facts, or things like these, as the nuclei which our less
critical ancestors elaborated into their extraordinary romances.  In
this way the belief in demoniacal possession (distinguished, as such,
from madness and epilepsy) has its nucleus, some contend, in the
phenomena of alternating personalities in certain patients.  Their
characters, ideas, habits, and even voices change, and the most
obvious solution of the problem, in the past, was to suppose that a
new alien personality--a "devil"--had entered into the sufferer.

Again, the phenomena occurring in "haunted houses" (whether caused, or
not, by imposture or hallucination, or both) were easily magnified
into such legends as that of Grettir and Glam, and into the
monstrosities of the witch trials.  Once more the simple hallucination
of a dead person's appearance in his house demanded an explanation.
This was easily given by evolving a legend that he was a spirit,
escaped from purgatory or the grave, to fulfil a definite purpose.
The rarity of such purposeful ghosts in an age like ours, so rich in
ghost stories, must have a cause.  That cause is, probably, a
dwindling of the myth-making faculty.

Any one who takes these matters seriously, as facts in human nature,
must have discovered the difficulty of getting evidence at first hand.
This arises from several causes.  First, the cock-sure common-sense of
the years from 1660 to 1850, or so, regarded every one who had
experience of a hallucination as a dupe, a lunatic, or a liar.  In
this healthy state of opinion, eminent people like Lord Brougham kept
their experience to themselves, or, at most, nervously protested that
they "were sure it was only a dream".  Next, to tell the story was,
often, to enter on a narrative of intimate, perhaps painful, domestic
circumstances.  Thirdly, many persons now refuse information as a
matter of "principle," or of "religious principle," though it is
difficult to see where either principle or religion is concerned, if
the witness is telling what he believes to be true.  Next, some
devotees of science aver that these studies may bring back faith by a
side wind, and, with faith, the fires of Smithfield and the torturing
of witches.  These opponents are what Professor Huxley called
"dreadful consequences argufiers," when similar reasons were urged
against the doctrine of evolution.  Their position is strongest when
they maintain that these topics have a tendency to befog the
intellect.  A desire to prove the existence of "new forces" may beget
indifference to logic and to the laws of evidence.  This is true, and
we have several dreadful examples among men otherwise scientific.  But
all studies have their temptations.  Many a historian, to prove the
guilt or innocence of Queen Mary, has put evidence, and logic, and
common honesty far from him.  Yet this is no reason for abandoning the
study of history.

There is another class of difficulties.  As anthropology becomes
popular, every inquirer knows what customs he _ought_ to find among
savages, so, of course, he finds them.  In the same way, people may
now know what customs it is orthodox to find among ghosts, and may
pretend to find them, or may simulate them by imposture.  The white
sheet and clanking chains are forsaken for a more realistic rendering
of the ghostly part.  The desire of social notoriety may beget wanton
fabrications.  In short, all studies have their perils, and these are
among the dangers which beset the path of the inquirer into things
ghostly.  He must adopt the stoical maxim:  "Be sober and do not
believe"--in a hurry.

If there be truth in even one case of "telepathy," it will follow that
the human soul is a thing endowed with attributes not yet recognised
by science.  It cannot be denied that this is a serious consideration,
and that very startling consequences might be deduced from it; such
beliefs, indeed, as were generally entertained in the ages of
Christian darkness which preceded the present era of enlightenment.
But our business in studies of any kind is, of course, with truth, as
we are often told, not with the consequences, however ruinous to our
most settled convictions, or however pernicious to society.

The very opposite objection comes from the side of religion.  These
things we learn, are spiritual mysteries into which men must not
inquire.  This is only a relic of the ancient opinion that he was an
impious character who first launched a boat, God having made man a
terrestrial animal.  Assuredly God put us into a world of phenomena,
and gave us inquiring minds.  We have as much right to explore the
phenomena of these minds as to explore the ocean.  Again, if it be
said that our inquiries may lead to an undignified theory of the
future life (so far they have not led to any theory at all), that,
also, is the position of the Dreadful Consequences Argufier.  Lastly,
"the stories may frighten children".  For children the book is not
written, any more than if it were a treatise on comparative anatomy.

The author has frequently been asked, both publicly and privately:
"Do you believe in ghosts?"  One can only answer:  "How do you define
a ghost?"  I do believe, with all students of human nature, in
hallucinations of one, or of several, or even of all the senses.  But
as to whether such hallucinations, among the sane, are ever caused by
psychical influences from the minds of others, alive or dead, not
communicated through the ordinary channels of sense, my mind is in a
balance of doubt.  It is a question of evidence.

In this collection many stories are given without the real names of
the witnesses.  In most of the cases the real names, and their owners,
are well known to myself.  In not publishing the names I only take the
common privilege of writers on medicine and psychology.  In other
instances the names are known to the managers of the Society for
Psychical Research, who have kindly permitted me to borrow from their
collections.

While this book passed through the press, a long correspondence called
"On the Trail of a Ghost" appeared in The Times.  It illustrated the
copious fallacies which haunt the human intellect.  Thus it was
maintained by some persons, and denied by others, that sounds of
unknown origin were occasionally heard in a certain house.  These, it
was suggested, might (if really heard) be caused by slight seismic
disturbances.  Now many people argue, "Blunderstone House is not
haunted, for I passed a night there, and nothing unusual occurred".
Apply this to a house where noises are actually caused by young
earthquakes.  Would anybody say:  "There are no seismic disturbances
near Blunderstone House, for I passed a night there, and none
occurred"?  Why should a noisy ghost (if there is such a thing) or a
hallucinatory sound (if there is such a thing), be expected to be more
punctual and pertinacious than a seismic disturbance?  Again, the
gentleman who opened the correspondence with a long statement on the
negative side, cried out, like others, for scientific publicity, for
names of people and places.  But neither he nor his allies gave their
own names.  He did not precisely establish his claim to confidence by
publishing his version of private conversations.  Yet he expected
science and the public to believe his anonymous account of a
conversation, with an unnamed person, at which he did not and could
not pretend to have been present.  He had a theory of sounds heard by
himself which could have been proved, or disproved, in five minutes,
by a simple experiment.  But that experiment he does not say that he
made.

This kind of evidence is thought good enough on the negative side.  It
certainly would not be accepted by any sane person for the affirmative
side.  If what is called psychical research has no other results, at
least it enables us to perceive the fallacies which can impose on the
credulity of common-sense.

In preparing this collection of tales, I owe much to Mr. W. A.
Craigie, who translated the stories from the Gaelic and the Icelandic;
to Miss Elspeth Campbell, who gives a version of the curious Argyll
tradition of Ticonderoga (rhymed by Mr. Robert Louis Stevenson, who
put a Cameron where a Campbell should be); to Miss Violet Simpson, who
found the Windham MS. about the Duke of Buckingham's story, and made
other researches; and to Miss Goodrich Freer, who pointed out the
family version of "The Tyrone Ghost".


CHAPTER I


Arbuthnot on Political Lying.  Begin with "Great Swingeing
Falsehoods".  The Opposite Method to be used in telling Ghost Stones.
Begin with the more Familiar and Credible.  Sleep.  Dreams.  Ghosts
are identical with Waking Dreams.  Possibility of being Asleep when we
think we are Awake.  Dreams shared by several People.  Story of the
Dog Fanti.  The Swithinbank Dream.  Common Features of Ghosts and
Dreams.  Mark Twain's Story.  Theory of Common-sense.  Not Logical.
Fulfilled Dreams.  The Pig in the Palace.  The Mignonette.  Dreams of
Reawakened Memory.  The Lost Cheque.  The Ducks' Eggs.  The Lost Key.
Drama in Dreams.  The Lost Securities.  The Portuguese Gold-piece.
St. Augustine's Story.  The Two Curmas.  Knowledge acquired in Dreams.
The Assyrian Priest.  The Deja Vu.  "I have been here before."  Sir
Walter's Experience.  Explanations.  The Knot in the Shutter.
Transition to Stranger Dreams.

Arbuthnot, in his humorous work on Political Lying, commends the Whigs
for occasionally trying the people with "great swingeing falsehoods".
When these are once got down by the populace, anything may follow
without difficulty.  Excellently as this practice has worked in
politics (compare the warming-pan lie of 1688), in the telling of
ghost stories a different plan has its merits.  Beginning with the
common-place and familiar, and therefore credible, with the thin end
of the wedge, in fact, a wise narrator will advance to the rather
unusual, the extremely rare, the undeniably startling, and so arrive
at statements which, without this discreet and gradual initiation, a
hasty reader might, justly or unjustly, dismiss as "great swingeing
falsehoods".

The nature of things and of men has fortunately made this method at
once easy, obvious, and scientific.  Even in the rather fantastic
realm of ghosts, the stories fall into regular groups, advancing in
difficulty, like exercises in music or in a foreign language.  We
therefore start from the easiest Exercises in Belief, or even from
those which present no difficulty at all.  The defect of the method is
that easy stories are dull reading.  But the student can "skip".  We
begin with common every-night dreams.

Sleeping is as natural as waking; dreams are nearly as frequent as
every-day sensations, thoughts, and emotions.  But dreams, being
familiar, are credible; it is admitted that people do dream; we reach
the less credible as we advance to the less familiar.  For, if we
think for a moment, the alleged events of ghostdom--apparitions of all
sorts--are precisely identical with the every-night phenomena of
dreaming, except for the avowed element of sleep in dreams.

In dreams, time and space are annihilated, and two severed lovers may
be made happy.  In dreams, amidst a grotesque confusion of things
remembered and things forgot, we _see_ the events of the past (I have
been at Culloden fight and at the siege of Troy); we are present in
places remote; we behold the absent; we converse with the dead, and we
may even (let us say by chance coincidence) forecast the future.  All
these things, except the last, are familiar to everybody who dreams.
It is also certain that similar, but yet more vivid, false experiences
may be produced, at the word of the hypnotiser, in persons under the
hypnotic sleep.  A hypnotised man will take water for wine, and get
drunk on it.

Now, the ghostly is nothing but the experience, when men are awake, or
_apparently_ awake, of the every-night phenomena of dreaming.  The
vision of the absent seen by a waking, or apparently waking, man is
called "a wraith"; the waking, or apparently waking, vision of the
dead is called "a ghost".  Yet, as St. Augustine says, the absent man,
or the dead man, may know no more of the vision, and may have no more
to do with causing it, than have the absent or the dead whom we are
perfectly accustomed to see in our dreams.  Moreover, the
comparatively rare cases in which two or more waking people are
alleged to have seen the same "ghost," simultaneously or in
succession, have _their_ parallel in sleep, where two or more persons
simultaneously dream the same dream.  Of this curious fact let us give
one example:  the names only are altered.

THE DOG FANTI

Mrs. Ogilvie of Drumquaigh had a poodle named Fanti.  Her family, or
at least those who lived with her, were her son, the laird, and three
daughters.  Of these the two younger, at a certain recent date, were
paying a short visit to a neighbouring country house.  Mrs. Ogilvie
was accustomed to breakfast in her bedroom, not being in the best of
health.  One morning Miss Ogilvie came down to breakfast and said to
her brother, "I had an odd dream; I dreamed Fanti went mad".

"Well, that _is_ odd," said her brother.  "So did I.  We had better
not tell mother; it might make her nervous."

Miss Ogilvie went up after breakfast to see the elder lady, who said,
"Do turn out Fanti; I dreamed last night that he went mad and bit".

In the afternoon the two younger sisters came home.

"How did you enjoy yourselves?" one of the others asked.

"We didn't sleep well.  I was dreaming that Fanti went mad when Mary
wakened me, and said she had dreamed Fanti went mad, and turned into a
cat, and we threw him into the fire."

Thus, as several people may see the same ghost at once, several people
may dream the same dream at once.  As a matter of fact, Fanti lived,
sane and harmless, "all the length of all his years". {4}

Now, this anecdote is credible, certainly is credible by people who
know the dreaming family.  It is nothing more than a curiosity of
coincidences; and, as Fanti remained a sober, peaceful hound, in face
of five dreamers, the absence of fulfilment increases the readiness of
belief.  But compare the case of the Swithinbanks.  Mr. Swithinbank,
on 20th May, 1883, signed for publication a statement to this effect:--

During the Peninsular war his father and his two brothers were
quartered at Dover.  Their family were at Bradford.  The brothers
slept in various quarters of Dover camp.  One morning they met after
parade.  "O William, I have had a queer dream," said Mr. Swithinbank's
father.  "So have I," replied the brother, when, to the astonishment
of both, the other brother, John, said, "I have had a queer dream as
well.  I dreamt that mother was dead."   "So did I," said each of the
other brothers.  And the mother had died on the night of this
dreaming.  Mrs. Hudson, daughter of one of the brothers, heard the
story from all three. {5a}

The distribution of the fulfilled is less than that of the unfulfilled
dream by three to five.  It has the extra coincidence of the death.
But as it is very common to dream of deaths, some such dreams must
occasionally hit the target.

Other examples might be given of shared dreams:  {5b} they are only
mentioned here to prove that all the _waking_ experiences of things
ghostly, such as visions of the absent and of the dead, and of the
non-existent, are familiar, and may even be common simultaneously to
several persons, in _sleep_.  That men may sleep without being aware
of it, even while walking abroad; that we may drift, while we think
ourselves awake, into a semi-somnolent state for a period of time
perhaps almost imperceptible is certain enough.  Now, the peculiarity
of sleep is to expand or contract time, as we may choose to put the
case.  Alfred Maury, the well-known writer on Greek religion, dreamed
a long, vivid dream of the Reign of Terror, of his own trial before a
Revolutionary Tribunal, and of his execution, in the moment of time
during which he was awakened by the accidental fall of a rod in the
canopy of his bed, which touched him on the neck.  Thus even a
prolonged interview with a ghost may _conceivably_ be, in real time, a
less than momentary dream occupying an imperceptible tenth of a second
of somnolence, the sleeper not realising that he has been asleep.

Mark Twain, who is seriously interested in these subjects, has
published an experience illustrative of such possibilities.  He tells
his tale at considerable length, but it amounts to this:--

MARK TWAIN'S STORY

Mark was smoking his cigar outside the door of his house when he saw a
man, a stranger, approaching him.  Suddenly he ceased to be visible!
Mark, who had long desired to see a ghost, rushed into his house to
record the phenomenon.  There, seated on a chair in the hall, was the
very man, who had come on some business.  As Mark's negro footman
acts, when the bell is rung, on the principle, "Perhaps they won't
persevere," his master is wholly unable to account for the
disappearance of the visitor, whom he never saw passing him or waiting
at his door--except on the theory of an unconscious nap.  Now, a
disappearance is quite as mystical as an appearance, and much less
common.

This theory, that apparitions come in an infinitesimal moment of
sleep, while a man is conscious of his surroundings and believes
himself to be awake was the current explanation of ghosts in the
eighteenth century.  Any educated man who "saw a ghost" or "had a
hallucination" called it a "dream," as Lord Brougham and Lord
Lyttelton did.  But, if the death of the person seen coincided with
his appearance to them, they illogically argued that, out of the
innumerable multitude of dreams, some _must_ coincide, accidentally,
with facts.  They strove to forget that though dreams in sleep are
universal and countless, "dreams" in waking hours are extremely rare--
unique, for instance, in Lord Brougham's own experience.  Therefore,
the odds against chance coincidence are very great.

Dreams only form subjects of good dream-stories when the vision
coincides with and adequately represents an _unknown_ event in the
past, the present, or the future.  We dream, however vividly, of the
murder of Rizzio.  Nobody is surprised at that, the incident being
familiar to most people, in history and art.  But, if we dreamed of
being present at an unchronicled scene in Queen Mary's life, and if,
_after_ the dream was recorded, a document proving its accuracy should
be for the first time recovered, then there is matter for a good
dream-story. {8}  Again, we dream of an event not to be naturally
guessed or known by us, and our dream (which should be recorded before
tidings of the fact arrive) tallies with the news of the event when it
comes.  Or, finally, we dream of an event (recording the dream), and
that event occurs in the future.  In all these cases the actual
occurrence of the unknown event is the only addition to the dream's
usual power of crumpling up time and space.

As a rule such dreams are only mentioned _after_ the event, and so are
not worth noticing.  Very often the dream is forgotten by the dreamer
till he hears of or sees the event.  He is then either reminded of his
dream by association of ideas or _he has never dreamed at all_, and
his belief that he has dreamed is only a form of false memory, of the
common sensation of "having been here before," which he attributes to
an awakened memory of a real dream.  Still more often the dream is
unconsciously cooked by the narrator into harmony with facts.

As a rule fulfilled dreams deal with the most trivial affairs, and
such as, being usual, may readily occur by chance coincidence.  Indeed
it is impossible to set limits to such coincidence, for it would
indeed be extraordinary if extraordinary coincidences never occurred.

What will be said of me by the warriors who have followed me into
this war, and whom--unutterable shame!

--I have abandoned to the bloodthirsty Trojans!

O winds! take pity on me, I entreat you; dash this vessel on some rugged
crag, and overwhelm me so that I can no longer be conscious
either of my humiliation or of the reproaches of my Rutulians."
While he thus lamented, he was uncertain whether he should put an
end to his own life with his sword or plunge into the sea and endeavor
to regain the land by swimming. Three times he attempted each expedient,
and as often Juno, full of pity, restrained him. Carried along by
a favorable wind, the ship bore him safely to the capital of his
father, King Daunus.

Meanwhile Æneas raged through the battle-field in search of the victim
whom the queen of the Gods had thus snatched from his conquering
hands.

Under his leadership the Trojans and their allies, flushed with success,
pressed more eagerly on their discomfited foe; but Mezentius now
advanced to restore the courage of the Rutulians.

The Etrurians, as soon as they saw their expelled monarch, out of
hostility to whom they had engaged in the war, rushed upon him with
shouts of rage; but he, as fearless as he was wicked, stood as
firmly against them as a great rock on the shore meets all the fury
of the winds and waves.

Three warriors he overthrew in quick succession: Hebrus he cut down
with his sword, Latagus he slew by hurling a great stone which battered
in his face, and at Palmus he threw a javelin which pierced his thigh
and extended him helpless on the ground.
Then the raging king slew Evas the Phrygian, and a Trojan named
Mimas, who in former days had been the companion of Paris, having
been born in Troy on the same night that gave to the light the ill-starred
son of Priam.
Paris now lay in eternal repose amid the ruins of his native city,
while to Mimas the sword of Mezentius assigned an unknown grave on the
distant shore of Italy. And just as when an old wild boar, chased
from his retreat amid the wooded Alps, stands at bay among the
underwood, and the hunters, afraid to approach him, ply him with
darts from a distance, while he gnashes his tusks with rage and
faces them undaunted, so stood Mezentius; while his former subjects,
though filled with just anger against him, and eager for his
destruction, dare not come within reach of his dreaded sword, but
galled him with spears and useless clamor.

It chanced that a Greek from Corytus, named Acron, presented himself in
the front, conspicuous in nodding plumes, and in purple trappings that
had been worked for him by his betrothed wife. His gay attire caught
the eye of Mezentius, who rushed forward and smote down the luckless
Greek; then, as the others fell back, he cut off the retreat of
an Etrurian chief, Orodes, forced him to engage hand to hand, and
speedily slew him.

Pressing his foot on the expiring warrior to draw out his lance
from his body, Mezentius cried to his followers, "Behold, friends!

Orodes has fallen--not the meanest of our foes." The Rutulians
raised a joyful shout, but the dying Orodes faintly answered, "Not
long shall thou rejoice with impunity over me; a similar fate awaits
thyself, and soon shalt thou also be stretched lifeless on this same
field." Smiling scornfully, Mezentius returned, "Die thou, and leave
my fate to the Gods, in whose hands it rests." His example inspired
other of the Rutulians; they pressed fiercely forward and drove back
the troops of Æneas. Mezentius advanced at their head, and as he
strode along, the Trojan hero espied him, and hastened towards him.

Unawed by the prospect of an encounter even with so terrible a foe,
Mezentius stood firm, and poising a huge spear in his hand,
exclaimed,--for he was a contemner of the Gods, and never offered
invocations to them,--"Now let this right hand and this good dart
be my aid; and then I vow that my son, my dear Lausus, shall be
clad in the bright arms torn from the body of yon Trojan pirate."

With these words he drew the spear. Sent with a true aim, it struck
the shield of Æneas, but glanced from the hardened surface, and turning
aside, pierced the side of Antores, a faithful follower of Evander,
who had come with Pallas to the war. Thus died Antores, by a weapon
never aimed at him, but he was speedily avenged. Æneas, putting all
his might into the cast, now in his turn hurled his spear.

It tore its way through the triple plates of Mezentius' shield,
through his corselet, and inflicted a severe wound in his groin,
though its force was so far spent that the injury was not mortal.

Overjoyed at the sight of his enemy's blood, Æneas drew his sword from
its sheath, and rushed upon Mezentius, who was as yet bewildered by
the blow.
When Lausus saw his father in such peril he sprang forward and stood
before Æneas, while Mezentius fell back among his friends, the
Trojan lance still trailing in his armor.

Lausus received the first stroke of Æneas' sword on his buckler,
while the Rutulians with loud shouts applauded him, and poured on the
Trojan hero a tempest of darts. Against this he protected himself
with his shield, and meanwhile, pitying the youth and courage of
Lausus, spoke to him in words of warning: "Why do you thus rush on
your own destruction, and attempt what is beyond your strength?

Your filial devotion blinds you to your danger."

But Lausus, resolute to defend his wounded sire, returned a haughty
defiance.

Then Æneas could no longer control his wrath; he exerted all his
strength, and thrust his terrible sword up to the hilt through
the body of the youth, who sank lifeless on the blood-steeped
ground. When Æneas saw the comely young warrior stretched dead
before him, his heart was filled with pity.
"Ill-fated youth!" he cried, "how can I testify my reverence for thy
filial piety and thy undaunted valor? Thou shalt at least retain those
arms which it was thy delight to wear, and thy body shall be given
up unspoiled to thy friends." With that he summoned the dismayed
followers of Lausus, and with his own hands raised from the ground
the comely body, all disfigured with blood and wounds. Meantime
Mezentius had retreated to the bank of the Tiber, where he took off
his armor, and bathed his wound with water. While he was thus resting
from the fatigues of the battle, he was full of anxiety for his son,
and sent messenger after messenger to recall him from the fight.

But too soon a crowd of weeping warriors appeared, carrying the corpse
of Lausus in their arms. The sorrowing father divined what had
occurred from their lamentations, even before the body was brought to
him. He threw dust upon his head, he clasped the loved form in his
arms, and bedewed the pallid face with his tears. "O my son," he
exclaimed, "was I possessed with such a fond desire of life as to
suffer thee to offer thyself in my place to the relentless foe? Am I
preserved at the cost of these cruel wounds?

Now, indeed, I feel the calamity of exile.
My crimes have cost thee not only thy paternal throne and sceptre, but
thy life also. It was I that owed expiation to my country, and
should have satisfied my people by a deserved death. And yet I live!
yet I do not quit the detested light! but I will quickly follow thee."
Then he rose up, and though crippled by the wound in his thigh, and
suffering anguish from its smart, he did not flinch, but ordered his
attendants to bring his courser.
This was a horse famous for its speed and its prompt obedience to the
rein. When it was brought, he accosted it: "Long have we lived
together, Rhoebus, and many great deeds have we accomplished.

To-day we shall either bear away the head of Æneas and his arms all
spattered with his blood, or we shall perish together; for I am
assured that thou wilt never condescend to bear a Trojan lord."

Then mounting the noble steed, he filled both hands with darts, and
dashed recklessly into the midst of the battle. His heart
swelling with rage and shame and grief, he thrice loudly summoned
Æneas to the combat. Æneas heard, and rejoiced at the challenge;
and with threatening spear advanced to meet his foe. "Barbarous
wretch," cried Mezentius, "thinkest thou to affright me with thy
weapons, now that thou hast robbed me of my son? That was the only
means by which thou couldst destroy me. I fear neither death nor the
anger of any of your gods.
Forbear threats; now am I come hither to die, but first I bring
you these gifts." So saying, he rapidly hurled one dart after another
at the hero, whirling swiftly round him on his horse; but the shield
framed by Vulcan's hands received all the shafts and repelled them.
Wearied at last of so unequal a fight, in which he had to endure
ceaseless attacks without striking a blow, Æneas stepped forward, and
hurled his spear against the charger, piercing its skull betwixt the
ears. The fiery horse reared upward in the death agony, and then fell
backward upon his rider, pressing him to the earth. The spectators of
this fierce combat uplifted their voices in shouts, some in joy
and others in sorrow, as Æneas rushed up to the fallen warrior, and
lifting his sword to deal the fatal blow, cried, "Where is now the
stern Mezentius?" The Etrurian, on the other hand, replied, "Spiteful
foe, why dost thou threaten and insult before thou strikest?
Thou wilt do me no wrong in slaying me. I sought thee expecting nothing
else, and neither I nor my son has asked mercy at thy hands. One favor
alone I implore of thee, that thou wilt give burial to my corpse. I
know well that the hate of my former subjects would pursue me after
death.
Defend my remains, I entreat, from outrage, and grant me a grave along
with my son." He said no more, but extended his throat to receive the
fatal blow, which descended and drew forth his life as the
blood poured over his armor.

The shades of night were now gathering, and as the Rutulians and Latins
had quitted the field in confusion, the conflicts of that sanguinary
day were at last, ended.

ÆNEAS FINALLY CONQUERS THE LATINS
By Alfred J. Church

Prince Turnus was filled with rage. Even as a lion which a hunter hath
wounded breaketh the arrow wherewith he hath been stricken, and rouseth
himself to battle, shaking his mane and roaring, so Turnus arose.
And first he spake to King Latinus, saying, "I will meet this man
face to face, and slay him while ye look on; or, if the Gods will that
he vanquish me so, he shall rule over you, and have Lavinia to wife."

But King Latinus made answer, "Yet think awhile, my son. Thou hast the
kingdom of thy father Daunus; and there are other noble virgins
in Latium whom thou mayest have to wife.

Wilt thou not then be content? For to give my daughter to any husband
of this nation I was forbidden, as thou knowest. Yet did I disobey,
being moved by love of thee, my wife also beseeching me with many
tears. Thou seest what troubles I and my people, and thou more than
all, have suffered from that time. Twice have we fled in the
battle, and now the city only is left to us. If I must yield me to these
men, let me yield whilst thou art yet alive. For what doth it
profit me that thou shouldst die? Nay, but all men would cry
shame on me if I gave thee to death!" Now for a space Turnus spake
not for wrath. Then he said, "Be not troubled for me, my father. For
I, too, can smite with the spear; and as for this Æneas, his mother
will not be at hand to snatch him in a cloud from my sight."
Then Amata cried to him, saying, "Fight not, I beseech thee, with
these men of Troy, my son; for surely what thou sufferest I
also shall suffer.
Nor will I live to see Æneas my son-in-law."

And Lavinia heard the voice of her mother, and wept. As a man stains
ivory with crimson, or as roses are seen mixed with lilies,
even so the virgin's face burned with crimson. And Turnus, regarding
her, loved her exceedingly, and made answer, "Trouble me not with tears
or idle words, my mother, for to this battle I must go. And do thou,
Idmon the herald, say to the Phrygian king, 'To-morrow, when the sun
shall rise, let the people have peace, but we two will fight together.
And let him that prevaileth have Lavinia to wife.'"
Then first he went to the stalls of his horses. The wife of the North
Wind gave them to Pilumnus. Whiter than snow were they, and swifter
than the wind. Then he put the coat of mail about his shoulders,
and fitted a helmet on his head, and took the great sword which
Vulcan had made for Daunus his father, and had dipped it when it
was white-hot in the river of Styx.

His spear also he took where it stood against a pillar, saying, "Serve
me well, my spear, that hast never failed me before, that I may lay
low this womanish robber of Phrygia, and soil with dust his curled and
perfumed hair." The next day the men of Italy and the men
of Troy measured out a space for the battle. And in the midst they
builded an altar of turf. And the two armies sat on the one side and
on the other, having fixed their spears in the earth and laid down
their shields. Also the women and the old men stood on the towers
and roofs of the city, that they might see the fight.

But Queen Juno spake to Juturna, the sister of Turnus, saying, "Seest
thou how these two are now about to fight, face to face? And indeed
Turnus goeth to his death. As for me, I endure not to look upon this
covenant or this battle. But if thou canst do aught for thy brother,
lo! the time is at hand." And when the nymph wept and beat her breast,
Juno said, "This is no time for tears. Save thy brother, if thou
canst, from death; or cause that they break this covenant."
After this came the kings, that they might make the covenant together.
And King Latinus rode in a chariot with four horses, and he had
on his head a crown with twelve rays of gold, for he was of the
race of the sun; and Turnus came in a chariot with two white horses,
having a javelin in either hand; and Æneas had donned the arms which
Vulcan had made, and with him was the young Iulus.

And after due offering Æneas sware, calling on all the Gods, "If the
victory shall fall this day to Turnus, the men of Troy shall depart to
the city of Evander, nor trouble this land any more. But if it fall
to me, I will not that the Latins should serve the men of Troy.
Let the nations be equal one with the other. The gods that I bring
we will worship together, but King Latinus shall reign as before. A new
city shall the men of Troy build for me, and Lavinia shall call it
after her own name."
Then King Latinus sware, calling on the gods that are above and the
gods that are below, saying, "This covenant shall stand forever,
whatsoever may befall. As sure as this sceptre which I bear--once
it was a tree, but a cunning workman closed it in bronze, to be
the glory of the Latian kings--shall never again bear twig or leaf,
so surely shall this covenant be kept."

But the thing pleased not the Latins; for before, indeed, they
judged that the battle would not be equal between two; and now were
they the more assured, seeing them when they came together, and
that Turnus walked with eyes cast to the ground, and was pale and
wan.

Wherefore there arose a murmuring among the people, which when
Juturna perceived, she took upon herself the likeness of Camertus,
who was a prince and a great warrior among them, and passed through
the host saying, "Are ye not ashamed, men of Italy, that one man
should do battle for you all?

For count these men; surely they are scarce one against two. And if
he be vanquished, what shame for you! As for him, indeed, though he
die, yet shall his glory reach to the heavens; but ye shall suffer
disgrace, serving these strangers forever."
And when she saw that the people were moved, she gave also a sign
from heaven. For lo! an eagle, that drave a crowd of sea-fowl before
him, swooped down to the water, and caught a great swan; and even
while the Italians looked, the birds that before had fled turned and
pursued the eagle, and drave him before them, so that he dropped the
swan and fled away. Which thing when the Italians perceived they
shouted, and made them ready for battle. And the augur Tolumnius
cried, "This is the token that I have looked for. For this eagle is
the stranger, and ye are the birds, which before, indeed, have
fled, but shall now make him to flee."
And he ran forward and cast his spear, smiting a man of Arcadia below
the belt, upon the groin.

One of nine brothers was he, sons of a Tuscan mother, but their father
was a Greek; and they, when they saw him slain, caught swords and
spears, and ran forward. And straightway the battle was begun. First
they brake down the altars, that they might take firebrands therefrom;
and King Latinus fled from the place.

Then did Messapus drive his horses against King Aulestes of Mantua,
who, being fain to fly, stumbled upon the altar and fell headlong on
the ground. And Messapus smote him with a spear that was like a
weaver's beam, saying, "This, of a truth, is a worthier victim."
After this Coryneus, the Arcadian, when Ebysus would have smitten him,
snatched a brand from the altar and set fire to the beard of the
man, and, before he came to himself, caught him by the hair, and
thrusting him to the ground, so slew him.

And when Podalirius pursued Alsus the shepherd, and now held his
sword over him ready to strike, the other turned, and with a
battle-axe cleft the man's head from forehead to chin.

But all the while the righteous Æneas, having his head bare, and holding
neither spear nor sword, cried to the people, "What seek ye? what madness
is this? The covenant is established, and I only have the right to do
battle." But even while he spake an arrow smote him, wounding him. But
who let it fly no man knoweth; for who, of a truth, would boast
that he had wounded Æneas?
The inscription ran thus, the missing fragment being restored, "by
analogy from many similar inscriptions":--

TO THE GOD NIBIB, CHILD
OF THE GOD BEL,
HIS LORD
KURIGALZU,
PONTIFEX OF THE GOD BEL
HAS PRESENTED IT.

But, in the drawings, the fragments were of different colours, so that
a student working on the drawings would not guess them to be parts of
one cylinder.  Professor Hilprecht, however, examined the two actual
fragments in the Imperial Museum at Constantinople.  They lay in two
distinct cases, but, when put together, fitted.  When cut asunder of
old, in Babylon, the white vein of the stone showed on one fragment,
the grey surface on the other.

Professor Romaine Newbold, who publishes this dream, explains that the
professor had unconsciously reasoned out his facts, the difference of
colour in the two pieces of agate disappearing in the dream.  The
professor had heard from Dr. Peters of the expedition, that a room had
been discovered with fragments of a wooden box and chips of agate and
lapis lazuli.  The sleeping mind "combined its information," reasoned
rightly from it, and threw its own conclusions into a dramatic form,
receiving the information from the lips of a priest of Nippur.

Probably we do a good deal of reasoning in sleep.  Professor
Hilprecht, in 1882-83, was working at a translation of an inscription
wherein came Nabu--Kudurru--usur, rendered by Professor Delitzsch
"Nebo protect my mortar-board".  Professor Hilprecht accepted this,
but woke one morning with his mind full of the thought that the words
should be rendered "Nebo protect my boundary," which "sounds a deal
likelier," and is now accepted.  I myself, when working at the MSS. of
the exiled Stuarts, was puzzled by the scorched appearance of the
paper on which Prince Charlie's and the king's letters were often
written and by the peculiarities of the ink.  I woke one morning with
a sudden flash of common-sense.  Sympathetic ink had been used, and
the papers had been toasted or treated with acids.  This I had
probably reasoned out in sleep, and, had I dreamed, my mind might have
dramatised the idea.  Old Mr. Edgar, the king's secretary, might have
appeared and given me the explanation.  Maury publishes tales in which
a forgotten fact was revealed to him in a dream from the lips of a
dream-character (Le Sommeil et les Reves, pp. 142-143.  The curious
may also consult, on all these things, The Philosophy of Mysticism, by
Karl du Prel, translated by Mr. Massey.  The Assyrian Priest is in
Proceedings, S.P.R., vol. xii., p. 14).

On the same plane as the dreams which we have been examining is the
waking sensation of the deja vu.

"I have been here before,
But when or how I cannot tell."

Most of us know this feeling, all the circumstances in which we find
ourselves have already occurred, we have a prophecy of what will
happen next "on the tip of our tongues" (like a half-remembered name),
and then the impression vanishes.  Scott complains of suffering
through a whole dinner-party from this sensation, but he had written
"copy" for fifty printed pages on that day, and his brain was breaking
down.  Of course psychology has explanations.  The scene _may_ have
really occurred before, or may be the result of a malady of
perception, or one hemisphere of the brain not working in absolute
simultaneousness with the other may produce a double impression, the
first being followed by the second, so that we really have had two
successive impressions, of which one seems much more remote in time
than it really was.  Or we may have dreamed something like the scene
and forgotten the dream, or we may actually, in some not understood
manner, have had a "prevision" of what is now actual, as when Shelley
almost fainted on coming to a place near Oxford which he had beheld in
a dream.

Of course, if this "prevision" could be verified in detail, we should
come very near to dreams of the future fulfilled.  Such a thing--
verification of a detail--led to the conversion of William Hone, the
free-thinker and Radical of the early century, who consequently became
a Christian and a pessimistic, clear-sighted Tory.  This tale of the
deja vu, therefore, leads up to the marvellous narratives of dreams
simultaneous with, or prophetic of, events not capable of being
guessed or inferred, or of events lost in the historical past, but,
later, recovered from documents.

Of Hone's affair there are two versions.  Both may be given, as they
are short.  If they illustrate the deja vu, they also illustrate the
fond discrepancies of all such narratives. {24}

THE KNOT IN THE SHUTTER

"It is said that a dream produced a powerful effect on Hone's mind.
He dreamt that he was introduced into a room where he was an entire
stranger, and saw himself seated at a table, and on going towards the
window his attention was somehow or other attracted to the window-
shutter, and particularly to a knot in the wood, which was of singular
appearance; and on waking the whole scene, and especially the knot in
the shutter, left a most vivid impression on his mind.  Some time
afterwards, on going, I think, into the country, he was at some house
shown into a chamber where he had never been before, and which
instantly struck him as being the identical chamber of his dream.  He
turned directly to the window, where the same knot in the shutter
caught his eye.  This incident, to his investigating spirit, induced a
train of reflection which overthrew his cherished theories of
materialism, and resulted in conviction that there were spiritual
agencies as susceptible of proof as any facts of physical science; and
this appears to have been one of the links in that mysterious chain of
events by which, according to the inscrutable purposes of the Divine
will, man is sometimes compelled to bow to an unseen and divine power,
and ultimately to believe and live."

"Another of the Christian friends from whom, in his later years,
William Hone received so much kindness, has also furnished
recollections of him.

" . . . Two or three anecdotes which he related are all I can
contribute towards a piece of mental history which, if preserved,
would have been highly interesting.  The first in point of time as to
his taste of mind, was a circumstance which shook his confidence in
_materialism_, though it did not lead to his conversion.  It was one
of those mental phenomena which he saw to be _inexplicable_ by the
doctrines he then held.

"It was as follows:  He was called in the course of business into a
part of London quite new to him, and as he walked along the street he
noticed to himself that he had never been there; but on being shown
into a room in a house where he had to wait some time, he immediately
fancied that it was all familiar, that he had seen it before, 'and if
so,' said he to himself, 'there is a very peculiar knot in this
shutter'.  He opened the shutter and found the knot.  'Now then,'
thought he, 'here is something I cannot explain on my principles!'"

Indeed the occurrence is not very explicable on any principles, as a
detail not visible without search was sought and verified, and that by
a habitual mocker at anything out of the common way.  For example,
Hone published a comic explanation, correct or not, of the famous
Stockwell mystery.

Supposing Hone's story to be true, it naturally conducts us to yet
more unfamiliar, and therefore less credible dreams, in which the
unknown past, present, or future is correctly revealed.


CHAPTER II


Veracious Dreams.  Past, Present and Future unknown Events "revealed".
Theory of "Mental Telegraphy" or "Telepathy" fails to meet Dreams of
the unknowable Future.  Dreams of unrecorded Past, how alone they can
be corroborated.  Queen Mary's Jewels.  Story from Brierre de
Boismont.  Mr. Williams's Dream before Mr. Perceval's Murder.
Discrepancies of Evidence.  Curious Story of Bude Kirk.  Mr.
Williams's Version.  Dream of a Rattlesnake.  Discrepancies.  Dream of
the Red Lamp.  "Illusions Hypnagogiques."  The Scar in the Moustache.
Dream of the Future.  The Coral Sprigs.  Anglo-Saxon Indifference.  A
Celtic Dream.  The Satin Slippers.  Waking Dreams.  The Dead Shopman.
Dreams in Swoons.

Perhaps nothing, not even a ghost, is so staggering to the powers of
belief as a well-authenticated dream which strikes the bull's eye of
facts not known to the dreamer nor capable of being guessed by him.
If the events beheld in the dream are far away in space, or are remote
in time past, the puzzle is difficult enough.  But if the events are
still in the future, perhaps no kind of explanation except a mere
"fluke" can even be suggested.  Say that I dream of an event occurring
at a distance, and that I record or act on my dream before it is
corroborated.  Suppose, too, that the event is not one which could be
guessed, like the death of an invalid or the result of a race or of an
election.  This would be odd enough, but the facts of which I dreamed
must have been present in the minds of living people.  Now, if there
is such a thing as "mental telegraphy" or "telepathy," {28} my mind,
in dream, may have "tapped" the minds of the people who knew the
facts.  We may not believe in "mental telegraphy," but we can
_imagine_ it as one of the unknown possibilities of nature.  Again, if
I dream of an unchronicled event in the past, and if a letter of some
historical person is later discovered which confirms the accuracy of
my dream, we can at least _conceive_ (though we need not believe) that
the intelligence was telegraphed to my dreaming mind from the mind of
a _dead_ actor in, or witness of the historical scene, for the facts
are unknown to living man.  But even these wild guesses cannot cover a
dream which correctly reveals events of the future; events necessarily
not known to any finite mind of the living or of the dead, and too
full of detail for an explanation by aid of chance coincidence.

In face of these difficulties mankind has gone on believing in dreams
of all three classes:  dreams revealing the unknown present, the
unknown past, and the unknown future.  The judicious reasonably set
them all aside as the results of fortuitous coincidence, or revived
recollection, or of the illusions of a false memory, or of imposture,
conscious or unconscious.  However, the stories continue to be told,
and our business is with the stories.

Taking, first, dreams of the unknown past, we find a large modern
collection of these attributed to a lady named "Miss A---".  They were
waking dreams representing obscure incidents of the past, and were
later corroborated by records in books, newspapers and manuscripts.
But as these books and papers existed, and were known to exist, before
the occurrence of the visions, it is obvious that the matter of the
visions _may_ have been derived from the books and so forth, or at
least, a sceptic will vastly prefer this explanation.  What we need is
a dream or vision of the unknown past, corroborated by a document _not
known to exist_ at the time when the vision took place and was
recorded.  Probably there is no such instance, but the following tale,
picturesque in itself, has a kind of shadow of the only satisfactory
sort of corroboration.

The author responsible for this yarn is Dr. Gregory, F.R.S., Professor
of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh.  After studying for many
years the real or alleged phenomena of what has been called mesmerism,
or electro-biology, or hypnotism, Dr. Gregory published in 1851 his
Letters to a Candid Inquirer on Animal Magnetism.

Though a F.R.S. and a Professor of Chemistry, the Doctor had no more
idea of what constitutes evidence than a baby.  He actually mixed up
the Tyrone with the Lyttelton ghost story!  His legend of Queen Mary's
jewels is derived from (1) the note-book, _or_ (2) a letter
containing, or professing to contain, extracts from the note-book, of
a Major Buckley, an Anglo-Indian officer.  This gentleman used to
"magnetise" or hypnotise people, some of whom became clairvoyant, as
if possessed of eyes acting as "double-patent-million magnifiers,"
permeated by X rays.

"What follows is transcribed," says the Doctor, "from Major Buckley's
note-book."  We abridge the narrative.  Major Buckley hypnotised a
young officer, who, on November 15, 1845, fell into "a deeper state"
of trance.  Thence he awoke into a "clairvoyant" condition and said:--

QUEEN MARY'S JEWELS

"I have had a strange dream about your ring" (a "medallion" of Anthony
and Cleopatra); "it is very valuable."

Major Buckley said it was worth 60 pounds, and put the ring into his
friend's hand.

"It belonged to royalty."

"In what country?"

"I see Mary, Queen of Scots.  It was given to her by a man, a
foreigner, with other things from Italy.  It came from Naples.  It is
not in the old setting.  She wore it only once.  The person who gave
it to her was a musician."

The seer then "saw" the donor's signature, "Rizzio".  But Rizzio
spelled his name Riccio!  The seer now copied on paper a writing which
in his trance he saw on vellum.  The design here engraved (p. 32) is
only from a rough copy of the seer's original drawing, which was made
by Major Buckley.

[Picture of vellum as described in the text - images/rizzo.gif]

"Here" (pointing to the middle) "I see a diamond cross."   The
smallest stone was above the size of one of four carats.  "It" (the
cross) "was worn out of sight by Mary.  The vellum has been shown in
the House of Lords." {31}

" . . . The ring was taken off Mary's finger by a man in anger and
jealousy:  he threw it into the water.  When he took it off, she was
being carried in a kind of bed with curtains" (a litter).

Just before Rizzio's murder Mary was enceinte, and might well be
carried in a litter, though she usually rode.

The seer then had a view of Sizzle's murder, which he had probably
read about.

Three weeks later, in another trance, the seer finished his design of
the vellum.  The words

A
M
DE LA PART

probably stand for a Marie, de la part de--

The thistle heads and leaves in gold at the corners were a usual
decoration of the period; compare the ceiling of the room in Edinburgh
Castle where James VI. was born, four months after Rizzio's murder.
They also occur in documents.  Dr. Gregory conjectures that so
valuable a present as a diamond cross may have been made not by
Rizzio, but through Rizzio by the Pope.

It did not seem good to the doctor to consult Mary's lists of jewels,
nor, if he had done so, would he have been any the wiser.  In 1566,
just before the birth of James VI., Mary had an inventory drawn up,
and added the names of the persons to whom she bequeathed her
treasures in case she died in child-bed.  But this inventory, hidden
among a mass of law-papers in the Record Office, was not discovered
till 1854, nine years after the vision of 1845, and three after its
publication by Dr. Gregory in 1851.  Not till 1863 was the inventory
of 1566, discovered in 1854, published for the Bannatyne Club by Dr.
Joseph Robertson.

Turning to the inventory we read of a valuable present made by David
Rizzio to Mary, a tortoise of rubies, which she kept till her death,
for it appears in a list made after her execution at Fotheringay.  The
murdered David Rizzio left a brother Joseph.  Him the queen made her
secretary, and in her will of 1566 mentions him thus:--

"A Josef, pour porter a celui qui je luy ay dit, une emeraude emaille
de blanc.

"A Josef, pour porter a celui qui je luy ai dit, dont il ranvoir
quittance.

"Une bague garnye de vingt cinq diamens tant grands que petis."

Now the diamond cross seen by the young officer in 1845 was set with
diamonds great and small, and was, in his opinion, a gift from or
through Rizzio.  "The queen wore it out of sight."  Here in the
inventory we have a bague (which may be a cross) of diamonds small and
great, connected with a secret only known to Rizzio's brother and to
the queen.  It is "to be carried to one whose name the queen has
spoken in her new secretary's ear" (Joseph's), "but dare not trust
herself to write".  "It would be idle now to seek to pry into the
mystery which was thus anxiously guarded," says Dr. Robertson, editor
of the queen's inventories.  The doctor knew nothing of the vision
which, perhaps, so nearly pried into the mystery.  There is nothing
like proof here, but there is just a presumption that the diamonds
connected with Rizzio, and secretly worn by the queen, seen in the
vision of 1845, are possibly the diamonds which, had Mary died in
1566, were to be carried by Joseph Rizzio to a person whose name might
not safely be written. {35a}

We now take a dream which apparently reveals a real fact occurring at
a distance.  It is translated from Brierre de Boismont's book, Des
Hallucinations {35b} (Paris, 1845).  "There are," says the learned
author, "authentic dreams which have revealed an event occurring at
the moment, or later."  These he explains by accidental coincidence,
and then gives the following anecdote, as within his own intimate
knowledge:--

THE DEATHBED

Miss C., a lady of excellent sense, religious but not bigoted, lived
before her marriage in the house of her uncle D., a celebrated
physician, and member of the Institute.  Her mother at this time was
seriously ill in the country.  One night the girl dreamed that she saw
her mother, pale and dying, and especially grieved at the absence of
two of her children:  one a cure in Spain, the other--herself--in
Paris.  Next she heard her own Christian name called, "Charlotte!"
and, in her dream, saw the people about her mother bring in her own
little niece and god-child Charlotte from the next room.  The patient
intimated by a sign that she did not want _this_ Charlotte, but her
daughter in Paris.  She displayed the deepest regret; her countenance
changed, she fell back, and died.

Next day the melancholy of Mademoiselle C. attracted the attention of
her uncle.  She told him her dream; he pressed her to his heart, and
admitted that her mother was dead.

Some months later Mademoiselle C., when her uncle was absent, arranged
his papers, which he did not like any one to touch.  Among these was a
letter containing the story of her mother's death, with all the
details of her own dream, which D. had kept concealed lest they should
impress her too painfully.

Boismont is staggered by this circumstance, and inclined to account
for it by "still unknown relations in the moral and physical world".
"Mental telegraphy," of course, would explain all, and even chance
coincidence is perfectly conceivable.

The most commonly known of dreams prior to, or simultaneous with an
historical occurrence represented in the vision, is Mr. Williams's
dream of the murder of Mr. Perceval in the lobby of the House of
Commons, May 11, 1812.  Mr. Williams, of Scorrier House, near Redruth,
in Cornwall, lived till 1841.  He was interested in mines, and a man
of substance.  Unluckily the versions of his dream are full of
discrepancies.  It was first published, apparently, in The Times
during the "silly season" of 1828 (August 28).  According to The
Times, whose account is very minute, Mr. Williams dreamed of the
murder thrice before 2 a.m. on the night of May 11.  He told Mrs.
Williams, and was so disturbed that he rose and dressed at two in the
morning.  He went to Falmouth next day (May 12), and told the tale to
every one he knew.  On the evening of the 13th he told it to Mr. and
Mrs. Tucker (his married daughter) of Tremanton Castle.  Mr. Williams
only knew that the _chancellor_ was shot; Mr. Tucker said it must be
the Chancellor of the Exchequer.  From the description he recognised
Mr. Perceval, with whom he was at enmity.  Mr. Williams had never been
inside the House of Commons.  As they talked, Mr. William's son
galloped up from Truro with news of the murder, got from a traveller
by coach.  Six weeks later, Mr. Williams went to town, and in the
House of Commons walked up to and recognised the scene of the various
incidents in the murder.

So far The Times, in 1828.  But two forms of a version of 1832 exist,
one in a note to Mr. Walpole's Life of Perceval (1874), "an attested
statement, drawn up and signed by Mr. Williams in the presence of the
Rev. Thomas Fisher and Mr. Charles Prideaux Brune".  Mr. Brune gave it
to Mr. Walpole.  With only verbal differences this variant corresponds
to another signed by Mr. Williams and given by him to his grandson,
who gave it to Mr. Perceval's great-niece, by whom it was lent to the
Society for Psychical Research.

These accounts differ toto coelo from that in The Times of 1828.  The
dream is _not_ of May 11, but "about" May 2 or 3.  Mr. Williams is
_not_ a stranger to the House of Commons; it is "a place well known to
me".  He is _not_ ignorant of the name of the victim, but "understood
that it was Mr. Perceval".  He thinks of going to town to give
warning.  We hear nothing of Mr. Tucker.  Mr. Williams does _not_
verify his dream in the House, but from a drawing.  A Mr. C. R. Fox,
son of one to whom the dream was told _before_ the event, was then a
boy of fourteen, and sixty-one years later was sure that he himself
heard of Mr. Williams's dream _before_ the news of the murder arrived.
After sixty years, however, the memory cannot be relied upon.

One very curious circumstance in connection with the assassination of
Mr. Perceval has never been noticed.  A rumour or report of the deed
reached Bude Kirk, a village near Annan, on the night of Sunday, May
10, a day before the crime was committed!  This was stated in the
Dumfries and Galloway Courier, and copied in The Times of May 25.  On
May 28, the Perth Courier quotes the Dumfries paper, and adds that
"the Rev. Mr. Yorstoun, minister of Hoddam (ob. 1833), has visited
Bude Kirk and has obtained the most satisfactory proof of the rumour
having existed" on May 10, but the rumour cannot be traced to its
source.  Mr. Yorstoun authorises the mention of his name.  The Times
of June 2 says that "the report is without foundation".  If Williams
talked everywhere of his dream, on May 3, some garbled shape of it may
conceivably have floated to Bude Kirk by May 10, and originated the
rumour.  Whoever started it would keep quiet when the real news
arrived for fear of being implicated in a conspiracy as accessory
before the fact.  No trace of Mr. Williams's dream occurs in the
contemporary London papers.

The best version of the dream to follow is probably that signed by Mr.
Williams himself in 1832. {39a}

It may, of course, be argued by people who accept Mr. Williams's dream
as a revelation of the future that it reached his mind from the
_purpose_ conceived in Bellingham's mind, by way of "mental
telegraphy". {39b}

DREAM OF MR.  PERCEVAL'S MURDER

"SUNDHILL, December, 1832.

"[Some account of a dream which occurred to John Williams, Esq., of
Scorrier House, in the county of Cornwall, in the year 1812.  Taken
from his own mouth, and narrated by him at various times to several of
his friends.]

"Being desired to write out the particulars of a remarkable dream
which I had in the year 1812, before I do so I think it may be proper
for me to say that at that time my attention was fully occupied with
affairs of my own--the superintendence of some very extensive mines in
Cornwall being entrusted to me.  Thus I had no leisure to pay any
attention to political matters, and hardly knew at that time who
formed the administration of the country.  It was, therefore, scarcely
possible that my own interest in the subject should have had any share
in suggesting the circumstances which presented themselves to my
imagination.  It was, in truth, a subject which never occurred to my
waking thoughts.

"My dream was as follows:--

"About the second or third day of May, 1812, I dreamed that I was in
the lobby of the House of Commons (a place well known to me).  A small
man, dressed in a blue coat and a white waistcoat, entered, and
immediately I saw a person whom I had observed on my first entrance,
dressed in a snuff-coloured coat with metal buttons, take a pistol
from under his coat and present it at the little man above-mentioned.
The pistol was discharged, and the ball entered under the left breast
of the person at whom it was directed.  I saw the blood issue from the
place where the ball had struck him, his countenance instantly
altered, and he fell to the ground.  I see not that it fares worse
with me than with you, even though I scarce rise from my bed. If you
will have my counsel then I must have my way in all that is done."

He consented, and said that she had long given him counsel for his
good.
The "double month" of the summer was now approaching. One fine day
the old woman said to Angle: "The weather is now calm and bright; I
will that you go to Drangey and pick a quarrel with Grettir. I
will go with you and learn what caution is in his words. I shall
have some surety when I see how far they are prospering, and then I
will speak over them such words as I please."
Angle said: "Let us not go to Drangey. It is always worse in my mind
when I leave that place than when I arrive."
The woman said: "I will not help you if you will not let me do as I
like."
"Far be that from me, my foster-mother. I have said that I will go
there a third time, that something may come of it for us."
"You may venture it," she said, "much labour will you have before
Grettir is laid in the earth; often your lot will be doubtful and
hard will it go with you before it is finished. And yet you are so
bound that somehow you must get yourself out of it."
Then Thorbjorn Angle had a ten-oared boat manned and went on board
with eleven men.

The woman was with them and they rowed out to Drangey. When the brothers
saw them coming they came forward to the ladder and began once
more to talk about their case. Thorbjorn said he had come once more
to hear their answer whether Grettir would leave the place. He said
he would treat the destruction of his property and Grettir's stay there
as a light thing, provided they parted in peace. Grettir said he had
no intention of coming to any terms about his going away.

"I have often told you," he said, "that there is no use in talking
to me about it.

You may do whatever you please; I mean to stay here and abide what
happens."
Thorbjorn saw that his end would not be gained this time, and said:
"I knew very well with what men of Hel I had to do. It is most likely
that some days will pass before I come here again."
"It would not hurt me if you never came at all," said Grettir.

The woman was lying in the stern sheets covered up with clothes. Then
she began to stir and said:
"These men are brave and unfortunate; there is much difference
between you; you offer them good and they refuse everything.

There are few more certain tokens of evil than not to know how to
accept the good. Now I say this of you, Grettir, that you be
deprived of health, of all good luck and fortune, of all
protection and counsel, ever the more the longer you live. I wish that
your days may be less happy in the future than they have been
in the past."
When Grettir heard that he started violently and said: "What fiend
is that in the ship with them?"

Illugi said: "I think that must be the old woman, Thorbjorn's foster-mother."

"Curse the hag!"

he said. "I could have thought of nothing worse!

Nothing that was ever said startled me more than her words, and I
know that some evil will befall me from her and her spells. She shall
have something to remind her of her visit here."

Then he took up an enormous stone and threw it down into the boat.

It fell into the heap of clothes. Thorbjorn had not thought that any man
could throw so far. A loud scream was heard, for the stone had
struck her thigh and broken it.

Illugi said: "I wish you had not done that."
"Do not blame me for it," said Grettir. "I fear it has been just
too little. One old woman would not have been too great a price for
us two."
"How will she pay for us? That will be a small sum for the pair
of us."
Thorbjorn then returned home; no greeting passed between them when he
left. He spoke to the old woman and said: "It has happened as I
expected.

Little credit has the journey to the island brought you. You have
been injured for the rest of your life, and we have no more honour
than we had before; we have to endure unatoned one insult after
another."

She answered: "This is the beginning of their destruction; I say
that from this time onwards they will go downwards.

I care not whether I live or not, if I do not have vengeance for the injury
they have done me."
"You seem to be in high spirits, foster-mother," he said. Then they
arrived home. The woman lay in bed for nearly a month before her leg
was set and she was able to walk again.

Men laughed much over the journey of Thorbjorn and the old woman.
Little luck had come from the meetings with Grettir, first at the peace
declaration at the Thing, next when Haering was killed, and now the
third time when the woman's thigh was broken, while nothing had been
done on their side. Thorbjorn Angle suffered much from their talk.

CHAPTER LXXIX. THE SPELL TAKES EFFECT

The autumn passed and but three weeks remained till the winter.

The old woman asked to be driven to the sea-shore. Thorbjorn asked what
she was going to do.

"A small thing only," she said, "yet maybe the signal of greater
things to come."
They did as she asked them. When they reached the shore she
hobbled on by the sea as if directed to a spot where lay a great stump
of a tree as large as a man could bear on his shoulder. She looked at
it and bade them turn it over before her; the other side looked as
if it had been burned and smoothed.

She had a small flat surface cut on its smooth side; then she took a
knife, cut runes upon it, reddened them with her blood and muttered
some spells over it.

After that she walked backwards against the sun round it, and spoke many
potent words. Then she made them push the tree into the sea, and said
it should go to Drangey and that Grettir should suffer hurt from it.

Then she went back to Vidvik.
Thorbjorn said he did not know what would come of it. The woman said
he would know more clearly some day. The wind was towards the land
up the fjord, but the woman's stump drifted against the wind, and
not more slowly than would have been expected.

Grettir was sitting in Drangey with his companions very comfortably,
as has been told. On the day following that on which the old woman
had cast her spells upon the tree they went down from the hill to look
for firewood. When they got to the western side of the island they found
a great stump stranded there.

"Here is a fine log for fuel," cried Illugi, "let us carry it home."

Grettir gave it a kick with his foot and said: "An ill tree and ill sent.
We must find other wood for the fire."
He pushed it out into the sea and told Illugi to beware of carrying it
home, for it was sent for their destruction. Then they returned to
their hut and said nothing about the tree to the thrall. The next day
they found the tree again, nearer to the ladder than on the day
before.
Grettir put it back into the sea and said he would never carry it
home.
That night passed and dirty weather set in with rain, so that they
did not care to go out and told Glaum to fetch fuel. He grumbled very
much and declared it was cruel to make him plague himself to
death in every kind of weather. He descended the ladder and found
there the woman's log. He thought himself lucky, laboured home with
it to the hut and threw it down with a great noise which Grettir
heard.

"Glaum has got something; I must go out and see what it is," he
said, and went out, taking his wood-cutting axe with him.

"Let your cutting up of it be no worse than my carrying of it home!"
said Glaum.

Grettir was irritated with the thrall; he used his axe with both hands
and did not notice what tree it was.

Directly the axe touched the tree it turned flat and glanced off
into Grettir's right leg. It entered above his right knee and pierced
to the bone, making a severe wound.
Grettir turned to the tree and said: "He who meant me evil has prevailed;
it will not end with this. This is the very log which I twice rejected.
Two disasters have you now brought about, Glaum; first you let our
fire go out, and now you have brought in this tree of ill-fortune.
A third mistake will be the death of you and of us all."
Illugi then bound the wound. It bled little; Grettir slept well that
night and three days passed without its paining him. When they opened
the bandages the flesh had grown together and the wound was almost
healed. Illugi said: "I do not think that you will suffer very long
with this wound."
"That would be well," said Grettir; "it has happened strangely
however it ends; but my mind tells me otherwise."

CHAPTER LXXX. THE SPELL CONTINUES TO WORK

One evening they all went to bed, and about midnight Grettir began to
toss about. Illugi asked him why he was so restless. Grettir said his
leg was hurting him and he thought there must be some change in its
appearance. They fetched a light, unbound the wound and found it swollen
and blue as coal. It had opened again and was much worse than at
first.
He had much pain after that and could not keep quiet, nor would any
sleep come to his eyes.

Grettir said: "We must be prepared for it. This illness of mine is
not for nothing; there is witchcraft in it. The old woman has meant
to punish me for the stone which I threw at her."

Illugi said: "I told you that no good would come of that old woman."

"It will be all the same in the end," said Grettir, and spoke a
verse:

"Often when men have threatened my life I have known to defend it
against the foe:
but now 'tis a woman has done me to death.

Truly the spells of the wicked are mighty."
"Now we must be on the watch; Thorbjorn Angle will not leave it to end
here. You, Glaum, must in future guard the ladder every day and
pull it up in the evening. Do this trustily, for much depends
thereon.

If you betray us your end will be a short one."
Glaum promised most faithfully. The weather now became severe. A
north-easterly wind set in and it was very cold. Every evening
Grettir asked if the ladder was drawn in.

"Are we now to look for men?" said Glaum.

"Is any man so anxious to take your life that he will lose his own
for it?

This weather is much worse than impossible. Your warlike mood seems to
have left you utterly if you think that everything is coming to
kill you."
"You will always bear yourself worse than either of us," said
Grettir, "whatever happens. But now you must mind the ladder however
unwilling you may be."
They drove him out every morning, much to his disgust. The pain of the
wound increased, and the whole leg was swollen; the thigh began to
fester both above and below the wound, which spread all round,
and Grettir thought he was likely to die. Illugi sat with him night and
day, paying no heed to anything else. They were now in the second
week of his illness.

CHAPTER LXXXI. THORBJORN AGAIN VISITS DRANGEY

Thorbjorn Angle was now at home in Vidvik, much put out at not having
been able to overcome Grettir. When about a week had passed from the
day when the old woman had bewitched the log, she came to speak with
Thorbjorn and asked whether he did not mean to visit Grettir. He said
there was nothing about which he was more determined.

"But do you wish to meet him, foster-mother?" he asked.

"I have no intention of meeting him," she said; "I have sent him my
greeting, which I expect he has received. But I advise you to set off
at once and go quickly to see him, otherwise it will not be your fate
to overcome him."
He replied: "I have made so many inglorious journeys there that
I am not going again.

This weather is reason enough; it would not be possible, however pressing
it were."
"You are indeed without counsel if you see not through these wiles.
Now, I will advise you.

First go and collect men; ride to your brother-in-law Halldor in
Hof and get help from him.

Is it too wild a thing to suppose that I may have to do with this
breeze that is now playing?"
Thorbjorn thought it might be that the woman saw further than he supposed,
so he sent through the country for men. Answer came very quickly
that none of those who had given up their shares would do anything to
help him. They said that both the island and the Grettir affair were
Thorbjorn's. Tungu-Steinn gave him two men, Hjalti his brother three,
Eirik in Guddal sent him one. Of his own he had six.
These twelve rode out from Vidvik to Hof, where Halldor invited them to
stay and asked their news. Thorbjorn told him everything fully. Halldor
asked who had done it all; he said his foster-mother had urged him
much.

"That will lead to no good. She is a sorceress, and sorcery is now
forbidden."
"I cannot overlook everything," said Thorbjorn; "I am determined that
it shall now be brought to an end somehow. But how shall I go
to work to get on to the island?"

"It seems to me," said Halldor, "that you are relying upon something,
but I know not whether it is anything good. If you want to accomplish
anything go out to my friend Bjorn in Haganes in Fljot. He has a good
boat; ask him from me to lend it to you, and then you will be able
to sail on to Drangey.

It seems to me that if you find Grettir well and hearty your journey
will have been in vain.

One thing know for certain:

do not slay him in open fight, for there are enough men to avenge
him.
Do not slay Illugi if you can help it. I fear that my counsel may
not appear altogether Christian."
Halldor then gave him six men; one was named Kar, another Thorleif,
the third Brand. The names of the others are not mentioned.

These eighteen men then went to Fljot, reached Haganes, and gave
Halldor's message to Bjorn.

He said it was his duty to do it for Halldor's sake, but that he
was under no obligation to Thorbjorn.

He said it was an insane journey to make, and tried hard to
dissuade them. They answered that they could not turn back, so they
went down to the sea and launched the boat, which was ready with all
her gear in the boat-house. Then they made ready to sail. All those who
were standing on the shore thought it impossible to cross.
They hoisted the sail and the boat was soon under way, far out in
the fjord. When they got right out to sea the weather quieted and
was no longer too heavy. In the evening as it was getting dark they
reached Drangey.
CHAPTER LXXXII. THE LAST BATTLE--DEATH OF GRETTIR AND ILLUGI
It has now to be told how Grettir became so ill that he could not
stand on his feet. Illugi sat with him and Glaum had to hold watch.
He still continued to object, and said they might think their lives
were going to fall out of them, but there was no reason for it. He
went out, but most unwillingly. When he came to the ladder he said
to himself that there was no need to draw it up. He felt very sleepy,
lay down and slept all day, and did not wake until Thorbjorn reached
the island. They saw then that the ladder was not drawn up. Thorbjorn
said: "The situation has changed from what it used to be; there are
no men moving about, and the ladder is in its place. It may be that
more will come of our journey than we expected at first. Now let
us go to the hut and not let our courage slacken. If they are well
we may know for certain that there will be need for each to do his
very best."
They went up the ladder, looked round and saw close to the ascent
a man lying and snoring aloud. Thorbjorn recognised Glaum, went up
to the rascal and told him to wake up, striking his ear with the
hilt of his sword and saying: "Truly he is in a bad case whose life
is entrusted to your keeping."
Glaum looked up and said: "They are going on as usual. Do you think
my freedom such a great thing while I am lying here in the cold?"

Angle said: "Have you lost your wits? Don't you see that your enemies
are upon you and about to kill you all?"
Glaum said nothing, but on recognising the men cried out as loud
as he could.
"Do one thing or the other," said Angle; "either be silent this
moment and tell me all about your household, or be killed."
Glaum was as silent as if he had been dipped in water.
Thorbjorn said: "Are the brothers in the hut? Why are they not
about?"
"That would not be so easy," said Glaum, "for Grettir is sick and
nigh to death and Illugi is sitting with him."
Thorbjorn asked about his condition, and what had happened. Then
Glaum told him all about Grettir's wound.We forbear to make
any comments on this wonderful circumstance, but should anything
further transpire that may tend to throw light upon it, we shall not
fail to give the public earliest information."

The Dumfries and Galloway Courier I cannot find!  It is not in the
British Museum.


CHAPTER III


Transition from Dreams to Waking Hallucinations.  Popular Scepticism
about the Existence of Hallucinations in the Sane.  Evidence of Mr.
Francis Galton, F.R.S.  Scientific Disbelief in ordinary Mental
Imagery.  Scientific Men who do not see in "the Mind's Eye".  Ordinary
People who do.  Frequency of Waking Hallucinations among Mr. Gallon's
friends.  Kept Private till asked for by Science.  Causes of such
Hallucinations unknown.  Story of the Diplomatist.  Voluntary or
Induced Hallucinations.  Crystal Gazing.  Its Universality.
Experience of George Sand.  Nature of such Visions.  Examples.
Novelists.  Crystal Visions only "Ghostly" when Veracious.  Modern
Examples.  Under the Lamp.  The Cow with the Bell Historical Example.
Prophetic Crystal Vision.  St. Simon The Regent d'Orleans.  The
Deathbed of Louis XIV.  References for other Cases of Crystal Visions.

From dreams, in sleep or swoon, of a character difficult to believe in
we pass by way of "hallucinations" to ghosts.  Everybody is ready to
admit that dreams do really occur, because almost everybody has
dreamed.  But everybody is not so ready to admit that sane and
sensible men and women can have hallucinations, just because everybody
has not been hallucinated.

On this point Mr. Francis Galton, in his Inquiries into Human Faculty
(1833), is very instructive.  Mr. Galton drew up a short catechism,
asking people how clearly or how dimly they saw things "in their
mind's eye".

"Think of your breakfast-table," he said; "is your mental picture of
it as clearly illuminated and as complete as your actual view of the
scene?"  Mr. Galton began by questioning friends in the scientific
world, F.R.S.'s and other savants.  "The earliest results of my
inquiry amazed me. . . .  The great majority of the men of science to
whom I first applied, protested that _mental imagery was unknown to
them_, and they looked on me as fanciful and fantastic in supposing
that the words 'mental imagery' really expressed what I believed
everybody supposed them to mean."  One gentleman wrote:  "It is only
by a figure of speech that I can describe my recollection of a scene
as a 'mental image' which I can 'see' with 'my mind's eye'.  I do not
see it," so he seems to have supposed that nobody else did.

When he made inquiries in general society, Mr. Galton found plenty of
people who "saw" mental imagery with every degree of brilliance or
dimness, from "quite comparable to the real object" to "I recollect
the table, but do not see it"--my own position.

Mr. Galton was next "greatly struck by the frequency of the replies in
which my correspondents" (sane and healthy) "described themselves as
subject to 'visions'".  These varied in degree, "some were so vivid as
actually to deceive the judgment".  Finally, "a notable proportion of
sane persons have had not only visions, but actual hallucinations of
sight at one or more periods of their life.  I have a considerable
packet of instances contributed by my personal friends."  Thus one
"distinguished authoress" saw "the principal character of one of her
novels glide through the door straight up to her.  It was about the
size of a large doll."  Another heard unreal music, and opened the
door to hear it better.  Another was plagued by voices, which said
"Pray," and so forth.

Thus, on scientific evidence, sane and healthy people may, and "in a
notable proportion _do_, experience hallucinations".  That is to say,
they see persons, or hear them, or believe they are touched by them,
or all their senses are equally affected at once, when no such persons
are really present.  This kind of thing is always going on, but "when
popular opinion is of a matter-of-fact kind, the seers of visions keep
quiet; they do not like to be thought fanciful or mad, and they hide
their experiences, which only come to light through inquiries such as
those that I have been making".

We may now proceed to the waking hallucinations of sane and healthy
people, which Mr. Galton declares to be so far from uncommon.  Into
the _causes_ of these hallucinations which may actually deceive the
judgment, Mr. Galton does not enter.

STORY OF THE DIPLOMATIST {56a}

For example, there is a living diplomatist who knows men and cities,
and has, moreover, a fine sense of humour.  "My Lord," said a famous
Russian statesman to him, "you have all the qualities of a
diplomatist, but you cannot control your smile."  This gentleman,
walking alone in a certain cloister at Cambridge, met a casual
acquaintance, a well-known London clergyman, and was just about
shaking hands with him, when the clergyman vanished.  Nothing in
particular happened to either of them; the clergyman was not in the
seer's mind at the moment.

This is a good example of a solitary hallucination in the experience
of a very cool-headed observer.  The _causes_ of such experiences are
still a mystery to science.  Even people who believe in "mental
telegraphy," say when a distant person, at death or in any other
crisis, impresses himself as present on the senses of a friend, cannot
account for an experience like that of the diplomatist, an experience
not very uncommon, and little noticed except when it happens to
coincide with some remarkable event. {56b}  Nor are such
hallucinations of an origin easily detected, like those of delirium,
insanity, intoxication, grief, anxiety, or remorse.  We can only
suppose that a past impression of the aspect of a friend is recalled
by some association of ideas so vividly that (though we are not
_consciously_ thinking of him) we conceive the friend to be actually
present in the body when he is absent.

These hallucinations are casual and unsought.  But between these and
the dreams of sleep there is a kind of waking hallucinations which
some people can purposely evoke.  Such are the visions of _crystal
gazing_.

Among the superstitions of almost all ages and countries is the belief
that "spirits" will show themselves, usually after magical ceremonies,
to certain persons, commonly children, who stare into a crystal ball,
a cup, a mirror, a blob of ink (in Egypt and India), a drop of blood
(among the Maoris of New Zealand), a bowl of water (Red Indian), a
pond (Roman and African), water in a glass bowl (in Fez), or almost
any polished surface.  The magical ceremonies, which have probably
nothing to do with the matter, have succeeded in making this old and
nearly universal belief seem a mere fantastic superstition.  But
occasionally a person not superstitious has recorded this experience.
Thus George Sand in her Histoire de ma Vie mentions that, as a little
girl, she used to see wonderful moving landscapes in the polished back
of a screen.  These were so vivid that she thought they must be
visible to others.

Recent experiments have proved that an unexpected number of people
have this faculty.  Gazing into a ball of crystal or glass, a crystal
or other smooth ring stone, such as a sapphire or ruby, or even into a
common ink-pot, they will see visions very brilliant.  These are often
mere reminiscences of faces or places, occasionally of faces or places
sunk deep below the ordinary memory.  Still more frequently they
represent fantastic landscapes and romantic scenes, as in an
historical novel, with people in odd costumes coming, going and
acting.  Thus I have been present when a lady saw in a glass ball a
man in white Oriental costume kneeling beside a leaping fountain of
fire.  Presently a hand appeared pointing downwards through the flame.
The _first_ vision seen pretty often represents an invalid in bed.
Printed words are occasionally read in the glass, as also happens in
the visions beheld with shut eyes before sleeping.

All these kinds of things, in fact, are common in our visions between
sleeping and waking (illusions hypnagogiques).  The singularity is
that they are seen by people wide awake in glass balls and so forth.
Usually the seer is a person whose ordinary "mental imagery" is
particularly vivid.  But every "visualiser" is not a crystal seer.  A
novelist of my acquaintance can "visualise" so well that, having
forgotten an address and lost the letter on which it was written, he
called up a mental picture of the letter, and so discovered the
address.  But this very popular writer can see no visions in a crystal
ball.  Another very popular novelist can see them; little dramas are
acted out in the ball for his edification. {58}

These things are as unfamiliar to men of science as Mr. Galton found
ordinary mental imagery, pictures in memory, to be.  Psychology may or
may not include them in her province; they may or may not come to be
studied as ordinary dreams are studied.  But, like dreams, these
crystal visions enter the domain of the ghostly only when they are
_veracious_, and contribute information previously unknown as to past,
present or future.  There are plenty of stories to this effect.  To
begin with an easy, or comparatively easy, exercise in belief.

UNDER THE LAMP

I had given a glass ball to a young lady, who believed that she could
play the "willing game" successfully without touching the person
"willed," and when the person did not even know that "willing" was
going on.  This lady, Miss Baillie, had scarcely any success with the
ball.  She lent it to Miss Leslie, who saw a large, square, old-
fashioned red sofa covered with muslin, which she found in the next
country house she visited.  Miss Baillie's brother, a young athlete
(at short odds for the amateur golf championship), laughed at these
experiments, took the ball into the study, and came back looking "gey
gash".  He admitted that he had seen a vision, somebody he knew "under
a lamp".  He would discover during the week whether he saw right or
not.  This was at 5.30 on a Sunday afternoon.  On Tuesday, Mr. Baillie
was at a dance in a town some forty miles from his home, and met a
Miss Preston.  "On Sunday," he said, "about half-past five you were
sitting under a standard lamp in a dress I never saw you wear, a blue
blouse with lace over the shoulders, pouring out tea for a man in blue
serge, whose back was towards me, so that I only saw the tip of his
moustache."

"Why, the blinds must have been up," said Miss Preston.

"I was at Dulby," said Mr. Baillie, as he undeniably was. {60a}

This is not a difficult exercise in belief.  Miss Preston was not
unlikely to be at tea at tea-time.

Nor is the following very hard.

THE COW WITH THE BELL

I had given a glass ball to the wife of a friend, whose visions proved
so startling and on one occasion so unholy that she ceased to make
experiments.  One day my friend's secretary, a young student and
golfer, took up the ball.

"I see a field I know very well," he said, "but there is a cow in it
that I never saw; brown, with white markings, and, this is odd in
Scotland, she has a bell hanging from her neck.  I'll go and look at
the field."

He went and found the cow as described, bell and all. {60b}

In the spring of 1897 I gave a glass ball to a young lady, previously
a stranger to me, who was entirely unacquainted with crystal gazing,
even by report.  She had, however, not infrequent experience of
spontaneous visions, which were fulfilled, including a vision of the
Derby (Persimmon's year), which enriched her friends.  In using the
ball she, time after time, succeeded in seeing and correctly
describing persons and places familiar to people for whom she
"scried," but totally strange to herself.  In one case she added a
detail quite unknown to the person who consulted her, but which was
verified on inquiry.  These experiments will probably be published
elsewhere.  Four people, out of the very small number who tried on
these occasions, saw fancy pictures in the ball:  two were young
ladies, one a man, and one a schoolboy.  I must confess that, for the
first time, I was impressed by the belief that the lady's veracious
visions, however they are to be explained, could not possibly be
accounted for by chance coincidence.  They were too many (I was aware
of five in a few days), too minute, and too remote from the range of
ingenious guessing.  But "thought transference," tapping the mental
wires of another person, would have accounted for every case, with,
perhaps, the exception of that in which an unknown detail was added.
This confession will, undoubtedly, seem weakly credulous, but not to
make it would be unfair and unsportsmanlike.  My statement, of course,
especially without the details, is not evidence for other people.

The following case is a much harder exercise in belief.  It is
narrated by the Duc de Saint Simon. {62}  The events were described to
Saint Simon on the day after their occurrence by the Duc d'Orleans,
then starting for Italy, in May, 1706.  Saint Simon was very intimate
with the duke, and they corresponded by private cypher without
secretaries.  Owing to the death of the king's son and grandson (not
seen in the vision), Orleans became Regent when Louis XIV. died in
1714.  Saint Simon is a reluctant witness, and therefore all the
better.

THE DEATHBED OF LOUIS XIV.

"Here is a strange story that the Duc d'Orleans told me one day in a
tete-a-tete at Marly, he having just run down from Paris before he
started for Italy; and it may be observed that all the events
predicted came to pass, though none of them could have been foreseen
at the time.  His interest in every kind of art and science was very
great, and in spite of his keen intellect, he was all his life subject
to a weakness which had been introduced (with other things) from Italy
by Catherine de Medici, and had reigned supreme over the courts of her
children.  He had exercised every known method of inducing the devil
to appear to him in person, though, as he has himself told me, without
the smallest success.  He had spent much time in investigating matters
that touched on the supernatural, and dealt with the future.

"Now La Sery (his mistress) had in her house a little girl of eight or
nine years of age, who had never resided elsewhere since her birth.
She was to all appearance a very ordinary child, and from the way in
which she had been brought up, was more than commonly ignorant and
simple.  One day, during the visit of M. d'Orleans, La Sery produced
for his edification one of the charlatans with whom the duke had long
been familiar, who pretended that by means of a glass of water he
could see the answer to any question that might be put.  For this
purpose it was necessary to have as a go-between some one both young
and innocent, to gaze into the water, and this little girl was at once
sent for.  They amused themselves by asking what was happening in
certain distant places; and after the man had murmured some words over
the water, the child looked in and always managed to see the vision
required of her.

"M. le duc d'Orleans had so often been duped in matters of this kind
that he determined to put the water-gazer to a severe test.  He
whispered to one of his attendants to go round to Madame de Nancre's,
who lived close by, and ascertain who was there, what they were all
doing, the position of the room and the way it was furnished, and
then, without exchanging a word with any one, to return and let him
know the result.  This was done speedily and without the slightest
suspicion on the part of any person, the child remaining in the room
all the time.  When M. le duc d'Orleans had learned all he wanted to
know, he bade the child look in the water and tell him who was at
Madame de Nancre's and what they were all doing.  She repeated word
for word the story that had been told by the duke's messenger;
described minutely the faces, dresses and positions of the assembled
company, those that were playing cards at the various tables, those
that were sitting, those that were standing, even the very furniture!
But to leave nothing in doubt, the Duke of Orleans despatched Nancre
back to the house to verify a second time the child's account, and
like the valet, he found she had been right in every particular.

"As a rule he said very little to me about these subjects, as he knew
I did not approve of them, and on this occasion I did not fail to
scold him, and to point out the folly of being amused by such things,
especially at a time when his attention should be occupied with more
serious matters.  'Oh, but I have only told you half,' he replied;
'that was just the beginning,' and then he went on to say that,
encouraged by the exactitude of the little girl's description of
Madame de Nancre's room, he resolved to put to her a more important
question, namely, as to the scene that would occur at the death of the
king.  The child had never seen any one who was about the court, and
had never even heard of Versailles, but she described exactly and at
great length the king's bedroom at Versailles and all the furniture
which was in fact there at the date of his death.  She gave every
detail as to the bed, and cried out on recognising, in the arms of
Madame de Ventadour, a little child decorated with an order whom she
had seen at the house of Mademoiselle la Sery; and again at the sight
of M. le duc d'Orleans.  From her account, Madame de Maintenon, Fagon
with his odd face, Madame la duchesse d'Orleans, Madame la duchesse,
Madame la princesse de Conti, besides other princes and nobles, and
even the valets and servants were all present at the king's deathbed.
Then she paused, and M. le duc d'Orleans, surprised that she had never
mentioned Monseigneur, Monsieur le duc de Bourgogne, Madame la
duchesse de Bourgogne, nor M. le duc de Berri, inquired if she did not
see such and such people answering to their description.  She
persisted that she did not, and went over the others for the second
time.  This astonished M. le duc d'Orleans deeply, as well as myself,
and we were at a loss to explain it, but the event proved that the
child was perfectly right.  This seance took place in 1706.  These
four members of the royal family were then full of health and
strength; and they all died before the king.  It was the same thing
with M. le prince, M. le duc, and M. le prince de Conti, whom she
likewise did not see, though she beheld the children of the two last
named; M. du Maine, his own (Orleans), and M. le comte de Toulouse.
But of course this fact was unknown till eight years after."

Science may conceivably come to study crystal visions, but veracious
crystal visions will be treated like veracious dreams.  That is to
say, they will be explained as the results of a chance coincidence
between the unknown fact and the vision, or of imposture, conscious or
unconscious, or of confusion of memory, or the fact of the crystal
vision will be simply denied.  Thus a vast number of well-
authenticated cases of veracious visions will be required before
science could admit that it might be well to investigate hitherto
unacknowledged faculties of the human mind.  They both fell dead, pierced
by the spear. Then all the others dashed down as they reached the steps.
Grettir tackled them each in turn, now thrusting with the spear,
now hewing with the sword, while they defended themselves with logs
lying on the ground or with anything else which they could get.
It was a terrible trial of a man's prowess to deal with men of
their strength, even unarmed.

Grettir slew two of the Halogaland men there in the enclosure.

Four of the serving-men then came up. They had not been able
to agree upon which arms each should take, but they came out to
the attack directly the berserks were running away; when these
turned against them they fell back on the house. Six of the ruffians
fell, all slain by Grettir's own hand; the other six then fled
towards the landing place and took refuge in the boat-house, where
they defended themselves with oars. Grettir received a severe
blow from one of them and narrowly escaped a serious hurt.

The serving-men all went home and told great stories of their own
exploits.

The lady wanted to know what had become of Grettir, but they could not
tell her. Grettir slew two men in the boat-house, but the other
four got away, two in one direction, two in another. He pursued those
who were nearest to him. The night was very dark. They ran to
Vindheim, the place spoken of before, and took refuge in a barn,
where they fought for a long time until at last Grettir killed them.
By this time he was terribly stiff and exhausted. The night was far
spent; it was very cold and there were driving snow-storms. He felt
little inclination to go after the two who yet remained, so he went
back home.
The goodwife kindled a light and put it in a window in the loft at
the top of the house, where it served him as a guide, and he was
able to find his way home by the light.

When he came to the door the mistress came to meet him and bade him
welcome.

"You have earned great glory," she said, "and have saved me and my
household from a disgrace never to be redeemed if you had not delivered
us."
"I think I am much the same person as I was last evening when you spoke
so roughly to me," said Grettir.

"We knew not then the might that was in you," she said, "as we
know it now. Everything in the house shall be yours, so far as it is
fitting for me to bestow and right for you to receive. I doubt
not that Thorfinn will reward you in a better way when he comes
home."
"There is little that I want as a reward at present," said Grettir.
"But I accept your offer until your husband returns. I think now that
you will be able to sleep in peace undisturbed by the berserks."

Grettir drank little before he retired and lay all night in his
armour.
In the morning, directly the day broke, all the men of the island
were called together to go forth and search for the two berserks
who had escaped.

They were found at the end of the day lying under a rock, both dead
from cold and from their wounds; they were carried away
and buried in a place on the shore beneath the tide, with some
loose stones over them, after which the islanders returned home,
feeling that they could live in peace. When Grettir came back
to the house and met the mistress he spoke a verse:

"Near the surging sea the twelve lie buried.

I stayed not my hand but slew them alone.
Great lady! what deed that is wrought by a man shall be sung of as
worthy if this be deemed small."
She answered: "Certainly you are very unlike any other man now living."
She set him in the high seat and gave him the best of everything. So
it remained until Thorfinn returned.

CHAPTER XX. THORFINN'S RETURN. GRETTIR VISITS THE NORTH

When Yule-tide was past, Thorfinn made ready for his homeward journey
and dismissed his many guests with gifts. He sailed with all his men
and landed near the place where the boat-houses were.

They saw a ship lying on the sand which they at once recognised as his
great boat. Thorfinn had heard nothing of the vikings and told his
men to put him on shore, "for I suspect," he said, "that they are
not friends who have been at work here."

Thorfinn was the first to land, and went straight to the boat-house,
where he saw a craft which he knew at once to be that of the berserks.

He said to his men: "I suspect that things have taken place here such
that I would give the whole island and everything that is in it for
them not to have happened."
They asked how that was.

"Vikings have been here, men whom I know as the worst in all Norway,
namely Thorir Paunch and Ogmund the Bad. They will not have dealt
gently with us. I mistrust that Icelander."
Then he spoke many things to his men. Grettir was at home and detained
the men from going down to the shore. He said he did not care if the
bondi got a little fright from what he saw. The goodwife asked his
leave to go down, and he said she was mistress of her own ways, but
that he was not going. So she hurried away to greet Thorfinn and
embraced him joyfully. He was rejoiced to see her and said: "God be
praised that I see you well and my daughter too. But what has happened
to you since I left?"
"It has ended well," she said. "But we were nigh to suffering a
disgrace which could never have been wiped out, had not your
winter-guest aided us."
Thorfinn said: "Let us sit down and you shall tell me everything."
Then she told him fully all that had happened, praising highly Grettir's
courage and resourcefulness. Thorfinn was silent while she was speaking,
and when she had finished he said: "True indeed is the word, `Long
shall a man be tried'.

But where is Grettir?"
"He is at home in the hall," she answered.

Then they went up to the house. Thorfinn went to Grettir and turned
towards him and thanked him with the fairest words for his courageous
conduct.

"I will say a word to you," he said, "which few would say to their friend.
I would it might happen that you should need the help of a man, for
you to know whether I count for anything or not; I cannot repay what
you have done for me as long as you are not in straits.

You shall have in my house whatever you desire, and shall be in the
highest honour in my household."
Grettir thanked him and said he would have accepted his offer even if
he had made it earlier.

Grettir stayed there the rest of the winter in high favour with
Thorfinn. The fame of his deed spread through all Norway, especially
in those parts where the berserks had ravaged most mercilessly. In
the spring Thorfinn asked him what he would like to do. He said he
would go North to Vagar while the fair was on there. Thorfinn said
that any money which he required should be at his service; Grettir
said he did not want more just then than enough to pay for his living.
Thorfinn said that was his due, and brought him to a ship, where he
gave him the excellent short sword. Grettir kept it as long as he
lived; it was a most precious possession. Thorfinn bade him come to
him if ever he wanted any help.

Grettir then travelled to Vagar, which was crowded with people. Many
whom he had never set eyes on before greeted him warmly because of his
exploit in killing the vikings, and several of the leading men
invited him to stay with them, but he preferred to return to his friend
Thorfinn.

So he took his passage in a trading ship belonging to one Thorkell, a
man of some consideration in Salfti in Halogaland.

Grettir went to visit Thorkell in his home, where he received a
hearty welcome and a very pressing invitation to stay there for the
winter. Grettir accepted the invitation and stayed the winter with
Thorkell, who treated him with great honour.

CHAPTER XXI. ADVENTURE WITH A BEAR

There was a man named Bjorn who was then on a visit to Thorkell. He
was of a somewhat violent character of good family and related in
some way to Thorkell.

He was not generally liked, because he was too much given to talking
against the men who were about Thorkell and drove many away from
him.

He and Grettir did not get on at all. Bjorn thought him of small account
compared to himself; Grettir paid him little deference, and it became
an open feud. Bjorn was a boisterous swaggering man, and many of
the younger men imitated him, loitering about outside in the
evenings.

It happened at the beginning of the winter that a savage brown bear
broke out of its den and raged about destroying men and cattle. Every
one declared that it had been provoked by the noise which Bjorn and
his company made. The beast became most mischievous, attacking the
flocks in the very face of the men themselves. Thorkell, being the
wealthiest man of that part, suffered most. One day he called up his
men to come with him and search out the bear's den. They found it in
a cliff by the sea where there was a cave under an overhanging
rock, with a narrow path leading to the entrance.

Below was a sheer precipice down to the beach, threatening certain death
to any one who stumbled.

In this den the bear lay in the daytime, going abroad at night.
Fences were of no avail against him, nor could the dogs do anything,
so that all were in the utmost distress.

Thorkell's kinsman Bjorn declared that the main thing was gained
now that they had found the den.

"Now we shall see," he said, "how the game will go with me and my
namesake." Grettir pretended not to hear what he said.

In the evenings when the others retired to bed, Bjorn used generally to
go out. One night he went to the bear's den and found the creature
inside, growling horribly. He lay down in the path, placing his shield
over him, intending to wait until the beast came out as usual. Bruin,
however, got wind of him and was rather slow in coming out. Bjorn got
very sleepy where he was lying and could not keep awake; in the
meantime out came the bear from his den and saw a man lying there.
He clawed at him, dragged off his shield and threw it down the cliff.
Bjorn woke up, not a little startled, took to his heels and ran
off home, narrowly escaping the bear's clutches.

His friends knew all about it, having watched his movements; on the
next morning they found the shield and made great game of his
adventure.

At Yule-time Thorkell himself went out to the den with Bjorn, Grettir
and others of his men, a party of eight in all. Grettir had on a fur
cape which he put off when they were attacking the bear. It was rather
difficult to get at him, since they could only reach him with
spear-thrusts, which he parried with his teeth.

Bjorn kept urging them on to tackle him, but himself did not go near
enough to be in any danger. At last, when no one was looking out, he
took Grettir's fur cloak and threw it in to the bear.

They did not succeed in getting the bear out, and when night came on
turned to go home. Grettir then missed his cloak and saw that the
bear had got it into his grip.

"Who has been playing tricks on me?" he cried. "Who threw my cloak into
the cave?"
Bjorn answered: "He who did it will not be afraid to say so."
"Things of that sort do not trouble me much," said Grettir.

Then they started on their way home. After they had gone a little way
Grettir's garter broke. Thorkell told them to wait for him, but
Grettir said it was not necessary. Then Bjorn said: "There is
no need to suppose that Grettir will run away from his cloak.
He wants to have the honour of killing the beast all alone, and he
will say that we eight men went away. Then he would appear to be
what he is said to be. He has been backward enough all day."
"I don't know how you stand in that matter," said Thorkell. "You and he
are not equal in valour; do not make any to-do about him."
Bjorn said that neither he nor Grettir should choose the words out
of his mouth.

There was a hill between them and Grettir, who had turned back along
the footpath. Now he had no others to reckon with in making
the attack.

He drew his sword Jokulsnaut and tied a loop round the handle which
he passed over his wrist, because he thought that he could carry
out his plans better if his hand were free.

He went along the path. When the bear saw a man coming, he charged
savagely, and struck at him with the paw that was on the side away from
the precipice. Grettir aimed a blow at him with his sword and cut
off his paw just above the claws.

Then the creature tried to strike him with his sound paw, but to do
so he had to drop on the stump, which was shorter than he expected,
and over he fell into Grettir's embraces. Grettir seized the
beast by the ears and held him off so that he could not bite. He
always said that he considered this holding back the bear the greatest
feat of strength that he ever performed. The beast struggled
violently; the space was very narrow, and they both fell over
the precipice. The bear being the heavier came down first on the beach;
Grettir fell on the top of him, and the bear was badly mauled on the
side that was down. Grettir got his sword, ran it into the heart of
the bear and killed him. Then he went home, after fetching
his cloak which was torn to pieces. He also took with him the bit of
the paw which he had cut off.

Thorkell was sitting and drinking when Grettir entered. They all laughed
at the ragged cloak which he was wearing.

Then he laid the piece of the paw upon the table. Thorkell said:
"Where is my kinsman Bjorn? I never saw iron bite like that in your
hands. Now I would like you to show Grettir some honour to make up
for the shame which you cast upon him."

Bjorn said that could wait, and that it mattered little to him whether
Grettir was pleased or not. Grettir then spoke a verse:

"Oft returned the watcher at night trembling home, but sound in
limb.

None ever saw me sit in the dusk at the cave; yet now I am home returned."

"It is true," said Bjorn, "that you have fought well; and also true that
our opinions differ. I suppose you think that your taunts hurt me."

Thorkell said: "I should be glad, Grettir, if you would not revenge
yourself upon Bjorn.

I will pay the full weregild of a man for you to be reconciled."
Bjorn said he might invest his money better than in paying for that; and
that it would be better for him and Grettir to go on bickering since
"each oak has that which it scrapes from the other." Thorkell said:
"But I ask you, Grettir, to do so much for my sake as not to attack
Bjorn while you are both with me."
"That I promise," said Grettir.

Bjorn said that he would walk without fear of Grettir wherever they
met.
Grettir grinned, and would accept no money on account of Bjorn. They
stayed there the winter.

CHAPTER XXII. GRETTIR KILLS BJORN AND IS SUMMONED BEFORE JARL
SVEINN

In the spring Grettir went North to Vagar with Thorkell's men. They
parted with friendship. Bjorn went West to England in Thorkell's ship,
of which he was master, staying there for the summer and transacting
the business which Thorkell had entrusted to him. In the end of the
autumn he returned from the western parts. Grettir stayed in Vagar
till the trading ships left, and then sailed South with some of
the traders, as far as the port of Gartar at the mouth of the
Thrandheim's Fjord, where he set up the awnings to make a stay.

When they were settled down a ship came up along the coast from the
South, which they at once recognised as one of the ships from
England.

She made fast further out off the coast and her crew landed. Grettir
went out with his companions to visit them.
On their meeting Grettir found Bjorn amongst the company and said: "It
is well that we meet here, for now we can continue our former quarrel.
I should like to try which of us is the better man."
Bjorn said that was all past now, as far as he was concerned. "But,"
he said, "if there has been anything between us I will pay you such
compensation that you shall be satisfied." Grettir spoke a verse:

"Time was when the bear was slain by my hand; my cloak in tatters
was torn.

A rascally knave was the cause of it all but now he shall make me
amends."
Bjorn said that weightier matters than this had been settled by
payment.

Grettir said that few men had any reason to act maliciously towards
him; he had accepted no money-atonement, nor would he do so now; that
if he had his way they should not both go away unhurt, and that if
Bjorn refused to fight he would brand him as a coward. Bjorn saw that
excuses would not avail him, so he took his arms and went out. They
rushed at each other and fought; soon Bjorn was wounded and then he
fell dead to the ground. On seeing that, his men went on board their
ship, sailed away to the North along the coast to Thorkell's place
and told him what had happened. He said it had not come sooner
than he expected.

Directly afterwards he sailed to the South to Thrandheim where he found
jarl Sveinn.

Grettir, after slaying Bjorn, went to More to his friend Thorfinn and
told him exactly what had happened. Thorfinn received him in a most
friendly way. "I am glad," he said, "that you will now have need
of a friend.

You must stay with me until this affair is finished."

Grettir thanked him for his invitation and said he would accept
it.

Jarl Sveinn was staying at Steinker in Thrandheim when he heard of
the Slaying of Bjorn.

With him was a brother of Bjorn named Hjarrandi, as one of his
bodyguard.

On hearing of Bjorn's death he became very angry and begged the jarl
for his support in the matter, which the jarl promised that he should
have. He sent messengers to Thorfinn to summon both him and Grettir
to appear before him. Immediately on receiving the jarl's commands
they both made ready and came to Thrandheim. The jarl held a council
on the matter and ordered Hjarrandi to be present.
Hjarrandi said he was not going to weigh his brother against his
purse, and that he must either follow him or avenge him.

When the case was looked into, it became evident that Bjorn had
given Grettir many provocations.

Thorfinn offered to pay a fine such as the jarl thought suitable
to the position of his kinsman, and dwelt at length upon Grettir's
achievement in killing the berserks, and how he had delivered the
men in the North from them.

The jarl answered: "Truth do you speak, Thorfinn!

that was indeed a cleansing! It would befit us well to accept the
compensation for your sake. Grettir, too, is a fine fellow, and noted
for his strength and valour."

Hjarrandi, however, would accept no compensation, and the meeting came
to an end. Thorfinn appointed one of his kinsmen, Arnbjorn, to accompany
Grettir every day, for he knew that Hjarrandi was plotting against
his life.

CHAPTER XXIII. GRETTIR KILLS HJARRANDI

One day Grettir and Arnbjorn were walking along the road for their
diversion when they passed a gate, whence a man rushed out holding
an axe aloft with both hands and struck at Grettir, who was not on his
guard and was moving slowly.

Arnbjorn, however, saw the man coming, seized Grettir and pushed him
aside with such force that he fell on his knee. The axe struck him in
the shoulder-blade and cut down to below the arm, inflicting a severe
wound.

Grettir turned quickly and drew his sword; he saw that it was
Hjarrandi who had attacked him.

The axe had stuck fast in the road, and Hjarrandi was slow in recovering
it. Grettir struck at him and cut off his arm at the shoulder.
Then there came running up five of Hjarrandi's followers and a battle
began with them.
They were soon routed; Grettir and Arnbjorn killed the five who were
with Hjarrandi; one man escaped and bore the tale to the jarl
forthwith.
The jarl was very angry indeed, and summoned the assembly for the
next day. Thorfinn and his party appeared thereat. The jarl brought
a charge of manslaughter against Grettir, who admitted it and said
that he had been obliged to defend himself. "I bear the marks of
it," he said. "I should have been killed if Arnbjorn had not defended
me."
The jarl said it was a pity he had not been killed, for this affair
would lead to many a man being slain if he lived.
There had come to the jarl's court Bersi the son of Skaldtorfa,
Grettir's comrade and friend. He and Thorfinn stepped before the
jarl and begged for pardon for Grettir. They asked that the jarl
should decide the matter himself as he thought best, only that
Grettir should have his life and the freedom of the country. The
jarl was averse to any terms being granted to him, but gave way to
their entreaties. He granted immunity to Grettir until the spring,
but not absolutely until Gunnar the brother of Bjorn and Hjarrandi
should be present. Gunnar was a landed proprietor in Tunsberg.
In the spring the jarl ordered Grettir and Thorfinn to appear at
Tunsberg, where he himself intended to be while the shipping was
assembled. So thither they went, and found the jarl was already in
the town. There Grettir met his brother Thorsteinn Dromund, who
greeted him joyfully and invited him to be his guest. He was a
landowner in the town. Grettir told him all about his case, and
Thorsteinn took his view of it, but told him to beware of Gunnar.
So the spring passed.
CHAPTER XXIV. GRETTIR KILLS GUNNAR. HIS FRIENDS RALLY ROUND HIM AND
SAVE HIM FROM THE VENGEANCE OF THE JARL
Gunnar was in the town and was plotting against Grettir's life.
Wherever he went Gunnar dogged his steps wherever he found a chance
of getting near him. One day Grettir was sitting in a booth and
drinking, because he wanted to keep out of Gunnar's way. Suddenly
there was a bang at the door, so hard that it broke in pieces, and
in rushed four men armed and attacked Grettir. They were Gunnar
with his followers. Grettir seized his arms which were hanging above
his head and ran into a corner, where he defended himself, holding
his shield before him, and hewing with his sword. They made little
way against him. One blow he succeeded in delivering upon one of
Gunnar's followers, who needed nothing more. Then Grettir advanced,
driving them before him out of the booth, and killing another of
them. Gunnar would fain have got away with his men, but on reaching
the door he caught his foot on the doorstep, fell over and was not
able to recover himself at once.Here part of her mind may have known that the
door was open, and started a ghost (for there was no real man there)
to stop her.  Pity that these things do not occur more frequently.
They do--in New Zealand. {82}

These are a few examples of useful veracious waking dreams.  The sort
of which we hear most are "wraiths".  A, when awake, meets B, who is
dead or dying or quite well at a distance.  The number of these
stories is legion.  To these we advance, under their Highland title,
_spirits of the living_.


CHAPTER V


"Spirits of the Living."  Mistakes of Identity.  Followed by Arrival
of Real Person.  "Arrivals."  Mark Twain's Phantom Lady.  Phantom
Dogcart.  Influence of Expectant Attention.  Goethe.  Shelley.  The
Wraith of the Czarina.  Queen Elizabeth's Wraith.  Second Sight.  Case
at Ballachulish.  Experiments in sending Wraiths.  An "Astral Body".
Evidence discussed.  Miss Russell's Case.  "Spirits of the Dying."
Maori Examples.  Theory of Chance Coincidence.  In Tavistock Place.
The Wynyard Wraith.  Lord Brougham's Wraith Story.  Lord Brougham's
Logic.  The Dying Mother.  Comparison with the Astral Body.  The
Vision of the Bride.  Animals as affected by the supposed Presence of
Apparitions.  Examples.  Transition to Appearances of the Dead.

"Spirits of the living" is the Highland term for the appearances of
people who are alive and well--but elsewhere.  The common Highland
belief is that they show themselves to second-sighted persons, very
frequently before the arrival of a stranger or a visitor, expected or
unexpected.  Probably many readers have had the experience of meeting
an acquaintance in the street.  He passes us, and within a hundred
yards we again meet and talk with our friend.  When he is of very
marked appearance, or has any strong peculiarity, the experience is
rather perplexing.  Perhaps a few bits of hallucination are sprinkled
over a real object.  This ordinary event leads on to what are called
"Arrivals," that is when a person is seen, heard and perhaps spoken to
in a place to which he is travelling, but whither he has not yet
arrived.  Mark Twain gives an instance in his own experience.  At a
large crowded reception he saw approaching him in the throng a lady
whom he had known and liked many years before.  When she was near him,
he lost sight of her, but met her at supper, dressed as he had seen
her in the "levee".  At that moment she was travelling by railway to
the town in which he was. {85a}

A large number of these cases have been printed. {85b}  In one case a
gentleman and lady from their window saw his brother and sister-in-law
drive past, with a horse which they knew had not been out for some
weeks.  The seers were presently joined by the visitors' daughter, who
had met the party on the road, she having just left them at their
house.  Ten minutes later the real pair arrived, horse and all. {85c}

This last affair is one of several tales of "Phantom Coaches," not
only heard but seen, the coach being a coach of the living.  In 1893
the author was staying at a Highland castle, when one of the ladies
observed to her nephew, "So you and Susan _did_ drive in the dogcart;
I saw you pass my window".  "No, we didn't; but we spoke of doing it."
The lady then mentioned minute details of the dress and attitudes of
her relations as they passed her window, where the drive turned from
the hall door through the park; but, in fact, no such journey had been
made.  Dr. Hack Tuke published the story of the "Arrival" of Dr. Boase
at his house a quarter of an hour before he came, the people who saw
him supposing him to be in Paris. {86}

When a person is seen in "Arrival" cases before he arrives, the affair
is not so odd if he is expected.  Undoubtedly, expectation does
sometimes conjure up phantasms, and the author once saw (as he
supposed) a serious accident occur which in fact did not take place,
though it seemed unavoidable.

Curiously enough, this creation of phantasms by expectant attention
seems to be rare where "ghosts" are expected.  The author has slept in
several haunted houses, but has never seen what he was led to expect.
In many instances, as in "The Lady in Black" (infra), a ghost who is a
frequent visitor is never seen when people watch for her.  Among the
many persons who have had delusions as to the presence of the dead,
very few have been hoping, praying for and expecting them.

"I look for ghosts, but none will force
   Their way to me:  'Tis falsely said
That there was ever intercourse
   Between the living and the dead,
For surely then I should have sight
Of him I wait for day and night
With love and longings infinite."

The Affliction of Margaret has been the affliction of most of us.
There are curious historical examples of these appearances of the
living.  Goethe declares that he once met himself at a certain place
in a certain dress, and several years later found himself there in
that costume.  Shelley was seen by his friends at Lerici to pass along
a balcony whence there was no exit.  However, he could not be found
there.  The story of the wraith of Catherine the Great is variously
narrated.  We give it as told by an eye-witness, the Comte de
Ribaupierre, about 1862 to Lady Napier and Ettrick.  The Count, in
1862, was a very old man, and more than thirty years have passed since
he gave the tale to Lady Napier, whose memory retains it in the
following form:--

THE WRAITH OF THE CZARINA

"In the exercise of his duties as one of the pages-in-waiting,
Ribaupierre followed one day his august mistress into the throne-room
of the palace.  When the Empress, accompanied by the high officers of
her court and the ladies of her household, came in sight of the chair
of state which she was about to occupy, she suddenly stopped, and to
the horror and astonished awe of her courtiers, she pointed to a
visionary being seated on the imperial throne.  The occupant of the
chair was an exact counterpart of herself.  All saw it and trembled,
but none dared to move towards the mysterious presentment of their
sovereign.

"After a moment of dead silence the great Catherine raised her voice
and ordered her guard to advance and fire on the apparition.  The
order was obeyed, a mirror beside the throne was shattered, the vision
had disappeared, and the Empress, with no sign of emotion, took the
chair from which her semblance had passed away."  It is a striking
barbaric scene!

"Spirits of the living" of this kind are common enough.  In the
Highlands "second sight" generally means a view of an event or
accident some time before its occurrence.  Thus an old man was sitting
with a little boy on a felled tree beside a steep track in a quarry at
Ballachulish.  Suddenly he jerked the boy to one side, and threw
himself down on the further side of the tree.  While the boy stared,
the old man slowly rose, saying, "The spirits of the living are strong
to-day!"  He had seen a mass of rock dashing along, killing some
quarrymen and tearing down the path.  The accident occurred next day.
It is needless to dwell on second sight, which is not peculiar to
Celts, though the Highlanders talk more about it than other people.

These appearances of the living but absent, whether caused by some
mental action of the person who appears or not, are, at least,
_unconscious_ on his part. {88}  But a few cases occur in which a
living person is said, by a voluntary exertion of mind, to have made
himself visible to a friend at a distance.  One case is vouched for by
Baron von Schrenck-Notzig, a German psychologist, who himself made the
experiment with success.  Others are narrated by Dr. Gibotteau.  A
curious tale is told by several persons as follows:--

AN "ASTRAL BODY"

Mr. Sparks and Mr. Cleave, young men of twenty and nineteen, were
accustomed to "mesmerise" each other in their dormitory at Portsmouth,
where they were students of naval engineering.  Mr. Sparks simply
stared into Mr. Cleave's eyes as he lay on his bed till he "went off".
The experiments seemed so curious that witnesses were called, Mr.
Darley and Mr. Thurgood.  On Friday, 15th January, 1886, Mr. Cleave
determined to try to see, when asleep, a young lady at Wandsworth to
whom he was in the habit of writing every Sunday.  He also intended,
if possible, to make _her_ see _him_.  On awaking, he said that he had
seen her in the dining-room of her house, that she had seemed to grow
restless, had looked at him, and then had covered her face with her
hands.  On Monday he tried again, and he thought he had frightened
her, as after looking at him for a few minutes she fell back in her
chair in a kind of faint.  Her little brother was in the room with her
at the time.  On Tuesday next the young lady wrote, telling Mr. Cleave
that she had been startled by seeing him on Friday evening (this is an
error), and again on Monday evening, "much clearer," when she nearly
fainted.

All this Mr. Sparks wrote to Mr. Gurney in the same week.  He was
inviting instructions on hypnotic experiments, and "launched a letter
into space," having read something vague about Mr. Gurney's studies in
the newspapers.  The letter, after some adventures, arrived, and on
15th March Mr. Cleave wrote his account, Mr. Darley and Mr. Thurgood
corroborating as to their presence during the trance and as to Mr.
Cleave's statement when he awoke.  Mr. Cleave added that he made
experiments "for five nights running" before seeing the lady.  The
young lady's letter of 19th January, 1886, is also produced (postmark,
Portsmouth, 20th January).  But the lady mentions her _first_ vision
of Mr. Cleave as on last _Tuesday_ (not Friday), and her second, while
she was alone with her little brother, at supper on Monday.  "I was so
frightened that I nearly fainted."

These are all young people.  It may be said that all five were
concerned in a complicated hoax on Mr. Gurney.  Nor would such a hoax
argue any unusual moral obliquity.  Surtees of Mainsforth, in other
respects an honourable man, took in Sir Walter Scott with forged
ballads, and never undeceived his friend.  Southey played off a hoax
with his book The Doctor.  Hogg, Lockhart, and Wilson, with Allan
Cunningham and many others, were constantly engaged in such
mystifications, and a "ghost-hunter" might seem a fair butt.

But the very discrepancy in Miss ---'s letter is a proof of fairness.
Her first vision of Mr. Cleave was on "Tuesday last".  Mr. Cleave's
first impression of success was on the Friday following.

But he had been making the experiment for five nights previous,
including the Tuesday of Miss ---'s letter.  Had the affair been a
hoax, Miss --- would either have been requested by him to re-write her
letter, putting Friday for Tuesday, or what is simpler, Mr. Sparks
would have adopted her version and written "Tuesday" in place of
"Friday" in his first letter to Mr. Gurney.  The young lady,
naturally, requested Mr. Cleave not to try his experiment on her
again.

A similar case is that of Mrs. Russell, who tried successfully, when
awake and in Scotland, to appear to one of her family in Germany.  The
sister corroborates and says, "Pray don't come appearing to me again".
{91a}

These spirits of the living lead to the subject of spirits of the
dying.  No kind of tale is so common as that of dying people appearing
at a distance.  Hundreds have been conscientiously published. {91b}
The belief is prevalent among the Maoris of New Zealand, where the
apparition is regarded as a proof of death. {91c}  Now there is
nothing in savage philosophy to account for this opinion of the
Maoris.  A man's "spirit" leaves his body in dreams, savages think,
and as dreaming is infinitely more common than death, the Maoris
should argue that the appearance is that of a man's spirit wandering
in his sleep.  However, they, like many Europeans, associate a man's
apparition with his death.  Not being derived from their philosophy,
this habit may be deduced from their experience.

As there are, undeniably, many examples of hallucinatory appearances
of persons in perfect health and ordinary circumstances, the question
has been asked whether there are _more_ cases of an apparition
coinciding with death than, according to the doctrine of chances,
there ought to be.  Out of about 18,000 answers to questions on this
subject, has been deduced the conclusion that the deaths do coincide
with the apparitions to an extent beyond mere accident.  Even if we
had an empty hallucination for every case coinciding with death, we
could not set the coincidences down to mere chance.  As well might we
say that if "at the end of an hour's rifle practice at long-distance
range, the record shows that for every shot that has hit the bull's
eye, another has missed the target, therefore the shots that hit the
target did so by accident." {92}  But as empty hallucinations are more
likely to be forgotten than those which coincide with a death; as
exaggeration creeps in, as the collectors of evidence are naturally
inclined to select and question people whom they know to have a good
story to tell, the evidence connecting apparitions, voices, and so on
with deaths is not likely to be received with favour.

One thing must be remembered as affecting the theory that the
coincidence between the wraith and the death is purely an accident.
Everybody dreams and out of the innumerable dreams of mankind, a few
must hit the mark by a fluke.  But _hallucinations_ are not nearly so
common as dreams.  Perhaps, roughly speaking, one person in ten has
had what he believes to be a waking hallucination.  Therefore, so to
speak, compared with dreams, but a small number of shots of this kind
are fired.  Therefore, bull's eyes (the coincidence between an
appearance and a death) are infinitely less likely to be due to chance
in the case of waking hallucinations than in the case of dreams, which
all mankind are firing off every night of their lives.  Stories of
these coincidences between appearances and deaths are as common as
they are dull.  Most people come across them in the circle of their
friends.  They are all very much alike, and make tedious reading.  We
give a few which have some picturesque features.

IN TAVISTOCK PLACE {93}

"In the latter part of the autumn of 1878, between half-past three and
four in the morning, I was leisurely walking home from the house of a
sick friend.  A middle-aged woman, apparently a nurse, was slowly
following, going in the same direction.  We crossed Tavistock Square
together, and emerged simultaneously into Tavistock Place.  The
streets and squares were deserted, the morning bright and calm, my
health excellent, nor did I suffer from anxiety or fatigue.  A man
suddenly appeared, striding up Tavistock Place, coming towards me, and
going in a direction opposite to mine.  When first seen he was
standing exactly in front of my own door (5 Tavistock Place).  Young
and ghastly pale, he was dressed in evening clothes, evidently made by
a foreign tailor.  Tall and slim, he walked with long measured strides
noiselessly.  A tall white hat, covered thickly with black crape, and
an eyeglass, completed the costume of this strange form.  The
moonbeams falling on the corpse-like features revealed a face well
known to me, that of a friend and relative.  The sole and only person
in the street beyond myself and this being was the woman already
alluded to.  She stopped abruptly, as if spell-bound, then rushing
towards the man, she gazed intently and with horror unmistakable on
his face, which was now upturned to the heavens and smiling ghastly.
She indulged in her strange contemplation but during very few seconds,
then with extraordinary and unexpected speed for her weight and age
she ran away with a terrific shriek and yell.  This woman never have I
seen or heard of since, and but for her presence I could have
explained the incident:  called it, say, subjection of the mental
powers to the domination of physical reflex action, and the man's
presence could have been termed a false impression on the retina.

"A week after this event, news of this very friend's death reached me.
It occurred on the morning in question.  From the family I learned
that according to the rites of the Greek Church and the custom of the
country he resided in, he was buried in his evening clothes made
abroad by a foreign tailor, and strange to say, he wore goloshes over
his boots, according also to the custom of the country he died in. . .
.  When in England, he lived in Tavistock Place, and occupied my rooms
during my absence." {95a}

THE WYNYARD WRAITH {95b}

"In the month of November (1785 or 1786), Sir John Sherbrooke and
Colonel Wynyard were sitting before dinner in their barrack room at
Sydney Cove, in America.  It was duskish, and a candle was placed on a
table at a little distance.  A figure dressed in plain clothes and a
good round hat, passed gently between the above people and the fire.
While passing, Sir J. Sherbrooke exclaimed, 'God bless my soul, who's
that?'

"Almost at the same moment Colonel W. said, 'That's my brother John
Wynyard, and I am sure he is dead'.  Colonel W. was much agitated, and
cried and sobbed a great deal.  Sir John said, 'The fellow has a
devilish good hat; I wish I had it'.  (Hats were not to be got there
and theirs were worn out.)  They immediately got up (Sir John was on
crutches, having broken his leg), took a candle and went into the
bedroom, into which the figure had entered.  They searched the bed and
every corner of the room to no effect; the windows were fastened up
with mortar. . . .

"They received no communication from England for about five months,
when a letter from Mr. Rush, the surgeon (Coldstream Guards),
announced the death of John Wynyard at the moment, as near as could be
ascertained, when the figure appeared.  In addition to this
extraordinary circumstance, Sir John told me that two years and a half
afterwards he was walking with Lilly Wynyard (a brother of Colonel W.)
in London, and seeing somebody on the other side of the way, he
recognised, he thought, the person who had appeared to him and Colonel
Wynyard in America.  Lilly Wynyard said that the person pointed out
was a Mr. Eyre (Hay?), that he and John Wynyard were frequently
mistaken for each other, and that money had actually been paid to this
Mr. Eyre in mistake."

A famous tale of an appearance is Lord Brougham's.  His Lordship was
not reckoned precisely a veracious man; on the other hand, this was
not the kind of fable he was likely to tell.  He was brought up under
the regime of common-sense.  "On all such subjects my father was very
sceptical," he says.  To disbelieve Lord Brougham we must suppose
either that he wilfully made a false entry in his diary in 1799, or
that in preparing his Autobiography in 1862, he deliberately added a
falsehood--and then explained his own marvel away!

LORD BROUGHAM'S STORY

"December 19, 1799.

" . . . At one in the morning, arriving at a decent inn (in Sweden),
we decided to stop for the night, and found a couple of comfortable
rooms.  Tired with the cold of yesterday, I was glad to take advantage
of a hot bath before I turned in.  And here a most remarkable thing
happened to me--so remarkable that I must tell the story from the
beginning.

"After I left the High School, I went with G---, my most intimate
friend, to attend the classes in the University. . . .  We actually
committed the folly of drawing up an agreement, written with our
blood, to the effect that whichever of us died the first should appear
to the other, and thus solve any doubts we had entertained of 'the
life after death'.  G--- went to India, years passed, and," says Lord
Brougham, "I had nearly forgotten his existence.  I had taken, as I
have said, a warm bath, and while lying in it and enjoying the comfort
of the heat, I turned my head round, looking towards the chair on
which I had deposited my clothes, as I was about to get out of the
bath.  On the chair sat G---, looking calmly at me.  How I got out of
the bath I know not, but on recovering my senses I found myself
sprawling on the floor.  The apparition, or whatever it was that had
taken the likeness of G---, had disappeared. . . .  So strongly was I
affected by it that I have here written down the whole history, with
the date, 19th December, and all the particulars as they are now fresh
before me.  No doubt I had fallen asleep" (he has just said that he
was awake and on the point of leaving the bath), "and that the
appearance presented so distinctly to my eyes was a dream I cannot for
a moment doubt. . . ."

On 16th October, 1862, Lord Brougham copied this extract for his
Autobiography, and says that on his arrival in Edinburgh he received a
letter from India, announcing that G--- had died on 19th December.  He
remarks "singular coincidence!" and adds that, considering the vast
number of dreams, the number of coincidences is perhaps fewer than a
fair calculation of chances would warrant us to expect.

This is a concession to common-sense, and argues an ignorance of the
fact that sane and (apparently) waking men may have hallucinations.
On the theory that we _may_ have inappreciable moments of sleep when
we think ourselves awake, it is not an ordinary but an extraordinary
coincidence that Brougham should have had that peculiar moment of the
"dream" of G--- on the day or night of G---'s death, while the
circumstance that he had made a compact with G--- multiplies the odds
against accident in a ratio which mathematicians may calculate.
Brougham was used to dreams, like other people; he was not shocked by
them.  This "dream" "produced such a shock that I had no inclination
to talk about it".  Even on Brougham's showing, then, this dream was a
thing unique in his experience, and not one of the swarm of visions of
sleep.  Thus his including it among these, while his whole language
shows that he himself did not really reckon it among these, is an
example of the fallacies of common-sense.  He completes his fallacy by
saying, "It is not much more wonderful than that a person whom we had
no reason to expect should appear to us at the very moment we had been
thinking or speaking of him".  But Lord Brougham had _not_ been
speaking or thinking of G---; "there had been nothing to call him to
my recollection," he says.  To give his logic any value, he should
constantly when (as far as he knew) awake, have had dreams that
"shocked" him.  Then _one_ coincidence would have had no assignable
cause save ordinary accident.

If Lord Brougham fabled in 1799 or in 1862, he did so to make a
"sensation".  And then he tried to undo it by arguing that his
experience was a thoroughly commonplace affair.

We now give a very old story, "The Dying Mother".  If the reader will
compare it with Mr. Cleave's case, "An Astral Body," in this chapter,
he will be struck by the resemblance.  Mr. Cleave and Mrs. Goffe were
both in a trance.  Both wished to see persons at a distance.  Both
saw, and each was seen, Mrs. Goffe by her children's nurse; Mr. Cleave
by the person whom he wished to see, but _not_ by a small boy also
present.

THE DYING MOTHER {101}

"Mary, the wife of John Goffe of Rochester, being afflicted with a
long illness, removed to her father's house at West Mulling, about
nine miles from her own.  There she died on 4th June, this present
year, 1691.

"The day before her departure (death) she grew very impatiently
desirous to see her two children, whom she had left at home to the
care of a nurse.  She prayed her husband to 'hire a horse, for she
must go home and die with the children'.  She was too ill to be moved,
but 'a minister who lives in the town was with her at ten o'clock that
night, to whom she expressed good hopes in the mercies of God and a
willingness to die'.  'But' said she, 'it is my misery that I cannot
see my children.'

"Between one and two o'clock in the morning, she fell into a trance.
One, widow Turner, who watched with her that night, says that her eyes
were open and fixed and her jaw fallen.  Mrs. Turner put her hand upon
her mouth and nostrils, but could perceive no breath.  She thought her
to be in a fit; and doubted whether she were dead or alive.

"The next morning the dying woman told her mother that she had been at
home with her children. . . . 'I was with them last night when I was
asleep.'

"The nurse at Rochester, widow Alexander by name, affirms, and says
she will take her oath on't before a Magistrate and receive the
sacrament upon it, that a little before two o'clock that morning she
saw the likeness of the said Mary Goffe come out of the next chamber
(where the elder child lay in a bed by itself) the door being left
open, and stood by her bedside for about a quarter of an hour; the
younger child was there lying by her.  Her eyes moved and her mouth
went, but she said nothing.  The nurse, moreover, says that she was
perfectly awake; it was then daylight, being one of the longest days
in the year.  She sat up in bed and looked steadfastly on the
apparition.  In that time she heard the bridge clock strike two, and a
while after said, 'In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, what
art thou?'  Thereupon the apparition removed and went away; she
slipped on her clothes and followed, but what became on't she cannot
tell.

"Mrs. Alexander then walked out of doors till six, when she persuaded
some neighbours to let her in.  She told her adventure; they failed to
persuade her that she had dreamed it.  On the same day the neighbour's
wife, Mrs. Sweet, went to West Mulling, saw Mrs. Goffe before her
death, and heard from Mrs. Goffe's mother the story of the daughter's
dream of her children, Mrs. Sweet not having mentioned the nurse's
story of the apparition."  That poor Mrs. Goffe walked to Rochester
and returned undetected, a distance of eighteen miles is difficult to
believe.

Goethe has an obiter dictum on the possibility of intercommunion
without the aid of the ordinary senses, between the souls of lovers.
Something of the kind is indicated in anecdotes of dreams dreamed in
common by husband and wife, but, in such cases, it may be urged that
the same circumstance, or the same noise or other disturbing cause,
may beget the same dream in both.  A better instance is

THE VISION OF THE BRIDE

Colonel Meadows Taylor writes, in The Story of my Life (vol. ii., p.
32):  "The determination (to live unmarried) was the result of a very
curious and strange incident that befel me during one of my marches to
Hyderabad.  I have never forgotten it, and it returns to this day to
my memory with a strangely vivid effect that I can neither repel nor
explain.  I purposely withhold the date of the year.  In my very early
life I had been deeply and devotedly attached to one in England, and
only relinquished the hope of one day winning her when the terrible
order came out that no furlough to Europe would be granted.

"One evening I was at the village of Dewas Kudea, after a very long
afternoon and evening march from Muktul, and I lay down very weary;
but the barking of village dogs, the baying of jackals and over-
fatigue and heat prevented sleep, and I was wide awake and restless.
Suddenly, for my tent door was wide open, I saw the face and figure so
familiar to me, but looking older, and with a sad and troubled
expression; the dress was white and seemed covered with a profusion of
lace and glistened in the bright moonlight.  The arms were stretched
out, and a low plaintive cry of 'Do not let me go!  Do not let me go!'
reached me.  I sprang forward, but the figure receded, growing fainter
and fainter till I could see it no more, but the low plaintive tones
still sounded.  I had run barefooted across the open space where my
tents were pitched, very much to the astonishment of the sentry on
guard, but I returned to my tent without speaking to him.  I wrote to
my father.  I wished to know whether there were any hope for me.  He
wrote back to me these words:  'Too late, my dear son--on the very day
of the vision you describe to me, A. was married'."

The colonel did not keep his determination not to marry, for his Life
is edited by his daughter, who often heard her father mention the
incident, "precisely in the same manner, and exactly as it is in the
book". {103}

If thinking of friends and lovers, lost or dead, could bring their
forms and voices before the eye and ear of flesh, there would be a
world of hallucinations around us.  "But it wants heaven-sent moments
for this skill," and few bridal nights send a vision and a voice to
the bed of a wakeful lover far away.

Stories of this kind, appearances of the living or dying really at a
distance, might be multiplied to any extent.  They are all capable of
explanation, if we admit the theory of telepathy, of a message sent by
an unknown process from one living man's mind to another.  Where more
than one person shares the vision, we may suppose that the influence
comes directly from A to B, C and D, or comes from A to B, and is by
him unconsciously "wired" on to B and C, or is "suggested" to them by
B's conduct or words.

In that case animals may be equally affected, thus, if B seems
alarmed, that may frighten his dog, or the alarm of a dog, caused by
some noise or smell, heard or smelt by him, may frighten B, C and D,
and make one or all of them see a ghost.

Popular opinion is strongly in favour of beasts seeing ghosts.  The
people of St. Kilda, according to Martin, held that cows shared the
visions of second-sighted milk-maids.  Horses are said to shy on the
scene of murders.  Scott's horse ran away (home) when Sir Walter saw
the bogle near Ashiestiel.  In a case given later the dog shut up in a
room full of unexplained noises, yelled and whined.  The same dog (an
intimate friend of my own) bristled up his hair and growled before his
master saw the Grey Lady.  The Rev. J. G. Wood gives a case of a cat
which nearly went mad when his mistress saw an apparition.  Jeremy
Taylor tells of a dog which got quite used to a ghost that often
appeared to his master, and used to follow it.  In "The Lady in
Black," a dog would jump up and fawn on the ghost and then run away in
a fright.  Mr. Wesley's mastiff was much alarmed by the family ghost.
Not to multiply cases, dogs and other animals are easily affected by
whatever it is that makes people think a ghost is present, or by the
conduct of the human beings on these occasions.

Absurd as the subject appears, there are stories of the ghosts of
animals.  These may be discussed later; meanwhile we pass from
appearances of the living or dying to stories of appearances of the
dead.


CHAPTER VI


Transition to Appearances of the Dead.  Obvious Scientific
Difficulties.  Purposeless Character of Modern Ghosts.  Theory of Dead
Men's Dreams.  Illustrated by Sleep-walking House-maid.  Purposeful
Character of the Old Ghost Stories.  Probable Causes of the Difference
between Old and New Ghost Stories.  Only the most Dramatic were
recorded.  Or the Tales were embellished or invented.  Practical
Reasons for inventing them.  The Daemon of Spraiton.  Sources of Story
of Sir George Villier's Ghost.  Clarendon.  Lilly, Douch.  Wyndham.
Wyndham's Letter.  Sir Henry Wotton.  Izaak Walton.  Anthony Wood.  A
Wotton Dream proved Legendary.  The Ghost that appeared to Lord
Lyttleton.  His Lordship's Own Ghost.

APPEARANCES OF THE DEAD

We now pass beyond the utmost limits to which a "scientific" theory of
things ghostly can be pushed.  Science admits, if asked, that it does
not know everything.  It is not _inconceivable_ that living minds may
communicate by some other channel than that of the recognised senses.
Science now admits the fact of hypnotic influence, though, sixty years
ago, Braid was not allowed to read a paper on it before the British
Association.  Even now the topic is not welcome.  But perhaps only one
eminent man of science declares that hypnotism is _all_ imposture and
malobservation.  Thus it is not wholly beyond the scope of fancy to
imagine that some day official science may glance at the evidence for
"telepathy".

But the stories we have been telling deal with living men supposed to
be influencing living men.  When the dead are alleged to exercise a
similar power, we have to suppose that some consciousness survives the
grave, and manifests itself by causing hallucinations among the
living.  Instances of this have already been given in "The Ghost and
the Portrait," "The Bright Scar" and "Riding Home after Mess".  These
were adduced as examples of _veracity_ in hallucinations.  Each
appearance gave information to the seer which he did not previously
possess.  In the first case, the lady who saw the soldier and the
suppliant did not know of their previous existence and melancholy
adventure.  In the second, the brother did not know that his dead
sister's face had been scratched.  In the third, the observer did not
know that Lieutenant B. had grown a beard and acquired a bay pony with
black mane and tail.  But though the appearances were _veracious_,
they were _purposeless_, and again, as in each case the information
existed in living minds, it _may_ have been wired on from them.

Thus the doctrine of telepathy puts a ghost of the dead in a great
quandary.  If he communicates no verifiable information, he may be
explained as a mere empty illusion.  If he does yield fresh
information, and if that is known to any living mind, he and his
intelligence may have been wired on from that mind.  His only chance
is to communicate facts which are proved to be true, facts which
nobody living knew before.  Now it is next to impossible to
demonstrate that the facts communicated were absolutely unknown to
everybody.

Far, however, from conveying unknown intelligence, most ghosts convey
none at all, and appear to have no purpose whatever.

It will be observed that there was no traceable reason why the girl
with a scar should appear to Mr. G., or the soldier and suppliant to
Mrs. M., or Lieutenant B. to General Barker.  The appearances came in
a vague, casual, aimless way, just as the living and healthy clergyman
appeared to the diplomatist.  On St. Augustine's theory the dead
persons who appeared may have known no more about the matter than did
the living clergyman.  It is not even necessary to suppose that the
dead man was dreaming about the living person to whom, or about the
place in which, he appeared.  But on the analogy of the tales in which
a dream or thought of the living seems to produce a hallucination of
their presence in the minds of other and distant living people, so a
dream of the dead may (it is urged) have a similar effect if "in that
sleep of death such dreams may come".  The idea occurred to
Shakespeare!  In any case the ghosts of our stories hitherto have been
so aimless and purposeless as to resemble what we might imagine a dead
man's dream to be.

This view of the case (that a "ghost" may be a reflection of a dead
man's dream) will become less difficult to understand if we ask
ourselves what natural thing most resembles the common idea of a
ghost.  You are reading alone at night, let us say, the door opens and
a human figure glides into the room.  To you it pays no manner of
attention; it does not answer if you speak; it may trifle with some
object in the chamber and then steal quietly out again.

_It is the House-maid walking in her Sleep_.

This perfectly accountable appearance, in its aimlessness, its
unconsciousness, its irresponsiveness, is undeniably just like the
common notion of a ghost.  Now, if ordinary ghosts are not of flesh
and blood, like the sleep-walking house-maid, yet are as irresponsive,
as unconscious, and as vaguely wandering as she, then (if the dead are
somewhat) a ghost _may_ be a hallucination produced in the living by
the _unconscious_ action of the mind of the dreaming dead.  The
conception is at least conceivable.  If adopted, merely for argument's
sake, it would first explain the purposeless behaviour of ghosts, and
secondly, relieve people who see ghosts of the impression that they
see "spirits".  In the Scotch phrase the ghost obviously "is not all
there," any more than the sleep walker is intellectually "all there".
This incomplete, incoherent presence is just what might be expected if
a dreaming disembodied mind could affect an embodied mind with a
hallucination.

But the good old-fashioned ghost stories are usually of another type.
The robust and earnest ghosts of our ancestors "had their own purpose
sun-clear before them," as Mr. Carlyle would have said.  They knew
what they wanted, asked for it, and saw that they got it.

As a rule their bodies were unburied, and so they demanded sepulture;
or they had committed a wrong, and wished to make restitution; or they
had left debts which they were anxious to pay; or they had advice, or
warnings, or threats to communicate; or they had been murdered, and
were determined to bring their assassins to the gibbet.

Why, we may ask, were the old ghost stories so different from the new?
Well, first they were not all different.  Again, probably only the
more dramatic tales were as a rule recorded.  Thirdly, many of the
stories may have been either embellished--a fancied purpose being
attributed to a purposeless ghost--or they may even have been invented
to protect witnesses who gave information against murderers.  Who
could disobey a ghost?

In any case the old ghost stories are much more dramatic than the new.
To them we turn, beginning with the appearances of Mr. and Mrs. Furze
at Spraiton, in Devonshire, in 1682.  Our author is Mr. Richard Bovet,
in his Pandaemonium, or the Devil's Cloister opened (1683).  The
motive of the late Mr. Furze was to have some small debts paid; his
wife's spectre was influenced by a jealousy of Mr. Furze's spectre's
relations with another lady.

THE DAEMON OF SPRAITON IN DEVON {111} ANNO 1682

"About the month of November in the year 1682, in the parish of
Spraiton, in the county of Devon, one Francis Fey (servant to Mr.
Philip Furze) being in a field near the dwelling-house of his said
master, there appeared unto him the _resemblance_ of an _aged
gentleman_ like his master's father, with a pole or staff in his hand,
resembling that he was wont to carry when living to kill the moles
withal.  The _spectrum_ approached near the young man, whom you may
imagin not a little surprized at the _appearance_ of one that he knew
to be dead, but the _spectrum bid him not be afraid of him, but tell
his master_ (who was his son) that several _legacies which by his
testament he had bequeathed were unpaid, naming ten shillings to one
and ten shillings to another, both which persons he named_ to the
young man, who replyed that the party he last named was dead, and so
it could not be paid to him.  The ghost answered _he knew that, but it
must be paid to the next relation_, whom he also named.  The spectrum
likewise ordered him to carry twenty shillings to a gentlewoman,
sister to the deceased, living near Totness in the said county, and
promised, if these things were performed, to trouble him no further;
but at the same time the _spectrum_, speaking of his _second wife_
(who was also dead) _called her wicked woman_, though the gentleman
who writ the letter knew her and esteemed her a very good woman.  And
(having thus related him his mind) the spectrum left the young man,
who according to the _direction_ of the _spirit_ took care to see the
small legacies satisfied, and carried the twenty shillings that was
appointed to be paid the gentlewoman near Totness, but she utterly
refused to receive it, being sent her (as she said) from the devil.
The same night the young man lodging at her house, the aforesaid
spectrum appeared to him again; whereupon the young man challenged his
_promise not to trouble him any more_, saying he had performed all
according to his appointment, but that the gentlewoman, his sister,
would not receive the money.

"_To which the spectrum replied that was true indeed_; but withal
_directed_ the young man to ride to Totness and buy for her _a ring of
that value, which the spirit said she would accept of_, which being
provided accordingly, she received.  Since the performance of which
the ghost or apparition of the old gentleman hath seemed to be at
rest, having never given the young man any further trouble.

"But the next day after having delivered the ring, the young man was
riding home to his master's house, accompanyed by a servant of the
gentlewoman's near Totness, and near about the time of their entrance
(or a little before they came) into the parish of Spraiton aforesaid,
there appeared to be upon the horse behind the young man, the
resemblance of the _second wife_ of the old gentleman spoken of
before.

"This daemon often threw the young man off his horse, and cast him
with such violence to the ground as was great astonishment, not only
to the gentlewoman's servant (with him), but to divers others who were
spectators of the frightful action, the ground resounding with great
noise by reason of the incredible force with which he was cast upon
it.  At his coming into his master's yard, the horse which he rid,
though very poor and out of case, leaped at one spring twenty-five
foot, to the amazement of all that saw it.  Soon after the she-spectre
shewed herself to divers in the house, viz., the aforesaid young man,
_Mistress Thomasin Gidly, Ann Langdon_, born in that parish, and a
little child, which, by reason of the troublesomeness of the spirit,
they were fain to remove from that house.  She appeared sometimes in
her own shape, sometimes in forms very horrid; now and then like a
monstrous dog belching out fire; at another time it flew out at the
window, in the shape of a horse, carrying with it only one pane of
glass and a small piece of iron.

"One time the young man's head was thrust into a very strait place
betwixt a bed's head and a wall, and forced by the strength of divers
men to be removed thence, and that not without being much hurt and
bruised, so that much blood appeared about it:  upon this it was
advised he should be bleeded, to prevent any ill accident that might
come of the bruise; after bleeding, the ligature or binder of his arm
was removed from thence and conveyed about his middle, where it was
strained with such violence that the girding had almost stopp'd his
breath and kill'd him, and being cut asunder it made _a strange and
dismal noise_, so that the standers by were affrighted at it.  At
divers other times he hath been in danger to be strangled with cravats
and handkerchiefs that he hath worn about his neck, which have been
drawn so close that with the sudden violence he hath near been
choaked, and hardly escaped death.

"The spectre hath shewed great offence at the perriwigs which the
young man used to wear, for they are often torn from his head after a
very strange manner; one that he esteemed above the rest he put in a
small box, and that box he placed in another, which he set against the
wall of his chamber, placing a joint-stool with other weight a top of
it, but in short time the boxes were broken in sunder and the perriwig
rended into many small parts and tatters.  Another time, lying in his
master's chamber with his perriwig on his head, to secure it from
danger, within a little time it was torn from him and reduced into
very small fragments.  At another time one of his shoe-strings was
observed (without the assistance of any hand) to come of its own
accord out of its shoe and fling itself to the other side of the room;
the other was crawling after it, but a maid espying that, with her
hand drew it out, and it strangely _clasp'd_ and _curl'd_ about her
hand like a living _eel_ or _serpent_; this is testified by a lady of
considerable quality, too great for exception, who was an eye-witness.
The same lady shewed Mr. C. one of the young man's gloves, which was
torn in his pocket while she was by, which is so dexterously tatter'd
and so artificially torn that it is conceived a cutler could not have
contrived an instrument to have laid it abroad so accurately, and all
this was done in the pocket in the compass of one minute.  It is
further observable that if the aforesaid young man, or another person
who is a servant maid in the house, do wear their own clothes, they
are certainly torn in pieces on their backs, but if the clothes belong
to any other, they are not injured after that manner.

"Many other strange and fantastical freaks have been done by the said
daemon or spirit in the view of divers persons; a barrel of salt of
considerable quantity hath been observed to march from room to room
without any human assistance.

"An hand-iron hath seemed to lay itself cross over-thwart a pan of
milk that hath been scalding over the fire, and two flitches of bacon
have of their own accord descended from the chimney where they were
hung, and placed themselves upon the hand-iron.

"When the spectre appears in resemblance of her own person, she seems
to be habited in the same cloaths and dress which the gentlewoman of
the house (her daughter-in-law) hath on at the same time.  Divers
times the feet and legs of the young man aforesaid have been so
entangled about his neck that he hath been loosed with great
difficulty; sometimes they have been so twisted about the frames of
chairs and stools that they have hardly been set at liberty.  But one
of the most considerable instances of the malice of the spirit against
the young man happened on Easter Eve, when Mrs. C. the relator, was
passing by the door of the house, and it was thus:--

"When the young man was returning from his labour, he was taken up by
the _skirt_ of his _doublet_ by this _female daemon_, and carried a
height into the air.  He was soon missed by his Master and some other
servants that had been at labour with him, and after diligent enquiry
no news could be heard of him, until at length (near half an hour
after) he was heard singing and whistling in a bog or quagmire, where
they found him in a kind of trance or _extatick fit_, to which he hath
sometimes been accustomed (but whether before the affliction he met
with from this spirit I am not certain).  He was affected much after
such sort, as at the time of those _fits_, so that the people did not
give that _attention_ and _regard_ to what he said as at other times;
but when he returned again to himself (which was about an hour after)
he solemnly protested to them that the daemon had carried him so high
that his master's house seemed to him to be but _as a hay-cock_, and
_that during all that time he was in perfect sense, and prayed to
Almighty God not to suffer the devil to destroy him_; and that he was
suddenly set down in that quagmire.

The workmen found one shoe on one side of his master's house, and the
other on the other side, and in the morning espied his perriwig
hanging on the top of a tree; by which it appears he had been carried
a considerable height, and that what he told them was not a fiction.

"After this it was observed that that part of the young man's body
which had been on the mud in the quagmire was somewhat benummbed and
seemingly deader than the other, whereupon the following _Saturday_,
which was the day before _Low Sunday_, he was carried to _Crediton,
alias Kirton_, to be bleeded, which being done accordingly, and the
company having left him for some little space, at their return they
found him in one of his fits, with his _forehead_ much _bruised_, and
_swoln_ to a _great bigness_, none being able to guess how it
happened, until his recovery from that _fit_, when upon enquiry he
gave them this account of it:  _that a bird had with great swiftness
and force flown in at the window with a stone in its beak, which it
had dashed against his forehead, which had occasioned the swelling
which they saw_.

"The people much wondering at the strangeness of the accident,
diligently sought the stone, and under the place where he sat they
found not such a stone as they expected but a weight of brass or
copper, which it seems the daemon had made use of on that occasion to
give the poor young man that hurt in his forehead.

"The persons present were at the trouble to break it to pieces, every
one taking a part and preserving it in memory of so strange an
accident.  After this the spirit continued to molest the young man in
a very severe and rugged manner, often handling him with great
extremity, and whether it hath yet left its violences to him, or
whether the young man be yet alive, I can have no certain account."

I leave the reader to consider of the extraordinary strangeness of the
relation.

The reader, considering the exceeding strangeness of the relation,
will observe that we have now reached "great swingeing falsehoods,"
even if that opinion had not hitherto occurred to his mind.  But if he
thinks that such stories are no longer told, and even sworn to on
Bible oath, he greatly deceives himself.  In the chapter on "Haunted
Houses" he will find statements just as hard narrated of the years
1870 and 1882.  In these, however, the ghosts had no purpose but
mischief. {118}

We take another "ghost with a purpose".

SIR GEORGE VILLIERS' GHOST.

The variations in the narratives of Sir George Villiers' appearance to
an old servant of his, or old protege, and the warning communicated by
this man to Villiers' son, the famous Duke of Buckingham, are curious
and instructive.  The tale is first told in print by William Lilly,
the astrologer, in the second part of a large tract called Monarchy or
No Monarchy in England (London, 1651), twenty-three years after
Buckingham's murder.  But while prior in publication, Lilly's story
was probably written after, though independent of Lord Clarendon's, in
the first book of his History of the Rebellion, begun on 18th March,
1646, that is within eighteen years of the events.  Clarendon, of
course, was in a position to know what was talked of at the time.
Next, we have a letter of Mr. Douch to Glanvil, undated, but written
after the Restoration, and, finally, an original manuscript of 1652.

Douch makes the warning arrive "some few days" before the murder of
Buckingham, and says that the ghost of Sir George, "in his morning
gown," bade one Parker tell Buckingham to abandon the expedition to La
Rochelle or expect to be murdered.  On the third time of appearing the
vision pulled a long knife from under his gown, as a sign of the death
awaiting Buckingham.  He also communicated a "private token" to
Parker, the "percipient," Sir George's old servant.  On each occasion
of the appearance, Parker was reading at midnight.  Parker, _after_
the murder, told one Ceeley, who told it to a clergyman, who told
Douch, who told Glanvil.

In Lilly's version the ghost had a habit of walking in Parker's room,
and finally bade him tell Buckingham to abstain from certain company,
"or else he will come to destruction, and that suddenly".  Parker,
thinking he had dreamed, did nothing; the ghost reappeared, and
communicated a secret "which he (Buckingham) knows that none in the
world ever knew but myself and he".  The duke, on hearing the story
from Parker, backed by the secret, was amazed, but did not alter his
conduct.  On the third time the spectre produced the knife, but at
_this_ information the duke only laughed.  Six weeks later he was
stabbed.  Douch makes the whole affair pass immediately before the
assassination.  "And Mr. Parker died soon after," as the ghost had
foretold to him.

Finally, Clarendon makes the appearances set in six months before
Felton slew the duke.  The percipient, unnamed, was in bed.  The
narrative now develops new features; the token given on the ghost's
third coming obviously concerns Buckingham's mother, the Countess, the
"one person more" who knew the secret communicated.  The ghost
produces no knife from under his gown; no warning of Buckingham's
death by violence is mentioned.  A note in the MS. avers that
Clarendon himself had papers bearing on the subject, and that he got
his information from Sir Ralph Freeman (who introduced the unnamed
percipient to the duke), and from some of Buckingham's servants, "who
were informed of much of it before the murder of the duke".  Clarendon
adds that, in general, "no man looked on relations of that sort with
less reverence and consideration" than he did.  This anecdote he
selects out of "many stories scattered abroad at the time" as "upon a
better foundation of credit".  The percipient was an officer in the
king's wardrobe at Windsor, "of a good reputation for honesty and
discretion," and aged about fifty.  He was bred at a school in Sir
George's parish, and as a boy was kindly treated by Sir George, "whom
afterwards he never saw".  On first beholding the spectre in his room,
the seer recognised Sir George's costume, then antiquated.  At last
the seer went to Sir Ralph Freeman, who introduced him to the duke on
a hunting morning at Lambeth Bridge.  They talked earnestly apart,
observed by Sir Ralph, Clarendon's informant.  The duke seemed
abstracted all day; left the field early, sought his mother, and after
a heated conference of which the sounds reached the ante-room, went
forth in visible trouble and anger, a thing never before seen in him
after talk with his mother.  She was found "overwhelmed with tears and
in the highest agony imaginable".  "It is a notorious truth" that,
when told of his murder, "she seemed not in the least degree
surprised."

The following curious manuscript account of the affair is, after the
prefatory matter, the copy of a letter dated 1652.  There is nothing
said of a ghostly knife, the name of the seer is not Parker, and in
its whole effect the story tallies with Clarendon's version, though
the narrator knows nothing of the scene with the Countess of
Buckingham.

CAVALIER VERSION {121}

"1627.  Since William Lilly the Rebells Jugler and Mountebank in his
malicious and blaspheamous discourse concerning our late Martyred
Soveraigne of ever blessed memory (amongst other lyes and falsehoods)
imprinted a relation concerning an Aparition which foretold several
Events which should happen to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein he
falsifies boeth the person to whom it appeared and ye circumstances; I
thought it not amis to enter here (that it may be preserved) the true
account of that Aparition as I have receaved it from the hande and
under the hande of Mr. Edmund Wyndham, of Kellefford in the County of
Somersett.  I shall sett it downe (ipsissimis verbis) as he delivered
it to me at my request written with his own hande.

WYNDHAM'S LETTER

"Sr.  According to your desire and my promise I have written down what
I remember (divers things being slipt out of my memory) of the
relation made me by Mr. Nicholas Towse concerning the Aparition wch
visited him.  About ye yeare 1627, {122} I and my wife upon an
occasion being in London lay att my Brother Pyne's house without
Bishopsgate, wch. was ye next house unto Mr. Nicholas Towse's, who was
my Kinsman and familiar acquaintance, in consideration of whose
Society and friendship he tooke a house in that place, ye said Towse
being a very fine Musician and very good company, and for ought I ever
saw or heard, a Vurtuous, religious and wel disposed Gentleman.  About
that time ye said Mr. Towse tould me that one night, being in Bed and
perfectly waking, and a Candle burning by him (as he usually had)
there came into his Chamber and stood by his bed side an Olde
Gentleman in such an habitt as was in fashion in Q:  Elizebeth's tyme,
at whose first appearance Mr. Towse was very much troubled, but after
a little tyme, recollecting himselfe, he demanded of him in ye Name of
God what he was, whether he were a Man.  And ye Aparition replyed No.
Then he asked him if he were a Divell.  And ye answer was No.  Then
Mr. Towse said 'in ye Name of God, what art thou then?'  And as I
remember Mr. Towse told me that ye Apparition answered him that he was
ye Ghost of Sir George Villiers, Father to ye then Duke of Buckingham,
whom he might very well remember, synce he went to schoole at such a
place in Leicestershire (naming ye place which I have forgotten).  And
Mr. Towse tould me that ye Apparition had perfectly ye resemblance of
ye said Sr George Villiers in all respects and in ye same habitt that
he had often seene him weare in his lifetime.

"The said Apparition then tould Mr. Towse that he could not but
remember ye much kindness that he, ye said Sr George Villiers, had
expressed to him whilst he was a Schollar in Leicestershire, as
aforesaid, and that as out of that consideration he believed that he
loved him and that therefore he made choyce of him, ye sayde Mr.
Towse, to deliver a message to his sonne, ye Duke of Buckingham;
thereby to prevent such mischiefe as would otherwise befall ye said
Duke whereby he would be inevitably ruined.  And then (as I remember)
Mr. Towse tould me that ye Apparition instructed him what message he
should deliver unto ye Duke.  Vnto wch. Mr. Towse replyed that he
should be very unwilling to goe to ye Duke of Buckingham upon such an
errand, whereby he should gaine nothing but reproach and contempt, and
to be esteemed a Madman, and therefore desired to be exscused from ye
employment, but ye Apparition pressd him wth. much earnestness to
undertake it, telling him that ye Circumstances and secret Discoveries
which he should be able to make to ye Duke of such passages in ye
course of his life which were known to none but himselfe, would make
it appeare that ye message was not ye fancy of a Distempered Brayne,
but a reality, and so ye Apparition tooke his leave of him for that
night and telling him that he would give him leave to consider till
the next night, and then he would come to receave his answer wheather
he would undertake to deliver his message or no.

"Mr. Towse past that day wth. much trouble and perplexity, debating
and reasoning wth. himselfe wether he should deliver his message or
not to ye Duke but, in ye conclusion, he resolved to doe it, and ye
next night when ye Apparition came he gave his answer accordingly, and
then receaved his full instruction.  After which Mr. Towse went and
founde out Sr. Thomas Bludder and Sr. Ralph Freeman, by whom he was
brought to ye Duke of Buckingham, and had sevarall private and lone
audiences of him, I my selfe, by ye favoure of a freinde (Sr. Edward
Savage) was once admitted to see him in private conference with ye
Duke, where (although I heard not there discourses) I observed much
earnestnessse in their actions and gestures.  After wch. conference
Mr. Towse tould me that ye Duke would not follow ye advice that was
given him, which was (as I remember) that he intimated ye casting of,
and ye rejecting of some Men who had great interest in him, which was,
and as I take it he named, Bp. Laud and that ye Duke was to doe some
popular Acts in ye ensuing Parliament, of which Parliament ye Duke
would have had Mr. Towse to have been a Burgesse, but he refused it,
alleadging that unlesse ye Duke followed his directions, he must doe
him hurt if he were of ye Parliament.  Mr. Towse then toalde that ye
Duke of Buckingham confessed that he had toalde him those things wch.
no Creature knew but himself, and that none but God or ye Divell could
reveale to him.  Ye Duke offered Mr. Towse to have ye King knight him,
and to have given him preferment (as he tould me), but that he refused
it, saying that vnless he would follow his advice he would receave
nothing from him.

"Mr. Towse, when he made me this relation, he tolde me that ye Duke
would inevitably be destroyed before such a time (wch. he then named)
and accordingly ye Duke's death happened before that time.  He
likewise tolde that he had written downe all ye severall discourses
that he had had wth. ye Apparition, and that at last his coming was so
familiar that he was as litle troubled with it as if it had beene a
friende or acquayntance that had come to visitt him.  Mr. Towse told
me further that ye Archbishop of Canterbury, then Bishop of London,
Dr. Laud, should by his Councells be ye authoure of very great
troubles to ye Kingdome, by which it should be reduced to ye extremity
of disorder and confusion, and that it should seeme to be past all
hope of recovery without a miracle, but when all people were in
dispayre of seeing happy days agayne, ye Kingdome should suddenly be
reduced and resettled agayne in a most happy condition.

"At this tyme my father Pyne was in trouble and comitted to ye
Gatehouse by ye Lords of ye Councell about a Quarrel betweene him and
ye Lord Powlett, upon which one night I saide to my Cosin Towse, by
way of jest, 'I pray aske your Appairition what shall become of my
father Pyne's business,' which he promised to doe, and ye next day he
tolde me that my father Pyne's enemyes were ashamed of their malicious
prosecution, and that he would be at liberty within a week or some few
days, which happened according.

"Mr. Towse, his wife, since his death tolde me that her husband and
she living at Windsor Castle, where he had an office that Sumer that
ye Duke of Buckingham was killed, tolde her that very day that the
Duke was sett upon by ye mutinous Mariners att Portesmouth, saying
then that ye next attempt agaynst him would be his Death, which
accordingly happened.  And att ye instant ye Duke was killed (as she
vnderstood by ye relation afterwards) Mr. Towse was sitting in his
chayre, out of which he suddenly started vp and sayd, 'Wyfe, ye Duke
of Buckingham is slayne!'

"Mr. Towse lived not long after that himselfe, but tolde his wife ye
tyme of his Death before itt happened.  I never saw him after I had
seen some effects of his discourse, which before I valued not, and
therefore was not curious to enquire after more than he voluntaryly
tolde me, which I then entertayned not wth. these serious thoughts
which I have synce reflected on in his discourse.  This is as much as
I can remember on this business which, according to youre desire, is
written by

"Sr. Yor., &c.,

"EDMUND WINDHAM.

"BOULOGNE, 5th August, 1652."

* * * * *

This version has, over all others, the merit of being written by an
acquaintance of the seer, who was with him while the appearances were
going on.  The narrator was also present at an interview between the
seer and Buckingham.  His mention of Sir Ralph Freeman tallies with
Clarendon's, who had the story from Freeman.  The ghost predicts the
Restoration, and this is recorded before that happy event.  Of course
Mr. Towse may have been interested in Buckingham's career and may have
invented the ghost (after discovering the secret token) {127} as an
excuse for warning him.

The reader can now take his choice among versions of Sir George
Villiers' ghost.  He must remember that, in 1642, Sir Henry Wotton
"spent some inquiry whether the duke had any ominous presagement
before his end," but found no evidence.  Sir Henry told Izaak Walton a
story of a dream of an ancestor of his own, whereby some robbers of
the University chest at Oxford were brought to justice.  Anthony Wood
consulted the records of the year mentioned, and found no trace of any
such robbery.  We now approach a yet more famous ghost than Sir
George's.  This is Lord Lyttelton's.  When the workmen came back in the
evening Atli told them of his conversation with Thorbjorn and said
to Ali that he must go his own ways, for he was not going to be
drawn into a quarrel for employing him.

Ali said: "True is the ancient saying: The over-praised are the
worst deceivers.

I did not think that you would have turned me off now after I had worked
here till I broke in the summer. I thought that you would have given
me protection. Such is your way, however you play the beneficent.
Now I shall be beaten before your very eyes if you refuse
to stand by me."
Atli's mind was changed after the man had spoken; he no longer wanted
to drive him away.

So the time passed until the hay-harvest began. One day a little
before midsummer Thorbjorn Oxmain rode to Bjarg. He wore a helmet
on his head, a sword was girt at his side, and in his hand was a spear
which had a very broad blade. The weather was rainy; Atli had sent
his men to mow the hay, and some were in the North at Horn on some work.
Atli was at home with a few men only. Thorbjorn arrived alone
towards midday and rode up to the door. The door was shut and no
one outside. Thorbjorn knocked at the door and then went to the back
of the house so that he could not be seen from the door.

The people in the house heard some one knocking and one of the women
went out.

Thorbjorn got a glimpse of the woman, but did not let himself be
seen, for he was seeking another person. She went back into the room
and Atli asked her who had come.
She said she could see nobody outside. As they were speaking Thorbjorn
struck a violent blow on the door. Atli said:

"He wants to see me; perhaps he has some business with me, for he seems
very pressing."
Then he went to the outer door and saw nobody there. It was raining hard,
so he did not go outside, but stood holding both the door-posts
with his hands and peering round.

At that moment Thorbjorn sidled round to the front of the door and
thrust his spear with both hands into Atli's middle, so that it pierced
him through. Atli said when he received the thrust: "They use broad
spear-blades nowadays."
Then he fell forward on the threshold. The women who were inside
came out and saw that he was dead. Thorbjorn had then mounted
his horse; he proclaimed the slaying and rode home. Asdis, the
mistress of the house, sent for men; Atli's body was laid out and he
was buried beside his father. There was much lamentation over his
death, for he was both wise and beloved. No blood-money was paid for
his death, nor was any demanded, for his representative was
Grettir, if he should ever return to Iceland. The matter rested
there during the summer.

Thorbjorn gained little credit by this deed, but remained quietly at
home.

CHAPTER XLVI. SENTENCE OF OUTLAWRY PASSED UPON GRETTIR AT THE ALL-THING

In that same summer before the assembly of the Thing there came a ship
out to Gasar bringing news of Grettir and of his house-burning adventure.
Thorir of Gard was very angry when he heard of it and bethought himself
of vengeance for his sons upon Grettir.

Thorir rode with a large retinue to the Thing and laid a complaint in
respect of the burning, but men thought nothing could be done as long
as there was no one to answer the charge. Thorir insisted that he
would be content with nothing short of banishment for Grettir from the
whole country after such a crime.

Then Skapti the Lawman said: "It certainly was an evil deed if all
really happened as has been told. But One man's tale is but half a
tale.
Most people try and manage not to improve a story if there is more
than one version of it. I hold that no judgment should be passed for
Grettir's banishment without further proceedings."
Thorir was a notable person and possessed great influence in the
district; many powerful men were his friends. He pressed his
suit so strongly that nothing could be done to save Grettir. Thorir
had him proclaimed an outlaw throughout the country, and was ever
afterwards the most bitter of his opponents, as he often found.

Having put a price upon his head, as it was usual to do with other
outlaws, he rode home.

Many said that the decree was carried more by violence than by
law, but it remained in force. Nothing more happened until after
midsummer.

CHAPTER XLVII. GRETTIR RETURNS TO BJARG--SVEINN AND HIS HORSE
SADDLE-HEAD
Later in the summer Grettir the son of Asmund came back to Iceland,
landing in the Hvita in Borgarfjord.

People about
the district went down to the ship and all the news came at once
upon Grettir, first that his father was dead, then that his brother
was slain, and third that he was declared outlaw throughout the land.

Then he spoke this verse:

"All fell at once upon the bard, exile, father dead and brother.
Oh man of battle! Many an one who breaks the swords shall smart for
this."

It is told that Grettir changed his manner no whit for these tidings,
but was just as merry as before. He remained on board his ship for a
time because he could not get a horse to suit him.

There was a man named Sveinn who dwelt at Bakki up from Thingnes.

He was a good bondi and a merry companion; he often composed verses
which it was a delight to listen to. He had a brown mare, the
swiftest of horses, which he called Saddle-head. Once Grettir left
Vellir in the night because he did not wish the traders to know
of it. He got a black cape and put it over his clothes to conceal
himself. He went up past Thingnes to Bakki, by which time it was light.
Seeing a brown horse in the meadow he went up and put a bridle on
it, mounted on its back and rode up along the Hvita river below Baer
on to the river Flokadalsa and up to the road above Kalfanes. The men
working at Bakki were up by then, and told the bondi that a man was
riding his horse. He got up and laughed and spoke a verse:

"There rode a man upon Saddle-head's
back; close to the garth the thief
has come.
Frey of the Odin's cloud, dreadful of aspect, appears from his
strength to be busy with mischief."

Then he took a horse and rode after him. Grettir rode on till he came
to the settlement at Kropp, where he met a man named Halli who said
he was going down to the ship at Vellir. Grettir then spoke a
verse:

"Tell, oh tell in the dwellings abroad tell thou hast met with
Saddle-head.
The handler of dice in sable cowl sat on his back; hasten, oh Halli!"

Then they parted. Halli went along the road as far as Kalfanes
before he met Sveinn.

They greeted each other hurriedly and Sveinn said:

"Saw you that loafer ride from the dwellings?
Sorely he means my patience to try.
The people about shall deal with him roughly; blue shall his body
be if I meet him."

"You can know from what I tell you," said Halli, "that I met the man who
said he was riding Saddle-head, and he told me to spread it abroad in
the dwellings and the district. He was a huge man in a black cloak."

"Well, he seems to think something of himself," said the bondi.
"I mean to know who he is."
Then he went on after him. Grettir came to Deildartunga and found
a woman outside. He began to talk to her and spoke a verse:

"Mistress august! Go tell of the jest that the serpent of earth has past
on his way.
The garrulous brewer of Odin's mead will come to Gilsbakki before
he will rest."
The woman learned the verse and Grettir rode on. Soon after Sveinn
rode up; she was still outside, and when he came he spoke the
verse:

"Who was the man who a moment ago rode past on a dusky horse in
the storm?
The hound-eyed rascal, practised in mischief.

This day I will follow his steps to the end."
She told him as she had been taught. He considered the lines and
said:
"It is not unlikely that this man is no play-fellow for me. But I
mean to catch him."
He then rode along the cultivated country.

Each could see the other's path. The weather was stormy and wet. Grettir
reached Gilsbakki that day, where Grim the son of Thorhall welcomed
him warmly and begged him to stay, which he did. He let Saddle-head
run loose and told Grim how he had come by her. Then Sveinn came
up, dismounted and saw his horse. Then he said:

"Who has ridden on my mare?
Who will pay me for her hire?
Who ever saw such an arrant thief?
What next will be the cowl-man's game?"

Grettir had then put off his wet clothes, and heard the ditty. He
said:

"Home I rode the mare to Grim's, a better man than the hovel-dweller!
Nothing will I pay for hire!

Now we may be friends again."
"Just so shall it be," said the bondi. "Your ride on the horse is fully
paid for."
Then they each began repeating verses, and Grettir said he could not
blame him for looking after his property. The bondi stayed there the
night and they had great jokes about the matter. The verses they
made were called "Saddle-head verses." In the morning the bondi
rode home, parting good friends with Grettir. Grim told Grettir of
many things that had been done in Midfjord in the North during his
absence, and that no blood-money had been paid for Atli. Thorbjorn
Oxmain's interest, he said, was so great that there was no certainty
of Grettir's mother, Asdis, being allowed to remain at Bjarg if the
feud continued.

Grettir stayed but a few nights with Grim, for he did not want it to
become known that he was about to travel North across the Heath.
Grim told him to come back to visit him if he needed protection.

"Yet," he said, "I would gladly avoid the penalty of being outlawed
for harbouring you."
Grettir bade him farewell and said: "It is more likely that I shall
need your good services still more later on."
Then Grettir rode North over the Tvidaegra Heath to Bjarg, where he
arrived at midnight. All were asleep except his mother. He went to
the back of the house and entered by a door which was there, for
he knew all the ways about. He entered the hall and went to his mother's
bed, groping his way.

She asked who was there. Grettir told her. She sat up and turned to
him, heaving a weary sigh as she spoke:

"Welcome, my kinsman! My hoard of sons has quickly passed away. He is
killed who was most needful to me; you have been declared an outlaw
and a criminal; my third is so young that he can do nothing."
"It is an ancient saying," said Grettir, "that one evil is mended by a
worse one. There is more in the heart of man than money can buy;
Atli may yet be avenged. As for me, there will be some who think they
have had enough in their dealings with me."
She said that was not unlikely. Grettir stayed there for a time, but
few knew of it, and he obtained news of the movements of the men
of the district. It was not known then that he had come to Midfjord.
He learned that Thorbjorn Oxmain was at home with few men. This
was after the hay-harvest.

CHAPTER XLVIII. DEATH OF THORBJORN OXMAIN

One fine day Grettir rode to the West across the ridge to Thoroddsstad,
where he arrived about noon and knocked at the door. Some women
came out and greeted him, not knowing who he was. He asked for
Thorbjorn, and they told him that he was gone out into the fields to
bind hay with his sixteen-year-old son Arnor. Thorbjorn was a hard
worker and was scarcely ever idle. Grettir on hearing that bade them
farewell and rode off North on the road to Reykir. There is some
marsh-land stretching away from the ridge with much grass-land, where
Thorbjorn had made a quantity of hay which was just dry. He was just
about to bind it up for bringing in with the help of his son, while a
woman gathered up what was left. Grettir rode to the field from
below, Thorbjorn and his son being above him; they had finished
one load and were beginning a second. Thorbjorn had laid down his
shield and sword against the load, and his son had his hand-axe near
him.

Thorbjorn saw a man coming and said to his son: "There is a man riding
towards us; we had better stop binding the hay and see what he wants."

They did so; Grettir got off his horse.

He had a helmet on his head, a short sword by his side, and a
great spear in his hand without barbs and inlaid with silver at
the socket. He sat down and knocked out the rivet which fastened the
head in order to prevent Thorbjorn from returning the spear upon
him.

Thorbjorn said: "This is a big man. I am no good at judging men
if that is not Grettir the son of Asmund. No doubt he thinks that
he has sufficient business with us. We will meet him boldly
and show him no signs of fear. We must act with a plan. I will
go on ahead towards him and see how we get on together, for I will
trust myself against any man if I can meet him alone.

Do you go round and get behind him; take your axe with both hands and
strike him between the shoulders.

You need not fear that he will hurt you, for his back will be turned
towards you."

Neither of them had a helmet. Grettir went along the marsh and when
he was within range launched his spear at Thorbjorn. The head was not
so firm as he had intended it to be, so it got loose in its flight
and fell off on to the ground. Thorbjorn took his shield, held it
before him, drew his sword and turned against Grettir directly he
recognised him.
Grettir drew his sword, and, turning round a little, saw the boy behind
him; so he kept continually on the move.

When he saw that the boy was within reach he raised his sword aloft and
struck Arnor's head with the back of it such a blow that the skull
broke and he died. Then Thorbjorn rushed upon Grettir and struck at
him, but he parried it with the buckler in his left hand and struck
with his sword a blow which severed Thorbjorn's shield in two and
went into his head, reaching the brain.
Thorbjorn fell dead. Grettir gave him no more wounds; he searched for
the spear-head but could not find it. He got on to his horse, rode
to Reykir and proclaimed the slaying.

The woman who was out in the field with them witnessed the battle. She
ran home terrified and told the news that Thorbjorn and his son were
killed. The people at home were much taken aback, for no one was aware
of Grettir's arrival.

They sent to the next homestead for men, who came in plenty and carried
the body to the church. The blood-feud then fell to Thorodd Drapustuf,
who at once called out his men.

Grettir rode home to Bjarg and told his mother what had happened.

She was very glad and said he had now shown his kinship to the Vatnsdal
race.

"And yet," she said, "this is the root and the beginning of your
outlawry; for certain I know that your dwelling here will not be for
long by reason of Thorbjorn's kinsmen, and now they may know that
they have the means of annoying you."
Grettir then spoke a verse:

"Atli's death was unatoned; fully now the debt is paid."

Asdis said it was true: "but I know not what counsel you now mean to
take."
Grettir said he meant now to visit his friends and kinsmen in the
western regions, and that she should have no unpleasantness on
his account. Then he made ready to go, and parted with much affection
from his mother. First he went to Melar in Hrutafjord and recounted
to his brother-in-law Gamli all his adventure with Thorbjorn. Gamli
begged him to betake himself away from Hrutafjord while the kinsmen of
Thorbjorn were abroad with their men, and said they would support
him in the suit about Atli's slaying to the best of their power.

Then Grettir rode to the West across the Laxardal Heath and did not
stop before he reached Ljarskogar, where he stayed some time in the
autumn with Thorsteinn Kuggason.

CHAPTER XLIX. GRETTIR VISITS THORSTEINN KUGGASON AND SNORRI GODI

Thorodd Drapustuf now made inquiries who it was who had killed Thorbjorn
and his son. They went to Reykir, where they were told that Grettir
had proclaimed the slaying. Thorodd then saw how matters stood and
went to Bjarg, where he found many people and asked whether
Grettir was there.
Asdis said that he was gone, and that he would not hide if he were at
home.

"You can be well content to leave things as they are. The vengeance
for Atli was not excessive, if it be reckoned up. No one asked what I
had to suffer then, and now it were well for it to rest."
Then they rode home, and it seemed as if there were nothing to be
done.
The spear which Grettir had lost was never found until within the memory
of men now living. It was found in the later days of Sturla the Lawman,
the son of Thord, in the very marsh where Thorbjorn fell, now
called Spearmarsh.

This is the proof that he was killed there and not in Midfitjar,
as has been elsewhere asserted.

Thorbjorn's kinsmen learned of Grettir's being in Ljarskogar and called
together their men with the purpose of going there. Gamli heard
of this at Melar and sent word to Thorsteinn and Grettir of their
approach.
Thorsteinn sent Grettir on to Tunga to Snorri the Godi, with whom he
was then at peace, and advised Grettir to ask for his protection,
and if it were refused to go West to Thorgils the son of Ari in
Reykjaholar, "who will surely take you in for the winter. Stay there
in the Western fjords until the affair is settled."
Grettir said he would follow his counsel. He rode to Tunga where he
found Snorri and asked to be taken in. Snorri answered: "I am now an
old man, and have no mind to harbour outlaws, unless in a case of
necessity.
But what has happened that the old man should have turned you out?"

Grettir said that Thorsteinn had often shown him kindness; "but we
shall need more than him alone to do any good."
Snorri said: "I will put in my word on your behalf, if it will be
of any use to you. But you must seek your quarters elsewhere than
with me."
So they parted. Grettir then went West to Reykjanes. The men of
Hrutafjord came with their followers to Samsstad, where they heard
that Grettir had left Ljarskogar, and went back home.
CHAPTER L. GRETTIR WINTERS WITH THORGILS AT REYKJAHOLAR IN COMPANY
WITH THE FOSTER-BROTHERS
Grettir came to Reykjaholar towards the beginning of the winter and
asked Thorgils to let him stay the winter with him. Thorgils said
he was welcome to his entertainment, like other free men; "but,"
he said, "we do not pay much attention to the preparation of the
food." 
Grettir said that would not trouble him.
"There is another little difficulty," Thorgils continued. "Some men
are expected here who are a little hot-headed, namely, the
foster-brothers Thorgeir and Thormod. I do not know how it will
suit you to be together with them. They shall always have entertainment
here whenever they wish for it. You may stay here if you will, but
I will not have any of you behaving ill to the others."
Grettir said that he would not be the first to raise a quarrel with
any man, more especially since the bondi had expressed his wish to
him.
Soon after the foster-brothers came up. Thorgeir and Grettir did
not take very kindly to one another, but Thormod behaved with
propriety.
Thorgils said to them what he had said to Grettir, and so great was
the deference paid to him that none of them spoke an improper word
to the other, although they did not always think alike. In this way
the first part of the winter was passed.
Men say that the islands called Olafseyjar, lying in the fjord about
a mile and a half from Reykjanes, belonged to Thorgils. He had there
a valuable ox, which he had not brought away in the autumn. He was
always saying that he wanted him to be brought in before Yule. One
day the foster-brothers prepared to go and fetch the ox, but wanted
a third man to help them. Grettir offered to go with them and they
were very glad to have him. So the three set out in a ten-oared
boat. The weather was cold and the wind from the North; the boat
was lying at Hvalshausholm. When they left the wind had freshened
a little; they reached the island and caught the ox. Grettir asked
whether they preferred to ship the ox or to hold the boat, for there
was a high surf running on the shore. They told him to hold the
boat. He stood by her middle on the side away from the land, the
sea reaching right up to beneath his shoulders, but he held the
boat firmly so that she could not drift. Thorgeir took the ox by
the stern and Thormod by the head, and so they hove him into the
boat.
Then they started heading for the bay, Thormod taking the bow-oars
with Thorgeir amidships and Grettir in the stern. By the time they
reached Hafraklett the wind was very high. Thorgeir said: "The stern
is slackening."
Grettir said: "The stern will not be left behind if the rowing
amidships is all right."I looked up, and I thought I heard the
voice of my husband come from near my mahogany table. . . .  I thought
I saw my husband's apparition, and the man that had done it, and that
man was Tyler. . . .  I ran out and said, 'O dear God! my husband is
murdered, and his ribs are broken'."

Lord Nugent--"What made you think your husband's ribs were broken?"

"He held up his hands like this, and I saw a hammer, or something like
a hammer, and it came into my mind that his ribs were broken."  Sewell
stated that the murder was accomplished by means of a hammer.

The prisoners were discharged on 13th September.  On 5th March, 1830,
they were tried at the Buckingham Lent Assizes, were found guilty and
were hanged, protesting their innocence, on 8th March, 1830.

"In the report of Mrs. Edden's evidence (at the Assizes) no mention is
made of the vision." {144}

Here end our ghosts in courts of justice; the following ghost gave
evidence of a murder, or rather, confessed to one, but was beyond the
reach of human laws.

This tale of 1730 is still current in Highland tradition.  It has,
however, been improved and made infinitely more picturesque by several
generations of narrators.  As we try to be faithful to the best
sources, the contemporary manuscript version is here reprinted from
The Scottish Standard-Bearer, an organ of the Scotch Episcopalians
(October and November, 1894).

THE DOG O' MAUSE

Account of an apparition that appeared to William Soutar, {145a} in
the Mause, 1730.

[This is a copy from that in the handwriting of Bishop Rattray,
preserved at Craighall, and which was found at Meikleour a few years
ago, to the proprietor of which, Mr. Mercer, it was probably sent by
the Bishop.--W. W. H., 3rd August, 1846.]

"I have sent you an account of an apparition as remarkable, perhaps,
as anything you ever heard of, and which, considered in all its
circumstances, leaves, I think, no ground of doubt to any man of
common-sense.  The person to whom it appeared is one William Soutar, a
tenant of Balgowan's, who lives in Middle Mause, within about half a
mile from this place on the other side of the river, and in view from
our windows of Craighall House.  He is about thirty-seven years of
age, as he says, and has a wife and bairns.

"The following is an account from his own mouth; and because there are
some circumstances fit to be taken in as you go along, I have given
them with reference at the end, {145b} that I may not interrupt the
sense of the account, or add anything to it.  Therefore, it begins:--

"'In the month of December in the year 1728, about sky-setting, I and
my servant, with several others living in the town (farm-steading)
heard a scratching (screeching, crying), and I followed the noise,
with my servant, a little way from the town (farm-steading
throughout).  We both thought we saw what had the appearance to be a
fox, and hounded the dogs at it, but they would not pursue it. {146a}

"'About a month after, as I was coming from Blair {146b} alone, about
the same time of the night, a big dog appeared to me, of a dark
greyish colour, between the Hilltown and Knockhead {146c} of Mause, on
a lea rig a little below the road, and in passing by it touched me
sonsily (firmly) on the thigh at my haunch-bane (hip-bone), upon which
I pulled my staff from under my arm and let a stroke at it; and I had
a notion at the time that I hit it, and my haunch was painful all that
night.  However, I had no great thought of its being anything
particular or extraordinary, but that it might be a mad dog wandering.
About a year after that, to the best of my memory, in December month,
about the same time of the night and in the same place, when I was
alone, it appeared to me again as before, and passed by me at some
distance; and then I began to think it might be something more than
ordinary.

"'In the month of December, 1730, as I was coming from Perth, from the
Claith (cloth) Market a little before sky-setting, it appeared to me
again, being alone, at the same place, and passed by me just as
before.  I had some suspicion of it then likewise, but I began to
think that a neighbour of mine in the Hilltown having an ox lately
dead, it might be a dog that had been at the carrion, by which I
endeavoured to put the suspicion out of my head.

"'On the second Monday of December, 1730, as I was coming from
Woodhead, a town (farm) in the ground of Drumlochy, it appeared to me
again in the same place just about sky-setting; and after it had
passed me as it was going out of my sight, it spoke with a low voice
so that I distinctly heard it, these words, "Within eight or ten days
do or die," and it thereupon disappeared.  No more passed at that
time.  On the morrow I went to my brother, who dwells in the Nether
Aird of Drumlochy, and told him of the last and of all the former
appearances, which was the first time I ever spoke of it to anybody.
He and I went to see a sister of ours at Glenballow, who was dying,
but she was dead before we came.  As we were returning home, I desired
my brother, whose name is James Soutar, to go forward with me till we
should be passed the place where it used to appear to me; and just as
we had come to it, about ten o'clock at night, it appeared to me again
just as formerly; and as it was passing over some ice I pointed to it
with my finger and asked my brother if he saw it, but he said he did
not, nor did his servant, who was with us.  It spoke nothing at that
time, but just disappeared as it passed the ice.

"'On the Saturday after, as I was at my own sheep-cots putting in my
sheep, it appeared to me again just after daylight, betwixt day and
skylight, and upon saying these words, "Come to the spot of ground
within half an hour," it just disappeared; whereupon I came home to my
own house, and took up a staff and also a sword off the head of the
bed, and went straight to the place where it used formerly to appear
to me; and after I had been there some minutes and had drawn a circle
about me with my staff, it appeared to me.  And I spoke to it saying,
"In the name of God and Jesus Christ, what are you that troubles me?"
and it answered me, "I am David Soutar, George Soutar's brother.
{148a}  I killed a man more than five-and-thirty years ago, when you
was new born, at a bush be-east the road, as you go into the Isle."
{148b}  And as I was going away, I stood again and said, "David Soutar
was a man, and you appear like a dog," whereupon it spoke to me again,
saying, "I killed him with a dog, and therefore I am made to speak out
of the mouth of a dog, and tell you you must go and bury these bones".
Upon this I went straight to my brother to his house, and told him
what had happened to me.  My brother having told the minister of
Blair, he and I came to the minister on Monday thereafter, as he was
examining in a neighbour's house in the same town where I live.  And
the minister, with my brother and me and two or three more, went to
the place where the apparition said the bones were buried, when
Rychalzie met us accidentally; and the minister told Rychalzie the
story in the presence of all that were there assembled, and desired
the liberty from him to break up the ground to search for the bones.
Rychalzie made some scruples to allow us to break up the ground, but
said he would go along with us to Glasclune {149a}; and if he advised,
he would allow search to be made.  Accordingly he went straight along
with my brother and me and James Chalmers, a neighbour who lives in
the Hilltown of Mause, to Glasclune, and told Glasclune the story as
above narrated; and he advised Rychalzie to allow the search to be
made, whereupon he gave his consent to it.

"'The day after, being Friday, we convened about thirty or forty men
and went to the Isle, and broke up the ground in many places,
searching for the bones, but we found nothing.

"'On Wednesday the 23rd December, about twelve o'clock, when I was in
my bed, I heard a voice but saw nothing; the voice said, "Come away".
{149b} Upon this I rose out of my bed, cast on my coat and went to the
door, but did not see it.  And I said, "In the name of God, what do
you demand of me now?"  It answered, "Go, take up these bones".  I
said, "How shall I get these bones?"  It answered again, "At the side
of a withered bush, {150} and there are but seven or eight of them
remaining".  I asked, "Was there any more guilty of that action but
you?"  It answered, "No".  I asked again, "What is the reason you
trouble me?"  It answered, "Because you are the youngest".  Then said
I to it, "Depart from me, and give me a sign that I may know the
particular spot, and give me time".  [Here there is written on the
margin in a different hand, "You will find the bones at the side of a
withered bush.  There are but eight of them, and for a sign you will
find the print of a cross impressed on the ground."]  On the morrow,
being Thursday, I went alone to the Isle to see if I could find any
sign, and immediately I saw both the bush, which was a small bush, the
greatest stick in it being about the thickness of a staff, and it was
withered about half-way down; and also the sign, which was about a
foot from the bush.  The sign was an exact cross, thus X; each of the
two lines was about a foot and a half in length and near three inches
broad, and more than an inch deeper than the rest of the ground, as if
it had been pressed down, for the ground was not cut.  On the morrow,
being Friday, I went and told my brother of the voice that had spoken
to me, and that I had gone and seen the bush which it directed me to
and the above-mentioned sign at it.  The next day, being Saturday, my
brother and I went, together with seven or eight men with us, to the
Isle.  About sun-rising we all saw the bush and the sign at it; and
upon breaking up the ground just at the bush, we found the bones,
viz., the chaft-teeth (jaw-teeth-molars) in it, one of the thigh
bones, one of the shoulder blades, and a small bone which we supposed
to be a collar bone, which was more consumed than any of the rest, and
two other small bones, which we thought to be bones of the sword-arm.
By the time we had digged up those bones, there convened about forty
men who also saw them.  The minister and Rychalzie came to the place
and saw them.

"'We immediately sent to the other side of the water, to Claywhat,
{151} to a wright that was cutting timber there, whom Claywhat brought
over with him, who immediately made a coffin for the bones, and my
wife brought linen to wrap them in, and I wrapped the bones in the
linen myself and put them in the coffin before all these people, and
sent for the mort-cloth and buried them in the churchyard of Blair
that evening.  There were near an hundred persons at the burial, and
it was a little after sunset when they were buried.'"

"This above account I have written down as dictated to me by William
Soutar in the presence of Robert Graham, brother to the Laird of
Balgowan, and of my two sons, James and John Rattray, at Craighall,
30th December, 1730.

"We at Craighall heard nothing of this history till after the search
was over, but it was told us on the morrow by some of the servants who
had been with the rest at the search; and on Saturday Glasclune's son
came over to Craighall and told us that William Soutar had given a
very distinct account of it to his father.

"On St. Andrew's Day, the 1st of December, this David Soutar (the
ghost) listed himself a soldier, being very soon after the time the
apparition said the murder was committed, and William Soutar declares
he had no remembrance of him till that apparition named him as brother
to George Soutar; then, he said, he began to recollect that when he
was about ten years of age he had seen him once at his father's in a
soldier's habit, after which he went abroad and was never more heard
of; neither did William ever before hear of his having listed as a
soldier, neither did William ever before hear of his having killed a
man, nor, indeed, was there ever anything heard of it in the country,
and it is not yet known who the person was that was killed, and whose
bones are now found.

"My son John and I went within a few days after to visit Glasclune,
and had the account from him as William had told him over.  Neither
knew of the other.

Both wanted to be received into the Varangian Guards, and their offer
was well received directly it was known that they were Norsemen. At
that time Michael Catalactus was king over Constantinople. Thorsteinn
Dromund watched for an opportunity of meeting Angle where he
might recognise him, but failed amidst the crowd, so he kept on
the watch, caring little for his own well-being and ever thinking
how much he had lost.

The next thing that happened was that the Varangians were ordered on
field service for the defence of the country. The custom and the law
were that before they marched a review was held for the inspection
of their weapons; this was done on the present occasion. On the
day appointed for the review all the Varangians and all who were
marching with them had to appear and show their arms.

Thorsteinn and Angle both presented themselves. Thorbjorn was the first
to show his weapons and he presented the sword Grettisnaut.

As he showed it all marvelled and declared that it was indeed a noble
weapon, but said it was a bad fault that a piece was out of the
middle of the edge, and they asked how that had come about. Angle
said that was a tale worth telling.

"The first thing I must tell you," he said, "is that out in Iceland I
slew a hero named Grettir the Strong. He was a tremendous warrior
and so valorous that no one could succeed in killing him until I
came. But as I was destined to be his slayer, I overcame him,
although he was many times stronger than I am. I cut off his head
with this sword and broke a piece out of the edge."
Those who stood by said he must have had a hard skull, and they showed
the sword round. From this Thorsteinn came to know which was
Angle, and asked to be shown the sword with the others. Angle willingly
showed it to him, for they were all praising his strength and courage,
and he, having no notion of its being Thorsteinn or any relation
of Grettir, thought he would do likewise.The last time he was seen he went
down by the Brae of Cockridge.  A man of the name of Irons, a
fisherman in Blairgowrie, says that his father, who died a very old
man some years ago, was present at the getting of the bones.  Mr.
Small, Finzyhan, when bringing his daughter home from school in
Edinburgh, saw a coffin at the door of a public house near Rychalzie
where he generally stopped, but he did not go in as usual, thinking
that there was a death in the family.  The innkeeper came out and
asked him why he was passing the door, and told him the coffin
contained the bones of the murdered man which had been collected, upon
which he went into the house.

"The Soutars disliked much to be questioned on the subject of the Dog
of Mause.  Thomas Soutar, who was tenant in Easter Mause, formerly
named Knowhead of Mause, and died last year upwards of eighty years of
age, said that the Soutars came originally from Annandale, and that
their name was Johnston; that there were three brothers who fled from
that part of the country on account of their having killed a man; that
they came by Soutar's Hill, and having asked the name of the hill,
were told 'Soutar,' upon which they said, 'Soutar be it then,' and
took that name.  One of the brothers went south and the others came
north." {155a}

The appearance of human ghosts in the form of beasts is common enough;
in Shropshire they usually "come" as bulls.  (See Miss Burne's
Shropshire Folklore.)  They do not usually speak, like the Dog o'
Mause.  M. d'Assier, a French Darwinian, explains that ghosts revert
"atavistically" to lower forms of animal life! {155b}

We now, in accordance with a promise already made, give an example of
the ghosts of beasts!  Here an explanation by the theory that the
consciousness of the beast survives death and affects with a
hallucination the minds of living men and animals, will hardly pass
current.  But if such cases were as common and told on evidence as
respectable as that which vouches for appearances of the dead,
believers in these would either have to shift their ground, or to
grant that

Admitted to that equal sky,
Our faithful dog may bear us company.

We omit such things as the dripping death wraith of a drowned cat who
appeared to a lady, or the illused monkey who died in a Chinese house,
after which he haunted it by rapping, secreting objects, and, in
short, in the usual way. {155c}  We adduce

PETER'S GHOST

A naval officer visited a friend in the country.  Several men were
sitting round the smoking-room fire when he arrived, and a fox-terrier
was with them.  Presently the heavy, shambling footsteps of an old
dog, and the metallic shaking sound of his collar, were heard coming
up stairs.

"Here's old Peter!" said his visitor.

"_Peter's dead_!" whispered his owner.

The sounds passed through the closed door, heard by all; they pattered
into the room; the fox-terrier bristled up, growled, and pursued a
viewless object across the carpet; from the hearth-rug sounded a
shake, a jingle of a collar and the settling weight of a body
collapsing into repose. {156}

This pleasing anecdote rests on what is called _nautical evidence_,
which, for reasons inexplicable to me, was (in these matters)
distrusted by Sir Walter Scott.


CHAPTER VIII


More Ghosts with a Purpose.  Ticonderoga.  The Beresford Ghost.
Sources of Evidence.  The Family Version.  A New Old-Fashioned Ghost.
Half-past One o'clock.  Put out the Light!

The ghost in the following famous tale had a purpose.  He was a
Highland ghost, a Campbell, and desired vengeance on a Macniven, who
murdered him.  The ghost, practically, "cried Cruachan," and tried to
rouse the clan.  Failing in this, owing to Inverawe's loyalty to his
oath, the ghost uttered a prophecy.

The tale is given in the words of Miss Elspeth Campbell, who collected
it at Inverawe from a Highland narrator.  She adds a curious
supplementary tradition in the Argyle family.

TICONDEROGA

It was one evening in the summer of the year 1755 that Campbell of
Inverawe {157} was on Cruachan hill side.  He was startled by seeing a
man coming towards him at full speed; a man ragged, bleeding, and
evidently suffering agonies of terror.  "The avengers of blood are on
my track, Oh, save me!" the poor wretch managed to gasp out.
Inverawe, filled with pity for the miserable man, swore "By the word
of an Inverawe which never failed friend or foe yet" to save him.

Inverawe then led the stranger to the secret cave on Cruachan hill
side.

None knew of this cave but the laird of Inverawe himself, as the
secret was most carefully kept and had been handed down from father to
son for many generations.  The entrance was small, and no one passing
would for an instant suspect it to be other than a tod's hole, {158a}
but within were fair-sized rooms, one containing a well of the purest
spring water.  It is said that Wallace and Bruce had made use of this
cave in earlier days.

Here Inverawe left his guest.  The man was so overcome by terror that
he clung on to Inverawe's plaid, {158b} imploring him not to leave him
alone.  Inverawe was filled with disgust at this cowardly conduct, and
already almost repented having plighted his word to save such a
worthless creature.

On Inverawe's return home he found a man in a state of great
excitement waiting to see him.  This man informed him of the murder of
his (Inverawe's) foster-brother by one Macniven.  "We have," said he,
"tracked the murderer to within a short distance of this place, and I
am here to warn you in case he should seek your protection."  Inverawe
turned pale and remained silent, not knowing what answer to give.  The
man, knowing the love that subsisted between the foster-brothers,
thought this silence arose from grief alone, and left the house to
pursue the search for Macniven further.

The compassion Inverawe felt for the trembling man he had left in the
cave turned to hate when he thought of his beloved foster-brother
murdered; but as he had plighted his word to save him, save him he
must and would.  As soon, therefore, as night fell he went to the cave
with food, and promised to return with more the next day.

Thoroughly worn out, as soon as he reached home he retired to rest,
but sleep he could not.  So taking up a book he began to read.  A
shadow fell across the page.  He looked up and saw his foster-brother
standing by the bedside.  But, oh, how changed!  Then the vikings tried
to escape, but could not, as their ships were in the narrowest part
of the channel and were impeded both by the current and by the
enemy's ships.

Onund's men vigorously attacked the wing commanded by Vigbjod while
Thrand engaged Vestmar, but effected little. When the men on
Vigbjod's ship had been somewhat reduced, Onund's men, he himself with
them, prepared to board her. On seeing that, Vigbjod spurred on his
men resolutely. He turned against Onund, most of whose men gave way.
Onund was a man of immense strength and he bade his followers observe
how it fared with them. They shoved a log under the stump of his
leg, so that he stood pretty firm.
The viking dashed forward, reached Onund and hewed at him with his sword,
which cut right through his shield and into the log beneath his
leg, where it remained fixed.

As Vigbjod bent down to pull his sword clear again, Onund dealt him a
blow on his shoulder, severing his arm and disabling him.

When Vestmar saw his comrade fall, he sprang on to the outermost
ship and escaped along with all who could get on to her.
Then they examined the dead. Vigbjod had already expired. Onund went
up to him and said:

"Bloody thy wounds. Didst thou see me flee?

'One-leg' no hurt received from thee.
Braver are many in word than in deed.
Thou, slave, didst fail when it came to the trial."
They took a large quantity of booty and returned to the Barra
Isles in the autumn.

CHAPTER V. VISIT OF ONUND AND THRAND TO EYVIND IN IRELAND

The following summer they made ready for a voyage to the West, to Ireland.
At the same time Balki and Hallvard sailed westwards, to Iceland,
where they had heard that good land was available for occupation.
Balki took up some land at Hrutafjord, and had his abode in two
places called Balkastad.

Hallvard occupied Sugandafjord and Skalavik as far as Stigi, where he
lived.

Thrand and Onund went to visit Eyvind the Easterner, who welcomed
joyfully his brother Thrand; but when he heard that Onund had also
come, he became very angry and wanted to fight him.

Thrand asked him not to do so, and said it would ill become
him to quarrel with men from Norway, especially with such as
had given no offence. Eyvind said that he had given offence before,
when he made war on Kjarval the king, and that he should now pay for
it.

The brothers had much to say to each other about the matter, till at
last Thrand said that he and Onund should share their fortune
together. Then Eyvind allowed himself to be appeased.
They stayed there a long time in the summer and went with Eyvind on
his expeditions.

Eyvind found Onund to be a man of the greatest valour. In the autumn
they went to the Hebrides, and Eyvind made over to Thrand all his
share in their father Bjorn's patrimony in the event of Bjorn dying
before Thrand.

They stayed in the Hebrides until they married and some years
after.

CHAPTER VI. DEATH OF BJORN; DISPUTES OVER HIS PROPERTY IN NORWAY

The next thing that happened was the death of Thrand's father Bjorn.

When the news of it reached Grim the Hersir he proceeded against Ondott
Crow and claimed Bjorn's estate. Ondott held Thrand to be the rightful
heir of his father, but Grim contended that Thrand was away
in the West.

Bjorn, he said, came from Gautland, and the succession to the
estate of all foreigners passed to the king. Ondott said that he would
hold the property on behalf of Thrand, who was his daughter's son.
Grim then departed, having effected nothing by his claim.

Thrand, when he heard of his father's death, prepared to leave the
Hebrides, and Onund Treefoot decided to go with him.

Ofeig Grettir and Thormod Shaft went to Iceland with all their belongings,
landing at Eyrar in the South. They spent the first winter with
Thorbjorn the Salmon-man, and then occupied Gnupverjahrepp. Ofeig
took the outer part lying between the rivers Thvera and Kalfa,
and lived at Ofeigsstad near Steinsholt, while Thormod took the eastern
part, living at Skaptaholt.

Thormod's daughters were named Thorvor and Thorve; the former afterwards
became the mother of Thorodd the Godi at Hjalli, Thorve of Thorstein
the Godi the father of Bjarni the Wise.

We now return to Thrand and Onund, who sailed back from the West to
Norway. A strong wind blew in their favour, so that they arrived at
the house of Ondott Crow before any one knew of their journey. He
welcomed Thrand and told him of the claim which Grim the Hersir
had raised for Bjorn's estate.

"To my thinking, kinsman," he said, "it is better that the property
should go to you than to the king's thralls. It is a fortunate thing
for you that no one knows of your having come here, for I expect that
Grim will make an attack upon one or the other of us if he can.
I should prefer if you would take over your property and stay in other
countries."
Thrand said that he would do so. He took over the property and
prepared to leave Norway.

Before leaving he asked Onund Treefoot whether he would not come
to Iceland.

Onund said he wanted first to visit some of his relations and friends
in the South.

"Then," said Thrand, "we must part. I should be glad if you would give
my kinsmen your support, for our enemies will certainly try to
take revenge upon them when I am gone.

I am going to Iceland, and I want you to come there too."
Onund said he would come, and they parted with great friendship.
Thrand went to Iceland, where he met with a welcome from Ofeig and
Thormod Shaft. He took up his dwelling at Thrandarholt to the west of
Thjorsa.

CHAPTER VII. MURDER OF ONDOTT CROW, AND THE VENGEANCE THEREFOR

Onund went to Rogaland in the South and visited many of his relations
and friends. He lived there in concealment with a man named Kolbeinn.
He there learned that King Harald had taken all his property and
given it into the charge of a man named Harekr, one of his officials.
Onund went by night to Harekr's house and caught him at home; he was
led to execution. Then Onund took possession of all the loose
property which he found and burnt the building.

That autumn Grim the Hersir murdered Ondott Crow because he had not
succeeded in getting the property for the king.

Ondott's wife Signy carried off all their loose property that same
night to a ship and escaped with her sons Asmund and Asgrim to her
father Sighvat. A little later she sent her sons to Hedin, her
foster-father in Soknadal, where they remained for a time and
then wanted to return to their mother. They left at last, and at
Yule-tide came to Ingjald the Trusty at Hvin.
His wife Gyda persuaded him to take them in, and they spent the winter
there. In the spring Onund came to northern Agdir, having learned
of the murder of Ondott. He met Signy and asked her what assistance
they would have of him. She said they were most anxious to punish Grim
for the death of Ondott. So the sons were sent for, and when they met
Onund Treefoot they all joined together and had Grim's doings closely
watched.

In the summer there was a beer-brewing at Grim's for a jarl
named Audun, whom he had invited. When Onund and the sons of Ondott
heard of it, they appeared at his house unexpectedly and set fire to
it. Grim the Hersir and about thirty men were burnt in the house.

They captured a quantity of valuables. Then Onund went into the forest,
while the two brothers took the boat of their foster-father Ingjald,
rowed away and lay in hiding a little way off. Soon jarl Audun
appeared, on his way to the feast, as had been arranged, but on
arriving he missed his host. So he collected his men around him
and stayed there a few nights, quite unaware of Onund and his
companions. He slept in a loft with two other men. Onund knew everything
that was going on in the house and sent for the two brothers to come
to him. On their arrival he asked them whether they preferred to keep
watch on the house or to attack the jarl. They chose to attack.
They then battered the entrance of the loft with beams until the door
gave way. Asmund seized the two men who were with the jarl and threw
them to the ground with such violence that they were well-nigh
killed.

Asgrim rushed at the jarl and demanded of him weregild for his father,
for he had been in league with Grim and took part in the attack
when Ondott was murdered. The jarl said he had no money about him
and asked for time. Asgrim then placed the point of his spear against
his breast and ordered him to pay up on the spot. Then the jarl took
a necklace from his neck and gave it to him with three gold
rings and a velvet mantle.

Asgrim took the things and bestowed a name upon the jarl. He called
him Audun Nannygoat.

When the farmers and people about heard of the disturbances they all
came out to help the jarl.

Onund had a large force with him, and there was a great battle in which
many a good farmer and many a follower of the jarl were slain. The
brothers returned to Onund and reported what had occurred with the
jarl. Onund said it was a pity they had not killed him. It would, he
said, have been something to make up for the losses which he had suffered
from King Harald. They said the disgrace was far worse for the jarl
as it was, and they went off to Surnadal to Eirik Beery, a Landman
there, who took them all in for the winter.

At Yule-tide they had a great drinking bout with a man named Hallsteinn,
nicknamed Stallion. Eirik opened the feast and entertained them
generously. Then it was Hallsteinn's turn, and they began to
quarrel.
Hallsteinn struck Eirik with a deer's horn, for which Eirik got no
revenge, but had to go home with it, to the great annoyance of Ondott's
sons. A little later Asgrim went to Hallsteinn's house and gave him
a severe wound. All the people who were present started up and
attacked Asgrim. He defended himself vigorously and escaped in the
dark, leaving them under the belief that they had killed him.
Onund and Asmund, on hearing that Asgrim had been killed, were at
a loss what they could do in the matter. Eirik's advice was
that they should betake themselves to Iceland, for it would never
do for them to remain in the land where the king could get at
them.

This they determined to do. Each of them had his own ship and they
made ready for the voyage to Iceland. Hallsteinn was laid low with his
wound and died before Onund sailed with his party.
Kolbeinn, the man who was mentioned before, went in the ship with
Onund.

CHAPTER VIII. ONUND AND ASMUND SAIL TO ICELAND

Onund and Asmund set sail directly when they were ready and their ships
kept together. Onund said:

"Hallvard and I were aforetime deemed worthy in storm of swords
to bear us.

With one foot now I step on the ship towards Iceland. The poet's day
is o'er."
They had a rough passage with cross winds, mostly from the south, so
that they drifted away to the north. They made Iceland right in the
North, at Langanes, where they regained their reckonings. The ships
were near enough to each other for them to speak together. Asmund said
they had better make for Eyjafjord, and this was agreed to. They kept
under the land and heavy weather set in from the south-east. Just
as Onund was tacking, the yard was carried away; they lowered the sail
and were driven out to sea. Asmund got under the lee of Hrisey,
where he waited until a fair wind set in which took him up to
Eyjafjord. Helgi the Lean gave him the whole of Kraeklingahlid, and
he lived at South-Glera. A few years later his brother Asgrim came to
Iceland and took up his residence at North-Glera. His son was Ellidagrim
the father of Asgrim.

CHAPTER IX. ONUND SETTLES IN KALDBAK

Onund Treefoot was driven away from the shore for several days,
after which the wind shifted and blew towards the land. Then they made
land again, which those of them who had been there before
recognised as the western coast of the Skagi peninsula. They sailed
in to Strandafloi, almost to Sudrstrandir. There came rowing towards
them a ten-oared boat with six men on board, who hailed the sea-going
ship and asked who was their captain. Onund told them his name and asked
whence they came.
They said they were the men of Thorvald from Drangar. Then Onund asked
whether all the land round that coast was occupied; they answered
there was very little left at Sudrstrandir and none at all in the
North.

So Onund asked his men whether they would seek some land further to the
West or take that of which they had just been told. They said they
would first explore a little further. They sailed in along the
coast of the bay and anchored off a creek near Arnes, where they put
off in a boat to the shore.

Here dwelt a wealthy man named Eirik Snare, who had taken the
land between Ingolfsfjord and Ofaera in Veidileysa. On hearing that
Onund had arrived in those parts, he offered to let him have such
portion as he needed from his own lands, adding that there was little
land which had not already been taken up. Onund said he would first
like to see what there was.

Then they went further into the bay past some fjords and came to Ofaera,
where Eirik said: "Here is what there is to see. From here down to
the lands of Bjorn is unoccupied." A high range of mountains, on which
snow had fallen, rose from beside the river. Onund looked at the
mountains and spoke a verse:

"My lands and my might have drifted away as drifts the ship on the
ocean.
My friends and my home I have left behind me, and bartered my acres for
Kaldbak."
"Many a man," answered Eirik, "has lost so much in Norway that it may
not be mended. I expect too that nearly all the lands in the main
districts have been taken, so that I will not urge you to leave these
parts and seek elsewhere. I will keep to my word and let you have
whatever lands of my own you may require."
Onund said he would take advantage of his offer, and in the end he
took some of the Ofaera land and the three creeks Byrgisvik, Kolbeinsvik,
and Kaldbaksvik as far as Kaldbak's Cliff.

Afterwards Eirik gave him Veidileysa with Reykjarfjord and the outer
part of Reykjanes on that side. Nothing was settled about the drift
which came to the coast, because there was so much of it that every one
could have what he wanted. Onund made his home in Kaldbak and had a
large household. His property increased and he had another house in
Reykjarfjord. Kolbeinn lived in Kolbeinsvik and for some years Onund
lived quietly at home.

CHAPTER X. OFEIG GRETTIR IS KILLED. VISIT OF ONUND TO AUD THE DEEP-MINDED

Onund was a man of such valour that few, even of those whose limbs
were sound, could measure themselves against him. His name, too,
was renowned throughout the whole country on account of his ancestry.
It happened that a dispute arose between Ofeig Grettir and one
Thorbjorn called Jarlakappi, which ended in Ofeig being killed by
Thorbjorn in Grettisgeil near Haell. The feud was taken up by Ofeig's
sons who assembled a large force of men. Onund Treefoot was sent
for, and in the spring he rode South to Hvamm, where he stayed
with Aud the Deep-Minded.
He had been with her over the sea in the West, and she received him
with welcome. Her grandson, Olaf Feilan, was then grown up, and Aud was
very infirm. She consulted Onund concerning her kinsman Olaf, for
whom she wished to ask in marriage Alfdis of the Barra Isles, the
cousin of Onund's wife Aesa. Onund thought it a very suitable match,
and Olaf rode with him to the South. Then Onund met friends and
kinsmen, who made him their guest. The matter of the dispute was talked
over between them, and finally laid before the Kjalarnes Thing, for
the All-Thing had not yet been established. Eventually it was settled
by arbitration and heavy weregilds were imposed for the murder.
Thorbjorn Jarlakappi was exiled.
His son was Solmund, the father of Svidukari. These kinsmen were long
abroad after that. Thrand invited Onund and Olaf with his party to
stay with him, as did Thormod Shaft. The matter of Olaf's marriage
was then pressed, and an agreement easily arrived at, for
Aud's rank and influence were well known to them. The settlement was
arranged and Onund's party rode home again. Aud thanked him for his
aid in behalf of Olaf, who married Alfdis of the Barra Isles that
autumn.

Then Aud the Deep-Minded died, as is told in the Laxdaela Saga.

CHAPTER XI. DEATH OF ONUND. DISPUTES BETWEEN THE SONS OF ONUND AND OF
EIRIK

Onund and Aesa had two sons; the elder was named Thorgeir, the younger
Ofeig Grettir. Soon afterwards Aesa died and Onund married a second
wife, Thordis Thorgrim's daughter of Gnup in Midfjord, a kinsman of
Skeggi of Midfjord. By her Onund had a son named Thorgrim, who grew
up quickly to manhood, tall and strong, wise and a good manager. Onund
continued to live at Kaldbak until his old age. He died a natural death
and lies in Treefoot's howe. He was the boldest and most active
one-legged man that ever came to Iceland.

Among Onund's sons Thorgrim was the foremost, although the others
were older. When he was twenty-five years old his hair was grey, whence
they nick-named him Greyhead. His mother Thordis married again,
taking as her second husband Audun Skokull. They had a son named Asgeir
of Asgeirsa.
Thorgrim Greyhead and his brothers had a large property, which they
managed together without dividing it up.

Eirik lived, as was mentioned, at Arnes. He had married Alof, the
daughter of Ingolf of Ingolfsfjord, by whom he had a son named Flosi,
a very promising young man with many friends.

There came to that part of Iceland three brothers, named Ingolf, Ofeig,
and Eyvind, and took the three fjords which are called by their names,
where they lived.

Eyvind had a son named Olaf. He at first lived at Eyvindsfjord, but
went later to Drangar. He was a most capable man.

So long as their fathers were living no disputes arose among these men;
but when Eirik was dead it occurred to Flosi that those of Kaldbak
had no legal title to the lands which Eirik had given to Onund. Out of
this serious dissensions arose between them. Thorgrim and his
brothers continued in possession of the lands as before, but they
would not join in games together. Thorgeir, the eldest brother, was
managing the farm at Reykjarfjord, and often rowed out fishing, as
the fjords were full of fish. The men of Vik now laid their plans.
Flosi had a man in Arnes named Thorfinn, and sent him to fetch
Thorgeir's head. This man hid himself in the boatshed. One morning
when Thorgeir was preparing to row out with two other men, one of
whom was named Brand, Thorgeir was walking ahead with a leather
skin on his back containing some drink. It was very dark, and as
he passed the boat-house Thorfinn sprang out upon him and dealt him
a blow with an axe between his shoulders. The axe went into something
and made a squeaking noise. Thorfinn let go his axe, feeling quite
sure that no bandages would be needed, and being very anxious to
escape as fast as he could. He ran North, and reaching Arnes before
the day had quite broken, said that he had killed Thorgeir and that
Flosi must protect him. The only thing to be done was to offer some
compensation in money. "That," he said, "will be the best thing for
us after such a terrible piece of work."
Flosi said he must first learn more about it, and that he thought
Thorfinn seemed very frightened after his doughty deed.
We must now tell what had happened to Thorgeir. He turned round
when he was struck, but the blow had gone into the leather bottle,
and he was unhurt. They could make no search for the man because
it was dark, so they rowed on down the fjord to Kaldbak, where they
told what had happened. People made great game of the affair and
called him Thorgeir Bottleback, a name which stuck to him ever
after. A verse was made:
"In days gone by men bathed their blades in the streaming gore of
a foeman's wound.
But now a wretch of all honour bereft reddens his dastard axe in
whey." 

CHAPTER XII. BATTLE AT RIFSKER
At that time there came over Iceland a famine the like of which had
never been seen before. Nearly all the fisheries failed, and also
the drift wood. So it continued for many years.
One autumn some traders in a sea-going ship, who had been driven
out of their course, were wrecked at Vik. Flosi took in four or
five of them with their captain, named Steinn. They all found shelter
in the neighbourhood of Vik and tried to rig up a ship out of the
wreckage, but were not very successful. The ship was too narrow in
the bow and stern and too broad amidships. In the spring a northerly
gale set in which lasted nearly a week, after which men began to
look for drift.
There was a man living in Reykjanes named Thorsteinn. He found a
whale stranded on the south side of the promontory at the place now
called Rifsker. It was a large rorqual, and he at once sent word
by a messenger to Flosi in Vik and to the nearest farms.
At Gjogr lived a man named Einar, a tenant of the Kaldbak men whom
they employed to look after the drift on that side of the fjord.
He got to know of the whale having been stranded and at once rowed
across the fjord in his boat to Byrgisvik, whence he sent a messenger
to Kaldbak.
When Thorgrim and his brother heard the news they got ready to go
with all speed to the spot. There were twelve of them in a ten-oared
boat, and six others, with Ivar and Leif, sons of Kolbeinn. All the
farmers who could get away went to the whale.
In the meantime Flosi had sent word to his kinsmen in the North at
Ingolfsfjord and Ofeigsfjord and to Olaf the son of Eyvind who lived
at Drangar. The first to arrive were Flosi and the men of Vik, who
at once began to cut up the whale, carrying on shore the flesh as
it was cut.
At first there were about twenty men, but more came thronging in.
Then there came the men of Kaldbak with four ships. Thorgrim laid
claim to the whale and forbade the men of Vik to cut, distribute,
or carry away any portion of it. Flosi called upon him to show proof
that Eirik had in express words given over the drift to Onund; if
not, he said he would prevent them by force."Her friend, the Archbishop, had had her buried in the Cathedral of
St. Patrick, in Dublin, in the Earl of Cork's tomb, where she now
lies."

* * * * *

The writer now professes his disbelief in any spiritual presence, and
explains his theory that Lady Beresford's anxiety about Lord Tyrone
deluded her by a vivid dream, during which she hurt her wrist.

Of all ghost stories the Tyrone, or Beresford Ghost, has most
variants.  Following Monsieur Haureau, in the Journal des Savants, I
have tracked the tale, the death compact, and the wound inflicted by
the ghost on the hand, or wrist, or brow, of the seer, through Henry
More, and Melanchthon, and a mediaeval sermon by Eudes de Shirton, to
William of Malmesbury, a range of 700 years.  Mrs. Grant of Laggan has
a rather recent case, and I have heard of another in the last ten
years!  Calmet has a case in 1625, the spectre leaves

The sable score of fingers four

on a board of wood.

Now for a modern instance of a gang of ghosts with a purpose!

When I narrated the story which follows to an eminent moral
philosopher, he remarked, at a given point, "Oh, the ghost _spoke_,
did she?" and displayed scepticism.  The evidence, however, left him,
as it leaves me, at a standstill, not convinced, but agreeably
perplexed.  The ghosts here are truly old-fashioned.

My story is, and must probably remain, entirely devoid of proof, as
far as any kind of ghostly influence is concerned.  We find ghosts
appearing, and imposing a certain course of action on a living
witness, for definite purposes of their own.  The course of action
prescribed was undeniably pursued, and apparently the purpose of the
ghosts was fulfilled, but what that purpose was their agent declines
to state, and conjecture is hopelessly baffled.

The documents in the affair have been published by the Society for
Psychical Research (Proceedings, vol. xi., p. 547), and are here used
for reference.  But I think the matter will be more intelligible if I
narrate it exactly as it came under my own observation.  The names of
persons and places are all fictitious, and are the same as those used
in the documents published by the S.P.R.

HALF-PAST ONE O'CLOCK

In October, 1893, I was staying at a town which we shall call
Rapingham.  One night I and some kinsfolk dined with another old
friend of all of us, a Dr. Ferrier.  In the course of dinner he asked
a propos de bottes:--

"Have you heard of the ghost in Blake Street?" a sunny, pleasant
street of respectable but uninteresting antiquity in Rapingham.

We had none of us heard of the ghost, and begged the doctor to
enlighten our ignorance.  His story ran thus--I have it in his own
writing as far as its essence goes:--

"The house," he said, "belongs to my friends, the Applebys, who let
it, as they live elsewhere.  A quiet couple took it and lived in it
for five years, when the husband died, and the widow went away.  They
made no complaint while tenants.  The house stood empty for some time,
and all I know personally about the matter is that I, my wife, and the
children were in the dining-room one Sunday when we heard unusual
noises in the drawing-room overhead.  We went through the rooms but
could find no cause or explanation of the disturbance, and thought no
more about it.

"About six or seven years ago I let the house to a Mr. Buckley, who is
still the tenant.  He was unmarried, and his family consisted of his
mother and sisters.  They preceded him to put the place in order, and
before his arrival came to me in some irritation complaining that I
had let them _a haunted house_!  They insisted that there were strange
noises, as if heavy weights were being dragged about, or heavy
footsteps pacing in the rooms and on the stairs.  I said that I knew
nothing about the matter.  The stairs are of stone, water is only
carried up to the first floor, there is an unused system of hot air
pipes. {177a}  Something went wrong with the water-main in the area
once, but the noises lasted after it was mended.

"I think Mr. Buckley when he arrived never heard anything unusual.
But one evening as he walked upstairs carrying an ink-bottle, he found
his hand full of some liquid.  Thinking that he had spilt the ink, he
went to a window where he found his hand full of water, to account for
which there was no stain on the ceiling, or anything else that he
could discover.  On another occasion one of the young ladies was
kneeling by a trunk in an attic, alone, when water was switched over
her face, as if from a wet brush. {177b}  There was a small pool of
water on the floor, and the wall beyond her was sprinkled.

"Time went on, and the disturbances were very rare:  in fact ceased
for two years till the present week, when Mrs. Claughton, a widow
accompanied by two of her children, came to stay with the Buckleys.
{177c}  She had heard of the disturbances and the theory of hauntings--
I don't know if these things interested her or not.

"Early on Monday, 9th October, Mrs. Claughton came to consult me.  Her
story was this:  About a quarter past one on Sunday night, or Monday
morning, she was in bed with one of her children, the other sleeping
in the room.  She was awakened by footsteps on the stair, and supposed
that a servant was coming to call her to Miss Buckley, who was ill.
The steps stopped at the door, then the noise was repeated.  Mrs.
Claughton lit her bedroom candle, opened the door and listened.  There
was no one there.  The clock on the landing pointed to twenty minutes
past one.  Mrs. Claughton went back to bed, read a book, fell asleep,
and woke to find the candle still lit, but low in the socket.  She
heard a sigh, and saw a lady, unknown to her, her head swathed in a
soft white shawl, her expression gentle and refined, her features much
emaciated.

"The Appearance said, 'Follow me,' and Mrs. Claughton, taking the
bedroom candle, rose and followed out on to the landing, and so into
the adjacent drawing-room.  She cannot remember opening the door,
which the housemaid had locked outside, and she owns that this passage
is dreamlike in her memory.  Seeing that her candle was flickering
out, she substituted for it a pink one taken from a chiffonier.  The
figure walked nearly to the window, turned three-quarters round, said
'To-morrow!' and was no more seen.  Mrs. Claughton went back to her
room, where her eldest child asked:--

"'Who is the lady in white?'

"'Only me, mother, go to sleep,' she thinks she answered.  After lying
awake for two hours, with gas burning, she fell asleep.  The pink
candle from the drawing-room chiffonier was in her candlestick in the
morning.

"After hearing the lady's narrative I told her to try change of air,
which she declined as cowardly.  So, as she would stay on at Mr.
Buckley's, I suggested that an electric alarm communicating with Miss
Buckley's room should be rigged up, and this was done."

Here the doctor paused, and as the events had happened within the
week, we felt that we were at last on the track of a recent ghost.

"Next morning, about one, the Buckleys were aroused by a tremendous
peal of the alarm; Mrs. Claughton they found in a faint.  Next morning
{179} she consulted me as to the whereabouts of a certain place, let
me call it 'Meresby'.  I suggested the use of a postal directory; we
found Meresby, a place extremely unknown to fame, in an agricultural
district about five hours from London in the opposite direction from
Rapingham.  To this place Mrs. Claughton said she must go, in the
interest and by the order of certain ghosts, whom she saw on Monday
night, and whose injunctions she had taken down in a note-book.  She
has left Rapingham for London, and there," said the doctor, "my story
ends for the present."

We expected it to end for good and all, but in the course of the week
came a communication to the doctor in writing from Mrs. Claughton's
governess.  This lady, on Mrs. Claughton's arrival at her London house
(Friday, 13th October), passed a night perturbed by sounds of weeping,
"loud moans," and "a very odd noise overhead, like some electric
battery gone wrong," in fact, much like the "warning" of a jack
running down, which Old Jeffrey used to give at the Wesley's house in
Epworth.  There were also heavy footsteps and thuds, as of moving
weighty bodies.  So far the governess.

This curious communication I read at Rapingham on Saturday, 14th
October, or Sunday, 15th October.  On Monday I went to town.  In the
course of the week I received a letter from my kinsman in Rapingham,
saying that Mrs. Claughton had written to Dr. Ferrier, telling him
that she had gone to Meresby on Saturday; had accomplished the bidding
of the ghosts, and had lodged with one Joseph Wright, the parish
clerk.  Her duty had been to examine the Meresby parish registers, and
to compare certain entries with information given by the ghosts and
written by her in her note-book.  If the entries in the parish
register tallied with her notes, she was to pass the time between one
o'clock and half-past one, alone, in Meresby Church, and receive a
communication from the spectres.  All this she said that she had done,
and in evidence of her journey enclosed her half ticket to Meresby,
which a dream had warned her would not be taken on her arrival.  She
also sent a white rose from a grave to Dr. Ferrier, a gentleman in no
sympathy with the Jacobite cause, which, indeed, has no connection
whatever with the matter in hand.

On hearing of this letter from Mrs. Claughton, I confess that, not
knowing the lady, I remained purely sceptical.  The railway company,
however, vouched for the ticket.  The rector of Meresby, being
appealed to, knew nothing of the matter.  He therefore sent for his
curate and parish clerk.

"Did a lady pass part of Sunday night in the church?"

The clerk and the curate admitted that this unusual event _had_
occurred.  A lady had arrived from London on Saturday evening; had
lodged with Wright, the parish clerk; had asked for the parish
registers; had compared them with her note-book after morning service
on Sunday, and had begged leave to pass part of the night in the
church.  The curate in vain tried to dissuade her, and finally,
washing his hands of it, had left her to Wright the clerk.  To him she
described a Mr. George Howard, deceased (one of the ghosts).  He
recognised the description, and he accompanied her to the church on a
dark night, starting at one o'clock.  She stayed alone, without a
light, in the locked-up church from 1.20 to 1.45, when he let her out.

There now remained no doubt that Mrs. Claughton had really gone to
Meresby, a long and disagreeable journey, and had been locked up in
the church alone at a witching hour.

Beyond this point we have only the statements of Mrs. Claughton, made
to Lord Bute, Mr. Myers and others, and published by the Society for
Psychical Research.  She says that after arranging the alarm bell on
Monday night (October 9-10) she fell asleep reading in her dressing-
gown, lying outside her bed.  She wakened, and found the lady of the
white shawl bending over her.  Mrs. Claughton said:  "Am I dreaming,
or is it true?"  The figure gave, as testimony to character, a piece
of information.  Next Mrs. Claughton saw a male ghost, "tall, dark,
healthy, sixty years old," who named himself as George Howard, buried
in Meresby churchyard, Meresby being a place of which Mrs. Claughton,
like most people, now heard for the first time.  He gave the dates of
his marriage and death, which are correct, and have been seen by Mr.
Myers in Mrs. Claughton's note-book.  He bade her verify these dates
at Meresby, and wait at 1.15 in the morning at the grave of Richard
Harte (a person, like all of them, unknown to Mrs. Claughton) at the
south-west corner of the south aisle in Meresby Church.  This Mr.
Harte died on 15th May, 1745, and missed many events of interest by
doing so.  Mr. Howard also named and described Joseph Wright, of
Meresby, as a man who would help her, and he gave minute local
information.  Next came a phantom of a man whose name Mrs. Claughton
is not free to give; {182} he seemed to be in great trouble, at first
covering his face with his hands, but later removing them.  These
three spectres were to meet Mrs. Claughton in Meresby Church and give
her information of importance on a matter concerning, apparently, the
third and only unhappy appearance.  After these promises and
injunctions the phantoms left, and Mrs. Claughton went to the door to
look at the clock.  Feeling faint, she rang the alarum, when her
friends came and found her in a swoon on the floor.  The hour was
1.20.

What Mrs. Claughton's children were doing all this time, and whether
they were in the room or not, does not appear.

On Thursday Mrs. Claughton went to town, and her governess was
perturbed, as we have seen.

On Friday night Mrs. Claughton _dreamed_ a number of things connected
with her journey; a page of the notes made from this dream was shown
to Mr. Myers.  Thus her half ticket was not to be taken, she was to
find a Mr. Francis, concerned in the private affairs of the ghosts,
which needed rectifying, and so forth.  These premonitions, with
others, were all fulfilled.  Mrs. Claughton, in the church at night,
continued her conversation with the ghosts whose acquaintance she had
made at Rapingham.  She obtained, it seems, all the information
needful to settling the mysterious matters which disturbed the male
ghost who hid his face, and on Monday morning she visited the daughter
of Mr. Howard in her country house in a park, "recognised the strong
likeness to her father, and carried out all things desired by the dead
to the full, as had been requested. . . .  The wishes expressed to her
were perfectly rational, reasonable and of natural importance."

The clerk, Wright, attests the accuracy of Mrs. Claughton's
description of Mr. Howard, whom he knew, and the correspondence of her
dates with those in the parish register and on the graves, which he
found for her at her request.  Mr. Myers, "from a very partial
knowledge" of what the Meresby ghosts' business was, thinks the
reasons for not revealing this matter "entirely sufficient".  The
ghosts' messages to survivors "effected the intended results," says
Mrs. Claughton.

* * * * *

Of this story the only conceivable natural explanation is that Mrs.
Claughton, to serve her private ends, paid secret preliminary visits
to Meresby, "got up" there a number of minute facts, chose a haunted
house at the other end of England as a first scene in her little
drama, and made the rest of the troublesome journeys, not to mention
the uncomfortable visit to a dark church at midnight, and did all this
from a hysterical love of notoriety.  This desirable boon she would
probably never have obtained, even as far as it is consistent with a
pseudonym, if I had not chanced to dine with Dr. Ferrier while the
adventure was only beginning.  As there seemed to be a chance of
taking a ghost "on the half volley," I at once communicated the first
part of the tale to the Psychical Society (using pseudonyms, as here,
throughout), and two years later Mrs. Claughton consented to tell the
Society as much as she thinks it fair to reveal.

This, it will be confessed, is a round-about way of obtaining fame,
and an ordinary person in Mrs. Claughton's position would have gone to
the Psychical Society at once, as Mark Twain meant to do when he saw
the ghost which turned out to be a very ordinary person.

There I leave these ghosts, my mind being in a just balance of
agnosticism.  If ghosts at all, they were ghosts with a purpose.  The
species is now very rare.

The purpose of the ghost in the following instance was trivial, but
was successfully accomplished.  In place of asking people to do what
it wanted, the ghost did the thing itself.  Now the modern theory of
ghosts, namely, that they are delusions of the senses of the seers,
caused somehow by the mental action of dead or distant people, does
not seem to apply in this case.  The ghost produced an effect on a
material object.

"PUT OUT THE LIGHT!"

The Rev. D. W. G. Gwynne, M.D., was a physician in holy orders.  In
1853 he lived at P--- House, near Taunton, where both he and his wife
"were made uncomfortable by auditory experiences to which they could
find no clue," or, in common English, they heard mysterious noises.
"During the night," writes Dr. Gwynne, "I became aware of a draped
figure passing across the foot of the bed towards the fireplace.  I
had the impression that the arm was raised, pointing with the hand
towards the mantel-piece on which a night-light was burning.  Mrs.
Gwynne at the same moment seized my arm, _and the light was
extinguished_!  Notwithstanding, I distinctly saw the figure returning
towards the door, and being under the impression that one of the
servants had found her way into our room, I leaped out of bed to
intercept the intruder, but found and saw nothing.  I rushed to the
door and endeavoured to follow the supposed intruder, and it was not
until I found the door locked, as usual, that I was painfully
impressed.  I need hardly say that Mrs. Gwynne was in a very nervous
state.  She asked me what I had seen, and I told her.  She had seen
the same figure," "but," writes Mrs. Gwynne, "I distinctly _saw the
hand of the figure placed over the night-light, which was at once
extinguished_".  "Mrs. Gwynne also heard the rustle of the 'tall man-
like figure's' garments.  In addition to the night-light there was
moonlight in the room."

"Other people had suffered many things in the same house, unknown to
Dr. and Mrs. Gwynne, who gave up the place soon afterwards."

In plenty of stories we hear of ghosts who draw curtains or open
doors, and these apparent material effects are usually called part of
the seer's delusion.  But the night-light certainly went out under the
figure's hand, and was relit by Dr. Gwynne.  Either the ghost was an
actual entity, not a mere hallucination of two people, or the
extinction of the light was a curious coincidence. {186}


CHAPTER IX


Haunted Houses.  Antiquity of Haunted Houses.  Savage Cases.  Ancient
Egyptian Cases.  Persistence in Modern Times.  Impostures.  Imaginary
Noises.  Nature of Noises.  The Creaking Stair.  Ghostly Effects
produced by the Living but Absent.  The Grocer's Cough.  Difficulty of
Belief.  My Gillie's Father's Story.  "Silverton Abbey."  The Dream
that Opened the Door.  Abbotsford Noises.  Legitimate Haunting by the
Dead.  The Girl in Pink.  The Dog in the Haunted Room.  The Lady in
Black.  Dogs Alarmed.  The Dead Seldom Recognised.  Glamis.  A Border
Castle.  Another Class of Hauntings.  A Russian Case.  The Dancing
Devil.  The Little Hands.

Haunted houses have been familiar to man ever since he has owned a
roof to cover his head.  The Australian blacks possessed only shelters
or "leans-to," so in Australia the spirits do their rapping on the
tree trunks; a native illustrated this by whacking a table with a
book.  The perched-up houses of the Dyaks are haunted by noisy routing
agencies.  We find them in monasteries, palaces, and crofters'
cottages all through the Middle Ages.  On an ancient Egyptian papyrus
we find the husband of the Lady Onkhari protesting against her habit
of haunting his house, and exclaiming:  "What wrong have I done,"
exactly in the spirit of the "Hymn of Donald Ban," who was "sair
hadden down by a bodach" (noisy bogle) after Culloden. {188a}

The husband of Onkhari does not say _how_ she disturbed him, but the
manners of Egyptian haunters, just what they remain at present, may be
gathered from a magical papyrus, written in Greek.  Spirits "wail and
groan, or laugh dreadfully"; they cause bad dreams, terror and
madness; finally, they "practice stealthy theft," and rap and knock.
The "theft" (by making objects disappear mysteriously) is often
illustrated in the following tales, as are the groaning and knocking.
{188b}  St. Augustine speaks of hauntings as familiar occurrences, and
we have a chain of similar cases from ancient Egypt to 1896.  Several
houses in that year were so disturbed that the inhabitants were
obliged to leave them.  The newspapers were full of correspondence on
the subject.

The usual annoyances are apparitions (rare), flying about of objects
(not very common), noises of every kind (extremely frequent), groans,
screams, footsteps and fire-raising.  Imposture has either been proved
or made very probable in ten out of eleven cases of volatile objects
between 1883 and 1895. {188c}  Moreover, it is certain that the noises
of haunted houses are not equally audible by all persons present, even
when the sounds are at their loudest.  Thus Lord St. Vincent, the
great admiral, heard nothing during his stay at the house of his
sister, Mrs. Ricketts, while that lady endured terrible things.  After
his departure she was obliged to recall him.  He arrived, and slept
peacefully.  Next day his sister told him about the disturbances,
after which he heard them as much as his neighbours, and was as
unsuccessful in discovering their cause. {189}

Of course this looks as if these noises were unreal, children of the
imagination.  Noises being the staple of haunted houses, a few words
may be devoted to them.  They are usually the frou-frou or rustling
sweep of a gown, footsteps, raps, thumps, groans, a sound as if all
the heavy furniture was being knocked about, crashing of crockery and
jingling of money.  Of course, as to footsteps, people _may_ be
walking about, and most of the other noises are either easily
imitated, or easily produced by rats, water pipes, cracks in furniture
(which the Aztecs thought ominous of death), and other natural causes.
The explanation is rather more difficult when the steps pace a
gallery, passing and repassing among curious inquirers, or in this
instance.

THE CREAKING STAIR

A lady very well known to myself, and in literary society, lived as a
girl with an antiquarian father in an old house dear to an antiquary.
It was haunted, among other things, by footsteps.  The old oak
staircase had two creaking steps, numbers seventeen and eighteen from
the top.  The girl would sit on the stair, stretching out her arms,
and count the steps as they passed her, one, two, three, and so on to
seventeen and eighteen, _which always creaked_. {190}   In this case
rats and similar causes were excluded, though we may allow for
"expectant attention".  But this does not generally work.  When people
sit up on purpose to look out for the ghost, he rarely comes; in the
case of the "Lady in Black," which we give later, when purposely
waited for, she was never seen at all.

Discounting imposture, which is sometimes found, and sometimes merely
fabled (as in the Tedworth story), there remains one curious
circumstance.  Specially ghostly noises are attributed to the living
but absent.

THE GROCER'S COUGH

A man of letters was born in a small Scotch town, where his father was
the intimate friend of a tradesman whom we shall call the grocer.
Almost every day the grocer would come to have a chat with Mr. Mackay,
and the visitor, alone of the natives, had the habit of knocking at
the door before entering.  One day Mr. Mackay said to his daughter,
"There's Mr. Macwilliam's knock.  Open the door."  But there was no
Mr. Macwilliam!  He was just leaving his house at the other end of the
street.  From that day Mr. Mackay always heard the grocer's knock "a
little previous," accompanied by the grocer's cough, which was
peculiar.  Then all the family heard it, including the son who later
became learned.  He, when he had left his village for Glasgow,
reasoned himself out of the opinion that the grocer's knock did herald
and precede the grocer.  But when he went home for a visit he found
that he heard it just as of old.  Possibly some local Sentimental
Tommy watched for the grocer, played the trick and ran away.  This
explanation presents no difficulty, but the boy was never detected.
{191}

Such anecdotes somehow do not commend themselves to the belief even of
people who can believe a good deal.

But "the spirits of the living," as the Highlanders say, have surely
as good a chance to knock, or appear at a distance, as the spirits of
the dead.  To be sure, the living do not know (unless they are making
a scientific experiment) what trouble they are giving on these
occasions, but one can only infer, like St. Augustine, that probably
the dead don't know it either.

Thus,

MY GILLIE'S FATHER'S STORY

Fishing in Sutherland, I had a charming companion in the gillie.  He
was well educated, a great reader, the best of salmon fishers, and I
never heard a man curse William, Duke of Cumberland, with more
enthusiasm.  His father, still alive, was second-sighted, and so, to a
moderate extent and without theory, was my friend.  Among other
anecdotes (confirmed in writing by the old gentleman) was this:--

The father had a friend who died in the house which they both
occupied.  The clothes of the deceased hung on pegs in the bedroom.
One night the father awoke, and saw a stranger examining and handling
the clothes of the defunct.  Then came a letter from the dead man's
brother, inquiring about the effects.  He followed later, and was the
stranger seen by my gillie's father.

Thus the living but absent may haunt a house both noisily and by
actual appearance.  The learned even think, for very exquisite
reasons, that "Silverton Abbey" {192} is haunted noisily by a "spirit
of the living".  Here is a case:--

THE DREAM THAT KNOCKED AT THE DOOR

The following is an old but good story.  The Rev. Joseph Wilkins died,
an aged man, in 1800.  He left this narrative, often printed; the date
of the adventure is 1754, when Mr. Wilkins, aged twenty-three, was a
schoolmaster in Devonshire.  The dream was an ordinary dream, and did
not announce death, or anything but a journey.  Mr. Wilkins dreamed,
in Devonshire, that he was going to London.  He thought he would go by
Gloucestershire and see his people.  So he started, arrived at his
father's house, found the front door locked, went in by the back door,
went to his parents' room, saw his father asleep in bed and his mother
awake.  He said:  "Mother, I am going a long journey, and have come to
bid you good-bye".  She answered in a fright, "Oh dear son, thou art
dead!"  Mr. Wilkins wakened, and thought nothing of it.  As early as a
letter could come, one arrived from his father, addressing him as if
he were dead, and desiring him, if by accident alive, or any one into
whose hands the letter might fall, to write at once.  The father then
gave his reasons for alarm.  Mrs. Wilkins, being awake one night,
heard some one try the front door, enter by the back, then saw her son
come into her room and say he was going on a long journey, with the
rest of the dialogue.  She then woke her husband, who said she had
been dreaming, but who was alarmed enough to write the letter.  No
harm came of it to anybody.

The story would be better if Mr. Wilkins, junior, like Laud, had kept
a nocturnal of his dreams, and published his father's letter, with
post-marks.

The story of the lady who often dreamed of a house, and when by chance
she found and rented it was recognised as the ghost who had recently
haunted it, is good, but is an invention!

A somewhat similar instance is that of the uproar of moving heavy
objects, heard by Scott in Abbotsford on the night preceding and the
night of the death of his furnisher, Mr. Bullock, in London.  The
story is given in Lockhart's Life of Scott, and is too familiar for
repetition.

On the whole, accepting one kind of story on the same level as the
other kind, the living and absent may unconsciously produce the
phenomena of haunted houses just as well as the dead, to whose alleged
performances we now advance.  Actual appearances, as we have said, are
not common, and just as all persons do not hear the sounds, so many do
not see the appearance, even when it is visible to others in the same
room.  As an example, take a very mild and lady-like case of haunting.

THE GIRL IN PINK

The following anecdote was told to myself, a few months after the
curious event, by the three witnesses in the case.  They were
connections of my own, the father was a clergyman of the Anglican
Church; he, his wife and their daughter, a girl of twenty, were the
"percipients".  All are cheerful, sagacious people, and all, though
they absolutely agreed as to the facts in their experience, professed
an utter disbelief in "ghosts," which the occurrence has not affected
in any way.  They usually reside in a foreign city, where there is a
good deal of English society.  One day they left the town to lunch
with a young fellow-countryman who lived in a villa in the
neighbourhood.  There he was attempting to farm a small estate, with
what measure of success the story does not say.  His house was kept by
his sister, who was present, of course, at the little luncheon party.
During the meal some question was asked, or some remark was made, to
which the clerical guest replied in English by a reference to "the
maid-servant in pink".

"There is no maid in pink," said the host, and he asked both his other
guests to corroborate him.

Both ladies, mother and daughter, were obliged to say that unless
their eyes deceived them, they certainly _had_ seen a girl in pink
attending on them, or, at least, moving about in the room.  To this
their entertainers earnestly replied that no such person was in their
establishment, that they had no woman servant but the elderly cook and
housekeeper, then present, who was neither a girl nor in pink.  After
luncheon the guests were taken all over the house, to convince them of
the absence of the young woman whom they had seen, and assuredly there
was no trace of her.

On returning to the town where they reside, they casually mentioned
the circumstance as a curious illusion.  The person to whom they spoke
said, with some interest, "Don't you know that a girl is said to have
been murdered in that house before your friends took it, and that she
is reported to be occasionally seen, dressed in pink?"

They had heard of no such matter, but the story seemed to be pretty
generally known, though naturally disliked by the occupant of the
house.  As for the percipients, they each and all remain firm in the
belief that, till convinced of the impossibility of her presence, they
were certain they had seen a girl in pink, and rather a pretty girl,
whose appearance suggested nothing out of the common.  An obvious
hypothesis is discounted, of course, by the presence of the sister of
the young gentleman who farmed the estate and occupied the house.

Here is another case, mild but pertinacious.

THE DOG IN THE HAUNTED ROOM

The author's friend, Mr. Rokeby, lives, and has lived for some twenty
years, in an old house at Hammersmith.  It is surrounded by a large
garden, the drawing-room and dining-room are on the right and left of
the entrance from the garden, on the ground floor.  My friends had
never been troubled by any phenomena before, and never expected to be.
However, they found the house "noisy," the windows were apt to be
violently shaken at night and steps used to be heard where no steps
should be.  Deep long sighs were audible at all times of day.  As Mrs.
Rokeby approached a door, the handle would turn and the door fly open.
{196}  Sounds of stitching a hard material, and of dragging a heavy
weight occurred in Mrs. Rokeby's room, and her hair used to be pulled
in a manner for which she could not account.  "These sorts of things
went on for about five years, when in October, 1875, about three
o'clock in the afternoon, I was sitting" (says Mrs. Rokeby) "with
three of my children in the dining-room, reading to them.  I rang the
bell for the parlour-maid, when the door opened, and on looking up I
saw the figure of a woman come in and walk up to the side of the
table, stand there a second or two, and then turn to go out again, but
before reaching the door she seemed to dissolve away.  She was a grey,
short-looking woman, apparently dressed in grey muslin.  I hardly saw
the face, which seemed scarcely to be defined at all.  None of the
children saw her," and Mrs. Rokeby only mentioned the affair at the
time to her husband.

Two servants, in the next two months, saw the same figure, alike in
dress at least, in other rooms both by daylight and candle light.
They had not heard of Mrs. Rokeby's experience, were accustomed to the
noises, and were in good health.  One of them was frightened, and left
her place.

A brilliant light in a dark room, an icy wind and a feeling of being
"watched" were other discomforts in Mrs. Rokeby's lot.  After 1876,
only occasional rappings were heard, till Mr. Rokeby being absent one
night in 1883, the noises broke out, "banging, thumping, the whole
place shaking".  The library was the centre of these exercises, and
the dog, a fine collie, was shut up in the library.  Mrs. Rokeby left
her room for her daughter's, while the dog whined in terror, and the
noises increased in violence.  Next day the dog, when let out, rushed
forth with enthusiasm, but crouched with his tail between his legs
when invited to re-enter.

This was in 1883.  Several years after, Mr. Rokeby was smoking, alone,
in the dining-room early in the evening, when the dog began to bristle
up his hair, and bark.  Mr. Rokeby looked up and saw the woman in
grey, with about half her figure passed through the slightly open
door.  He ran to the door, but she was gone, and the servants were
engaged in their usual business. {198a}

Our next ghost offered many opportunities to observers.

THE LADY IN BLACK

A ghost in a haunted house is seldom observed with anything like
scientific precision.  The spectre in the following narrative could
not be photographed, attempts being usually made in a light which
required prolonged exposure.  Efforts to touch it were failures, nor
did it speak.  On the other hand, it did lend itself, perhaps
unconsciously, to one scientific experiment.  The story is unromantic;
the names are fictitious. {198b}

Bognor House, an eligible family residence near a large town, was
built in 1860, and occupied, till his death in 1876, by Mr. S.  He was
twice married, and was not of temperate ways.  His second wife adopted
his habits, left him shortly before his death, and died at Clifton in
1878.  The pair used to quarrel about some jewels which Mr. S.
concealed in the flooring of a room where the ghost was never seen.

A Mr L. now took the house, but died six months later.  Bognor House
stood empty for four years, during which there was vague talk of
hauntings.  In April, 1882, the house was taken by Captain Morton.
This was in April; in June Miss Rose Morton, a lady of nineteen
studying medicine (and wearing spectacles), saw the first appearance.
Miss Morton did not mention her experiences to her family, her mother
being an invalid, and her brothers and sisters very young, but she
transmitted accounts to a friend, a lady, in a kind of diary letters.
These are extant, and are quoted.

Phenomena of this kind usually begin with noises, and go on to
apparitions.  Miss Morton one night, while preparing to go to bed,
heard a noise outside, thought it was her mother, opened the door, saw
a tall lady in black holding a handkerchief to her face, and followed
the figure till her candle burned out.  A widow's white cuff was
visible on each wrist, the whole of the face was never seen.  In 1882-
84, Miss Morton saw the figure about six times; it was thrice seen,
once through the window from outside, by other persons, who took it
for a living being.  Two boys playing in the garden ran in to ask who
was the weeping lady in black.

On 29th January, 1884, Miss Morton spoke to her inmate, as the lady in
black stood beside a sofa.  "She only gave a slight gasp and moved
towards the door.  Just by the door I spoke to her again, but she
seemed as if she were quite unable to speak." {199}  In May and June
Miss Morton fastened strings at different heights from the stair
railings to the wall, where she attached them with glue, but she twice
saw the lady pass through the cords, leaving them untouched.  When
Miss Morton cornered the figure and tried to touch her, or pounce on
her, she dodged, or disappeared.  But by a curious contradiction her
steps were often heard by several of the family, and when she heard
the steps, Miss Morton used to go out and follow the figure.  There is
really no more to tell.  Miss Morton's father never saw the lady, even
when she sat on a sofa for half an hour, Miss Morton watching her.
Other people saw her in the garden crying, and sent messages to ask
what was the matter, and who was the lady in distress.  Many members
of the family, boys, girls, married ladies, servants and others often
saw the lady in black.  In 1885 loud noises, bumps and turning of door
handles were common, and though the servants were told that the lady
was quite harmless, they did not always stay.  The whole establishment
of servants was gradually changed, but the lady still walked.  She
appeared more seldom in 1887-1889, and by 1892 even the light
footsteps ceased.  Two dogs, a retriever and a Skye terrier, showed
much alarm.  "Twice," says Miss Morton, "I saw the terrier suddenly
run up to the mat at the foot of the stairs in the hall, wagging its
tail, and moving its back in the way dogs do when they expect to be
caressed.  Gone is his fame, his glory lost!"
In the spring after this Gisli prepared to go on board his ship and
forbade in the strongest terms anything which belonged to him being
carried South by the way of the mountains; for he said that the Fiend
himself was there.

Gisli when he went South to join his ship kept all the way along
the coast and he never met Grettir again. Nobody considered him worth
thinking about, nor do we hear any more of him in this saga. Grettir's
relations with Thord the son of Kolbeinn became worse than ever,
and Thord tried every means to get Grettir driven away or killed.

CHAPTER LX. THE BATTLE WITH THE MYRAMEN

When Grettir had been two winters in Fagraskogafjall and the third
winter had set in, he went South into Myrar to the farm called
Laekjarbug, where he took six wethers without their owner's
permission.
Then he went down to Akrar and drove off two oxen for slaughter
with several sheep, and went up South to the Hitara. When the bondis
heard of his exploits they sent word to Thord at Hitarnes and
asked him to take the lead in the slaying of Grettir. He was
rather reluctant, but as they had asked him he sent his son Arnor,
afterwards called Jarlsbard, to go with them, and told them not to
let Grettir escape. Messengers were then sent round to all the
farms.

There was a man named Bjarni who dwelt in Jorvi in Flysjuhverfi.
He collected men on the other side of the Hitara; the intention was
that each band should keep on its own side. Grettir had two men
with him, one named Eyjolf, a stout man, the son of a bondi in
Fagraskogar, and another. The party came on, about twenty in number,
under Thorarin from Akrar and Thorfinn of Laekjarbug. Grettir tried to
get out across the river, but was met by Arnor and Bjarni coming
from the coast. There was a narrow point jutting out into the river
on Grettir's side, and when he saw the men approaching he drove his
animals on to it, for he never would let go anything of which he had
once got possession.

The Myramen prepared to attack in good order and Grettir told his
companions to guard his rear.

They could not all come on at once. There was a hard struggle between
them; Grettir used his short sword with both hands and they found
it not easy to get at him. Some of the Myramen fell and some were
wounded. The men on the other side of the river were rather slow
in coming up because there was no ford near.

Before they had been fighting very long they fell back.

Thorarin of Akrar was a very old man and not able to join in the fighting.
When the battle was over there came up his son Thrand, his brother
Ingjald's son Thorgils, Finnbogi the son of Thorgeir, the son of
Thorhadd of Hitardal, and Steinolf the son of Thorleif of Hraundal.
They set on their men and there was a hard struggle.

Grettir saw that there was no choice left but either to flee or else
to do his utmost and not spare himself. He pressed on hard and nothing
could hold against him, for his foes were so numerous that there was
no chance of escaping except by fighting to the last before he fell.
He tried always to engage those who seemed most courageous; first
he went for Steinolf of Hraundal and cleft his skull down to his
shoulders; then he struck at Thorgils the son of Ingjald and almost
cut him in two. Then Thrand tried to spring forward and avenge his
kinsmen, and Grettir hewed at his right thigh, cutting out all the
muscles so that he could fight no more.

Next he gave Finnbogi a severe wound. Then Thorarin ordered them off.
"The longer you fight," he said, "the worse you will get from him
and the more will he choose out the men from your company."
They obeyed and fell back. Ten had fallen; five were wounded to death
or crippled, and nearly all who had been in the battle were hurt. Grettir
was terribly fatigued but little wounded. The Myramen drew off,
having suffered heavy losses, for many a good man had fallen. Those
who were beyond the river came over slowly and did not arrive till
the fight was over, and when they saw the plight of their men Arnor
would not risk himself any further, for which he was much blamed
by his father and by others. Men thought he was not much of a
warrior. The place where they fought is now called Grettisoddi.

Grettir and his companions were all wounded; they took their horses
and rode back along the foot of the mountain.

When they reached Fagraskogar Eyjolf was behind. There was a bondi's
daughter there and she asked for their tidings, which Grettir told
her fully and spoke a verse:

"Goddess of horn-floods! Steinolf's wounds are such that scarcely
may be healed.
Of Thorgils' life is little hope; his bones are smashed; eight more
are dead."

Then Grettir went to his retreat and spent the winter there.

CHAPTER LXI. GRETTIR WINTERS UNDER THE GEITLAND GLACIER

The next time that Bjorn met Grettir he told him that this was a very
serious affair, and that he would not be able to stay there in
peace much longer.

"You have killed kinsmen and friends of mine, but I will not depart
from my promise to you so long as you are here."
Grettir said he was sorry to have given him offence, but that he had to
defend his hands and his life. Bjorn said it would have to remain so.
Soon there came to him some of the men who had lost their kinsmen
through Grettir and petitioned him not to allow such a ruffian as he
was to stay there any longer and molest them. Bjorn said he would do
as they desired directly the winter was over.

Thrand the son of Thorarin of Akrar had now recovered from his wound.
He was a man of much worth, and had married Steinunn the daughter
of Hrut of Kambsnes.

Steinolf's father Thorleif of Hraundal was a great man; from him
are sprung the Hraundal men.

No more meetings are told of between Grettir and the Myramen while
he was in the mountains.

Bjorn continued in friendship with him, but some of Bjorn's other
friends fell away from him because of his allowing Grettir to remain
there, for they were annoyed at getting no compensation for the
slaying of their kinsmen.

When the Thing assembled Grettir left the Myrar district and went to
Borgarfjord, where he visited Grim the son of Thorhall and sought
counsel of him where he should move to next. Grim said he was not
powerful enough to keep him there, so Grettir went off to his friend
Hallmund and stayed there till the end of the summer.

In the autumn Grettir went to Geitland, where he stayed till bright
weather set in. Then he ascended the Geitlandsjokull and turned his
steps South-east along the glacier, taking with him a kettle and
fuel.
It is supposed that he went there by the counsel of Hallmund, who
knew the country far and wide. He went on till he came to a long and
rather narrow valley in the glacier, shut in on every side by the ice
which overhung the valley. He went about everywhere, and found fair
grass-grown banks and brushwood. There were hot springs, and it seemed
as if volcanic fires had kept the ice from closing in above the
valley.

A little stream flowed down the dale with smooth banks on either
side.
Little did the light of the sun enter there, and the number of sheep
in the valley seemed to him countless.

They were much better and fatter than any which he had ever seen.

Grettir stayed there and built himself a hut out of logs which he
found about. He caught a sheep to eat, and it was better for slaughter
than two in other places. There was a ewe there with her lamb; she
had a brown head and excelled all the others in size. He was
anxious to have the lamb, so he caught it and slaughtered it and
got half a measure of suet out of it, and it was better in every way.
When Brownhead missed her lamb she came up every night to Grettir's
hut and bleated so that he never could get any sleep. He regretted
much having killed the lamb on account of the disturbance which she
caused him.

Every evening when the twilight set in he heard a voice calling in
the valley, and then the sheep used to run together into a place of
shelter. Grettir has told us that a blending ruled over the valley, a
giant named Thorir, under whose protection he remained. Grettir called
the valley after him Thorisdal.
He said that Thorir had daughters with whom he had some play, and
that they were very pleased, because not many people came there.
And when the days of fasting came Grettir remembered to tell them
that fat and liver should be eaten in Lent.

Nothing particular occurred that winter, and Grettir found it so dull
that he could not stay there any longer. He left the valley and
went to the South through the glacier, reaching the middle of
Skjaldbreid from the North. There he took up a stone, cut a hole in
it and said that if a man put his eye to the hole he could see into
the gully which flows out of Thorisdal.

Then he went across the country South and reached the eastern fjords.
He spent the summer and the winter on this journey and visited all the
great men, but found them all against him so that nowhere could he
get lodging or shelter. So he returned to the North and stayed in various
places.

CHAPTER LXII. HALLMUND IS KILLED BY A FOREST-MAN NAMED GRIM

Soon after Grettir had left the Arnarvatn Heath there came a man
there named Grim, the son of a widow at Kropp.

He had killed the son of Eid of Ass, the son of Skeggi, and been outlawed
for it. So there he stayed where Grettir had been before him and
got plenty of fish out of the lake. Hallmund was not at all pleased at
Grim being there instead of Grettir, and said that he should have little
advantage from his great catches of fish.

One morning
Grim had caught a hundred fish, which he brought to the hut and
arranged outside.

The next morning when he went there every fish was gone. He thought
it very strange, but returned to the lake and caught this time two
hundred. He carried them home and arranged them; again everything
happened as before; in the morning all were gone, evidently through
the same agency as before. The third day he caught three hundred,
carried them home and kept a watch on his hut. He looked out through
a hole in the door to see if any one came, and so he remained for
a time.

When about one third of the night had passed he heard some one walking
near and stepping rather heavily; so he immediately took his axe, which
was very sharp, and wanted to know what was the matter. There came
a man with a big basket on his back; he put it down and looked round,
but saw no one outside. He rummaged about among the fish and seemed
to think that they would do for him to lay hands upon. He threw
them all into his basket and they quite filled it.
The fishes were so large that Grim thought no horse would be able to
carry more. This man then took the load and got beneath it. Just
as he was about to rise Grim rushed out and taking his axe in both
hands struck a blow at his neck which went through the skin. He
started in surprise and then ran off towards the south of the hill with
his basket.
Grim went after him to see whether he had got him. They went south along
the foot of the Balljokull where the man entered a cave. There
was a bright fire in the cave and a woman standing in it, very
tall but shapely.

Grim heard her greet her father, calling him Hallmund. He flung
down his load and heaved a great sigh. She asked why he was
covered with blood. He answered in a verse:

"No man, I see, may trust his might.

His luck and heart will fail at death."

Then she pressed him to say what had happened, and he told her
everything.

"Hear now," he said, "what I tell you of my adventure. I will
tell it to you in verse, and you shall cut it in runes on a staff."
She did so, and he spoke the Hallmundarkvida, in which the following
occurs:

"I was strong when Grettir's bridle I seized I saw him gazing long at
his palms.

Then Thorir came on the Heath with his men.
'Gainst eighty we two had play with our spears.

Grettir's hands knew how to strike; much deeper the marks that
were left by mine.

Arms and heads then flew as they tried to gain my rear; eighteen
of them fell.

The giant-kind and the grim rock-dwellers, demons and blendings fell
before me, elves and devils have felt my hand."
Many exploits of his did Hallmund recount in the lay, for he had
been in every land.

The daughter said: "That man was not going to let his catch slip away
from him. It was only to be expected, for you treated him very
badly.
But who is going to avenge you?"
"It is not certain that anybody will, but I think that Grettir would
avenge me if he were able. It will not be easy to go against this
man's luck; he is destined to great things."

Then as the lay continued his strength began to fail. Hallmund died
almost at the moment when he finished the song. She grieved much
for him and wept sorely. Then Grim came forward and bade her be comforted.
"All," he said, "must depart when their fate calls. It was partly his
own fault, for I could not look on and see myself robbed."
She said he might speak much about that: "The unjust man prospers
ill."

She was somewhat cheered by the talk with him. Grim stayed several nights
in the cave and learned the lay; all went well with them. Grim
was in the Arnarvatn Heath all the winter after Hallmund's death.
Afterwards Thorkell the son of Eyjolf came to the heath and fought
with him. The meeting ended by Grim having Thorkell's life in his
power, but he would not kill him. Thorkell then took him in, sent him
abroad and supplied him with means; each was considered to have acted
generously towards the other. Grim became a great traveller and
there is a long saga about him.

CHAPTER LXIII. GRETTIR'S MEETING WITH THORIR ON THE REYKJA HEATH

We now return to Grettir, who came from the eastern fjords, travelling
in disguise and hiding his head because he did not wish to meet
Thorir.
That summer he spent in Modrudal Heath and other places. For a time too
he was on Reykja Heath. Thorir heard of his being on Reykja Heath,
gathered his men and rode thither, determined not to let him
escape.

Grettir scarcely knew of their plans before they came upon him. He was
in a hill-dairy a little off the road with another man, and when they
saw the troop they had to lay their plans quickly. Grettir said they
should make their horses lie down inside the house, and they did
so.
Thorir rode forward across the heath in a northerly direction,
missed the place, did not find Grettir and turned back home.

When the troop had ridden round to the West, Grettir said: "They will
not be pleased with their expedition if they do not meet me. You
stay and mind the horses while I go after them. It would be a good
jest if they did not recognise me."
His companion tried to dissuade him, but he would go. He changed his
dress, put on a wide hat which came down over his face and took a stick
in his hand. Then he went along the road towards them. They addressed
him and asked whether he had seen any men riding over the
heath.

"I have seen the men whom you are seeking," he said, "you very nearly
came upon them; they were on your left hand just south of the
marshes."
On hearing this they galloped off towards the marshes, which were
so swampy that they could not get through and had to spend a great part
of the day dragging their horses out. They swore much at the supposed
traveller for playing a practical joke upon them.

Grettir returned speedily home to his companion, and when they met
spoke a verse:

"I will not ride to the warriors' arms; too great the danger is.
I dare not meet the storm of Vidri; but homeward turn my steps."
They rode off as fast as they could westwards towards the homestead in
Gard before Thorir could come there with his company. When they were
near the place they met a man on the road who did not know them.
There was a young woman standing outside, very much dressed up, and
Grettir asked who she was. The man who had come up said she was
Thorir's daughter. Then Grettir spoke a verse:

"Maiden, when thy father comes tell him, little though it please him,
how I rode his dwelling past; only two who with me rode."
From this the man learnt who it was, and rode to the house to tell them
that Grettir had come round. When Thorir returned many men thought
that he had been bamboozled by Grettir. He then set spies to watch
Grettir's movements.

Grettir took the precaution of sending his companion to the
western districts with his horse, while he himself went North
into the mountains at the beginning of the winter, muffling up
his face so that no one should recognise him. Every one thought that
Thorir had fared no better but even worse than at their former
encounter.

CHAPTER LXIV. GHOSTS IN BARDARDAL
There was dwelling at Eyjardalsa in Bardardal a priest named Steinn,
a good farmer and wealthy. His son Kjartan was grown up and was now
a fine young man. Thorsteinn the White was a man who dwelt at
Sandhaugar to the south of Eyjardalsa; his wife Steinvor was young
and of a merry disposition. They had children who at this time were
yet young. Their place was generally thought to be much haunted by
trolls. Two winters before Grettir came North into those parts,
Steinvor the mistress of Sandhaugar went as usual to spend Yule at
Eyjardalsa, while her husband stayed at home. Men lay down to sleep
in the evening, and in the night they heard a great noise in the
room near the bondi's bed. No one dared to get up to see what was
the matter because there were so few of them. The mistress of the
house returned home the next morning, but her husband had disappeared
and no one knew what had become of him. So the next season passed.
The following winter the mistress wanted to go to mass, and told
her servant to stay at home; he was very unwilling but said she
should be obeyed. It happened just as before; this time the servant
disappeared. People thought it very strange and found some drops
of blood upon the outer door, so they supposed that some evil spirit
must have carried off both the men. The story spread all through
the district and came to the ears of Grettir, who being well
accustomed to deal with ghosts and spectres turned his steps to
Bardardal and arrived at Yule-eve at Sandhaugar. He retained his
disguise and called himself Gest. The lady of the house saw that
he was enormously tall, and the servants were terribly afraid of
him. He asked for hospitality; the mistress told him that food was
ready for him but that he must see after himself. He said he would,
and added: "I will stay in the house while you go to mass if you
would like it."
She said: "You must be a brave man to venture to stay in the house."
"I do not care for a monotonous life," he said.
Then she said: "I do not want to remain at home, but I cannot get
across the river."
"I will come with you," said Gest. Then she made ready to go to
mass with her little daughter. It was thawing outside; the river
was flooded and was covered with ice. She said: "It is impossible
for either man or horse to cross the river."
"There must be fords," said Gest; "do not be afraid."
"First carry the maiden over," she said; "she is lighter."
"I don't want to make two journeys of it," said he; "I will carry
you in my arms."
She crossed herself and said: "That is impossible; what will you
do with the girl?"
"I will find a way," he said, taking them both up and setting the
girl on her mother's knee as he bore them both on his left arm,
keeping his right arm free. So he carried them across. They were
too frightened to cry out. The river came up to his breast, and a
great piece of ice drove against him, which he pushed off with the
hand that was free.Something "like
a badger, with no head," says Emily; Mrs. Wesley only says, "like a
badger," ran from under the bed.  On the night of the 25th there was
an appalling vacarme.  Mr. and Mrs. Wesley went on a tour of
inspection, but only found the mastiff whining in terror.  "We still
heard it rattle and thunder in every room above or behind us, locked
as well as open, except my study, where as yet it never came."  On the
night of the 26th Mr. Wesley seems to have heard of a phenomenon
already familiar to Emily--"something like the quick winding up of a
jack, at the corner of the room by my bed head".  This was always
followed by knocks, "hollow and loud, such as none of us could ever
imitate".  Mr. Wesley went into the nursery, Hetty, Kezzy and Patty
were asleep.  The knocks were loud, beneath and in the room, so Mr.
Wesley went below to the kitchen, struck with his stick against the
rafters, and was answered "as often and as loud as I knocked".  The
peculiar knock which was his own, 1-23456-7, was not successfully
echoed at that time.  Mr. Wesley then returned to the nursery, which
was as tapageuse as ever.  The children, three, were trembling in
their sleep.  Mr. Wesley invited the agency to an interview in his
study, was answered by one knock outside, "all the rest were within,"
and then came silence.  Investigations outside produced no result, but
the latch of the door would rise and fall, and the door itself was
pushed violently back against investigators.

"I have been with Hetty," says Emily, "when it has knocked under her,
and when she has removed has followed her," and it knocked under
little Kezzy, when "she stamped with her foot, pretending to scare
Patty."

Mr. Wesley had requested an interview in his study, especially as the
Jacobite goblin routed loudly "over our heads constantly, when we came
to the prayers for King George and the prince".  In his study the
agency pushed Mr. Wesley about, bumping him against the corner of his
desk, and against his door.  He would ask for a conversation, but
heard only "two or three feeble squeaks, a little louder than the
chirping of a bird, but not like the noise of rats, which I have often
heard".

Mr. Wesley had meant to leave home for a visit on Friday, 28th
December, but the noises of the 27th were so loud that he stayed at
home, inviting the Rev. Mr. Hoole, of Haxey, to view the performances.
"The noises were very boisterous and disturbing this night."  Mr.
Hoole says (in 1726, confirmed by Mrs. Wesley, 12th January, 1717)
that there were sounds of feet, trailing gowns, raps, and a noise as
of planing boards:  the disturbance finally went outside the house and
died away.  Mr. Wesley seems to have paid his visit on the 30th, and
notes, "1st January, 1717.  My family have had no disturbance since I
went away."

To judge by Mr. Wesley's letter to Sam, of 12th January, there was no
trouble between the 29th of December and that date.  On the 19th of
January, and the 30th of the same month, Sam wrote, full of curiosity,
to his father and mother.  Mrs. Wesley replied (25th or 27th January),
saying that no explanation could be discovered, but "it commonly was
nearer Hetty than the rest".  On 24th January, Sukey said "it is now
pretty quiet, but still knocks at prayers for the king."  On 11th
February, Mr. Wesley, much bored by Sam's inquiries, says, "we are all
now quiet. . . .  It would make a glorious penny book for Jack
Dunton," his brother-in-law, a publisher of popular literature, such
as the Athenian Mercury.  Emily (no date) explains the phenomena as
the revenge for her father's recent sermons "against consulting those
that are called cunning men, which our people are given to, and _it
had a particular spite at my father_".

The disturbances by no means ended in the beginning of January, nor at
other dates when a brief cessation made the Wesleys hope that Jeffrey
had returned to his own place.  Thus on 27th March, Sukey writes to
Sam, remarking that as Hetty and Emily are also writing "so
particularly," she need not say much.  "One thing I believe you do not
know, that is, last Sunday, to my father's no small amazement, his
trencher danced upon the table a pretty while, without anybody's
stirring the table. . . .  Send me some news for we are excluded from
the sight or hearing of any versal thing, except Jeffery."

The last mention of the affair, at this time, is in a letter from
Emily, of 1st April, to a Mr. Berry.

"Tell my brother the sprite was with us last night, and heard by many
of our family."  There are no other contemporary letters preserved,
but we may note Mrs. Wesley's opinion (25th January) that it was
"beyond the power of any human being to make such strange and various
noises".

The next evidence is ten years after date, the statements taken down
by Jack Wesley in 1726 (1720?).  Mrs. Wesley adds to her former
account that she "earnestly desired it might not disturb her" (at her
devotions) "between five and six in the evening," and it did not rout
in her room at that time.  Emily added that a screen was knocked at on
each side as she went round to the other.  Sukey mentioned the noise
as, on one occasion, coming gradually from the garret stairs, outside
the nursery door, up to Hetty's bed, "who trembled strongly in her
sleep.  It then removed to the room overhead, where it knocked my
father's knock on the ground, as if it would beat the house down."
Nancy said that the noise used to follow her, or precede her, and once
a bed, on which she sat playing cards, was lifted up under her several
times to a considerable height.  Robin, the servant, gave evidence
that he was greatly plagued with all manner of noises and movements of
objects.

John Wesley, in his account published many years after date in his
Arminian Magazine, attributed the affair of 1716 to his father's
broken vow of deserting his mother till she recognised the Prince of
Orange as king!  He adds that the mastiff "used to tremble and creep
away before the noise began".

Some other peculiarities may be noted.  All persons did not always
hear the noises.  It was three weeks before Mr. Wesley heard anything.
"John and Kitty Maw, who lived over against us, listened several
nights in the time of the disturbance, but could never hear anything."
Again, "The first time my mother ever heard any unusual noise at
Epworth was long before the disturbance of old Jeffrey . . . the door
and windows jarred very loud, and presently several distinct strokes,
three by three, were struck.  From that night it never failed to give
notice in much the same manner, against any signal misfortune or
illness of any belonging to the family," writes Jack.

Once more, on 10th February, 1750, Emily (now Mrs. Harper) wrote to
her brother John, "that wonderful thing called by us Jeffery, how
certainly it calls on me against any extraordinary new affliction".

This is practically all the story of Old Jeffrey.  The explanations
have been, trickery by servants (Priestley), contagious hallucinations
(Coleridge), devilry (Southey), and trickery by Hetty Wesley (Dr.
Salmon, of Trinity College, Dublin).  Dr. Salmon points out that there
is no evidence from Hetty; that she was a lively, humorous girl, and
he conceives that she began to frighten the maids, and only
reluctantly exhibited before her father against whom, however, Jeffrey
developed "a particular spite".  He adds that certain circumstances
were peculiar to Hetty, which, in fact, is not the case.  The present
editor has examined Dr. Salmon's arguments in The Contemporary Review,
and shown reason, in the evidence, for acquitting Hetty Wesley, who
was never suspected by her family.

Trickery from without, by "the cunning men," is an explanation which,
at least, provides a motive, but how the thing could be managed from
without remains a mystery.  Sam Wesley, the friend of Pope, and
Atterbury, and Lord Oxford, not unjustly said:  "Wit, I fancy, might
find many interpretations, but wisdom none". {220}

As the Wesley tale is a very typical instance of a very large class,
our study of it may exempt us from printing the well-known parallel
case of "The Drummer of Tedworth".  Briefly, the house of Mr.
Mompesson, near Ludgarshal, in Wilts, was disturbed in the usual way,
for at least two years, from April, 1661, to April, 1663, or later.
The noises, and copious phenomena of moving objects apparently
untouched, were attributed to the unholy powers of a wandering
drummer, deprived by Mr. Mompesson of his drum.  A grand jury
presented the drummer for trial, on a charge of witchcraft, but the
petty jury would not convict, there being a want of evidence to prove
threats, malum minatum, by the drummer.  In 1662 the Rev. Joseph
Glanvil, F.R.S., visited the house, and, in the bedroom of Mr.
Mompesson's little girls, the chief sufferers, heard and saw much the
same phenomena as the elder Wesley describes in his own nursery.  The
"little modest girls" were aged about seven and eight.  Charles II.
sent some gentlemen to the house for one night, when nothing occurred,
the disturbances being intermittent.  Glanvil published his narrative
at the time, and Mr. Pepys found it "not very convincing".  Glanvil,
in consequence of his book, was so vexed by correspondents "that I
have been haunted almost as bad as Mr. Mompesson's house".  A report
that imposture had been discovered, and confessed by Mr. Mompesson,
was set afloat, by John Webster, in a well-known work, and may still
be found in modern books.  Glanvil denied it till he was "quite
tired," and Mompesson gave a formal denial in a letter dated Tedworth,
8th November, 1672.  He also, with many others, swore to the facts on
oath, in court, at the drummer's trial. {221}

In the Tedworth case, as at Epworth, and in the curious Cideville case
of 1851, a quarrel with "cunning men" preceded the disturbances.  In
Lord St. Vincent's case, which follows, nothing of the kind is
reported.  As an almost universal rule children, especially girls of
about twelve, are centres of the trouble; in the St. Vincent story,
the children alone were exempt from annoyance.

LORD ST. VINCENT'S GHOST STORY

Sir Walter Scott, writing about the disturbances in the house occupied
by Mrs. Ricketts, sister of the great admiral, Lord St. Vincent, asks:
"Who has seen Lord St. Vincent's letters?"  He adds that the gallant
admiral, after all, was a sailor, and implies that "what the sailor
said" (if he said anything) "is not evidence".

The fact of unaccountable disturbances which finally drove Mrs.
Ricketts out of Hinton Ampner, is absolutely indisputable, though the
cause of the annoyances may remain as mysterious as ever.  The
contemporary correspondence (including that of Lord St. Vincent, then
Captain Jervis) exists, and has been edited by Mrs. Henley Jervis,
grand-daughter of Mrs. Ricketts. {222}

There is only the very vaguest evidence for hauntings at Lady
Hillsborough's old house of Hinton Ampner, near Alresford, before Mr.
Ricketts took it in January, 1765.  He and his wife were then
disturbed by footsteps, and sounds of doors opening and shutting.
They put new locks on the doors lest the villagers had procured keys,
but this proved of no avail.  The servants talked of seeing
appearances of a gentleman in drab and of a lady in silk, which Mrs.
Ricketts disregarded.  Her husband went to Jamaica in the autumn of
1769, and in 1771 she was so disturbed that her brother, Captain
Jervis, a witness of the phenomena, insisted on her leaving the house
in August.  He and Mrs. Ricketts then wrote to Mr. Ricketts about the
affair.  In July, 1772, Mrs. Ricketts wrote a long and solemn
description of her sufferings, to be given to her children.

We shall slightly abridge her statement, in which she mentions that
when she left Hinton she had not one of the servants who came thither
in her family, which "evinces the impossibility of a confederacy".
Her new, like her former servants, were satisfactory; Camis, her new
coachman, was of a yeoman house of 400 years' standing.  It will be
observed that Mrs. Ricketts was a good deal annoyed even _before_ 2nd
April, 1771, the day when she dates the beginning of the worst
disturbances.  She believed that the agency was human--a robber or a
practical joker--and but slowly and reluctantly became convinced that
the "exploded" notion of an abnormal force might be correct.  We learn
that while Captain Jervis was not informed of the sounds he never
heard them, and whereas Mrs. Ricketts heard violent noises after he
went to bed on the night of his vigil, he heard nothing.  "Several
instances occurred where very loud noises were heard by one or two
persons, when those equally near and in the same direction were not
sensible of the least impression." {223}

With this preface, Mrs. Ricketts may be allowed to tell her own tale.

"Sometime after Mr. Ricketts left me (autumn, 1769) I--then lying in
the bedroom over the kitchen--heard frequently the noise of some one
walking in the room within, and the rustling as of silk clothes
against the door that opened into my room, sometimes so loud, and of
such continuance as to break my rest.  Instant search being often
made, we never could discover any appearance of human or brute being.
Repeatedly disturbed in the same manner, I made it my constant
practice to search the room and closets within, and to secure the only
door on the inside. . . .  Yet this precaution did not preclude the
disturbance, which continued with little interruption."

Nobody, in short, could enter this room, except by passing through
that of Mrs. Ricketts, the door of which "was always made fast by a
drawn bolt".  Yet somebody kept rustling and walking in the inner
room, which somebody could never be found when sought for.

In summer, 1770, Mrs. Ricketts heard someone walk to the foot of her
bed in her own room, "the footsteps as distinct as ever I heard,
myself perfectly awake and collected".  Nobody could be discovered in
the chamber.  Mrs. Ricketts boldly clung to her room, and was only now
and then disturbed by "sounds of harmony," and heavy thumps, down
stairs.  After this, and early in 1771, she was "frequently sensible
of a hollow murmuring that seemed to possess the whole house:  it was
independent of wind, being equally heard on the calmest nights, and it
was a sound I had never been accustomed to hear".

On 27th February, 1771, a maid was alarmed by "groans and fluttering
round her bed":  she was "the sister of an eminent grocer in
Alresford".  On 2nd April, Mrs. Ricketts heard people walking in the
lobby, hunted for burglars, traced the sounds to a room whence their
was no outlet, and found nobody.  This kind of thing went on till Mrs.
Ricketts despaired of any natural explanation.  After mid-summer,
1771, the trouble increased, in broad daylight, and a shrill female
voice, answered by two male voices was added to the afflictions.
Captain Jervis came on a visit, but was told of nothing, and never
heard anything.  After he went to Portsmouth, "the most deep, loud
tremendous noise seemed to rush and fall with infinite velocity and
force on the lobby floor adjoining my room," accompanied by a shrill
and dreadful shriek, seeming to proceed from under the spot where the
rushing noise fell, and repeated three or four times.

Mrs. Ricketts' "resolution remained firm," but her health was
impaired; she tried changing her room, without results.  The
disturbances pursued her.  Her brother now returned.  She told him
nothing, and he heard nothing, but next day she unbosomed herself.
Captain Jervis therefore sat up with Captain Luttrell and his own man.
He was rewarded by noises which he in vain tried to pursue.  "I should
do great injustice to my sister" (he writes to Mr. Ricketts on 9th
August, 1771), "if I did not acknowledge to have heard what I could
not, after the most diligent search and serious reflection, any way
account for."  Captain Jervis during a whole week slept by day, and
watched, armed, by night.  Even by day he was disturbed by a sound as
of immense weights falling from the ceiling to the floor of his room.
He finally obliged his sister to leave the house.

What occurred after Mrs. Ricketts abandoned Hinton is not very
distinct.  Apparently Captain Jervis's second stay of a week, when he
did hear the noises, was from 1st August to 8th August.  From a
statement by Mrs. Ricketts it appears that, when her brother joined
his ship, the Alarm (9th August), she retired to Dame Camis's house,
that of her coachman's mother.  Thence she went, and made another
attempt to live at Hinton, but was "soon after assailed by a noise I
never before heard, very near me, and the terror I felt not to be
described".  She therefore went to the Newbolts, and thence to the old
Palace at Winton; later, on Mr. Ricketts' return, to the Parsonage,
and then to Longwood (to the _old_ house there) near Alresford.

Meanwhile, on 18th September, Lady Hillsborough's agent lay with armed
men at Hinton, and, making no discovery, offered 50 pounds (increased
by Mr. Ricketts to 100 pounds) for the apprehension of the persons who
caused the noises.  The reward was never claimed.  On 8th March, 1772,
Camis wrote:  "I am very sorry that we cannot find out the reason of
the noise"; at other dates he mentions sporadic noises heard by his
mother and another woman, including "the murmur".  A year after Mrs.
Ricketts left a family named Lawrence took the house, and, according
to old Lucy Camis, in 1818, Mr. Lawrence very properly threatened to
dismiss any servant who spoke of the disturbances.  The result of this
sensible course was that the Lawrences left suddenly, at the end of
the year--and the house was pulled down.  Some old political papers of
the Great Rebellion, and a monkey's skull, not exhibited to any
anatomist, are said to have been discovered under the floor of the
lobby, or of one of the rooms.  Mrs. Ricketts adds sadly, "The
unbelief of Chancellor Hoadley went nearest my heart," as he had
previously a high opinion of her veracity.  The Bishop of St. Asaph
was incredulous, "on the ground that such means were unworthy of the
Deity to employ".

Probably a modern bishop would say that there were no noises at all,
that every one who heard the sounds was under the influence of
"suggestion," caused first in Mrs. Ricketts' own mind by vague tales
of a gentleman in drab seen by the servants.

The contagion, to be sure, also reached two distinguished captains in
the navy, but not till one of them was told about disturbances which
had not previously disturbed him.  If this explanation be true, it
casts an unusual light on the human imagination.  Physical science has
lately invented a new theory.  Disturbances of this kind are perhaps
"seismic,"--caused by earthquakes!  (See Professor Milne, in The
Times, 21st June, 1897.)


CHAPTER XI


A Question for Physicians.  Professor William James's Opinion.
Hysterical Disease?  Little Hands.  Domestic Arson.  The Wem Case.
"The Saucepan began it."  The Nurse-maid.  Boots Fly Off.
Investigation.  Emma's Partial Confession.  Corroborative Evidence.
Question of Disease Repeated.  Chinese Cases.  Haunted Mrs. Chang.
Mr. Niu's Female Slave.  The Great Amherst Mystery.  Run as a Show.
Failure.  Later Miracles.  The Fire-raiser Arrested.  Parallels.  A
Highland Case.  A Hero of the Forty-Five.  Donald na Bocan.  Donald's
Hymn.  Icelandic Cases.  The Devil of Hjalta-stad.  The Ghost at
Garpsdal.

MORE HAUNTED HOUSES

A physician, as we have seen, got the better of the demon in Mrs.
Shchapoff's case, at least while the lady was under his care.  Really
these disturbances appear to demand the attention of medical men.  If
the whole phenomena are caused by imposture, the actors, or actresses,
display a wonderful similarity of symptoms and an alarming taste for
fire-raising.  Professor William James, the well-known psychologist,
mentions ten cases whose resemblances "suggest a natural type," and we
ask, is it a type of hysterical disease? {229}  He chooses, among
others, an instance in Dr. Nevius's book on Demon Possession in China,
and there is another in Peru.  He also mentions The Great Amherst
Mystery, which we give, and the Rerrick case in Scotland (1696),
related by Telfer, who prints, on his margins, the names of the
attesting witnesses of each event, lairds, clergymen, and farmers.  At
Rerrick, as in Russia, the _little hand_ was seen by Telfer himself,
and the fire-raising was endless.  At Amherst too, as in a pair of
recent Russian cases and others, there was plenty of fire-raising.  By
a lucky chance an English case occurred at Wem, in Shropshire, in
November, 1883.  It began at a farm called the Woods, some ten miles
from Shrewsbury.  First a saucepan full of eggs "jumped" off the fire
in the kitchen, and the tea-things, leaping from the table, were
broken.  Cinders "were thrown out of the fire," and set some clothes
in a blaze.  A globe leaped off a lamp.  A farmer, Mr. Lea, saw all
the windows of the upper story "as it were on fire," but it was no
such matter.  The nurse-maid ran out in a fright, to a neighbour's,
and her dress spontaneously combusted as she ran.  The people
attributed these and similar events, to something in the coal, or in
the air, or to electricity.  When the nurse-girl, Emma Davies, sat on
the lap of the school mistress, Miss Maddox, her boots kept flying
off, like the boot laces in The Daemon of Spraiton.

All this was printed in the London papers, and, on 15th November, The
Daily Telegraph and Daily News published Emma's confession that she
wrought by sleight of hand and foot.  On 17th November, Mr. Hughes
went from Cambridge to investigate.  For some reason investigation
never begins till the fun is over.  On the 9th the girl, now in a very
nervous state (no wonder!) had been put under the care of a Dr.
Mackey.  This gentleman and Miss Turner said that things had occurred
since Emma came, for which they could not account.  On 13th November,
however, Miss Turner, looking out of a window, spotted Emma throwing a
brick, and pretending that the flight of the brick was automatic.
Next day Emma confessed to her tricks, but steadfastly denied that she
had cheated at Woods Farm, and Weston Lullingfield, where she had also
been.  Her evidence to this effect was so far confirmed by Mrs.
Hampson of Woods Farm, and her servant, Priscilla Evans, when examined
by Mr. Hughes.  Both were "quite certain" that they saw crockery rise
by itself into air off the kitchen table, when Emma was at a
neighbouring farm, Mr. Lea's.  Priscilla also saw crockery come out of
a cupboard, in detachments, and fly between her and Emma, usually in a
slanting direction, while Emma stood by with her arms folded.  Yet
Priscilla was not on good terms with Emma.  Unless, then, Mrs. Hampson
and Priscilla fabled, it is difficult to see how Emma could move
objects when she was "standing at some considerable distance,
standing, in fact, in quite another farm".

Similar evidence was given and signed by Miss Maddox, the
schoolmistress, and Mr. and Mrs. Lea.  On the other hand Mrs. Hampson
and Priscilla believed that Emma managed the fire-raising herself.
The flames were "very high and white, and the articles were very
little singed".  This occurred also at Rerrick, in 1696, but Mr.
Hughes attributes it to Emma's use of paraffin, which does not apply
to the Rerrick case.  Paraffin smells a good deal--nothing is said
about a smell of paraffin.

Only one thing is certain:  Emma was at last caught in a cheat.  This
discredits her, but a man who cheats at cards _may_ hold a good hand
by accident.  In the same way, if such wonders can happen (as so much
world-wide evidence declares), they _may_ have happened at Woods Farm,
and Emma, "in a very nervous state," _may_ have feigned then, or
rather did feign them later.

The question for the medical faculty is:  Does a decided taste for
wilful fire-raising often accompany exhibitions of dancing furniture
and crockery, gratuitously given by patients of hysterical
temperament?  This is quite a normal inquiry.  Is there a nervous
malady of which the symptoms are domestic arson, and amateur leger-de-
main?  The complaint, if it exists, is of very old standing and wide
prevalence, including Russia, Scotland, New England, France, Iceland,
Germany, China and Peru.

As a proof of the identity of symptoms in this malady, we give a
Chinese case.  The Chinese, as to diabolical possession, are precisely
of the same opinion as the inspired authors of the Gospels.  People
are "possessed," and, like the woman having a spirit of divination in
the Acts of the Apostles, make a good thing out of it.  Thus Mrs. Ku
was approached by a native Christian.  She became rigid and her demon,
speaking through her, acknowledged the Catholic verity, and said that
if Mrs. Ku were converted he would have to leave.  On recovering her
everyday consciousness, Mrs. Ku asked what Tsehwa, her demon, had
said.  The Christian told her, and perhaps she would have deserted her
erroneous courses, but her fellow-villagers implored her to pay homage
to the demon.  They were in the habit of resorting to it for medical
advice (as people do to Mrs. Piper's demon in the United States), so
Mrs. Ku decided to remain in the business. {232}  The parallel to the
case in the Acts is interesting.

HAUNTED MRS. CHANG

Mr. Chang, of that ilk (Chang Chang Tien-ts), was a man of fifty-
seven, and a graduate in letters.  The ladies of his family having
accommodated a demon with a shrine in his house, Mr. Chang said he
"would have none of that nonsense".  The spirit then entered into Mrs.
Chang, and the usual fire-raising began all over the place.  The
furniture and crockery danced in the familiar way, and objects took to
disappearing mysteriously, even when secured under lock and key.  Mr.
Chang was as unlucky as Mr. Chin.  At _his_ house "doors would open of
their own accord, footfalls were heard, as of persons walking in the
house, although no one could be seen.  Plates, bowls and the teapot
would suddenly rise from the table into the air." {233a}

Mrs. Chang now tried the off chance of there being something in
Christianity, stayed with a native Christian (the narrator), and felt
much better.  She could enjoy her meals, and was quite a new woman.
As her friend could not go home with her, Mrs. Fung, a native
Christian, resided for a while at Mr. Chang's; "comparative quiet was
restored," and Mrs. Fung retired to her family.

The symptoms returned; the native Christian was sent for, and found
Mr. Chang's establishment full of buckets of water for extinguishing
the sudden fires.  Mrs. Chang's daughter-in-law was now possessed, and
"drank wine in large quantities, though ordinarily she would not touch
it".  She was staring and tossing her arms wildly; a service was held,
and she soon became her usual self.

In the afternoon, when the devils went out of the ladies, the fowls
flew into a state of wild excitement, while the swine rushed furiously
about and tried to climb a wall.

The family have become Christians, the fires have ceased; Mr. Chang is
an earnest inquirer, but opposed, for obvious reasons, to any public
profession of our religion. {233b}

In Mr. Niu's case "strange noises and rappings were frequently heard
about the house.  The buildings were also set on fire in different
places in some mysterious way."  The Christians tried to convert Mr.
Niu, but as the devil now possessed his female slave, whose success in
fortune-telling was extremely lucrative, Mr. Niu said that he
preferred to leave well alone, and remained wedded to his idols. {234}

We next offer a recent colonial case, in which the symptoms, as Mr.
Pecksniff said, were "chronic".

THE GREAT AMHERST MYSTERY

On 13th February, 1888, Mr. Walter Hubbell, an actor by profession,
"being duly sworn" before a Notary Public in New York, testified to
the following story:--

In 1879 he was acting with a strolling company, and came to Amherst,
in Nova Scotia.  Here he heard of a haunted house, known to the local
newspapers as "The Great Amherst Mystery".  Having previously
succeeded in exposing the frauds of spiritualism Mr. Hubbell
determined to investigate the affair of Amherst.  The haunted house
was inhabited by Daniel Teed, the respected foreman in a large shoe
factory.  Under his roof were Mrs. Teed, "as good a woman as ever
lived"; little Willie, a baby boy; and Mrs. Teed's two sisters,
Jennie, a very pretty girl, and Esther, remarkable for large grey
eyes, pretty little hands and feet, and candour of expression.  A
brother of Teed's and a brother of Mrs. Cox made up the family.  They
were well off, and lived comfortably in a detached cottage of two
storys.  It began when Jennie and Esther were in bed one night.
Esther jumped up, saying that there was a mouse in the bed.  Next
night, a green band-box began to make a rustling noise, and then rose
a foot in the air, several times.  On the following night Esther felt
unwell, and "was a swelling wisibly before the werry eyes" of her
alarmed family.  Reports like thunder peeled through her chamber,
under a serene sky.  Next day Esther could only eat "a small piece of
bread and butter, and a large green pickle".  She recovered slightly,
in spite of the pickle, but, four nights later, all her and her
sister's bed-clothes flew off, and settled down in a remote corner.
At Jennie's screams, the family rushed in, and found Esther "fearfully
swollen".  Mrs. Teed replaced the bed-clothes, which flew off again,
the pillow striking John Teed in the face.  Mr. Teed then left the
room, observing, in a somewhat unscientific spirit, that "he had had
enough of it".  The others, with a kindness which did them credit, sat
on the edges of the bed, and repressed the desire of the sheets and
blankets to fly away.  The bed, however, sent forth peels like
thunder, when Esther suddenly fell into a peaceful sleep.

Next evening Dr. Carritte arrived, and the bolster flew at his head,
_and then went back again under Esther's_.  While paralysed by this
phenomenon, unprecedented in his practice, the doctor heard a metal
point scribbling on the wall.  Examining the place whence the sound
proceeded, he discovered this inscription:--

Esther Cox!  You are mine
to kill.

Mr. Hubbell has verified the inscription, and often, later, recognised
the hand, in writings which "came out of the air and fell at our
feet".  Bits of plaster now gyrated in the room, accompanied by peels
of local thunder.  The doctor admitted that his diagnosis was at
fault.  Next day he visited his patient when potatoes flew at him.  He
exhibited a powerful sedative, but pounding noises began on the roofs
and were audible at a distance of 200 yards, as the doctor himself
told Mr. Hubbell.

The clergy now investigated the circumstances, which they attributed
to electricity.  "Even the most exclusive class" frequented Mr. Teed's
house, till December, when Esther had an attack of diphtheria.  On
recovering she went on to visit friends in Sackville, New Brunswick,
where nothing unusual occurred.  On her return the phenomena broke
forth afresh, and Esther heard a voice proclaim that the house would
be set on fire.  Lighted matches then fell from the ceiling, but the
family extinguished them.  The ghost then set a dress on fire,
apparently as by spontaneous combustion, and this kind of thing
continued.  The heads of the local fire-brigade suspected Esther of
these attempts at arson, and Dr. Nathan Tupper suggested that she
should be flogged.  So Mr. Teed removed Esther to the house of a Mr.
White.

In about a month "all," as Mrs. Nickleby's lover said, "was gas and
gaiters".  The furniture either flew about, or broke into flames.
Worse, certain pieces of iron placed as an experiment on Esther's lap
"became too hot to be handled with comfort," and then flew away.

Mr. Hubbell himself now came on the scene, and, not detecting
imposture, thought that "there was money in it".  He determined to
"run" Esther as a powerful attraction, he lecturing, and Esther
sitting on the platform.

It did not pay.  The audience hurled things at Mr. Hubbell, and these
were the only volatile objects.  Mr. Hubbell therefore brought Esther
back to her family at Amherst, where, in Esther's absence, his
umbrella and a large carving knife flew at him with every appearance
of malevolence.  A great arm-chair next charged at him like a bull,
and to say that Mr. Hubbell was awed "would indeed seem an inadequate
expression of my feelings".  The ghosts then thrice undressed little
Willie in public, in derision of his tears and outcries.  Fire-raising
followed, and that would be a hard heart which could read the tale
unmoved.  Here it is, in the simple eloquence of Mr. Hubbell:--

"This was my first experience with Bob, the demon, as a fire-fiend;
and I say, candidly, that until I had had that experience I never
fully realised what an awful calamity it was to have an invisible
monster, somewhere within the atmosphere, going from place to place
about the house, gathering up old newspapers into a bundle and hiding
it in the basket of soiled linen or in a closet, then go and steal
matches out of the match-box in the kitchen or somebody's pocket, as
he did out of mine, and after kindling a fire in the bundle, tell
Esther that he had started a fire, but would not tell where; or
perhaps not tell her at all, in which case the first intimation we
would have was the smell of the smoke pouring through the house, and
then the most intense excitement, everybody running with buckets of
water.  I say it was the most truly awful calamity that could possible
befall any family, infidel or Christian, that could be conceived in
the mind of man or ghost.

"And how much more terrible did it seem in this little cottage, where
all were strict members of church, prayed, sang hymns and read the
Bible.  Poor Mrs. Teed!"

On Mr. Hubbell's remarking that the cat was not tormented, "she was
instantly lifted from the floor to a height of five feet, and then
dropped on Esther's back. . . .  I never saw any cat more frightened;
she ran out into the front yard, where she remained for the balance
(rest) of the day."  On 27th June "a trumpet was heard in the house
all day".

The Rev. R. A. Temple now prayed with Esther, and tried a little
amateur exorcism, including the use of slips of paper, inscribed with
Habakkuk ii. 3.  The ghosts cared no more than Voltaire for ce coquin
d'Habacuc.

Things came to such a pass, matches simply raining all round, that Mr.
Teed's landlord, a Mr. Bliss, evicted Esther.  She went to a Mr. Van
Amburgh's, and Mr. Teed's cottage was in peace.

Some weeks later Esther was arrested for incendiarism in a barn, was
sentenced to four months' imprisonment, but was soon released in
deference to public opinion.  She married, had a family; and ceased to
be a mystery.

This story is narrated with an amiable simplicity, and is backed, more
or less, by extracts from Amherst and other local newspapers.  On
making inquiries, I found that opinion was divided.  Some held that
Esther was a mere impostor and fire-raiser; from other sources I
obtained curious tales of the eccentric flight of objects in her
neighbourhood.  It is only certain that Esther's case is identical
with Madame Shchapoff's, and experts in hysteria may tell us whether
that malady ever takes the form of setting fire to the patient's
wardrobe, and to things in general. {239a}

After these modern cases of disturbances, we may look at a few old, or
even ancient examples.  It will be observed that the symptoms are
always of the same type, whatever the date or country.  The first is
Gaelic, of last century.

DONALD BAN AND THE BOCAN {239b}

It is fully a hundred years ago since there died in Lochaber a man
named Donald Ban, sometimes called "the son of Angus," but more
frequently known as Donald Ban of the Bocan.  This surname was derived
from the troubles caused to him by a bocan--a goblin--many of whose
doings are preserved in tradition.

Donald drew his origin from the honourable house of Keppoch, and was
the last of the hunters of Macvic-Ronald.  His home was at Mounessee,
and later at Inverlaire in Glenspean, and his wife belonged to the
MacGregors of Rannoch.  He went out with the Prince, and was present
at the battle of Culloden.  He fled from the field, and took refuge in
a mountain shieling, having two guns with him, but only one of them
was loaded.  A company of soldiers came upon him there, and although
Donald escaped by a back window, taking the empty gun with him by
mistake, he was wounded in the leg by a shot from his pursuers.  The
soldiers took him then, and conveyed him to Inverness, where he was
thrown into prison to await his trial.  While he was in prison he had
a dream; he saw himself sitting and drinking with Alastair MacCholla,
and Donald MacRonald Vor.  The latter was the man of whom it was said
that he had two hearts; he was taken prisoner at Falkirk and executed
at Carlisle.  Donald was more fortunate than his friend, and was
finally set free.

It was after this that the bocan began to trouble him; and although
Donald never revealed to any man the secret of who the bocan was (if
indeed he knew it himself), yet there were some who professed to know
that it was a "gillie" of Donald's who was killed at Culloden.  Their
reason for believing this was that on one occasion the man in question
had given away more to a poor neighbour than Donald was pleased to
spare.  Donald found fault with him, and in the quarrel that followed
the man said, "I will be avenged for this, alive or dead".

It was on the hill that Donald first met with the bocan, but he soon
came to closer quarters, and haunted the house in a most annoying
fashion.  He injured the members of the household, and destroyed all
the food, being especially given to dirtying the butter (a thing quite
superfluous, according to Captain Burt's description of Highland
butter).  On one occasion a certain Ronald of Aberardair was a guest
in Donald's house, and Donald's wife said, "Though I put butter on the
table for you tonight, it will just be dirtied".  "I will go with you
to the butter-keg," said Ronald, "with my dirk in my hand, and hold my
bonnet over the keg, and he will not dirty it this night."  So the two
went together to fetch the butter, but it was dirtied just as usual.

Things were worse during the night and they could get no sleep for the
stones and clods that came flying about the house.  "The bocan was
throwing things out of the walls, and they would hear them rattling at
the head of Donald's bed."  The minister came (Mr. John Mor MacDougall
was his name) and slept a night or two in the house, but the bocan
kept away so long as he was there.  Another visitor, Angus MacAlister
Ban, whose grandson told the tale, had more experience of the bocan's
reality.  "Something seized his two big toes, and he could not get
free any more than if he had been caught by the smith's tongs.  It was
the bocan, but he did nothing more to him."  Some of the clergy, too,
as well as laymen of every rank, were witnesses to the pranks which
the spirit carried on, but not even Donald himself ever saw him in any
shape whatever.  So famous did the affair become that Donald was
nearly ruined by entertaining all the curious strangers who came to
see the facts for themselves.

In the end Donald resolved to change his abode, to see whether he
could in that way escape from the visitations.  He took all his
possessions with him except a harrow, which was left beside the wall
of the house, but before the party had gone far on the road the harrow
was seen coming after them.  "Stop, stop," said Donald; "if the harrow
is coming after us, we may just as well go back again."  The mystery
of the harrow is not explained, but Donald did return to his home, and
made no further attempt to escape from his troubles in this way.

If the bocan had a spite at Donald, he was still worse disposed
towards his wife, the MacGregor woman.  On the night on which he last
made his presence felt, he went on the roof of the house and cried,
"Are you asleep, Donald Ban?"  "Not just now," said Donald.  "Put out
that long grey tether, the MacGregor wife," said he.  "I don't think
I'll do that tonight," said Donald.  "Come out yourself, then," said
the bocan, "and leave your bonnet."  The good-wife, thinking that the
bocan was outside and would not hear her, whispered in Donald's ear as
he was rising, "Won't you ask him when the Prince will come?"  The
words, however, were hardly out of her mouth when the bocan answered
her with, "Didn't you get enough of him before, you grey tether?"

Another account says that at this last visit of the bocan, he was
saying that various other spirits were along with him.  Donald's wife
said to her husband:  "I should think that if they were along with him
they would speak to us"; but the bocan answered, "They are no more
able to speak than the sole of your foot".  He then summoned Donald
outside as above.  "I will come," said Donald, "and thanks be to the
Good Being that you have asked me."  Donald was taking his dirk with
him as he went out, but the bocan said, "leave your dirk inside,
Donald, and your knife as well".

Donald then went outside, and the bocan led him on through rivers and
a birch-wood for about three miles, till they came to the river Fert.
There the bocan pointed out to Donald a hole in which he had hidden
some plough-irons while he was alive.  Donald proceeded to take them
out, and while doing so the two eyes of the bocan were causing him
greater fear than anything else he ever heard or saw.  When he had got
the irons out of the hole, they went back to Mounessie together, and
parted that night at the house of Donald Ban.

Donald, whether naturally or by reason of his ghostly visitant, was a
religious man, and commemorated his troubles in some verses which bear
the name of "The Hymn of Donald Ban of the Bocan".  In these he speaks
of the common belief that he had done something to deserve all this
annoyance, and makes mention of the "stones and clods" which flew
about his house in the night time.  Otherwise the hymn is mainly
composed of religious sentiments, but its connection with the story
makes it interesting, and the following is a literal translation of
it.

THE HYMN OF DONALD BAN

O God that created me so helpless,
Strengthen my belief and make it firm.
Command an angel to come from Paradise,
And take up his abode in my dwelling,
To protect me from every trouble
That wicked folks are putting in my way;
Jesus, that did'st suffer Thy crucifixion,
Restrain their doings, and be with me Thyself.

Little wonder though I am thoughtful--
_Always at the time when I go to bed
The stones and the clods will arise--
How could a saint get sleep there_?
I am without peace or rest,
Without repose or sleep till the morning;
O Thou that art in the throne of grace,
Behold my treatment and be a guard to me.

Little wonder though I am troubled,
So many stories about me in every place.
Some that are unjust will be saying,
"It is all owing to himself, that affair".
Judge not except as you know,
Though the Son of God were awaking you;
No one knows if I have deserved more
Than a rich man that is without care.

Although I am in trouble at this time,
Verily, I shall be doubly repaid;
When the call comes to me from my Saviour,
I shall receive mercy and new grace;
I fear no more vexation,
When I ascend to be with Thy saints;
O Thou that sittest on the throne,
Assist my speaking and accept my prayer.

O God, make me mindful
Night and day to be praying,
Seeking pardon richly
For what I have done, on my knees.
Stir with the spirit of Truth
True repentance in my bosom,
That when Thou sendest death to seek me,
Christ may take care of me.

The bocan was not the only inhabitant of the spirit-world that Donald
Ban encountered during his lifetime.  A cousin of his mother was said
to have been carried off by the fairies, and one night Donald saw him
among them, dancing away with all his might.  Donald was also out
hunting in the year of the great snow, and at nightfall he saw a man
mounted on the back of a deer ascending a great rock.  He heard the
man saying, "Home, Donald Ban," and fortunately he took the advice,
for that night there fell eleven feet of snow in the very spot where
he had intended to stay.

We now take two modern Icelandic cases, for the purpose of leading up
to the famous Icelandic legend of Grettir and Glam the Vampire, from
the Grettis Saga.  It is plain that such incidents as those in the two
modern Icelandic cases (however the effects were produced) might
easily be swollen into the prodigious tale of Glam in the course of
two or three centuries, between Grettir's time and the complete
formation of his Saga.

THE DEVIL OF HJALTA-STAD {246}

The sheriff writes:  "The Devil at Hjalta-stad was outspoken enough
this past winter, although no one saw him.  I, along with others, had
the dishonour to hear him talking for nearly two days, during which he
addressed myself and the minister, Sir Grim, with words the like of
which 'eye hath not seen nor ear heard'.  As soon as we reached the
front of the house there was heard in the door an iron voice saying:
'So Hans from Eyrar is come now, and wishes to talk with me, the ---
idiot'.  Compared with other names that he gave me this might be
considered as flattering.  When I inquired who it was that addressed
me with such words, he answered in a fierce voice, 'I was called
Lucifer at first, but now I am called Devil and Enemy'.  He threw at
us both stones and pieces of wood, as well as other things, and broke
two windows in the minister's room.  He spoke so close to us that he
seemed to be just at our side.  There was an old woman there of the
name of Opia, whom he called his wife, and a 'heavenly blessed soul,'
and asked Sir Grim to marry them, with various other remarks of this
kind, which I will not recount.

"I have little liking to write about his ongoings, which were all
disgraceful and shameful, in accordance with the nature of the actor.
He repeated the 'Pater Noster' three times, answered questions from
the Catechism and the Bible, said that the devils held service in
hell, and told what texts and psalms they had for various occasions.
He asked us to give him some of the food we had, and a drink of tea,
etc.  I asked the fellow whether God was good.  He said, 'Yes'.
Whether he was truthful.  He answered, 'Not one of his words can be
doubted'.  Sir Grim asked him whether the devil was good-looking.  He
answered:  'He is far better-looking than you, you --- ugly snout!'  I
asked him whether the devils agreed well with each other.  He answered
in a kind of sobbing voice:  'It is painful to know that they never
have peace'.  I bade him say something to me in German, and said to
him Lass uns Teusc redre (sic), but he answered as if he had
misunderstood me.

"When we went to bed in the evening he shouted fiercely in the middle
of the floor, 'On this night I shall snatch you off to hell, and you
shall not rise up out of bed as you lay down'.  During the evening he
wished the minister's wife good-night.  The minister and I continued
to talk with him during the night; among other things we asked him
what kind of weather it was outside.  He answered:  'It is cold, with
a north wind'.  We asked if he was cold.  He answered:  'I think I am
both hot and cold'.  I asked him how loud he could shout.  He said,
'So loud that the roof would go off the house, and you would all fall
into a dead faint'.  I told him to try it.  He answered:  'Do you
think I am come to amuse you, you --- idiot?'  I asked him to show us
a little specimen.  He said he would do so, and gave three shouts, the
last of which was so fearful that I have never heard anything worse,
and doubt whether I ever shall.  Towards daybreak, after he had parted
from us with the usual compliments, we fell asleep.

"Next morning he came in again, and began to waken up people; he named
each one by name, not forgetting to add some nickname, and asking
whether so-and-so was awake.  When he saw they were all awake, he said
he was going to play with the door now, and with that he threw the
door off its hinges with a sudden jerk, and sent it far in upon the
floor.  The strangest thing was that when he threw anything it went
down at once, and then went back to its place again, so it was evident
that he either went inside it or moved about with it.

"The previous evening he challenged me twice to come out into the
darkness to him, and this in an angry voice, saying that he would tear
me limb from limb.  I went out and told him to come on, but nothing
happened.  When I went back to my place and asked him why he had not
fulfilled his promise, he said, 'I had no orders for it from my
master'.  He asked us whether we had ever heard the like before, and
when we said 'Yes,' he answered, 'That is not true:  the like has
never been heard at any time'.  He had sung 'The memory of Jesus'
after I arrived there, and talked frequently while the word of God was
being read.  He said that he did not mind this, but that he did not
like the 'Cross-school Psalms,' and said it must have been a great
idiot who composed them.  This enemy came like a devil, departed as
such, and behaved himself as such while he was present, nor would it
befit any one but the devil to declare all that he said.  At the same
time it must be added that I am not quite convinced that it was a
spirit, but my opinions on this I cannot give here for lack of time."

In another work {249} where the sheriff's letter is given with some
variations and additions, an attempt is made to explain the story.
The phenomena were said to have been caused by a young man who had
learned ventriloquism abroad.  Even if this art could have been
practised so successfully as to puzzle the sheriff and others, it
could hardly have taken the door off its hinges and thrown it into the
room.  It is curious that while Jon Espolin in his Annals entirely
discredits the sheriff's letter, he yet gives a very similar account
of the spirit's proceedings.

A later story of the same kind, also printed by Jon Arnason (i., 311),
is that of the ghost at Garpsdal as related by the minister there, Sir
Saemund, and written down by another minister on 7th June, 1808.  The
narrative is as follows:--

THE GHOST AT GARPSDAL

In Autumn, 1807, there was a disturbance by night in the outer room at
Garpsdal, the door being smashed.  There slept in this room the
minister's men-servants, Thorsteinn Gudmundsson, Magnus Jonsson, and a
child named Thorstein.  Later, on 16th November, a boat which the
minister had lying at the sea-side was broken in broad daylight, and
although the blows were heard at the homestead yet no human form was
visible that could have done this.  All the folks at Garpsdal were at
home, and the young fellow Magnus Jonsson was engaged either at the
sheep-houses or about the homestead; the spirit often appeared to him
in the likeness of a woman.  On the 18th of the same month four doors
of the sheep-houses were broken in broad daylight, while the minister
was marrying a couple in the church; most of his people were present
in the church, Magnus being among them.  That same day in the evening
this woman was noticed in the sheep-houses; she said that she wished
to get a ewe to roast, but as soon as an old woman who lived at
Garpsdal and was both skilled and wise (Gudrun Jons-dottir by name)
had handled the ewe, its struggles ceased and it recovered again.
While Gudrun was handling the ewe, Magnus was standing in the door of
the house; with that one of the rafters was broken, and the pieces
were thrown in his face.  He said that the woman went away just then.
The minister's horses were close by, and at that moment became so
scared that they ran straight over smooth ice as though it had been
earth, and suffered no harm.

On the evening of the 20th there were great disturbances, panelling
and doors being broken down in various rooms.  The minister was
standing in the house door along with Magnus and two or three girls
when Magnus said to him that the spirit had gone into the sitting-
room.  The minister went and stood at the door of the room, and after
he had been there a little while, talking to the others, a pane of
glass in one of the room windows was broken.  Magnus was standing
beside the minister talking to him, and when the pane broke he said
that the spirit had gone out by that.  The minister went to the
window, and saw that the pane was all broken into little pieces.  The
following evening, the 21st, the spirit also made its presence known
by bangings, thumpings, and loud noises.

On the 28th the ongoings of the spirit surpassed themselves.  In the
evening a great blow was given on the roof of the sitting-room.  The
minister was inside at the time, but Magnus with two girls was out in
the barn.  At the same moment the partition between the weaving-shop
and the sitting-room was broken down, and then three windows of the
room itself--one above the minister's bed, another above his writing-
table, and the third in front of the closet door.  A piece of a table
was thrown in at one of these, and a spade at another.  At this the
household ran out of that room into the loft, but the minister sprang
downstairs and out; the old woman Gudrun who was named before went
with him, and there also came Magnus and some of the others.  Just
then a vessel of wash, which had been standing in the kitchen, was
thrown at Gudrun's head.  The minister then ran in, along with Magnus
and the girls, and now everything that was loose was flying about,
both doors and splinters of wood.  The minister opened a room near the
outer door intending to go in there, but just then a sledge hammer
which lay at the door was thrown at him, but it only touched him on
the side and hip, and did him no harm.  From there the minister and
the others went back to the sitting-room, where everything was dancing
about, and where they were met with a perfect volley of splinters of
deal from the partitions.  The minister then fled, and took his wife
and child to Muli, the next farm, and left them there, as she was
frightened to death with all this.  He himself returned next day.

On the 8th of December, the woman again made her appearance in broad
daylight.  On this occasion she broke the shelves and panelling in the
pantry, in presence of the minister, Magnus, and others.  According to
Magnus, the spirit then went out through the wall at the minister's
words, and made its way to the byre-lane.  Magnus and Gudrun went
after it, but were received with throwings of mud and dirt.  A stone
was also hurled at Magnus, as large as any man could lift, while
Gudrun received a blow on the arm that confined her to her bed for
three weeks.

On the 26th of the month the shepherd, Einar Jonsson, a hardy and
resolute fellow, commanded the spirit to show itself to him.
Thereupon there came over him such a madness and frenzy, that he had
to be closely guarded to prevent him from doing harm to himself.  He
was taken to the house, and kept in his bed, a watch being held over
him.  When he recovered his wits, he said that this girl had come
above his head and assailed him.  When he had completely got over
this, he went away from Garpsdal altogether.

Later than this the minister's horse was found dead in the stable at
Muli, and the folks there said that it was all black and swollen.

These are the most remarkable doings of the ghost at Garpsdal,
according to the evidence of Sir Saemund, Magnus, Gudrun, and all the
household at Garpsdal, all of whom will confirm their witness with an
oath, and aver that no human being could have been so invisible there
by day and night, but rather that it was some kind of spirit that did
the mischief.  From the story itself it may be seen that neither
Magnus nor any other person could have accomplished the like, and all
the folk will confirm this, and clear all persons in the matter, so
far as they know.  In this form the story was told to me, the
subscriber, to Samuel Egilsson and Bjarni Oddsson, by the minister
himself and his household, at Garpsdal, 28th May, 1808.  That this is
correctly set down, after what the minister Sir Saemund related to me,
I witness here at Stad on Reykjanes, 7th June, 1808.

GISLI OLAFSSON

* * * * *

Notwithstanding this declaration, the troubles at Garpsdal were
attributed by others to Magnus, and the name of the "Garpsdale Ghost"
stuck to him throughout his life.  He was alive in 1862, when Jon
Arnason's volume was published.

These modern instances lead up to "the best story in the world," the
old Icelandic tale of Glam.


CHAPTER XII
The Story of Glam.  The Foul Fords.


THE STORY OF GLAM

There was a man named Thorhall, who lived at Thorhall-stead in
Forsaela-dala, which lies in the north of Iceland.  He was a fairly
wealthy man, especially in cattle, so that no one round about had so
much live-stock as he had.  He was not a chief, however, but an honest
and worthy yeoman.

"Now this man's place was greatly haunted, so that he could scarcely
get a shepherd to stay with him, and although he asked the opinion of
many as to what he ought to do, he could find none to give him advice
of any worth.

"One summer at the Althing, or yearly assembly of the people, Thorhall
went to the booth of Skafti, the law man, who was the wisest of men
and gave good counsel when his opinion was asked.  He received
Thorhall in a friendly way, because he knew he was a man of means, and
asked him what news he had.

"'I would have some good advice from you,' said Thorhall.

'"I am little able to give that,' said Skafti; 'but what is the
matter?'

"'This is the way of it,' said Thorhall, 'I have had very bad luck
with my shepherds of late.  Some of them get injured, and others will
not serve out their time; and now no one that knows how the case
stands will take the place at all.'

"'Then there must be some evil spirit there,' said Skafti, 'when men
are less willing to herd your sheep, than those of others.  Now since
you have asked my advice, I will get a shepherd for you.  Glam is his
name, he belongs to Sweden, and came out here last summer.  He is big
and strong, but not very well liked by most people.'

"Thorhall said that he did not mind that, if he looked well after the
sheep.  Skafti answered that there was no hope of other men doing it,
if Glam could not, seeing he was so strong and stout-hearted.  Their
talk ended there, and Thorhall left the booth.

"This took place just at the breaking up of the assembly.  Thorhall
missed two of his horses, and went to look for them in person, from
which it may be seen that he was no proud man.  He went up to the
mountain ridge, and south along the fell that is called Armann's fell.
There he saw a man coming down from the wood, leading a horse laden
with bundles of brushwood.  They soon met each other and Thorhall
asked his name.  He said he was called Glam.  He was tall of body, and
of strange appearance; his eyes were blue and staring, and his hair
wolf-grey in colour.  Thorhall was a little startled when he saw him,
and was certain that this was the man he had been told about.

"'What work are you best fitted for?' he asked.  Glam said that he was
good at keeping sheep in winter.

"'Will you look after _my_ sheep?' said Thorhall.  'Skafti has put you
into my hands.'

"'On this condition only will I take service with you,' said Glam,
'that I have my own free will, for I am ill-tempered if anything does
not please me.'

"'That will not harm me,' said Thorhall, 'and I should like you to
come to me.'

"'I will do so,' said Glam; 'but is there any trouble at your place?'

"'It is believed to be haunted,' said Thorhall.

"'I am not afraid of such bug-bears,' said Glam, 'and think that it
will be all the livelier for that.'

"'You will need all your boldness,' said Thorhall, 'It is best not to
be too frightened for one's self there.'

"After this they made a bargain between them, and Glam was to come
when the winter nights began.  Then they parted, and Thorhall found
his horses where he had just newly looked for them, and rode home,
after thanking Skafti for his kindness.

"The summer passed, and Thorhall heard nothing of the shepherd, nor
did any one know the least about him, but at the time appointed he
came to Thorhall-stead.  The yeoman received him well, but the others
did not like him, and the good-wife least of all.  He began his work
among the sheep which gave him little trouble, for he had a loud,
hoarse voice, and the flock all ran together whenever he shouted.
There was a church at Thorhall-stead, but Glam would never go to it
nor join in the service.  He was unbelieving, surly, and difficult to
deal with, and ever one felt a dislike towards him.

"So time went on till it came to Christmas eve.  On that morning Glam
rose early and called for his food.  The good-wife answered:  'It is
not the custom of Christian people to eat on this day, for to-morrow
is the first day of Christmas, and we ought to fast to-day'.  Glam
replied:  'You have many foolish fashions that I see no good in.  I
cannot see that men are any better off now than they were when they
never troubled themselves about such things.  I think it was a far
better life when men were heathens; and now I want my food, and no
nonsense.'  The good-wife answered:  'I am sure you will come to
sorrow to-day if you act thus perversely'.

"Glam bade her bring his food at once, or it would be the worse for
her.  She was afraid to refuse, and after he had eaten he went out in
a great rage.

"Indeed I will," he said, "if this companion of mine sitting
here is released along with me. If not, we must both remain sitting
here together."
She answered: "I think you are more worth paying for than he is."
"However that may be," he said, "either we both of us come out from
here together or neither of us comes out."
So she went to the Varangians' quarters and asked for the release of
Thorsteinn, offering money. They agreed. With her interest and her
wealth she brought it about that both of them were released.

Directly Thorsteinn came out of the dungeon he went to pay his respects
to the lady Spes. She welcomed him and kept him there secretly. From
time to time he went campaigning with the Varangians, and was distinguished
for his courage in all their engagements.

CHAPTER LXXXVIII. ADVENTURES OF THORSTEINN AND SPES

At that time Harald the son of Sigurd [3] was in Constantinople, and
Thorsteinn became friendly with him. Thorsteinn was now a very great
personage, for Spes kept him well supplied with money, and they became
very much attached to one another.

She was a great admirer of his skill.
Her expenses were very great because she tried to keep up many friends.

Her husband noticed a great change in her character and her behaviour,
and especially that she had become very extravagant. Treasures of
gold and other property which were in her keeping disappeared.
One day her husband Sigurd spoke with her and said that he was much
surprised at her conduct.

"You pay no attention to our affairs," he said, "and squander money
in many ways. You seem as if you were in a dream, and never wish to
be where I am. I am certain that something is going on."
She replied: "I told you as I told my kinsmen when we married that
I meant to be my own mistress in all matters which concern myself;
that is why I do not spare your money.

Or is there anything more than this that you wish to speak about with
me? Do you accuse me of anything shameful?"
He said: "I am not without my suspicions that you are keeping some
man whom you prefer to me."
"I do not know," she said, "that there would be very much in that;
and yet of a surety there is no truth in what you say.

I will not speak with you alone if you bring such improper accusations
against me."
He dropped the subject for the time. She and Thorsteinn continued to
carry on as before, and were not very heedful of the talk of evil-minded
people; they relied upon her wits and her popularity. They were often
sitting together and diverting themselves.

One evening when they were sitting in an upper room in which her treasures
were kept she asked Thorsteinn to sing something, and thinking
that her husband was as usual sitting at drink she fastened the door.

When he had sung for a time there was a banging at the door, and some
one called to them to open it. It was her husband with a number of
his followers. The lady had opened a large chest to show Thorsteinn
the treasures. When she knew who was outside she refused to open the
door, and said to Thorsteinn: "Quickly! Jump into the chest and keep
very quiet."
He did so. She locked the chest and sat upon it. Her husband then
entered, having forced his way in. She said:

"What are you coming here for with all this uproar?

Are there robbers after you?"
He said: "Now it is well that you yourself give proof of what you
are.

Where is the man who was letting his voice run on so grandly? No
doubt you think his voice is better than mine."
"No man is a fool if he keeps silence," she said; "that applies to
you.

You think yourself very cunning, and would like to fasten your lies
on to me, as in this case. Well, if you have spoken the truth, find the
man. He will not escape through the walls or the roof."
He searched all through the room and found nothing.

"Why don't you take him," she said, "if you are so certain?"
He was silent and knew not how he could have been deceived. He asked
his men whether they had not heard what he heard, but when they
saw that the lady was displeased there was nothing to be got out
of them; they said that one was often mistaken about sounds.

He then went away, not doubting that he knew the truth, though he could
not find the man.

After that he ceased for some time to pry into his wife's concerns.

On another occasion, much later, Thorsteinn and Spes were sitting
in a tiring-room where dresses were kept which belonged to them,
both made up and in the piece.

She showed many of the cloths to Thorsteinn and spread them out.
When they were least expecting it her husband came up with a troop
of men and broke into the room.

While they were forcing their way in she covered Thorsteinn up with a
bundle of clothes and leaned against the heap when they
entered.

"Do you again deny," he said, "that there was a man here with you?
There are those present here now who saw you both."
She told him not to be so violent. "You will not fail to catch him now,"
she said.

"Only leave me in peace and do not push me about."
They searched the room, but finding nothing had to give it up.

"It is always good to have better proofs than people suppose. It was
only to be expected that you would not find what was not there. Now,
my husband, will you admit your folly and free me from this slanderous
accusation?"
"By no means will I free you," he said, "for I know that what I have
accused you of is true, and it will cost you an effort to free
yourself of the charge."

She said she was quite ready to do that, and therewith they
parted.

After this Thorsteinn remained entirely with the Varangians. Men
say that he acted by the advice of Harald the son of Sigurd, and
it is thought that they would not have got out of it as they did
if they had not made use of him and his wits.

After a time Sigurd gave out that he was about to go abroad on some
business. His wife did not try to dissuade him. When he was gone
Thorsteinn came to Spes and they were always together. Her house was
built on the very edge of the sea and there were some of the rooms
under which the sea flowed.

Here it was that Spes and Thorsteinn always sat. There was a small
trap-door in the floor, known to no one but these two, and it was kept
open in case of its being wanted in a hurry.

Sigurd, it must be told, did not go away, but concealed himself so as
to be able to watch his wife's doings.

One evening when they were sitting unconcernedly in the room over the
sea and enjoying themselves, in came her husband with a party of
men, taking them by surprise. He had taken some of the men to the
window of the room that they might see whether it was not as he
had said.

They all said that he had spoken truly, and that it must have been so
too on the former occasions. Then they rushed into the room.

On hearing the noise Spes said to Thorsteinn: "You must go down here
whatever it costs. Give me some sign that you have got away from the
house."
He promised that he would, and descended through the floor. The lady
closed the trap-door with her foot, and it fell back into its place
so that no one could see any mark of the floor having been touched.
Sigurd entered the room with his men, searched, and of course found
nothing.

The room was uninhabited and there was no furniture in it, but only
the bare floor and a bed, on which the lady was sitting and twirling
her fingers. She paid little attention to them and seemed as if
their business did not concern her. Sigurd thought it altogether
ridiculous and asked his followers if they had not seen the man.
They declared that they had seen him most assuredly.

The lady said: "Now we may say as the proverb has it: All good things
are in threes. This is your case, Sigurd. Three times you have disturbed
me, if I remember rightly; and now are you any the wiser than you
were in the beginning?"
"This time I am not alone to tell the story," he said. "For all that you
will have to clear yourself, for on no terms will I allow your shameful
deeds to go unpunished."
"It seems," she said, "that you require the very thing which I would
myself propose.

It will please me well to show the falsehood of this accusation, which
has been so thoroughly aired that I shall be disgraced if I cannot
refute it."
"At the same time," he said, "you will have to deny that you have
expended my money and my property."
She replied: "At the time when I clear myself I will refute all the
matters which you brought against me, and you may consider how it
will all end.

I mean to go at once, to-morrow morning, before the bishop that he
may grant me full compurgation from this charge."

Her husband was satisfied with this and went away with his men.

In the meantime Thorsteinn had swum away from the house and landed at
a convenient place, where he got a firebrand and held it aloft so that
it could be seen from the lady's house. She stayed long outside in the
evening and the night, for she was anxious to know whether Thorsteinn
had reached the land. When she saw the light she knew that he had
landed, for that was the signal which they had agreed upon.

The next morning Spes proposed to her husband that they should speak
with the bishop on their matter.

This he was quite ready to do, so they went before the bishop and
Sigurd repeated his accusation. The bishop asked whether she had ever
been accused of misbehaviour before, but nobody had heard of such a
thing. Then he asked upon what evidence this charge was brought
against her, and Sigurd produced the men who had seen her sitting
in a room with the door locked and a man with her.

Her husband said that this was ground enough for supposing that the man
meant to seduce her.

The bishop said that she might very well purge herself from this
accusation if she so desired. She replied that she desired it very
much.
"I hope," she said, "that I shall have many women to swear for me
on this charge."

The form of the oath which she was to swear was then communicated to
her and the day for the compurgation fixed. She returned home and was
quite happy. She and Thorsteinn met and laid their plans.

ENDNOTES:

[Footnote 3: The same Harald who, as King of Norway, would later
challenge King Harald I for the throne of England.

He lost at the Battle of Stamford Bridge--three weeks before Hastings
(A.D. 1066).]

CHAPTER LXXXIX. THE ORDEAL

The day now arrived when Spes was to make oath. She invited all her
friends and relations, and appeared in the finest clothes that she
possessed, with many a fine lady in her train. It was raining heavily
and the roads were flooded; on the way to the church there was a
swamp to be passed. When Spes came with her company to the swamp
there was a great crowd on the high road, and a multitude of poor
people asking for alms, for all who knew her thought it a duty to
give her a greeting and wish her well because of the kindnesses
which they had often received from her.

Amongst these poor people there was a beggar very large of stature and
with a long beard. The women halted at the swamp; being people of high
rank they did not like to cross the dirty slough. The big beggar, seeing
that Spes was better dressed than the other ladies, said to her: "Good
lady, have the condescension to allow me to carry you over the swamp.
It is the duty of us gaberlunzies to serve you in whatever way we can."

"How can you carry me," she said, "when you can scarcely carry yourself?"

"Nevertheless, it would be a great condescension. I cannot offer you
more than I have, and you will prosper the better in other things
for having had no pride with a poor man."

"Know then for a surety," she said, "that if you carry me not properly
the skin shall be flayed from your back."
"Gladly will I venture upon that," he said, and waded out into the
stream. She pretended to dislike very much being carried by him;
nevertheless, she got upon his back. He staggered along very slowly,
using two crutches, and when they reached the middle he was reeling
in every direction. She told him to pull himself together. "If you
drop me here," she said, "it shall be the worst journey that you ever
made."
The poor wretch gathered up all his strength and still went on.
By dint of a valiant effort he had all but reached the shore when he
struck his foot against something and fell forwards, projecting her
on to the bank while he himself fell into the mire up to his armpits.
There as he lay he put out his hands, not on her clothes, but on
her legs.

She sprang up cursing and said she always suffered ill from low
vagabonds. "It would only be right that you should have a good beating,"
she said, "were I not ashamed to beat such a miserable creature as you
are."
He said: "Unequal is the lot of man. I thought to earn some benefit
and to receive alms from you, and you only give me abuse and insult
without any reward." And he pretended to be very much disgusted. Many
felt pity for him, but she said he was a very cunning rascal. When they
all began to beg for him she took out her purse, wherein was many a
golden penny.
She shook out the money, saying: "Take that, fellow! It would not be
right that you should go unpaid for all my scoldings. You are now
paid for what you have done."
He gathered up the money and thanked her for her liberality. Spes then
went to the church, which was full of people. Sigurd proceeded with
energy and told her to clear herself of the charge which he had
brought against her.

"I pay no heed to your accusation," she said; "but I want to know what
man it was whom you pretend to have seen in the room with me, because
there is always some proper man near me; there is nothing to be
ashamed of in that. But this I will swear, that to no man have I
given money and that by no man has my body been defiled excepting by
my husband and by that beggar, who put his muddy hands upon my leg
to-day when I was carried over the ditch."
Many then were satisfied and declared that her oath was perfectly
good and that she was in no way disgraced by a man having touched
her unwittingly.

She said she had to tell the story just as it happened, and then she
swore the oath in the words appointed for her. Many said that she
would be observing the saying that: Nothing should be omitted from an
oath. But she replied that wise men would hold that there was no cause
for suspicion. Then her relations began to talk with her and said
that it was a great insult to a woman of high birth that such lies
should be told about her and go unpunished, for they said it was an
offence punishable with death if a woman were proved to have been
unfaithful to her husband. So Spes asked the bishop to divorce her
from Sigurd, saying that she would not endure the lies which he had
told.
Her kinsmen supported her, and with their help her request was granted.

Sigurd got little of the property and had to leave the country. So
it happened as usual that the weaker had to bow, nor could he
accomplish anything although the right was on his side.

Spes took all the money and was held in high esteem, but when men came
to consider her oath they thought it was not altogether above
suspicion, and they concluded that very skilful men had composed
the Latin formula for her. They ferreted out that the beggar who
carried her was Thorsteinn Dromund. But Sigurd got no redress.

CHAPTER XC. THORSTEINN AND SPES RETURN TO NORWAY

While the affair was being talked about Thorsteinn Dromund remained
with the Varangians, where he was held in such high estimation that
his prowess was considered to be beyond that of nearly every man who
had come to them. Especially Harald the son of Sigurd did him honour,
and claimed kinship with him; it was supposed to have been by his
advice that Thorsteinn had acted.

Soon after Sigurd was driven from the country Thorsteinn proposed
marriage to Spes; she was quite agreeable, but referred it to her
kinsmen. There were family meetings and all agreed that she herself
ought to decide. Matters were settled between them; their union was
most prosperous and they had plenty of money. Thorsteinn was
considered lucky to have got out of his difficulties in such a way.
After they had lived together for two years in Constantinople, Thorsteinn
told her that he would like to visit his property once more in Norway.
She said he should do as he pleased, and he then sold his property
so as to have some ready money. They left the country with a good
company of followers and sailed all the way to Norway. Thorsteinn's
kinsmen welcomed them both, and soon saw that Spes was both generous
and noble; accordingly she quickly became very popular. They had three
children, and remained on their property very well contented with
their condition.

The king of Norway was at that time Magnus the Good.

Thorsteinn soon went to meet him, and was well received because
of the fame which he had earned through having avenged Grettir the
Strong.

Scarcely an example was known of a man from Iceland having been
avenged in Constantinople, excepting Grettir the son of Asmund.

It is said that Thorsteinn entered his bodyguard. Thorsteinn remained
nine years in Norway, both he and his wife being in high honour. After
that King Harald the son of Sigurd returned from Constantinople, and
King Magnus gave him the half of Norway. Both kings were together in
Norway for a time. After Magnus's death some who had been his
friends were less contented, for he was beloved of all, but Harald was
not easy to get on with, since he was hard and severe. Thorsteinn
Dromund then began to grow old, but was still very vigorous. Sixteen
winters had now passed since the death of Grettir.

CHAPTER XCI. ABSOLUTION IN ROME

There were many who urged Thorsteinn to visit King Harald and become his
man, but he would not. Spes said to him: "I would not, Thorsteinn,
that you go to Harald, for a larger debt remains unpaid to another
King, whereto we must now turn our thoughts. Our youth is now passed;
we are both becoming old, and we have lived more after our desires
than after Christian doctrine or regard for righteousness. Now I
know that neither kinsmen nor wealth may pay this debt if we pay
it not ourselves.

I would therefore that we now change our way of life and leave the country
to betake ourselves to Pafagard. [4] I have hope that so I shall be
absolved from my sin."
Thorsteinn answered: "The matter of which you speak is as well known
to me as it is to you. It is right that you should rule now, and
most seemly, since you allowed me to rule when our matter was much
less hopeful. And so shall it be now in all that you say."
This resolve of theirs took men by surprise. Thorsteinn was then two
years past of sixty-five, but still vigorous in all that he undertook.

He summoned all his kinsmen and connections to him and told them his
plans. The wiser men approved of his resolve, while holding his
departure a great misfortune for themselves. Thorsteinn said there
was no certainty of his return.

He said:

"I wish now to thank you all for the care of my goods which you took
while I was absent. Now I ask you to take over my children along
with my property, and to bring them up in your own ways; for I
am now come to such an age that even if I live there is much doubt about
whether I shall return. Manage all that I leave behind as if I should
never return to Norway."
The men answered that matters would be more easily managed if his wife
remained to look after them.

She answered: "I left my own country and came from Mikligard with
Thorsteinn, I bade farewell to my kinsmen and my possessions, because
I wished that one fate should befall us both. And now it has seemed
pleasant to me here, but no desire have I to remain in Norway or in
these Northern lands after he has departed. There has always been
goodwill between us and no dissension. Now we must both depart together;
for we ourselves know best about many things which have happened since
we first met."
When they had thus dealt with their own condition, Thorsteinn appointed
certain impartial men to divide his property in two parts. Thorsteinn's
kinsmen took over the half which was to go to the children, and
brought them up with their father's relations.

They became in time men of the utmost valour, and a large posterity
in the Vik is sprung from them.
Thorsteinn and Spes divided their share, giving some to the church
for the good of their souls and keeping some for themselves.

So they set off for Rome, bearing the good wishes of many with
them.

ENDNOTES:

[Footnote 4: Rome.]

CHAPTER XCII. THE END OF THORSTEINN AND SPES
They travelled then the whole way to Rome, and appeared before him
who was appointed to hear confessions. They related truly all that
had happened, all the cunning tricks wherewith they had achieved
their union. They submitted with humility to the penances laid upon
them, and by reason of their having voluntarily turned their hearts
to desire absolution from their sins, without any pressure from the
elders of the church, their penance was lightened so far as it was
possible, and they were gently admonished to arrange their lives
with wisdom for the well-being of their souls, and, after receiving
absolution in full, to live henceforward in purity. They were
declared to have acted wisely and well.
Then the lady Spes said: "Now, I think it has gone well; and now
we have not suffered only misfortune together. It may be that foolish
men will follow the example of our former lives. Let us now end in
such way that we may be an example to the good. We will come to an
agreement with some men skilled in building to erect for each of
us a stone retreat, thus may we atone for all the offences which
we have committed against God."
So Thorsteinn advanced money to stone-masons and such other persons
as might be needed, that they might not be without the means of
subsistence. When these works were completed and all matters were
settled, a fitting time was chosen for them to part company with
each other, each to live alone, in order more surely to partake of
the eternal life in another world. They remained each in their own
retreat, living as long as it pleased God to spare them, and thus
ending their lives.
Most men consider Thorsteinn Dromund and Spes to have been most
fortunate in escaping from the difficulties which they had fallen
into.
None of their children or posterity are mentioned as having come
to Iceland.
CHAPTER XCIII. THE TESTIMONY OF STURLA THE LAWMAN
Sturla the Lawman has declared that no outlaw was ever so distinguished
as Grettir the Strong. For this he assigns three reasons. First,
that he was the cleverest, inasmuch as he was the longest time an
outlaw of any man without ever being captured, so long as he was
sound in health.
Secondly, that he was the strongest man in the land of his age, and
better able than any other to deal with spectres and goblins.
Thirdly, that his death was avenged in Constantinople, a thing which
had never happened to any other Icelander.
Further, he says that Thorsteinn Dromund was a man who had great
luck in the latter part of his life.
Here endeth the story of Grettir the son of Asmund.Some of the minor portents, such as the
disturbances among inanimate objects, and the appearance of a glow of
mysterious light, "the Fate Moon," recur in modern tales of haunted
houses.  The combination of Christian exorcism, then a novelty in
Iceland, with legal proceedings against the ghosts, is especially
characteristic.

THE MARVELS AT FRODA {273}

During that summer in which Christianity was adopted by law in Iceland
(1000 A.D.), it happened that a ship came to land at Snowfell Ness.
It was a Dublin vessel, manned by Irish and Hebrideans, with few
Norsemen on board.  They lay there for a long time during the summer,
waiting for a favourable wind to sail into the firth, and many people
from the Ness went down to trade with them.  There was on board a
Hebridean woman named Thorgunna, of whom her shipmates said that she
owned some costly things, the like of which would be difficult to find
in Iceland.  When Thurid, the housewife at Froda, heard of this she
was very curious to see the articles, for she was a woman that was
fond of show and finery.  She went to the ship and asked Thorgunna
whether she had any woman's apparel that was finer than the common.
Thorgunna said that she had nothing of the kind to sell, but had some
good things of her own, that she might not be affronted at feasts or
other gatherings.  Thurid begged a sight of these, and Thorgunna
showed her treasures.  Thurid was much pleased with them, and thought
them very becoming, though not of high value.  She offered to buy
them, but Thorgunna would not sell.  Thurid then invited her to come
and stay with her, because she knew that Thorgunna was well provided,
and thought that she would get the things from her in course of time.

Thorgunna answered, "I am well pleased to go to stay with you, but you
must know that I have little mind to pay for myself, because I am well
able to work, and have no dislike to it, though I will not do any
dirty work.  I must be allowed to settle what I shall pay for myself
out of such property as I have."

Although Thorgunna spoke in this fashion, yet Thurid would have her to
go with her, and her things were taken out of the ship; these were in
a large chest with a lock and a small box, and both were taken home to
Froda.  When Thorgunna arrived there she asked for her bed to be shown
her, and was given one in the inner part of the hall.  Then she opened
up the chest, and took bed-clothes out of it:  they were all very
beautiful, and over the bed she spread English coverlets and a silken
quilt.  Out of the chest she also brought a bed-curtain and all the
hangings that belonged to it, and the whole outfit was so fine that
folk thought they had never seen the like of it.

Then said Thurid the housewife:  "Name the price of all your bed-
clothes and hangings".

Thorgunna answered, "I will not lie among straw for you, although you
are so stately, and bear yourself so proudly".

Thurid was ill pleased at this, and offered no more to buy the things.

Thorgunna worked at cloth-making every day when there was no hay-
making, but when the weather was dry she worked among the dry hay in
the home field, and had a rake made for herself which she alone was to
use.  Thorgunna was a big woman, both broad and tall, and very stout;
she had dark eyebrows, and her eyes were close set; her hair brown and
in great abundance.  She was well-mannered in her daily life, and went
to church every day before beginning her work, but she was not of a
light disposition nor of many words.  Most people thought that
Thorgunna must be in the sixties, yet she was a very active woman.

At this time one Thorir "wooden-leg" and his wife Thorgrima "charm-
cheek" were being maintained at Froda, and there was little love
between them and Thorgunna.  The person that she had most ado with was
Kjartan, the son of the house; him she loved much, but he was rather
cold towards her, and this often vexed her.  Kjartan was then fifteen
years old, and was both big of body and manly in appearance.

The summer that year was very wet, but in the autumn there came dry
days.  By this time the hay-work at Froda was so far advanced that all
the home field was mown, and nearly the half of it was quite dry.
There came then a fine dry day, clear and bright, with not a cloud to
be seen in all the sky.  Thorodd, the yeoman, rose early in the
morning and arranged the work of each one; some began to cart off the
hay, and some to put it into stalks, while the women were set to toss
and dry it.  Thorgunna also had her share assigned to her, and the
work went on well during the day.  When it drew near to three in the
afternoon, a mass of dark clouds was seen rising in the north which
came rapidly across the sky and took its course right above the farm.
They thought it certain that there was rain in the cloud and Thorodd
bade his people rake the hay together; but Thorgunna continued to
scatter hers, in spite of the orders that were given.  The clouds came
on quickly, and when they were above the homestead at Froda there came
such darkness with them that the people could see nothing beyond the
home field; indeed, they could scarcely distinguish their own hands.
Out of the cloud came so much rain that all the hay which was lying
flat was quite soaked.  When the cloud had passed over and the sky
cleared again, it was seen that blood had fallen amid the rain.  In
the evening there was a good draught, and the blood soon dried off all
the hay except that which Thorgunna had been working at; it did not
dry, nor did the rake that she had been using.

Thurid asked Thorgunna what she supposed this marvel might portend.
She said that she did not know, "but it seems to me most likely that
it is an evil omen for some person who is present here".  In the
evening Thorgunna went home and took off her clothes, which had been
stained with the blood; then she lay down in her bed and breathed
heavily, and it was found that she was taken with sickness.  The
shower had not fallen anywhere else than at Froda.

All that evening Thorgunna would taste no food.  In the morning
Thorodd came to her and asked about her sickness, and what end she
thought it would have.  She answered that she did not expect to have
any more illnesses.  Then she said:  "I consider you the wisest person
in the homestead here, and so I shall tell you what arrangements I
wish to make about the property that I leave behind me, and about
myself, for things will go as I tell you, though you think there is
nothing very remarkable about me.  It will do you little good to
depart from my instructions, for this affair has so begun that it will
not pass smoothly off, unless strong measures are taken in dealing
with it."

Thorodd answered:  "There seems to me great likelihood that your
forebodings will come true; and therefore," said he, "I shall promise
to you not to depart from your instructions".

"These are my arrangements," said Thorgunna, "that I will have myself
taken to Skalholt if I die of this sickness, for my mind forbodes me
that that place will some time or other be the most glorious spot in
this land.  I know also that by now there are priests there to sing
the funeral service over me.  So I ask you to have me carried thither,
and for that you shall take so much of my property that you suffer no
loss in the matter.  Of my other effects, Thurid shall have the
scarlet cloak that I own, and I give it her so that she may readily
consent to my disposing of all the rest as I please.  I have a gold
ring, and it shall go to the church with me; but as for my bed and
bed-hangings, I will have them burned with fire, because they will be
of service to no one.  I do not say this because I grudge that any one
should possess these treasures, if I knew that they would be of use to
them; rather am I so earnest in the matter, because I should be sorry
for folk to fall into such trouble for me, as I know will be the case
if my words are not heeded."

Thorodd promised to do as she asked him, and after this Thorgunna's
sickness increased, so that she lay but few days before she died.  The
body was first taken to the church, and Thorodd had a coffin made for
it.  On the following day Thorodd had all the bed-clothes carried out
into the open air, and made a pile of wood beside them.  Then Thurid
the housewife came up, and asked what he was going to do with the bed-
clothes.  He answered that he was to burn them with fire, as Thorgunna
had directed him.  "I will not have such treasures burned," said
Thurid.  Thorodd answered:  "She declared strongly that it would not
do to depart from what she said".  "That was mere jealousy," said
Thurid; "she grudged any other person the use of them, and that was
why she gave these orders; but nothing terrible will happen though her
words are set aside."  "I doubt," said he, "whether it will be well to
do otherwise than as she charged me."

Then Thurid laid her arms round his neck, and besought him not to burn
the furnishings of the bed, and so much did she press him in this that
his heart gave way to her, and she managed it so that Thorodd burned
the mattresses and pillows, while she took for herself the quilt and
coverlets and all the hangings.  Yet neither of them was well pleased.

After this the funeral was made ready; trustworthy men were sent with
the body, and good horses which Thorodd owned.  The body was wrapped
in linen, but not sewed up in it, and then laid in the coffin.  After
this they held south over the heath as the paths go, and went on until
they came to a farm called Lower Ness, which lies in the Tongues of
Staf-holt.  There they asked leave to stay over night, but the farmer
would give them no hospitality.  However, as it was close on
nightfall, they did not see how they could go on, for they thought it
would be dangerous to deal with the White River by night.  They
therefore unloaded their horses, and carried the body into an out-
house, after which they went into the sitting-room and took off their
outer clothes, intending to stay there over night without food.

The people of the house were going to bed by daylight, and after they
were in bed a great noise was heard in the kitchen.  Some went to see
whether thieves had not broken in, and when they reached the kitchen
they saw there a tall woman.  She was quite naked, with no clothes
whatever upon her, and was busy preparing food.  Those who saw her
were so terrified that they dared not go near her at all.  When the
funeral party heard of this they went thither, and saw what the matter
was--Thorgunna had come there, and it seemed advisable to them all not
to meddle with her.  When she had done all that she wanted, she
brought the food into the room, set the tables and laid the food upon
them.  Then the funeral party said to the farmer:  "It may happen in
the end, before we part, that you will think it dearly bought that you
would show us no hospitality".  Both the farmer and the housewife
answered:  "We will willingly give you food, and do you all other
services that you require".

As soon as the farmer had offered them this, Thorgunna passed out of
the room into the kitchen, and then went outside, nor did she show
herself again.  Then a light was kindled in the room, and the wet
clothes of the guests were taken off, and dry ones given them in their
place.  After this they sat down at table, and blessed their food,
while the farmer had holy water sprinkled over all the house.  The
guests ate their food, and it harmed no man, although Thorgunna had
prepared it.  They slept there that night, and were treated with great
hospitality.

In the morning they continued their journey, and things went very
smoothly with them; wherever this affair was heard of, most people
thought it best to do them all the service that they required, and of
their journey no more is to be told.  When they came to Skalholt, they
handed over the precious things which Thorgunna had sent thither:  the
ring and other articles, all of which the priests gladly received.
Thorgunna was buried there, while the funeral party returned home,
which they all reached in safety.

At Froda there was a large hall with a fireplace in the midde, and a
bed-closet at the inner end of it, as was then the custom.  At the
outer end were two store-closets, one on each side; dried fish were
piled in one of these, and there was meal in the other.  In this hall
fires were kindled every evening, as was the custom, and folk sat
round these fires for a long while before they went to supper.  On
that evening on which the funeral party came home, while the folk at
Froda were sitting round the fires, they saw a half-moon appear on the
panelling of the hall, and it was visible to all those who were
present.  It went round the room backwards and against the sun's
course, nor did it disappear so long as they sat by the fires.
Thorodd asked Thorir Wooden-leg what this might portend.  "It is the
Moon of Fate," said Thorir, "and deaths will come after it."  This
went on all that week that the Fate-Moon came in every evening.

The next tidings that happened at Froda were that the shepherd came in
and was very silent; he spoke little, and that in a frenzied manner.
Folk were most inclined to believe that he had been bewitched, because
he went about by himself, and talked to himself.  This went on for
some time, but one evening, when two weeks of winter had passed, the
shepherd came home, went to his bed, and lay down there.  When they
went to him in the morning he was dead, and was buried at the church.

Soon after this there began great hauntings.  One night Thorir Wooden-
leg went outside and was at some distance from the door.  When he was
about to go in again, he saw that the shepherd had come between him
and the door.  Thorir tried to get in, but the shepherd would not
allow him.  Then Thorir tried to get away from him, but the shepherd
followed him, caught hold of him, and threw him down at the door.  He
received great hurt from this, but was able to reach his bed; there he
turned black as coal, took sickness and died.  He was also buried at
the church there, and after this both the shepherd and Thorir were
seen in company, at which all the folk became full of fear, as was to
be expected.

This also followed upon the burial of Thorir, that one of Thorodd's
men grew ill, and lay three nights before he died; then one died after
another, until six of them were gone.  By this time the Christmas fast
had come, although the fast was not then kept in Iceland.  The store-
closet, in which the dried fish were kept, was packed so full that the
door could not be opened; the pile reached nigh up to the rafters, and
a ladder was required to get the fish off the top of it.  One evening
while the folk were sitting round the fires, the fish were torn, but
when search was made no living thing could be found there.

During the winter, a little before Christmas, Thorodd went out to Ness
for the fish he had there; there were six men in all in a ten-oared
boat, and they stayed out there all night.  The same evening that
Thorodd went from home, it happened at Froda, when folk went to sit by
the fires that had been made, that they saw a seal's head rise up out
of the fireplace.  A maid-servant was the first who came forward and
saw this marvel; she took a washing-bat which lay beside the door, and
struck the seal's head with this, but it rose up at the blow and gazed
at Thorgunna's bed-hangings.  Then one of the men went up and beat the
seal, but it rose higher at every blow until it had come up above the
fins; then the man fell into a swoon, and all those who were present
were filled with fear.  Then the lad Kjartan sprang forward, took up a
large iron sledge-hammer and struck at the seal's head; it was a heavy
blow, but it only shook its head, and looked round.  Then Kjartan gave
it stroke after stroke, and the seal went down as though he were
driving in a stake.  Kjartan hammered away till the seal went down so
far that he beat the floor close again above its head, and during the
rest of the winter all the portents were most afraid of Kjartan.

Next morning, while Thorodd and the others were coming in from Ness
with the fish, they were all lost out from Enni; the boat and the fish
drove on shore there, but the bodies were never found.  When the news
of this reached Froda, Kjartan and Thurid invited their neighbours to
the funeral banquet, and the ale prepared for Christmas was used for
this purpose.  The first evening of the feast, however, after the folk
had taken their seats, there came into the hall Thorodd and his
companions, all dripping wet.  The folk greeted Thorodd well, thinking
this a good omen, for at that time it was firmly believed that drowned
men, who came to their own funeral feast, were well received by Ran,
the sea-goddess; and the old beliefs had as yet suffered little,
though folk were baptised and called Christians.

Thorodd and his fellows went right along the hall where the folk sat,
and passed into the one where the fires were, answering no man's
greeting.  Those of the household who were in the hall ran out, and
Thorodd and his men sat down beside the fires, where they remained
till they had fallen into ashes; then they went away again.  This
befel every evening while the banquet lasted, and there was much talk
about it among those who were present.  Some thought that it would
stop when the feast was ended.  When the banquet was over the guests
went home, leaving the place very dull and dismal.

On the evening after they had gone, the fires were kindled as usual,
and after they had burned up, there came in Thorodd with his company,
all of them wet.  They sat down by the fire and began to wring their
clothes; and after they had sat down there came in Thorir Wooden-leg
and his five companions, all covered with earth.  They shook their
clothes and scattered the earth on Thorodd and his fellows.  The folk
of the household rushed out of the hall, as might be expected, and all
that evening they had no light nor any warmth from the fire.

Rendered furious by the event, he impetuously mowed with his sword a
bloody passage through the hostile ranks in search of Turnus,
on whom he was eager to avenge the death of his friend. The thought
of the bright youth who had thus perished in his cause, of the
hoary father bereaved of all that made life dear to him, filled his
heart with sorrow as he recalled the kindness which both had shown
to him, and the pledges of enduring friendship he had exchanged
with them.

Eight Rutulian warriors he struck down, and captured them alive, destining
them as victims to be offered to the shade of Pallas, and to drench
with their blood the flames of the hero's funeral pyre. Next, Æneas
having hurled a javelin at a Latian named Magus, the trembling
wretch evaded the dart by stooping, and as Æneas rushed upon
him with uplifted sword, he clasped his knees, and implored him
to spare his life, proffering a large ransom of silver and gold
which lay concealed underground in his house.

Sternly the Trojan chief bade him keep his treasures for his sons;
as for showing mercy, that was forbidden to him from the moment that
Pallas fell by the hand of Turnus. Then grasping the suppliant's
helmet, and forcing back his head so as to expose the neck, even as
Magus renewed his petition he plunged the sword into his body to the
hilt. Near by, the luckless Æmonides, a priest of Apollo and Diana,
who wore a sacred fillet on his temples and shone in burnished
armor, fell a victim to his relentless spear, and the splendid arms
he had worn were carried off by Serestus as an offering to Mars.
Following upon this, Thorgrima Charm-cheek, the wife of Thorir Wooden-
leg, fell ill, and lay only a little while before she died, and the
same evening that she was buried she was seen in company with her
husband Thorir.  The sickness then began a second time after the tail
had been seen, and now the women died more than the men.  Another six
persons died in this attack, and some fled away on account of the
ghosts and the hauntings.  In the autumn there had been thirty in the
household, of whom eighteen were dead, and five had run away, leaving
only seven behind in the spring.

When these marvels had reached this pitch, it happened one day that
Kjartan went to Helga-fell to see his uncle Snorri, and asked his
advice as to what should be done.  There had then come to Helga-fell a
priest whom Gizurr the white had sent to Snorri, and this priest
Snorri sent to Froda along with Kjartan, his son Thord, and six other
men.  He also gave them this advice, that they should burn all
Thorgunna's bed-hangings and hold a law court at the door, and there
prosecute all those men who were walking after death.  He also bade
the priest hold service there, consecrate water, and confess the
people.  They summoned men from the nearest farms to accompany them,
and arrived at Froda on the evening before Candlemas, just at the time
when the fires were being kindled.  Thurid the housewife had then
taken the sickness after the same fashion as those who had died.
Kjartan went in at once, and saw that Thorodd and the others were
sitting by the fire as usual.  He took down Thorgunna's bed-hangings,
went into the hall, and carried out a live coal from the fire:  then
all the bed-gear that Thorgunna had owned was burned.

After this Kjartan summoned Thorir Wooden-leg, and Thord summoned
Thorodd, on the charge of going about the homestead without leave, and
depriving men of both health and life; all those who sat beside the
fire were summoned in the same way.  Then a court was held at the
door, in which the charges were declared, and everything done as in a
regular law court; opinions were given, the case summed up, and
judgment passed.  After sentence had been pronounced on Thorir Wooden-
leg, he rose up and said:  "Now we have sat as long as we can bear".
After this he went out by the other door from that at which the court
was held.  Then sentence was passed on the shepherd, and when he heard
it he stood up and said:  "Now I shall go, and I think it would have
been better before".  When Thorgrima heard sentence pronounced on her,
she rose up and said:  "Now we have stayed while it could be borne".
Then one after another was summoned, and each stood up as judgment was
given upon him; all of them said something as they went out, and
showed that they were loath to part.  Finally sentence was passed on
Thorodd himself, and when he heard it, he rose and said:  "Little
peace I find here, and let us all flee now," and went out after that.
Then Kjartan and the others entered and the priest carried holy water
and sacred relics over all the house.  Later on in the day he held
solemn service, and after this all the hauntings and ghost-walkings at
Froda ceased, while Thurid recovered from her sickness and became well
again.


CHAPTER XIV


Spiritualistic Floating Hands.  Hands in Haunted Houses.  Jerome
Cardan's Tale.  There are enough to defend the city." But Turnus spake,
saying, "Nay, my sister, for who thou art I have known even from
the beginning; it must not be so.

Why camest thou down from heaven?

Was it to see thy brother die? And now what shall I do? Have I not
seen Murranus die, and Ufens the Æquian? And shall I suffer this
city to be destroyed? Shall this land see Turnus flee before his
enemies? Be ye kind to me, O gods of the dead, seeing that the gods
of heaven hate me. I come down to you a righteous spirit, and not
unworthy of my fathers."

And even as he spake came Saces, riding on a horse that was covered
with foam, and on his face was the wound of an arrow.

And he cried, "O Turnus, our last hopes are in thee. For Æneas is about
to destroy the city, and the firebrands are cast upon the roofs. And
King Latinus is sore tried with doubt, and the Queen hath laid hands
upon herself and is dead.

And now only Messapus and Atinas maintain the battle, and the fight
grows fierce around them, whilst thou drivest thy chariot about these
empty fields."
Then for a while Turnus stood speechless, and shame and grief and
madness were in his soul; and he looked to the city, and lo! the fire
went up even to the top of the tower which he himself had builded
upon the walls to be a defense against the enemy. And when he saw it,
he cried, "It is enough, my sister; I go whither the Gods call me.
I will meet with Æneas face to face, and endure my doom."
And as he spake he leapt down from his chariot, and ran across the
plain till he came near to the city, even where the blood was
deepest upon the earth, and the arrows were thickest in the air.

And he beckoned with the hand and called to the Italians, saying,
"Stay now your arrows.

I am come to fight this battle for you all." And when they heard it
they left a space in the midst. Æneas also, when he heard the
name of Turnus, left attacking the city, and came to meet him, mighty
as Athos, or Eryx, or Father Apenninus, that raiseth his snowy
head to the heavens.

After half an hour of stillness I felt a
thumb press on my head, and a sense of cold.  I kept watching; the
forefinger, the middle finger, and the rest of the hand were next laid
on, the little finger nearly reaching my forehead.  The hand was like
that of a boy of ten, to guess by the size, and so cold that it was
extremely unpleasant.  Meantime I was chuckling over my luck in such
an opportunity of witnessing a wonder, and I listened eagerly.

"The hand stole with the ring finger foremost over my face and down my
nose, it was slipping into my mouth, and two finger-tips had entered,
when I threw it off with my right hand, thinking it was uncanny, and
not relishing it inside my body.  Silence followed and I lay awake,
distrusting the spectre more or less.  In about half an hour it
returned and repeated its former conduct, touching me very lightly,
yet very chilly.  When it reached my mouth I again drove it away.
Though my lips were tightly closed, I felt an extreme icy cold in my
teeth.  I now got out of bed, thinking this might be a friendly visit
from the ghost of the sick lad upstairs, who must have died.

"As I went to the door, the thing passed before me, rapping on the
walls.  When I was got to the door it knocked outside; when I opened
the door, it began to knock on the turret.  The moon was shining; I
went on to see what would happen, but it beat on the other sides of
the tower, and, as it always evaded me, I went up to see how my
patient was.  He wore a cloak of coarse material with breeches and had his fingers
webbed.

The weather was fine; he left the island towards the evening. Illugi
thought his journey was hopeless.
Grettir had the current with him and it was calm as he swam towards
the fjord.

I
thought it was you who wanted to waken me and take me to see my
brother, so I pretended to be asleep and lay quiet, supposing that you
would go alone when you found me so sound asleep.  On the eve the
shepherd went out with his sheep.
The mistress said: "Now I hope that our former experiences will not be
repeated."
"Have no fear for that, mistress," he said. "There will be something
worth telling of if I come not back.""The sick lad died on the following night."

Here Carden the elder stopped, and Jerome, his son, philosophised on
the subject.

Miss Dendy, on the authority of Mr. Elijah Cope, an itinerant
preacher, gives this anecdote of similar familiarity with a follet in
Staffordshire.