Numerous distinguished competitors stood with him for the
praetor's office; but he was chosen before them all, and managed
the decision of causes with justice and integrity.  It is
related that Licinius Macer, a man himself of great power in the
city, and supported also by the assistance of Crassus, was
accused before him of extortion, and that, in confidence on his
own interest and the diligence of his friends, whilst the judges
were debating about the sentence, he went to his house, where
hastily trimming his hair and putting on a clean gown, as
already acquitted, he was setting off again to go to the Forum;
but at his hall door meeting Crassus, who told him that he was
condemned by all the votes, he went in again, threw himself upon
his bed, and died immediately.  This verdict was considered very
creditable to Cicero, as showing his careful management of the
courts of justice.  On another occasion, Vatinius, a man of rude
manners and often insolent in court to the magistrates, who had
large swellings on his neck, came before his tribunal and made
some request, and on Cicero's desiring further time to consider
it, told him that he himself would have made no question about
it, had he been praetor.  Cicero, turning quickly upon him,
answered, "But I, you see, have not the neck that you have."

When there were but two or three days remaining in his office,
Manilius was brought before him, and charged with peculation.
Manilius had the good opinion and favor of the common people,
and was thought to be prosecuted only for Pompey's sake, whose
particular friend he was.  And therefore, when he asked a space
of time before his trial, and Cicero allowed him but one day,
and that the next only, the common people grew highly offended,
because it had been the custom of the praetors to allow ten days
at least to the accused: and the tribunes of the people having
called him before the people, and accused him, he, desiring to
be heard, said, that as he had always treated the accused with
equity and humanity, as far as the law allowed, so he thought it
hard to deny the same to Manilius, and that he had studiously
appointed that day of which alone, as praetor, he was master,
and that it was not the part of those that were desirous to help
him, to cast the judgment of his cause upon another praetor.
These things being said made a wonderful change in the people,
and, commending him much for it, they desired that he himself
would undertake the defense of Manilius; which he willingly
consented to, and that principally for the sake of Pompey, who
was absent.  And, accordingly, taking his place before the
people again, he delivered a bold invective upon the
oligarchical party and on those who were jealous of Pompey.

Yet he was preferred to the consulship no less by the nobles
than the common people, for the good of the city; and both
parties jointly assisted his promotion, upon the following
reasons.  The change of government made by Sylla, which at first
seemed a senseless one, by time and usage had now come to be
considered by the people no unsatisfactory settlement.  But
there were some that endeavored to alter and subvert the whole
present state of affairs not from any good motives, but for
their own private gain; and Pompey being at this time employed
in the wars with the kings of Pontus and Armenia, there was no
sufficient force at Rome to suppress any attempts at a
revolution.  These people had for their head a man of bold,
daring, and restless character, Lucius Catiline, who was
accused, besides other great offenses, of deflowering his virgin
daughter, and killing his own brother; for which latter crime,
fearing to be prosecuted at law, he persuaded Sylla to set him
down, as though he were yet alive, amongst those that were to be
put to death by proscription.  This man the profligate citizens
choosing for their captain, gave faith to one another, amongst
other pledges, by sacrificing a man and eating of his flesh; and
a great part of the young men of the city were corrupted by him,
he providing for everyone pleasures, drink, and women, and
profusely supplying the expense of these debauches.  Etruria,
moreover, had all been excited to revolt, as well as a great
part of Gaul within the Alps.  But Rome itself was in the most
dangerous inclination to change, on account of the unequal
distribution of wealth and property, those of highest rank and
greatest spirit having impoverished themselves by shows,
entertainments, ambition of offices, and sumptuous buildings,
and the riches of the city having thus fallen into the hands of
mean and low-born persons.  So that there wanted but a slight
impetus to set all in motion, it being in the power of every
daring man to overturn a sickly commonwealth.

Catiline, however, being desirous of procuring a strong position
to carry out his designs, stood for the consulship, and had
great hopes of success, thinking he should be appointed, with
Caius Antonius as his colleague, who was a man fit to lead
neither in a good cause nor in a bad one, but might be a
valuable accession to another's power.  These things the
greatest part of the good and honest citizens apprehending, put
Cicero upon standing for the consulship; whom the people readily
receiving, Catiline was put by, so that he and Caius Antonius
were chosen, although amongst the competitors he was the only
man descended from a father of the equestrian, and not of the
senatorial order.

Though the designs of Catiline were not yet publicly known, yet
considerable preliminary troubles immediately followed upon
Cicero's entrance upon the consulship.  For, on the one side,
those who were disqualified by the laws of Sylla from holding
any public offices, being neither inconsiderable in power nor in
number, came forward as candidates and caressed the people for
them; speaking many things truly and justly against the tyranny
of Sylla, only that they disturbed the government at an improper
and unseasonable time; on the other hand, the tribunes of the
people proposed laws to the same purpose, constituting a
commission of ten persons, with unlimited powers, in whom as
supreme governors should be vested the right of selling the
public lands of all Italy and Syria and Pompey's new conquests,
of judging and banishing whom they pleased, of planting
colonies, of taking moneys out of the treasury, and of levying
and paying what soldiers should be thought needful.  And several
of the nobility favored this law, but especially Caius Antonius,
Cicero's colleague, in hopes of being one of the ten.  But what
gave the greatest fear to the nobles was, that he was thought
privy to the conspiracy of Catiline, and not to dislike it,
because of his great debts.

Cicero, endeavoring in the first place to provide a remedy
against this danger, procured a decree assigning to him the
province of Macedonia, he himself declining that of Gaul, which
was offered to him.  And this piece of favor so completely won
over Antonius, that he was ready to second and respond to, like
a hired player, whatever Cicero said for the good of the
country.  And now, having made his colleague thus tame and
tractable, he could with greater courage attack the
conspirators.  And, therefore, in the senate, making an oration
against the law of the ten commissioners, he so confounded those
who proposed it, that they had nothing to reply.  And when they
again endeavored, and, having prepared things beforehand, had
called the consuls before the assembly of the people, Cicero,
fearing nothing, went first out, and commanded the senate to
follow him, and not only succeeded in throwing out the law, but
so entirely overpowered the tribunes by his oratory, that they
abandoned all thought of their other projects.

For Cicero, it may be said, was the one man, above all others,
who made the Romans feel how great a charm eloquence lends to
what is good, and how invincible justice is, if it be well
spoken; and that it is necessary for him who would dexterously
govern a commonwealth, in action, always to prefer that which
is honest before that which is popular, and in speaking, to free
the right and useful measure from everything that may occasion
offense.  An incident occurred in the theater, during his
consulship, which showed what his speaking could do.  For
whereas formerly the knights of Rome were mingled in the theater
with the common people, and took their places amongst them as it
happened, Marcus Otho, when he was praetor, was the first who
distinguished them from the other citizens, and appointed them a
proper seat, which they still enjoy as their special place in
the theater.  This the common people took as an indignity done
to them, and, therefore, when Otho appeared in the theater, they
hissed him; the knights, on the contrary, received him with loud
clapping.  The people repeated and increased their hissing; the
knights continued their clapping.  Upon this, turning upon one
another, they broke out into insulting words, so that the
theater was in great disorder.  Cicero, being informed of it,
came himself to the theater, and summoning the people into the
temple of Bellona, he so effectually chid and chastised them for
it, that, again returning into the theater, they received Otho
with loud applause, contending with the knights who should give
him the greatest demonstrations of honor and respect.

The conspirators with Catiline, at first cowed and disheartened,
began presently to take courage again.  And assembling
themselves together, they exhorted one another boldly to
undertake the design before Pompey's return, who, as it was
said, was now on his march with his forces for Rome.  But the
old soldiers of Sylla were Catiline's chief stimulus to action.
They had been disbanded all about Italy, but the greatest number
and the fiercest of them lay scattered among the cities of
Etruria, entertaining themselves with dreams of new plunder and
rapine amongst the hoarded riches of Italy.  These, having for
their leader Manlius, who had served with distinction in the
wars under Sylla, joined themselves to Catiline, and came to
Rome to assist him with their suffrages at the election.  For he
again pretended to the consulship, having resolved to kill
Cicero in a tumult at the elections.  Also, the divine powers
seemed to give intimation of the coming troubles, by
earthquakes, thunderbolts, and strange appearances.  Nor was
human evidence wanting, certain enough in itself, though not
sufficient for the conviction of the noble and powerful
Catiline.  Therefore Cicero, deferring the day of election,
summoned Catiline into the senate, and questioned him as to the
charges made against him.  Catiline, believing there were many
in the senate desirous of change, and to give a specimen of
himself to the conspirators present, returned an audacious
answer, "What harm," said he, "when I see two bodies, the one
lean and consumptive with a head, the other great and strong
without one, if I put a head to that body which wants one?"
This covert representation of the senate and the people excited
yet greater apprehensions in Cicero.  He put on armor, and was
attended from his house by the noble citizens in a body; and a
number of the young men went with him into the Plain.  Here,
designedly letting his tunic slip partly off from his shoulders,
he showed his armor underneath, and discovered his danger to the
spectators; who, being much moved at it, gathered round about
him for his defense.  At length, Catiline was by a general
suffrage again put by, and Silanus and Murena chosen consuls.

Not long after this, Catiline's soldiers got together in a body
in Etruria, and began to form themselves into companies, the day
appointed for the design being near at hand.  About midnight,
some of the principal and most powerful citizens of Rome, Marcus
Crassus, Marcus Marcellus, and Scipio Metellus went to Cicero's
house, where, knocking at the gate, and calling up the porter,
they commended him to awake Cicero, and tell him they were
there.  The business was this: Crassus's porter after supper
had delivered to him letters brought by an unknown person.  Some
of them were directed to others, but one to Crassus, without a
name; this only Crassus read, which informed him that there was
a great slaughter intended by Catiline, and advised him to leave
the city.  The others he did not open, but went with them
immediately to Cicero, being affrighted at the danger, and to
free himself of the suspicion he lay under for his familiarity
with Catiline.  Cicero, considering the matter, summoned the
senate at break of day.  The letters he brought with him, and
delivered them to those to whom they were directed, commanding
them to read them publicly; they all alike contained an account
of the conspiracy.  And when Quintus Arrius, a man of praetorian
dignity, recounted to them, how soldiers were collecting in
companies in Etruria, and Manlius stated to be in motion with a
large force, hovering about those cities, in expectation of
intelligence from Rome, the senate made a decree, to place all
in the hands of the consuls, who should undertake the conduct of
everything, and do their best to save the state.  This was not
a common thing, but only done by the senate in case of imminent
danger.

After Cicero had received this power, he committed all affairs
outside to Quintus Metellus, but the management of the city he
kept in his own hands.  Such a numerous attendance guarded him
every day when he went abroad, that the greatest part of the
market-place was filled with his train when he entered it.
Catiline, impatient of further delay, resolved himself to break
forth and go to Manlius, but he commanded Marcius and Cethegus
to take their swords, and go early in the morning to Cicero's
gates, as if only intending to salute him, and then to fall upon
him and slay him.  This a noble lady, Fulvia, coming by night,
discovered to Cicero, bidding him beware of Cethegus and
Marcius.  They came by break of day, and being denied entrance,
made an outcry and disturbance at the gates, which excited all
the more suspicion.  But Cicero, going forth, summoned the
senate into the temple of Jupiter Stator, which stands at the
end of the Sacred Street, going up to the Palatine.  And when
Catiline with others of his party also came, as intending to
make his defense, none of the senators would sit by him, but all
of them left the bench where he had placed himself.  And when he
began to speak, they interrupted him with outcries.  At length
Cicero, standing up, commanded him to leave the city, for since
one governed the commonwealth with words, the other with arms,
it was necessary there should be a wall betwixt them.  Catiline,
therefore, immediately left the town, with three hundred armed
men; and assuming, as if he had been a magistrate, the rods,
axes, and military ensigns, he went to Manlius, and having got
together a body of near twenty thousand men, with these he
marched to the several cities, endeavoring to persuade or force
them to revolt.  So it being now come to open war, Antonius was
sent forth to fight him.

The remainder of those in the city whom he had corrupted,
Cornelius Lentulus kept together and encouraged.  He had the
surname Sura, and was a man of a noble family, but a dissolute
liver, who for his debauchery was formerly turned out of the
senate, and was now holding the office of praetor for the second
time, as the custom is with those who desire to regain the
dignity of senator.  It is said that he got the surname Sura
upon this occasion; being quaestor in the time of Sylla, he had
lavished away and consumed a great quantity of the public
moneys, at which Sylla being provoked, called him to give an
account in the senate; he appeared with great coolness and
contempt, and said he had no account to give, but they might
take this, holding up the calf of his leg, as boys do at ball,
when they have missed.  Upon which he was surnamed Sura, sura
being the Roman word for the calf of the leg.  Being at another
time prosecuted at law, and having bribed some of the judges, he
escaped only by two votes, and complained of the needless
expense he had gone to in paying for a second, as one would have
sufficed to acquit him.  This man, such in his own nature, and
now inflamed by Catiline, false prophets and fortune-tellers had
also corrupted with vain hopes, quoting to him fictitious verses
and oracles, and proving from the Sibylline prophecies that
there were three of the name Cornelius designed by fate to be
monarchs of Rome; two of whom, Cinna and Sylla, had already
fulfilled the decree, and that divine fortune was now advancing
with the gift of monarchy for the remaining third Cornelius; and
that therefore he ought by all means to accept it, and not lose
opportunity by delay, as Catiline had done.

Lentulus, therefore, designed no mean or trivial matter, for he
had resolved to kill the whole senate, and as many other
citizens as he could, to fire the city, and spare nobody, except
only Pompey's children, intending to seize and keep them as
pledges of his reconciliation with Pompey.  For there was then a
common and strong report that Pompey was on his way homeward
from his great expedition.  The night appointed for the design
was one of the Saturnalia; swords, flax, and sulfur they carried
and hid in the house of Cethegus; and providing one hundred men,
and dividing the city into as many parts, they had allotted to
every one singly his proper place, so that in a moment many
kindling the fire, the city might be in a flame all together.
Others were appointed to stop up the aqueducts, and to kill
those who should endeavor to carry water to put it out.  Whilst
these plans were preparing, it happened there were two
ambassadors from the Allobroges staying in Rome; a nation at
that time in a distressed condition, and very uneasy under the
Roman government.  These Lentulus and his party judging useful
instruments to move and seduce Gaul to revolt, admitted into the
conspiracy, and they gave them letters to their own magistrates,
and letters to Catiline; in those they promised liberty, in
these they exhorted Catiline to set all slaves free, and to
bring them along with him to Rome.  They sent also to accompany
them to Catiline, one Titus, a native of Croton, who was to
carry those letters to him.

These counsels of inconsidering men, who conversed together over
wine and with women, Cicero watched with sober industry and
forethought, and with most admirable sagacity, having several
emissaries abroad, who observed and traced with him all that was
done, and keeping also a secret correspondence with many who
pretended to join in the conspiracy.  He thus knew all the
discourse which passed betwixt them and the strangers; and lying
in wait for them by night, he took the Crotonian with his
letters, the ambassadors of the Allobroges acting secretly in
concert with him.

By break of day, he summoned the senate into the temple of
Concord, where he read the letters and examined the informers.
Junius Silanus further stated, that several persons had heard
Cethegus say, that three consuls and four praetors were to be
slain; Piso, also, a person of consular dignity, testified other
matters of the like nature; and Caius Sulpicius, one of the
praetors, being sent to Cethegus's house, found there a quantity
of darts and of armor, and a still greater number of swords and
daggers, all recently whetted.  At length, the senate decreeing
indemnity to the Crotonian upon his confession of the whole
matter, Lentulus was convicted, abjured his office (for he was
then praetor), and put off his robe edged with purple in the
senate, changing it for another garment more agreeable to his
present circumstances.  He, thereupon, with the rest of his
confederates present, was committed to the charge of the
praetors in free custody.

It being evening, and the common people in crowds expecting
without, Cicero went forth to them, and told them what was done,
and then, attended by them, went to the house of a friend and
near neighbor; for his own was taken up by the women, who were
celebrating with secret rites the feast of the goddess whom the
Romans call the Good, and the Greeks, the Women's goddess.  For
a sacrifice is annually performed to her in the consul's house,
either by his wife or mother, in the presence of the vestal
virgins.  And having got into his friend's house privately, a
few only being present, he began to deliberate how he should
treat these men.  The severest, and the only punishment fit for
such heinous crimes, he was somewhat shy and fearful of
inflicting, as well from the clemency of his nature, as also
lest he should be thought to exercise his authority too
insolently, and to treat too harshly men of the noblest birth
and most powerful friendships in the city; and yet, if he should
use them more mildly, he had a dreadful prospect of danger from
them.  For there was no likelihood, if they suffered less than
death, they would be reconciled, but rather, adding new rage to
their former wickedness, they would rush into every kind of
audacity, while he himself, whose character for courage already
did not stand very high with the multitude, would be thought
guilty of the greatest cowardice and want of manliness.

Whilst Cicero was doubting what course to take, a portent
happened to the women in their sacrificing.  For on the altar,
where the fire seemed wholly extinguished, a great and bright
flame issued forth from the ashes of the burnt wood; at which
others were affrighted, but the holy virgins called to Terentia,
Cicero's wife, and bade her haste to her husband, and command
him to execute what he had resolved for the good of his country,
for the goddess had sent a great light to the increase of his
safety and glory.  Terentia, therefore, as she was otherwise in
her own nature neither tender-hearted nor timorous, but a woman
eager for distinction (who, as Cicero himself says, would rather
thrust herself into his public affairs, than communicate her
domestic matters to him), told him these things, and excited him
against the conspirators.  So also did Quintus his brother, and
Publius Nigidius, one of his philosophical friends, whom he
often made use of in his greatest and most weighty affairs of
state.

The next day, a debate arising in the senate about the
punishment of the men, Silanus, being the first who was asked
his opinion, said, it was fit they should be all sent to the
prison, and there suffer the utmost penalty.  To him all
consented in order till it came to Caius Caesar, who was
afterwards dictator.  He was then but a young man, and only at
the outset of his career, but had already directed his hopes and
policy to that course by which he afterwards changed the Roman
state into a monarchy.  Of this others foresaw nothing; but
Cicero had seen reason for strong suspicion, though without
obtaining any sufficient means of proof.  And there were some
indeed that said that he was very near being discovered, and
only just escaped him; others are of opinion that Cicero
voluntarily overlooked and neglected the evidence against him,
for fear of his friends and power; for it was very evident to
everybody, that if Caesar was to be accused with the
conspirators, they were more likely to be saved with him, than
he to be punished with them.

When, therefore, it came to Caesar's turn to give his opinion,
he stood up and proposed that the conspirators should not be put
to death, but their estates confiscated, and their persons
confined in such cities in Italy as Cicero should approve, there
to be kept in custody till Catiline was conquered.  To this
sentence, as it was the most moderate, and he that delivered it
a most powerful speaker, Cicero himself gave no small weight,
for he stood up and, turning the scale on either side, spoke in
favor partly of the former, partly of Caesar's sentence.  And
all Cicero's friends, judging Caesar's sentence most expedient
for Cicero, because he would incur the less blame if the
conspirators were not put to death, chose rather the latter; so
that Silanus, also, changing his mind, retracted his opinion,
and said he had not declared for capital, but only the utmost
punishment, which to a Roman senator is imprisonment.  The first
man who spoke against Caesar's motion was Catulus Lutatius.
Cato followed, and so vehemently urged in his speech the strong
suspicion about Caesar himself, and so filled the senate with
anger and resolution, that a decree was passed for the execution
of the conspirators.  But Caesar opposed the confiscation of
their goods, not thinking it fair that those who had rejected
the mildest part of his sentence should avail themselves of the
severest.  And when many insisted upon it, he appealed to the
tribunes, but they would do nothing; till Cicero himself
yielding, remitted that part of the sentence.

After this, Cicero went out with the senate to the conspirators;
they were not all together in one place, but the several
praetors had them, some one, some another, in custody.  And
first he took Lentulus from the Palatine, and brought him by the
Sacred Street, through the middle of the marketplace, a circle
of the most eminent citizens encompassing and protecting him.
The people, affrighted at what was doing, passed along in
silence, especially the young men; as if, with fear and
trembling; they were undergoing a rite of initiation into some
ancient, sacred mysteries of aristocratic power.  Thus passing
from the market-place, and coming to the gaol, he delivered
Lentulus to the officer, and commanded him to execute him; and
after him Cethegus, and so all the rest in order, he brought and
delivered up to execution.  And when he saw many of the
conspirators in the market-place, still standing together in
companies, ignorant of what was done, and waiting for the night,
supposing the men were still alive and in a possibility of being
rescued, he called out in a loud voice, and said, "They did
live;" for so the Romans, to avoid inauspicious language, name
those that are dead.

It was now evening, when he returned from the market-place to
his own house, the citizens no longer attending him with
silence, nor in order, but receiving him, as he passed, with
acclamations and applauses, and saluting him as the savior and
founder of his country.  A bright light shone through the
streets from the lamps and torches set up at the doors, and the
women showed lights from the tops of the houses, to honor
Cicero, and to behold him returning home with a splendid train
of the most principal citizens; amongst whom were many who had
conducted great wars, celebrated triumphs, and added to the
possessions of the Roman empire, both by sea and land.  These,
as they passed along with him, acknowledged to one another, that
though the Roman people were indebted to several officers and
commanders of that age for riches, spoils, and power, yet to
Cicero alone they owed the safety and security of all these, for
delivering them from so great and imminent a danger.  For though
it might seem no wonderful thing to prevent the design, and
punish the conspirators, yet to defeat the greatest of all
conspiracies with so little disturbance, trouble, and commotion,
was very extraordinary.  For the greater part of those who had
flocked in to Catiline, as soon as they heard the fate of
Lentulus and Cethegus, left and forsook him, and he himself,
with his remaining forces, joining battle with Antonius, was
destroyed with his army.

And yet there were some who were very ready both to speak ill of
Cicero, and to do him hurt for these actions; and they had for
their leaders some of the magistrates of the ensuing year, as
Caesar, who was one of the praetors, and Metellus and Bestia,
the tribunes.  These, entering upon their office some few days
before Cicero's consulate expired, would not permit him to make
any address to the people, but, throwing the benches before the
Rostra, hindered his speaking, telling him he might, if he
pleased, make the oath of withdrawal from office, and then come
down again.  Cicero, accordingly, accepting the conditions, came
forward to make his withdrawal; and silence being made, he
recited his oath, not in the usual, but in a new and peculiar
form, namely, that he had saved his country, and preserved the
empire; the truth of which oath all the people confirmed with
theirs.  Caesar and the tribunes, all the more exasperated by
this, endeavored to create him further trouble, and for this
purpose proposed a law for calling Pompey home with his army, to
put an end to Cicero's usurpation.  But it was a very great
advantage for Cicero and the whole commonwealth that Cato was at
that time one of the tribunes.  For he, being of equal power
with the rest, and of greater reputation, could oppose their
designs.  He easily defeated their other projects, and, in an
oration to the people, so highly extolled Cicero's consulate,
that the greatest honors were decreed him, and he was publicly
declared the Father of his Country, which title he seems to have
obtained, the first man who did so, when Cato gave it him in
this address to the people.

At this time, therefore, his authority was very great in the
city; but he created himself much envy, and offended very many,
not by any evil action, but because he was always lauding and
magnifying himself.  For neither senate, nor assembly of the
people, nor court of judicature could meet, in which he was not
heard to talk of Catiline and Lentulus.  Indeed, he also filled
his books and writings with his own praises, to such an excess
as to render a style, in itself most pleasant and delightful,
nauseous and irksome to his hearers; this ungrateful humor, like
a disease, always cleaving to him.  Nevertheless, though he was
intemperately fond of his own glory, he was very free from
envying others, and was, on the contrary, most liberally profuse
in commending both the ancients and his contemporaries, as
anyone may see in his writings.  And many such sayings of his are
also remembered; as that he called Aristotle a river of flowing
gold, and said of Plato's Dialogues, that if Jupiter were to
speak, it would be in language like theirs.  He used to call
Theophrastus his special luxury.  And being asked which of
Demosthenes's orations he liked best, he answered, the longest.
And yet some affected imitators of Demosthenes have complained
of some words that occur in one of his letters, to the effect
that Demosthenes sometimes falls asleep in his speeches;
forgetting the many high encomiums he continually passes upon
him, and the compliment he paid him when he named the most
elaborate of all his orations, those he wrote against Antony,
Philippics.  And as for the eminent men of his own time, either
in eloquence or philosophy, there was not one of them whom he
did not, by writing or speaking favorably of him, render more
illustrious.  He obtained of Caesar, when in power, the Roman
citizenship for Cratippus, the Peripatetic, and got the court of
Areopagus, by public decree, to request his stay at Athens, for
the instruction of their youth, and the honor of their city.
There are letters extant from Cicero to Herodes, and others to
his son, in which he recommends the study of philosophy under
Cratippus.  There is one in which he blames Gorgias, the
rhetorician, for enticing his son into luxury and drinking, and,
therefore, forbids him his company.  And this, and one other to
Pelops, the Byzantine, are the only two of his Greek epistles
which seem to be written in anger.  In the first, he justly
reflects on Gorgias, if he were what he was thought to be, a
dissolute and profligate character; but in the other, he rather
meanly expostulates and complains with Pelops, for neglecting to
procure him a decree of certain honors from the Byzantines.

Another illustration of his love of praise is the way in which
sometimes, to make his orations more striking, he neglected
decorum and dignity.  When Munatius, who had escaped conviction
by his advocacy, immediately prosecuted his friend Sabinus, he
said in the warmth of his resentment, "Do you suppose you were
acquitted for your own meets, Munatius, and was it not that I so
darkened the case, that the court could not see your guilt?"
When from the Rostra he had made an eulogy on Marcus Crassus,
with much applause, and within a few days after again as
publicly reproached him, Crassus called to him, and said, "Did
not you yourself two days ago, in this same place, commend me?"
"Yes," said Cicero, "I exercised my eloquence in declaiming upon
a bad subject."  At another time, Crassus had said that no one
of his family had ever lived beyond sixty years of age, and
afterwards denied it, and asked, "What should put it into my
head to say so?"  "It was to gain the people's favor," answered
Cicero; "you knew how glad they would be to hear it."  When
Crassus expressed admiration of the Stoic doctrine, that the
good man is always rich, "Do you not mean," said Cicero, "their
doctrine that all things belong to the wise?"  Crassus being
generally accused of covetousness.  One of Crassus's sons, who
was thought so exceedingly like a man of the name of Axius as to
throw some suspicion on his mother's honor, made a successful
speech in the senate.  Cicero on being asked how he liked it,
replied with the Greek words, Axios Crassou.

When Crassus was about to go into Syria, he desired to leave
Cicero rather his friend than his enemy, and, therefore, one day
saluting him, told him he would come and sup with him, which the
other as courteously received.  Within a few days after, on some
of Cicero's acquaintances interceding for Vatinius, as desirous
of reconciliation and friendship, for he was then his enemy,
"What," he replied, "does Vatinius also wish to come and sup
with me?"  Such was his way with Crassus.  When Vatinius, who
had swellings in his neck, was pleading a cause, he called him
the tumid orator; and having been told by someone that Vatinius
was dead, on hearing presently after that he was alive, "May the
rascal perish," said he, "for his news not being true."

Upon Caesar's bringing forward a law for the division of the
lands in Campania amongst the soldiers, many in the senate
opposed it; amongst the rest, Lucius Gellius, one of the oldest
men in the house, said it should never pass whilst he lived.
"Let us postpone it," said Cicero, "Gellius does not ask us to
wait long."  There was a man of the name of Octavius, suspected
to be of African descent.  He once said, when Cicero was
pleading, that he could not hear him; "Yet there are holes,"
said Cicero, "in your ears."  When Metellus Nepos told him,
that he had ruined more as a witness, than he had saved as an
advocate, "I admit," said Cicero, "that I have more truth than
eloquence."  To a young man who was suspected of having given a
poisoned cake to his father, and who talked largely of the
invectives he meant to deliver against Cicero, "Better these,"
replied he, "than your cakes."  Publius Sextius, having amongst
others retained Cicero as his advocate in a certain cause, was
yet desirous to say all for himself, and would not allow anybody
to speak for him; when he was about to receive his acquittal
from the judges, and the ballots were passing, Cicero called to
him, "Make haste, Sextius, and use your time; tomorrow you will
be nobody."  He cited Publius Cotta to bear testimony in a
certain cause, one who affected to be thought a lawyer, though
ignorant and unlearned; to whom, when he had said, "I know
nothing of the matter," he answered, "You think, perhaps, we ask
you about a point of law."  To Metellus Nepos, who, in a dispute
between them, repeated several times, "Who was your father,
Cicero?"  he replied, "Your mother has made the answer to such a
question in your case more difficult;" Nepos's mother having
been of ill repute.  The son, also, was of a giddy, uncertain
temper.  At one time, he suddenly threw up his office of
tribune, and sailed off into Syria to Pompey; and immediately
after, with as little reason, came back again.  He gave his
tutor, Philagrus, a funeral with more than necessary attention,
and then set up the stone figure of a crow over his tomb.
"This," said Cicero, "is really appropriate; as he did not teach
you to speak, but to fly about."  When Marcus Appius, in the
opening of some speech in a court of justice, said that his
friend had desired him to employ industry, eloquence, and
fidelity in that cause, Cicero answered, "And how have you had
the heart not to accede to any one of his requests?"

To use this sharp raillery against opponents and antagonists in
judicial pleading seems allowable rhetoric.  But he excited much
ill feeling by his readiness to attack anyone for the sake of a
jest.  A few anecdotes of this kind may be added.  Marcus
Aquinius, who had two sons-in-law in exile, received from him
the name of king Adrastus. Lucius Cotta, an intemperate lover
of wine, was censor when Cicero stood for the consulship.
Cicero, being thirsty at the election, his friends stood round
about him while he was drinking.  "You have reason to be
afraid," he said, "lest the censor should be angry with me for
drinking water."  Meeting one day Voconius with his three very
ugly daughters, he quoted the verse,

He reared a race without Apollo's leave.

When Marcus Gellius, who was reputed the son of a slave, had
read several letters in the senate with a very shrill, and loud
voice, "Wonder not," said Cicero, "he comes of the criers."
When Faustus Sylla, the son of Sylla the dictator, who had,
during his dictatorship, by public bills proscribed and
condemned so many citizens, had so far wasted his estate, and
got into debt, that he was forced to publish his bills of sale,
Cicero told him that he liked these bills much better than those
of his father.  By this habit he made himself odious with many
people.

But Clodius's faction conspired against him upon the following
occasion.  Clodius was a member of a noble family, in the flower
of his youth, and of a bold and resolute temper.  He, being in
love with Pompeia, Caesar's wife, got privately into his house
in the dress and attire of a music-girl; the women being at that
time offering there the sacrifice which must not be seen by men,
and there was no man present.  Clodius, being a youth and
beardless, hoped to get to Pompeia among the women without being
taken notice of.  But coming into a great house by night, he
missed his way in the passages, and a servant belonging to
Aurelia, Caesar's mother, spying him wandering up and down,
inquired his name.  Thus being necessitated to speak, he told
her he was seeking for one of Pompeia's maids, Abra by name; and
she, perceiving it not to be a woman's voice, shrieked out, and
called in the women; who, shutting the gates, and searching
every place, at length found Clodius hidden in the chamber of
the maid with whom he had come in.  This matter being much
talked about, Caesar put away his wife, Pompeia, and Clodius was
prosecuted for profaning the holy rites.

Cicero was at this time his friend, for he had been useful
to him in the conspiracy of Catiline, as one of his forwardest
assistants and protectors.  But when Clodius rested his defense
upon this point, that he was not then at Rome, but at a distance
in the country, Cicero testified that he had come to his house
that day, and conversed with him on several matters; which thing
was indeed true, although Cicero was thought to testify it not
so much for the truth's sake as to preserve his quiet with
Terentia his wife.  For she bore a grudge against Clodius on
account of his sister Clodia's wishing, as it was alleged, to
marry Cicero, and having employed for this purpose the
intervention of Tullus, a very intimate friend of Cicero's; and
his frequent visits to Clodia, who lived in their neighborhood,
and the attentions he paid to her had excited Terentia's
suspicions, and, being a woman of a violent temper, and having
the ascendant over Cicero, she urged him on to taking a part
against Clodius, and delivering his testimony.  Many other good
and honest citizens also gave evidence against him, for
perjuries, disorders, bribing the people, and debauching women.
Lucullus proved, by his women-servants, that he had debauched
his youngest sister when she was Lucullus's wife; and there was
a general belief that he had done the same with his two other
sisters, Tertia, whom Marcius Rex, and Clodia, whom Metellus
Celer had married; the latter of whom was called Quadrantia,
because one of her lovers had deceived her with a purse of small
copper money instead of silver, the smallest copper coin being
called a quadrant.  Upon this sister's account, in particular,
Clodius's character was attacked.  Notwithstanding all this,
when the common people united against the accusers and witnesses
and the whole party, the judges were affrighted, and a guard was
placed about them for their defense; and most of them wrote
their sentences on the tablets in such a way, that they could
not well be read.  It was decided, however, that there was a
majority for his acquittal, and bribery was reported to have
been employed; in reference to which Catulus remarked, when he
next met the judges, "You were very right to ask for a guard, to
prevent your money being taken from you."  And when Clodius
upbraided Cicero that the judges had not believed his testimony,
"Yes," said he, "five and twenty of them trusted me, and
condemned you, and the other thirty did not trust you, for they
did not acquit you till they had got your money."

Caesar, though cited, did not give his testimony against
Clodius, and declared himself not convinced of his wife's
adultery, but that he had put her away because it was fit that
Caesar's house should not be only free of the evil fact, but of
the fame too.

Clodius, having escaped this danger, and having got himself
chosen one of the tribunes, immediately attacked Cicero, heaping
up all matters and inciting all persons against him.  The common
people he gained over with popular laws; to each of the consuls
he decreed large provinces, to Piso, Macedonia, and to Gabinius,
Syria; he made a strong party among the indigent citizens, to
support him in his proceedings, and had always a body of armed
slaves about him.  Of the three men then in greatest power,
Crassus was Cicero's open enemy, Pompey indifferently made
advances to both, and Caesar was going with an army into Gaul.
To him, though not his friend (what had occurred in the time of
the conspiracy having created suspicions between them), Cicero
applied, requesting an appointment as one of his lieutenants in
the province.  Caesar accepted him, and Clodius, perceiving that
Cicero would thus escape his tribunician authority, professed to
be inclinable to a reconciliation, laid the greatest fault upon
Terentia, made always a favorable mention of him, and addressed
him with kind expressions, as one who felt no hatred or
ill-will, but who merely wished to urge his complaints in a
moderate and friendly way.  By these artifices, he so freed
Cicero of all his fears, that he resigned his appointment to
Caesar, and betook himself again to political affairs.  At which
Caesar being exasperated, joined the party of Clodius against
him, and wholly alienated Pompey from him; he also himself
declared in a public assembly of the people, that he did not
think Lentulus and Cethegus, with their accomplices, were fairly
and legally put to death without being brought to trial.  And
this, indeed, was the crime charged upon Cicero, and this
impeachment he was summoned to answer.  And so, as an accused
man, and in danger for the result, he changes his dress, and
went round with his hair untrimmed, in the attire of a
suppliant, to beg the people's grace.  But Clodius met him in
every corner, having a band of abusive and daring fellows about
him, who derided Cicero for his change of dress and his
humiliation, and often, by throwing dirt and stones at him,
interrupted his supplication to the people.

However, first of all, almost the whole equestrian order changed
their dress with him, and no less than twenty thousand young
gentlemen followed him with their hair untrimmed, and
supplicating with him to the people.  And then the senate met,
to pass a decree that the people should change their dress as in
time of public sorrow.  But the consuls opposing it, and Clodius
with armed men besetting the senate-house, many of the senators
ran out, crying out and tearing their clothes.  But this sight
moved neither shame nor pity; Cicero must either fly or
determine it by the sword with Clodius.  He entreated Pompey to
aid him, who was on purpose gone out of the way, and was staying
at his country-house in the Alban hills; and first he sent his
son-in-law Piso to intercede with him, and afterwards set out to
go himself.  Of which Pompey being informed, would not stay to
see him, being ashamed at the remembrance of the many conflicts
in the commonwealth which Cicero had undergone in his behalf,
and how much of his policy he had directed for his advantage.
But being now Caesar's son-in-law, at his instance he had set
aside all former kindness, and, slipping out at another door,
avoided the interview.  Thus being forsaken by Pompey, and left
alone to himself, he fled to the consuls.  Gabinius was rough
with him, as usual, but Piso spoke more courteously, desiring
him to yield and give place for a while to the fury of Clodius,
and to await a change of times, and to be now, as before, his
country's savior from the peril of these troubles and commotions
which Clodius was exciting.

Cicero, receiving this answer, consulted with his friends.
Lucullus advised him to stay, as being sure to prevail at last;
others to fly, because the people would soon desire him again,
when they should have enough of the rage and madness of Clodius.
This last Cicero approved.  But first he took a statue of
Minerva, which had been long set up and greatly honored in his
house, and carrying it to the capitol, there dedicated it, with
the inscription, "To Minerva, Patroness of Rome."  And receiving
an escort from his friends, about the middle of the night he
left the city, and went by land through Lucania, intending to
reach Sicily.

But as soon as it was publicly known that he was fled, Clodius
proposed to the people a decree of exile, and by his own order
interdicted him fire and water, prohibiting any within five
hundred miles in Italy to receive him into their houses.  Most
people, out of respect for Cicero, paid no regard to this edict,
offering him every attention and escorting him on his way.  I
watched the new procession yet more keenly, if possible, than
the former. This time, the central figure was a girl; and, at the
close, I observed, yet more indubitably, the shrinking back,
and the crowding push. What happened to the victims, I never
learned; but I had learned enough, and I could bear it no longer.
I stooped, and whispered to the young girl who stood by me, to
lend me her white garment. I wanted it, that I might not be
entirely out of keeping with the solemnity, but might have
at least this help to passing unquestioned. She looked up,
half-amused and half-bewildered, as if doubting whether I was
in earnest or not. But in her perplexity, she permitted
me to unfasten it, and slip it down from her shoulders.

I easily got possession of it; and, sinking down on my knees
in the crowd, I rose apparently in the habit of one of
the worshippers.

Giving my battle-axe to the girl, to hold in pledge for the return
of her stole, for I wished to test the matter unarmed, and, if
it was a man that sat upon the throne, to attack him with hands
bare, as I supposed his must be, I made my way through the crowd
to the front, while the singing yet continued, desirous of
reaching the platform while it was unoccupied by any of the
priests. I was permitted to walk up the long avenue of white
robes unmolested, though I saw questioning looks in many of
the faces as I passed. I presume my coolness aided my passage;
for I felt quite indifferent as to my own fate; not feeling,
after the late events of my history, that I was at all worth
taking care of; and enjoying, perhaps, something of an evil
satisfaction, in the revenge I was thus taking upon the self which
had fooled me so long. When I arrived on the platform, the
song had just ceased, and I felt as if all were looking towards me.

But instead of kneeling at its foot, I walked right up the
stairs to the throne, laid hold of a great wooden image that
seemed to sit upon it, and tried to hurl it from its seat. In
this I failed at first, for I found it firmly fixed. But in
dread lest, the first shock of amazement passing away, the
guards would rush upon me before I had effected my purpose, I
strained with all my might; and, with a noise as of the
cracking, and breaking, and tearing of rotten wood, something
gave way, and I hurled the image down the steps. Its displacement
revealed a great hole in the throne, like the hollow of a decayed
tree, going down apparently a great way. But I had no time to
examine it, for, as I looked into it, up out of it rushed a
great brute, like a wolf, but twice the size, and tumbled
me headlong with itself, down the steps of the throne. As we
fell, however, I caught it by the throat, and the moment
we reached the platform, a struggle commenced, in which
I soon got uppermost, with my hand upon its throat, and knee
upon its heart. But now arose a wild cry of wrath and
revenge and rescue.
A universal hiss of steel, as every sword was swept from its
scabbard, seemed to tear the very air in shreds. I heard the
rush of hundreds towards the platform on which I knelt. I only
tightened my grasp of the brute's throat. His eyes were already
starting from his head, and his tongue was hanging out.
My anxious hope was, that, even after they had killed me, they
would be unable to undo my gripe of his throat, before the
monster was past breathing. I therefore threw all my will, and
force, and purpose, into the grasping hand. I remember
no blow. A faintness came over me, and my consciousness departed.

CHAPTER XXIV
"We are ne'er like angels till our passions die." DEKKER.

"This wretched INN, where we scarce stay to bait, We call our
DWELLING-PLACE:
We call one STEP A RACE:
But angels in their full enlightened state, Angels, who LIVE, and
know what 'tis to BE, Who all the nonsense of our language see, Who
speak THINGS, and our WORDS,their ill-drawn PICTURES, scorn, When
we, by a foolish figure, say, BEHOLD AN OLD MAN DEAD!

then they Speak properly, and cry, BEHOLD A MAN-CHILD BORN!"
COWLEY.

I was dead, and right content. I lay in my coffin, with my hands
folded in peace. The knight, and the lady I loved, wept over
me.

Her tears fell on my face.

"Ah!" said the knight, "I rushed amongst them like a madman.
I hewed them down like brushwood. Their swords battered on me
like hail, but hurt me not. I cut a lane through to my friend.
He was dead. But he had throttled the monster, and I had to cut
the handful out of its throat, before I could disengage and carry
off his body.

They dared not molest me as I brought him back."
"He has died well," said the lady.

My spirit rejoiced. They left me to my repose. I felt as if
a cool hand had been laid upon my heart, and had stilled it.
My soul was like a summer evening, after a heavy fall of rain,
when the drops are yet glistening on the trees in the last rays
of the down-going sun, and the wind of the twilight has begun
to blow. The hot fever of life had gone by, and I breathed the
clear mountain-air of the land of Death. I had never
dreamed of such blessedness. It was not that I had in any way
ceased to be what I had been. The very fact that anything can
die, implies the existence of something that cannot die; which
must either take to itself another form, as when the seed
that is sown dies, and arises again; or, in conscious existence,
may, perhaps, continue to lead a purely spiritual life. If
my passions were dead, the souls of the passions, those essential
mysteries of the spirit which had imbodied themselves in the
passions, and had given to them all their glory and wonderment,
yet lived, yet glowed, with a pure, undying fire. They rose
above their vanishing earthly garments, and disclosed
themselves angels of light. But oh, how beautiful beyond the
old form! I lay thus for a time, and lived as it were an
unradiating existence; my soul a motionless lake, that received
all things and gave nothing back; satisfied in still contemplation,
and spiritual consciousness.

Ere long, they bore me to my grave. Never tired child lay down
in his white bed, and heard the sound of his playthings being
laid aside for the night, with a more luxurious satisfaction
of repose than I knew, when I felt the coffin settle on the firm
earth, and heard the sound of the falling mould upon its lid.

It has not the same hollow rattle within the coffin, that it sends
up to the edge of the grave. They buried me in no graveyard.
They loved me too much for that, I thank them; but they laid
me in the grounds of their own castle, amid many trees; where,
as it was spring-time, were growing primroses, and blue-bells,
and all the families of the woods
Now that I lay in her bosom, the whole earth, and each of
her many births, was as a body to me, at my will. I seemed to
feel the great heart of the mother beating into mine, and feeding
me with her own life, her own essential being and nature. I heard
the footsteps of my friends above, and they sent a thrill through
my heart. I knew that the helpers had gone, and that the
knight and the lady remained, and spoke low, gentle, tearful
words of him who lay beneath the yet wounded sod. I rose
into a single large primrose that grew by the edge of the grave,
and from the window of its humble, trusting face, looked full in
the countenance of the lady. I felt that I could manifest myself
in the primrose; that it said a part of what I wanted to say;
just as in the old time, I had used to betake myself to a song
for the same end. The flower caught her eye. She stooped
and plucked it, saying, "Oh, you beautiful creature!" and,
lightly kissing it, put it in her bosom. It was the first kiss
she had ever given me. But the flower soon began to wither, and
I forsook it.

It was evening. The sun was below the horizon; but his rosy
beams yet illuminated a feathery cloud, that floated high
above the world. I arose, I reached the cloud; and, throwing
myself upon it, floated with it in sight of the sinking sun. He
sank, and the cloud grew gray; but the grayness touched not my
heart. It carried its rose-hue within; for now I could love without
needing to be loved again. The moon came gliding up with all the
past in her wan face. She changed my couch into a ghostly pallor,
and threw all the earth below as to the bottom of a pale sea of
dreams. But she could not make me sad. I knew now, that it
is by loving, and not by being loved, that one can come nearest
the soul of another; yea, that, where two love, it is the
loving of each other, and not the being loved by each other,
that originates and perfects and assures their blessedness.

I knew that love gives to him that loveth, power over any soul
beloved, even if that soul know him not, bringing him inwardly
close to that spirit; a power that cannot be but for good;
for in proportion as selfishness intrudes, the love ceases, and
the power which springs therefrom dies. Yet all love will, one
day, meet with its return. All true love will, one day,
behold its own image in the eyes of the beloved, and be humbly
glad. This is possible in the realms of lofty Death. "Ah! my
friends," thought I, "how I will tend you, and wait upon you,
and haunt you with my love."
"My floating chariot bore me over a great city. Its faint dull
sound steamed up into the air--a sound--how composed?" How many
hopeless cries," thought I, "and how many mad shouts go to
make up the tumult, here so faint where I float in eternal
peace, knowing that they will one day be stilled in the
surrounding calm, and that despair dies into infinite hope, and
the seeming impossible there, is the law here!

"But, O pale-faced women, and gloomy-browed men, and forgotten
children, how I will wait on you, and minister to you, and,
putting my arms about you in the dark, think hope into your
hearts, when you fancy no one is near! Soon as my senses have
all come back, and have grown accustomed to this new blessed
life, I will be among you with the love that healeth."

With this, a pang and a terrible shudder went through me; a
writhing as of death convulsed me; and I became once again
conscious of a more limited, even a bodily and earthly life.

CHAPTER XXV
"Our life is no dream; but it ought to become one, and perhaps
will."--NOVALIS.

"And on the ground, which is my modres gate, I knocke with my
staf; erlich and late, And say to hire, Leve mother, let me in."
CHAUCER, The Pardoneres Tale.

Sinking from such a state of ideal bliss, into the world of shadows
which again closed around and infolded me, my first dread
was, not unnaturally, that my own shadow had found me again, and
that my torture had commenced anew. It was a sad revulsion of
feeling. This, indeed, seemed to correspond to what we think death
is, before we die. Yet I felt within me a power of calm
endurance to which I had hitherto been a stranger. For, in truth,
that I should be able if only to think such things as I had
been thinking, was an unspeakable delight. An hour of such
peace made the turmoil of a lifetime worth striving through.

I found myself lying in the open air, in the early morning, before
sunrise. Over me rose the summer heaven, expectant of the
sun. The clouds already saw him, coming from afar; and soon
every dewdrop would rejoice in his individual presence within
it.

I lay motionless for a few minutes; and then slowly rose and looked
about me. I was on the summit of a little hill; a valley lay
beneath, and a range of mountains closed up the view upon
that side. But, to my horror, across the valley, and up the
height of the opposing mountains, stretched, from my
very feet, a hugely expanding shade. There it lay, long and
large, dark and mighty. I turned away with a sick despair; when
lo! I beheld the sun just lifting his head above the eastern hill,
and the shadow that fell from me, lay only where his beams fell not.

I danced for joy. It was only the natural shadow, that goes
with every man who walks in the sun. As he arose, higher and
higher, the shadow-head sank down the side of the opposite hill,
and crept in across the valley towards my feet.

Now that I was so joyously delivered from this fear, I saw and
recognised the country around me. In the valley below, lay
my own castle, and the haunts of my childhood were all about
me hastened home.
My sisters received me with unspeakable joy; but I suppose they
observed some change in me, for a kind of respect, with a slight
touch of awe in it, mingled with their joy, and made me ashamed.

They had been in great distress about me. On the morning of my
disappearance, they had found the floor of my room flooded;
and, all that day, a wondrous and nearly impervious mist had
hung about the castle and grounds. I had been gone, they
told me, twenty-one days. To me it seemed twenty-one years.
Nor could I yet feel quite secure in my new experiences. When,
at night, I lay down once more in my own bed, I did not feel
at all sure that when I awoke, I should not find myself in
some mysterious region of Fairy Land.
My dreams were incessant and perturbed; but when I did awake, I
saw clearly that I was in my own home.

My mind soon grew calm; and I began the duties of my new position,
somewhat instructed, I hoped, by the adventures that had
befallen me in Fairy Land. Could I translate the experience of
my travels there, into common life? This was the question.
Or must I live it all over again, and learn it all over again, in
the other forms that belong to the world of men, whose experience
yet runs parallel to that of Fairy Land?

These questions I cannot answer yet. But I fear.

Even yet, I find myself looking round sometimes with anxiety,
to see whether my shadow falls right away from the sun or no.
I have never yet discovered any inclination to either side. And
if I am not unfrequently sad, I yet cast no more of a shade on
the earth, than most men who have lived in it as long as
I. I have a strange feeling sometimes, that I am a ghost, sent
into the world to minister to my fellow men, or, rather, to
repair the wrongs I have already done.

May the world be brighter for me, at least in those portions
of it, where my darkness falls not.

Thus I, who set out to find my Ideal, came back rejoicing
that I had lost my Shadow.

When the thought of the blessedness I experienced, after my death
in Fairy Land, is too high for me to lay hold upon it and hope
in it, I often think of the wise woman in the cottage, and of her
solemn assurance that she knew something too good to be told.
When I am oppressed by any sorrow or real perplexity, I often
feel as if I had only left her cottage for a time, and would soon
return out of the vision, into it again. Sometimes, on
such occasions, I find myself, unconsciously almost, looking
about for the mystic mark of red, with the vague hope of
entering her door, and being comforted by her wise tenderness.
I then console myself by saying: "I have come through the door
of Dismay; and the way back from the world into which that has
led me, is through my tomb. Upon that the red sign lies, and
I shall find it one day, and be glad."
I will end my story with the relation of an incident which befell
me a few days ago. I had been with my reapers, and, when
they ceased their work at noon, I had lain down under the shadow
of a great, ancient beech-tree, that stood on the edge of the
field. As I lay, with my eyes closed, I began to listen to the
sound of the leaves overhead. At first, they made sweet
inarticulate music alone; but, by-and-by, the sound seemed to
begin to take shape, and to be gradually moulding itself
into words; till, at last, I seemed able to distinguish these,
half-dissolved in a little ocean of circumfluent tones: "A great
good is coming--is coming--is coming to thee, Anodos;" and so over
and over again.

I fancied that the sound reminded me of the voice of the
ancient woman, in the cottage that was four-square. I
opened my eyes, and, for a moment, almost believed that I saw her
face, with its many wrinkles and its young eyes, looking at
me from between two hoary branches of the beech overhead.
But when I looked more keenly, I saw only twigs and leaves,
and the infinite sky, in tiny spots, gazing through between. Yet
I know that good is coming to me--that good is always coming;
though few have at all times the simplicity and the courage to
believe it. What we call evil, is the only and best shape, which,
for the person and his condition at the time, could be assumed
by the best good. And so, FAREWELL.
For the young woman was very
rich, and Cicero had the custody of her estate, being left
guardian in trust; and being indebted many myriads of money, he
was persuaded by his friends and relations to marry her,
notwithstanding his disparity of age, and to use her money to
satisfy his creditors.  Antony, who mentions this marriage in
his answer to the Philippics, reproaches him for putting away a
wife with whom he had lived to old age; adding some happy
strokes of sarcasm on Cicero's domestic, inactive,
unsoldier-like habits.  Not long after this marriage, his
daughter died in child-bed at Lentulus's house, to whom she had
been married after the death of Piso, her former husband.  The
philosophers from all parts came to comfort Cicero; for his
grief was so excessive, that he put away his new-married wife,
because she seemed to be pleased at the death of Tullia.  And
thus stood Cicero's domestic affairs at this time.

He had no concern in the design that was now forming against
Caesar, although, in general, he was Brutus's most principal
confidant, and one who was as aggrieved at the present, and as
desirous of the former state of public affairs, as any other
whatsoever.  But they feared his temper, as wanting courage, and
his old age, in which the most daring dispositions are apt to
be timorous.

As soon, therefore, as the act was committed by Brutus and
Cassius, and the friends of Caesar were got together, so that
there was fear the city would again be involved in a civil war,
Antony, being consul, convened the senate, and made a short
address recommending concord.  And Cicero, following with
various remarks such as the occasion called for, persuaded the
senate to imitate the Athenians, and decree an amnesty for what
had been done in Caesar's case, and to bestow provinces on
Brutus and Cassius.  But neither of these things took effect.  For
as soon as the common people, of themselves inclined to pity,
saw the dead body of Caesar borne through the marketplace, and
Antony showing his clothes filled with blood, and pierced
through in every part with swords, enraged to a degree of
frenzy, they made a search for the murderers, and with
firebrands in their hands ran to their houses to burn them.
They, however, being forewarned, avoided this danger; and
expecting many more and greater to come, they left the city.

Antony on this was at once in exultation, and everyone was in
alarm with the prospect that he would make himself sole ruler,
and Cicero in more alarm than anyone.  For Antony, seeing his
influence reviving in the commonwealth, and knowing how closely
he was connected with Brutus, was ill-pleased to have him in the
city.  Besides, there had been some former jealousy between
them, occasioned by the difference of their manners.  Cicero,
fearing the event, was inclined to go as lieutenant with
Dolabella into Syria.  But Hirtius and Pansa, consuls elect as
successors of Antony, good men and lovers of Cicero, entreated
him not to leave them, undertaking to put down Antony if he
would stay in Rome.  And he, neither distrusting wholly, nor
trusting them, let Dolabella go without him, promising Hirtius
that he would go and spend his summer at Athens, and return
again when he entered upon his office.  So he set out on his
journey; but some delay occurring in his passage, new
intelligence, as often happens, came suddenly from Rome, that
Antony had made an astonishing change, and was doing all things
and managing all public affairs at the will of the senate, and
that there wanted nothing but his presence to bring things to a
happy settlement.  And therefore, blaming himself for his
cowardice, he returned again to Rome, and was not deceived in
his hopes at the beginning.  For such multitudes flocked out to
meet him, that the compliments and civilities which were paid
him at the gates, and at his entrance into the city, took up
almost one whole day's time.

On the morrow, Antony convened the senate, and summoned Cicero
thither.  He came not, but kept is bed, pretending to be ill
with his journey; but the true reason seemed the fear of some
design against him, upon a suspicion and intimation given him on
his way to Rome.  Antony, however, showed great offense at the
affront, and sent soldiers, commanding them to bring him or burn
his house; but many interceding and supplicating for him, he was
contented to accept sureties.  Ever after, when they met, they
passed one another with silence, and continued on their guard,
till Caesar, the younger, coming from Apollonia, entered on the
first Caesar's inheritance, and was engaged in a dispute with
Antony about two thousand five hundred myriads of money, which
Antony detained from the estate.

Upon this, Philippus, who married the mother, and Marcellus, who
married the sister of young Caesar, came with the young man to
Cicero, and agreed with him that Cicero should give them the aid
of his eloquence and political influence with the senate and
people, and Caesar give Cicero the defense of his riches and
arms.  For the young man had already a great party of the
soldiers of Caesar about him.  And Cicero's readiness to join
him was founded, it is said, on some yet stronger motives; for
it seems, while Pompey and Caesar were yet alive, Cicero, in his
sleep, had fancied himself engaged in calling some of the sons
of the senators into the capitol, Jupiter being about, according
to the dream, to declare one of them the chief ruler of Rome.
The citizens, running up with curiosity, stood about the temple,
and the youths, sitting in their purple-bordered robes, kept
silence.  On a sudden the doors opened, and the youths, arising
one by one in order, passed round the god, who reviewed them all,
and, to their sorrow, dismissed them; but when this one was
passing by, the god stretched forth his right hand and said, "O
ye Romans, this young man, when he shall be lord of Rome, shall
put an end to all your civil wars."  It is said that Cicero
formed from his dream a distinct image of the youth, and
retained it afterwards perfectly, but did not know who it was.
The next day, going down into the Campus Martius, he met the
boys resuming from their gymnastic exercises, and the first was
he, just as he had appeared to him in his dream.  Being
astonished at it, he asked him who were his parents.  And it
proved to be this young Caesar, whose father was a man of no
great eminence, Octavius, and his mother, Attia, Caesar's
sister's daughter; for which reason, Caesar, who had no
children, made him by will the heir of his house and property.
From that time, it is said that Cicero studiously noticed the
youth whenever he met him, and he as kindly received the
civility; and by fortune he happened to be born when Cicero was
consul.

These were the reasons spoken of; but it was principally
Cicero's hatred of Antony, and a temper unable to resist honor,
which fastened him to Caesar, with the purpose of getting the
support of Caesar's power for his own public designs.  For the
young man went so far in his court to him, that he called him
Father; at which Brutus was so highly displeased, that, in his
epistles to Atticus he reflected on Cicero saying, it was
manifest, by his courting Caesar for fear of Antony, he did not
intend liberty to his country, but an indulgent master to
himself.  Notwithstanding, Brutus took Cicero's son, then
studying philosophy at Athens, gave him a command, and employed
him in various ways, with a good result.  Cicero's own power at
this time was at the greatest height in the city, and he did
whatsoever he pleased; he completely overpowered and drove out
Antony, and sent the two consuls, Hirtius and Pansa, with an
army, to reduce him; and, on the other hand, persuaded the
senate to allow Caesar the lictors and ensigns of a praetor, as
though he were his country's defender.  But after Antony was
defeated in battle, and the two consuls slain, the armies
united, and ranged themselves with Caesar.  And the senate,
fearing the young man, and his extraordinary fortune,
endeavored, by honors and gifts, to call off the soldiers from
him, and to lessen his power; professing there was no further
need of arms, now Antony was put to flight.

This giving Caesar an affright, he privately sends some friends
to entreat and persuade Cicero to procure the consular dignity
for them both together; saying he should manage the affairs as
he pleased, should have the supreme power, and govern the young
man who was only desirous of name and glory.  And Caesar himself
confessed, that in fear of ruin, and in danger of being
deserted, he had seasonably made use of Cicero's ambition,
persuading him to stand with him, and to accept the offer of his
aid and interest for the consulship.

And now, more than at any other time, Cicero let himself be
carried away and deceived, though an old man, by the persuasions
of a boy.  He joined him in soliciting votes, and procured the
good-will of the senate, not without blame at the time on the
part of his friends; and he, too, soon enough after, saw that he
had ruined himself, and betrayed the liberty of his country.
For the young man, once established, and possessed of the office
of consul, bade Cicero farewell; and, reconciling himself to
Antony and Lepidus, joined his power with theirs, and divided
the government, like a piece of property, with them.  Thus
united, they made a schedule of above two hundred persons who
were to be put to death.  But the greatest contention in all
their debates was on the question of Cicero's case.  Antony
would come to no conditions, unless he should be the first man
to be killed.  Lepidus held with Antony, and Caesar opposed them
both.  They met secretly and by themselves, for three days
together, near the town of Bononia.  The spot was not far from
the camp, with a river surrounding it.  Caesar, it is said,
contended earnestly for Cicero the first two days; but on the
third day he yielded, and gave him up.

The terms of their mutual concessions were these; that Caesar
should desert Cicero, Lepidus his brother Paulus, and Antony,
Lucius Caesar, his uncle by his mother's side.  Thus they let
their anger and fury take from them the sense of humanity, and
demonstrated that no beast is more savage than man, when
possessed with power answerable to his rage.

Whilst these things were contriving, Cicero was with his brother
at his country-house near Tusculum; whence, hearing of the
proscriptions, they determined to pass to Astura, a villa of
Cicero's near the sea, and to take shipping from thence for
Macedonia to Brutus, of whose strength in that province news had
already been heard.  They traveled together in their separate
litters, overwhelmed with sorrow; and often stopping on the way
till their litters came together, condoled with one another.
But Quintus was the more disheartened, when he reflected on his
want of means for his journey; for, as he said, he had brought
nothing with him from home.  And even Cicero himself had but a
slender provision.  It was judged, therefore, most expedient
that Cicero should make what haste he could to fly, and Quintus
return home to provide necessaries, and thus resolved, they
mutually embraced, and parted with many tears.

Quintus, within a few days after, betrayed by his servants to
those who came to search for him, was slain, together with his
young son.  But Cicero was carried to Astura, where, finding a
vessel, he immediately went on board her, and sailed as far as
Circaeum with a prosperous gale; but when the pilots resolved
immediately to set sail from thence, whether fearing the sea, or
not wholly distrusting the faith of Caesar, he went on shore,
and passed by land a hundred furlongs, as if he was going for
Rome.  But losing resolution and changing his mind, he again
returned to the sea, and there spent the night in fearful and
perplexed thoughts.  Sometimes he resolved to go into Caesar's
house privately, and there kill himself upon the altar of his
household gods, to bring divine vengeance upon him; but the fear
of torture put him off this course.  And after passing through a
variety of confused and uncertain counsels, at last he let his
servants carry him by sea to Capitae, where he had a house, an
agreeable place to retire to in the heat of summer, when the
Etesian winds are so pleasant.

There was at that place a chapel of Apollo, not far from the
sea-side, from which a flight of crows rose with a great noise,
and made towards Cicero's vessel as it rowed to land, and
lighting on both sides of the yard, some croaked, others pecked
the ends of the ropes.  This was looked upon by all as an ill
omen; and, therefore, Cicero went again ashore, and entering his
house, lay down upon his bed to compose himself to rest.  Many
of the crows settled about the window, making a dismal cawing;
but one of them alighted upon the bed where Cicero lay covered
up, and with its bill by little and little pecked off the
clothes from his face.  His servants, seeing this, blamed
themselves that they should stay to be spectators of their
master's murder, and do nothing in his defense, whilst the brute
creatures came to assist and take care of him in his undeserved
affliction; and, therefore, partly by entreaty, partly by force,
they took him up, and carried him in his litter towards the
sea-side.

But in the meantime the assassins were come with a band of
soldiers, Herennius, a centurion, and Popillius, a tribune, whom
Cicero had formerly defended when prosecuted for the murder of
his father.  Finding the doors shut, they broke them open, and
Cicero not appearing and those within saying they knew not
where he was, it is stated that a youth, who had been educated
by Cicero in the liberal arts and sciences, an emancipated slave
of his brother Quintus, Philologus by name, informed the tribune
that the litter was on its way to the sea through the close and
shady walks.  The tribune, taking a few with him, ran to the
place where he was to come out.  And Cicero, perceiving
Herennius running in the walks, commanded his servants to set
down the litter; and stroking his chin, as he used to do, with
his left hand, he looked steadfastly upon his murderers, his
person covered with dust, his beard and hair untrimmed, and his
face worn with his troubles.  So that the greatest part of those
that stood by covered their faces whilst Herennius slew him.
And thus was he murdered, stretching forth his neck out of the
litter, being now in his sixty-fourth year.  Herennius cut off
his head, and, by Antony's command, his hands also, by which his
Philippics were written; for so Cicero styled those orations he
wrote against Antony, and so they are called to this day.

When these members of Cicero were brought to Rome, Antony was
holding an assembly for the choice of public officers; and when
he heard it, and saw them, he cried out, "Now let there be an
end of our proscriptions."  He commanded his head and hands to
be fastened up over the Rostra, where the orators spoke; a sight
which the Roman people shuddered to behold, and they believed
they saw there not the face of Cicero, but the image of Antony's
own soul.  And yet amidst these actions he did justice in one
thing, by delivering up Philologus to Pomponia, the wife of
Quintus; who, having got his body into her power, besides other
grievous punishments, made him cut off his own flesh by pieces,
and roast and eat it; for so some writers have related.  But
Tiro, Cicero's emancipated slave, has not so much as mentioned
the treachery of Philologus.

Some long time after, Caesar, I have been told, visiting one of
his daughter's sons, found him with a book of Cicero's in his
hand.  The boy for fear endeavored to hide it under his gown;
which Caesar perceiving, took it from him, and turning over a
great part of the book standing, gave it him again, and said,
"My child, this was a learned man, and a lover of his country."
And immediately after he had vanquished Antony, being then
consul, he made Cicero's son his colleague in the office; and
under that consulship, the senate took down all the statues of
Antony, and abolished all the other honors that had been given
him, and decreed that none of that family should thereafter bear
the name of Marcus; and thus the final acts of the punishment of
Antony were, by the divine powers, devolved upon the family of
Cicero.


COMPARISON OF DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO

These are the most memorable circumstances recorded in history
of Demosthenes and Cicero which have come to our knowledge.  But
omitting an exact comparison of their respective faculties in
speaking, yet thus much seems fit to be said; that Demosthenes,
to make himself a master in rhetoric, applied all the faculties
he had, natural or acquired, wholly that way; that he far
surpassed in force and strength of eloquence all his
contemporaries in political and judicial speaking, in grandeur
and majesty all the panegyrical orators, and in accuracy and
science all the logicians and rhetoricians of his day; that
Cicero was highly educated, and by his diligent study became a
most accomplished general scholar in all these branches, having
left behind him numerous philosophical treatises of his own on
Academic principles; as, indeed, even in his written speeches,
both political and judicial, we see him continually trying to
show his learning by the way.  And one may discover the
different temper of each of them in their speeches.  For
Demosthenes's oratory was without all embellishment and jesting,
wholly composed for real effect and seriousness; not smelling of
the lamp, as Pytheas scoffingly said, but of the temperance,
thoughtfulness, austerity, and grave earnestness of his temper.
Whereas Cicero's love of mockery often ran him into scurrility;
and in his love of laughing away serious arguments in judicial
cases by jests and facetious remarks, with a view to the
advantage of his clients, he paid too little regard to what was
decent: saying, for example, in his defense of Caelius, that he
had done no absurd thing in such plenty and affluence to indulge
himself in pleasures, it being a kind of madness not to enjoy
the things we possess, especially since the most eminent
philosophers have asserted pleasure to be the chiefest good.  So
also we are told, that when Cicero, being consul, undertook the
defense of Murena against Cato's prosecution, by way of
bantering Cato, he made a long series of jokes upon the absurd
paradoxes, as they are called, of the Stoic sect; so that a loud
laughter passing from the crowd to the judges, Cato, with a
quiet smile, said to those that sat next him, "My friends, what
an amusing consul we have."

And, indeed, Cicero was by natural temper very much disposed to
mirth and pleasantry, and always appeared with a smiling and
serene countenance.  But Demosthenes had constant care and
thoughtfulness in his look, and a serious anxiety, which he
seldom, if ever, laid aside; and, therefore, was accounted by
his enemies, as he himself confessed, morose and ill-mannered.

Also, it is very evident, out of their several writings, that
Demosthenes never touched upon his own praises but decently and
without offense when there was need of it, and for some
weightier end; but, upon other occasions modestly and sparingly.
But Cicero's immeasurable boasting of himself in his orations
argues him guilty of an uncontrollable appetite for distinction,
his cry being evermore that arms should give place to the gown,
and the soldier's laurel to the tongue. And at last we find him
extolling not only his deeds and actions, but his orations also,
as well those that were only spoken, as those that were
published; as if he were engaged in a boyish trial of skill, who
should speak best, with the rhetoricians, Isocrates and
Anaximenes, not as one who could claim the task to guide and
instruct the Roman nation, the

Soldier full-armed, terrific to the foe.

It is necessary, indeed, for a political leader to be an able
speaker; but it is an ignoble thing for any man to admire and
relish the glory of his own eloquence.  And, in this matter,
Demosthenes had a more than ordinary gravity and magnificence of
mind, accounting his talent in speaking nothing more than a mere
accomplishment and matter of practice, the success of which must
depend greatly on the good-will and candor of his hearers, and
regarding those who pride themselves on such accounts to be men
of a low and petty disposition.

The power of persuading and governing the people did, indeed,
equally belong to both, so that those who had armies and camps
at command stood in need of their assistance; as Chares,
Diopithes, and Leosthenes of Demosthenes's, Pompey and young
Caesar of Cicero's, as the latter himself admits in his Memoirs
addressed to Agrippa and Maecenas.  But what are thought and
commonly said most to demonstrate and try the tempers of men,
namely, authority and place, by moving every passion, and
discovering every frailty, these are things which Demosthenes
never received; nor was he ever in a position to give such proof
of himself, having never obtained any eminent office, nor led
any of those armies into the field against Philip which he
raised by his eloquence.  Cicero, on the other hand, was sent
quaestor into Sicily, and proconsul into Cilicia and Cappadocia,
at a time when avarice was at the height, and the commanders and
governors who were employed abroad, as though they thought it a
mean thing to steal, set themselves to seize by open force; so
that it seemed no heinous matter to take bribes, but he that did
it most moderately was in good esteem.  And yet he, at this
time, gave the most abundant proofs alike of his contempt of
riches and of his humanity and good-nature.  And at Rome, when
he was created consul in name, but indeed received sovereign and
dictatorial authority against Catiline and his conspirators, he
attested the truth of Plato's prediction, that then the miseries
of states would be at an end, when by a happy fortune supreme
power, wisdom, and justice should be united in one.

It is said, to the reproach of Demosthenes, that his eloquence
was mercenary; that he privately made orations for Phormion and
Apollodorus, though adversaries in the same cause; that he was
charged with moneys received from the king of Persia, and
condemned for bribes from Harpalus.  And should we grant that
all those (and they are not few) who have made these statements
against him have spoken what is untrue, yet that Demosthenes was
not the character to look without desire on the presents offered
him out of respect and gratitude by royal persons, and that one
who lent money on maritime usury was likely to be thus indifferent,
is what we cannot assert.  But that Cicero refused, from the
Sicilians when he was quaestor, from the king of Cappadocia when
he was proconsul, and from his friends at Rome when he was in exile,
many presents, though urged to receive them, has been said already.

Moreover, Demosthenes's banishment was infamous, upon conviction
for bribery; Cicero's very honorable, for ridding his country of
a set of villains.  Therefore, when Demosthenes fled his
country, no man regarded it; for Cicero's sake the senate
changed their habit, and put on mourning, and would not be
persuaded to make any act before Cicero's return was decreed.
Cicero, however, passed his exile idly in Macedonia.  But the
very exile of Demosthenes made up a great part of the services
he did for his country; for he went through the cities of
Greece, and everywhere, as we have said, joined in the conflict
on behalf of the Grecians, driving out the Macedonian
ambassadors, and approving himself a much better citizen than
Themistocles and Alcibiades did in the like fortune.  And, after
his return, he again devoted himself to the same public service,
and continued firm to his opposition to Antipater and the
Macedonians.  Whereas Laelius reproached Cicero in the senate
for sitting silent when Caesar, a beardless youth, asked leave
to come forward, contrary to the law, as a candidate for the
consulship; and Brutus, in his epistles, charges him with
nursing and rearing a greater and more heavy tyranny than that
they had removed.

Finally, Cicero's death excites our pity; for an old man to be
miserably carried up and down by his servants, flying and hiding
himself from that death which was, in the course of nature, so
near at hand; and yet at last to be murdered.  Demosthenes,
though he seemed at first a little to supplicate, yet, by his
preparing and keeping the poison by him, demands our admiration;
and still more admirable was his using it.  When the temple of
the god no longer afforded him a sanctuary, he took refuge, as
it were, at a mightier altar, freeing himself from arms and
soldiers, and laughing to scorn the cruelty of Antipater.


DEMETRIUS

Ingenious men have long observed a resemblance between the arts
and the bodily senses.  And they were first led to do so, I
think, by noticing the way in which, both in the arts and with
our senses, we examine opposites.  Judgment once obtained, the
use to which we put it differs in the two cases.  Our senses are
not meant to pick out black rather than white, to prefer sweet
to bitter, or soft and yielding to hard and resisting objects;
all they have to do is to receive impressions as they occur, and
report to the understanding the impressions as received.  The
arts, on the other hand, which reason institutes expressly to
choose and obtain some suitable, and to refuse and get rid of
some unsuitable object, have their proper concern in the
consideration of the former; though, in a casual and contingent
way, they must also, for the very rejection of them, pay
attention to the latter.  Medicine, to produce health, has to
examine disease, and music, to create harmony, must investigate
discord; and the supreme arts, of temperance, of justice, and of
wisdom, as they are acts of judgment and selection, exercised
not on good and just and expedient only, but also on wicked,
unjust, and inexpedient objects, do not give their commendations
to the mere innocence whose boast is its inexperience of evil,
and whose truer name is, by their award, suppleness and
ignorance of what all men who live aright should know.  The
ancient Spartans, at their festivals, used to force their Helots
to swallow large quantities of raw wine, and then to expose them
at the public tables, to let the young men see what it is to be
drunk.  And, though I do not think it consistent with humanity
or with civil justice to correct one man's morals by corrupting
those of another, yet we may, I think, avail ourselves of the
cases of those who have fallen into indiscretions, and have, in
high stations, made themselves conspicuous for misconduct; and I
shall not do ill to introduce a pair or two of such examples
among these biographies, not, assuredly, to amuse and divert my
readers, or give variety to my theme, but, as Ismenias, the
Theban, used to show his scholars good and bad performers on the
flute, and to tell them, "You should play like this man," and
"You should not play like that," and as Antigenidas used to say,
Young people would take greater pleasure in hearing good
playing, if first they were set to hear bad, so, and in the same
manner, it seems to me likely enough that we shall be all the
more zealous and more emulous to read, observe, and imitate the
better lives, if we are not left in ignorance of the blameworthy
and the bad.

For this reason, the following book contains the lives of
Demetrius Poliorcetes, and Antonius the Triumvir; two persons
who have abundantly justified the words of Plato, that great
natures produce great vices as well as virtues.  Both alike were
amorous and intemperate, warlike and munificent, sumptuous in
their way of living, and overbearing in their manners.  And the
likeness of their fortunes carried out the resemblance in their
characters.  Not only were their lives each a series of great
successes and great disasters, mighty acquisitions and
tremendous losses of power, sudden overthrows, followed by
unexpected recoveries, but they died, also, Demetrius in actual
captivity to his enemies, and Antony on the verge of it.

Antigonus had by his wife, Stratonice, the daughter of
Corrhaeus, two sons; the one of whom, after the name of his
uncle, he called Demetrius, the other had that of his
grandfather Philip, and died young.  This is the most general
account, although some have related, that Demetrius was not the
son of Antigonus, but of his brother; and that his own father
dying young, and his mother being afterwards married to
Antigonus, he was accounted to be his son.

Demetrius had not the height of his father Antigonus, though he
was a tall man.  But his countenance was one of such singular
beauty and expression, that no painter or sculptor ever produced
a good likeness of him.  It combined grace and strength, dignity
with boyish bloom, and, in the midst of youthful heat and
passion, what was hardest of all to represent was a certain
heroic look and air of kingly greatness.  Nor did his character
belie his looks, as no one was better able to render himself
both loved and feared.  For as he was the most easy and
agreeable of companions, and the most luxurious and delicate of
princes in his drinking and banqueting and daily pleasures, so
in action there was never anyone that showed a more vehement
persistence, or a more passionate energy.  Bacchus, skilled in
the conduct of war, and after war in giving peace its pleasures
and joys, seems to have been his pattern among the gods.

He was wonderfully fond of his father Antigonus; and the
tenderness he had for his mother led him, for her sake, to
redouble attentions, which it was evident were not so much owing
to fear or duty as to the more powerful motives of inclination.
It is reported, that, returning one day from hunting, he went
immediately into the apartment of Antigonus, who was conversing
with some ambassadors, and after stepping up and kissing his
father, he sat down by him, just as he was, still holding in his
hand the javelins which he had brought with him.  Whereupon
Antigonus, who had just dismissed the ambassadors with their
answer, called out in a loud voice to them, as they were going,
"Mention, also, that this is the way in which we two live
together;" as if to imply to them that it was no slender mark of
the power and security of his government that there was so
perfect a good understanding between himself and his son.  Such
an unsociable, solitary thing is power, and so much of jealousy
and distrust in it, that the first and greatest of the
successors of Alexander could make it a thing to glory in that
he was not so afraid of his son as to forbid his standing beside
him with a weapon in his hand.  And, in fact, among all the
successors of Alexander, that of Antigonus was the only house
which, for many descents, was exempted from crime of this kind;
or, to state it exactly, Philip was the only one of this family
who was guilty of a son's death.  All the other families, we may
fairly say, afforded frequent examples of fathers who brought
their children, husbands their wives, children their mothers, to
untimely ends; and that brothers should put brothers to death
was assumed, like the postulates of mathematicians, as the
common and recognized royal first principle of safety.

Let us here record an example in the early life of Demetrius,
showing his natural humane and kindly disposition.  It was an
adventure which passed betwixt him and Mithridates, the son of
Ariobarzanes, who was about the same age with Demetrius, and
lived with him, in attendance on Antigonus; and although nothing
was said or could be said to his reproach, he fell under
suspicion, in consequence of a dream which Antigonus had.
Antigonus thought himself in a fair and spacious field, where he
sowed golden seed, and saw presently a golden crop come up; of
which, however, looking presently again, he saw nothing remain
but the stubble, without the ears.  And as he stood by in anger
and vexation, he heard some voices saying, Mithridates had cut
the golden harvest and carried it off into Pontus.  Antigonus,
much discomposed with his dream, first bound his son by an oath
not to speak, and then related it to him, adding, that he had
resolved, in consequence, to lose no time in ridding himself of
Mithridates, and making away with him.  Demetrius was extremely
distressed; and when the young man came, as usual, to pass his
time with him, to keep his oath he forbore from saying a word,
but, drawing him aside little by little from the company, as
soon as they were by themselves, without opening his lips, with
the point of his javelin he traced before him the words, "Fly,
Mithridates."  Mithridates took the hint, and fled by night into
Cappadocia, where Antigonus's dream about him was quickly
brought to its due fulfillment; for he got possession of a large
and fertile territory; and from him descended the line of the
kings of Pontus, which, in the eighth generation, was reduced by
the Romans.  This may serve for a specimen of the early goodness
and love of justice that was part of Demetrius's natural
character.

But as in the elements of the world, Empedocles tells us, out of
liking and dislike, there spring up contention and warfare, and
all the more, the closer the contact, or the nearer the approach
of the objects, even so the perpetual hostilities among the
successors of Alexander were aggravated and inflamed, in
particular cases, by juxtaposition of interests and of
territories; as, for example, in the case of Antigonus and
Ptolemy.  News came to Antigonus that Ptolemy had crossed from
Cyprus and invaded Syria, and was ravaging the country and
reducing the cities.  Remaining, therefore, himself in Phrygia,
he sent Demetrius, now twenty-two years old, to make his first
essay as sole commander in an important charge.  He, whose
youthful heat outran his experience, advancing against an
adversary trained in Alexander's school, and practiced in many
encounters, incurred a great defeat near the town of Gaza, in
which eight thousand of his men were taken, and five thousand
killed.  His own tent, also, his money, and all his private
effects and furniture, were captured.  These, however, Ptolemy
sent back, together with his friends, accompanying them with the
humane and courteous message, that they were not fighting for
anything else but honor and dominion.  Demetrius accepted the
gift, praying only to the gods not to leave him long in
Ptolemy's debt, but to let him have an early chance of doing the
like to him.  He took his disaster, also, with the temper not of
a boy defeated in his attempt, but of an old and long-tried
general, familiar with reverse of fortune; he busied himself in
collecting his men, replenishing his magazines, watching the
allegiance of the cities, and drilling his new recruits.

Antigonus received the news of the battle with the remark, that
Ptolemy had beaten boys, and would now have to fight with men.
But not to humble the spirit of his son, he acceded to his
request, and left him to command on the next occasion.

Not long after, Cilles, Ptolemy's lieutenant, with a powerful
army, took the field, and, looking upon Demetrius as already
defeated by the previous battle, he had in his imagination
driven him out of Syria before he saw him.  But he quickly found
himself deceived; for Demetrius came so unexpectedly upon him
that he surprised both the general and his army, making him and
seven thousand of the soldiers prisoners of war, and possessing
himself of a large amount of treasure.  But his joy in the
victory was not so much for the prizes he should keep, as for
those he could restore; and his thankfulness was less for the
wealth and glory than for the means it gave him of requiting his
enemy's former generosity.  He did not, however, take it into
his own hands, but wrote to his father.  And on receiving leave
to do as he liked, he sent back to Ptolemy Cilles and his
friends, loaded with presents.  This defeat drove Ptolemy out of
Syria, and brought Antigonus from Celaenae, to enjoy the
victory, and the sight of the son who had gained it.

Soon after, Demetrius was sent to bring the Nabathaean Arabs
into obedience.  And here he got into a district without water,
and incurred considerable danger, but by his resolute and
composed demeanor he overawed the barbarians, and returned after
receiving from them a large amount of booty, and seven hundred
camels.  Not long after, Seleucus, whom Antigonus had formerly
chased out of Babylon, but who had afterwards recovered his
dominion by his own efforts and maintained himself in it, went
with large forces on an expedition to reduce the tribes on the
confines of India and the provinces near Mount Caucasus.  And
Demetrius, conjecturing that he had left Mesopotamia but
slenderly guarded in his absence, suddenly passed the Euphrates
with his army, and made his way into Babylonia unexpectedly;
where he succeeded in capturing one of the two citadels, out of
which he expelled the garrison of Seleucus, and placed in it
seven thousand men of his own.  And after allowing his soldiers
to enrich themselves with all the spoil they could carry with
them out of the country, he retired to the sea, leaving Seleucus
more securely master of his dominions than before, as he seemed
by this conduct to abandon every claim to a country which he
treated like an enemy's.  However, by a rapid advance, he
rescued Halicarnassus from Ptolemy, who was besieging it.  The
glory which this act obtained them inspired both the father and
son with a wonderful desire for freeing Greece, which Cassander
and Ptolemy had everywhere reduced to slavery.  No nobler or
juster war was undertaken by any of the kings; the wealth they
had gained while humbling, with Greek assistance, the barbarians
being thus employed, for honor's sake and good repute, in
helping the Greeks.  When the resolution was taken to begin
their attempt with Athens, one of his friends told Antigonus, if
they captured Athens, they must keep it safe in their own hands,
as by this gangway they might step out from their ships into
Greece when they pleased.  But Antigonus would not hear of it;
he did not want a better or a steadier gangway than people's
good-will; and from Athens, the beacon of the world, the news of
their conduct would soon be handed on to all the world's
inhabitants.  So Demetrius, with a sum of five thousand talents,
and a fleet of two hundred and fifty ships, set sail for Athens,
where Demetrius the Phalerian was governing the city for
Cassander, with a garrison lodged in the port of Munychia.  By
good fortune and skillful management he appeared before Piraeus,
on the twenty-sixth of Thargelion, before anything had been
heard of him.  Indeed, when his ships were seen, they were taken
for Ptolemy's, and preparations were commenced for receiving
them; till at last, the generals discovering their mistake,
hurried down, and all was alarm and confusion, and attempts to
push forward preparations to oppose the landing of this hostile
force.  For Demetrius, having found the entrances of the port
undefended, stood in directly, and was by this time safely
inside, before the eyes of everybody, and made signals from his
ship, requesting a peaceable hearing.  And on leave being given,
he caused a herald with a loud voice to make proclamation that
he was come thither by the command of his father, with no other
design than what he prayed the gods to prosper with success, to
give the Athenians their liberty, to expel the garrison, and to
restore the ancient laws and constitution of the country.

The people, hearing this, at once threw down their shields, and,
clapping their hands, with loud acclamations entreated Demetrius
to land, calling him their deliverer and benefactor.  And the
Phalerian and his party, who saw that there was nothing for it
but to receive the conqueror, whether he should perform his
promises or not, sent, however, messengers to beg for his
protection; to whom Demetrius gave a kind reception, and sent
back with them Aristodemus of Miletus, one of his father's
friends.  The Phalerian, under the change of government, was
more afraid of his fellow-citizens than of the enemy; but
Demetrius took precautions for him, and, out of respect for his
reputation and character, sent him with a safe conduct to
Thebes, whither he desired to go.  For himself, he declared he
would not, in spite of all his curiosity, put his foot in the
city, till he had completed its deliverance by driving out the
garrison.  So, blockading Munychia with a palisade and trench,
he sailed off to attack Megara, where also there was one of
Cassander's garrisons.  But, hearing that Cratesipolis, the wife
of Alexander son of Polysperchon, who was famous for her beauty,
was well disposed to see him, he left his troops near Megara,
and set out with a few light-armed attendants for Patrae, where
she was now staying.  And, quitting these also, he pitched his
tent apart from everybody, that the woman might pay her visit
without being seen.  This some of the enemy perceived, and
suddenly attacked him; and, in his alarm, he was obliged to
disguise himself in a shabby cloak, and run for it, narrowly
escaping the shame of being made a prisoner, in reward for his
foolish passion.  And as it was, his tent and money were taken.
Megara, however, surrendered, and would have been pillaged by
the soldiers, but for the urgent intercession of the Athenians.
The garrison was driven out, and the city restored to
independence.  While he was occupied in this, he remembered that
Stilpo, the philosopher, famous for his choice of a life of
tranquillity, was residing here.  He, therefore, sent for him,
and begged to know whether anything belonging to him had been
taken.  "No," replied Stilpo, "I have not met with anyone to
take away knowledge."  Pretty nearly all the servants in the
city had been stolen away; and so, when Demetrius, renewing his
courtesies to Stilpo, on taking leave of him, said, "I leave
your city, Stilpo, a city of freemen," "certainly," replied
Stilpo, "there is not one serving man left among us all."

Returning from Megara, he sat down before the citadel of
Munychia, which in a few days he took by assault, and caused the
fortifications to be demolished; and thus having accomplished
his design, upon the request and invitation of the Athenians he
made his entrance into the upper city, where, causing the people
to be summoned, he publicly announced to them that their ancient
constitution was restored, and that they should receive from his
father, Antigonus, a present of one hundred and fifty thousand
measures of wheat, and such a supply of timber as would enable
them to build a hundred galleys.  In this manner did the
Athenians recover their popular institutions, after the space of
fifteen years from the time of the war of Lamia and the battle
before Cranon, during which interval of time the government had
been administered nominally as an oligarchy, but really by a
single man, Demetrius the Phalerian being so powerful.  But the
excessive honors which the Athenians bestowed, for these noble
and generous acts, upon Demetrius, created offense and disgust.
The Athenians were the first who gave Antigonus and Demetrius
the title of kings, which hitherto they had made it a point of
piety to decline, as the one remaining royal honor still
reserved for the lineal descendants of Philip and Alexander, in
which none but they could venture to participate.  Another name
which they received from no people but the Athenians was that of
the Tutelar Deities and Deliverers.  And to enhance this
flattery, by a common vote it was decreed to change the style of
the city, and not to have the years named any longer from the
annual archon; a priest of the two Tutelary Divinities, who was
to be yearly chosen, was to have this honor, and all public acts
and instruments were to bear their date by his name.  They
decreed, also, that the figures of Antigonus and Demetrius
should be woven, with those of the gods, into the pattern of the
great robe. They consecrated the spot where Demetrius first
alighted from his chariot, and built an altar there, with the
name of the Altar of the Descent of Demetrius.  They created two
new tribes, calling them after the names of these princes, the
Antigonid and the Demetriad; and to the Council, which consisted
of five hundred persons, fifty being chosen out of every tribe,
they added one hundred more to represent these new tribes.  But
the wildest proposal was one made by Stratocles, the great
inventor of all these ingenious and exquisite compliments,
enacting that the members of any deputation that the city should
send to Demetrius or Antigonus should have the same title as
those sent to Delphi or Olympia for the performance of the
national sacrifices in behalf of the state, at the great Greek
festivals. This Stratocles was, in all respects, an audacious
and abandoned character, and seemed to have made it his object
to copy, by his buffoonery and impertinence, Cleon's old
familiarity with the people.  His mistress, Phylacion, one day
bringing him a dish of brains and neckbones for his dinner,
"Oh," said he, "I am to dine upon the things which we statesmen
play at ball with."  At another time, when the Athenians
received their naval defeat near Amorgos, he hastened home
before the news could reach the city, and, having a chaplet on
his head, came riding through the Ceramicus, announcing that
they had won a victory, and moved a vote for thanksgivings to
the gods, and a distribution of meat among the people in their
tribes.  Presently after came those who brought home the wrecks
from the battle; and when the people exclaimed at what he had
done, he came boldly to face the outcry, and asked what harm
there had been in giving them two days' pleasure.

Such was Stratocles.  And, "adding flame to fire," as
Aristophanes says, there was one who, to outdo Stratocles,
proposed, that it should be decreed, that whensoever Demetrius
should honor their city with his presence, they should treat him
with the same show of hospitable entertainment, with which Ceres
and Bacchus are received; and the citizen who exceeded the rest
in the splendor and costliness of his reception should have a
sum of money granted him from the public purse to make a sacred
offering.  Finally, they changed the name of the month of
Munychion, and called it Demetrion; they gave the name of the
Demetrian to the odd day between the end of the old and the
beginning of the new month; and turned the feast of Bacchus, the
Dionysia, into the Demetria, or feast of Demetrius.  Most of
these changes were marked by the divine displeasure.  The sacred
robe, in which, according to their decree, the figures of
Demetrius and Antigonus had been woven with those of Jupiter and
Minerva, was caught by a violent gust of wind, while the
procession was conveying it through the Ceramicus, and was torn
from the top to the bottom.  A crop of hemlock, a plant which
scarcely grew anywhere, even in the country thereabout, sprang
up in abundance round the altars which they had erected to these
new divinities.  They had to omit the solemn procession at the
feast of Bacchus, as upon the very day of its celebration there
was such a severe and rigorous frost, coming quite out of its
time, that not only the vines and fig-trees were killed, but
almost all the wheat was destroyed in the blade.  Accordingly,
Philippides, an enemy to Stratocles, attacked him in a comedy,
in the following verses: --

He for whom frosts that nipped your vines were sent,
And for whose sins the holy robe was rent,
Who grants to men the gods' own honors, he,
Not the poor stage, is now the people's enemy.

Philippides was a great favorite with king Lysimachus, from whom
the Athenians received, for his sake, a variety of kindnesses.
Lysimachus went so far as to think it a happy omen to meet or
see Philippides at the outset of any enterprise or expedition.
And, in general, he was well thought of for his own character,
as a plain, uninterfering person, with none of the officious,
self-important habits of a court.  Once, when Lysimachus was
solicitous to show him kindness, and asked what he had that he
could make him a present of, "Anything," replied Philippides,
"but your state secrets."  The stage-player, we thought,
deserved a place in our narrative quite as well as the public
speaker.

But that which exceeded all the former follies and flatteries,
was the proposal of Dromoclides of Sphettus; who, when there was
a debate about sending to the Delphic Oracle to inquire the
proper course for the consecration of certain bucklers, moved in
the assembly that they should rather send to receive an oracle
from Demetrius.  I will transcribe the very words of the order,
which was in these terms: "May it be happy and propitious.  The
people of Athens have decreed, that a fit person shall be
chosen among the Athenian citizens, who shall be deputed to be
sent to the Deliverer; and after he hath duly performed the
sacrifices, shall inquire of the Deliverer, in what most
religious and decent manner he will please to direct, at the
earliest possible time, the consecration of the bucklers; and
according to the answer the people shall act."  With this
befooling they completed the perversion of a mind which even
before was not so strong or sound as it should have been.

During his present leisure in Athens, he took to wife Eurydice,
a descendant of the ancient Miltiades, who had been married to
Opheltas, the ruler of Cyrene, and after his death had come back
to Athens.  The Athenians took the marriage as a compliment and
favor to the city.  But Demetrius was very free in these
matters, and was the husband of several wives at once; the
highest place and honor among all being retained by Phila, who
was Antipater's daughter, and had been the wife of Craterus, the
one of all the successors of Alexander who left behind him the
strongest feelings of attachment among the Macedonians.  And for
these reasons Antigonus had obliged him to marry her,
notwithstanding the disparity of their years, Demetrius being
quite a youth, and she much older; and when upon that account he
made some difficulty in complying, Antigonus whispered in his
ear the maxim from Euripides, broadly substituting a new word
for the original, serve, --

Natural or not,
A man must wed where profit will be got.

Any respect, however, which he showed either to Phila or to his
other wives did not go so far as to prevent him from consorting
with any number of mistresses, and bearing, in this respect,
the worst character of all the princes of his time.

A summons now arrived from his father, ordering him to go and
fight with Ptolemy in Cyprus, which he was obliged to obey,
sorry as he was to abandon Greece.  And in quitting this nobler
and more glorious enterprise, he sent to Cleonides, Ptolemy's
general, who was holding garrisons in Sicyon and Corinth,
offering him money to let the cities be independent.  But on his
refusal, he set sail hastily, taking additional forces with him,
and made for Cyprus; where, immediately upon his arrival, he
fell upon Menelaus, the brother of Ptolemy, and gave him a
defeat.  But when Ptolemy himself came in person, with large
forces both on land and sea, for some little time nothing took
place beyond an interchange of menaces and lofty talk.  Ptolemy
bade Demetrius sail off before the whole armament came up, if he
did not wish to be trampled under foot; and Demetrius offered to
let him retire, on condition of his withdrawing his garrisons
from Sicyon and Corinth.  And not they alone, but all the other
potentates and princes of the time, were in anxiety for the
uncertain impending issue of the conflict; as it seemed evident,
that the conqueror's prize would be, not Cyprus or Syria, but
the absolute supremacy.

Ptolemy had brought a hundred and fifty galleys with him, and
gave orders to Menelaus to sally, in the heat of the battle, out
of the harbor of Salamis, and attack with sixty ships the rear
of Demetrius.  Demetrius, however, opposing to these sixty ten
of his galleys, which were a sufficient number to block up the
narrow entrance of the harbor, and drawing out his land forces
along all the headlands running out into the sea, went into
action with a hundred and eighty galleys, and, attacking with
the utmost boldness and impetuosity, utterly routed Ptolemy, who
fled with eight ships, the sole remnant of his fleet, seventy
having been taken with all their men, and the rest destroyed in
the battle; while the whole multitude of attendants, friends,
and women, that had followed in the ships of burden, all the
arms, treasure, and military engines fell, without exception,
into the hands of Demetrius, and were by him collected and
brought into the camp.  Among the prisoners was the celebrated
Lamia, famed at one time for her skill on the flute, and
afterwards renowned as a mistress.  And although now upon the
wane of her youthful beauty, and though Demetrius was much her
junior, she exercised over him so great a charm, that all other
women seemed to be amorous of Demetrius, but Demetrius amorous
only of Lamia.  After this signal victory, Demetrius came before
Salamis; and Menelaus, unable to make any resistance,
surrendered himself and all his fleet, twelve hundred horse, and
twelve thousand foot, together with the place.  But that which
added more than all to the glory and splendor of the success was
the humane and generous conduct of Demetrius to the vanquished.
For, after he had given honorable funerals to the dead, he
bestowed liberty upon the living; and that he might not forget
the Athenians, he sent them, as a present, complete arms for
twelve hundred men.

To carry this happy news, Aristodemus of Miletus, the most
perfect flatterer belonging to the court, was dispatched to
Antigonus; and he, to enhance the welcome message, was resolved,
it would appear, to make his most successful effort.  When he
crossed from Cyprus, he bade the galley which conveyed him come
to anchor off the land; and, having ordered all the ship's crew
to remain aboard, he took the boat, and was set ashore alone.
Thus he proceeded to Antigonus, who, one may well imagine, was
in suspense enough about the issue, and suffered all the
anxieties natural to men engaged in so perilous a struggle.  And
when he heard that Aristodemus was coming alone, it put him into
yet greater trouble; he could scarcely forbear from going out to
meet him himself; he sent messenger on messenger, and friend
after friend, to inquire what news.  But Aristodemus, walking
gravely and with a settled countenance, without making any
answer, still proceeded quietly onward; until Antigonus, quite
alarmed and no longer able to refrain, got up and met him at the
gate, whither he came with a crowd of anxious followers now
collected and running after him.  As soon as he saw Antigonus
within hearing, stretching out his hands, he accosted him with
the loud exclamation, "Hail, king Antigonus! we have defeated
Ptolemy by sea, and have taken Cyprus and sixteen thousand eight
hundred prisoners."  "Welcome, Aristodemus," replied Antigonus,
"but, as you chose to torture us so long for your good news, you
may wait awhile for the reward of it."

Upon this the people around gave Antigonus and Demetrius, for
the first time, the title of kings.  His friends at once set a
diadem on the head of Antigonus; and he sent one presently to
his son, with a letter addressed to him as King Demetrius.  And
when this news was told in Egypt, that they might not seem to be
dejected with the late defeat, Ptolemy's followers also took
occasion to bestow the style of king upon him; and the rest of
the successors of Alexander were quick to follow the example.
Lysimachus began to wear the diadem; and Seleucus, who had
before received the name in all addresses from the barbarians,
now also took it upon him in all business with the Greeks.
Cassander still retained his usual superscription in his
letters, but others, both in writing and speaking, gave him the
royal title.  Nor was this the mere accession of a name, or
introduction of a new fashion.  The men's own sentiments about
themselves were disturbed, and their feelings elevated; a spirit
of pomp and arrogance passed into their habits of life and
conversation, as a tragic actor on the stage modifies, with a
change of dress, his step, his voice, his motions in sitting
down, his manner in addressing another.  The punishments they
inflicted were more violent after they had thus laid aside that
modest style under which they formerly dissembled their power,
and the influence of which had often made them gentler and less
exacting to their subjects.  A single pattering voice effected a
revolution in the world.

Antigonus, extremely elevated with the success of his arms in
Cyprus under the conduct of Demetrius, resolved to push on his
good fortune, and to lead his forces in person against Ptolemy
by land, whilst Demetrius should coast with a great fleet along
the shore, to assist him by sea.  The issue of the contest was
intimated in a dream which Medius, a friend to Antigonus, had at
this time in his sleep.  He thought he saw Antigonus and his
whole army running, as if it had been a race; that, in the first
part of the course, he went off showing great strength and
speed; gradually, however, his pace slackened; and at the end he
saw him come lagging up, tired and almost breathless and quite
spent.  Antigonus himself met with many difficulties by land;
and Demetrius, encountering a great storm at sea, was driven,
with the loss of many or his ships, upon a dangerous coast
without a harbor.  So the expedition returned without effecting
anything.  Antigonus, now nearly eighty years old, was no
longer well able to go through the fatigues of a marching
campaign, though rather on account of his great size and
corpulence than from loss of strength; and for this reason he
left things to his son, whose fortune and experience appeared
sufficient for all undertakings, and whose luxury and expense
and revelry gave him no concern.  For though in peace he vented
himself in his pleasures, and, when there was nothing to do, ran
headlong into any excesses, in war he was as sober and
abstemious as the most temperate character.  The story is told,
that once, after Lamia had gained open supremacy over him, the
old man, when Demetrius coming home from abroad began to kiss
him with unusual warmth, asked him if he took him for Lamia.  At
another time, Demetrius, after spending several days in a
debauch, excused himself for his absence, by saying he had had a
violent flux.  "So I heard," replied Antigonus; "was it of
Thasian wine, or Chian?"  Once he was told his son was ill, and
went to see him.  At the door he met some young beauty.  Going
in, he sat down by the bed and took his pulse.  "The fever,"
said Demetrius, "has just left me."  "O yes," replied the
father, "I met it going out at the door."  Demetrius's great
actions made Antigonus treat him thus easily.  The Scythians in
their drinking-bouts twang their bows, to keep their courage
awake amidst the dreams of indulgence; but he would resign his
whole being, now, to pleasure, and now to action; and though he
never let thoughts of the one intrude upon the pursuit of the
other, yet, when the time came for preparing for war, he showed
as much capacity as any man.

And indeed his ability displayed itself even more in preparing
for, than in conducting a war.  He thought he could never be too
well supplied for every possible occasion, and took a pleasure,
not to be satiated, in great improvements in ship-building and
machines.  He did not waste his natural genius and power of
mechanical research on toys and idle fancies, turning, painting,
and playing on the flute, like some kings, Aeropus, for example,
king of Macedon, who spent his days in making small lamps and
tables; or Attalus Philometor, whose amusement was to cultivate
poisons, henbane and hellebore, and even hemlock, aconite, and
dorycnium, which he used to sow himself in the royal gardens,
and made it his business to gather the fruits and collect the
juices in their season.  The Parthian kings took a pride in
whetting and sharpening with their own hands the points of their
arrows and javelins.  But when Demetrius played the workman, it
was like a king, and there was magnificence in his handicraft.
The articles he produced bore marks upon the face of them not of
ingenuity only, but of a great mind and a lofty purpose.  They
were such as a king might not only design and pay for, but use
his own hands to make; and while friends might be terrified with
their greatness, enemies could be charmed with their beauty; a
phrase which is not so pretty to the ear as it is true to the
fact.  The very people against whom they were to be employed
could not forbear running to gaze with admiration upon his
galleys of five and six ranges of oars, as they passed along
their coasts; and the inhabitants of besieged cities came on
their walls to see the spectacle of his famous City-takers.
Even Lysimachus, of all the kings of his time the greatest enemy
of Demetrius, coming to raise the siege of Soli in Cilicia, sent
first to desire permission to see his galleys and engines, and,
having had his curiosity gratified by a view of them, expressed
his admiration and quitted the place.  The Rhodians, also, whom
he long besieged, begged him, when they concluded a peace, to
let them have some of his engines, which they might preserve as
a memorial at once of his power and of their own brave
resistance.

The quarrel between him and the Rhodians was on account of their
being allies to Ptolemy, and in the siege the greatest of all
the engines was planted against their walls.  The base of it was
exactly square, each side containing twenty-four cubits; it rose
to a height of thirty-three cubits, growing narrower from the
base to the top.  Within were several apartments or chambers,
which were to be filled with armed men, and in every story the
front towards the enemy had windows for discharging missiles of
all sorts, the whole being filled with soldiers for every
description of fighting.  And what was most wonderful was that,
notwithstanding its size, when it was moved it never tottered or
inclined to one side, but went forward on its base in perfect
equilibrium, with a loud noise and great impetus, astounding the
minds, and yet at the same time charming the eyes of all the
beholders.

Whilst Demetrius was at this same siege, there were brought to
him two iron cuirasses from Cyprus, weighing each of them no
more than forty pounds, and Zoilus, who had forged them, to show
the excellence of their temper, desired that one of them might
be tried with a catapult missile, shot out of one of the engines
at no greater distance than six and twenty paces; and, upon the
experiment, it was found, that though the dart exactly hit the
cuirass, yet it made no greater impression than such a slight
scratch as might be made with the point of a style or graver.
Demetrius took this for his own wearing, and gave the other to
Alcimus the Epirot, the best soldier and strongest man of all
his captains, the only one who used to wear armor to the weight
of two talents, one talent being the weight which others thought
sufficient.  He fell during this siege in a battle near the
theater.

The Rhodians made a brave defense, insomuch that Demetrius saw
he was making but little progress, and only persisted out of
obstinacy and passion; and the rather because the Rhodians,
having captured a ship in which some clothes and furniture, with
letters from herself; were coming to him from Phila his wife,
had sent on everything to Ptolemy, and had not copied the
honorable example of the Athenians, who, having surprised an
express sent from king Philip, their enemy, opened all the
letters he was charged with, excepting only those directed to
queen Olympias, which they returned with the seal unbroken.
Yet, although greatly provoked, Demetrius, into whose power it
shortly after came to repay the affront, would not suffer
himself to retaliate.  Protogenes the Caunian had been making
them a painting of the story of Ialysus, which was all but
completed, when it was taken by Demetrius in one of the suburbs.
The Rhodians sent a herald begging him to be pleased to spare
the work and not let it be destroyed; Demetrius's answer to
which was that he would rather burn the pictures of his father
than a piece of art which had cost so much labor.  It is said to
have taken Protogenes seven years to paint, and they tell us
that Apelles, when he first saw it, was struck dumb with wonder,
and called it, on recovering his speech, "a great labor and a
wonderful success," adding, however, that it had not the graces
which carried his own paintings as it were up to the heavens.
This picture, which came with the rest in the general mass to
Rome, there perished by fire.

While the Rhodians were thus defending their city to the
uttermost, Demetrius, who was not sorry for an excuse to retire,
found one in the arrival of ambassadors from Athens, by whose
mediation terms were made that the Rhodians should bind
themselves to aid Antigonus and Demetrius against all enemies,
Ptolemy excepted.

The Athenians entreated his help against Cassander, who was
besieging the city.  So he went thither with a fleet of three
hundred and thirty ships, and many soldiers; and not only drove
Cassander out of Attica, but pursued him as far as Thermopylae,
routed him, and became master of Heraclea, which came over to
him voluntarily, and of a body of six thousand Macedonians,
which also joined him.  Returning hence, he gave their liberty
to all the Greeks on this side Thermopylae, and made alliance
with the Boeotians, took Cenchreae, and reducing the fortresses
of Phyle and Panactum, in which were garrisons of Cassander,
restored them to the Athenians.  They, in requital, though they
had before been so profuse in bestowing honors upon him, that
one would have thought they had exhausted all the capacities of
invention, showed they had still new refinements of adulation to
devise for him.  They gave him, as his lodging, the back temple
in the Parthenon, and here he lived, under the immediate roof,
as they meant it to imply, of his hostess, Minerva; no reputable
or well-conducted guest to be quartered upon a maiden goddess.
When his brother Philip was once put into a house where three
young women were living, Antigonus saying nothing to him, sent
for his quartermaster, and told him, in the young man's
presence, to find some less crowded lodgings for him.

Demetrius, however, who should, to say the least, have paid the
goddess the respect due to an elder sister, for that was the
purport of the city's compliment, filled the temple with such
pollutions that the place seemed least profaned when his license
confined itself to common women like Chrysis, Lamia, Demo, and
Anticyra.

The fair name of the city forbids any further plain particulars;
let us only record the severe virtue of the young Damocles,
surnamed, and by that surname pointed out to Demetrius, the
beautiful; who, to escape importunities, avoided every place of
resort, and when at last followed into a private bathing room by
Demetrius, seeing none at hand to help or deliver, seized the
lid from the cauldron, and, plunging into the boiling water,
sought a death untimely and unmerited, but worthy of the country
and of the beauty that occasioned it.  Not so Cleaenetus, the
son of Cleomedon, who, to obtain from Demetrius a letter of
intercession to the people in behalf of his father, lately
condemned in a fine of fifty talents, disgraced himself, and got
the city into trouble.  In deference to the letter, they
remitted the fine, yet they made an edict prohibiting any
citizen for the future to bring letters from Demetrius.  But
being informed that Demetrius resented this as a great
indignity, they not only rescinded in alarm the former order,
but put some of the proposers and advisers of it to death and
banished others, and furthermore enacted and decreed, that
whatsoever king Demetrius should in time to come ordain, should
be accounted right towards the gods and just towards men; and
when one of the better class of citizens said Stratocles must be
mad to use such words, Demochares of Leuconoe observed, he
would be a fool not to be mad.  For Stratocles was well rewarded
for his flatteries; and the saying was remembered against
Demochares, who was soon after sent into banishment.  So fared
the Athenians, after being relieved of the foreign garrison, and
recovering what was called their liberty.

After this Demetrius marched with his forces into Peloponnesus,
where he met with none to oppose him, his enemies flying before
him, and allowing the cities to join him.  He received into
friendship all Acte, as it is called, and all Arcadia except
Mantinea.  He bought the liberty of Argos, Corinth, and Sicyon,
by paying a hundred talents to their garrisons to evacuate them.
At Argos, during the feast of Juno, which happened at the time,
he presided at the games, and, joining in the festivities with
the multitude of the Greeks assembled there, he celebrated his
marriage with Deidamia, daughter of Aeacides, king of the
Molossians, and sister of Pyrrhus.  At Sicyon he told the people
they had put the city just outside of the city, and, persuading
them to remove to where they now live, gave their town not only
a new site but a new name, Demetrias, after himself.  A general
assembly met on the Isthmus, where he was proclaimed, by a great
concourse of people, the Commander of Greece, like Philip and
Alexander of old; whose superior he, in the present height of
his prosperity and power, was willing enough to consider
himself; and, certainly, in one respect he outdid Alexander, who
never refused their title to other kings, or took on himself the
style of king of kings, though many kings received both their
title and their authority as such from him; whereas Demetrius
used to ridicule those who gave the name of king to any except
himself and his father; and in his entertainments was well
pleased when his followers, after drinking to him and his father
as kings, went on to drink the health of Seleucus, with the
title of Master of the Elephants; of Ptolemy, by the name of
High Admiral; of Lysimachus, with the addition of Treasurer; and
of Agathocles, with the style of Governor of the Island of
Sicily.  The other kings merely laughed when they were told of
this vanity; Lysimachus alone expressed some indignation at
being considered a eunuch; such being usually then selected for
the office of treasurer.  And, in general, there was a more
bitter enmity between him and Lysimachus than with any of the
others.  Once, as a scoff at his passion for Lamia, Lysimachus
said he had never before seen a courtesan act a queen's part; to
which Demetrius rejoined that his mistress was quite as honest
us Lysimachus's own Penelope.

But to proceed.  Demetrius being about to return to Athens,
signified by letter to the city that he desired immediate
admission to the rites of initiation into the Mysteries, and
wished to go through all the stages of the
ceremony, from first to last, without delay.  This was
absolutely contrary to the rules, and a thing which had never
been allowed before; for the lesser mysteries were celebrated in
the month of Anthesterion, and the great solemnity in
Boedromion, and none of the novices were finally admitted till
they had completed a year after this latter.  Yet all this
notwithstanding, when in the public assembly these letters of
Demetrius were produced and read, there was not one single
person who had the courage to oppose them, except Pythodorus,
the torch-bearer.  But it signified nothing, for Stratocles at
once proposed that the month of Munychion, then current, should
by edict be reputed to be the month of Anthesterion; which being
voted and done, and Demetrius thereby admitted to the lesser
ceremonies, by another vote they turned the same month of
Munychion into the other month of Boedromion; the celebration of
the greater mysteries ensued, and Demetrius was fully admitted.
These proceedings gave the comedian, Philippides, a new occasion
to exercise his wit upon Stratocles,

whose flattering fear
Into one month hath crowded all the year.

And on the vote that Demetrius should lodge in the Parthenon,

Who turns the temple to a common inn,
And makes the Virgin's house a house of sin.

Of all the disreputable and flagitious acts of which he was
guilty in this visit, one that particularly hurt the feelings of
the Athenians was that, having given comment that they should
forthwith raise for his service two hundred and fifty talents,
and they to comply with his demands being forced to levy it upon
the people with the utmost rigor and severity, when they
presented him with the money, which they had with such
difficulty raised, as if it were a trifling sum, he ordered it
to be given to Lamia and the rest of his women, to buy soap.
The loss, which was bad enough, was less galling than the shame,
and the words more intolerable than the act which they
accompanied.  Though, indeed, the story is variously reported;
and some say it was the Thessalians, and not the Athenians, who
were thus treated.  Lamia, however, exacted contributions
herself to pay for an entertainment she gave to the king, and
her banquet was so renowned for its sumptuosity, that a
description of it was drawn up by the Samian writer, Lynceus.
Upon this occasion, one of the comic writers gave Lamia the name
of the real Helepolis; and Demochares of Soli called Demetrius
Mythus, because the fable always has its Lamia, and so had he.

And, in truth, his passion for this woman and the prosperity in
which she lived were such as to draw upon him not only the envy
and jealousy of all his wives, but the animosity even of his
friends.  For example, on Lysimachus's showing to some
ambassadors from Demetrius the scars of the wounds which he had
received upon his thighs and arms by the paws of the lion with
which Alexander had shut him up, after hearing his account of
the combat, they smiled and answered, that their king, also, was
not without his scars, but could show upon his neck the marks of
a Lamia, a no less dangerous beast.  It was also matter of
wonder that, though he had objected so much to Phila on account
of her age, he was yet such a slave to Lamia, who was so long
past her prime.  One evening at supper, when she played the
flute, Demetrius asked Demo, whom the men called Madness, what
she thought of her.  Demo answered she thought her an old woman.
And when a quantity of sweetmeats were brought in, and the king
said again, "See what presents I get from Lamia!"  "My old
mother," answered Demo, "will send you more, if you will make
her your mistress."  Another story is told of a criticism passed
by Lamia or the famous judgment of Bocchoris.  A young Egyptian
had long made suit to Thonis, the courtesan, offering a sum of
gold for her favor.  But before it came to pass, he dreamed one
night that he had obtained it, and, satisfied with the shadow,
felt no more desire for the substance.  Thonis upon this brought
an action for the sum.  Bocchoris, the judge, on hearing the
case, ordered the defendant to bring into court the full amount
in a vessel, which he was to move to and fro in his hand, and
the shadow of it was to be adjudged to Thonis.  The fairness of
this sentence Lamia contested, saying the young man's desire
might have been satisfied with the dream, but Thonis's desire
for the money could not be relieved by the shadow.  Thus much
for Lamia.

And now the story passes from the comic to the tragic stage in
pursuit of the acts and fortunes of its subject.  A general
league of the kings, who were now gathering and combining their
forces to attack Antigonus, recalled Demetrius from Greece.  He
was encouraged by finding his father full of a spirit and
resolution for the combat that belied his years.  Yet it would
seem to be true, that if Antigonus could only have borne to
make some trifling concessions, and if he had shown any
moderation in his passion for empire, he might have maintained
for himself till his death, and left to his son behind him, the
first place among the kings.  But he was of a violent and
haughty spirit; and the insulting words as well as actions in
which he allowed himself could not be borne by young and
powerful princes, and provoked them into combining against him.
Though now when he was told of the confederacy, he could not
forbear from saying that this flock of birds would soon be
scattered by one stone and a single shout.  He took the field at
the head of more than seventy thousand foot, and of ten thousand
horse, and seventy-five elephants.  His enemies had sixty-four
thousand foot, five hundred more horse than he, elephants to the
number of four hundred, and a hundred and twenty chariots.  On
their near approach to each other, an alteration began to be
observable, not in the purposes, but in the presentiments of
Antigonus.  For whereas in all former campaigns he had ever
shown himself lofty and confident, loud in voice and scornful in
speech, often by some joke or mockery on the eve of battle
expressing his contempt and displaying his composure, he was now
remarked to be thoughtful, silent, and retired.  He presented
Demetrius to the army, and declared him his successor; and what
everyone thought stranger than all was that he now conferred
alone in his tent with Demetrius, whereas in former time he had
never entered into any secret consultations even with him; but
had always followed his own advice, made his resolutions, and
then given out his commands.  Once when Demetrius was a boy and
asked him how soon the army would move, he is said to have
answered him sharply, "Are you afraid lest you, of all the army,
should not hear the trumpet?"

There were now, however, inauspicious signs, which affected his
spirits.  Demetrius, in a dream, had seen Alexander, completely
armed, appear and demand of him what word they intended to give
in the time of the battle; and Demetrius answering that he
intended the word should be "Jupiter and Victory."  "Then," said
Alexander, "I will go to your adversaries and find my welcome
with them."  And on the morning of the combat, as the armies
were drawing up, Antigonus, going out of the door of his tent,
by some accident or other, stumbled and fell flat upon the
ground, hurting himself a good deal.  And on recovering his
feet, lifting up his hands to heaven, he prayed the gods to
grant him "either victory, or death without knowledge of
defeat."  When the armies engaged, Demetrius, who commanded the
greatest and best part of the cavalry, made a charge on
Antiochus, the son of Seleucus, and, gloriously routing the
enemy, followed the pursuit, in the pride and exultation of
success, so eagerly, and so unwisely far, that it fatally lost
him the day, for when, perceiving his error, he would have come
in to the assistance of his own infantry, he was not able, the
enemy with their elephants having cut off his retreat.  And on
the other hand, Seleucus, observing the main battle of Antigonus
left naked of their horse, did not charge, but made a show of
charging; and keeping them in alarm and wheeling about and still
threatening an attack, he gave opportunity for those who wished
it to separate and come over to him; which a large body of them
did, the rest taking to flight.  But the old king Antigonus
still kept his post, and when a strong body of the enemies drew
up to charge him, and one of those about him cried out to him,
"Sir, they are coming upon you," he only replied, "What else
should they do? but Demetrius will come to my rescue."  And in
this hope he persisted to the last, looking out on every side
for his son's approach, until he was borne down by a whole
multitude of darts, and fell.  His other followers and friends
fled, and Thorax of Larissa remained alone by the body.

The battle having been thus decided, the kings who had gained
the victory, carving up the whole vast empire that had belonged
to Demetrius and Antigonus, like a carcass, into so many
portions, added these new gains to their former possessions.  As
for Demetrius, with five thousand foot and four thousand horse,
he fled at his utmost speed to Ephesus, where it was the common
opinion he would seize the treasures of the temple to relieve
his wants; but he, on the contrary, fearing such an attempt on
the part of his soldiers, hastened away, and sailed for Greece,
his chief remaining hopes being placed in the fidelity of the
Athenians, with whom he had left part of his navy and of his
treasure and his wife Deidamia.  And in their attachment he had
not the least doubt but he should in this his extremity find a
safe resource.  Accordingly when, upon reaching the Cyclades, he
was met by ambassadors from Athens, requesting him not to
proceed to the city, as the people had passed a vote to admit no
king whatever within their walls, and had conveyed Deidamia with
honorable attendance to Megara, his anger and surprise
overpowered him, and the constancy quite failed him which he had
hitherto shown in a wonderful degree under his reverses, nothing
humiliating or mean-spirited having as yet been seen in him
under all his misfortunes.  But to be thus disappointed in the
Athenians, and to find the friendship he had trusted prove, upon
trial, thus empty and unreal, was a great pang to him.  And, in
truth, an excessive display of outward honor would seem to be
the most uncertain attestation of the real affection of a people
for any king or potentate.  Such shows lose their whole credit
as tokens of affection (which has its virtue in the feelings and
moral choice), when we reflect that they may equally proceed
from fear.  The same decrees are voted upon the latter motive as
upon the former.  And therefore judicious men do not look so
much to statues, paintings, or divine honors that are paid them,
as to their own actions and conduct, judging hence whether they
shall trust these as a genuine, or discredit them as a forced
homage.  As in fact nothing is less unusual than for a people,
even while offering compliments, to be disgusted with those who
accept them greedily, or arrogantly, or without respect to the
freewill of the givers.

Demetrius, shamefully used as he thought himself, was in no
condition to revenge the affront.  He returned a message of
gentle expostulation, saying, however, that he expected to have
his galleys sent to him, among which was that of thirteen banks
of oars.  And this being accorded him, he sailed to the Isthmus,
and, finding his affairs in very ill condition, his garrisons
expelled, and a general secession going on to the enemy, he left
Pyrrhus to attend to Greece, and took his course to the
Chersonesus, where he ravaged the territories of Lysimachus,
and, by the booty which he took, maintained and kept together
his troops, which were now once more beginning to recover and to
show some considerable front.  Nor did any of the other princes
care to meddle with him on that side; for Lysimachus had quite
as little claim to be loved, and was more to be feared for his
power.  But, not long after, Seleucus sent to treat with
Demetrius for a marriage betwixt himself and Stratonice,
daughter of Demetrius by Phila.  Seleucus, indeed, had already,
by Apama the Persian, a son named Antiochus, but he was
possessed of territories that might well satisfy more than one
successor, and he was the rather induced to this alliance with
Demetrius, because Lysimachus had just married himself to one
daughter of king Ptolemy, and his son Agathocles to another.
Demetrius, who looked upon the offer as an unexpected piece of
good fortune, presently embarked with his daughter, and with his
whole fleet sailed for Syria.  Having during his voyage to touch
several times on the coast, among other places he landed in part
of Cilicia, which, by the apportionment of the kings after the
defeat of Antigonus, was allotted to Plistarchus, the brother of
Cassander.  Plistarchus, who took this descent of Demetrius upon
his coasts as an infraction of his rights, and was not sorry to
have something to complain of hastened away to expostulate in
person with Seleucus for entering separately into relations with
Demetrius, the common enemy, without consulting the other kings.

Demetrius, receiving information of this, seized the
opportunity, and fell upon the city of Quinda, which he
surprised, and took in it twelve hundred talents, still
remaining of the treasure.  With this prize, he hastened back to
his galleys, embarked, and set sail.  At Rhosus, where his wife
Phila was now with him, he was met by Seleucus, and their
communications with each other at once were put on a frank,
unsuspecting, and kingly footing.  First, Seleucus gave a
banquet to Demetrius in his tent in the camp; then Demetrius
received him in the ship of thirteen banks of oars.  Meetings
for amusements, conferences, and long visits for general
intercourse succeeded, all without attendants or arms; until at
length Seleucus took his leave, and in great state conducted
Stratonice to Antioch.  Demetrius meantime possessed himself of
Cilicia, and sent Phila to her brother Cassander, to answer the
complaints of Plistarchus.  And here his wife Deidamia came by
sea out of Greece to meet him, but not long after contracted an
illness, of which she died.  After her death, Demetrius, by the
mediation of Seleucus, became reconciled to Ptolemy, and an
agreement was made that he should marry his daughter Ptolemais.
Thus far all was handsomely done on the part of Seleucus.  But,
shortly after, desiring to have the province of Cilicia from
Demetrius for a sum of money, and being refused it, he then
angrily demanded of him the cities of Tyre and Sidon, which
seemed a mere piece of arbitrary dealing, and, indeed, an
outrageous thing, that he, who was possessed of all the vast
provinces between India and the Syrian sea, should think himself
so poorly off as for the sake of two cities, which he coveted,
to disturb the peace of his near connection, already a sufferer
under a severe reverse of fortune.  However, he did but justify
the saying of Plato, that the only certain way to be truly rich
is not to have more property, but fewer desires.  For whoever is
always grasping at more avows that he is still in want, and must
be poor in the midst of affluence.

But Demetrius, whose courage did not sink, resolutely sent him
answer, that, though he were to lose ten thousand battles like
that of Ipsus, he would pay no price for the good-will of such a
son-in-law as Seleucus.  He reinforced these cities with
sufficient garrisons to enable them to make a defense against
Seleucus; and, receiving information that Lachares, taking the
opportunity of their civil dissensions, had set up himself as an
usurper over the Athenians, he imagined that if he made a sudden
attempt upon the city, he might now without difficulty get
possession of it.  He crossed the sea in safety, with a large
fleet; but, passing along the coast of Attica, was met by a
violent storm, and lost the greater number of his ships, and a
very considerable body of men on board of them.  As for him, he
escaped, and began to make war in a petty manner with the
Athenians, but finding himself unable to effect his design, he
sent back orders for raising another fleet, and, with the troops
which he had, marched into Peloponnesus, and laid siege to the
city of Messena.  In attacking which place, he was in danger of
death; for a missile from an engine struck him in the face, and
passed through the cheek into his mouth.  He recovered, however,
and, as soon as he was in a condition to take the field, won
over divers cities which had revolted from him, and made an
incursion into Attica, where he took Eleusis and Rhamnus and
wasted the country thereabout.  And that he might straighten the
Athenians by cutting off all manner of provision, a vessel laden
with corn bound thither falling into his hands, he ordered the
master and the supercargo to be immediately hanged, thereby to
strike a terror into others, that so they might not venture to
supply the city with provisions.  By which means they were
reduced to such extremities, that a bushel of salt sold for
forty drachmas, and a peck of wheat for three hundred.  Ptolemy
had sent to their relief a hundred and fifty galleys, which came
so near as to be seen off Aegina; but this brief hope was soon
extinguished by the arrival of three hundred ships, which came
to reinforce Demetrius from Cyprus, Peloponnesus, and other
places; upon which Ptolemy's fleet took to flight, and Lachares,
the tyrant, ran away, leaving the city to its fate.

And now the Athenians, who before had made it capital for any
person to propose a treaty or accommodation with Demetrius,
immediately opened the nearest gates to send ambassadors to him,
not so much out of hopes of obtaining any honorable conditions
from his clemency as out of necessity, to avoid death by famine.
For among many frightful instances of the distress they were
reduced to, it is said that a father and son were sitting in a
room together, having abandoned every hope, when a dead mouse
fell from the ceiling; and for this prize they leaped up and
came to blows.  In this famine, it is also related, the
philosopher Epicurus saved his own life, and the lives of his
scholars, by a small quantity of beans, which he distributed to
them daily by number.

In this condition was the city when Demetrius made his entrance
and issued a proclamation that all the inhabitants should
assemble in the theater; which being done, he drew up his
soldiers at the back of the stage, occupied the stage itself
with his guards, and, presently coming in himself by the actor's
passages, when the people's consternation had risen to its
height, with his first words he put an end to it.  Without any
harshness of tone or bitterness of words, he reprehended them in
a gentle and friendly way, and declared himself reconciled,
adding a present of a hundred thousand bushels of wheat, and
appointing as magistrates persons acceptable to the people.  So
Dromoclides the orator, seeing the people at a loss how to
express their gratitude by any words or acclamations, and ready
for anything that would outdo the verbal encomiums of the
public speakers, came forward, and moved a decree for delivering
Piraeus and Munychia into the hands of king Demetrius.  This was
passed accordingly, and Demetrius, of his own motion, added a
third garrison, which he placed in the Museum, as a precaution
against any new restiveness on the part of the people, which
might give him the trouble of quitting his other enterprises.

He had not long been master of Athens before he had formed
designs against Lacedaemon; of which Archidamus, the king, being
advertised, came out and met him, but he was overthrown in a
battle near Mantinea; after which Demetrius entered Laconia,
and, in a second battle near Sparta itself, defeated him again
with the loss of two hundred Lacedaemonians slain, and five
hundred taken prisoners.  And now it was almost impossible for
the city, which hitherto had never been captured, to escape his
arms.  But certainly there never was any king upon whom fortune
made such short turns, nor any other life or story so filled
with her swift and surprising changes, over and over again, from
small things to great, from splendor back to humiliation, and
from utter weakness once more to power and might.  They say in
his sadder vicissitudes he used sometimes to apostrophize
fortune in the words of Aeschylus --

Thou liftest up, to cast us down again.

And so at this moment, when all things seemed to conspire
together to give him his heart's desire of dominion and power,
news arrived that Lysimachus had taken all his cities in Asia,
that Ptolemy had reduced all Cyprus with the exception of
Salamis, and that in Salamis his mother and children were shut
up and close besieged: and yet like the woman in Archilochus,

Water in one deceitful hand she shows,
While burning fire within her other glows.

The same fortune that drew him off with these disastrous tidings
from Sparta, in a moment after opened upon him a new and
wonderful prospect, of the following kind.  Cassander, king of
Macedon, dying, and his eldest son, Philip, who succeeded him,
not long surviving his father, the two younger brothers fell at
variance concerning the succession.  And Antipater having
murdered his mother Thessalonica, Alexander, the younger
brother, called in to his assistance Pyrrhus out of Epirus, and
Demetrius out of the Peloponnese.  Pyrrhus arrived first, and,
taking in recompense for his succor a large slice of Macedonia,
had made Alexander begin to be aware that he had brought upon
himself a dangerous neighbor.  And, that he might not run a yet
worse hazard from Demetrius, whose power and reputation were so
great, the young man hurried away to meet him at Dium, whither
he, who on receiving his letter had set out on his march, was
now come.  And, offering his greetings and grateful
acknowledgments, he at the same time informed him that his
affairs no longer required the presence of his ally, and
thereupon he invited him to supper.  There were not wanting some
feelings of suspicion on either side already; and when Demetrius
was now on his way to the banquet, someone came and told him
that in the midst of the drinking he would be killed.  Demetrius
showed little concern, but, making only a little less haste, he
sent to the principal officers of his army, commanding them to
draw out the soldiers, and make them stand to their arms, and
ordered his retinue (more numerous a good deal than that of
Alexander) to attend him into the very room of the entertainment,
and not to stir from thence till they saw him rise from the table.
Thus Alexander's servants, finding themselves overpowered,
had not courage to attempt anything.  And,
indeed, Demetrius gave them no opportunity, for he made a very
short visit, and, pretending to Alexander that he was not at
present in health for drinking wine, left early.  And the next
day he occupied himself in preparations for departing, telling
Alexander he had received intelligence that obliged him to
leave, and begging him to excuse so sudden a parting; he would
hope to see him further when his affairs allowed him leisure.
Alexander was only too glad, not only that he was going, but
that he was doing so of his own motion, without any offense, and
proposed to accompany him into Thessaly.  But when they came to
Larissa, new invitations passed between them, new professions of
good-will, covering new conspiracies; by which Alexander put
himself into the power of Demetrius.  For as he did not like to
use precautions on his own part, for fear Demetrius should take
the hint to use them on his, the very thing he meant to do was
first done to him.  He accepted an invitation, and came to
Demetrius's quarters; and when Demetrius, while they were still
supping, rose from the table and went forth, the young man rose
also, and followed him to the door, where Demetrius, as he
passed through, only said to the guards, "Kill him that follows
me," and went on; and Alexander was at once dispatched by them,
together with such of his friends as endeavored to come to his
rescue, one of whom, before he died, said, "You have been one
day too quick for us."

The night following was one, as may be supposed, of disorder and
confusion.  And with the morning, the Macedonians, still in
alarm, and fearful of the forces of Demetrius, on finding no
violence offered, but only a message sent from Demetrius
desiring an interview and opportunity for explanation of his
actions, at last began to feel pretty confident again, and
prepared to receive him favorably.  And when he came, there was
no need of much being said; their hatred of Antipater for his
murder of his mother, and the absence of anyone better to
govern them, soon decided them to proclaim Demetrius king of
Macedon.  And into Macedonia they at once started and took him.
And the Macedonians at home, who had not forgotten or forgiven
the wicked deeds committed by Cassander on the family of
Alexander, were far from sorry at the change.  Any kind
recollections that still might subsist, of the plain and simple
rule of the first Antipater, went also to the benefit of
Demetrius, whose wife was Phila, his daughter, and his son by
her, a boy already old enough to be serving in the army with his
father, was the natural successor to the government.

To add to this unexpected good fortune, news arrived that
Ptolemy had dismissed his mother and children, bestowing upon
them presents and honors; and also that his daughter Stratonice,
whom he had married to Seleucus, was remarried to Antiochus, the
son of Seleucus, and proclaimed queen of Upper Asia.

For Antiochus, it appears, had fallen passionately in love with
Stratonice, the young queen, who had already made Seleucus the
father of a son.  He struggled very hard with the beginnings of
this passion, and at last, resolving with himself that his
desires were wholly unlawful, his malady past all cure, and his
powers of reason too feeble to act, he determined on death, and
thought to bring his life slowly to extinction by neglecting his
person and refusing nourishment, under the pretense of being
ill.  Erasistratus, the physician who attended him, quickly
perceived that love was his distemper, but the difficulty was to
discover the object.  He therefore waited continually in his
chamber, and when any of the beauties of the court made their
visits to the sick prince, he observed the emotions and
alterations in the countenance of Antiochus, and watched for the
changes which he knew to be indicative of the inward passions
and inclinations of the soul.  He took notice that the presence
of other women produced no effect upon him; but when Stratonice
came, as she often did, alone, or in company with Seleucus, to
see him, he observed in him all Sappho's famous symptoms, his
voice faltered, his face flushed up, his eyes glanced
stealthily, a sudden sweat broke out on his skin, the beatings
of his heart were irregular and violent, and, unable to support
the excess of his passion, he would sink into a state of
faintness, prostration, and pallor.

Erasistratus, reasoning upon these symptoms, and, upon the
probability of things, considering that the king's son would
hardly, if the object of his passion had been any other, have
persisted to death rather than reveal it, felt, however, the
difficulty of making a discovery of this nature to Seleucus.
But, trusting to the tenderness of Seleucus for the young man,
he put on all the assurance he could, and at last, on some
opportunity, spoke out, and told him the malady was love, a love
impossible to gratify or relieve.  The king was extremely
surprised, and asked, "Why impossible to relieve?"  "The fact
is," replied Erasistratus, "he is in love with my wife."
"How!" said Seleucus, "and will our friend Erasistratus refuse to
bestow his wife upon my son and only successor, when there is no
other way to save his life?"  "You," replied Erasistratus, "who
are his father, would not do so, if he were in love with
Stratonice."  "Ah, my friend," answered Seleucus, "would to
heaven any means, human or divine, could but convert his present
passion to that; it would be well for me to part not only with
Stratonice, but with my empire, to save Antiochus."  This he
said with the greatest passion, shedding tears as he spoke; upon
which Erasistratus, taking him by the hand, replied, "In that
case, you have no need of Erasistratus; for you, who are the
husband, the father, and the king, are the proper physician for
your own family."  Seleucus, accordingly, summoning a general
assembly of his people, declared to them, that he had resolved
to make Antiochus king, and Stratonice queen, of all the
provinces of Upper Asia, uniting them in marriage; telling them,
that he thought he had sufficient power over the prince's will,
that he should find in him no repugnance to obey his commands;
and for Stratonice, he hoped all his friends would endeavor to
make her sensible, if she should manifest any reluctance to such
a marriage, that she ought to esteem those things just and
honorable which had been determined upon by the king as
necessary to the general good.  In this manner, we are told, was
brought about the marriage of Antiochus and Stratonice.

To return to the affairs of Demetrius.  Having obtained the
crown of Macedon, he presently became master of Thessaly also.
And, holding the greatest part of Peloponnesus, and, on this
side the Isthmus, the cities of Megara and Athens, he now turned
his arms against the Boeotians.  They at first made overtures
for an accommodation; but Cleonymus of Sparta having ventured
with some troops to their assistance, and having made his way
into Thebes, and Pisis, the Thespian, who was their first man in
power and reputation, animating them to make a brave resistance,
they broke off the treaty.  No sooner, however, had Demetrius
begun to approach the walls with his engines, but Cleonymus in
affright secretly withdrew; and the Boeotians, finding
themselves abandoned, made their submission.  Demetrius placed a
garrison in charge of their towns, and, having raised a large
sum of money from them, he placed Hieronymus, the historian, in
the office of governor and military commander over them, and was
thought on the whole to have shown great clemency, more
particularly to Pisis, to whom he did no hurt, but spoke with
him courteously and kindly, and made him chief magistrate of
Thespiae.  Not long after, Lysimachus was taken prisoner by
Dromichaetes, and Demetrius went off instantly in the hopes of
possessing himself of Thrace, thus left without a king.  Upon
this, the Boeotians revolted again, and news also came that
Lysimachus had regained his liberty.  So Demetrius, turning back
quickly and in anger, found on coming up that his son Antigonus
had already defeated the Boeotians in battle, and therefore
proceeded to lay siege again to Thebes.

But, understanding that Pyrrhus had made an incursion into
Thessaly, and that he was advanced as far as Thermopylae,
leaving Antigonus to continue the siege, he marched with the
rest of his army to oppose this enemy.  Pyrrhus, however, made a
quick retreat.  So, leaving ten thousand foot and a thousand
horse for the protection of Thessaly, he returned to the siege
of Thebes, and there brought up his famous City-taker to the
attack, which, however, was so laboriously and so slowly moved
on account of its bulk and heaviness, that in two months it did
not advance two furlongs.  In the meantime the citizens made a
stout defense, and Demetrius, out of heat and contentiousness
very often, more than upon any necessity, sent his soldiers into
danger; until at last Antigonus, observing how many men were
losing their lives, said to him, "Why, my father, do we go on
letting the men be wasted in this way, without any need of it?"
But Demetrius, in a great passion, interrupted him: "And you,
good sir, why do you afflict yourself for the matter? will dead
men come to you for rations?"  But that the soldiers might see
he valued his own life at no dearer rate than theirs, he exposed
himself freely, and was wounded with a javelin through his neck,
which put him into great hazard of his life.  But,
notwithstanding, he continued the siege, and in conclusion took
the town again.  And after his entrance, when the citizens were
in fear and trembling, and expected all the severities which an
incensed conqueror could indict, he only put to death thirteen,
and banished some few others, pardoning all the rest.  Thus the
city of Thebes, which had not yet been ten years restored, in
that short space was twice besieged and taken.

Shortly after, the festival of the Pythian Apollo was to be
celebrated, and the Aetolians having blocked up all the passages
to Delphi, Demetrius held the games and celebrated the feast at
Athens, alleging it was great reason those honors should be paid
in that place, Apollo being the paternal god of the Athenian
people, and the reputed first founder of their race.

From thence Demetrius returned to Macedon, and as he not only
was of a restless temper himself, but saw also that the
Macedonians were ever the best subjects when employed in
military expeditions, but turbulent and desirous of change in
the idleness of peace, he led them against the Aetolians, and,
having wasted their country, he left Pantauchus with a great
part of his army to complete the conquest, and with the rest he
marched in person to find out Pyrrhus, who in like manner was
advancing to encounter him.  But so it fell out, that by taking
different ways the two armies did not meet; but whilst Demetrius
entered Epirus, and laid all waste before him, Pyrrhus fell upon
Pantauchus, and, in a battle in which the two commanders met in
person and wounded each other, he gained the victory, and took
five thousand prisoners, besides great numbers slain on the
field.  The worst thing, however, for Demetrius was that Pyrrhus
had excited less animosity as an enemy than admiration as a
brave man.  His taking so large a part with his own hand in the
battle had gained him the greatest name and glory among the
Macedonians.  Many among them began to say that this was the
only king in whom there was any likeness to be seen of the great
Alexander's courage; the other kings, and particularly
Demetrius, did nothing but personate him, like actors on a
stage, in his pomp and outward majesty.  And Demetrius truly was
a perfect play and pageant, with his robes and diadems, his
gold-edged purple and his hats with double streamers, his very
shoes being of the richest purple felt, embroidered over in
gold.  One robe in particular, a most superb piece of work, was
long in the loom in preparation for him, in which was to be
wrought the representation of the universe and the celestial
bodies.  This, left unfinished when his reverses overtook him,
not any one of the kings of Macedon, his successors, though
divers of them haughty enough, ever presumed to use.

But it was not this theatric pomp alone which disgusted the
Macedonians, but his profuse and luxurious way of living; and,
above all, the difficulty of speaking with him or of obtaining
access to his presence.  For either he would not be seen at all,
or, if he did give audience, he was violent and overbearing.
Thus he made the envoys of the Athenians, to whom yet he was
more attentive than to all the other Grecians, wait two whole
years before they could obtain a hearing.  And when the
Lacedaemonians sent a single person on an embassy to him, he
held himself insulted, and asked angrily whether it was the fact
that the Lacedaemonians had sent but one ambassador.  "Yes," was
the happy reply he received, "one ambassador to one king."

Once when in some apparent fit of a more popular and acceptable
temper he was riding abroad, a number of people came up and
presented their written petitions.  He courteously received all
these, and put them up in the skirt of his cloak, while the poor
people were overjoyed, and followed him close.  But when he came
upon the bridge of the river Axius, shaking out his cloak, he
threw all into the river.  This excited very bitter resentment
among the Macedonians, who felt themselves to be not governed,
but insulted.  They called to mind what some of them had seen,
and others had heard related of King Philip's unambitious and
open, accessible manners.  One day when an old woman had
assailed him several times in the road and importuned him to
hear her, after he had told her he had no time, "If so," cried
she, "you have no time to be a king."  And this reprimand so
stung the king that after thinking of it a while he went back
into the house, and, setting all other matters apart, for
several days together he did nothing else but receive, beginning
with the old woman, the complaints of all that would come.  And
to do justice, truly enough, might well be called a king's first
business.  "Mars," as says Timotheus, "is the tyrant;" but Law,
in Pindar's words, the king of all.  Homer does not say that
kings received at the hands of Jove besieging engines or ships
of war, but sentences of justice, to keep and observe; nor is it
the most warlike, unjust, and murderous, but the most righteous
of kings, that has from him the name of Jupiter's "familiar
friend" and scholar.  Demetrius's delight was the title most
unlike the choices of the king of gods.  The divine names were
those of the Defender and Keeper, his was that of the Besieger
of Cities. The place of virtue was given by him to that which,
had he not been as ignorant as he was powerful, he would have
known to be vice, and honor by his act was associated with
crime.  While he lay dangerously ill at Pella, Pyrrhus pretty
nearly overran all Macedon, and advanced as far as the city of
Edessa.  On recovering his health, he quickly drove him out, and
came to terms with him, being desirous not to employ his time in
a string of petty local conflicts with a neighbor, when all his
thoughts were fixed upon another design.  This was no less than
to endeavor the recovery of the whole empire which his father
had possessed; and his preparations were suitable to his hopes,
and the greatness of the enterprise.  He had arranged for the
levying of ninety-eight thousand foot, and nearly twelve
thousand horse; and he had a fleet of five hundred galleys on
the stocks, some building at Athens, others at Corinth and
Chalcis, and in the neighborhood of Pella.  And he himself was
passing evermore from one to another of these places, to give
his directions and his assistance to the plans, while all that
saw were amazed, not so much at the number, as at the magnitude
of the works.  Hitherto, there had never been seen a galley with
fifteen or sixteen ranges of oars.  At a later time, Ptolemy
Philopator built one of forty rows, which was two hundred and
eighty cubits in length, and the height of her to the top of her
stern forty eight cubits; she had four hundred sailors and four
thousand rowers, and afforded room besides for very near three
thousand soldiers to fight on her decks.  But this, after all,
was for show, and not for service, scarcely differing from a
fixed edifice ashore, and was not to be moved without extreme
toil and peril; whereas these galleys of Demetrius were meant
quite as much for fighting as for looking at, were not the less
serviceable for their magnificence, and were as wonderful for
their speed and general performance as for their size.

These mighty preparations against Asia, the like of which had
not been made since Alexander first invaded it, united Seleucus,
Ptolemy, and Lysimachus in a confederacy for their defense.
They also dispatched ambassadors to Pyrrhus, to persuade him to
make a diversion by attacking Macedonia; he need not think there
was any validity in a treaty which Demetrius had concluded, not
as an engagement to be at peace with him, but as a means for
enabling himself to make war first upon the enemy of his choice.
So when Pyrrhus accepted their proposals, Demetrius, still in
the midst of his preparations, was encompassed with war on all
sides.  Ptolemy, with a mighty navy, invaded Greece; Lysimachus
entered Macedonia upon the side of Thrace, and Pyrrhus, from the
Epirot border, both of them spoiling and wasting the country.
Demetrius, leaving his son to look after Greece, marched to the
relief of Macedon, and first of all to oppose Lysimachus.  On
his way, he received the news that Pyrrhus had taken the city
Beroea; and the report quickly getting out among the soldiers,
all discipline at once was lost, and the camp was filled with
lamentations and tears, anger and execrations on Demetrius; they
would stay no longer, they would march off, as they said, to
take care of their country, friends, and families; but in
reality the intention was to revolt to Lysimachus.  Demetrius,
therefore, thought it his business to keep them as far away as
he could from Lysimachus, who was their own countryman, and for
Alexander's sake kindly looked upon by many; they would be ready
to fight with Pyrrhus, a new-comer and a foreigner, whom they
could hardly prefer to himself.  But he found himself under a
great mistake in these conjectures.  For when he advanced and
pitched his camp near, the old admiration for Pyrrhus's
gallantry in arms revived again; and as they had been used from
time immemorial to suppose that the best king was he that was
the bravest soldier, so now they were also told of his generous
usage of his prisoners, and, in short, they were eager to have
anyone in the place of Demetrius, and well pleased that the man
should be Pyrrhus.  At first, some straggling parties only
deserted, but in a little time the whole army broke out into an
universal mutiny, insomuch that at last some of them went up,
and told him openly that if he consulted his own safety he were
best to make haste to be gone, for that the Macedonians were
resolved no longer to hazard their lives for the satisfaction of
his luxury and pleasure.  And this was thought fair and moderate
language, compared with the fierceness of the rest.  So,
withdrawing into his tent, and, like an actor rather than a real
king, laying aside his stage-robes of royalty, he put on some
common clothes and stole away.  He was no sooner gone but the
mutinous army were fighting and quarreling for the plunder of
his tent, but Pyrrhus, coming immediately, took possession of
the camp without a blow, after which he, with Lysimachus, parted
the realm of Macedon betwixt them, after Demetrius had securely
held it just seven years.

As for Demetrius, being thus suddenly despoiled of everything,
he retired to Cassandrea.  His wife Phila, in the passion of her
grief, could not endure to see her hapless husband reduced to
the condition of a private and banished man.  She refused to
entertain any further hope, and, resolving to quit a fortune
which was never permanent except for calamity, took poison and
died.  Demetrius, determining still to hold on by the wreck,
went off to Greece, and collected his friends and officers
there.  Menelaus, in the play of Sophocles, to give an image of
his vicissitudes of estate, says, --

For me, my destiny, alas, is found
Whirling upon the gods' swift wheel around,
And changing still, and as the moon's fair frame
Cannot continue for two nights the same,
But out of shadow first a crescent shows,
Thence into beauty and perfection grows,
And when the form of plenitude it wears,
Dwindles again, and wholly disappears.

The simile is yet truer of Demetrius and the phases of his
fortunes, now on the increase, presently on the wane, now
filling up and now falling away.  And so, at this time of
apparent entire obscuration and extinction, his light again
shone out, and accessions of strength, little by little, came in
to fulfill once more the measure of his hope.  At first he
showed himself in the garb of a private man, and went about the
cities without any of the badges of a king.  One who saw him
thus at Thebes applied to him not inaptly, the lines of
Euripides,

Humbled to man, laid by the godhead's pride,
He comes to Dirce and Ismenus' side.

But erelong his expectations had reentered the royal track, and
he began once more to have about him the body and form of
empire.  The Thebans received back, as his gift, their ancient
constitution.  The Athenians had deserted him.  They displaced
Diphilus, who was that year the priest of the two Tutelar
Deities, and restored the archons, as of old, to mark the year;
and on hearing that Demetrius was not so weak as they had
expected, they sent into Macedonia to beg the protection of
Pyrrhus.  Demetrius, in anger, marched to Athens, and laid close
siege to the city.  In this distress, they sent out to him
Crates the philosopher, a person of authority and reputation,
who succeeded so far, that what with his entreaties and the
solid reasons which he offered, Demetrius was persuaded to raise
the siege; and, collecting all his ships, he embarked a force of
eleven thousand men with cavalry, and sailed away to Asia, to
Caria and Lydia, to take those provinces from Lysimachus.
Arriving at Miletus, he was met there by Eurydice, the sister of
Phila, who brought along with her Ptolemais, one of her
daughters by king Ptolemy, who had before been affianced to
Demetrius, and with whom he now consummated his marriage.
Immediately after, he proceeded to carry out his project, and
was so fortunate in the beginning, that many cities revolted to
him; others, as particularly Sardis, he took by force; and some
generals of Lysimachus, also, came over to him with troops and
money.  But when Agathocles, the son of Lysimachus, arrived with
an army, he retreated into Phrygia, with an intention to pass
into Armenia, believing that, if he could once plant his foot in
Armenia, he might set Media in revolt, and gain a position in
Upper Asia, where a fugitive commander might find a hundred ways
of evasion and escape.  Agathocles pressed hard upon him, and
many skirmishes and conflicts occurred, in which Demetrius had
still the advantage; but Agathocles straitened him much in his
forage, and his men showed a great dislike to his purpose, which
they suspected, of carrying them far away into Armenia and
Media.  Famine also pressed upon them, and some mistake occurred
in their passage of the river Lycus, in consequence of which a
large number were swept away and drowned.  Still, however, they
could pass their jests, and one of them fixed upon Demetrius's
tent-door a paper with the first verse, slightly altered of the
Oedipus; --

Child of the blind old man, Antigonus,
Into what country are you bringing us?

But at last, pestilence, as is usual, when armies are driven to
such necessities as to subsist upon any food they can get, began
to assail them as well as famine.  So that, having lost eight
thousand of his men, with the rest he retreated and came to
Tarsus, and because that city was within the dominions of
Seleucus, he was anxious to prevent any plundering, and wished
to give no sort of offense to Seleucus.  But when he perceived
it was impossible to restrain the soldiers in their extreme
necessity, Agathocles also having blocked up all the avenues of
Mount Taurus, he wrote a letter to Seleucus, bewailing first all
his own sad fortunes, and proceeding with entreaties and
supplications for some compassion on his part towards one
nearly connected with him, who was fallen into such calamities
as might extort tenderness and
pity from his very enemies.

These letters so far moved Seleucus, that he gave orders to the
governors of those provinces that they should furnish Demetrius
with all things suitable to his royal rank, and with sufficient
provisions for his troops.  But Patrocles, a person whose
judgment was greatly valued, and who was a friend highly trusted
by Seleucus, pointed out to him, that the expense of maintaining
such a body of soldiers was the least important consideration,
but that it was contrary to all policy to let Demetrius stay in
the country, since he, of all the kings of his time, was the
most violent, and most addicted to daring enterprises; and he
was now in a condition which might tempt persons of the greatest
temper and moderation to unlawful and desperate attempts.
Seleucus, excited by this advice, moved with a powerful army
towards Cilicia; and Demetrius, astonished at this sudden
alteration, betook himself for safety to the most inaccessible
places of Mount Taurus; from whence he sent envoys to Seleucus,
to request from him that he would permit him the liberty to
settle with his army somewhere among the independent barbarian
tribes, where he might be able to make himself a petty king, and
end his life without further travel and hardship; or, if he
refused him this, at any rate to give his troops food during the
winter, and not expose him in this distressed and naked
condition to the fury of his enemies.

But Seleucus, whose jealousy made him put an ill construction on
all he said, sent him answer, that he would permit him to stay
two months and no longer in Cataonia, provided he presently sent
him the principal of his friends as hostages for his departure
then; and, in the meantime, he fortified all the passages into
Syria.  So that Demetrius, who saw himself thus, like a wild
beast, in the way to be encompassed on all sides in the toils,
was driven in desperation to his defense, overran the country,
and in several engagements in which Seleucus attacked him, had
the advantage of him.  Particularly, when he was once assailed
by the scythed chariots, he successfully avoided the charge and
routed his assailants, and then, expelling the troops that were
in guard of the passes, made himself master of the roads leading
into Syria.  And now, elated himself, and finding his soldiers
also animated by these successes, he was resolved to push at
all, and to have one deciding blow for the empire with Seleucus;
who, indeed, was in considerable anxiety and distress, being
averse to any assistance from Lysimachus, whom he both
mistrusted and feared, and shrinking from a battle with
Demetrius, whose desperation he knew, and whose fortune he had
so often seen suddenly pass from the lowest to the highest.

But Demetrius, in the meanwhile, was taken with a violent
sickness, from which he suffered extremely himself, and which
ruined all his prospects.  His men deserted to the enemy, or
dispersed.  At last, after forty days, he began to be so far
recovered as to be able to rally his remaining forces, and
marched as if he directly designed for Cilicia; but in the
night, raising his camp without sound of trumpet, he took a
countermarch, and, passing the mountain Amanus, he ravaged an
the lower country as far as Cyrrhestica.

Upon this, Seleucus advancing towards him and encamping at no
great distance, Demetrius set his troops in motion to surprise
him by night.  And almost to the last moment Seleucus knew
nothing, and was lying asleep.  Some deserter came with the
tidings just so soon that he had time to leap, in great
consternation, out of bed, and give the alarm to his men.  And
as he was putting on his boots to mount his horse, he bade the
officers about him look well to it, for they had to meet a
furious and terrible wild beast.  But Demetrius, by the noise he
heard in the camp, finding they had taken the alarm, drew off
his troops in haste.  With the morning's return he found
Seleucus pressing hard upon him; so, sending one of his officers
against the other wing, he defeated those that were opposed to
himself.  But Seleucus, lighting from his horse, pulling off his
helmet, and taking a target, advanced to the foremost ranks of
the mercenary soldiers, and, showing them who he was, bade them
come over and join him, telling them that it was for their sakes
only that he had so long forborne coming to extremities.  And
thereupon, without a blow more, they saluted Seleucus as their
king, and passed over.

Demetrius, who felt that this was his last change of fortune,
and that he had no more vicissitudes to expect, fled to the
passes of Amanus, where, with a very few friends and followers,
he threw himself into a dense forest, and there waited for the
night, purposing, if possible, to make his escape towards
Caunus, where he hoped to find his shipping ready to transport
him.  But upon inquiry, finding that they had not provisions
even for that one day, he began to think of some other project.
The news was brought to them.

[FN#42] Literally, "It is better their protection, and their
slaying, and coming for them to their own land, &c." If this
reading is right (and three MSS. agree), the extended
words of the text seem to give the intention: it is, however,
possible that the reading should be, "It is better their
protection than their slaying" (oldaas for ocus), which would
make sense at once. The idea of the text seems to be that the
sons of Usnach were, owing to Cathbad's prophecy, thought of
as fated men; and it was only a question where they should
be put to death.

"This is welcome news for us," they said; "we will indeed come,
and let Fergus come as our surety, and Dubhtach, and Cormac the
son of Conor." These then went to them, and they moved them to
pass over the sea.

But at the contrivance of Conor, Fergus was pressed to
join in an ale-feast, while the sons of Usnach were pledged
to eat no food in Erin, until they had eaten the food of Conor.
So Fergus tarried behind with Dubhtach and Cormac; and the sons of
Usnach went on, accompanied by Fiacha, Fergus' son; until they came
to the meadows around Emain.
Now at that time Eogan the son of Durthacht had come to Emain to
make his peace with Conor, for they had for a long time been at
enmity; and to him, and to the warmen of Conor, the charge was given
that they should slay the sons of Usnach, in order that they should
not come before the king. The sons of Usnach stood upon the level
part of. the meadows, and the women sat upon the ramparts of Emain.He
was, therefore, as the fittest person, dispatched from the king
to meet Demetrius, that he might feel himself more at his ease,
and might come with the confidence of being received as a friend
and relative.  No sooner was this message known, but the
courtiers and officers, some few at first, and afterwards almost
the whole of them, thinking, Demetrius would presently become
of great power with the king, hurried off, vying who should be
foremost to pay him their respects.  The effect of which was
that compassion was converted into jealousy, and ill-natured,
malicious people could the more easily insinuate to Seleucus
that he was giving way to an unwise humanity, the very first
sight of Demetrius having been the occasion of a dangerous
excitement in the army.  So, whilst Apollonides, in great
delight, and after him many others, were relating to Demetrius
the kind expressions of Seleucus, and he, after so many troubles
and calamities, if indeed he had still any sense of his
surrender of himself being a disgrace, had now, in confidence on
the good hopes held out to him, entirely forgotten all such
thoughts, Pausanias, with a guard of a thousand horse and foot,
came and surrounded him; and, dispersing the rest that were with
him, carried him, not to the presence of Seleucus, but to the
Syrian Chersonese, where he was committed to the safe custody
of a strong guard.  Sufficient attendance and liberal provision
were here allowed him, space for riding and walking, a park with
game for hunting, those of his friends and companions in exile
who wished it had permission to see him, and messages of
kindness, also, from time to time, were brought him from
Seleucus, bidding him fear nothing, and intimating, that, so
soon as Antiochus and Stratonice should arrive, he would receive
his liberty.

Demetrius, however, finding himself in this condition, sent
letters to those who were with his son, and to his captains and
friends at Athens and Corinth, that they should give no manner
of credit to any letters written to them in his name, though
they were sealed with his own signet, but that, looking upon him
as if he were already dead, they should maintain the cities and
whatever was left of his power, for Antigonus, as his successor.
Antigonus received the news of his father's captivity with great
sorrow; he put himself into mourning, and wrote letters to the
rest of the kings, and to Seleucus himself, making entreaties,
and offering not only to surrender whatever they had left, but
himself to be a hostage for his father.  Many cities, also, and
princes joined in interceding for him; only Lysimachus sent and
offered a large sum of money to Seleucus to take away his life.
But he, who had always shown his aversion to Lysimachus before,
thought him only the greater barbarian and monster for it.
Nevertheless, he still protracted the time, reserving the favor,
as he professed, for the intercession of Antiochus and
Stratonice.

Demetrius, who had sustained the first stroke of his misfortune,
in time grew so familiar with it, that, by continuance, it
became easy.  At first he persevered one way or other in taking
exercise, in hunting, so far as he had means, and in riding.
Little by little, however, after a while, he let himself grow
indolent and indisposed for them, and took to dice and drinking,
in which he passed most of his time, whether it were to escape
the thoughts of his present condition, with which he was haunted
when sober, and to drown reflection in drunkenness, or that he
acknowledged to himself that this was the real happy life he had
long desired and wished for, and had foolishly let himself be
seduced away from it by a senseless and vain ambition, which had
only brought trouble to himself and others; that highest good
which he had thought to obtain by arms and fleets and soldiers,
he had now discovered unexpectedly in idleness, leisure, and
repose.  As, indeed, what other end or period is there of all
the wars and dangers which hapless princes run into, whose
misery and folly it is, not merely that they make luxury and
pleasure, instead of virtue and excellence, the object of their
lives, but that they do not so much as know where this luxury
and pleasure are to be found?

Having thus continued three years a prisoner in Chersonesus, for
want of exercise, and by indulging himself in eating and
drinking, he fell into a disease, of which he died at the age of
fifty-four.  Seleucus was ill-spoken of, and was himself greatly
grieved, that he had yielded so far to his suspicions, and had
let himself be so much outdone by the barbarian Dromichaetes of
Thrace, who had shown so much humanity and such a kingly temper
in his treatment of his prisoner Lysimachus.

There was something dramatic and theatrical in the very funeral
ceremonies with which Demetrius was honored.  For his son
Antigonus, understanding that his remains were coming over from
Syria, went with all his fleet to the islands to meet them.
They were there presented to him in a golden urn, which he
placed in his largest admiral galley.  All the cities where they
touched in their passage sent chaplets to adorn the urn, and
deputed certain of their citizens to follow in mourning, to
assist at the funeral solemnity.  When the fleet approached the
harbor of Corinth, the urn, covered with purple, and a royal
diadem upon it, was visible upon the poop, and a troop of young
men attended in arms to receive it at landing Xenophantus, the
most famous musician of the day, played on the flute his most
solemn measure, to which the rowers, as the ship came in, made
loud response, their oars, like the funeral beating of the
breast, keeping time with the cadences of the music.  But
Antigonus, in tears and mourning attire, excited among the
spectators gathered on the shore the greatest sorrow and
compassion.  After crowns and other honors had been offered at
Corinth, the remains were conveyed to Demetrias, a city to which
Demetrius had given his name, peopled from the inhabitants of
the small villages of Iolcus.

Demetrius left no other children by his wife Phila but Antigonus
and Stratonice, but he had two other sons, both of his own name,
one surnamed the Thin, by an Illyrian mother, and one who ruled
in Cyrene, by Ptolemais.  He had also, by Deidamia, a son,
Alexander, who lived and died in Egypt; and there are some who
say that he had a son by Eurydice, named Corrhabus.  His family
was continued in a succession of kings down to Perseus, the
last, from whom the Romans took Macedonia.

And now, the Macedonian drama being ended, let us prepare to see
the Roman.


ANTONY

The grandfather of Antony was the famous pleader, whom Marius
put to death for having taken part with Sylla.  His father was
Antony, surnamed of Crete, not very famous or distinguished in
public life, but a worthy, good man, and particularly remarkable
for his liberality, as may appear from a single example.  He was
not very rich, and was for that reason checked in the exercise
of his good-nature by his wife.  A friend that stood in need of
money came to borrow of him.  Money he had none, but he bade a
servant bring him water in a silver basin, with which, when it
was brought, he wetted his face, as if he meant to shave; and,
sending away the servant upon another errand, gave his friend
the basin, desiring him to turn it to his purpose.  And when
there was, afterwards, a great inquiry for it in the house, and
his wife was in a very ill humor, and was going to put the
servants one by one to the search, he acknowledged what he had
done, and begged her pardon.

His wife was Julia, of the family of the Caesars, who, for her
discretion and fair behavior, was not inferior to any of her
time.  Under her, Antony received his education, she being,
after the death of his father, remarried to Cornelius Lentulus.
who was put to death by Cicero for having been of Catiline's
conspiracy.  This, probably, was the first ground and occasion
of that mortal grudge that Antony bore Cicero.  He says, even,
that the body of Lentulus was denied burial, till, by
application made to Cicero's wife, it was granted to Julia.  But
this seems to be a manifest error, for none of those that
suffered in the consulate of Cicero had the right of burial
denied them.  Antony grew up a very beautiful youth, but, by the
worst of misfortunes, he fell into the acquaintance and
friendship of Curio, a man abandoned to his pleasures; who, to
make Antony's dependence upon him a matter of greater necessity,
plunged him into a life of drinking and dissipation, and led him
through a course of such extravagance, that he ran, at that
early age, into debt to the amount of two hundred and fifty
talents.  For this sum, Curio became his surety; on hearing
which, the elder Curio, his father, drove Antony out of his
house.  After this, for some short time, he took part with
Clodius, the most insolent and outrageous demagogue of the time,
in his course of violence and disorder; but, getting weary,
before long, of his madness, and apprehensive of the powerful
party forming against him, he left Italy, and traveled into
Greece, where he spent his time in military exercises and in the
study of eloquence.  He took most to what was called the Asiatic
taste in speaking, which was then at its height, and was, in
many ways, suitable to his ostentatious, vaunting temper, full
of empty flourishes and unsteady efforts for glory.

After some stay in Greece, he was invited by Gabinius, who had
been consul, to make a campaign with him in Syria, which at
first he refused, not being willing to serve in a private
character, but, receiving a commission to command the horse, he
went along with him.  His first service was against Aristobulus,
who had prevailed with the Jews to rebel.  Here he was himself
the first man to scale the largest of the works, and beat
Aristobulus out of all of them; after which he routed, in a
pitched battle, an army many times over the number of his,
killed almost all of them, and took Aristobulus and his son
prisoners.  This war ended, Gabinius was solicited by Ptolemy to
restore him to his kingdom of Egypt, and a promise made of ten
thousand talents reward.  Most of the officers were against this
enterprise, and Gabinius himself did not much like it, though
sorely tempted by the ten thousand talents.  But Antony,
desirous of brave actions, and willing to please Ptolemy, joined
in persuading Gabinius to go.  And whereas all were of opinion
that the most dangerous thing before them was the march to
Pelusium, in which they would have to pass over a deep sand,
where no fresh water was to be hoped for, along the Ecregma and
the Serbonian marsh (which the Egyptians call Typhon's
breathing-hole, and which is, in probability, water left behind
by, or making its way through from, the Red Sea, which is here
divided from the Mediterranean by a narrow isthmus), Antony,
being ordered thither with the horse, not only made himself
master of the passes, but won Pelusium itself, a great city,
took the garrison prisoners, and, by this means, rendered the
march secure to the army, and the way to victory not difficult
for the general to pursue.  The enemy, also, reaped some benefit
of his eagerness for honor.  For when Ptolemy, after he had
entered Pelusium, in his rage and spite against the Egyptians,
designed to put them to the sword, Antony withstood him, and
hindered the execution.  In all the great and frequent
skirmishes and battles, he gave continual proofs of his
personal valor and military conduct; and once in particular, by
wheeling about and attacking the rear of the enemy, he gave the
victory to the assailants in the front, and received for this
service signal marks of distinction.  Nor was his humanity
towards the deceased Archelaus less taken notice of.  He had
been formerly his guest and acquaintance, and, as he was now
compelled, he fought him bravely while alive, but, on his death,
sought out his body and buried it with royal honors.  The
consequence was that he left behind him a great name among the
Alexandrians, and all who were serving in the Roman army looked
upon him as a most gallant soldier.

He had also a very good and noble appearance; his beard was well
grown, his forehead large, and his nose aquiline, giving him
altogether a bold, masculine look, that reminded people of the
faces of Hercules in paintings and sculptures.  It was,
moreover, an ancient tradition, that the Antonys were descended
from Hercules, by a son of his called Anton; and this opinion he
thought to give credit to, by the similarity of his person just
mentioned, and also by the fashion of his dress.  For, whenever
he had to appear before large numbers, he wore his tunic girt
low about the hips, a broadsword on his side, and over all a
large, coarse mantle.  What might seem to some very
insupportable, his vaunting, his raillery, his drinking in
public, sitting down by the men as they were taking their food,
and eating, as he stood, off the common soldiers' tables, made
him the delight and pleasure of the army.  In love affairs,
also, he was very agreeable; he gained many friends by the
assistance he gave them in theirs, and took other people's
raillery upon his own with good-humor.  And his generous ways,
his open and lavish hand in gifts and favors to his friends and
fellow-soldiers, did a great deal for him in his first advance
to power, and, after he had become great, long maintained his
fortunes, when a thousand follies were hastening their
overthrow.  One instance of his liberality I must relate.  He
had ordered payment to one of his friends of twenty-five myriads
of money, or decies, as the Romans call it, and his steward,
wondering at the extravagance of the sum, laid all the silver in
a heap, as he should pass by.  Antony, seeing the heap, asked
what it meant; his steward replied, "The money you have ordered
to be given to your friend."  So, perceiving the man's malice,
said he, "I thought the decies had been much more; 't is too
little; let it be doubled."  This, however, was at a later time.

When the Roman state finally broke up into two hostile factions,
the aristocratical party joining Pompey, who was in the city,
and the popular side seeking help from Caesar, who was at the
head of an army in Gaul, Curio, the friend of Antony, having
changed his party and devoted himself to Caesar, brought over
Antony also to his service.  And the influence which he gained
with the people by his eloquence and by the money which was
supplied by Caesar enabled him to make Antony, first, tribune of
the people, and then, augur.  And Antony's accession to office
was at once of the greatest advantage to Caesar.  In the first
place, he resisted the consul Marcellus, who was putting under
Pompey's orders the troops who were already collected, and was
giving him power to raise new levies; he, on the other hand,
making an order that they should be sent into Syria to reinforce
Bibulus, who was making war with the Parthians, and that no one
should give in his name to serve under Pompey.  Next, when the
senators would not suffer Caesar's letters to be received or
read in the senate, by virtue of his office he read them
publicly, and succeeded so well, that many were brought to
change their mind; Caesar's demands, as they appeared in what he
wrote, being but just and reasonable.  At length, two questions
being put in the senate, the one, whether Pompey should dismiss
his army, the other, if Caesar his, some were for the former,
for the latter all, except some few, when Antony stood up and
put the question, if it would be agreeable to them that both
Pompey and Caesar should dismiss their armies.  This proposal
met with the greatest approval, they gave him loud acclamations,
and called for it to be put to the vote.  But when the consuls
would not have it so, Caesar's friends again made some new
offers, very fair and equitable, but were strongly opposed by
Cato, and Antony himself was commanded to leave the senate by
the consul Lentulus.  So, leaving them with execrations, and
disguising himself in a servant's dress, hiring a carriage with
Quintus Cassius, he went straight away to Caesar, declaring at
once, when they reached the camp, that affairs at Rome were
conducted without any order or justice, that the privilege of
speaking in the senate was denied the tribunes, and that he who
spoke for common fair dealing was driven out and in danger of
his life.

Upon this, Caesar set his army in motion, and marched into
Italy; and for this reason it is that Cicero writes in his
Philippics, that Antony was as much the cause of the civil war,
as Helen was of the Trojan.  But this is but a calumny.  For
Caesar was not of so slight or weak a temper as to suffer
himself to be carried away, by the indignation of the moment,
into a civil war with his country, upon the sight of Antony and
Cassius seeking refuge in his camp, meanly dressed and in a
hired carriage, without ever having thought of it or taken any
such resolution long before.  This was to him, who wanted a
pretense of declaring war, a fair and plausible occasion; but
the true motive that led him was the same that formerly led
Alexander and Cyrus against all mankind, the unquenchable thirst
of empire, and the distracted ambition of being the greatest man
in the world, which was impracticable for him, unless Pompey
were put down.  So soon, then, as he had advanced and occupied
Rome, and driven Pompey out of Italy, he purposed first to go
against the legions that Pompey had in Spain, and then cross
over and follow him with the fleet that should be prepared
during his absence, in the meantime leaving the government of
Rome to Lepidus, as praetor, and the command of the troops and
of Italy to Antony, as tribune of the people.  Antony was not
long in getting the hearts of the soldiers, joining with them in
their exercises, and for the most part living amongst them, and
making them presents to the utmost of his abilities; but with
all others he was unpopular enough.  He was too lazy to pay
attention to the complaints of persons who were injured; he
listened impatiently to petitions; and he had an ill name for
familiarity with other people's wives.  In short, the government
of Caesar (which, so far as he was concerned himself, had the
appearance of anything rather than a tyranny), got a bad repute
through his friends.  And of these friends, Antony, as he had
the largest trust, and committed the greatest errors, was
thought the most deeply in fault.

Caesar, however, at his return from Spain, overlooked the
charges against him, and had no reason ever to complain, in the
employments he gave him in the war, of any want of courage,
energy, or military skill.  He himself, going aboard at
Brundusium, sailed over the Ionian Sea with a few troops, and
sent back the vessels with orders to Antony and Gabinius to
embark the army, and come over with all speed into Macedonia.
Gabinius, having no mind to put to sea in the rough, dangerous
weather of the winter season, was for marching the army round by
the long land route; but Antony, being more afraid lest Caesar
might suffer from the number of his enemies, who pressed him
hard, beat back Libo, who was watching with a fleet at the mouth
of the haven of Brundusium, by attacking his galleys with a
number of small boats, and, gaining thus an opportunity, put on
board twenty thousand foot and eight hundred horse, and so set
out to sea.  And, being espied by the enemy and pursued, from
this danger he was rescued by a strong south wind, which sprang
up and raised so high a sea, that the enemy's galleys could make
little way.  But his own ships were driving before it upon a lee
shore of cliffs and rocks running sheer to the water, where
there was no hope of escape, when all of a sudden the wind
turned about to south-west, and blew from land to the main sea,
where Antony, now sailing in security, saw the coast all covered
with the wreck of the enemy's fleet.  For hither the galleys in
pursuit had been carried by the gale, and not a few of them
dashed to pieces.  Many men and much property fell into Antony's
hands; he took also the town of Lissus, and, by the seasonable
arrival of so large a reinforcement, gave Caesar great
encouragement.

There was not one of the many engagements that now took place
one after another in which he did not signalize himself; twice
he stopped the army in its full flight, led them back to a
charge, and gained the victory.  So that not without reason his
reputation, next to Caesar's, was greatest in the army.  And what
opinion Caesar himself had of him well appeared when for the
final battle in Pharsalia, which was to determine everything,
he himself chose to lead the right wing, committing the
charge of the left to Antony, as to the best officer of all that
served under him.  After the battle, Caesar, being created
dictator, went in pursuit of Pompey, and sent Antony to Rome,
with the character of Master of the Horse, who is in office and
power next to the dictator, when present, and in his absence is
the first, and pretty nearly indeed the sole magistrate.  For on
the appointment of a dictator, with the one exception of the
tribunes, all other magistrates cease to exercise any authority
in Rome.

Dolabella, however, who was tribune, being a young man and eager
for change, was now for bringing in a general measure for
canceling debts, and wanted Antony, who was his friend, and
forward enough to promote any popular project, to take part with
him in this step.  Asinius and Trebellius were of the contrary
opinion, and it so happened, at the same time, Antony was
crossed by a terrible suspicion that Dolabella was too familiar
with his wife; and in great trouble at this, he parted with her
(she being his cousin, and daughter to Caius Antonius, the
colleague of Cicero), and, taking part with Asinius, came to
open hostilities with Dolabella, who had seized on the forum,
intending to pass his law by force.  Antony, backed by a vote of
the senate that Dolabella should be put down by force of arms,
went down and attacked him, killing some of his, and losing some
of his own men; and by this action lost his favor with the
commonalty, while with the better class and with all well
conducted people his general course of life made him, as Cicero
says, absolutely odious, utter disgust being excited by his
drinking bouts at all hours, his wild expenses, his gross
amours, the day spent in sleeping or walking off his debauches,
and the night in banquets and at theaters, and in celebrating
the nuptials of some comedian or buffoon.  It is related that,
drinking all night at the wedding of Hippias, the comedian, on
the morning, having to harangue the people, he came forward,
overcharged as he was, and vomited before them all, one of his
friends holding his gown for him.  Sergius, the player, was one
of the friends who could do most with him; also Cytheris, a
woman of the same trade, whom he made much of, and who, when he
went his progress, accompanied him in a litter, and had her
equipage, not in anything inferior to his mother's; while every
one, moreover, was scandalized at the sight of the golden cups
that he took with him, fitter for the ornaments of a procession
than the uses of a journey, at his having pavilions set up, and
sumptuous morning repasts laid out by river-sides and in groves,
at his having chariots drawn by lions, and common women and
singing girls quartered upon the houses of serious fathers and
mothers of families.  And it seemed very unreasonable that
Caesar, out of Italy, should lodge in the open field, and, with
great fatigue and danger, pursue the remainder of a hazardous
war, whilst others, by favor of his authority, should insult the
citizens with their impudent luxury.

All this appears to have aggravated party quarrels in Rome, and
to have encouraged the soldiers in acts of license and rapacity.
And, accordingly, when Caesar came home, he acquitted Dolabella,
and, being created the third time consul, took, not Antony, but
Lepidus, for his colleague.  Pompey's house being offered for
sale, Antony bought it, and, when the price was demanded of him,
loudly complained.  This, he tells us himself, and because he
thought his former services had not been recompensed as they
deserved, made him not follow Caesar with the army into Libya.
However, Caesar, by dealing gently with his errors, seems to
have succeeded in curing him of a good deal of his folly and
extravagance.  He gave up his former courses, and took a wife,
Fulvia, the widow of Clodius the demagogue, a woman not born for
spinning or housewifery, nor one that could be content with
ruling a private husband, but prepared to govern a first
magistrate, or give orders to a commander-in-chief.  So that
Cleopatra had great obligations to her for having taught Antony
to be so good a servant, he coming to her hands tame and broken
into entire obedience to the commands of a mistress.  He used to
play all sorts of sportive, boyish tricks, to keep Fulvia in
good-humor.  As, for example, when Caesar, after his victory in
Spain, was on his return, Antony, among the rest, went out to
meet him; and, a rumor being spread that Caesar was killed and
the enemy marching into Italy, he resumed to Rome, and,
disguising himself, came to her by night muffled up as a servant
that brought letters from Antony.  She, with great impatience,
before she received the letter, asks if Antony were well, and
instead of an answer he gives her the letter; and, as she was
opening it, took her about the neck and kissed her.  This little
story of many of the same nature, I give as a specimen.

There was nobody of any rank in Rome that did not go some days'
journey to meet Caesar on his return from Spain; but Antony was
the best received of any, admitted to ride the whole journey
with him in his carriage, while behind came Brutus Albinus, and
Octavian, his niece's son, who afterwards bore his name and
reigned so long over the Romans.  Caesar being created, the
fifth time, consul, without delay chose Antony for his
colleague, but, designing himself to give up his own consulate
to Dolabella, he acquainted the senate with his resolution.  But
Antony opposed it with all his might, saying much that was bad
against Dolabella, and receiving the like language in return,
till Caesar could bear with the indecency no longer, and
deferred the matter to another time.  Afterwards, when he came
before the people to proclaim Dolabella, Antony cried out that
the auspices were unfavorable, so that at last Caesar, much to
Dolabella's vexation, yielded and gave it up.  And it is
credible that Caesar was about as much disgusted with the one as
the other.  When someone was accusing them both to him, "It is
not," said he, "these well fed, long-haired men that I fear, but
the pale and the hungry looking;" meaning Brutus and Cassius, by
whose conspiracy he afterwards fell.

And the fairest pretext for that conspiracy was furnished,
without his meaning it, by Antony himself.  The Romans were
celebrating their festival, called the Lupercalia, when Caesar,
in his triumphal habit, and seated above the Rostra in the
market-place, was a spectator of the sports.  The custom is,
that many young noblemen and of the magistracy, anointed with
oil and having straps of hide in their hands, run about and
strike, in sport, at everyone they meet.  Antony was running
with the rest; but, omitting the old ceremony, twining a garland
of bay round a diadem, he ran up to the Rostra, and, being
lifted up by his companions, would have put it upon the head of
Caesar, as if by that ceremony he were declared king.  Caesar
seemingly refused, and drew aside to avoid it, and was applauded
by the people with great shouts.  Again Antony pressed it, and
again he declined its acceptance.  And so the dispute between
them went on for some time, Antony's solicitations receiving but
little encouragement from the shouts of a few friends, and
Caesar's refusal being accompanied with the general applause of
the people; a curious thing enough, that they should submit with
patience to the fact, and yet at the same time dread the name as
the destruction of their liberty.  Caesar, very much discomposed
at what had past, got up from his seat, and, laying bare his
neck, said, he was ready to receive the stroke, if any one of
them desired to give it.  The crown was at last put on one of
his statues, but was taken down by some of the tribunes, who
were followed home by the people with shouts of applause.
Caesar, however, resented it, and deposed them.

These passages gave great encouragement to Brutus and Cassius,
who, in making choice of trusty friends for such an enterprise,
were thinking to engage Antony.  The rest approved, except
Trebonius, who told them that Antony and he had lodged and
traveled together in the last journey they took to meet Caesar,
and that he had
let fall several words, in a cautious way, on purpose to sound
him; that Antony very well understood him, but did not encourage
it; however, he had said nothing of it to Caesar, but had kept
the secret faithfully.  The conspirators then proposed that
Antony should die with him, which Brutus would not consent to,
insisting that an action undertaken in defense of right and the
laws must be maintained unsullied, and pure of injustice.  It
was settled that Antony, whose bodily strength and high office
made him formidable, should, at Caesar's entrance into the
senate, when the deed was to be done, be amused outside by some
of the party in a conversation about some pretended business.

So when all was proceeded with, according to their plan, and
Caesar had fallen in the senate-house, Antony, at the first
moment, took a servant's dress, and hid himself.  But,
understanding that the conspirators had assembled in the
Capitol, and had no further design upon anyone, he persuaded
them to come down, giving them his son as a hostage.  That night
Cassius supped at Antony's house, and Brutus with Lepidus.
Antony then convened the senate, and spoke in favor of an act of
oblivion, and the appointment of Brutus and Cassius to
provinces.  These measures the senate passed; and resolved that
all Caesar's acts should remain in force.  Thus Antony went out
of the senate with the highest possible reputation and esteem;
for it was apparent that he had prevented a civil war, and had
composed, in the wisest and most statesman-like way, questions
of the greatest difficulty and embarrassment.  But these
temperate counsels were soon swept away by the tide of popular
applause, and the prospects, if Brutus were overthrown, of being
without doubt the ruler-in-chief.  As Caesar's body was
conveying to the tomb, Antony, according to the custom, was
making his funeral oration in the market; place, and, perceiving
the people to be infinitely affected with what he had said, he
began to mingle with his praises language of commiseration, and
horror at what had happened, and, as he was ending his speech,
he took the under-clothes of the dead, and held them up,
showing them stains of blood and the holes of the many stabs,
calling those that had done this act villains and bloody
murderers.  All which excited the people to such indignation,
that they would not defer the funeral, but, making a pile of
tables and forms in the very market-place, set fire to it; and
everyone, taking a brand, ran to the conspirators' houses, to
attack them.

Upon this, Brutus and his whole party left the city, and
Caesar's friends joined themselves to Antony.  Calpurnia,
Caesar's wife, lodged with him the best part of the property, to
the value of four thousand talents; he got also into his hands
all Caesar's papers, wherein were contained journals of all he
had done, and draughts of what he designed to do, which Antony
made good use of; for by this means he appointed what
magistrates he pleased, brought whom he would into the senate,
recalled some from exile, freed others out of prison, and all
this as ordered so by Caesar.  The Romans, in mockery, gave
those who were thus benefited the name of Charonites, since, if
put to prove their patents, they must have recourse to the
papers of the dead.  In short, Antony's behavior in Rome was
very absolute, he himself being consul, and his two brothers in
great place; Caius, the one, being praetor, and Lucius, the
other, tribune of the people.

While matters went thus in Rome, the young Caesar, Caesar's
niece's son, and by testament left his heir, arrived at Rome
from Apollonia, where he was when his uncle was killed.  The
first thing he did was to visit Antony, as his father's friend.
He spoke to him concerning the money that was in his hands, and
reminded him of the legacy Caesar had made of seventy-five
drachmas to every Roman citizen.  Antony, at first, laughing at
such discourse from so young a man, told him he wished he were
in his health, and that he wanted good counsel and good friends,
to tell him the burden of being executor to Caesar would sit
very uneasily upon his young shoulders.  When she shone out
again, with a brilliancy increased by the contrast, I saw
plainly on the path before me--from around which at this spot
the trees receded, leaving a small space of green sward--the
shadow of a large hand, with knotty joints and protuberances here
and there. Especially I remarked, even in the midst of my fear,
the bulbous points of the fingers. I looked hurriedly all around,
but could see nothing from which such a shadow should fall.
Now, however, that I had a direction, however undetermined, in
which to project my apprehension, the very sense of
danger and need of action overcame that stifling which is the
worst property of fear. I reflected in a moment, that
if this were indeed a shadow, it was useless to look for the object
that cast it in any other direction than between the shadow and the
moon.

I looked, and peered, and intensified my vision, all to no
purpose. I could see nothing of that kind, not even an ash-tree
in the neighbourhood. Still the shadow remained; not steady,
but moving to and fro, and once I saw the fingers close, and grind
themselves close, like the claws of a wild animal, as if in
uncontrollable longing for some anticipated prey. There seemed
but one mode left of discovering the substance of this shadow. I
went forward boldly, though with an inward shudder which I would
not heed, to the spot where the shadow lay, threw myself
on the ground, laid my head within the form of the hand, and
turned my eyes towards the moon Good heavens! what did I see?
I wonder that ever I arose, and that the very shadow of the hand
did not hold me where I lay until fear had frozen my brain. I
saw the strangest figure; vague, shadowy, almost transparent,
in the central parts, and gradually deepening in substance towards
the outside, until it ended in extremities capable of casting
such a shadow as fell from the hand, through the awful fingers
of which I now saw the moon. The hand was uplifted in
the attitude of a paw about to strike its prey. But the face,
which throbbed with fluctuating and pulsatory visibility--not
from changes in the light it reflected, but from changes in its
own conditions of reflecting power, the alterations being from
within, not from without--it was horrible. I do not know how
to describe it. It caused a new sensation. Just as one cannot
translate a horrible odour, or a ghastly pain, or a fearful
sound, into words, so I cannot describe this new form of awful
hideousness. I can only try to describe something that is not
it, but seems somewhat parallel to it; or at least is suggested
by it. It reminded me of what I had heard of vampires; for
the face resembled that of a corpse more than anything else
I can think of; especially when I can conceive such a
face in motion, but not suggesting any life as the source of the
motion.

The features were rather handsome than otherwise, except the
mouth, which had scarcely a curve in it. The lips were of equal
thickness; but the thickness was not at all remarkable, even
although they looked slightly swollen. They seemed fixedly open,
but were not wide apart. Of course I did not REMARK these
lineaments at the time: I was too horrified for that. I noted
them afterwards, when the form returned on my inward sight with
a vividness too intense to admit of my doubting the accuracy of
the reflex. But the most awful of the features were the eyes.
These were alive, yet not with life.

They seemed lighted up with an infinite greed. A gnawing
voracity, which devoured the devourer, seemed to be the
indwelling and propelling power of the whole ghostly apparition.

Antony, however, had no wish for this, but next
morning marched his army to pass over the river that parted the
two camps.  He was himself the first man that stepped in, and,
as he went through towards the other bank, he saw Lepidus's
soldiers in great numbers reaching out their hands to help him,
and beating down the works to make him way.  Being entered into
the camp, and finding himself absolute master, he nevertheless
treated Lepidus with the greatest civility, and gave him the title
of Father, when he spoke to him, and, though he had everything
at his own command, he left him the honor of being called
the general.  This fair usage brought over to him Munatius
Plancus, who was not far off with a considerable force.  Thus in
great strength he repassed the Alps, leading with him into Italy
seventeen legions and ten thousand horse, besides six legions
which he left in garrison under the command of Varius, one of
his familiar friends and boon companions, whom they used to call
by the nickname of Cotylon.

Caesar, perceiving that Cicero's wishes were for liberty, had
ceased to pay any further regard to him, and was now employing
the mediation of his friends to come to a good understanding
with Antony.  They both met together with Lepidus in a small
island, where the conference lasted three days.  The empire was
soon determined of, it being divided amongst them as if it had
been their paternal inheritance.  That which gave them all the
trouble was to agree who should be put to death, each of them
desiring to destroy his enemies and to save his friends.  But,
in the end, animosity to those they hated carried the day
against respect for relations and affection for friends; and
Caesar sacrificed Cicero to Antony, Antony gave up his uncle
Lucius Caesar, and Lepidus received permission to murder his
brother Paulus, or, as others say, yielded his brother to them.
I do not believe anything ever took place more truly savage or
barbarous than this composition, for, in this exchange of blood
for blood, they were equally guilty of the lives they
surrendered and of those they took; or, indeed, more guilty in
the case of their friends, for whose deaths they had not even
the justification of hatred.  To complete the reconciliation,
the soldiery, coming about them, demanded that confirmation
should be given to it by some alliance of marriage; Caesar
should marry Clodia, the daughter of Fulvia, wife to Antony.
This also being agreed to, three hundred persons were put to
death by proscription.  Antony gave orders to those that were to
kill Cicero, to cut off his head and right hand, with which he
had written his invectives against him; and, when they were
brought before him, he regarded them joyfully, actually bursting
out more than once into laughter, and when he had satiated
himself with the sight of them, ordered them to be hung up above
the speaker's place in the forum, thinking thus to insult the
dead, while in fact he only exposed his own wanton arrogance,
and his unworthiness to hold the power that fortune had given
him.  His uncle Lucius Caesar, being closely pursued, took
refuge with his sister, who, when the murderers had broken into
her house and were pressing into her chamber, met them at the
door, and, spreading out her hands, cried out several times,
"You shall not kill Lucius Caesar till you first dispatch me,
who gave your general his birth;" and in this manner she
succeeded in getting her brother out of the way, and saving his
life.

This triumvirate was very hateful to the Romans, and Antony most
of all bore the blame, because he was older than Caesar, and had
greater authority than Lepidus, and withal he was no sooner
settled in his affairs, but he returned to his luxurious and
dissolute way of living.  Besides the ill reputation he gained
by his general behavior, it was some considerable disadvantage
to him his living in the house of Pompey the Great, who had been
as much admired for his temperance and his sober, citizen-like
habits of life, as ever he was for having triumphed three times.
They could not without anger see the doors of that house shut
against magistrates, officers, and envoys, who were shamefully
refused admittance, while it was filled inside with players,
jugglers, and drunken flatterers, upon whom were spent the
greatest part of the wealth which violence and cruelty procured.
For they did not limit themselves to the forfeiture of the
estates of such as were proscribed, defrauding the widows and
families, nor were they contented with laying on every possible
kind of tax and imposition; but, hearing that several sums of
money were, as well by strangers as citizens of Rome, deposited
in the hands of the vestal virgins, they went and took the money
away by force.  When it was manifest that nothing would ever be
enough for Antony, Caesar at last called for a division of
property.  The army was also divided between them, upon their
march into Macedonia to make war with Brutus and Cassius,
Lepidus being left with the command of the city.

However, after they had crossed the sea and engaged in
operations of war, encamping in front of the enemy, Antony
opposite Cassius, and Caesar opposite Brutus, Caesar did nothing
worth relating, and all the success and victory were Antony's.
In the first battle, Caesar was completely routed by Brutus, his
camp taken, he himself very narrowly escaping by flight.  As he
himself writes in his Memoirs, he retired before the battle, on
account of a dream which one of his friends had.  But Antony, on
the other hand, defeated Cassius; though some have written that
he was not actually present in the engagement, and only joined
afterwards in the pursuit.  Cassius was killed, at his own
entreaty and order, by one of his most trusted freedmen,
Pindarus, not being aware of Brutus's victory.  After a few
days' interval, they fought another battle, in which Brutus lost
the day, and slew himself; and Caesar being sick, Antony had
almost all the honor of the victory.  Standing over Brutus's
dead body, he uttered a few words of reproach upon him for the
death of his brother Caius, who had been executed by Brutus's
order in Macedonia in revenge of Cicero; but, saying presently
that Hortensius was most to blame for it, he gave order for his
being slain upon his brother's tomb, and, throwing his own
scarlet mantle, which was of great value, upon the body of
Brutus, he gave charge to one of his own freedmen to take care
of his funeral.  This man, as Antony came to understand, did not
leave the mantle with the corpse, but kept both it and a good
part of the money that should have been spent in the funeral for
himself; for which he had him put to death.

But Caesar was conveyed to Rome, no one expecting that he would
long survive.  Antony, proposing to go to the eastern provinces
to lay them under contribution, entered Greece with a large
force.  The promise had been made that every common soldier
should receive for his pay five thousand drachmas; so it was
likely there would be need of pretty severe taxing and levying
to raise money.  However, to the Greeks he showed at first
reason and moderation enough; he gratified his love of amusement
by hearing the learned men dispute, by seeing the games, and
undergoing initiation; and in judicial matters he was equitable,
taking pleasure in being styled a lover of Greece, but, above
all, in being called a lover of Athens, to which city he made
very considerable presents.  The people of Megara wished to let
him know that they also had something to show him, and invited
him to come and see their senate-house.  So he went and examined
it, and on their asking him how he liked it, told them it was
"not very large, but extremely ruinous."  At the same time, he
had a survey made of the temple of the Pythian Apollo, as if he
had designed to repair it, and indeed he had declared to the
senate his intention so to do.

However, leaving Lucius Censorinus in Greece, he crossed over
into Asia, and there laid his hands on the stores of accumulated
wealth, while kings waited at his door, and queens were rivaling
one another, who should make him the greatest presents or appear
most charming in his eyes.  Thus, whilst Caesar in Rome was
wearing out his strength amidst seditions and wars, Antony, with
nothing to do amidst the enjoyments of peace, let his passions
carry him easily back to the old course of life that was
familiar to him.  A set of harpers and pipers, Anaxenor and
Xuthus, the dancing-man Metrodorus, and a whole Bacchic rout of
the like Asiatic exhibitors, far outdoing in license and
buffoonery the pests that had followed out of Italy, came in and
possessed the court; the thing was past patience, wealth of all
kinds being wasted on objects like these.  The whole of Asia was
like the city in Sophocles, loaded, at one time,

with incense in the air,
Jubilant songs, and outcries of despair.

When he made his entry into Ephesus, the women met him dressed
up like Bacchantes, and the men and boys like Satyrs and Fauns,
and throughout the town nothing was to be seen but spears
wreathed about with ivy, harps, flutes, and psaltries, while
Antony in their songs was Bacchus the Giver of Joy and the
Gentle.  And so indeed he was to some, but to far more the
Devourer and the Savage; for he would deprive persons of worth
and quality of their fortunes to gratify villains and
flatterers, who would sometimes beg the estates of men yet
living, pretending they were dead, and, obtaining a grant, take
possession.  He gave his cook the house of a Magnesian citizen,
as a reward for a single highly successful supper, and, at last,
when he was proceeding to lay a second whole tribute on Asia,
Hybreas, speaking on behalf of the cities, took courage, and
told him broadly, but aptly enough for Antony's taste, "If you
can take two yearly tributes, you can doubtless give us a couple
of summers, and a double harvest time;" and put it to him in the
plainest and boldest way, that Asia had raised two hundred
thousand talents for his service: "If this has not been paid to
you, ask your collectors for it; if it has, and is all gone, we
are ruined men."  These words touched Antony to the quick, who
was simply ignorant of most things that were done in his name;
not that he was so indolent, as he was prone to trust frankly in
all about him.  For there was much simplicity in his character;
he was slow to see his faults, but, when he did see them, was
extremely repentant, and ready to ask pardon of those he had
injured; prodigal in his acts of reparation, and severe in his
punishments, but his generosity was much more extravagant than
his severity; his raillery was sharp and insulting, but the edge
of it was taken off by his readiness to submit to any kind of
repartee; for he was as well contented to be rallied, as he was
pleased to rally others.  And this freedom of speech was,
indeed, the cause of many of his disasters.  He never imagined
that those who used so much liberty in their mirth would flatter
or deceive him in business of consequence, not knowing how
common it is with parasites to mix their flattery with boldness,
as confectioners do their sweetmeats with something biting, to
prevent the sense of satiety.  Their freedoms and impertinences
at table were designed expressly to give to their obsequiousness
in council the air of being not complaisance, but conviction.

Such being his temper, the last and crowning mischief that could
befall him came in the love of Cleopatra, to awaken and kindle
to fury passions that as yet lay still and dormant in his
nature, and to stifle and finally corrupt any elements that yet
made resistance in him, of goodness and a sound judgment.  He
fell into the snare thus.  When making preparation for the
Parthian war, he sent to command her to make her personal
appearance in Cilicia, to answer an accusation, that she had
given great assistance, in the late wars, to Cassius.  Dellius,
who was sent on this message, had no sooner seen her face, and
remarked her adroitness and subtlety in speech, but he felt
convinced that Antony would not so much as think of giving any
molestation to a woman like this; on the contrary, she would be
the first in favor with him.  So he set himself at once to pay
his court to the Egyptian, and gave her his advice, "to go," in
the Homeric style, to Cilicia, "in her best attire," and bade
her fear nothing from Antony, the gentlest and kindest of
soldiers.  She had some faith in the words of Dellius, but more
in her own attractions, which, having formerly recommended her
to Caesar and the young Cnaeus Pompey, she did not doubt might
prove yet more successful with Antony.  Their acquaintance was
with her when a girl, young, and ignorant of the world, but she
was to meet Antony in the time of life when women's beauty is
most splendid, and their intellects are in full maturity. She
made great preparation for her journey, of money, gifts, and
ornaments of value, such as so wealthy a kingdom might afford,
but she brought with her her surest hopes in her own magic arts
and charms.

She received several letters, both from Antony and from his
friends, to summon her, but she took no account of these orders;
and at last, as if in mockery of them, she came sailing up the
river Cydnus, in a barge with gilded stern and outspread sails
of purple, while oars of silver beat time to the music of flutes
and fifes and harps.  She herself lay all along, under a canopy
of cloth of gold, dressed as Venus in a picture, and beautiful
young boys, like painted Cupids, stood on each side to fan her.
Her maids were dressed like Sea Nymphs and Graces, some steering
at the rudder, some working at the ropes.  The perfumes diffused
themselves from the vessel to the shore, which was covered with
multitudes, part following the galley up the river on either
bank, part running out of the city to see the sight.  The
market-place was quite emptied, and Antony at last was left
alone sitting upon the tribunal; while the word went through all
the multitude, that Venus was come to feast with Bacchus, for
the common good of Asia.  On her arrival, Antony sent to invite
her to supper.  She thought it fitter he should come to her; so,
willing to show his good-humor and courtesy, he complied, and
went.  He found the preparations to receive him magnificent
beyond expression, but nothing so admirable as the great number
of lights; for on a sudden there was let down altogether so
great a number of branches with lights in them so ingeniously
disposed, some in squares, and some in circles, that the whole
thing was a spectacle that has seldom been equaled for beauty.

The next day, Antony invited her to supper, and was very
desirous to outdo her as well in magnificence as contrivance;
but he found he was altogether beaten in both, and was so well
convinced of it, that he was himself the first to jest and mock
at his poverty of wit, and his rustic awkwardness.  She,
perceiving that his raillery was broad and gross, and savored
more of the soldier than the courtier, rejoined in the same
taste, and fell into it at once, without any sort of reluctance
or reserve.  For her actual beauty, it is said, was not in
itself so remarkable that none could be compared with her, or
that no one could see her without being struck by it, but the
contact of her presence, if you lived with her, was
irresistible; the attraction of her person, joining with the
charm of her conversation, and the character that attended all
she said or did, was something bewitching.  It was a pleasure
merely to hear the sound of her voice, with which, like an
instrument of many strings, she could pass from one language to
another; so that there were few of the barbarian nations that
she answered by an interpreter; to most of them she spoke
herself, as to the Ethiopians, Troglodytes, Hebrews, Arabians,
Syrians, Medes, Parthians, and many others, whose language she
had learnt; which was all the more surprising, because most of
the kings her predecessors scarcely gave themselves the trouble
to acquire the Egyptian tongue, and several of them quite
abandoned the Macedonian.

Antony was so captivated by her, that, while Fulvia his wife
maintained his quarrels in Rome against Caesar by actual force
of arms, and the Parthian troops, commanded by Labienus (the
king's generals having made him commander-in-chief), were
assembled in Mesopotamia, and ready to enter Syria, he could yet
suffer himself to be carried away by her to Alexandria, there to
keep holiday, like a boy, in play and diversion, squandering and
fooling away in enjoyments that most costly, as Antiphon says,
of all valuables, time.  They had a sort of company, to which
they gave a particular name, calling it that of the Inimitable
Livers.  The members entertained one another daily in turn, with
an extravagance of expenditure beyond measure or belief.
Philotas, a physician of Amphissa, who was at that time a
student of medicine in Alexandria, used to tell my grandfather
Lamprias, that, having some acquaintance with one of the royal
cooks, he was invited by him, being a young man, to come and see
the sumptuous preparations for supper.  So he was taken into the
kitchen, where he admired the prodigious variety of all things;
but particularly, seeing eight wild boars roasting whole, says
he, "Surely you have a great number of guests."  The cook
laughed at his simplicity, and told him there were not above
twelve to sup, but that every dish was to be served up just
roasted to a turn, and if anything was but one minute ill-timed,
it was spoiled; "And," said he, "maybe Antony will sup just now,
maybe not this hour, maybe he will call for wine, or begin to
talk, and will put it off.  So that," he continued, "it is not
one, but many suppers must be had in readiness, as it is
impossible to guess at his hour."  This was Philotas's story;
who related besides, that he afterwards came to be one of the
medical attendants of Antony's eldest son by Fulvia, and used to
be invited pretty often, among other companions, to his table,
when he was not supping with his father.  One day another
physician had talked loudly, and given great disturbance to the
company, whose mouth Philotas stopped with this sophistical
syllogism: "In some states of fever the patient should take cold
water; everyone who has a fever is in some state of fever;
therefore in a fever cold water should always be taken."  The
man was quite struck dumb, and Antony's son, very much pleased,
laughed aloud, and said, Philotas, "I make you a present of all
you see there," pointing to a sideboard covered with plate.
Philotas thanked him much, but was far enough from ever
imagining that a boy of his age could dispose of things of that
value.  Soon after, however, the plate was all brought to him,
and he was desired to set his mark upon it; and when he put it
away from him, and was afraid to accept the present, "What ails
the man?" said he that brought it; "do you know that he who
gives you this is Antony's son, who is free to give it, if it
were all gold? but if you will be advised by me, I would counsel
you to accept of the value in money from us; for there may be
amongst the rest some antique or famous piece of workmanship,
which Antony would be sorry to part with."  These anecdotes my
grandfather told us Philotas used frequently to relate.

To return to Cleopatra; Plato admits four sorts of flattery,
but she had a thousand.  Were Antony serious or disposed to
mirth, she had at any moment some new delight or charm to meet
his wishes; at every turn she was upon him, and let him escape
her neither by day nor by night.  She played at dice with him,
drank with him, hunted with him; and when he exercised in arms,
she was there to see.  At night she would go rambling with him
to disturb and torment people at their doors and windows,
dressed like a servant-woman, for Antony also went in servant's
disguise, and from these expeditions he often came home very
scurvily answered, and sometimes even beaten severely, though
most people guessed who it was.  However, the Alexandrians in
general liked it all well enough, and joined good humoredly and
kindly in his frolic and play, saying they were much obliged to
Antony for acting his tragic parts at Rome, and keeping his
comedy for them.  It would be trifling without end to be
particular in his follies, but his fishing must not be
forgotten.  He went out one day to angle with Cleopatra, and,
being so unfortunate as to catch nothing in the presence of his
mistress, he gave secret orders to the fishermen to dive under
water, and put fishes that had been already taken upon his
hooks; and these he drew so fast that the Egyptian perceived it.
But, feigning great admiration, she told everybody how dexterous
Antony was, and invited them next day to come and see him again.
So, when a number of them had come on board the fishing boats,
as soon as he had let down his hook, one of her servants was
beforehand with his divers, and fixed upon his hook a salted
fish from Pontus.  Antony, feeling his line give, drew up the
prey, and when, as may be imagined, great laughter ensued,
"Leave," said Cleopatra, "the fishing-rod, general, to us poor
sovereigns of Pharos and Canopus; your game is cities,
provinces, and kingdoms."

Whilst he was thus diverting himself and engaged in this boys'
play, two dispatches arrived; one from Rome, that his brother
Lucius and his wife Fulvia, after many quarrels among
themselves, had joined in war against Caesar, and, having lost
all, had fled out of Italy; the other bringing little better
news, that Labienus, at the head of the Parthians, was
overrunning Asia, from Euphrates and Syria as far as Lydia and
Ionia.  So, scarcely at last rousing himself from sleep, and
shaking off the fumes of wine, he set out to attack the
Parthians, and went as far as Phoenicia; but, upon the receipt
of lamentable letters from Fulvia, turned his course with two
hundred ships to Italy.  And, in his way, receiving, such of his
friends as fled from Italy, he was given to understand that
Fulvia was the sole cause of the war, a woman of a restless
spirit and very bold, and withal her hopes were that commotions
in Italy would force Antony from Cleopatra.  But it happened
that Fulvia, as she was coming to meet her husband, fell sick by
the way, and died at Sicyon, so that an accommodation was the
more easily made.  support thy handmaid; and from her soul cast
out The fear of man, which brings a snare, the weakness and
the doubt."
Then the dreary shadows scattered, like a cloud in morning's
breeze, And a low deep voice within me seemed whispering words
like these:
"Though thy earth be as the iron, and thy heaven a brazen wall,
Trust still His loving-kindness whose power is over all."

We paused at length, where at my feet the sunlit waters broke
On glaring reach of shining beach, and shingly wall of rock; The
merchant-ships lay idly there, in hard clear lines on high, Tracing
with rope and slender spar their network on the sky.

And there were ancient citizens, cloak-wrapped and grave and
cold, And grim and stout sea-captains with faces bronzed and
old, And on his horse, with Rawson, his cruel clerk at hand,
Sat dark and haughty Endicott, the ruler of the land.

And poisoning with his evil words the ruler's ready ear,
The priest leaned o'er his saddle, with laugh and scoff
and jeer; It stirred my soul, and from my lips the seal of
silence broke, As if through woman's weakness a warning spirit
spoke.

I cried, "The Lord rebuke thee, thou smiter of the meek, Thou
robber of the righteous, thou trampler of the weak!
Go light the dark, cold hearth-stones,--go turn the prison
lock Of the poor hearts thou hast hunted, thou wolf amid the
flock!"
Dark lowered the brows of Endicott, and with a deeper red O'er
Rawson's wine-empurpled cheek the flush of anger spread; "Good
people," quoth the white-lipped priest, "heed not her words so
wild, Her Master speaks within her,--the Devil owns his child!"

But gray heads shook, and young brows knit, the while the sheriff
read That law the wicked rulers against the poor have made, Who to
their house of Rimmon and idol priesthood bring No bended knee of
worship, nor gainful offering.Sextus Pompeius was in possession of Sicily, and with his ships,
under the command of Menas, the pirate, and Menecrates, so
infested the Italian coast, that no vessels durst venture into
those seas.  Sextus had behaved with much humanity towards
Antony, having received his mother when she fled with Fulvia,
and it was therefore judged fit that he also should be received
into the peace.  They met near the promontory of Misenum, by the
mole of the port, Pompey having his fleet at anchor close by,
and Antony and Caesar their troops drawn up all along the shore.
There it was concluded that Sextus should quietly enjoy the
government of Sicily and Sardinia, he conditioning to scour the
seas of all pirates, and to send so much corn every year to
Rome.

This agreed on, they invited one another to supper, and by lot
it fell to Pompey's turn to give the first entertainment, and
Antony, asking where it was to be, "There," said he, pointing to
the admiral-galley, a ship of six banks of oars, "that is the
only house that Pompey is heir to of his father's."  And this
he said, reflecting upon Antony, who was then in possession of
his father's house.  Having fixed the ship on her anchors, and
formed a bridgeway from the promontory to conduct on board of
her, he gave them a cordial welcome.  And when they began to
grow warm, and jests were passing freely on Antony and
Cleopatra's loves, Menas, the pirate, whispered Pompey in the
ear, "Shall I," said he, "cut the cables, and make you master
not of Sicily only and Sardinia, but of the whole Roman empire?"
Pompey, having considered a little while, returned him answer,
"Menas, this might have been done without acquainting me; now we
must rest content; I do not break my word."  And so, having been
entertained by the other two in their turns, he set sail for
Sicily.

After the treaty was completed, Antony dispatched Ventidius into
Asia, to check the advance of the Parthians, while he, as a
compliment to Caesar, accepted the office of priest to the
deceased Caesar.  And in any state affair and matter of
consequence, they both behaved themselves with much
consideration and friendliness for each other.  But it annoyed
Antony, that in all their amusements, on any trial of skill
or fortune, Caesar should be constantly victorious.  He had with
him an Egyptian diviner, one of those who calculate nativities,
who, either to make his court to Cleopatra, or that by the rules
of his art he found it to be so, openly declared to him, that
though the fortune that attended him was bright and glorious,
yet it was overshadowed by Caesar's; and advised him to keep
himself as far distant as he could from that young man; "for
your Genius," said he, "dreads his; when absent from him yours
is proud and brave, but in his presence unmanly and dejected;"
and incidents that occurred appeared to show that the Egyptian
spoke truth.  For whenever they cast lots for any playful
purpose, or threw dice, Antony was still the loser; and
repeatedly, when they fought game-cocks or quails, Caesar's had
the victory.  This gave Antony a secret displeasure, and made
him put the more confidence in the skill of his Egyptian.  So,
leaving the management of his home affairs to Caesar, he left
Italy, and took Octavia, who had lately borne him a daughter,
along with him into Greece.

Here, whilst he wintered in Athens, he received the first news
of Ventidius's successes over the Parthians, of his having
defeated them in a battle, having slain Labienus and
Pharnapates, the best general their king, Hyrodes, possessed.
For the celebrating of which he made a public feast through
Greece, and for the prizes which were contested at Athens he
himself acted as steward, and, leaving at home the ensigns that
are carried before the general, he made his public appearance in
a gown and white shoes, with the steward's wands marching
before; and he performed his duty in taking the combatants by
the neck, to part them, when they had fought enough.

When the time came for him to set out for the war, he took a
garland from the sacred olive, and, in obedience to some oracle,
he filled a vessel with the water of the Clepsydra, to carry
along with him.  In this interval, Pacorus, the Parthian king's
son, who was marching into Syria with a large army, was met by
Ventidius, who gave him battle in the country of Cyrrhestica,
slew a large number of his men, and Pacorus among the first.
This victory was one of the most renowned achievements of the
Romans, and fully avenged their defeats under Crassus, the
Parthians being obliged, after the loss of three battles
successively, to keep themselves within the bounds of Media and
Mesopotamia.  Ventidius was not willing to push his good fortune
further, for fear of raising some jealousy in Antony, but,
turning his arms against those that had quitted the Roman
interest, he reduced them to their former obedience.  Among the
rest, he besieged Antiochus, king of Commagene, in the city of
Samosata, who made an offer of a thousand talents for his
pardon, and a promise of submission to Antony's commands.  But
Ventidius told him that he must send to Antony, who was already
on his march, and had sent word to Ventidius to make no terms
with Antiochus, wishing that at any rate this one exploit might
be ascribed to him, and that people might not think that all his
successes were won by his lieutenants.  The siege, however, was
long protracted; for when those within found their offers
refused, they defended themselves stoutly, till, at last,
Antony, finding he was doing nothing, in shame and regret for
having refused the first offer, was glad to make an
accommodation with Antiochus for three hundred talents.  And,
having given some orders for the affairs of Syria, he returned
to Athens; and, paying Ventidius the honors he well deserved,
dismissed him to receive his triumph.  He is the only man that
has ever yet triumphed for victories obtained over the
Parthians; he was of obscure birth, but, by means of Antony's
friendship, obtained an opportunity of showing his capacity, and
doing great things; and his making such glorious use of it gave
new credit to the current observation about Caesar and Antony,
that they were more fortunate in what they did by their
lieutenants than in their own persons.  For Sossius, also, had
great success, and Canidius, whom he left in Armenia, defeated
the people there, and also the kings of the Albanians and
Iberians, and marched victorious as far as Caucasus, by which
means the fame of Antony's arms had become great among the
barbarous nations.

He, however, once more, upon some unfavorable stories, taking
offense against Caesar, set sail with three hundred ships for
Italy, and, being refused admittance to the port of Brundusium,
made for Tarentum.  There his wife Octavia, who came from Greece
with him, obtained leave to visit her brother, she being then
great with child, having already borne her husband a second
daughter; and as she was on her way, she met Caesar, with his
two friends Agrippa and Maecenas, and, taking these two aside,
with great entreaties and lamentations she told them, that of
the most fortunate woman upon earth, she was in danger of
becoming the most unhappy; for as yet everyone's eyes were fixed
upon her as the wife and sister of the two great commanders,
but, if rash counsels should prevail, and war ensue, "I shall be
miserable," said she, "without redress; for on what side soever
victory falls, I shall be sure to be a loser."  Caesar was
overcome by these entreaties, and advanced in a peaceable temper
to Tarentum, where those that were present beheld a most stately
spectacle; a vast army drawn up by the shore, and as great a
fleet in the harbor, all without the occurrence of any act of
hostility; nothing but the salutations of friends, and other
expressions of joy and kindness, passing from one armament to
the other.  Antony first entertained Caesar this also being a
concession on Caesar's part to his sister; and when at length an
agreement was made between them, that Caesar should give Antony
two of his legions to serve him in the Parthian war, and that
Antony should in return leave with him a hundred armed galleys,
Octavia further obtained of her husband, besides this, twenty
light ships for her brother, and of her brother, a thousand foot
for her husband.  So, having parted good friends, Caesar went
immediately to make war with Pompey to conquer Sicily.  And
Antony, leaving in Caesar's charge his wife and children, and
his children by his former wife Fulvia, set sail for Asia.

But the mischief that thus long had lain still, the passion for
Cleopatra, which better thoughts had seemed to have lulled and
charmed into oblivion, upon his approach to Syria, gathered
strength again, and broke out into a flame.  And, in fine, like
Plato's restive and rebellious horse of the human soul, flinging
off all good and wholesome counsel, and breaking fairly loose,
he sends Fonteius Capito to bring Cleopatra into Syria.  To whom
at her arrival he made no small or trifling present, Phoenicia,
Coele-Syria, Cyprus, great part of Cilicia, that side of Judaea
which produces balm, that part of Arabia where the Nabathaeans
extend to the outer sea; profuse gifts, which much displeased
the Romans.  For, although he had invested several private
persons in great governments and kingdoms, and bereaved many
kings of theirs, as Antigonus of Judaea, whose head he caused to
be struck off (the first example of that punishment being
inflicted on a king), yet nothing stung the Romans like the
shame of these honors paid to Cleopatra.  Their dissatisfaction
was augmented also by his acknowledging as his own the twin
children he had by her, giving them the name of Alexander and
Cleopatra, and adding, as their surnames, the titles of Sun and
Moon.  But he, who knew how to put a good color on the most
dishonest action, would say, that the greatness of the Roman
empire consisted more in giving than in taking kingdoms, and
that the way to carry noble blood through the world was by
begetting in every place a new line and series of kings; his own
ancestor had thus been born of Hercules; Hercules had not
limited his hopes of progeny to a single womb, nor feared any
law like Solon's, or any audit of procreation, but had freely
let nature take her will in the foundation and first
commencement of many families.

After Phraates had killed his father Hyrodes, and taken
possession of his kingdom, many of the Parthians left their
country; among the rest, Monaeses, a man of great distinction
and authority, sought refuge with Antony, who, looking on his
case as similar to that of Themistocles, and likening his own
opulence and magnanimity to those of the former Persian kings,
gave him three cities, Larissa, Arethusa, and Hierapolis, which
was formerly called Bambyce.  But when the king of Parthia soon
recalled him, giving him his word and honor for his safety,
Antony was not unwilling to give him leave to return, hoping
thereby to surprise Phraates, who would believe that peace would
continue; for he only made the demand of him, that he should
send back the Roman ensigns which were taken when Crassus was
slain, and the prisoners that remained yet alive.  This done, he
sent Cleopatra into Egypt, and marched through Arabia and
Armenia; and, when his forces came together, and were joined by
those of his confederate kings (of whom there were very many,
and the most considerable, Artavasdes, king of Armenia, who came
at the head of six thousand horse and seven thousand foot), he
made a general muster.  There appeared sixty thousand Roman
foot, ten thousand horse, Spaniards and Gauls, who counted as
Romans; and, of other nations, horse and foot, thirty thousand.
And these great preparations, that put the Indians beyond
Bactria into alarm, and made all Asia shake, were all, we are
told, rendered useless to him because of Cleopatra.  For, in
order to pass the winter with her, the war was pushed on before
its due time; and all he did was done without perfect
consideration, as by a man who had no proper control over his
faculties, who, under the effects of some drug or magic, was
still looking back elsewhere, and whose object was much more to
hasten his return than to conquer his enemies.

For, first of all, when he should have taken up his
winter-quarters in Armenia, to refresh his men, who were tired
with long marches, having come at least eight thousand furlongs,
and then have taken the advantage in the beginning of the spring
to invade Media, before the Parthians were out of
winter-quarters, he had not patience to expect his time, but
marched into the province of Atropatene, leaving Armenia on the
left hand, and laid waste all that country.  Secondly, his haste
was so great, that he left behind the engines absolutely
required for any siege, which followed the camp in three hundred
wagons, and, among the rest, a ram eighty feet long; none of
which was it possible, if lost or damaged, to repair or to make
the like, as the provinces of the upper Asia produce no trees
long or hard enough for such uses.  Nevertheless, he left them
all behind, as a mere impediment to his speed, in the charge of
a detachment under the command of Statianus, the wagon-officer.
He himself laid siege to Phraata, a principal city of the king
of Media, wherein were that king's wife and children.  And when
actual need proved the greatness of his error in leaving the
siege train behind him, he had nothing for it but to come up and
raise a mound against the walls, with infinite labor and great
loss of time.  Meantime Phraates, coming down with a large army,
and hearing that the wagons were left behind with the battering
engines, sent a strong party of horse, by which Statianus was
surprised, he himself and ten thousand of his men slain, the
engines all broken in pieces, many taken prisoners, and, among
the rest, king Polemon.

This great miscarriage in the opening of the campaign much
discouraged Antony's army, and Artavasdes, king of Armenia,
deciding that the Roman prospects were bad, withdrew with all
his forces from the camp, although he had been the chief
promoter of the war.  The Parthians, encouraged by their
success, came up to the Romans at the siege, and gave them many
affronts; upon which Antony, fearing that the despondency and
alarm of his soldiers would only grow worse if he let them lie
idle, taking all the horse, ten legions, and three praetorian
cohorts of heavy infantry, resolved to go out and forage,
designing by this means to draw the enemy with more advantage to
a battle.  To effect this, he marched a day's journey from his
camp, and, finding the Parthians hovering about, in readiness to
attack him while he was in motion, he gave orders for the signal
of battle to be hung out in the encampment, but, at the same
time, pulled down the tents, as if he meant not to fight, but to
lead his men home again; and so he proceeded to lead them past
the enemy, who were drawn up in a half-moon, his orders being
that the horse should charge as soon as the legions were come up
near enough to second them.  And Cuchulain complained and lamented,
and he spoke the words that follow, and thus did Ferdia
reply:

Cuchulain
Is't indeed Ferdia's face?[FN#57] Sure his meed is dire disgrace;
He, to war by woman led, Comes his comrade's blood to shed.

[FN#57] The metre is that of the Irish.

Ferdia
Thou who warrior art indeed, Champion tried! who wounds dost
breed, I am forced the sod to see Where my final grave shall
be.

Cuchulain
Maev her daughter, Findabar, Who all maids excelleth far,
Gave thee, not at love's behest, She thy kingly might would
test.

Ferdia
Gently ruling Hound, I know That was tested long ago; None so
great is known to fame, None, till now, to match it came.

Cuchulain
All that's chanced from thee hath sprung, Darry's grandchild,
Daman's son; Woman's hest hath brought thee here Swords to test
with comrade dear.

Ferdia
Comrade! had I fled, nor found Fight with thee, fair graceful
Hound, Maev my word could broken call; Croghan hold my fame
but small.

Cuchulain
None put meat his lips between, None to king or stainless queen
Yet was born, whose praise I'd gain, None whose scorn would win
thy pain.

Ferdia
Thou who deep in wars dost wade, 'Twas not thou, 'twas Maev
betrayed:
Back with conquest shalt thou ride, Fault hast none thy fame to
hide.

Cuchulain
Clots of blood my faithful heart Choke; my soul is like to
part:
'Tis with little force my arm Strikes, to do Ferdia harm!

"Greatly although thou makest complaint against me to-day," said
Ferdia, "tell me to what arms shall we resort?" Thine is the
choice of weapons until the night," said Cuchulain, "because
it was I who had the choice in the day that is past." "Then,"
said Ferdia, "let us this day take to our heavy hard-smiting
swords; for sooner shall we attain to the end of our strife by
the edge of the sword this day than we did by the thrusts
of our spears in the day that is gone." "Let us do so
indeed," said Cuchulain. That day they took upon them two long
and exceedingly great shields, and they resorted to their heavy
and hard-striking swords. And each of them began to hew, and to
cut, and to slaughter, and to destroy till larger than the head
of a month-old child were the masses and the gobbets of flesh
which each of them cut from the shoulders and the thighs and
the shoulder-blades of his foe.

After this fashion did each of them hew at each other from the
dawn of the day until the ninth hour of the even, and then
Ferdia said, "Let us desist from this now, O Cuchulain!" "Let
us cease indeed," said Cuchulain, "if the time has come."
They ceased from their strife, and they threw from them their arms
into the hands of their charioteers. Pleasant and cheerful and
joyous was the meeting of the two: mournfully, and sorrowfully, and
unhappily did they part from each other that night. Their horses
were not in the same paddock, their charioteers were not at the
same fire, and there they stayed for that night.
It was early in the morning when Ferdia arose, and he advanced alone
towards the Ford of Combat. Well did he know that the battle and
the conflict would be decided that day; that upon that day and in
that place one of the two would fall or that both would fall. And
then, before Cuchulain could come, Ferdia put on the armour that
he was to use for that battle in the conflict and fight. And this
was the battle armour that he used for that conflict and fight; he
put a kilt of striped silk, bordered with spangles of gold, next
to his white skin, and over that he put his well-sewn apron of brown
leather to protect the lower part of his body. Upon his belly he
put a great stone as large as a millstone, and over that great stone
as large as a millstone he put his firm deep apron of purified iron,
on account of the fear and the dread that he had of the Gae-Bulg
that day. And his crested helmet that he used for battle and conflict
and fight he put upon his head:
there were upon it four jewels of carbuncle, each one of them fit
to adorn it: also it was studded with enamels, with crystals, with
carbuncles, and with blazing rubies that had come from the East.
Into his right hand he took his death-dealing sharp-pointed strong
spear; upon his left side he hung his curved sword of battle with
its golden hilt and its pommels of red gold: upon the slope of his
back he took his great and magnificent shield with great bosses
upon it: fifty was the number of the bosses, and upon each of them
could be supported a full-grown hog: moreover in the centre of the
shield was a great boss of red gold. Upon that day Ferdia displayed
many noble, rapidly changing, wonderful feats of arms on high; feats
which he had never learned from any other, either from his nurse
or his tutor, or from Scathach, or from Uathach, or from Aife, but
which he himself invented that day for his battle with Cuchulain.Antony had resolved to return by the same way he came, which was
through a level country clear of all trees, but a certain
Mardian came to him (one that was very conversant with the
manners of the Parthians, and whose fidelity to the Romans had
been tried at the battle where the machines were lost), and
advised him to keep the mountains close on his right hand, and
not to expose his men, heavily armed, in a broad, open, riding
country, to the attacks of a numerous army of light-horse and
archers; that Phraates with fair promises had persuaded him from
the siege on purpose that he might with more ease cut him off in
his retreat; but, if so he pleased, he would conduct him by a
nearer route, on which moreover he should find the necessaries
for his army in greater abundance.  Antony upon this began to
consider what was best to be done; he was unwilling to seem to
have any mistrust of the Parthians after their treaty; but,
holding it to be really best to march his army the shorter and
more inhabited way, he demanded of the Mardian some assurance of
his faith, who offered himself to be bound until the army came
safe into Armenia.  Two days he conducted the army bound, and,
on the third, when Antony had given up all thought of the
enemy, and was marching at his ease in no very good order, the
Mardian, perceiving the bank of a river broken down, and the
water let out and overflowing the road by which they were to
pass, saw at once that this was the handiwork of the Parthians,
done out of mischief, and to hinder their march; so he advised
Antony to be upon his guard, for that the enemy was nigh at
hand.  And no sooner had he begun to put his men in order,
disposing the slingers and dart men in convenient intervals for
sallying out, but the Parthians came pouring in on all sides,
fully expecting to encompass them, and throw the whole army into
disorder.  They were at once attacked by the light troops, whom
they galled a good deal with their arrows; but, being themselves
as warmly entertained with the slings and darts, and many
wounded, they made their retreat.  Soon after, rallying up
afresh, they were beat back by a battalion of Gallic horse, and
appeared no more that day.

By their manner of attack Antony seeing what to do, not only
placed the slings and darts as a rear guard, but also lined both
flanks with them, and so marched in a square battle, giving
order to the horse to charge and beat off the enemy, but not to
follow them far as they retired.  So that the Parthians, not
doing more mischief for the four ensuing days than they
received, began to abate in their zeal, and, complaining that
the winter season was much advanced, pressed for returning home.

But, on the fifth day, Flavius Gallus, a brave and active
officer, who had a considerable command in the army, came to
Antony, desiring of him some light-infantry out of the rear, and
some horse out of the front, with which he would undertake to do
some considerable service.  Which when he had obtained, he beat
the enemy back, not withdrawing, as was usual, at the same time,
and retreating upon the mass of the heavy infantry, but
maintaining his own ground, and engaging boldly.  The officers
who commanded in the rear, perceiving how far he was getting
from the body of the army, sent to warn him back, but he took no
notice of them.  It is said that Titius the quaestor snatched
the standards and turned them round, upbraiding Gallus with thus
leading so many brave men to destruction.  But when he on the
other side reviled him again, and commanded the men that were
about him to stand firm, Titius made his retreat, and Gallus,
charging the enemies in the front, was encompassed by a party
that fell upon his rear, which at length perceiving, he sent a
messenger to demand succor.  But the commanders of the heavy
infantry, Canidius amongst others, a particular favorite of
Antony's, seem here to have committed a great oversight.  For,
instead of facing about with the whole body, they sent small
parties, and, when they were defeated, they still sent out small
parties, so that by their bad management the rout would have
spread through the whole army, if Antony himself had not marched
from the van at the head of the third legion, and, passing this
through among the fugitives, faced the enemies, and hindered
them from any further pursuit.

In this engagement were killed three thousand, five thousand
were carried back to the camp wounded, amongst the rest Gallus,
shot through the body with four arrows, of which wounds he died.
Antony went from tent to tent to visit and comfort the rest of
them, and was not able to see his men without tears and a
passion of grief.  They, however, seized his hand with joyful
faces, bidding him go and see to himself and not be concerned
about them, calling him their emperor and their general, and
saying that if he did well they were safe.  For in short, never
in all these times can history make mention of a general at the
head of a more splendid army; whether you consider strength and
youth, or patience and sufferance in labors and fatigues; but as
for the obedience and affectionate respect they bore their
general, and the unanimous feeling amongst small and great
alike, officers and common soldiers, to prefer his good opinion
of them to their very lives and being, in this part of military
excellence it was not possible that they could have been
surpassed by the very Romans of old.  For this devotion, as I
have said before, there were many reasons, as the nobility of
his family, his eloquence, his frank and open manners, his
liberal and magnificent habits, his familiarity in talking with
everybody, and, at this time particularly, his kindness in
assisting and pitying the sick, joining in all their pains, and
furnishing them with all things necessary, so that the sick and
wounded were even more eager to serve than those that were whole
and strong.

Nevertheless, this last victory had so encouraged the enemy,
that, instead of their former impatience and weariness, they
began soon to feel contempt for the Romans, staying all night
near the camp, in expectation of plundering their tents and
baggage, which they concluded they must abandon; and in the
morning new forces arrived in large masses, so that their number
was grown to be not less, it is said, than forty thousand horse;
and the king had sent the very guards that attended upon his own
person, as to a sure and unquestioned victory.  For he himself
was never present in any fight.  Antony, designing to harangue
the soldiers, called for a mourning habit, that he might move
them the more, but was dissuaded by his friends; so he came
forward in the general's scarlet cloak, and addressed them,
praising those that had gained the victory, and reproaching
those that had fled, the former answering him with promises of
success, and the latter excusing themselves, and telling him
they were ready to undergo decimation, or any other punishment
he should please to inflict upon them, only entreating that he
would forget and not discompose himself with their faults.  At
which he lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed the gods,
that if to balance the great favors he had received of them any
judgment lay in store, they would pour it upon his head alone,
and grant his soldiers victory.

The next day they took better order for their march, and the
Parthians, who thought they were marching rather to plunder than
to fight, were much taken aback, when they came up and were
received with a shower of missiles, to find the enemy not
disheartened, but fresh and resolute.  So that they themselves
began to lose courage.  But at the descent of a hill where the
Romans were obliged to pass, they got together, and let fly
their arrows upon them as they moved slowly down.  But the
full-armed infantry, facing round, received the light troops
within; and those in the first rank knelt on one knee, holding
their shields before them, the next rank holding theirs over the
first, and so again others over these, much like the tiling of a
house, or the rows of seats in a theater, the whole affording
sure defense against arrows, which glance upon them without
doing any harm.  The Parthians, seeing the Romans down upon
their knees, could not imagine but that it must proceed from
weariness; so that they laid down their bows, and, taking their
spears, made a fierce onset, when the Romans, with a great cry,
leapt upon their feet, striking hand to hand with their
javelins, slew the foremost, and put the rest to flight.  After
this rate it was every day, and the trouble they gave made the
marches short; in addition to which famine began to be felt in
the camp, for they could get but little corn, and that which
they got they were forced to fight for; and, besides this, they
were in want of implements to grind it and make bread.  For they
had left almost all behind, the baggage horses being dead or
otherwise employed in carrying the sick and wounded.  Provision
was so scarce in the army that an Attic quart of wheat sold for
fifty drachmas, and barley loaves for their weight in silver.
And when they tried vegetables and roots, they found such as
are commonly eaten very scarce, so that they were constrained to
venture upon any they could get, and, among others, they chanced
upon an herb that was mortal, first taking away all sense and
understanding.  He that had eaten of it remembered nothing in
the world, and employed himself only in moving great stones from
one place to another, which he did with as much earnestness and
industry as if it had been a business of the greatest
consequence.  Through all the camp there was nothing to be seen
but men grubbing upon the ground at stones, which they carried
from place to place.  But in the end they threw up bile and
died, as wine, moreover, which was the one antidote, failed.
When Antony saw them die so fast, and the Parthian still in
pursuit, he was heard to exclaim several times over, "O, the Ten
Thousand!" as if in admiration of the retreat of the Greeks with
Xenophon, who, when they had a longer journey to make from
Babylonia, and a more powerful enemy to deal with, nevertheless
came home safe.

The Parthians, finding that they could not divide the Roman
army, nor break the order of their battle, and that withal they
had been so often worsted, once more began to treat the foragers
with professions of humanity; they came up to them with their
bows unbended, telling them that they were going home to their
houses; that this was the end of their retaliation, and that
only some Median troops would follow for two or three days, not
with any design to annoy them, but for the defense of some of
the villages further on.  And, saying this, they saluted them
and embraced them with a great show of friendship.  This made
the Romans full of confidence again, and Antony, on hearing of
it, was more disposed to take the road through the level
country, being told that no water was to be hoped for on that
through the mountains.  But while he was preparing thus to do,
Mithridates came into the camp, a cousin to Monaeses, of whom we
related that he sought refuge with the Romans, and received in
gift from Antony the three cities.  Upon his arrival, he desired
somebody might be brought to him that could speak Syriac or
Parthian.  One Alexander, of Antioch, a friend of Antony's, was
brought to him, to whom the stranger, giving his name, and
mentioning Monaeses as the person who desired to do the
kindness, put the question, did he see that high range of hills,
pointing at some distance.  He told him, yes.  "It is there,"
said he, "the whole Parthian army lie in wait for your passage;
for the great plains come immediately up to them, and they
expect that, confiding in their promises, you will leave the
way of the mountains, and take the level route.  It is true that
in passing over the mountains you will suffer the want of water,
and the fatigue to which you have become familiar, but if you
pass through the plains, Antony must expect the fortune of
Crassus."

This said, he departed.  Antony, in alarm, calling his friends
in council, sent for the Mardian guide, who was of the same
opinion.  He told them that, with or without enemies, the want
of any certain track in the plain, and the likelihood of their
losing their way, were quite objection enough; the other route
was rough and without water, but then it was but for a day.
Antony, therefore, changing his mind, marched away upon this
road that night, commanding that everyone should carry water
sufficient for his own use; but most of them being unprovided
with vessels, they made shift with their helmets, and some with
skins.  As soon as they started, the news of it was carried to
the Parthians, who followed them, contrary to their custom,
through the night, and at sunrise attacked the rear, which was
tired with marching and want of sleep, and not in condition to
make any considerable defense.  For they had got through two
hundred and forty furlongs that night, and at the end of such a
march to find the enemy at their heels, put them out of heart.
Besides, having to fight for every step of the way increased
their distress from thirst.  Those that were in the van came up
to a river, the water of which was extremely cool and clear, but
brackish and medicinal, and, on being drunk, produced immediate
pains in the bowels and a renewed thirst.  Of this the Mardian
had forewarned them, but they could not forbear, and, beating
back those that opposed them, they drank of it.  Antony ran from
one place to another, begging they would have a little patience,
that not far off there was a river of wholesome water, and that
the rest of the way was so difficult for the horse, that the
enemy could pursue them no further; and, saying this, he ordered
to sound a retreat to call those back that were engaged, and
commanded the tents should be set up, that the soldiers might at
any rate refresh themselves in the shade.

But the tents were scarce well put up, and the Parthians
beginning, according to their custom, to withdraw, when
Mithridates came again to them, and informed Alexander, with
whom he had before spoken, that he would do well to advise
Antony to stay where he was no longer than needs he must, that,
after having refreshed his troops, he should endeavor with all
diligence to gain the next river, that the Parthians would not
cross it, but so far they were resolved to follow them.
Alexander made his report to Antony, who ordered a quantity of
gold plate to be carried to Mithridates, who, taking as much as
be could well hide under his clothes, went his way.  And, upon
this advice, Antony, while it was yet day, broke up his camp,
and the whole army marched forward without receiving any
molestation from the Parthians, though that night by their own
doing was in effect the most wretched and terrible that they
passed.  For some of the men began to kill and plunder those
whom they suspected to have any money, ransacked the baggage,
and seized the money there.  In the end, they laid hands on
Antony's own equipage, and broke all his rich tables and cups,
dividing the fragments amongst them.  Antony, hearing such a
noise and such a stirring to and fro all through the army, the
belief prevailing that the enemy had routed and cut off a
portion of the troops, called for one of his freedmen, then
serving as one of his guards, Rhamnus by name, and made him take
an oath that, whenever he should give him orders, he would run
his sword through his body and cut off his head, that he might
not fall alive into the hands of the Parthians, nor, when dead,
be recognized as the general.  While he was in this
consternation, and all his friends about him in tears, the
Mardian came up, and gave them all new life.  He convinced
them, by the coolness and humidity of the air, which they could
feel in breathing it, that the river which he had spoken of was
now not far off, and the calculation of the time that had been
required to reach it came, he said, to the same result, for the
night was almost spent.  And, at the same time, others came with
information that all the confusion in the camp proceeded only
from their own violence and robbery among themselves.  To
compose this tumult, and bring them again into some order after
their distraction, he commanded the signal to be given for a
halt.

Day began to break, and quiet and regularity were just
reappearing, when the Parthian arrows began to fly among the
rear, and the light armed troops were ordered out to battle.
And, being seconded by the heavy infantry, who covered one
another as before described with their shields, they bravely
received the enemy, who did not think convenient to advance any
further, while the van of the army, marching forward leisurely
in this manner came in sight of the river, and Antony, drawing
up the cavalry on the banks to confront the enemy, first passed
over the sick and wounded.  And, by this time, even those who
were engaged with the enemy had opportunity to drink at their
ease; for the Parthians, on seeing the river, unbent their bows,
and told the Romans they might pass over freely, and made them
great compliments in praise of their valor.  Having crossed
without molestation, they rested themselves awhile, and
presently went forward, not giving perfect credit to the fair
words of their enemies.  Six days after this last battle, they
arrived at the river Araxes, which divides Media and Armenia,
and seemed, both by its deepness and the violence of the
current, to be very dangerous to pass.  A report, also, had
crept in amongst them, that the enemy was in ambush, ready to
set upon them as soon as they should be occupied with their
passage.  But when they were got over on the other side, and
found themselves in Armenia, just as if land was now sighted
after a storm at sea, they kissed the ground for joy, shedding
tears and embracing each other in their delight.  But taking
their journey through a land that abounded in all sorts of
plenty, they ate, after their long want, with that excess of
everything they met with, that they suffered from dropsies and
dysenteries.

Here Antony, making a review of his army, found that he had lost
twenty thousand foot and four thousand horse, of which the
better half perished, not by the enemy, but by diseases.  Their
march was of twenty-seven days from Phraata, during which they
had beaten the Parthians in eighteen battles, though with little
effect or lasting result, because of their being so unable to
pursue.  By which it is manifest that it was Artavasdes who lost
Antony the benefit of the expedition.  For had the sixteen
thousand horsemen whom he led away out of Media, armed in the
same style as the Parthians and accustomed to their manner of
fight, been there to follow the pursuit when the Romans put them
to flight, it is impossible they could have rallied so often
after their defeats, and reappeared again as they did to renew
their attacks.  For this reason, the whole army was very earnest
with Antony to march into Armenia to take revenge.  But he, with
more reflection, forbore to notice the desertion, and continued
all his former courtesies, feeling that the army was wearied
out, and in want of all manner of necessaries.  Afterwards,
however, entering Armenia, with invitations and fair promises he
prevailed upon Artavasdes to meet him, when he seized him, bound
him, and carried him to Alexandria, and there led him in a
triumph; one of the things which most offended the Romans, who
felt as if all the honors and solemn observances of their
country were, for Cleopatra's sake, handed over to the
Egyptians.

This, however, was at an after time.  For the present, marching
his army in great haste in the depth of winter through continual
storms of snow, he lost eight thousand of his men, and came with
much diminished numbers to a place called the White Village,
between Sidon and Berytus, on the seacoast, where he waited for
the arrival of Cleopatra.  And, being impatient of the delay she
made, he bethought himself of shortening the time in wine and
drunkenness, and yet could not endure the tediousness of a meal,
but would start from table and run to see if she were coming.
Till at last she came into port, and brought with her clothes
and money for the soldiers.  Though some say that Antony only
received the clothes from her, and distributed his own money in
her name.

A quarrel presently happened between the king of Media and
Phraates of Parthia, beginning, it is said, about the division
of the booty that was taken from the Romans, and creating great
apprehension in the Median lest he should lose his kingdom.  He
sent, therefore, ambassadors to Antony, with offers of entering
into a confederate war against Phraates.  And Antony, full of
hopes at being thus asked, as a favor, to accept that one thing,
horse and archers, the want of which had hindered his beating
the Parthians before, began at once to prepare for a return to
Armenia, there to join the Medes on the Araxes, and begin the
war afresh.  But Octavia, in Rome, being desirous to see Antony,
asked Caesar's leave to go to him; which he gave her, not so
much, say most authors, to gratify his sister, as to obtain a
fair pretense to begin the war upon her dishonorable reception.
She no sooner arrived at Athens, but by letters from Antony she
was informed of his new expedition, and his will that she should
await him there.  And, though she were much displeased, not
being ignorant of the real reason of this usage, yet she wrote
to him to know to what place he would be pleased she should send
the things she had brought with her for his use; for she had
brought clothes for his soldiers, baggage, cattle, money, and
presents for his friends and officers, and two thousand chosen
soldiers sumptuously armed, to form praetorian cohorts.  This
message was brought from Octavia to Antony by Niger, one of his
friends, who added to it the praises she deserved so well.
Cleopatra, feeling her rival already, as it were, at hand, was
seized with fear, lest if to her noble life and her high
alliance, she once could add the charm of daily habit and
affectionate intercourse, she should become irresistible, and be
his absolute mistress for ever.  So she feigned to be dying for
love of Antony, bringing her body down by slender diet; when he
entered the room, she fixed her eyes upon him in a rapture, and
when he left, seemed to languish and half faint away.  She took
great pains that he should see her in tears, and, as soon as he
noticed it, hastily dried them up and turned away, as if it were
her wish that he should know nothing of it.  All this was acting
while he prepared for Media; and Cleopatra's creatures were not
slow to forward the design, upbraiding Antony with his
unfeeling, hard-hearted temper, thus letting a woman perish
whose soul depended upon him and him alone.  Octavia, it was
true, was his wife, and had been married to him because it was
found convenient for the affairs of her brother that it should
be so, and she had the honor of the title; but Cleopatra, the
sovereign queen of many nations, had been contented with the
name of his mistress, nor did she shun or despise the character
whilst she might see him, might live with him, and enjoy him; if
she were bereaved of this, she would not survive the loss.  In
fine, they so melted and unmanned him, that, fully believing she
would die if he forsook her, he put off the war and returned to
Alexandria, deferring his Median expedition until next summer,
though news came of the Parthians being all in confusion with
intestine disputes.  Nevertheless, he did some time after go
into that country, and made an alliance with the king of Media,
by marriage of a son of his by Cleopatra to the king's daughter,
who was yet very young; and so returned, with his thoughts taken
up about the civil war.

When Octavia returned from Athens, Caesar, who considered she
had been injuriously treated, commanded her to live in a
separate house; but she refused to leave the house of her
husband, and entreated him, unless he had already resolved, upon
other motives, to make war with Antony, that he would on her
account let it alone; it would be intolerable to have it said of
the two greatest commanders in the world, that they had
involved the Roman people in a civil war, the one out of passion
for; the other out of resentment about, a woman.  And her
behavior proved her words to be sincere.  She remained in
Antony's house as if he were at home in it, and took the noblest
and most generous care, not only of his children by her, but of
those by Fulvia also.  She received all the friends of Antony
that came to Rome to seek office or upon any business, and did
her utmost to prefer their requests to Caesar; yet this her
honorable deportment did but, without her meaning it, damage the
reputation of Antony; the wrong he did to such a woman made him
hated.  Nor was the division he made among his sons at
Alexandria less unpopular; it seemed a theatrical piece of
insolence and contempt of his country.  For, assembling the
people in the exercise ground, and causing two golden thrones to
be placed on a platform of silver, the one for him and the other
for Cleopatra, and at their feet lower thrones for their
children, he proclaimed Cleopatra queen of Egypt, Cyprus, Libya,
and Coele-Syria, and with her conjointly Caesarion, the reputed
son of the former Caesar, who left Cleopatra with child.  His
own sons by Cleopatra were to have the style of kings of kings;
to Alexander he gave Armenia and Media, with Parthia, so soon as
it should be overcome; to Ptolemy, Phoenicia, Syria, and
Cilicia.  Alexander was brought out before the people in the
Median costume, the tiara and upright peak, and Ptolemy, in
boots and mantle and Macedonian cap done about with the diadem;
for this was the habit of the successors of Alexander, as the
other was of the Medes and Armenians.  And, as soon as they had
saluted their parents, the one was received by a guard of
Macedonians, the other by one of Armenians.  Cleopatra was then,
as at other times when she appeared in public, dressed in the
habit of the goddess Isis, and gave audience to the people under
the name of the New Isis.

Caesar, relating these things in the senate, and often
complaining to the people, excited men's minds against Antony.
And Antony also sent messages of accusation against Caesar.  The
principal of his charges were these: first, that he had not made
any division with him of Sicily, which was lately taken from
Pompey; secondly, that he had retained the ships he had lent him
for the war; thirdly, that after deposing Lepidus, their
colleague, he had taken for himself the army, governments, and
revenues formerly appropriated to him; and, lastly, that he had
parceled out almost all Italy amongst his own soldiers, and left
nothing for his.  Caesar's answer was as follows: that he had
put Lepidus out of government because of his own misconduct;
that what he had got in war he would divide with Antony, so soon
as Antony gave him a share of Armenia; that Antony's soldiers
had no claims in Italy, being in possession of Media and
Parthia, the acquisitions which their brave actions under their
general had added to the Roman empire.

Antony was in Armenia when this answer came to him, and
immediately sent Canidius with sixteen legions towards the sea;
but he, in the company of Cleopatra, went to Ephesus, whither
ships were coming in from all quarters to form the navy,
consisting, vessels of burden included, of eight hundred
vessels, of which Cleopatra furnished two hundred, together with
twenty thousand talents, and provision for the whole army during
the war.  Antony, on the advice of Domitius and some others,
bade Cleopatra return into Egypt, there to expect the event of
the war; but she, dreading some new reconciliation by Octavia's
means, prevailed with Canidius, by a large sum of money, to
speak in her favor with Antony, pointing out to him that it was
not just that one that bore so great a part in the charge of the
war should be robbed of her share of glory in the carrying it
on: nor would it be politic to disoblige the Egyptians, who were
so considerable a part of his naval forces; nor did he see how
she was inferior in prudence to any one of the kings that were
serving with him; she had long governed a great kingdom by
herself alone, and long lived with him, and gained experience in
public affairs.  These arguments (so the fate that destined all
to Caesar would have it), prevailed; and when all their forces
had met, they sailed together to Samos, and held high
festivities.  For, as it was ordered that all kings, princes,
and governors, all nations and cities within the limits of
Syria, the Maeotid Lake, Armenia, and Illyria, should bring or
cause to be brought all munitions necessary for war, so was it
also proclaimed that all stage-players should make their
appearance at Samos; so that, while pretty nearly the whole
world was filled with groans and lamentations, this one island
for some days resounded with piping and harping, theaters
filling, and choruses playing.  Every city sent an ox as its
contribution to the sacrifice, and the kings that accompanied
Antony competed who should make the most magnificent feasts and
the greatest presents; and men began to ask themselves, what
would be done to celebrate the victory, when they went to such
an expense of festivity at the opening of the war.

This over, he gave Priene to his players for a habitation, and
set sail for Athens, where fresh sports and play-acting employed
him.  Cleopatra, jealous of the honors Octavia had received at
Athens (for Octavia was much beloved by the Athenians), courted
the favor of the people with all sorts of attentions.  The
Athenians, in requital, having decreed her public honors,
deputed several of the citizens to wait upon her at her house;
amongst whom went Antony as one, he being an Athenian citizen,
and he it was that made the speech.  He sent orders to Rome to
have Octavia removed out of his house.  She left it, we are
told, accompanied by all his children, except the eldest by
Fulvia, who was then with his father, weeping and grieving that
she must be looked upon as one of the causes of the war.  But
the Romans pitied, not so much her, as Antony himself, and more
particularly those who had seen Cleopatra, whom they could
report to have no way the advantage of Octavia either in youth
or in beauty.

The speed and extent of Antony's preparations alarmed Caesar,
who feared he might be forced to fight the decisive battle that
summer.  For he wanted many necessaries, and the people grudged
very much to pay the taxes; freemen being called upon to pay a
fourth part of their incomes, and freed slaves an eighth of
their property, so that there were loud outcries against him,
and disturbances throughout all Italy.  And this is looked upon
as one of the greatest of Antony's oversights, that he did not
then press the war.  For he allowed time at once for Caesar to
make his preparations, and for the commotions to pass over.  For
while people were having their money called for, they were
mutinous and violent; but, having paid it, they held their
peace.  Titius and Plancus, men of consular dignity and friends
to Antony, having been ill used by Cleopatra, whom they had most
resisted in her design of being present in the war, came over to
Caesar, and gave information of the contents of Antony's will,
with which they were acquainted.  It was deposited in the hands
of the vestal virgins, who refused to deliver it up, and sent
Caesar word, if he pleased, he should come and seize it himself,
which he did.  And, reading it over to himself, he noted those
places that were most for his purpose, and, having summoned the
senate, read them publicly.  Many were scandalized at the
proceeding, thinking it out of reason and equity to call a man
to account for what was not to be until after his death.  Caesar
specially pressed what Antony said in his will about his burial;
for he had ordered that even if he died in the city of Rome, his
body, after being carried in state through the forum, should be
sent to Cleopatra at Alexandria.  why hither faring,[FN#54]
Strife with strong ones daring?
As if home were flaring, Woe shall come on thee!
Blood from out thee draining Shall thy steeds be staining;
Thou, thy home if gaining, Wounded sore shalt be.

[FN#54] The metre is that of the Irish.

Cuchulain
Hot with indignation, Take I battle-station, Face yon warrior
nation, Round their warlike king:
They shall see me meet thee, Count the strifes that greet thee,
Watch, as down I beat thee, Drowning, suffering.

Ferdia
Here is one to shame thee; How 'twas I o'ercame thee, They who
champion name thee Long the tale shall tell.
Ulster, near thee lying, Soon shall see thee dying; All shall say,
with sighing, Theirs the chief who fell.Calvisius, however, was looked upon as the inventor of most of
these stories.  Antony's friends went up and down the city to
gain him credit, and sent one of themselves, Geminius, to him,
to beg him to take heed and not allow himself to be deprived by
vote of his authority, and proclaimed a public enemy to the
Roman state.  But Geminius no sooner arrived in Greece but he
was looked upon as one of Octavia's spies; at their suppers he
was made a continual butt for mockery, and was put to sit in the
least honorable places; all which he bore very well, seeking
only an occasion of speaking with Antony.  So, at supper, being
told to say what business he came about, he answered he would
keep the rest for a soberer hour, but one thing he had to say,
whether full or fasting, that all would go well if Cleopatra
would return to Egypt.  And on Antony showing his anger at it,
"You have done well, Geminius," said Cleopatra, "to tell your
secret without being put to the rack." So Geminius, after a few
days, took occasion to make his escape and go to Rome.  Many
more of Antony's friends were driven from him by the insolent
usage they had from Cleopatra's flatterers, amongst whom were
Marcus Silanus and Dellius the historian.  And Dellius says he
was afraid of his life, and that Glaucus, the physician,
informed him of Cleopatra's design against him.  She was angry
with him for having said that Antony's friends were served with
sour wine, while at Rome Sarmentus, Caesar's little page (his
delicia, as the Romans call it), drank Falernian.

As soon as Caesar had completed his preparations, he had a
decree made, declaring war on Cleopatra, and depriving Antony of
the authority which he had let a woman exercise in his place.
Caesar added that he had drunk potions that had bereaved him of
his senses, and that the generals they would have to fight with
would be Mardion the eunuch, Pothinus, Iras, Cleopatra's
hairdressing girl, and Charmion, who were Antony's chief
state-councillors.

These prodigies are said to have announced the war.  Pisaurum,
where Antony had settled a colony, on the Adriatic sea, was
swallowed up by an earthquake; sweat ran from one of the marble
statues of Antony at Alba for many days together, and, though
frequently wiped off, did not stop.  When he himself was in the
city of Patrae, the temple of Hercules was struck by lightning,
and, at Athens, the figure of Bacchus was torn by a violent wind
out of the Battle of the Giants, and laid flat upon the
theater; with both which deities Antony claimed connection,
professing to be descended from Hercules, and from his imitating
Bacchus in his way of living having received the name of Young
Bacchus.  The same whirlwind at Athens also brought down, from
amongst many others which were not disturbed, the colossal
statues of Eumenes and Attalus, which were inscribed with
Antony's name.  And in Cleopatra's admiral-galley, which was
called the Antonias, a most inauspicious omen occurred.  Some
swallows had built in the stern of the galley, but other
swallows came, beat the first away, and destroyed their nests.

When the armaments gathered for the war, Antony had no less than
five hundred ships of war, including numerous galleys of eight
and ten banks of oars, as richly ornamented as if they were
meant for a triumph.  He had a hundred thousand foot and twelve
thousand horse.  He had vassal kings attending, Bocchus of
Libya, Tarcondemus of the Upper Cilicia, Archelaus of
Cappadocia, Philadelphus of Paphlagonia, Mithridates of
Commagene, and Sadalas of Thrace; all these were with him in
person.  Out of Pontus Polemon sent him considerable forces, as
did also Malchus from Arabia, Herod the Jew, and Amyntas, king
of Lycaonia and Galatia; also the Median king sent some troops
to join him.  Caesar had two hundred and fifty galleys of war,
eighty thousand foot, and horse about equal to the enemy.
Antony's empire extended from Euphrates and Armenia to the
Ionian sea and the Illyrians; Caesar's, from Illyria to the
westward ocean, and from the ocean all along the Tuscan and
Sicilian sea.  "But tell me how it is that she could be so
beautiful without any heart at all--without any place even for
a heart to live in."

"I cannot quite tell," she said; "but I am sure she would not
look so beautiful if she did not take means to make herself
look more beautiful than she is. And then, you know, you began
by being in love with her before you saw her beauty, mistaking
her for the lady of the marble--another kind altogether, I should
think. But the chief thing that makes her beautiful is this:
that, although she loves no man, she loves the love of any
man; and when she finds one in her power, her desire to bewitch
him and gain his love (not for the sake of his love either, but
that she may be conscious anew of her own beauty, through the
admiration he manifests), makes her very lovely--with a
self-destructive beauty, though; for it is that which is constantly
wearing her away within, till, at last, the decay will reach
her face, and her whole front, when all the lovely mask of
nothing will fall to pieces, and she be vanished for ever.
So a wise man, whom she met in the wood some years ago, and
who, I think, for all his wisdom, fared no better than you,
told me, when, like you, he spent the next night here,
and recounted to me his adventures."
I thanked her very warmly for her solution, though it was but
partial; wondering much that in her, as in woman I met on my
first entering the forest, there should be such superiority
to her apparent condition. Here she left me to take some rest;
though, indeed, I was too much agitated to rest in any other
way than by simply ceasing to move.

In half an hour, I heard a heavy step approach and enter the
house.On the morrow, Antony, seeing the enemy sailing up, and fearing
lest his ships might be taken for want of the soldiers to go on
board of them, armed all the rowers, and made a show upon the
decks of being in readiness to fight; the oars were mounted as
if waiting to be put in motion, and the vessels themselves drawn
up to face the enemy on either side of the channel of Actium, as
though they were properly manned, and ready for an engagement
And Caesar, deceived by this stratagem, retired.  He was also
thought to have shown considerable skill in cutting off the
water from the enemy by some lines of trenches and forts, water
not being plentiful anywhere else, nor very good.  And again,
his conduct to Domitius was generous, much against the will of
Cleopatra.  For when he had made his escape in a little boat to
Caesar, having then a fever upon him, although Antony could not
but resent it highly, yet he sent after him his whole equipage,
with his friends and servants; and Domitius, as if he would give
a testimony to the world how repentant he had become on his
desertion and treachery being thus manifest, died soon after.
Among the kings, also, Amyntas and Deiotarus went over to
Caesar.  And the fleet was so unfortunate in everything that
was undertaken, and so unready on every occasion, that Antony
was driven again to put his confidence in the land-forces.
Canidius, too, who commanded the legions, when he saw how things
stood, changed his opinion, and now was of advice that Cleopatra
should be sent back, and that, retiring into Thrace or
Macedonia, the quarrel should be decided in a land fight.  For
Dicomes, also, the king of the Getae, promised to come and join
him with a great army, and it would not be any kind of
disparagement to him to yield the sea to Caesar, who, in the
Sicilian wars, had had such long practice in ship-fighting; on
the contrary, it would be simply ridiculous for Antony, who was
by land the most experienced commander living, to make no use of
his well-disciplined and numerous infantry, scattering and
wasting his forces by parceling them out in the ships.  But for
all this, Cleopatra prevailed that a sea-fight should determine
all, having already an eye to flight, and ordering all her
affairs, not so as to assist in gaining a victory, but to escape
with the greatest safety from the first commencement of a
defeat.

There were two long walls, extending from the camp to the
station of the ships, between which Antony used to pass to and
fro without suspecting any danger.  But Caesar, upon the
suggestion of a servant that it would not be difficult to
surprise him, laid an ambush, which, rising up somewhat too
hastily, seized the man that came just before him, he himself
escaping narrowly by flight.

When it was resolved to stand to a fight at sea, they set fire
to all the Egyptian ships except sixty; and of these the best
and largest, from ten banks down to three, he manned with twenty
thousand full-armed men, and two thousand archers.  Here it is
related that a foot captain, one that had fought often under
Antony, and had his body all mangled with wounds, exclaimed, "O,
my general, what have our wounds and swords done to displease
you, that you should give your confidence to rotten timbers?
Let Egyptians and Phoenicians contend at sea, give us the land,
where we know well how to die upon the spot or gain the
victory."  To which he answered nothing, but, by his look and
motion of his hand seeming to bid him be of good courage, passed
forwards, having already, it would seem, no very sure hopes,
since when the masters proposed leaving the sails behind them,
he commanded they should be put aboard, "For we must not," said
he, "let one enemy escape."

That day and the three following the sea was so rough they could
not engage.  But on the fifth there was a calm, and they fought;
Antony commanding with Publicola the right, and Coelius the left
squadron, Marcus Octavius and Marcus Insteius the center.
Caesar gave the charge of the left to Agrippa, commanding in
person on the right.  As for the land-forces, Canidius was
general for Antony, Taurus for Caesar; both armies remaining
drawn up in order along the shore.  Antony in a small boat went
from one ship to another, encouraging his soldiers, and bidding
them stand firm, and fight as steadily on their large ships as
if they were on land.  The masters he ordered that they should
receive the enemy lying still as if they were at anchor, and
maintain the entrance of the port, which was a narrow and
difficult passage.  Of Caesar they relate, that, leaving his
tent and going round, while it was yet dark, to visit the ships,
he met a man driving an ass, and asked him his name.  He
answered him that his own name was "Fortunate, and my ass," says
he, "is called Conqueror."  And afterwards, when he disposed
the beaks of the ships in that place in token of his victory,
the statue of this man and his ass in bronze were placed amongst
them.  After examining the rest of his fleet, he went in a boat
to the right wing, and looked with much admiration at the enemy
lying perfectly still in the straits, in all appearance as if
they had been at anchor.  For some considerable length of time
he actually thought they were so, and kept his own ships at
rest, at a distance of about eight furlongs from them.  But
about noon a breeze sprang up from the sea, and Antony's men,
weary of expecting the enemy so long, and trusting to their
large tall vessels, as if they had been invincible, began to
advance the left squadron.  Caesar was overjoyed to see them
move, and ordered his own right squadron to retire, that he
might entice them out to sea as far as he could, his design
being to sail round and round, and so with his light and
well-manned galleys to attack these huge vessels, which their
size and their want of men made slow to move and difficult to
manage.

When they engaged, there was no charging or striking of one ship
by another, because Antony's, by reason of their great bulk,
were incapable of the rapidity required to make the stroke
effectual, and, on the other side, Caesar's durst not charge
head to head on Antony's, which were all armed with solid masses
and spikes of brass; nor did they like even to run in on their
sides, which were so strongly built with great squared pieces of
timber, fastened together with iron bolts, that their vessels'
beaks would easily have been shattered upon them.  So that the
engagement resembled a land fight, or, to speak yet more
properly, the attack and defense of a fortified place; for there
were always three or four vessels of Caesar's about one of
Antony's, pressing them with spears, javelins, poles, and
several inventions of fire, which they flung among them,
Antony's men using catapults also, to pour down missiles from
wooden towers.  Agrippa drawing out the squadron under his
command to outflank the enemy, Publicola was obliged to observe
his motions, and gradually to break off from the middle
squadron, where some confusion and alarm ensued, while
Arruntius engaged them.  But the fortune of the day was still
undecided, and the battle equal, when on a sudden Cleopatra's
sixty ships were seen hoisting sail and making out to sea in
full flight, right through the ships that were engaged.  For
they were placed behind the great ships, which, in breaking
through, they put into disorder.  The enemy was astonished to
see them sailing off with a fair wind towards Peloponnesus.
Here it was that Antony showed to all the world that he was no
longer actuated by the thoughts and motives of a commander or a
man, or indeed by his own judgment at all, and what was once
said as a jest, that the soul of a lover lives in some one
else's body, he proved to be a serious truth.  For, as if he had
been born part of her, and must move with her wheresoever she
went, as soon as he saw her ship sailing away, he abandoned all
that were fighting and spending their lives for him, and put
himself aboard a galley of five ranks of oars, taking with him
only Alexander of Syria and Scellias, to follow her that had so
well begun his ruin and would hereafter accomplish it.

She, perceiving him to follow, gave the signal to come aboard.
So, as soon as he came up with them, he was taken into the ship.
But without seeing her or letting himself be seen by her, he
went forward by himself, and sat alone, without a word, in the
ship's prow, covering his face with his two hands.  In the
meanwhile, some of Caesar's light Liburnian ships, that were in
pursuit, came in sight.  But on Antony's commanding to face
about, they all gave back except Eurycles the Laconian, who
pressed on, shaking a lance from the deck, as if he meant to
hurl it at him.  Antony, standing at the prow, demanded of him,
"Who is this that pursues Antony?"  "I am," said he, "Eurycles,
the son of Lachares, armed with Caesar's fortune to revenge my
father's death."  Lachares had been condemned for a robbery, and
beheaded by Antony's orders.  However, Eurycles did not attack
Antony, but ran with his full force upon the other
admiral-galley (for there were two of them), and with the blow
turned her round, and took both her and another ship, in which
was a quantity of rich plate and furniture.  So soon as Eurycles
was gone, Antony returned to his posture, and sat silent, and
thus he remained for three days, either in anger with Cleopatra,
or wishing not to upbraid her, at the end of which they touched
at Taenarus.  Here the women of their company succeeded first in
bringing them to speak, and afterwards to eat and sleep
together.  And, by this time, several of the ships of burden and
some of his friends began to come in to him from the rout,
bringing news of his fleet's being quite destroyed, but that the
land-forces, they thought, still stood firm.  So that he sent
messengers to Canidius to march the army with all speed through
Macedonia into Asia.  And, designing himself to go from Taenarus
into Africa, he gave one of the merchant ships, laden with a
large sum of money, and vessels of silver and gold of great
value, belonging to the royal collections, to his friends,
desiring them to share it amongst them, and provide for their
own safety.  They refusing his kindness with tears in their
eyes, he comforted them with all the goodness and humanity
imaginable, entreating them to leave him, and wrote letters in
their behalf to Theophilus, his steward, at Corinth, that he
would provide for their security, and keep them concealed till
such time as they could make their peace with Caesar.  This
Theophilus was the father of Hipparchus, who had such interest
with Antony, who was the first of all his freedmen that went
over to Caesar, and who settled afterwards at Corinth.  In this
posture were affairs with Antony.

But at Actium, his fleet, after a long resistance to Caesar, and
suffering the most damage from a heavy sea that set in right
ahead, scarcely, at four in the afternoon, gave up the contest,
with the loss of not more than five thousand men killed, but of
three hundred ships taken, as Caesar himself has recorded.  Only
few had known of Antony's flight; and those who were told of it
could not at first give any belief to so incredible a thing, as
that a general who had nineteen entire legions and twelve
thousand horse upon the sea-shore, could abandon all and fly
away; and he, above all, who had so often experienced both good
and evil fortune, and had in a thousand wars and battles been
inured to changes.  His soldiers, howsoever would not give up
their desires and expectations, still fancying he would appear
from some part or other, and showed such a generous fidelity to
his service, that, when they were thoroughly assured that he was
fled in earnest, they kept themselves in a body seven days,
making no account of the messages that Caesar sent to them.  But
at last, seeing that Canidius himself, who commanded them, was
fled from the camp by night, and that all their officers had
quite abandoned them, they gave way, and made their submission
to the conqueror.  After this, Caesar set sail for Athens, where
he made a settlement with Greece, and distributed what remained
of the provision of corn that Antony had made for his army among
the cities, which were in a miserable condition, despoiled of
their money, their slaves, their horses, and beasts of service.
My great-grandfather Nicarchus used to relate, that the whole
body of the people of our city were put in requisition to carry
each one a certain measure of corn upon their shoulders to the
sea-side near Anticyra, men standing by to quicken them with the
lash.  They had made one journey of the kind, but when they had
just measured out the corn and were putting it on their backs
for a second, news came of Antony's defeat, and so saved
Chaeronea, for all Antony's purveyors and soldiers fled upon the
news, and left them to divide the corn among themselves.

When Antony came into Africa, he sent on Cleopatra from
Paraetonium into Egypt, and stayed himself in the most entire
solitude that he could desire, roaming and wandering about with
only two friends, one a Greek, Aristocrates, a rhetorician, and
the other a Roman, Lucilius, of whom we have elsewhere spoken,
how, at Philippi, to give Brutus time to escape, he suffered
himself to be taken by the pursuers, pretending he was Brutus.
Antony gave him his life, and on this account he remained true
and faithful to him to the last.

He does away with all appearances, and shows me things in their
true colour and form. And I am not one to be fooled with the
vanities of the common crowd. I will not see beauty where there
is none. I will dare to behold things as they are. And if I live
in a waste instead of a paradise, I will live knowing where I
live." But of this a certain exercise of his power which soon
followed quite cured me, turning my feelings towards him once
more into loathing and distrust. It was thus:

One bright noon, a little maiden joined me, coming through the
wood in a direction at right angles to my path. She came along
singing and dancing, happy as a child, though she seemed almost
a woman. In her hands--now in one, now in another--she carried a
small globe, bright and clear as the purest crystal.But the first galleys which were carried over
being burnt by the Arabians of Petra, and Antony not knowing but
that the army before Actium still held together, she desisted
from her enterprise, and gave orders for the fortifying all the
approaches to Egypt.  But Antony, leaving the city and the
conversation of his friends, built him a dwelling-place in the
water, near Pharos, upon a little mole which he cast up in the
sea, and there, secluding himself from the company of mankind,
said he desired nothing but to live the life of Timon; as,
indeed, his case was the same, and the ingratitude and injuries
which he suffered from those he had esteemed his friends, made
him hate and mistrust all mankind.

This Timon was a citizen of Athens, and lived much about the
Peloponnesian war, as may be seen by the comedies of
Aristophanes and Plato, in which he is ridiculed as the hater
and enemy of mankind.  He avoided and repelled the approaches of
everyone, but embraced with kisses and the greatest show of
affection Alcibiades, then in his hot youth.  And when Apemantus
was astonished, and demanded the reason, he replied that he knew
this young man would one day do infinite mischief to the
Athenians.  He never admitted anyone into his company, except
at times this Apemantus, who was of the same sort of temper, and
was an imitator of his way of life.  At the celebration of the
festival of flagons, these two kept the feast together, and
Apemantus saying to him, "What a pleasant party, Timon!"  "It
would be," he answered, "if you were away."  One day he got up
in a full assembly on the speaker's place, and when there was a
dead silence and great wonder at so unusual a sight, he said,
"Ye men of Athens, I have a little plot of ground, and in it
grows a fig-tree, on which many citizens have been pleased to
hang themselves; and now, having resolved to build in that
place, I wished to announce it publicly that any of you who may
be desirous may go and hang yourselves before I cut it down."
He died and was buried at Halae, near the sea, where it so
happened that, after his burial, a land-slip took place on the
point of the shore, and the sea, flowing in, surrounded his
tomb, and made it inaccessible to the foot of man.  It bore this
inscription: --

Here am I laid, my life of misery done.
Ask not my name, I curse you every one.

And this epitaph was made by himself while yet alive; that which
is more generally known is by Callimachus: --

Timon, the misanthrope, am I below.
Go, and revile me, traveler, only go.

Thus much of Timon, of whom much more might be said.  Canidius
now came, bringing word in person of the loss of the army before
Actium.  Then he received news that Herod of Judaea was gone
over to Caesar with some legions and cohorts, and that the other
kings and princes were in like manner deserting him, and that,
out of Egypt, nothing stood by him.  All this, however, seemed
not to disturb him, but, as if he were glad to put away all
hope, that with it he might be rid of all care, and leaving his
habitation by the sea, which he called the Timoneum, he was
received by Cleopatra in the palace, and set the whole city into
a course of feasting, drinking, and presents.  The son of Caesar
and Cleopatra was registered among the youths, and Antyllus, his
own son by Fulvia, received the gown without the purple border,
given to those that are come of age; in honor of which the
citizens of Alexandria did nothing but feast and revel for many
days.  They themselves broke up the Order of the Inimitable
Livers, and constituted another in its place, not inferior in
splendor, luxury, and sumptuosity, calling it that of the Diers
together. For all those that said they would die with Antony
and Cleopatra gave in their names, for the present passing their
time in all manner of pleasures and a regular succession of
banquets.  But Cleopatra was busied in making a collection of
all varieties of poisonous drugs, and, in order to see which of
them were the least painful in the operation, she had them tried
upon prisoners condemned to die.  But, finding that the quick
poisons always worked with sharp pains, and that the less
painful were slow, she next tried venomous animals, and watched
with her own eyes whilst they were applied, one creature to the
body of another.  This was her daily practice, and she pretty
well satisfied herself that nothing was comparable to the bite
of the asp, which, without convulsion or groaning, brought on a
heavy drowsiness and lethargy, with a gentle sweat on the face,
the senses being stupefied by degrees; the patient, in
appearance, being sensible of no pain, but rather troubled to be
disturbed or awakened, like those that are in a profound natural
sleep.

At the same time, they sent ambassadors to Caesar into Asia,
Cleopatra asking for the kingdom of Egypt for her children, and
Antony, that he might have leave to live as a private man in
Egypt, or, if that were thought too much, that he might retire
to Athens.  In lack of friends, so many having deserted, and
others not being trusted, Euphronius, his son's tutor, was sent
on this embassy.  For Alexas of Laodicea, who, by the
recommendation of Timagenes, became acquainted with Antony at
Rome, and had been more powerful with him than any Greek, and
was, of all the instruments which Cleopatra made use of to
persuade Antony, the most violent, and the chief subverter of
any good thoughts that, from time to time, might rise in his
mind in Octavia's favor, had been sent before to dissuade Herod
from desertion; but, betraying his master, stayed with him, and,
confiding in Herod's interest, had the boldness to come into
Caesar's presence.  Herod, however, was not able to help him,
for he was immediately put in chains, and sent into his own
country, where, by Caesar's order, he was put to death.  This
reward of his treason Alexas received while Antony was yet
alive.

Caesar would not listen to any proposals for Antony, but he made
answer to Cleopatra, that there was no reasonable favor which
she might not expect, if she put Antony to death, or expelled
him from Egypt.  He sent back with the ambassadors his own
freedman Thyrsus, a man of understanding, and not at all
ill-qualified for conveying the messages of a youthful general
to a woman so proud of her charms and possessed with the opinion
of the power of her beauty.  But by the long audiences he
received from her, and the special honors which she paid him,
Antony's jealousy began to be awakened; he had him seized,
whipped, and sent back; writing Caesar word that the man's busy,
impertinent ways had provoked him; in his circumstances he could
not be expected to be very patient: "But if it offend you," he
added, "you have got my freedman, Hipparchus, with you; hang him
up and scourge him to make us even."  But Cleopatra, after this,
to clear herself, and to allay his jealousies, paid him all the
attentions imaginable.  When her own birthday came, she kept it
as was suitable to their fallen fortunes; but his was observed
with the utmost prodigality of splendor and magnificence, so
that many of the guests sat down in want, and went home wealthy
men.  J. Williams, W.W. Ffoulkes, E.A. Freeman (Architecture of
Llandaff Cathedral), &c., &c., with Illustrations by Jewitt.

Also, now completed, price 11s. cloth lettered, Vol. IV., First
Series, for 1849. Vols. II. and III. may still be had, price
11s.
each, with numerous Illustrations on copper and wood.

On the 15th of April will be published, reprinted from the
ARCHÆOLOGIA CAMBRENSIS,
NOTES on the Architectural Antiquities of the District of Gower,
in Glamorganshire. With Illustrations on Copper.She had caused to be built, joining to the temple of Isis,
several tombs and monuments of wonderful height, and very
remarkable for the workmanship; thither she removed her
treasure, her gold, silver, emeralds, pearls, ebony, ivory,
cinnamon, and, after all, a great quantity of torchwood and tow.
Upon which Caesar began to fear lest she should, in a desperate
fit, set all these riches on fire; and, therefore, while he was
marching towards the city with his army, he omitted no occasion
of giving her new assurances of his good intentions.  He took up
his position in the Hippodrome, where Antony made a fierce sally
upon him, routed the horse, and beat them back into their
trenches, and so returned with great satisfaction to the palace,
where, meeting Cleopatra, armed as he was, he kissed her, and
commended to her favor one of his men, who had most signalized
himself in the fight, to whom she made a present of a
breastplate and helmet of gold; which he having received, went
that very night and deserted to Caesar.

After this, Antony sent a new challenge to Caesar, to fight him
hand to hand; who made him answer that he might find several
other ways to end his life; and he, considering with himself
that he could not die more honorably than in battle, resolved to
make an effort both by land and sea.  At supper, it is said, he
bade his servants help him freely, and pour him out wine
plentifully, since tomorrow, perhaps, they should not do the
same, but be servants to a new master, whilst he should lie on
the ground, a dead corpse, and nothing.  His friends that were
about him wept to hear him talk so; which he perceiving, told
them he would not lead them to a battle in which he expected
rather an honorable death than either safety or victory.  That
night, it is related, about the middle of it, when the whole
city was in a deep silence and general sadness, expecting the
event of the next day, on a sudden was heard the sound of all
sorts of instruments, and voices singing in tune, and the cry of
a crowd of people shouting and dancing, like a troop of
bacchanals on its way.  This tumultuous procession seemed to
take its course right through the middle of the city to the gate
nearest the enemy; here it became loudest, and suddenly passed
out.  People who reflected considered this to signify that
Bacchus, the god whom Antony had always made it his study to
copy and imitate, had now forsaken him.

As soon as it was light, he marched his infantry out of the
city, and posted them upon a rising ground, from whence he saw
his fleet make up to the enemy.  There he stood in expectation
of the event; but, as soon as the fleets came near to one
another, his men saluted Caesar's with their oars; and, on their
responding, the whole body of the ships, forming into a single
fleet, rowed up direct to the city.  Antony had no sooner seen
this, but the horse deserted him, and went over to Caesar; and
his foot being defeated, he retired into the city, crying out
that Cleopatra had betrayed him to the enemies he had made for
her sake.  She, being afraid lest in his fury and despair he
might do her a mischief, fled to her monument, and letting down
the falling doors, which were strong with bars and bolts, she
sent messengers who should tell Antony she was dead.  He,
believing it, cried out, "Now, Antony, why delay longer?  Fate
has snatched away the only pretext for which you could say you
desired yet to live."  Going into his chamber, and there
loosening and opening his coat of armor, "I am not," said he,
"troubled, Cleopatra, to be at present bereaved of you, for I
shall soon be with you; but it distresses me that so great a
general should be found of a tardier courage than a woman."  He
had a faithful servant, whose name was Eros; he had engaged him
formerly to kill him when he should think it necessary, and now
he put him to his promise.  Eros drew his sword, as designing to
kill him, but, suddenly turning round, he slew himself.  And as
he fell dead at his feet, "It is well done, Eros," said Antony;
"you show your master how to do what you had not the heart to do
yourself;" and so he ran himself into the belly, and laid
himself upon the couch.  The wound, however, was not immediately
mortal; and the flow of blood ceasing when he lay down,
presently he came to himself, and entreated those that were
about him to put him out of his pain; but they all fled out of
the chamber, and left him crying out and struggling, until
Diomede, Cleopatra's secretary, came to him, having orders from
her to bring him into the monument.

When he understood she was alive, he eagerly gave order to the
servants to take him up, and in their arms was carried to the
door of the building.  Cleopatra would not open the door, but,
looking from a sort of window, she let down ropes and cords, to
which Antony was fastened; and she and her two women, the only
persons she had allowed to enter the monument, drew him up.
Those that were present say that nothing was ever more sad than
this spectacle, to see Antony, covered all over with blood and
just expiring, thus drawn up, still holding up his hands to her,
and lifting up his body with the little force he had left.  As,
indeed, it was no easy task for the women; and Cleopatra, with
all her force, clinging to the rope, and straining with her head
to the ground, with difficulty pulled him up, while those below
encouraged her with their cries, and joined in all her effort
and anxiety.  When she had got him up, she laid him on the bed,
tearing all her clothes, which she spread upon him; and, beating
her breasts with her hands, lacerating herself, and disfiguring
her own face with the blood from his wounds, she called him her
lord, her husband, her emperor, and seemed to have pretty nearly
forgotten all her own evils, she was so intent upon his
misfortunes.  Antony, stopping her lamentations as well as he
could, called for wine to drink, either that he was thirsty; or
that he imagined that it might put him the sooner out of pain.
When he had drunk, he advised her to bring her own affairs, so
far as might be honorably done, to a safe conclusion, and that,
among all the friends of Caesar, she should rely on Proculeius;
that she should not pity him in this last turn of fate, but
rather rejoice for him in remembrance of his past happiness, who
had been of all men the most illustrious and powerful, and, in
the end, had fallen not ignobly, a Roman by a Roman overcome.

Just as he breathed his last, Proculeius arrived from Caesar;
for when Antony gave himself his wound, and was carried in to
Cleopatra, one of his guards, Dercetaeus, took up Antony's sword
and hid it; and, when he saw his opportunity, stole away to
Caesar, and brought him the first news of Antony's death, and
withal showed him the bloody sword.  Caesar, upon this, retired
into the inner part of his tent, and, giving some tears to the
death of one that had been nearly allied to him in marriage, his
colleague in empire, and companion in so many wars and dangers,
he came out to his friends, and, bringing with him many letters,
he read to them with how much reason and moderation he had
always addressed himself to Antony, and in return what
overbearing and arrogant answers he received.  Then he sent
Proculeius to use his utmost endeavors to get Cleopatra alive
into his power; for he was afraid of losing a great treasure,
and, besides, she would be no small addition to the glory of his
triumph.  She, however, was careful not to put herself in
Proculeius's power; but from within her monument, he standing on
the outside of a door, on the level of the ground, which was
strongly barred, but so that they might well enough hear one
another's voice, she held a conference with him; she demanding
that her kingdom might be given to her children, and he bidding
her be of good courage, and trust Caesar for everything.

Having taken particular notice of the place, he returned to
Caesar, and Gallus was sent to parley with her the second time;
who, being come to the door, on purpose prolonged the
conference, while Proculeius fixed his scaling-ladders in the
window through which the women had pulled up Antony.  And so
entering, with two men to follow him, he went straight down to
the door where Cleopatra was discoursing with Gallus.  One of
the two women who were shut up in the monument with her cried
out, "Miserable Cleopatra, you are taken prisoner!"  Upon which
she turned quick, and, looking at Proculeius, drew out her
dagger, which she had with her to stab herself.  But Proculeius
ran up quickly, and, seizing her with both his hands, "For
shame," said he, "Cleopatra; you wrong yourself and Caesar much,
who would rob him of so fair an occasion of showing his
clemency, and would make the world believe the most gentle of
commanders to be a faithless and implacable enemy."  And so,
taking the dagger out of her hand, he also shook her dress to
see if there were any poison hid in it.  After this, Caesar sent
Epaphroditus, one of his freedmen, with orders to treat her with
all the gentleness and civility possible, but to take the
strictest precautions to keep her alive.

In the meanwhile, Caesar made his entry into Alexandria, with
Areius the philosopher at his side, holding him by the hand and
talking with him; desiring that all his fellow-citizens should
see what honor was paid to him, and should look up to him
accordingly from the very first moment.  Then, entering the
exercise-ground, he mounted a platform erected for the purpose,
and from thence commanded the citizens (who, in great fear and
consternation, fell prostrate at his feet) to stand up, and told
them, that he freely acquitted the people of all blame, first,
for the sake of Alexander, who built their city; then, for the
city's sake itself, which was so large and beautiful; and,
thirdly, to gratify his friend Areius.

Such great honor did Areius receive from Caesar; and by his
intercession many lives were saved, amongst the rest that of
Philostratus, a man, of all the professors of logic that ever
were, the most ready in extempore speaking, but quite destitute
of any right to call himself one of the philosophers of the
Academy.  Caesar, out of disgust at his character, refused all
attention to his entreaties.  So, growing a long, white beard,
and dressing himself in black, he followed behind Areius,
shouting out the verse,

The wise, if they are wise, will save the wise.

Which Caesar hearing, gave him his pardon, to prevent rather any
odium that might attach to Areius, than any harm that
Philostratus might suffer.

Of Antony's children, Antyllus, his son by Fulvia, being
betrayed by his tutor, Theodorus, was put to death; and while
the soldiers were cutting off his head, his tutor contrived to
steal a precious jewel which he wore about his neck, and put it
into his pocket, and afterwards denied the fact, but was
convicted and crucified.  Cleopatra's children, with their
attendants, had a guard set on them, and were treated very
honorably.  Caesarion, who was reputed to be the son of Caesar
the Dictator, was sent by his mother, with a great sum of money,
through Ethiopia, to pass into India; but his tutor, a man named
Rhodon, about as honest as Theodorus, persuaded him to turn
back, for that Caesar designed to make him king.  Caesar
consulting what was best to be done with him, Areius, we are
told, said,

Too many Caesars are not well.

So, afterwards, when Cleopatra was dead, he was killed.

Many kings and great commanders made petition to Caesar for the
body of Antony, to give him his funeral rites; but he would not
take away his corpse from Cleopatra, by whose hands he was
buried with royal splendor and magnificence, it being granted to
her to employ what she pleased on his funeral.  In this
extremity of grief and sorrow, and having inflamed and ulcerated
her breasts with beating them, she fell into a high fever, and
was very glad of the occasion, hoping, under this pretext, to
abstain from food, and so to die in quiet without interference.
She had her own physician, Olympus, to whom she told the truth,
and asked his advice and help to put an end to herself, as
Olympus himself has told us, in a narrative which he wrote of
these events.  But Caesar, suspecting her purpose, took to
menacing language about her children, and excited her fears for
them, before which engines her purpose shook and gave way, so
that she suffered those about her to give her what meat or
medicine they pleased.

Some few days after, Caesar himself came to make her a visit and
comfort her.  She lay then upon her pallet-bed in undress,
and, on his entering in, sprang up from off her bed, having
nothing on but the one garment next her body, and flung herself
at his feet, her hair and face looking wild and disfigured, her
voice quivering, and her eyes sunk in her head.  The marks of
the blows she had given herself were visible about her bosom,
and altogether her whole person seemed no less afflicted than
her soul.  But, for all this, her old charm, and the boldness of
her youthful beauty had not wholly left her, and, in spite of
her present condition, still sparkled from within, and let
itself appear in all the movements of her countenance.  Caesar,
desiring her to repose herself, sat down by her; and, on this
opportunity, she said something to justify her actions,
attributing what she had done to the necessity she was under,
and to her fear of Antony; and when Caesar, on each point, made
his objections, and she found herself confuted, she broke off at
once into language of entreaty and deprecation, as if she
desired nothing more than to prolong her life.  And at last,
having by her a list of her treasure, she gave it into his
hands; and when Seleucus, one of her stewards, who was by,
pointed out that various articles were omitted, and charged her
with secreting them, she flew up and caught him by the hair, and
struck him several blows on the face.  Caesar smiling and
withholding her, "Is it not very hard, Caesar," said she, "when
you do me the honor to visit me in this condition I am in, that
I should be accused by one of my own servants of laying by some
women's toys, not meant to adorn, be sure, my unhappy self, but
that I might have some little present by me to make your Octavia
and your Livia, that by their intercession I might hope to find
you in some measure disposed to mercy?"  Caesar was pleased to
hear her talk thus, being now assured that she was desirous to
live.  And, therefore, letting her know that the things she had
laid by she might dispose of as she pleased, and his usage of
her should be honorable above her expectation, he went away,
well satisfied that he had overreached her, but, in fact, was
himself deceived.

There was a young man of distinction among Caesar's companions,
named Cornelius Dolabella.  He was not without a certain
tenderness for Cleopatra, and sent her word privately, as she
had besought him to do, that Caesar was about to return through
Syria, and that she and her children were to be sent on within
three days.  When she understood this, she made her request to
Caesar that he would be pleased to permit her to make oblations
to the departed Antony; which being granted, she ordered herself
to be carried to the place where he was buried, and there,
accompanied by her women, she embraced his tomb with tears in
her eyes, and spoke in this manner: "O, dearest Antony," said
she, "it is not long since that with these hands I buried you;
then they were free, now I am a captive, and pay these last
duties to you with a guard upon me, for fear that my just griefs
and sorrows should impair my servile body, and make it less fit
to appear in their triumph over you.  No further offerings or
libations expect from me; these are the last honors that
Cleopatra can pay your memory, for she is to be hurried away far
from you.  Nothing could part us whilst we lived, but death
seems to threaten to divide us.  You, a Roman born, have found a
grave in Egypt; I, an Egyptian, am to seek that favor, and none
but that, in your country.  But if the gods below, with whom
you now are, either can or will do anything (since those above
have betrayed us), suffer not your living wife to be abandoned;
let me not be led in triumph to your shame, but hide me and bury
me here with you, since, amongst all my bitter misfortunes,
nothing has afflicted me like this brief time that I have lived
away from you."

Having made these lamentations, crowning the tomb with garlands
and kissing it, she gave orders to prepare her a bath, and,
coming out of the bath, she lay down and made a sumptuous meal.
And a country fellow brought her a little basket, which the
guards intercepting and asking what it was, the fellow put the
leaves which lay uppermost aside, and showed them it was full of
figs; and on their admiring the largeness and beauty of the
figs, he laughed, and invited them to take some, which they
refused, and, suspecting nothing, bade him carry them in.  After
her repast, Cleopatra sent to Caesar a letter which she had
written and sealed; and, putting everybody out of the monument
but her two women, she shut the doors.  Caesar, opening her
letter, and finding pathetic prayers and entreaties that she
might be buried in the same tomb with Antony, soon guessed what
was doing.  At first he was going himself in all haste, but,
changing his mind, he sent others to see.  The thing had been
quickly done.  The messengers came at full speed, and found the
guards apprehensive of nothing; but on opening the doors, they
saw her stone-dead, lying upon a bed of gold, set out in all her
royal ornaments.  Iras, one of her women, lay dying at her feet,
and Charmion, just ready to fall, scarce able to hold up her
head, was adjusting her mistress's diadem.  And when one that
came in said angrily, "Was this well done of your lady,
Charmion?"  "Extremely well," she answered, "and as became the
descendant of so many kings"; and as she said this, she fell
down dead by the bedside.

Some relate that an asp was brought in amongst those figs and
covered with the leaves, and that Cleopatra had arranged that it
might settle on her before she knew, but, when she took away
some of the figs and saw it, she said, "So here it is," and held
out her bare arm to be bitten.  Others say that it was kept in a
vase, and that she vexed and pricked it with a golden spindle
till it seized her arm.  But what really took place is known to
no one.  Since it was also said that she carried poison in a
hollow bodkin, about which she wound her hair; yet there was not
so much as a spot found, or any symptom of poison upon her body,
nor was the asp seen within the monument; only something like
the trail of it was said to have been noticed on the sand by the
sea, on the part towards which the building faced and where the
windows were.  Some relate that two faint puncture-marks were
found on Cleopatra's arm, and to this account Caesar seems to
have given credit; for in his triumph there was carried a figure
of Cleopatra, with an asp clinging to her.  Such are the various
accounts.  Perhaps the allusion is to the capture of Etain by
Mider as prize at chess from her husband. Fand may be claiming
superiority over a rival fairy beauty.

Lines 17 and 18 repeat lines 13 and 14.

Lines 46 and 47 are translated by Thurneysen, "Too hard have I
been offended; Laeg, son of Riangabra, farewell," but there
is no "farewell" in the Irish. The lines seem to be: "Indeed the
offence was great, O Laeg, O thou son of Riangabra," and the
words are an answer to Laeg, who may be supposed to try to
stop her flight.

PAGE 85
Line 24. "That she might forget her jealousy," lit. "a drink of
forgetfulness of her jealousy," deoga dermait a heta. The
translation seems to be an accepted one, and certainly gives
sense, but it is doubtful whether or not eta can be regarded
as a genitive of et, "jealousy "; the genitive elsewhere is
eoit.

There is a conclusion to this romance which is plainly added by
the compiler: it is reproduced here, to show the difference
between its style and the style of the original author:

"This then was a token given to Cuchulain that he should be
destroyed by the People of the Mound, for the power of the
demons was great before the advent of the Faith; so great was
that power that the demons warred against men in bodily
form, and they showed delights and secret things to them; and
that those demons were co-eternal was believed by them. So that
from the signs that they showed, men called them the Ignorant
Folk of the Mounds, the People of the Sid."

THE EXILE OF THE SONS OF USNACH

PAGE 91
The four pieces of rhetoric, at the beginning of this text are
translated by Thurneysen, Sagen aus dem alten Irland, pp.
11 and 12.

In the first, third, and fourth of those, the only difference of
any importance between the text adopted and Thurneysen's versions
is the third line of the third piece, which perhaps should run:
"With stately eyes with blue pupils," segdaib suilib sellglassaib,
taking the text of the Yellow Book of Lecan.

The second piece appears to run as follows:

Let Cathbad hear, the fair one, with face that all love, the
prince, the royal diadem, let he who is extolled be increased
by druid arts of the Druid:
because I have no words of wisdom to oppose (?) to Feidlimid, the
light of knowledge; for the nature of woman knows not what is under
her body, (or) what in the hollow of my womb cries out.
These rhetorics are remarkable for the great number of the alliterations
in the original.

PAGE 93
Thurneysen omits a verse of Cathbad's poem. A translation of the
whole seems to run thus:
Deirdre, great cause of destruction, though thou art fair of face,
famous, pale, Ulster shall sorrow in thy time, thou hidden (?)
daughter of Feidlimid.
Windisch's Dict. gives "modest daughter" in the last line; the
original is ingen fial. But the word might be more closely connected
with fial, "a veil." "Modest" is not exactly the epithet that one
would naturally apply to the Deirdre of the Leinster version, and
the epithet of "veiled" or "hidden" would suit her much better, the
reference being to her long concealment by Conor.Antony's father was well
enough in other respects, but was no warrior, and could bequeath
no great legacy of reputation to his son, who had the boldness,
nevertheless, to take upon him the government, to which birth
gave him no claim, which had been held by Caesar, and became the
inheritor of his great labors.  And such power did he attain,
with only himself to thank for it, that, in a division of the
whole empire into two portions, he took and received the nobler
one; and, absent himself, by his mere subalterns and lieutenants
often defeated the Parthians, and drove the barbarous nations of
the Caucasus back to the Caspian Sea.  Those very things that
procured him ill-repute bear witness to his greatness.
Antigonus considered Antipater's daughter Phila, in spite of the
disparity of her years, an advantageous match for Demetrius.
Antony was thought disgraced by his marriage with Cleopatra, a
queen superior in power and glory to all, except Arsaces, who
were kings in her time.  Antony was so great as to be thought by
others worthy of higher things than his own desires.

As regards the right and justice of their aims at empire,
Demetrius need not be blamed for seeking to rule a people that
had always had a king to rule them.  Antony, who enslaved the
Roman people, just liberated from the rule of Caesar, followed a
cruel and tyrannical object.  His greatest and most illustrious
work, his successful war with Brutus and Cassius, was done to
crush the liberties of his country and of his fellow-citizens.
Demetrius, till he was driven to extremity, went on, without
intermission, maintaining liberty in Greece, and expelling the
foreign garrisons from the cities; not like Antony, whose boast
was to have slain in Macedonia those who had set up liberty in
Rome.  As for the profusion and magnificence of his gifts,
one point for which Antony is lauded, Demetrius so far outdid
them, that what he gave to his enemies was far more than Antony
ever gave to his friends.  Antony was renowned for giving Brutus
honorable burial; Demetrius did so to all the enemy's dead, and
sent the prisoners back to Ptolemy with money and presents.

Both were insolent in prosperity, and abandoned themselves to
luxuries and enjoyments.  Yet it cannot be said that Demetrius,
in his revelings and dissipations, ever let slip the time for
action; pleasures with him attended only the superabundance of
his ease, and his Lamia, like that of the fable, belonged only
to his playful, half-waking, half-sleeping hours.  When war
demanded his attention, his spear was not wreathed with ivy, nor
his helmet redolent of unguents; he did not come out to battle
from the women's chamber, but, hushing the bacchanal shouts and
putting an end to the orgies, he became at once, as Euripides
calls it, "the minister of the unpriestly Mars;" and, in short,
he never once incurred disaster through indolence or
self-indulgence.  Whereas Antony, like Hercules in the picture
where Omphale is seen removing his club and stripping him of his
lion's skin, was over and over again disarmed by Cleopatra, and
beguiled away, while great actions and enterprises of the first
necessity fell, as it were, from his hands, to go with her to
the seashore of Canopus and Taphosiris, and play about.  And in
the end, like another Paris, he left the battle to fly to her
arms; or rather, to say the truth, Paris fled when he was
already beaten; Antony fled first, and, to follow Cleopatra,
abandoned his victory.

There was no law to prevent Demetrius from marrying several
wives; from the time of Philip and Alexander, it had become
usual with Macedonian kings, and he did no more than was done by
Lysimachus and Ptolemy.  And those he married he treated
honorably.  But Antony, first of all, in marrying two wives at
once, did a thing which no Roman had ever allowed himself; and
then he drove away his lawful Roman wife to please the foreign
and unlawful woman.  And so Demetrius incurred no harm at all;
Antony procured his ruin by his marriage.  On the other hand, no
licentious act of Antony's can be charged with that impiety
which marks those of Demetrius.  Historical writers tell us that
the very dogs are excluded from the whole Acropolis, because of
their gross, uncleanly habits.  The very Parthenon itself saw
Demetrius consorting with harlots and debauching free women of
Athens.  The vice of cruelty, also, remote as it seems from the
indulgence of voluptuous desires, must be attributed to him,
who, in the pursuit of his pleasures, allowed, or to say more
truly, compelled the death of the most beautiful and most chaste
of the Athenians, who found no way but this to escape his
violence.  In one word, Antony himself suffered by his excesses,
and other people by those of Demetrius.

In his conduct to his parents, Demetrius was irreproachable.
Antony gave up his mother's brother, in order that he might have
leave to kill Cicero, this itself being so cruel and shocking an
act, that Antony would hardly be forgiven if Cicero's death had
been the price of this uncle's safety.  In respect of breaches
of oaths and treaties, the seizure of Artabazes, and the
assassination of Alexander, Antony may urge the plea which no
one denies to be true, that Artabazes first abandoned and
betrayed him in Media; Demetrius is alleged by many to have
invented false pretexts for his act, and not to have retaliated
for injuries, but to have accused one whom he injured himself.

The achievements of Demetrius are all his own work.  Antony's
noblest and greatest victories were won in his absence by his
lieutenants.  For their final disasters they have both only to
thank themselves; not, however, in an equal degree.  Demetrius
was deserted, the Macedonians revolted from him: Antony deserted
others, and ran away while men were fighting for him at the risk
of their lives.  The fault to be found with the one is that he
had thus entirely alienated the affections of his soldiers; the
other's condemnation is that he abandoned so much love and faith
as he still possessed.  We cannot admire the death of either,
but that of Demetrius excites our greater contempt.  He let
himself become a prisoner, and was thankful to gain a three
years' accession of life in captivity.  He was tamed like a wild
beast by his belly, and by wine; Antony took himself out of the
world in a cowardly, pitiful, and ignoble manner, but, still in
time to prevent the enemy having his person in their power.


DION

If it be true, Sosius Senecio, that, as Simonides tells us,

"Of the Corinthians Troy does not complain"

for having taken part with the Achaeans in the siege, because
the Trojans also had Corinthians (Glaucus, who sprang from
Corinth,) fighting bravely on their side, so also it may be
fairly said that neither Romans nor Greeks can quarrel with the
Academy, each nation being equally represented in the following
pair of lives, which will give an account of Brutus and of Dion,
-- Dion, who was Plato's own hearer, and Brutus, who was brought
up in his philosophy.  They came from one and the selfsame
school, where they had been trained alike, to run the race of
honor; nor need we wonder that in the performance of actions
often most nearly allied and akin, they both bore evidence to
the truth of what their guide and teacher had said, that,
without the concurrence of power and success with justice and
prudence, public actions do not attain their proper, great, and
noble character.  For as Hippomachus the wrestling-master
affirmed, he could distinguish his scholars at a distance.
though they were but carrying meat from the shambles, so it is
very probable that the principles of those who have had the same
good education should appear with a resemblance in all their
actions, creating in them a certain harmony and proportion, at
once agreeable and becoming.

We may also draw a close parallel of the lives of the two men
from their fortunes, wherein chance, even more than their own
designs, made them nearly alike.  For they were both cut off by
an untimely death, not being able to accomplish those ends which
through many risks and difficulties they aimed at.  But, above
all, this is most wonderful; that by preternatural interposition
both of them had notice given of their approaching death by an
unpropitious form, which visibly appeared to them.  Although
there are people who utterly deny any such thing, and say that
no man in his right senses ever yet saw any supernatural phantom
or apparition, but that children only, and silly women, or men
disordered by sickness, in some aberration of the mind or
distemperature of the body, have had empty and extravagant
imaginations, whilst the real evil genius, superstition, was in
themselves.  Yet if Dion and Brutus, men of solid understanding,
and philosophers, not to be easily deluded by fancy or
discomposed by any sudden apprehension, were thus affected by
visions, that they forthwith declared to their friends what they
had seen, I know not how we can avoid admitting again the
utterly exploded opinion of the oldest times, that evil and
beguiling spirits, out of an envy to good men, and a desire of
impeding their good deeds, make efforts to excite in them
feelings of terror and distraction, to make them shake and
totter in their virtue, lest by a steady and unbiased
perseverance they should obtain a happier condition than these
beings after death.  But I shall leave these things for another
opportunity, and, in this twelfth book of the lives of great men
compared one with another, begin with his who was the elder.

Dionysius the First, having possessed himself of the government,
at once took to wife the daughter of Hermocrates, the Syracusan.
She, in an outbreak which the citizens made before the new power
was well settled, was abused in such a barbarous and outrageous
manner, that for shame she put an end to her own life.  But
Dionysius, when he was reestablished and confirmed in his
supremacy, married two wives together, one named Doris, of
Locri, the other, Aristomache, a native of Sicily, and daughter
of Hipparinus, a man of the first quality in Syracuse, and
colleague with Dionysius when he was first chosen general with
unlimited powers for the war.  It is said he married them both
in one day, and no one ever knew which of the two he first made
his wife; and ever after he divided his kindness equally between
them, both accompanying him together at his table, and in his
bed by turns.  Indeed, the Syracusans were urgent that their own
countrywoman might be preferred before the stranger; but Doris,
to compensate for her foreign extraction; had the good fortune
to be the mother of the son and heir of the family, whilst
Aristomache continued a long time without issue, though
Dionysius was very desirous to have children by her, and,
indeed, caused Doris's mother to be put to death, laying to her
charge that she had given drugs to Aristomache, to prevent her
being with child.

Dion, Aristomache's brother, at first found an honorable
reception for his sister's sake; but his own worth and parts
soon procured him a nearer place in his brother-in-law's
affection, who, among other favors, gave special command to his
treasurers to furnish Dion with whatever money he demanded, only
telling him on the same day what they had delivered out.  Now,
though Dion was before reputed a person of lofty character; of a
noble mind, and daring courage, yet these excellent
qualifications all received a great development from the happy
chance which conducted Plato into Sicily; not assuredly by any
human device or calculation, but some supernatural power,
designing that this remote cause should hereafter occasion the
recovery of the Sicilians' lost liberty and the subversion of
the tyrannical government, brought the philosopher out of Italy
to Syracuse, and made acquaintance between him and Dion.  Dion
was, indeed, at this time extremely young in years, but of all
the scholars that attended Plato he was the quickest and aptest
to learn, and the most prompt and eager to practice, the lessons
of virtue, as Plato himself reports of him, and his own actions
sufficiently testify.  It seemed strange, after the fulness of
her first greeting, that she could not trust me to come close to
her. Though her words were those of a lover, she kept herself
withdrawn as if a mile of space interposed between us.

"Why did you run away from me when you woke in the cave?"
I said.

"Did I?" she returned. "That was very unkind of me; but
I did not know better."
"I wish I could see you. The night is very dark."
"So it is. Come to my grotto. There is light there."
"Have you another cave, then?" 
"Come and see."
But she did not move until I rose first, and then she was on her
feet before I could offer my hand to help her. She came close to
my side, and conducted me through the wood.
