Etext prepared by Theresa Armao.


DORA THORNE

by Charlotte M. Braeme


Chapter I

"The consequences of folly seldom end with its originator," said
Lord Earle to his son.  "Rely upon it, Ronald, if you were to
take this most foolish and unadvisable step, you would bring
misery upon yourself and every one connected with you.  Listen to
reason."

"There is no reason in prejudice," replied the young man
haughtily.  "You can not bring forward one valid reason against
my marriage."

Despite his annoyance, a smile broke over Lord Earle's grave
face.

"I can bring a thousand reasons, if necessary," he replied.  "I
grant everything you say.  Dora Thorne is very pretty; but
remember, she is quite a rustic and unformed beauty--and I
almost doubt whether she can read or spell properly.  She is
modest and good, I grant, and I never heard one syllable against
her.  Ronald, let me appeal to your better judgment--are a
moderate amount of rustic prettiness and shy modesty sufficient
qualifications for your wife, who will have to take your mother's
place?"

"They are quite sufficient to satisfy me," replied the young man.

"You have others to consider," said Lord Earle, quickly.

"I love her," interrupted his son; and again his father smiled.

"We know what it means," he said, "when boys of nineteen talk
about love.  Believe me, Ronald, if I were to consent to your
request, you would be the first in after years to reproach me for
weak compliance with your youthful folly."

"You would not call it folly," retorted Ronald, his face flushing
hotly, "if Dora were an heiress, or the daughter of some--"

"Spare me a long discourse," again interrupted Lord Earle.  "You
are quite right; if the young girl in question belonged to your
own station, or even if she were near it, that would be quite a
different matter.  I am not annoyed that you have, as you think,
fallen in love, or that you wish to marry, although you are
young.  I am annoyed that you should dream of wishing to marry a
simple rustic, the daughter of my lodge keeper.  It is so
supremely ridiculous that I can hardly treat the matter
seriously."

"It is serious enough for me," returned his son with a long, deep
sigh. "If I do not marry Dora Thorne, I shall never marry at
all."

"Better that than a mesalliance," said Lord Earle, shortly.

"She is good," cried Ronald--"good and fair, modest and
graceful.  Her heart is pure as her face is fair.  What
mesalliance can there be, father?  I never have believed and
never shall believe in the cruel laws of caste.  In what is one
man better than or superior to another save that he is more
intelligent or more virtuous?"

"I shall never interfere in your politics, Ronald," said Lord
Earle, laughing quietly.  "Before you are twenty-one you will
have gone through many stages of that fever.  Youth is almost
invariably liberal, age conservative.  Adopt what line of
politics you will, but do not bring theory into practice in this
instance."

"I should consider myself a hero," continued the young man, "if I
could be the first to break through the trammels of custom and
the absurd laws of caste."

"You would not be the first," said Lord Earle, quietly.  "Many
before you have made unequal marriages; many will do so after
you, but in every case I believe regret and disappointment
followed."

"They would not in my case," said Ronald, eagerly; "and with Dora
Thorne by my side, I could so anything; without her, I can do
nothing."

Lord Earle looked grieved at the pertinacity of his son.

"Most fathers would refuse to hear all this nonsense, Ronald," he
said, gently. "I listen, and try to convince you by reasonable
arguments that the step you seem bent upon taking is one that
will entail nothing but misery.  I have said no angry word to
you, nor shall I do so.  I tell you simply it can not be.  Dora
Thorne, my lodge keeper's daughter, is no fitting wife for my
son, the heir of Earlescourt.  Come with me, Ronald; I will show
you further what I mean."

They went together, the father and son, so like in face yet so
dissimilar in mind.  They had been walking up and down the broad
terrace, one of the chief beauties of Earlescourt.  The park and
pleasure grounds, with flushed summer beauty, lay smiling around
them.  The song of hundreds of birds trilled through the sweet
summer air, the water of many fountains rippled musically, rare
flowers charmed the eye and sent forth sweet perfume; but neither
song of birds nor fragrance of flowers--neither sunshine nor
music--brought any brightness to the grave faces of the father
and son.

With slow steps they quitted the broad terrace, and entered the
hall.  They passed through a long suite of magnificent
apartments, up the broad marble staircase, through long
corridors, until they reached the picture gallery, one of the
finest in England.  Nearly every great master was represented
there.  Murillo, Guido, Raphael, Claude Lorraine, Salvator Rosa,
Correggio, and Tintoretto.  The lords of Earlescourt had all
loved pictures, and each of them ad added to the treasures of
that wonderful gallery.

One portion of the gallery was set aside for the portraits of the
family.  Grim old warriors and fair ladies hung side by side;
faces of marvelous beauty, bearing the signs of noble descent,
shone out clearly from their gilded frames.

"Look, Ronald," Lord Earle said, laying one hand upon his
shoulder, "you stand before your ancestors now.  Yours is a grand
old race.  England knows and honors it.  Look at these pictured
faces of the wives our fathers chose.  There is Lady Sybella
Earle; when one of Cromwell's soldiers drew his dagger to slay
her husband, the truest friend King Charles ever had, she flung
herself before him, and received the blow in his stead.  She
died, and he lived--noble and beautiful, is she not?  Now look
at the Lacy Alicia--this fair patrician lady smiling by the side
of her grim lord; she, at the risk of her life, helped him to fly
from prison, where he lay condemned to death for some great
political wrong.  She saved him, and for her sake he received
pardon.  Here is the Lady Helena--she is not beautiful, but look
at the intellect, the queenly brow, the soul-lit eyes!  She, I
need not tell you, was a poetess.  Wherever the English language
was spoken, her verses were read--men were nobler and better for
reading them.  The ladies of our race were such that brave men
may be proud of them.  Is it not so, Ronald?"

"Yes," he replied, calmly; "they were noble women."

Lord Earle then led his son to a large painting, upon which the
western sunbeams lingered, brightening the fair face they shone
upon, until it seemed living and smiling.  A deep and tender
reverence stole into Lord Earle's voice as he spoke:

"No fairer or more noble woman ever ruled at Earlescourt than
your mother, Ronald.  She is the daughter of 'a hundred earls,'
high-bred, beautiful, and refined.  Now, let me ask you, in the
name of common sense, do you wish to place my lodge keeper's
daughter by your mother's side?  Admit that she is pretty and
good--is it in the fitting order of things that she should be
here?"

For the first time, in the heedless, fiery course of his love,
Ronald Earle paused.  He looked at the serene and noble face
before him, the broad brow, the sweet, arched lips, the refined
patrician features, and there came to him the memory of another
face, charming, shy and blushing, with a rustic, graceful beauty
different from the one before him as sunlight compared to
moonlight.  The words faltered upon his lips--instinctively he
felt that pretty, blushing Dora had no place there.  Lord Earle
looked relieved as he saw the doubt upon his son's face.

"You see it, Ronald," he cried.  "Your idea of the 'fusion' of
races is well enough in theory, but it will not do brought into
practice.  I have been patient with you--I have treated you, not
as a school boy whose head is half turned by his first love, but
as a sensible man endowed with reason and thought.  Now give me a
reward.  Promise me here that you will make a brave effort, give
up all foolish thoughts of Dora Thorne, and not see her again.
Go abroad for a year or two--you will soon forget this boyish
folly, and bless the good sense that has saved you from it.  Will
you promise me, Ronald?"

"I can not, father," he replied, "for I have promised Dora to
make her my wife.  I can not break my word.  You yourself could
never counsel that."

"In this case I can," said Lord Earle, eagerly.  "That promise is
not binding, even in honor; the girl herself, if she has any
reason, can not and does not expect it."

"She believed me," said Ronald, simply.  "Besides, I love her,
father."

"Hush," replied Lord Earle, angrily, "I will listen to no more
nonsense.  There is a limit to my patience.  Once and for all,
Ronald, I tell you that I decidedly forbid any mention of such a
marriage; it is degrading and ridiculous.  I forbid you to marry
Dora Thorne; if you disobey me, you must bear the penalty."

"And what would the penalty be?" asked the heir of Earlescourt,
with a coolness and calmness that irritated the father.

"One you would hardly wish to pay," replied the earl.  "If, in
spite of my prayers, entreaties, and commands, you persist in
marrying the girl, I will never look upon your face again.  My
home shall be no longer your home.  You will lose my love, my
esteem, and what perhaps those who have lured you to ruin may
value still more, my wealth.  I can not disinherit you; but, if
you persist in this folly, I will not allow you one farthing.
You shall be to me as one dead until I die myself."

"I have three hundred a year," said Ronald, calmly; "that my
godfather left me."

Lord Earle's face now grew white with anger.

"Yes," he replied, "you have that; it would not find you in
gloves and cigars now.  But, Ronald, you can not be serious, my
boy.  I have loved you--I have been so proud of you--you can
not mean to defy and wound me."

His voice faltered, and his son looked up quickly, touched to the
heart by his father's emotion.

"Give me your consent, father," he cried, passionately.  "You
know I love you, and I love Dora; I can not give up Dora."

"Enough," said Lord Earle; "words seem useless.  You hear my
final resolve; I shall never change it--no after repentance, no
entreaties, will move me. Choose between your parents, your home,
your position, and the love of this fair, foolish girl, of whom
in a few months you will be tired and weary.  Choose between us.
I ask for no promises; you have refused to give it.  I appeal no
more to your affection; I leave you to decide for yourself.  I
might coerce and force you, but I will not do so.  Obey me, and I
will make your happiness my study.  Defy me, and marry the girl 
then, in life, I will never look upon your face again.
Henceforth, I will have no son; you will not be worthy of the
name.  There is no appeal.  I leave you now to make your choice;
this is my final resolve."


Chapter II

The Earles, of Earlescourt, were one of the oldest families in
England.  The "Barony of Earle" is mentioned in the early reigns
of the Tudor kings.  They never appeared to have taken any great
part either in politics or warfare.  The annals of the family
told of simple, virtuous lives; they contained, too, some few
romantic incidents.  Some of the older barons had been brave
soldiers; and there were stories of hair-breadth escapes and
great exploits by flood and field.  Two or three had taken to
politics, and had suffered through their eagerness and zeal; but,
as a rule, the barons of Earle had been simple, kindly gentlemen,
contented to live at home upon their own estates, satisfied with
the duties they found there, careful in the alliances they
contracted, and equally careful in the bringing up and
establishment of their children.  One and all they had been
zealous cultivators of the fine arts.  Earlescourt was almost
overcrowded with pictures, statues, and works of art.

Son succeeded father, inheriting with title and estate the same
kindly, simple dispositions and the same tastes, until Rupert
Earle, nineteenth baron, with whom our story opens, became Lord
Earle.  Simplicity and kindness were not his characteristics.  He
was proud, ambitious, and inflexible; he longed for the time when
the Earles should become famous, when their name should be one of
weight in council.  In early life his ambitious desires seemed
about to be realized.  He was but twenty when he succeeded his
father, and was an only child, clever, keen and ambitious.  In
his twenty-first year he married Lady Helena Brooklyn, the
daughter of one of the proudest peers in Britain.  There lay
before him a fair and useful life.  His wife was an elegant,
accomplished woman, who knew the world and its ways--who had,
from her earliest childhood, been accustomed to the highest and
best society.  Lord Earle often told her, laughingly, that she
would have made an excellent embassadress--her manners were so
bland and gracious; she had the rare gift of appearing interested
in every one and in everything.

With such a wife at the head of his establishment, Lord Earle
hoped for great things.  He looked to a prosperous career as a
statesman; no honors seemed to him too high, no ambition too
great.  But a hard fate lay before him.  He made one brilliant
and successful speech in Parliament--a speech never forgotten by
those who heard it, for its astonishing eloquence, its keen wit,
its bitter satire.  Never again did his voice rouse alike friend
and foe.  He was seized with a sudden and dangerous illness which
brought him to the brink of the grave.  After a long and
desperate struggle with the "grim enemy," he slowly recovered,
but all hope of public life was over for him.  The doctors said
he might live to be a hale old man if he took proper precautions;
he must live quietly, avoid all excitement, and never dream again
of politics.

To Lord Earle this seemed like a sentence of exile or death.  His
wife tried her utmost to comfort and console him, but for some
years he lived only to repine at his lot.  Lady Helena devoted
herself to him.  Earlescourt became the center and home of famous
hospitality; men of letters, artists, and men of note visited
there, and in time Lord Earle became reconciled to his fate.  All
his hopes and his ambitions were now centered in his son, Ronald,
a fine, noble boy, like his father in every respect save one.  He
had the same clear-cut Saxon face, with clear, honest eyes and
proud lips, the same fair hair and stately carriage, but in one
respect they differed.  Lord Earle was firm and inflexible; no
one ever thought of appealing against his decision or trying to
change his resolution.  If "my lord" had spoken, the matter was
settled.  Even Lady Helena knew that any attempt to influence him
was vain.  Ronald, on the contrary, could be stubborn, but not
firm.  He was more easily influenced; appeal to the better part
of his nature, to his affection or sense of duty, was seldom made
in vain.

No other children gladdened the Lord Earle's heart, and all his
hopes were centered in his son.  For the second time in his life
great hopes and ambitions rose within him.  What he had not
achieved his son would do; the honor he could no longer seek
might one day be his son's.  There was something almost pitiful
in the love of the stern, disappointed man for his child.  He
longed for the time when Ronald would be of age to commence his
public career.  He planned for his son as he had never planned
for himself.

Time passed on, and the heir of Earlescourt went to Oxford, as
his father had done before him.  Then came the second bitter
disappointment of Lord Earle's life.  He himself was a Tory of
the old school.  Liberal principles were an abomination to him;
he hated and detested everything connected with Liberalism.  It
was a great shock when Ronald returned from college a "full-
fledged Liberal."  With his usual keenness he saw that all
discussion was useless.

"Let the Liberal fever wear out," said one of his friends; "you
will find, Lord Earle, that all young men favor it.  Conservatism
is the result of age and experience.  By the time your son takes
a position in the world, he will have passed through many stages
of Liberalism."

Lord Earle devoutly believed it.  When the first shock of his
disappointment was over, Ronald's political zeal began to amuse
him.  He liked to see the boy earnest in everything.  He smiled
when Ronald, in his clear, young voice, read out the speeches of
the chief of his party.  He smiled when the young man, eager to
bring theory into practice, fraternized with the tenant farmers,
and visited families from whom his father shrunk in aristocratic
dread.

There was little doubt that in those days Ronald Earl believed
himself called to a great mission.  He dreamed of the time when
the barriers of caste would be thrown down, when men would have
equal rights and privileges, when the aristocracy of intellect
and virtue would take precedence of noble birth, when wealth
would be more equally distributed, and the days when one man
perished of hunger while another reveled in luxury should cease
to be.  His dreams were neither exactly Liberal nor Radical; they
were simply Utopian.  Even then, when he was most zealous, had
any one proposed to him that he should inaugurate the new state
of things, and be the first to divide his fortune, the futility
of his theories would have struck him more plainly.  Mingling in
good society, the influence of clever men and beautiful women
would, Lord Earle believed, convert his son in time. He did not
oppose him, knowing that all opposition would but increase his
zeal.  It was a bitter disappointment to him, but he bore it
bravely, for he never ceased to hope.

A new trouble was dawning for Lord Earle, one far more serious
than the Utopian dream of his son; of all his sorrows it was the
keenest and the longest felt.  Ronald fell in love, and was bent
on marrying a simple rustic beauty, the lodge keeper's daughter.

Earlescourt was one of the fairest spots in fair and tranquil
England.  It stood in the deep green heart of the land, in the
midst of one of the bonny, fertile midland counties.

The Hall was surrounded by a large park, where the deer browsed
under the stately spreading trees, where there were flowery dells
and knolls that would charm an artist; a wide brook, almost broad
and deep enough to be called a river, rippled through it.

Earlescourt was noted for its trees, a grand old cedar stood in
the middle of the park; the shivering aspen, the graceful elm,
the majestic oak, the tall, flowering chestnut were all seen to
greatest perfection there.

Art had done much, Nature more, to beautify the home of the
Earles.  Charming pleasure gardens were laid out with unrivaled
skill; the broad, deep lake was half hidden by the drooping
willows bending over it, and the white water lilies that lay on
its tranquil breast.

The Hall itself was a picturesque, gray old building, with
turrets covered with ivy, and square towers of modern build;
there were deep oriel windows, stately old rooms that told of the
ancient race, and cheerful modern apartments replete with modern
comfort.

One of the great beauties of Earlescourt was the broad terrace
that ran along one side of the house; the view from it was
unequaled for quiet loveliness.  The lake shone in the distance
from between the trees; the perfume from the hawthorn hedges
filled the air, the fountains rippled merrily in the sunshine,
and the flowers bloomed in sweet summer beauty.

Lord Earle loved his beautiful home; he spared no expense in
improvements, and the time came when Earlescourt was known as a
model estate.

One thing he did of which he repented till the hour of his death.
On the western side of the park he built a new lodge, and
installed therein Stephen Thorne and his wife, little dreaming as
he did so that the first link in what was to be a fatal tragedy
was forged.

Ronald was nineteen, and Lord Earle thought, his son's college
career ended, he should travel for two or three years.  He could
not go with him, but he hoped that surveillance would not be
needed, that his boy would be wise enough and manly enough to
take his first steps in life alone.  At college he won the
highest honors; great things were prophesied for Ronald Earle.
They might have been accomplished but for the unfortunate event
that darkened Earlescourt with a cloud of shame and sorrow.

Lord and Lady Earle had gone to pay a visit to an old friend, Sir
Hugh Charteris, of Greenoke.  Thinking Ronald would not reach
home until the third week in June, they accepted Sir Hugh's
invitation, and promised to spend the first two weeks in June
with him.  But Ronald altered his plans; the visit he was making
did not prove to be a very pleasant one, and he returned to
Earlescourt two days after Lord and Lady Earle had left it.  His
father wrote immediately, pressing him to join the party at
Greenoke.  He declined, saying that after the hard study of the
few last months he longed for quiet and rest.

Knowing that every attention would be paid to his son's comfort,
Lord Earle thought but little of the matter.  In after years he
bitterly regretted that he had not insisted upon his son's going
to Greenoke.  So it happened that Ronald Earle, his college
career ended, his future lying like a bright, unruffled dream
before him, had two weeks to spend alone in Earlescourt.

The first day was pleasant enough.  Ronald went to see the
horses, inspected the kennels, gladdened the gamekeeper's heart
by his keen appreciation of good sport, rowed on the lake, played
a solitary game at billiards, dined in great state, read three
chapters or "Mill on Liberalism," four of a sensational novel,
and fell asleep satisfied with that day, but rather at a loss to
know what he should do on the next.

It was a beautiful June day; no cloud was in the smiling heavens,
the sun shone bright, and Nature looked so fair and tempting that
it was impossible to remain indoors.  Out in the gardens the
summer air seemed to thrill with the song of the birds.
Butterflies spread their bright wings and coquetted with the
fragrant blossoms; busy humming bees buried themselves in the
white cups of the lily and the crimson heart of the rose.

Ronald wandered through the gardens; the delicate golden laburnum
blossoms fell at his feet, and he sat down beneath a large
acacia.  The sun was warm, and Ronald thought a dish of
strawberries would be very acceptable.  He debated within himself
for some time whether he should return to the house and order
them, or walk down to the fruit garden and gather them for
himself.

What impulse was it that sent him on that fair June morning, when
all Nature sung of love and happiness, to the spot where he met
his fate?


Chapter III

The strawberry gardens at Earlescourt were very extensive.  Far
down among the green beds Ronald Earle saw a young girl kneeling,
gathering the ripe fruit, which she placed in a large basket
lined with leaves, and he went down to her.

"I should like a few of those strawberries," he said, gently, and
she raised to his a face he never forgot.  Involuntarily he
raised his hat, in homage to her youth and her shy, sweet beauty.
"For whom are you gathering these?" he asked, wondering who she
was, and whence she came.

In a moment the young girl stood up, and made the prettiest and
most graceful of courtesies.

"They are for the housekeeper, sir," she replied; and her voice
was musical and clear as a silver bell.

"Then may I ask who you are?" continued Ronald.

"I am Dora Thorne," she replied, "the lodge keeper's daughter."

"How is it I have never seen you before?" he asked.

"Because I have lived always with my aunt, at Dale," she replied.
"I only came home last year."

"I see," said Ronald. "Will you give me some of those
strawberries?" he asked.  "They look so ripe and tempting."

He sat down on one of the garden chairs and watched her.  The
pretty white fingers looked so fair, contrasted with the crimson
fruit and green leaves.  Deftly and quickly she contrived a small
basket of leaves, and filled it with fruit.  She brought it to
him, and then for the first time Ronald saw her clearly, and that
one glance was fatal to him.

She was no calm, grand beauty.  She had a shy, sweet, blushing
face, resembling nothing so much as a rosebud, with fresh, ripe
lips; pretty little teeth, which gleamed like white jewels, large
dark eyes, bright as stars, and veiled by long lashes; dark hair,
soft and shining.  She was indeed so fair, so modest and
graceful, that Ronald Earle was charmed.

"It must be because you gathered them that they are so nice," he
said, taking the little basket from her hands.  "Rest awhile,
Dora--you must be tired with this hot sun shining full upon you.
Sit here under the shade of this apple tree."

He watched the crimson blushes that dyed her fair young face.
She never once raised her dark eyes to his.  He had seen
beautiful and stately ladies, but none so coy or bewitching as
this pretty maiden.  The more he looked at her the more he
admired her.  She had no delicate patrician loveliness, no
refined grace; but for glowing, shy, fresh beauty, who could
equal her?

So the young heir of Earlescourt sat, pretending to enjoy the
strawberries, but in reality engrossed by the charming figure
before him.  She neither stirred nor spoke.  Under the boughs of
the apple tree, with the sunbeams falling upon her, she made a
fair picture, and his eyes were riveted upon it.

It was all very delightful, and very wrong.  Ronald should not
have talked to the lodge keeper's daughter, and sweet, rustic
Dora Thorne should have known better.  But they were young, and
such days come but seldom, and pass all too quickly.

"Dora Thorne," said Ronald, musingly--"what a pretty name!  How
well it suits you!  It is quite a little song in itself."

She smiled with delight at his words; then her shy, dark eyes
were raised for a moment, and quickly dropped again.

"Have you read Tennyson's 'Dora?'" he asked.

"No," she replied--"I have little time for reading."

"I will tell you the story," he said, patronizingly.  "Ever since
I read it I have had an ideal 'Dora,' and you realize my dream."

She had not the least idea what he meant; but when he recited the
musical words, her fancy and imagination were stirred; she saw
the wheat field, the golden corn, the little child and its
anxious mother.  When Ronald ceased speaking, he saw her hands
were clasped and her lips quivering.

"Did you like that?" he asked, with unconscious patronage.

"So much!" she replied.  "Ah, he must be a great man who wrote
those words; and you remember them all."

Her simple admiration flattered and charmed him.  He recited
other verses for her, and the girl listened in a trance of
delight.  The sunshine and western wind brought no warning to the
heir of Earlescourt that he was forging the first link of a
dreadful tragedy; he thought only of the shy, blushing beauty and
coy grace of the young girl!

Suddenly from over the trees there came the sound of the great
bell at the Hall.  Then Dora started.

"It is one o'clock!" she cried.  "What shall I do?  Mrs. Morton
will be angry with me."

"Angry!" said Ronald, annoyed at this sudden breakup of his
Arcadian dream.  "Angry with you!  For what?"

"She is waiting for the strawberries," replied conscious Dora,
"and my basket is not half full."

It was a new idea to him that any one should dare to be angry
with this pretty, gentle Dora.

"I will help you," he said.

In less than a minute the heir of Earlescourt was kneeling by
Dora Thorne, gathering quickly the ripe strawberries, and the
basket was soon filled.

"There," said Ronald, "you need not fear Mrs. Morton now, Dora.
You must go, I suppose; it seems hard to leave this bright
sunshine to go indoors!"

"I--I would rather stay," said Dora, frankly; "but I have much
to do."

"Shall you be here tomorrow?" he asked.

"Yes," she replied; "it will take me all the week to gather
strawberries for the housekeeper."

"Goodbye, Dora," he said, "I shall see you again."

He held out his hand, and her little fingers trembled and
fluttered in his grasp.  She looked so happy, yet so frightened,
so charming, yet so shy.  He could have clasped her in his arms
at that moment, and have said he loved her; but Ronald was a
gentleman.  He bowed over the little hand, and then relinquished
it.  He watched the pretty, fairy figure, as the young girl
tripped away.

"Shame on all artificial training!" said Ronald to himself.
"What would our fine ladies give for such a face?  Imagine beauty
without coquetry or affectation.  The girl's heart is as pure as
a stainless lily; she never heard of 'a grand match' or a 'good
parli.'  If Tennyson's Dora was like her, I do not wonder at
anything that happened."

Instead of thinking to himself that he had done a foolish thing
that bright morning, and that his plain duty was to forget all
about the girl, Ronald lighted his cigar, and began to dream of
the face that had charmed him.

Dora took the fruit to Mrs. Morton, and received no reprimand;
then she was sent home to the cottage, her work for the day
ended.  She had to pass through the park.  Was it the same road
she had trodden this morning?  What caused the new and shining
glory that had fallen on every leaf and tree?  The blue heavens
seemed to smile upon her; every flower, every song of the bright
birds had a new meaning.  What was it?  Her own heart was beating
as it had never beaten before; her face was flushed, and the
sweet, limpid eyes shone with a new light.  What was it?  Then
she came to the brook-side and sat down on the violet bank.

The rippling water was singing a new song, something of love and
youth, of beauty and happiness--something of a new and fairy-
like life; and with the faint ripple and fall of the water came
back to her the voice that had filled her ears and touched her
heart.  Would she ever again forget the handsome face that had
smiled so kindly upon her?  Surely he was a king among men, and
he had praised her, said her name was like a song, and that she
was like the Dora of the beautiful poem.  This grand gentleman,
with the clear, handsome face and dainty white hands, actually
admired her.

So Dora dreamed by the brook-side, and she was to see him again
and again; she gave no thought to a cold, dark time when she
should see him no more.  Tomorrow the sun would shine, the birds
sing, and she should see him once again.

Dora never remembered how that happy day passed.  Good Mrs.
Thorne looked at her child, and sighed to think how pretty she
was and how soon that sweet, dimpled face would be worn with
care.

Dora's first proceeding was characteristic enough.  She went to
her own room and locked the door; then she put the cracked little
mirror in the sunshine, and proceeded to examine her face.  She
wanted to see why Ronald Earle admired her; she wondered much at
this new power she seemed possessed of; she placed the glass on
the table, and sat down to study her own face.  She saw that it
was very fair; the coloring was delicate and vivid, like that of
the heart of a rose; the fresh, red lips were arched and smiling;
the dark, shy eyes, with their long silken lashes, were bright
and clear; a pretty, dimpled, smiling face told of a sweet,
simple, loving nature--that was all; there was no intellect, no
soul, no high-bred refinement; nothing but the charm of bright,
half-startled beauty.

Dora was half puzzled.  She had never thought much of her own
appearance.  Having lived always with sensible, simple people,
the pernicious language of flattery was unknown to her.  It was
with a half-guilty thrill of delight that she for the first time
realized the charm of her own sweet face.

The sunny hours flew by.  Dora never noted them; she thought only
of the morning past and the morning to come, while Ronald dreamed
of her almost unconsciously.  She had been a bright feature in a
bright day; his artistic taste had been gratified, his eyes had
been charmed.  The pretty picture haunted him, and he remembered
with pleasure that on the morrow he should see the shy, sweet
face again.  No thought of harm or wrong even entered his mind.
He did not think that he had been imprudent.  He had recited a
beautiful poem to a pretty, coy girl, and in a grand, lordly way
he believed himself to have performed a kind action.

The morning came, and they brought bright, blushing Dora to her
work; again the little white fingers glistened amid the crimson
berries.  Then Dora heard him coming.  She heard his footsteps,
and her face grew "ruby red."  He made no pretense of finding her
accidentally.

"Good morning, Dora," he said; "you look as bright as the
sunshine and as fair as the flowers.  Put away the basket; I have
brought a book of poems, and mean to read some to you.  I will
help you with your work afterward."

Dora, nothing loath, sat down, and straightway they were both in
fairyland.  He read industriously, stealing every now and then a
glance at his pretty companion.  She knew nothing of what he was
reading, but his voice made sweeter music than she had ever heard
before.

At length the book was closed, and Ronald wondered what thoughts
were running through his companion's simple, artless mind.  So he
talked to her of her daily life, her work, her pleasures, her
friends.  As he talked he grew more and more charmed; she had no
great amount of intellect, no wit or keen powers of repartee, but
the girl's love of nature made her a poetess.  She seemed to know
all the secrets of the trees and the flowers; no beauty escaped
her; the rustle of green leaves, the sighs of the western wind,
the solemn hush of the deep-green woods, the changing tints of
the summer sky delighted her.  Beautiful words, embodying
beautiful thoughts, rippled over the fresh, ripe lips.  She knew
nothing else.  She had seen no pictures, read no books, knew
nothing of the fine arts, was totally ignorant of all scholarly
lore, but deep in her heart lay a passionate love for the fair
face of nature.

It was new to Ronald.  He had heard fashionable ladies speak of
everything they delighted in.  He had ever heard of "music in the
fall of rain drops," or character in flowers.

Once Dora forgot her shyness, and when Ronald said something, she
laughed in reply.  How sweet and pure that laughter was--like a
soft peal of silver bells!  When Ronald Earle went to sleep that
night, the sound haunted his dreams.


Chapter IV

Every morning brought the young heir of Earlescourt to the bright
sunny gardens where Dora worked among the strawberries.  As the
days passed she began to lose something of her shy, startled
manner, and laughed and talked to him as she would have done to
her own brother.  His vanity was gratified by the sweetest homage
of all, the unconscious, unspoken love and admiration of the
young girl.  He liked to watch the blushes on her face, and the
quivering of her lips when she caught the first sound of his
coming footsteps.  He liked to watch her dark eyes droop, and
then to see them raised to his with a beautiful, startled light.

Insensibly his own heart became interested.  At first he had
merely thought of passing a pleasant hour; then he admired Dora,
and tried to believe that reading to her was an act of pure
benevolence; but, as the days passed on, something stronger and
sweeter attracted him.  He began to love her--and she was his
first love.

Wonderful to say, these long tete-a-tetes had not attracted
observation.  No rumor of them escaped, so that no thorn appeared
in this path of roses which led to the brink of a precipice.

It wanted three days until the time settled for the return of
Lord and Lady Earle.  Sir Harry Laurence, of Holtham Hall, asked
Ronald to spend a day with him; and, having no valid excuse, he
consented.

"I shall not see you tomorrow, Dora," he said. "I am going away
for the day."

She looked at him with a startled face.  One whole day without
him!  Then, with a sudden deadly pain, came the thought that
these golden days must end; the time must come when she should
see him no more.  The pretty, dimpled face grew pale, and a dark
shadow came into the clear eyes.

"Dora," cried Ronald, "why do you look so frightened?  What is
it?"

She gave him no answer, but turned away.  He caught her hands in
his own.

"Are you grieved that I am going away for one whole day?" he
asked.  But she looked so piteous and so startled that he waited
for no reply.  "I shall continue to see you," he resumed.  "I
could not let any day pass without that."

"And afterward," she said, simply, raising her eyes to his full
of tears.

Then Ronald paused abruptly--he had never given one thought to
the "afterward."  Why, of course strawberries would not grow
forever--it would not always be summer.  Lord Earle would soon
be back again, and then he must go abroad.  Where would Dora be
then?  He did not like the thought--it perplexed him.  Short as
was the time he had known her, Dora had, in some mysterious way,
grown to be a part of himself.  He could not think of a day
wherein he should not see her blushing, pretty face, and hear the
music of her words.  He was startled, and clasped her little
hands more tightly within his own.

"You would not like to lose me, Dora?" he said, gently.

"No," she replied; and then tears fell from her dark eyes.

Poor Ronald!  Had he been wise, he would have flown then; but he
bent his head over her, and kissed the tears away.  The pretty
rounded cheek, so soft and child-like, he kissed again, and then
clasped the slight girlish figure in his arms.

"Do not shed another tear, Dora," he whispered; "we will not lose
each other.  I love you, and you shall be my wife."

One minute before he spoke the idea had not even crossed his
mind; it seemed to him afterward that another voice had spoken by
his lips.

"Your wife!" she cried, looking at him in some alarm.  "Ah, no!
You are very kind and good, but that could never be."

"Why not?" he asked.

"Because you are so far above me," replied the girl.  "I and mine
are servants and dependents of yours.  We are not equal; I must
learn to forget you," sobbed Dora, "and break my own heart!"

She could not have touched Ronald more deeply; in a moment he had
poured forth a torrent of words that amazed her.  Fraternity and
equality, caste and folly, his mission and belief, his love and
devotion, were all mingled in one torrent of eloquence that
simply alarmed her.

"Never say that again, Dora," he continued, his fair, boyish face
flushing.  "You are the equal of a queen upon her throne; you are
fair and true, sweet and good.  What be a queen more than that?"

"A queen knows more," sighed Dora.  "I know nothing in all the
wide world."

"Then I will teach you," he said.  "Ah, Dora, you know enough!
You have beautiful thoughts, and you clothe them in beautiful
words.  Do not turn from me; say you love me and will be my wife.
I love you, Dora--do not make me unhappy."

"I would not make you unhappy," she said, "for the whole world;
if you wish me to love you--oh, you know I love you--if you
wish me to go away and forget you, I will do my best."

But the very thought of it brought tears again.  She looked so
pretty, so bewildered between sorrow and joy, so dazzled by
happiness, and yet so piteously uncertain, that Ronald was more
charmed than ever.

"My darling Dora," he said, "you do love me.  Your eyes speak, if
your lips do not tell me.  Will you be my wife?  I can not live
without you."

It was the prettiest picture in the world to see the color return
to the sweet face.  Ronald bent his head, and heard the sweet
whisper.

"You shall never rue your trust, Dora," he said, proudly; but she
interrupted him.

"What will Lord Earle say?" she asked; and again Ronald was
startled by that question.

"My father can say nothing," he replied.  "I am old enough to
please myself, and this is a free country.  I shall introduce you
to him, Dora, and tell him you have promised to be my wife.  No
more tears, love.  There is nothing but happiness before us."

And so he believed.  He could think of nothing, care for nothing
but Dora--her pretty face, her artless, simple ways, her
undisguised love for him.  There was but one excuse.  He was
young, and it was his first love; yet despite his happiness, his
pride, his independence, he did often wonder in what words he
should tell his father that he had promised to marry the lodge
keeper's daughter.  There were even times when he shivered, as
one seized with sudden cold, at the thought.

The four days passed like a long, bright dream.  It was a pretty
romance, but sadly misplaced--a pretty summer idyll.  They were
but boy and girl.  Dora met Ronald in the park, by the brook-
side, and in the green meadows where the white hawthorn grew.
They talked of but one thing, their love.  Ronald never tired of
watching Dora's fair face and pretty ways; she never wearied of
telling him over and over again, in a hundred different ways, how
noble and kind he was, and how dearly she loved him.

Lord Earle wrote to say that he should be home on the Thursday
evening, and that they were bringing back a party of guests with
them.

"There will be no time to tell my father just at present," said
Ronald; "so, Dora, we must keep our secret.  It will not do to
tell your father before I tell mine."

They arranged to keep the secret until Lord Earle should be alone
again.  They were to meet twice every day--in the early morning,
while the dew lay on the grass, and in the evening, when the Hall
would be full of bustle and gayety.

Ronald felt guilty--he hardly knew how or why--when his father
commiserated him for the two lonely weeks he had spent.  Lonely!
He had not felt them so; they had passed all too quickly for him.
How many destinies were settled in that short time!

There was little time for telling his secret to Lord Earle.  The
few guests who had returned to Earlescourt were men of note, and
their host devoted himself to their entertainment.

Lady Earle saw some great change in her son.  She fancied that he
spent a great deal of time out of doors.  She asked him about it,
wondering if he had taken to studying botany, for late and early
he never tired of rambling in the park.  She wondered again at
the flush that crimsoned his face; but the time was coming when
she would understand it all.

It is probable that if Ronald at that time had had as much of
Dora's society as he liked, he would soon have discovered his
mistake, and no great harm would have been done; but the foolish
romance of foolish meetings had a charm for him.  In those
hurried interviews he had only time to think of Dora's love--he
never noted her deficiencies; he was charmed with her tenderness
and grace; her artless affection was so pretty; the difference
between her and those with whom he was accustomed to talk was so
great; her very ignorance had a piquant charm for him.  So they
went on to their fate.

One by one Lord Earle's guests departed, yet Ronald had not told
his secret.  A new element crept into his love, and urged him on.
Walking one day through the park with his father they overtook
Dora's father.  A young man was with him and the two were talking
earnestly together, so earnestly that they never heard the two
gentlemen; and in passing by Ronald distinguished the words, "You
give me your daughter, Mr. Thorne, and trust me to make her
happy."

Ronald Earle turned quickly to look at the speaker.  He saw
before him a young man, evidently a well-to-do farmer from his
appearance, with a calm, kind face and clear and honest eyes; and
he was asking for Dora--Dora who was to be his wife and live at
Earlescourt.  He could hardly control his impatience; and it
seemed to him that evening would never come.

Dinner was over at last.  Lord Earle sat with Sir Harry Laurence
over a bottle of claret, and Lady Earle was in the drawing room
and had taken up her book.  Ronald hastened to the favorite
trysting place, the brook-side.  Dora was there already, and he
saw that her face was still wet with tears.  She refused at first
to tell him her sorrow.  Then she whispered a pitiful little
story, that made her lover resolve upon some rash deeds.

Ralph Holt had been speaking to her father, and had asked her to
marry him.  She had said "No;" but her mother had wept, and her
father had grown angry, and had said she should obey him.

"He has a large farm," said Dora, with a bitter sigh.  "He says I
should live like a great lady, and have nothing to do.  He would
be kind to my father and mother; but I do not love him," she
added.

Clasping her tender little hands round Ronald's arm, "I do not
love him," she sobbed; "and, Ronald, I do love you."

He bent down and kissed her pretty, tear-bedewed face, all the
chivalry of his nature aroused by her words.

"You shall be my wife, Dora," he said, proudly, "and not his.
This very evening I will tell my father, and ask his consent to
our marriage.  My mother is sure to love you--she is so kind and
gracious to every one.  Do not tremble, my darling; neither Ralph
Holt nor any one else shall take you from me."

She was soon comforted!  There was no bound or limit to her faith
in Ronald Earle.

"Go home now,"he said, "and tomorrow my father himself shall see
you.  I will teach that young farmer his place.  No more tears,
Dora--our troubles will end tonight."

He went with her down the broad walk, and then returned to the
Hall.  He walked very proudly, with his gallant head erect,
saying to himself that this was a free country and he could do
what he liked; but for all that his heart beat loudly when he
entered the drawing room and found Lord and Lady Earle.  She
received an immediate reply from the husband, in which, after
the business had been attended to, he informed her that he
and his wife selected their own circle of friends, which was quite
as large as they desired to make it.

The lady as promptly sent back a note in answer, in which she
expressed her regret for the mistake she had made, and thanked him
for having corrected the impression which she had formed of him as
a gentleman in her acquaintance with him solely in business
relations.

Such an experience would prevent a sensitive woman from ever
placing herself in a position to receive such a rudeness again
from any one and therefore no one whose duty it is to make a
first call, and who has not made it, should ever feel hurt or
offended at not being invited by such an acquaintance, no matter
how general may have been the invitation.

Ladies who are the most apt to give offence are those who
divide their lists, giving two parties in the course of
the year, instead of the grand crush which is more popular.
Some feel aggrieved because they are not invited to both, fancying
that there are reasons why an exception should be made in their
favor; while others prefer the party for which no invitation was
sent.

Those who send regrets for the first party sometimes expect to
be invited to the second, but this in no way changes the relation
between the inviter and the invited.

It is the misfortune and not the fault of the lady who invites
that such regrets are sent; and if she is able to repeat her
invitations to any upon her first list, it will surely be to those
who gave such reasons for regretting as illness or absence from the
city.

Certainly the entertainer must desire to make both parties equally
pleasant, and must select her guests to this end; and yet there
are those who, when left out, do not hesitate to show her by the
change in their manner that they consider themselves more capable
than she is of selecting her guests.

The question is frequently asked whether replies should be
sent to invitations to wedding and other receptions, and to "at-home"
cards.

If one receives the great compliment of being invited to a marriage
ceremony (not at church), an acceptance or regret would of course
be immediately sent, for it is only in the case of the reception
following that any doubt seems to exist.

It is generally understood that no answers are expected; but
as it is certainly very polite to send a regret when one is unable
to accept, why is it not equally polite to send an acceptance?
After receptions it is not considered necessary for those who have
been present to call, but those who are prevented from going call
in person as soon as is convenient.

Sometimes, as in the case of wedding receptions, many are invited
for the occasion, friends either of the bride or groom, whom the
relative who gives the reception has never visited, and does not
wish to visit in the future.

Of course the visiting then ends with the call made after the
reception; for if the cards left at the reception or afterward are
not returned by those of the host or hostess, no matter how desirous
the recipient of the civility may be to extend her hospitality in
return, she ought not to do so unless under corresponding circumstances.

Frequently those who are prevented from attending wedding-receptions
send their cards, and these are returned by those of the bride and
groom when they make their round of visits, except in cases where,
after the reception, their cards are sent with a new address.

Then, of course, those who receive them always pay the first
visit. The gentleman sends his card alone (when there has been
no reception) where he wishes to have his wife make the acquaintance
of his friends whom she has not previously visited; and the sooner
the call is made under such circumstances the more polite it is
considered.

The reason why an invitation to an opera-box, like an invitation
to dine, must be answered immediately is because the number of
seats being limited it is necessary, when regrets are received,
to send out other invitations at once, in order that all may be
complimented alike by receiving them upon the same day.

Gentleman not receiving any special invitation to a box, who
chance to be in the opera-house in a dress-suit, often pay visits
of ten or fifteen minutes to the box of any lady with whom they are
well acquainted.

If a gentleman wishes to enter the box of some chaperone with
whom he is not acquainted, he always requests some mutual
acquaintance in the box to present him to the chaperone immediately
upon entering.

Unless invited by her to remain, he is careful not to prolong
his visit beyond the time allowed.

Young ladies are sometimes very thoughtless in urging young gentlemen
to stay during an entire act, or even longer; but when the party
is made up by the chaperone, she does not like to see the gentlemen
whom she has invited incommoded by one whom she has not asked to
her box.

The diversity of opinion that exists with us in reference to many
points of etiquette is unfortunate; for where no fixed rules exist
there must always be misapprehensions and misunderstandings;
rudenesses suspected where none are intended, and sometimes resented,
to the great perplexity of the offender as to the cause of the
offence.

It is not every one who knows how rude a thing people of the old
school consider it to make use of a lady's house in calling upon
a guest staying with her, and leaving no card for the hostess.
This simple act of courtesy does not necessitate a continuance of
visiting, inasmuch as the lady only feels obliged to return her
card through her friend, leaving it to after circumstances to decide
whether it will be mutually agreeable to make the acquaintance.

To call upon strangers for whom dinners are given when invited
to meet them is very polite, but it should not be construed into
any intended impoliteness in this country if the call is not made;
and it may even happen that one is unable to be presented to such
guests where the dinner is large, though one should at least make
the attempt.

Nor is it generally understood how great is the discourtesy
of permitting any person who has been shown into a house through
the mistake of a servant when the ladies are engaged, to be shown
out again without seeing any member of the family.

The mistake having occurred, if no member of the family is able
to make her appearance without considerable delay, a message
should be sent down with an explanation, inquiring if the visitor
will wait until one of the ladies can come down.

The lady who finds herself admitted when out upon a round of calls
will be without doubt only too glad of the excuse for departure;
and even if calling upon matters that require an answer, her _savoir
faire_ would prevent her from waiting under such circumstances.

Any hesitation upon the part of the servant who answers the bell,
as to whether the ladies are at home or engaged, authorizes the
persons calling to leave their cards without waiting to ascertain.

The etiquette in regard to bowing is so simple and reasonable
that one would scarcely suppose it possible that any differences
of opinion could exist, and yet there are some who think it a breach
of politeness if one neglect to bow, although meeting half a dozen
times on a promenade or in driving.

Custom has made it necessary to bow only the first time in
passing: after that exchange of salutations it is very properly
not expected.

The difference between a courteous and a familiar bow should be
remembered by gentlemen who wish to make a favorable impression.
A lady dislikes to receive from a man with whom she has but a
slight acquaintance a bow accompanied by a broad smile, as though
he were on the most familiar terms with her.

It is far better to err on the other side, and to give one of those
stiff, ungracious bows which some men indulge in.

Those gentlemen who smile with their eyes instead of their mouths
give the most charming bows. As for men who bow charmingly at
one time, and with excessive hauteur at others, according
as they feel in a good or bad humor, they need never be surprised
if the person thus treated should cease speaking altogether; nor
can any man who does not lift, or at least touch, his hat in speaking
to a lady expect that she will continue her salutations.

The rules to which allusion has been made are all reasonable,
but there are others which, having only an imaginary foundation
in the requirements of true politeness, might be disregarded
with advantage.
Such, for example, as that of sending answers to invitations by
a special messenger. It is equally convenient to employ a man
to deliver invitations or to send them by post.

With the reply it is different.
Each family receiving an invitation has to send out a servant with
the answer.

This not being always convenient, the reply is frequently
delayed--sometimes until it is forgotten. But if the foreign
custom of sending acceptances and regrets by post could be brought
into general use, how much more sensible it would be!

It was the occasion of many comments when a few years since some
cards, not invitations, were thus sent by mistake, the servant
posting those which he had forgotten to deliver before the wedding
had taken place.

But it only needs a few resolute persons to set the example, and
persist in it, to have it as generally adopted as it is abroad.

THE HERMIT'S VIGIL.

Here is the ancient legend I was reading From the black-letter
vellum page last night:
Its yellow husk holds lessons worth the heeding, If we unfold it
right.

The tome is musty with dank superstition From which we shrink
recoiling, to th' extreme Of an unfaith that with material vision,
Accounts as myth or dream
Problems too subtle for our clumsy fingers-- High truths that stretch
beyond our reach as far As o'er the fire-fly in the grass that
lingers Stretches yon quenchless star.

Give rather back the old hallucinations-- The visible spirits--the
rapture, terror, grief Of faith so human, than the drear negations
Of dumb, dead unbelief!

--But will you hear the story?
--In a forest, Girt round by blacken'd tarns, a hermit dwelt:
And as one midnight, when the storm raged sorest, Within his
hut he knelt
In ghostly penance, sounds of fiendish laughter Smote on the tempest's
lull with sudden jar, That sent the gibbering echoes shrilling
after, O'er weir and wold afar.

"Christ ban ye now!"--he cried, the door wide flinging, "Fare
ye some whither with perdition's dole?" --"We go"--out from the
wrack a shriek came ringing-- "To seize the emperor's soul,
"Who lies this hour death-smitten." Execration Thereat still
fouler filled the sulphurous air:
Before the rood the hermit sank:--"Salvation Grant, Lord! in his
despair!"
And agonizing thus, with lips all ashen, He prayed--till back, with
ghastlier rage and roar, The demon rout rushed, strung to fiercer
passion, And crashed his osier door.

"Speak, fiend!--I do adjure thee!--Came repentance Too late?"--With
wrathful curse was answer made:
--"Heaped high within the Judgment Scales for sentence, The emperor's
sins were laid;

"And downward, downward, with a plunge descended _Our_ scale,
till we exulted!--when a moan, --'_Save, Christ, O save
me!_'--from his lips was rended Out with his dying groan.

"Quick in the other scale did Mercy lay it, _Lo!

it outweighed his guilt_--" --"Ha,--baffled! braved!"-- The
hermit cried;--"Hence, fiends! nor dare gainsay it, _The
emperor's soul is saved!_"
MARGARET J. PRESTOX.

CHATEAUBRIAND'S DUCKS.

François-Auguste de Chateaubriand, the illustrious author of the
_Génie du Christianisme_, the poet, statesman, diplomatist, soldier,
and traveler in the Old World and the New, was one of the two or
three human beings who, at the commencement of the nineteenth
century, disputed with the emperor Napoleon the attention of Europe.

Sprung from an old family of the Breton nobility--a race preserving
longer perhaps than any other in France the traditions of the
monarchy--he reluctantly gave in his adhesion to the _de facto_
government of Napoleon; but the execution of the duc d'Enghien
outraged him profoundly, and sending back to Napoleon his commission
as foreign minister, he abjured him for ever.

Napoleon probably regretted the fact seriously. "Chateaubriand,"
said the emperor, "has received from Nature the sacred fire: his
works attest it.

His style is that of a prophet, and all that is grand and
national appertains to his genius."
It would be out of place in the brief sketch here given to trace
his long and adventurous career.

By turns author, minister, ambassador, soldier, he saw, like
his famous contemporary and associate, Talleyrand, revolution after
revolution, dynasty after dynasty, Bonapartist, Bourbon and
Orleanist, pass before him; and having in this long career enjoyed
or suffered all the splendors and all the woes of life--now at the
height of wealth and power, now a penniless and homeless wanderer--he
came at the age of eighty, in 1848, to Paris to die, in wellnigh
abject poverty.

Among the personal delineations of this celebrated man, the
most characteristic and entertaining perhaps are those presented
by Victor Hugo and Alexander Dumas in their respective memoirs.
Chateaubriand is there shown in undress, and the portrait drawn
of him is vivid and interesting.

Victor Hugo describes him as he appeared in 1819 at his fine hôtel
in Paris, wealthy, influential and renowned. The author-to-be of
_Les Misèrables_ was then a mere youth, and his budding glories
as an ultra-royalist poet conferred upon him the honor of an
introduction to the great man.

Hugo was ushered in, and saw before him, leaning in a stately
attitude against the mantelpiece, the illustrious individual.

M.
de Chateaubriand, says Hugo, affected the bearing of a soldier:
the
man of the pen remembered the man of the sword. His neck was
encircled by a black cravat, which hid the collar of his
shirt: a black frockcoat, buttoned to the top, encased his
small, bent body. The fine part about him was his head--out of
proportion with his figure, but grave and noble.

The nose was firm and imperious in outline, the eye proud,
the smile charming; but this smile was a sudden flash, the mouth
quickly resuming its severe and haughty expression.

"Monsieur Hugo," said Chateaubriand without moving, "I am delighted
to see you.

I have read your verses on La Vendeé and the death of the duc de
Berri; and there are things in the latter more especially
which no other poet of this age could have written.

Ronald smiled at his mother's words, and told her he would never
fail in her service.

"If he sees much of Valentine," thought his mother, "he can not
help loving her.  Then all will be well."

Ronald was not in the house when the guests arrived; they came
rather before the appointed time.  His mother and Lady Charteris
had gone to the library together, leaving Valentine in the
drawing room alone.  Ronald found her there.  Opening the door,
he saw the sleeve of a white dress; believing Lady Earle was
there, he went carelessly into the room, then started in
astonishment at the vision before him.  Once in a century,
perhaps, one sees a woman like Valentine Charteris; of the purest
and loveliest Greek type, a calm, grand, magnificent blonde, with
clear, straight brows, fair hair that shone like satin and lay in
thick folds around her queenly head--tall and stately, with a
finished ease and grace of manner that could only result from
long and careful training.  She rose when Ronald entered the
room, and her beautiful eyes were lifted calmly to his face.
Suddenly a rush of color dyed the white brow.  Valentine
remembered what Lady Earle had said of her son.  She knew that
both his mother and hers wished that she should be Ronald's wife.

"I beg your pardon," he said hastily, "I thought Lady Earle was
here."

"She is in the library," said Valentine, with a smile that
dazzled him.

He bowed and withdrew.  This, then, was Valentine Charteris, the
fine lady whose coming he had dreaded.  She was very beautiful--
he had never seen a face like hers.

No thought of love, or of comparing this magnificent woman with
simple, pretty Dora, ever entered his mind.  But Ronald was a
true artist, and one of no mean skill.  He thought of that pure
Grecian face as he would have thought of a beautiful picture or
an exquisite statue.  He never thought of the loving, sensitive
woman's heart hidden under it.

It was not difficult when dinner was over to open the grand piano
for Valentine, to fetch her music, and listen while she talked of
operas he had never heard.  It was pleasant to watch her as she
sat in the evening gloaming, her superb beauty enhanced by the
delicate evening dress of fine white lace; the shapely shoulders
were polished and white, the exquisite arms rounded and clasped
by a bracelet of pearls.  She wore a rose in the bodice of her
dress, and, as Ronald bent over the music she was showing him the
sweet, subtle perfume came to him like a message from Dora.

Valentine Charteris had one charm even greater than her beauty.
She talked well and gracefully--the play of her features, the
movement of her lips, were something not to be forgotten; and her
smile seemed to break like a sunbeam over her whole face--it was
irresistible.

Poor Ronald stood by her, watching the expression that seemed to
change with every word; listening to pretty polished language
that was in itself a charm.  The two mothers, looking on, and
Lord Earle felt himself relieved from a heavy weight of care.
Then Lady Earle asked Valentine to sing.  She was quite free from
all affectation.

"What kind of music do you prefer?" she asked, looking at Ronald.

"Simple old ballads," he replied, thinking of Dora, and how
prettily she would sing them.

He started when the first note of Valentine's magnificent voice
rang clear and sweet in the quiet gloaming.  She sang some quaint
old story of a knight who loved a maiden--loved and rode away,
returning after long years to find a green grave.  Ronald sat
thinking of Dora.  Ah, perhaps, had he forsaken her, the pretty
dimpled face would have faded away!  He felt pleased that he had
been true.  Then the music ceased.

"Is that what you like?" asked Valentine Charteris, "it is of the
stronger sentimental school."

Simple, honest Ronald wondered if sentiment was a sin against
etiquette, or why fashionable ladies generally spoke of it with a
sneer.

"Do you laugh at sentiment?" he asked; and Valentine opened her
fine eyes in wonder at the question.  Lady Earle half overheard
it, and smiled in great satisfaction.  Matters must be going on
well, she thought, if Ronald had already begun to speak of
sentiment.  She never thought that his heart and mind were with
Dora while he spoke--pretty Dora, who cried over his poetry, and
devoutly believed in the language of flowers.

The evening passed rapidly, and Ronald felt something like regret
when it ended.  Lady Earle was too wise to make any comments; she
never asked her son if he liked Valentine or what he thought of
her.

"I am afraid you are tired," she said, with a charming smile;
"thank you for helping to amuse my friends."

When Ronald thought over what he had done, his share seemed very
small; still his mother was pleased, and he went to rest resolved
that on the morrow he would be doubly attentive to Miss
Charteris.

Three days passed, and Ronald had grown quite at ease with
Valentine.  They read and disputed over the same books; Ronald
brought out his large folio of drawings, and Valentine wondered
at his skill.  He bent over her, explaining the sketches,
laughing and talking gayly, as though there was no dark
background to his life.

"You are an accomplished artist," said Miss Charteris, "you must
have given much time to study."

"I am fond of it," said Ronald; "if fate had not made me an only
son, I should have chosen painting as my profession."

In after years these words came back to them as a sad prophecy.

Ronald liked Miss Charteris.  Apart from her grand beauty, she
had the charm, too, of a kindly heart and an affectionate nature.
He saw how much Lady Earle loved her, and resolved to tell
Valentine all about Dora, and ask her to try to influence his
mother.  With that aim and end in view, he talked continually to
the young lady; he accompanied her in all her walks and drives,
and they sang and sketched together.  Ronald, knowing himself so
safely bound to Dora, forgot in what light his conduct must
appear to others.  Lady Earle had forgotten her fears; she
believed that her son was learning to love Valentine, and her
husband shared her belief.

All things just then were couleur de rose at Earlescourt.  Ronald
looked and felt happy--he had great faith in Valentine's
persuasive powers.

Days passed by rapidly; the time for the grand ball was drawing
near. Lady Earle half wondered when her son would speak of Miss
Charteris, and Valentine wondered why he lingered near her, why
oftentimes he was on the point of speaking, and then drew back.
She quite believed he cared for her, and she liked him in return,
as much as she was capable of liking any one.

She was no tragedy queen, but a loving, affectionate girl, unable
to reach the height of passionate love, or the depth of despair.
She was well disposed toward Ronald--Lady Earle spoke so much of
him at Greenoke.  She knew too that a marriage with him would
delight her mother.

Valentine's favorable impression of Ronald was deepened when she
saw him.  Despite the one great act of duplicity which shadowed
his whole life, Ronald was true and honorable.  Valentine admired
his clear Saxon face and firm lips; she admired his deep bright
eyes, that darkened with every passing emotion; she liked his
gentle, chivalrous manner, his earnest words, his deferential
attention to herself, his affectionate devotion to Lady Earle.

There was not a braver or more gallant man in England than this
young heir of Earlescourt.  He inherited the personal beauty and
courage of his race.  He gave promise of a splendid manhood; and
no one knew how proudly Lord Earle had rejoiced in that promise.

In her calm stately way, Valentine liked him; she even loved him,
and would have been happy as his wife.  She enjoyed his keen,
intellectual powers and his originality of thought.  Even the
"dreadful politics," that scared and shocked his father, amused
her.

Ronald, whose heart was full of the pretty little wife he dared
neither see nor write to, gave no heed to Valentine's manner; it
never occurred to him what construction could be put upon his
friendly liking for her.


Chapter VII

The day came for the grand ball, and during breakfast the ladies
discussed the important question of bouquets; from that the
conversation changed to flowers.  "There are so many of them,"
said Valentine, "and they are all so beautiful, I am always at a
loss which to choose."

"I should never hesitate a moment," said Ronald, laughingly.
"You will accuse me, perhaps of being sentimental, but I must
give preference to the white lily-bells.  Lilies of the valley
are the fairest flowers that grow."

Lady Earle overheard the remark; no one else appeared to notice
it, and she was not much surprised when Valentine entered the
ball room to see white lilies in her fair hair, and a bouquet of
the same flowers, half-shrouded by green leaves, in her hand.

Many eyes turned admiringly upon the calm, stately beauty and her
white flowers. Ronald saw them.  He could not help remarking the
exquisite toilet, marred by no obtrusive colors, the pretty lily
wreath and fragrant bouquet.  It never occurred to him that
Valentine had chosen those delicate blossoms in compliment to
him.  He thought he had never seen a fairer picture than this
magnificent blonde; then she faded from his mind.  He looked
round on those fair and noble ladies, thinking that Dora's shy,
sweet face was far lovelier than any there.  He looked at the
costly jewels, the waving plumes, the sweeping satins, and
thought of Dora's plain, pretty dress.  A softened look came into
his eyes, as he pictured his shy, graceful wife.  Some day she,
too, would walk through these gorgeous rooms, and then would all
admire the wisdom of his choice.  So the heir of Earlescourt
dreamed as he watched the brilliant crowd that began to fill the
ball room; but his reverie was suddenly broken by a summons from
Lady Earle.

"Ronald," said she, looking slightly impatient, "have you
forgotten that it is your place to open the ball?  You must ask
Miss Charteris to dance with you."

"That will be no hardship," he replied, smiling at his mother's
earnest manner.  "I would rather dance with Miss Charteris than
any one else."

Lady Earle wisely kept silence; her son went up to Valentine and
made his request.  He danced with her again and again--not as
Lady Earle hoped, from any unusual preference, but because it
gave him less trouble than selecting partners among strange young
ladies.  Valentine understood him; they talked easily, and
without restraint.  He paid her no compliments, and she did not
seem to expect any.  With other ladies, Ronald was always
thinking, "What would they say if they knew of that fair young
wife at Eastham?"  With Valentine no such idea haunted him--he
had an instinctive belief in her true and firm friendship.

Lady Earle overheard a few whispered comments, and they filled
her heart with delight.  Old friends whispered to her that "it
would be a splendid match for her son," and "how happy she would
be with such a daughter-in-law as Miss Charteris, so beautiful
and dignified;" and all this because Ronald wanted to secure
Valentine's friendship, so that she might intercede for Dora.

When, for the fourth time, Ronald asked Miss Charteris "for the
next dance," she looked up at him with a smile.

"Do you know how often we have danced together this evening?" she
asked.

"What does it matter?" he replied, wondering at the flush that
crimsoned her face.  "Forgive me, Miss Charteris, if I say that
you realize my idea of the poetry of motion."

"Is that why you ask me so frequently?" she said, archly.

"Yes," replied honest Ronald; "it is a great pleasure; for one
good dancer there are fifty bad ones."

He did not quite understand the pretty, piqued expression of her
face.

"You have not told me," said Valentine, "whether you like my
flowers."

"They are very beautiful," he replied; but the compliment of her
selection was all lost upon him.

Miss Charteris did not know whether he was simply indifferent or
timid.

"You told me these lilies were your favorite flowers," she said.

"Yes," replied Ronald; "but they are not the flowers that
resemble you."  He was thinking how much simple, loving Dora was
like the pretty delicate little blossoms.  "You are like the tall
queenly lilies."

He paused, for Valentine was looking at him with a wondering
smile.

"Do you know you have paid me two compliments in less than five
minutes?" she said.  "And yesterday we agreed that between true
friends they were quite unnecessary."

"I--I did not intend to pay idle compliments," he replied.  "I
merely said what I thought.  You are like a tall, grand, white
lily, Miss Charteris.  I have often thought so.  If you will not
dance with me again, will you walk through the rooms?"

Many admiring glances followed them--a handsomer pair was seldom
seen.  They passed through the long suite of rooms and on to the
conservatory, where lamps gleamed like stars between the green
plants and rare exotics.

"Will you rest here?" said Ronald.  "The ball room is so crowded
one can not speak there."

"Ah," thought Miss Charteris, "then he really has something to
say to me!"

Despite her calm dignity and serene manner, Valentine's heart
beat high.  She loved the gallant young heir--his honest, kindly
nature had a great charm for her.  She saw that the handsome face
bending over the flowers was agitated and pale.  Miss Charteris
looked down at the lilies in her hand.  He came nearer to her,
and looked anxiously at her beautiful face.

"I am not eloquent," said Ronald--"I have no great gift of
speech; but, Miss Charteris, I should like to find some words
that would reach your heart and dwell there."

He wanted to tell her of Dora, to describe her sweet face with
its dimples and blushes, her graceful manner, her timid,
sensitive disposition.  He wanted to make her love Dora, to help
him to soften his mother's prejudices and his father's anger; no
wonder his lips quivered and his voice faltered.

"For some days past I have been longing to speak to you,"
continued Ronald; "now my courage almost fails me.  Miss
Charteris, say something that will give me confidence."  She
looked up at him, and any other man would have read the love in
her face.

"The simplest words you can use will always interest me," she
said, gently.

His face cleared, and he began: "You are kind and generous--"

Then came an interruption--Sir Harry Laurence, with a lady,
entered the conservatory.

"This is refreshing," he said to Ronald.  "I have been ten
minutes trying to get here, the rooms are so full."

Miss Charteris smiled in replying, wishing Sir Harry had waited
ten minutes longer.

"Promise me," said Ronald, detaining her, as Sir Harry passed on,
"that you will give me one half hour tomorrow."

"I will do so," replied she.

"And you will listen to me, Miss Charteris?" he continued.  "You
will hear all I have to say?"

Valentine made no reply; several other people came, some to
admire the alcove filled with ferns which drooped from the wall
by which she was standing, others to breathe the fragrant air. 
"Verses! make verses! 'Tis the highest department of literature.
You are on higher ground than mine:
the true writer is the poet.

I have made verses, too, and am sorry I did not continue to do so,
as my verses were worth more than my prose.

Do you know that I have written a tragedy? I must read you a
scene.

Pilorge! come here: I want you."
An individual with red face, hair and moustaches entered.
"Go and find the manuscript of _Moses_," said Chateaubriand.
Pilorge was Chateaubriand's secretary, and the place was no sinecure.He was
singularly free from vanity.  Perhaps if he had a little more
confidence in himself, the story of the Earles might have been
different.

Lady Charteris looked at her daughter's calm, proud face.  She
had noticed the little interview in the conservatory, and drew
her own conclusions from it.  Valentine's face confirmed them 
there was a delicate flush upon it, and a new light shone in the
lustrous eyes.

"You like Earlescourt?" said Lady Charteris to her daughter that
evening, as they sat in her drawing room alone.

"Yes, mamma, I like it very much," said Valentine.

"And from what I see," continued the elder lady, "I think it is
likely to be your home."

"Yes, I believe so," said Valentine, bending over her mother, and
kissing her.  "Ronald has asked me to give him one half hour
tomorrow, and I am very happy, mamma."

For one so calm and stately, it was admission enough.  Lady
Charteris knew, from the tone of her daughter's voice, that she
loved Ronald Earle.

Ronald slept calmly, half hoping that the end of his troubles was
drawing nigh.  Valentine, whom his mother loved so well, would
intercede for Dora.  Lord Earle would be sure to relent; and he
could bring Dora home, and all would be well.  If ever and anon a
cold fear crept into his heart that simple, pretty Dora would be
sadly out of place in that magnificent house, he dashed it from
him.  Miss Charteris slept calmly, too, but her dreams were
different from Ronald's.  She thought of the time when she would
be mistress of that fair domain, and the wife of its brave young
lord.  She loved him well.  No one had ever pleased her as he had
--no one would ever charm her again.  Valentine had made the
grand mistake of her life.

The morrow so eagerly looked for was a fair, bright day.  The sun
shone warm and bright, the air was soft and fragrant, the sky
blue and cloudless.  Lady Charteris did not leave her room for
breakfast, and Valentine remained with her mother.

When breakfast was ended, Ronald lingered about, hoping to see
Valentine.  He had not waited long before he saw the glimmer of
her white dress and blue ribbons.  He met her in the hall.

"Will you come out into the gardens, Miss Charteris?" he asked.
"The morning is so beautiful, and you promised me one half hour.
Do not take that book with you.  I shall want all your attention
for I have a story to tell you."

He walked by her side through the pleasure gardens where the lake
gleamed in the sunshine, the water lilies sleeping on its quiet
bosom; through the fragrant flower beds where the bees hummed and
the butterflies made love to the fairest blossoms.

"Let us go on to the park," said Valentine; "the sun is too warm
here."

"I know a little spot just fitted for a fairy bower," said
Ronald.  "Let me show it to you.  I can tell my story better
there."

They went through the broad gates of the park, across which the
checkered sunbeams fell, where the deer browsed and king-cups and
tall foxgloves grew--on to the brook side where Dora had rested
so short a time since to think of her new-found happiness.

The pale primroses had all died away, the violets were gone; but
in their place the deep green bank was covered with other flowers
of bright and sunny hue.  The shade of tall trees covered the
bank, the little brook sang merrily, and birds chimed in with the
rippling water; the summer air was filled with the faint, sweet
summer music.

"It is a pretty spot," said Miss Charteris.

The green grass seemed to dance in the breeze, and Ronald made
something like a throne amid it.

"You shall be queen, and I your suppliant," he said.  "You
promise to listen; I will tell you my story."

They sat a few minutes in deep silence, broken only by the
singing brook and the music of the birds; a solemn hush seemed to
have fallen on them, while the leaves rustled in the wind.

If Ronald Earle's heart and mind had not been filled with another
and very different image, he must have seen how fair Valentine
looked; the sunlight glinting through the dense green foliage
fell upon her face, while the white dress and blue ribbons, the
fair floating hair, against the dark background of the bank and
the trees, made a charming picture; but Ronald never saw it.
After long years the memory of it came back to him, and he
wondered at his own blindness.  He never saw the trembling of the
white fingers that played carelessly with sprays of purple
foxglove; he never saw the faint flush upon her face, the quiver
of her proud, beautiful lips, or the love light in her eyes.  He
only saw and thought of Dora.

"I told you, Miss Charteris, last evening, that I was not
eloquent," began Ronald.  "When anything lies deep in my heart, I
find great difficulty in telling it in words."

"All sacred and deep feeling is quiet," said Valentine; "a
torrent of words does not always show an earnest nature.  I have
many thoughts that I could never express."

"If I could only be sure that you would understand me, Miss
Charteris," said Ronald--"that you would see and comprehend the
motives that I can hardly explain myself!  Sitting here in the
summer sunshine, I can scarcely realize how dark the cloud is
that hangs over me.  You are so kind and patient, I will tell you
my story in my own way."  She gathered a rich cluster of
bluebells, and bent over them, pulling the pretty flowers into
pieces, and throwing leaf after leaf into the stream.

"Three months since," continued Ronald, "I came home to
Earlescourt.  Lord and Lady Earle were both at Greenoke; I, and
not quite myself, preferred remaining here alone and quiet.  One
morning I went out into the garden, listless for want of
something to do.  I saw there--ah!  Now I want words, Miss
Charteris--the fairest girl the sun ever shone upon."

He saw the flowers fall from Valentine's grasp; she put her hand
to her brow, as though to shield her face.

"Does the light annoy you?" he asked.

"No," she replied, steadily; "go on with your story."

"A clever man," said Ronald, "might paint for you the pretty
face, all smiles and dimples, the dark shining rings of hair that
fell upon a white brow, the sweet, shy eyes fringed by long
lashes, seldom raised, but full of wonderful light when once you
could look into their depths.  I can only tell you how in a few
days I grew to love the fair young face, and how Dora Thorne 
that was her name, Miss Charteris--loved me."

Valentine never moved nor spoke; Ronald could see the bright
flush die away, and the proud lips quiver.

"I must tell you all quickly," said Ronald.  "She is not what
people call a lady, this beautiful wild flower of mine.  Her
father lives at the lodge; he is Lord Earle's lodge keeper, and
she knows nothing of the world or its ways.  She has never been
taught or trained, though her voice is like sweet music, and her
laugh like the chime of silver bells.  She is like a bright April
day, smiles and tears, sunshine and rain--so near together that
I never know whether I love her best weeping or laughing."

He paused, but Valentine did not speak; her hand still shaded her
face.

"I loved her very much," said Ronald, "and I told her so.  I
asked her to be my wife, and she promised.  When my father came
home from Greenoke I asked his consent, and he laughed at me.  He
would not believe me serious.  I need not tell you the details.
They sent my pretty Dora away, and some one who loved her--who
wanted to make her his wife--came, and quarreled with me.  He 
my rival--swore that Dora should be his.  In his passion he
betrayed the secret so well kept from me.  He told me where she
was, and I went to see her."

There was no movement in the quiet figure, no words passed the
white lips.

"I went to see her," he continued; "she was so unhappy, so pretty
in her sorrow and love, so innocent, so fond of me, that I forgot
all I should have remembered, and married her."

Valentine started then and uttered a low cry.

"You are shocked," said Ronald; "but, Miss Charteris, think of
her so young and gentle!  They would have forced her to marry the
farmer, and she disliked him.  What else could I do to save her?"

Of course it is of no use to direct our steps to the woods, if they
do not carry us thither.

I am alarmed when it happens that I have walked a mile into
the woods bodily, without getting there in spirit. In my afternoon
walk I would fain forget all my morning occupations and my
obligations to society. But it sometimes happens that I
cannot easily shake off the village. The thought of some work will
run in my head, and I am not where my body is,--I am out of
my senses. In my walks I would fain return to my senses. What
business have I in the woods, if I am thinking of something out
of the woods?

I suspect myself, and cannot help a shudder, when I find myself
so implicated even in what are called good works,--for this may
sometimes happen.

My vicinity affords many good walks; and though for so many years
I have walked almost every day, and sometimes for several days
together, I have not yet exhausted them.

An absolutely new prospect is a great happiness, and I can still
get this any afternoon. Two or three hours' walking will carry
me to as strange a country as I expect ever to see. A single
farm-house which I had not seen before is sometimes as good as the
dominions of the King of Dahomey.

There is in fact a sort of harmony discoverable between the
capabilities of the landscape within a circle of ten miles' radius,
or the limits of an afternoon walk, and the threescore years and
ten of human life.

It will never become quite familiar to you.

Nowadays almost all man's improvements, so called, as the building
of houses, and the cutting down of the forest and of all large
trees, simply deform the landscape, and make it more and more tame
and cheap.

A people who would begin by burning the fences and let the forest
stand!

I saw the fences half consumed, their ends lost in the middle of
the prairie, and some worldly miser with a surveyor looking after
his bounds, while heaven had taken place around him, and he did not
see the angels going to and fro, but was looking for an old post-hole
in the midst of paradise.

I looked again, and saw him standing in the middle of a boggy,
stygian fen, surrounded by devils, and he had found his bounds
without a doubt, three little stones, where a stake had been driven,
and looking nearer, I saw that the Prince of Darkness was his
surveyor.

I can easily walk ten, fifteen, twenty, any number of miles,
commencing at my own door, without going by any house, without
crossing a road except where the fox and the mink do: first
along by the river, and then the brook, and then the meadow
and the wood-side.

There are square miles in my vicinity which have no inhabitant.

From many a hill I can see civilization and the abodes of man afar.
The farmers and their works are scarcely more obvious than woodchucks
and their burrows.

Man and his affairs, church and state and school, trade and
commerce, and manufactures and agriculture, even politics, the
most alarming of them all,--I am pleased to see how little space
they occupy in the landscape.

Politics is but a narrow field, and that still narrower highway
yonder leads to it. I sometimes direct the traveller thither.
If you would go to the political world, follow the great road,--follow
that market-man, keep his dust in your eyes, and it will lead you
straight to it; for it, too, has its place merely, and does not
occupy all space.

I pass from it as from a beanfield into the forest, and it is
forgotten.
In one half-hour I can walk off to some portion of the earth's
surface where a man does not stand from one year's end to
another, and there, consequently, politics are not, for they are
but as the cigar-smoke of a man.

The village is the place to which the roads tend, a sort of expansion
of the highway, as a lake of a river.

It is the body of which roads are the arms and legs,--a
trivial or quadrivial place, the thoroughfare and ordinary of
travellers. The word is from the Latin _villa_, which,
together with _via_, a way, or more anciently _ved_ and _vella_,
Varro derives from _veho_, to carry, because the villa is the place
to and from which things are carried.

They who got their living by teaming were said _vellaturam facere_.

Hence, too, apparently, the Latin word _vilis_ and our vile;
also _villain_. This suggests what kind of degeneracy villagers
are liable to.

They are wayworn by the travel that goes by and over them, without
travelling themselves.

Some do not walk at all; others walk in the highways; a few walk
across lots. Roads are made for horses and men of business. I
do not travel in them much, comparatively, because I am not in a
hurry to get to any tavern or grocery or livery-stable or depot
to which they lead. I am a good horse to travel, but not
from choice a roadster. The landscape-painter uses the figures
of men to mark a road. He would not make that use of my figure.

I walk out into a Nature such as the old prophets and poets, Menu,
Moses, Homer, Chaucer, walked in. You may name it America, but
it is not America: neither Americus Vespucius, nor Columbus, nor
the rest were the discoverers of it. There is a truer account
of it in mythology than in any history of America, so called, that
I have seen.

However, there are a few old roads that may be trodden with profit,
as if they led somewhere now that they are nearly discontinued.

There is the Old Marlborough Road, which does not go to Marlborough
now, methinks, unless that is Marlborough where it carries me.
I am the bolder to speak of it here, because I presume that
there are one or two such roads in every town.

THE OLD MARLBOROUGH ROAD.

Where they once dug for money, But never found any; Where sometimes
Martial Miles Singly files, And Elijah Wood, I fear for no good:
No other man, Save Elisha Dugan,-- O man of wild habits, Partridges
and rabbits, Who hast no cares Only to set snares, Who liv'st all
alone, Close to the bone, And where life is sweetest Constantly
eatest.

When the spring stirs my blood With the instinct to travel, I
can get enough gravel On the Old Marlborough Road.
Nobody repairs it, For nobody wears it; It is a living way, As the
Christians say.
Not many there be Who enter therein, Only the guests of the Irishman
Quin.
What is it, what is it, But a direction out there, And the bare
possibility Of going somewhere?
Great guide-boards of stone, But travellers none; Cenotaphs of the
towns Named on their crowns.

It is worth going to see Where you _might_ be.
What king Did the thing, Set up how or when, By what selectmen,
Gourgas or Lee, Clark or Darby?
They're a great endeavor To be something forever; Blank tablets of
stone, Where a traveller might groan, And in one sentence Grave all
that is known; Which another might read, In his extreme need.

I know one or two Lines that would do, Literature that might stand
All over the land, Which a man could remember Till next December,
And road again in the spring, After the thawing.

If with fancy unfurled You leave your abode, You may go round
the world By the Old Marlborough Road.

At present, in this vicinity, the best part of the land is not
private property; the landscape is not owned, and the walker enjoys
comparative freedom.

But possibly the day will come when it will be partitioned off into
so-called pleasure-grounds, in which a few will take a narrow and
exclusive pleasure only,--when fences shall be multiplied, and
man-traps and other engines invented to confine men to the _public_
road, and walking over the surface of God's earth shall be construed
to mean trespassing on some gentleman's grounds.

To enjoy a thing exclusively is commonly to exclude yourself from
the true enjoyment of it.

Let us improve our opportunities, then, before the evil days
come.

What is it that makes it so hard sometimes to determine whither
we will walk?

I believe that there is a subtile magnetism in Nature, which, if
we unconsciously yield to it, will direct us aright.

It is not indifferent to us which way we walk. There is a right
way; but we are very liable from heedlessness and stupidity to
take the wrong one.

We would fain take that walk, never yet taken by us through this
actual world, which is perfectly symbolical of the path which we
love to travel in the interior and ideal world; and sometimes, no
doubt, we find it difficult to choose our direction, because it
does not yet exist distinctly in our idea.

When I go out of the house for a walk, uncertain as yet whither I
will bend my steps, and submit myself to my instinct to decide
for me, I find, strange and whimsical as it may seem, that I finally
and inevitably settle southwest, toward some particular wood or
meadow or deserted pasture or hill in that direction.

My needle is slow to settle,--varies a few degrees, and does not
always point due southwest, it is true, and it has good authority
for this variation, but it always settles between west and
south-southwest.

The future lies that way to me, and the earth seems more
unexhausted and richer on that side.
The outline which would bound my walks would be, not a circle, but
a parabola, or rather like one of those cometary orbits which have
been thought to be non-returning curves, in this case opening
westward, in which my house occupies the place of the sun.

I turn round and round irresolute sometimes for a quarter of an
hour, until I decide, for the thousandth time, that I will walk
into the southwest or west.

Eastward I go only by force; but westward I go free.

Thither no business leads me. It is hard for me to believe
that I shall find fair landscapes or sufficient wildness and freedom
behind the eastern horizon.

I am not excited by the prospect of a walk thither; but I
believe that the forest which I see in the western horizon
stretches uninterruptedly towards the setting sun, and that there
are no towns nor cities in it of enough consequence to disturb me.

Let me live where I will, on this side is the city, on that the
wilderness, and ever I am leaving the city more and more, and
withdrawing into the wilderness.

I should not lay so much stress on this fact, if I did not
believe that something like this is the prevailing tendency
of my countrymen. I must walk toward Oregon, and not toward Europe.
And that way the nation is moving, and I may say that mankind
progress from east to west.

Within a few years we have witnessed the phenomenon of a
southeastward migration, in the settlement of Australia; but
this affects us as a retrograde movement, and, judging from the
moral and physical character of the first generation of Australians,
has not yet proved a successful experiment.

The eastern Tartars think that there is nothing west beyond Thibet.
"The world ends there," say they; "beyond there is nothing but a
shoreless sea."

It is unmitigated East where they live.

We go eastward to realize history and study the works of art and
literature, retracing the steps of the race; we go westward as into
the future, with a spirit of enterprise and adventure.

The Atlantic is a Lethean stream, in our passage over which we
have had an opportunity to forget the Old World and its institutions.

If we do not succeed this time, there is perhaps one more chance
for the race left before it arrives on the banks of the Styx;
and that is in the Lethe of the Pacific, which is three times as
wide.

I know not how significant it is, or how far it is an evidence of
singularity, that an individual should thus consent in his
pettiest walk with the general movement of the race;
but I know that something akin to the migratory instinct in birds
and quadrupeds,--which, in some instances, is known to
have affected the squirrel tribe, impelling them to a general and
mysterious movement, in which they were seen, say some, crossing
the broadest rivers, each on its particular chip, with its tail
raised for a sail, and bridging narrower streams with their
dead,--that something like the _furor_ which affects the domestic
cattle in the spring, and which is referred to a worm in their
tails,--affects both nations and individuals, either perennially
or from time to time.

Not a flock of wild geese cackles over our town, but it to some
extent unsettles the value of real estate here, and, if I were a
broker, I should probably take that disturbance into account.

"Than longen folk to gon on pilgrimages, And palmeres for to seken
strange strondes."
Every sunset which I witness inspires me with the desire to go
to a West as distant and as fair as that into which the sun goes
down. He appears to migrate westward daily, and tempt us to follow
him.

He is the Great Western Pioneer whom the nations follow. We dream
all night of those mountain-ridges in the horizon, though they
may be of vapor only, which were last gilded by his rays.
The island of Atlantis, and the islands and gardens of the Hesperides,
a sort of terrestrial paradise, appear to have been the Great West
of the ancients, enveloped in mystery and poetry.

Who has not seen in imagination, when looking into the sunset
sky, the gardens of the Hesperides, and the foundation of all those
fables?

Columbus felt the westward tendency more strongly than any before.

He obeyed it, and found a New World for Castile and Leon. The
herd of men in those days scented fresh pastures from afar.

"And now the sun had stretched out all the hills, And now
was dropped into the western bay; At last _he_ rose, and
twitched his mantle blue; To-morrow to fresh woods and pastures
new."

Where on the globe can there be found an area of equal extent with
that occupied by the bulk of our States, so fertile and so rich
and varied in its productions, and at the same time so habitable
by the European, as this is?

Michaux, who knew but part of them, says that "the species of large
trees are much more numerous in North America than in Europe; in
the United States there are more than one hundred and forty
species that exceed thirty feet in height; in France there are
but thirty that attain this size." Later botanists more than
confirm his observations. Humboldt came to America to realize his
youthful dreams of a tropical vegetation, and he beheld it in its
greatest perfection in the primitive forests of the Amazon, the
most gigantic wilderness on the earth, which he has so eloquently
described.

The geographer Guyot, himself a European, goes farther,--farther
than I am ready to follow him; yet not when he says,--"As the plant
is made for the animal, as the vegetable world is made for the
animal world, America is made for the man of the Old World ....

The man of the Old World sets out upon his way. Leaving the
highlands of Asia, he descends from station to station towards
Europe.
Each of his steps is marked by a new civilization superior to the
preceding, by a greater power of development.

Arrived at the Atlantic, he pauses on the shore of this unknown
ocean, the bounds of which he knows not, and turns upon his
footprints for an instant."

When he has exhausted the rich soil of Europe, and reinvigorated
himself, "then recommences his adventurous career westward as
in the earliest ages." So far Guyot.

From this western impulse coming in contact with the barrier of the
Atlantic sprang the commerce and enterprise of modern times.

The younger Michaux, in his "Travels West of the Alleghanies
in 1802," says that the common inquiry in the newly settled West
was, "'From what part of the world have you come?'

As if these vast and fertile regions would naturally be the place
of meeting and common country of all the inhabitants of the globe."

To use an obsolete Latin word, I might say, _Ex Oriente lux; ex
Occidente_ FRUX.

From the East light; from the West fruit.

Sir Francis Head, an English traveller and a Governor-General of
Canada, tells us that "in both the northern and southern hemispheres
of the New World, Nature has not only outlined her works on a larger
scale, but has painted the whole picture with brighter and more
costly colors than she used in delineating and in beautifying the
Old World....

The heavens of America appear infinitely higher, the sky is bluer,
the air is fresher, the cold is intenser, the moon looks larger,
the stars are brighter, the thunder is louder, the lightning is
vivider, the wind is stronger, the rain is heavier, the mountains
are higher, the rivers longer, the forests bigger, the plains
broader."

This statement will do at least to set against Buffon's account
of this part of the world and its productions.

Linnaeus said long ago, "Nescio quae facies _laeta, glabra_ plantis
Americanis: I know not what there is of joyous and smooth in the
aspect of American plants"; and I think that in this country there
are no, or at most very few, _Africanae bestice_, African beasts,
as the Romans called them, and that in this respect also it is
peculiarly fitted for the habitation of man.

We are told that within three miles of the centre of the East-Indian
city of Singapore, some of the inhabitants are annually carried
off by tigers; but the traveller can lie down in the woods at night
almost anywhere in North America without fear of wild beasts.

These are encouraging testimonies.

If the moon looks larger here than in Europe, probably the sun
looks larger also.
He never forgot the pleading of those sorrowful eyes, the anguish
of the brave young face, as Ronald turned from him and left the
room.

When Lady Earle awoke to consciousness of her misery, her son had
left her.  No one would have called Lord Earle hard or stern who
saw him clasp his weeping wife in his arms, and console her by
every kind and tender word he could utter. 

Lord Earle did not know that in his wife's heart there was a hope
that in time he would relent.  It was hard to lose her brave boy
for a few months or even years; but he would return, his father
must forgive him, her sorrow would be but for a time.  But Lord
Earle, inflexible and unflinching, knew that he should never in
life see his son again.

No one knew what Lord Earle suffered; as Valentine Charteris
said, he was too proud for scenes.  He dined with Lady Charteris
and her daughter, excusing his wife, and never naming his son.
After dinner he shut himself in his own room, and suffered his
agony along.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

Earlescourt was full of bustle and activity.  The young heir was
leaving suddenly; boxes and trunks had to be packed.  He did not
say where he was going; indeed those who helped him said
afterward that his face was fixed and pale, and that he moved
about like one in a dream.

Everything was arranged for Ronald's departure by the night mail
from Greenfield, the nearest station to Earlescourt.  He took
with him neither horses nor servants; even his valet, Morton, was
left behind.  "My lady" was ill, and shut up in her room all day.

Valentine Charteris sat alone in the drawing room when Ronald
came in to bid her farewell.  She was amazed at the unhappy
termination of the interview.  She would have gone instantly to
Lord Earle, but Ronald told her it was useless--no prayers, no
pleadings could change his determination.

As Ronald stood here, looking into Valentine's beautiful face, he
remembered his mother's words, that she cared for him as she
cared for no other.  Could it be possible that this magnificent
girl, with her serene, queenly dignity, loved him?  She looked
distressed by his sorrow.  When he spoke of his mother, and she
saw the quivering lips he vainly tried to still, tears filled her
eyes.

"Where shall you go," she asked, "and what shall you do?"

"I shall go to my wife at once," he replied, "and take her
abroad.  Do not look so pained and grieved for me, Miss Charteris
I must do the best I can.  If my income will not support me, I
must work; a few months' study will make me a tolerable artist.
Do not forget my mother, Valentine, and bid me 'Godspeed.'"

Her heart yearned for him--so young, so simple, so brave.  She
longed to tell him how much she admired him--how she wanted to
help him, and would be his friend while she lived.  But Miss
Charteris rarely yielded to any emotion; she had laid her hand in
his and said:

"Goodbye, Ronald--God bless you!  Be brave; it is not one great
deed that makes a hero.  The man who bears trouble well is the
greatest hero of all."

As he left his home in that quiet starlit night, Ronald little
thought that, while his mother lay weeping as though her heart
would break, a beautiful face, wet with bitter tears, watched him
from one of the upper windows, and his father, shut up alone,
listened to every sound, and heard the door closed behind his son
as he would have heard his own death knell.

The next day Lady Charteris and her daughter left Earlescourt.
Lord Earle gave no sign of the heavy blow which had struck him.
He was their attentive host while they remained; he escorted them
to their carriage, and parted from them with smiling words.  Then
he went back to the house, where he was never more to hear the
sound of the voice he loved best on earth.

As the days and months passed, and the young heir did not return,
wonder and surprise reigned at Earlescourt.  Lord Earle never
mentioned his son's name.  People said he had gone abroad, and
was living somewhere in Italy.  To Lord Earl it seemed that his
life was ended; he had no further plans, ambition died away; the
grand purpose of his life would never be fulfilled.

Lady Earle said nothing of the trouble that had fallen upon her.
She hoped against hope that the time would come when her husband
would pardon their only son.  Valentine Charteris bore her
disappointment well. She never forgot the simple, chivalrous man
who had clung to her friendship and relied so vainly upon her
influence.

Many lovers sighed round Valentine.  One after another she
dismissed them.  She was waiting until she saw some one like
Ronald Earle--like him in all things save the weakness which had
so fatally shadowed his life.


Chapter IX

In a small, pretty villa, on the banks of the Arno, Ronald Earle
established himself with his young wife.  He had gone direct to
Eastham, after leaving Earlescourt, his heart aching with sorrow
for home and all that he had left there, and beating high with
joy at the thought that now nothing stood between him and Dora.
He told her of the quarrel--of his father's stern words--and
Dora, as he had foreseen clung round his neck and wept.

She would love him all the more, she said.  She must love him
enough to make up for home and every one else.

Yet, strange to say, when Ronald told his pretty, weeping wife
all that happened, he made no mention of Valentine Charteris--he
did not even utter her name.

Ronald's arrangements were soon made.  He sent for Stephen Thorne
and his wife, and told them how and when he had married Dora.

"I am sorry for it," said Stephen.  "No good will ever come of
such an unequal match.  My girl had better have stayed at home,
or married the young farmer who loved her.  The distance between
you is too great, Mr. Earle, and I fear me you will find it out."

Ronald laughed at the idea that he should ever tire of Dora.  How
little these prosaic, commonplace people knew of love!

The good lodge keeper and his wife parted from Dora with many
tears.  She was never to brighten their home again with her sweet
face and gay voice.  She was going away to strange lands over the
sea.  Many dark forebodings haunted them; but it was too late for
advice and interference now.

The first news that came to the villa on the banks of the Arno
was that Stephen Thorne and his wife had left the lodge and taken
a small farm somewhere in the county of Kent.  Lady Earle had
found them the means, and they had left without one word from
Lord Earle.  He never asked whither they had gone.

Despite his father's anger and his mother's sorrow, despite his
poverty and loss of position, Ronald for some months was very
happy with his young wife.  It was so pleasant to teach Dora, to
watch her sweet, dimpled face and the dark eyes grow large with
wonder; to hear her simple, naive remarks, her original ideas; to
see her pretty, artless ways; above all, it was pleasant to be so
dearly loved.

He often thought that there never had been, never could be, a
wife so loving as Dora.  He could not teach her much, although he
tried hard.  She sang simple little ballads sweetly and clearly;
but although master after master tried his best, she could never
be taught to play--not even as much as the easy accompaniments
of her own songs.  Ronald hoped that with time and attention she
would be able to sketch, but Dora never managed it.  Obediently
enough she took pencil and paper in her hands and tried, but the
strokes would never come straight.  Sometimes the drawing she
made would resemble something so comical that both she and Ronald
laughed heartily; while the consciousness of her own inferiority
grieved her, and large, bright tears would frequently fall upon
the paper.  Then Ronald would take the pencils away, and Dora
would cling around his neck and ask him if he would not have been
happier with a cleverer wife.

"No, a thousand times, no," he would say; he loved Dora better in
her artless simplicity than he could have loved the cleverest
woman in the world.

"And you are quite sure," said Dora, "that you will never repent
marrying me?"

"No, again," was the reply.  "You are the crowning joy of my
life."

It was pleasant to sit amid the oleanders and myrtles, reading
the great poems of the world to Dora.  Even if she did not
understand them, her face lighted with pleasure as the grand
words came from Ronald's lips.  It was pleasant, too, to sit on
the banks of the Arno, watching the blue waters gleaming in the
sun.  Dora was at home there.  She would say little of books, of
pictures, or music; but she could talk of beautiful Nature, and
never tire.  She knew the changing colors of the sky, the varied
hues of the waves, the different voices of the wind, the songs of
the birds.  All these had a separate and distinct meaning for
her.

Ronald could not teach her much more.  She liked the beautiful
poems he read, but never could remember who had written them.
She forgot the names of great authors, or mixed them up so
terribly that Ronald, in despair, told her it would be better not
to talk of books just yet--not until she was more familiar with
them.

But he soon found out that Dora could not read for many minutes
together.  She would open her book, and make a desperate attempt;
then her dark eyes would wander away to the distant mountains, or
to the glistening river.  She could never read while the sun
shone or the birds sang.

Seeing that, Ronald gave up all attempts at literature in the
daytime; when the lamps were lighted in the evening, and the fair
face of Nature was shut out, he tried again, and succeeded for
ten minutes; then Dora's eyes drooped, the white lids with their
jetty fringe closed; and with great dismay he found that over the
masterpieces of the world Dora had fallen asleep.

Two long, bright years had passed away before Ronald began to
perceive that he could educate his pretty young wife no further.
She was a strange mixture of ignorance and uncultivated poetry.
She could speak well; her voice was sweet, her accent, caught
from him, good; alone he never noticed any deficiencies, but if
he met an English friend in Florence and brought him home to
dine, then Ronald began to wish that Dora would leave off
blushing and grow less shy, that she could talk a little more,
and that he might lose all fear of her making some terrible
blunder.

The third year of their married life dawned; Dora was just
twenty, and Ronald twenty-three.  There had been no rejoicing
when he had attained his majority; it passed over unnoticed and
unmarked.  News came to them from England, letters from the
little farm in Kent, telling of simple home intelligence, and
letters from Lady Earle, always sad and stained with tears.  She
had no good news to tell them.  Lord Earle was well, but he would
never allow his son's name to be mentioned before him, and she
longed to see her son.  In all her letters Lady Earle said: "Give
my love to Dora."

In this, the third year of his married life, Ronald began to feel
the pressure of poverty.  His income was not more than three
hundred a year.  To Dora this seemed boundless riches; but the
heir of Earlescourt had spent more in dress and cigars.  Now
debts began to press upon him, writing home he knew was useless.
He would not ask Lady Earle, although he knew that she would have
parted with the last jewel in her case for him.

Ronald gave himself up to the study of painting.  A pretty little
studio was built, and Dora spent long hours in admiring both her
husband and his work.  He gave promise of being some day a good
artist--not a genius.  The world would never rave about his
pictures; but, in time, he would be a conscientious, painstaking
artist.  Among his small coterie of friends some approved, others
laughed.

"Why not go to the Jews?" asked fashionable young men.
"Earlescourt must be yours some day.  You can borrow money if you
like."

Ronald steadily refused to entertain the idea.  He wondered at
modern ideas of honor--that men saw no shame in borrowing upon
the lives of their nearest and dearest, yet thought it a disgrace
to be a follower of one of the grandest of arts.  He made one
compromise--that was for his father's sake.  As an artist, he
was known by Dora's name of Thorne, and, before long, Ronald
Thorne's pictures were in great request.  There was no dash of
genius about them; but they were careful studies.  Some few were
sold, and the price realized proved no unwelcome addition to a
small income.

Ronald became known in Florence.  People who had not thought much
of Mr. Earle were eager to know the clever artist and his pretty,
shy wife.  Then the trial of Ronald Earle began in earnest.  Had
he lived always away from the world, out of society, the chances
are that his fate would have been different; but invitations
began to pour in upon him and Dora, and Ronald, half tired of his
solitude, although he never suspected it, accepted them eagerly.

Dora did not like the change; she felt lonely and lost where
Ronald was so popular and so much at home.

Among those who eagerly sought Ronald's society was the pretty
coquette, the Countess Rosali, an English lady who had married
the Count Rosali, a Florentine noble of great wealth.

No one in Florence was half so popular as the fair countess.
Among the dark, glowing beauties of sunny Italy she was like a
bright sunbeam.  Her fair, piquant face was charming from its
delicate bright coloring and gay smiles; her hair, of the rare
color painted by the old masters, yet so seldom seen, was of pure
golden hue, looking always as though the sun shone upon it.

Countess Rosali, there was no denying the fact, certainly did
enjoy a little flirtation.  Her grave, serious husband knew it,
and looked on quite calmly.  To his grave mind the pretty
countess resembled a butterfly far more than a rational being.
He knew that, though she might laugh and talk to others, though
she might seek admiration and enjoy delicate flattery, yet in her
heart she was true as steel.  She loved bright colors, and
everything else that was gay and brilliant.  She had gathered the
roses; perhaps some one else had her share of thorns.

The fair, dainty lady had a great desire to see Mr. Thorne.  She
had seen one of his pictures at the house of one of her friends 
a simple little thing, but it had charmed her.  It was merely a
bouquet of English wild flowers; but then they were so naturally
painted!  The bluebells looked as though they had just been
gathered.  One almost fancied dew drops on the delicate wild
roses; a spray of pink hawthorn, daisies and golden buttercups
mingled with woodbine and meadow-sweet, told sweet stories of the
English meadows.

"Whoever painted that," said the fair countess, "loves flowers,
and knows what English flowers mean."

The countess did not rest until Ronald had been introduced to
her, and then she would know his wife.  Her grave, silent husband
smiled at her evident admiration of the handsome young
Englishman.  She liked his clear, Saxon face and fair hair; she
liked his simple, kindly manner, so full of chivalry and truth.
She liked pretty Dora, too; but there were times when the dainty,
fastidious countess looked at the young wife in wonder, for, as
she said one evening to her husband:

"There is something in Mrs. Thorne that puzzles me--she does not
always speak or look like a lady--"

Few days passed without bringing Ronald and Dora to the Villa
Rosali.  It would have been better for Ronald had he never left
his pretty home on the banks of the Arno.


Chapter X

Going into society increased the expenses which Ronald and his
wife found already heavy enough.  There were times when the money
received from the sale of his pictures failed in liquidating
bills; then Ronald grew anxious, and Dora, not knowing what
better to do, wept and blamed herself for all the trouble.  It
was a relief then to leave the home over which the clouds lowered
and seek the gay villa, where something pleasant and amusing was
always going on.

The countess gathered around her the elite of Florentine society;
she selected her friends and acquaintances as carefully as she
selected her dresses, jewels, and flowers.  She refused to know
"bores" and "nobodies"; her lady friends must be pretty, piquant,
or fashionable, any gentleman admitted into her charmed circle
must have genius, wit, or talent to recommend him.  Though grave
matrons shook their heads and looked prudish when the Countess
Rosali was mentioned, yet to belong to her set was to receive the
"stamp of fashion."  No day passed without some amusement at the
villa--picnic, excursion, soiree, dance, or, what its fair
mistress preferred, private theatricals and charades.

"Help me," she said one morning, as Ronald and Dora, in
compliance with her urgent invitation, came to spend the day at
the villa--"help me; I want to do something that will surprise
every one.  There are some great English people coming to
Florence--one of your heiresses, who is at the same time a
beauty.  We must have some grand charades or tableaus.  What
would you advise?  Think of something original that will take
Florence by surprise."

"Wishing any one to be original," said Ronald, smiling at her
quick, eager ways, "immediately deprives one of all thought.  I
must have time; it seems to me you have exhausted every subject."

"An artist has never-failing resources," she replied; "when every
'fount of inspiration' is closed it will be time to tell me there
are no ideas.  You must have seen many charades, Mrs. Thorne,"
she said, turning suddenly to Dora; "they are very popular in
England.  Tell me of some."

Dora blushed.  She thought of the lodge and its one small parlor,
and then felt wretched and uncomfortable, out of place, and
unhappy.

"I have never seen any charades," she said, stiffly, and with
crimson cheeks.

The countess opened her blue eyes in surprise, and Ronald looked
anxiously from one to the other.

"My wife was too young when we were married to have seen much of
the world," he said, inwardly hoping that the tears he saw
gathering in Dora's dark eyes would not fall.

"Ah, then, she will be of no use in our council," replied the
countess, quickly.  "Let us go out on the terrace; there is
always inspiration under an Italian sky."

She led the way to a pretty veranda on the terrace, and they sat
under the shade of a large spreading vine.

"Now we can discuss my difficulty in peace," said the lady, in
her pretty, imperious way. "I will, with your permission, tell
you some of my ideas."

The countess was not particularly gifted, but Ronald was charmed
by the series of pictures she placed before him, all well chosen,
with startling points of interest, scenes from noble poems,
pictures from fine old tragedies.  She never paused or seemed
tired, while Dora sat, her face still flushed, looking more
awkward and ill at ease than Ronald had ever seen her.  For the
first time, as they sat under the vine that morning, Ronald
contrasted his wife with his dainty, brilliant hostess, and felt
that she lost by the contrast--"awkward and ill at ease," self-
conscious to a miserable degree.  For the first time Ronald felt
slightly ashamed of Dora, and wished that she knew more, and
could take some part in the conversation.  Dimples and smiles,
curling rings of dark hair, and pretty rosebud lips were, he
thought, all very well, but a man grew tired of them in time,
unless there was something to keep up the charm.  But poor little
Dora had no resources beyond her smiles and tears.  She sat
shrinking and timid, half frightened at the bright lady who knew
so much and told it so well; feeling her heart cold with its
first dread that Ronald was not pleased with her.  Her eyes
wandered to the far-off hills.  Ah! Could it be that he would
ever tire of her and wished that he had married some one like
himself.  The very thought pierced her heart, and the timid young
wife sat with a sorrowful look upon her face that took away all
its simple beauty.

"I will show you a sketch of the costume," said the countess; "it
is in my desk.  Pray excuse me."

She was gone in an instant, and Dora was alone with her husband.

"For Heaven's sake, Dora," he said, quickly, "do look a little
brighter; what will the countess think of you?  You look like a
frightened school girl."

It was an injudicious speech.  If Ronald had only caressed her,
all would have been sunshine again; as it was, the first
impatient words she had ever heard from him smote her with a new,
strange pain, and the tears overflowed.

"Do not--pray--never do that," said Ronald; "we shall be the
laughing stock of all Florence.  Well-bred people never give way
to emotion."

"Here is the sketch," said the countess, holding a small drawing
in her hand.  Her quick glance took in Dora's tears and the
disturbed expression of Ronald's face.

With kind and graceful tact the countess gave Dora time to
recover herself; but that was the last time she ever invited the
young artist and his wife alone.  Countess Rosali had a great
dread of all domestic scenes.

Neither Dora nor Ronald ever alluded again to this little
incident; it had one bad effect--it frightened the timid young
wife, and made her dread going into society.  When invitations to
grand houses came, she would say, "Go alone, Ronald; if I am with
you they are sure to ask me ever so many questions which I can
not answer; then you will be vexed with me, and I shall be
ashamed of my ignorance."

"Why do you not learn?" Ronald would ask, disarmed by her sweet
humility.

"I can not," said Dora, shaking her pretty head.  "The only
lesson I ever learned in my life was how to love you."

"You have learned that by heart," replied Ronald.  Then he would
kiss her pitiful little face and go without her.

By slow degrees it became a settled rule that Dora should stay at
home and Ronald go out.  He had no scruples in leaving her--she
never objected; her face was always smiling and bright when he
went away, and the same when he returned.  He said to himself
that Dora was happier at home than elsewhere, that fine ladies
frightened her and made her unhappy.

Their ways in life, now became separate and distinct, Ronald
going more than ever into society, Dora clinging more to the safe
shelter of home.

But society was expensive in two ways--not only from the outlay
in dress and other necessaries, but in the time taken from work.
There were many days when Ronald never went near his studio, and
only returned home late in the evening to leave early in the
morning.  He was only human, this young hero who had sacrificed
so much for love; and there were times, after some brilliant fete
or soiree, when the remembrance of home, Dora, hard work, narrow
means, would come to him like a heavy weight or the shadow of a
dark cloud.

Not that he loved her less--pretty, tender Dora; but there was
not one feeling or taste in common between them.  Harder men
would have tired of her long before.  They never cared to speak
much of home, for Dora noticed that Ronald was always sad after a
letter from Lady Earle.  The time came when she hesitated to
speak of her own parents, lest he should remember much that she
would have liked him to forget.

If any true friend had stepped in then, and warned them, life
would have been a different story for Ronald Earle and his wife.

Ronald's story became known in Florence.  He was the son of a
wealthy English peer, who had offended his father by a "low"
marriage; in time he would succeed to the title.  Hospitalities
were lavished upon him, the best houses in Florence were thrown
open to him, and he was eagerly welcomed there.  When people met
him continually unaccompanied by his young wife they smiled
significantly, and bright eyes grew soft with pity.  Poor, pretty
Dora!

Ronald never knew how the long hours of his absence were spent by
Dora.  She never looked sad or weary to him, he never saw any
traces of tears, yet Dora shed many.  Through the long sunny
hours and far into the night she sat alone, thinking of the home
she had left in far-off England--where she had been loved and
worshiped by her rough, homely, honest father and a loving
mother; thinking too, of Ralph, and his pretty, quiet homestead
in the green fields, where she would have been honored as its
mistress, where no fine ladies would have vexed her with
questions, and no one would have thought her ignorant or awkward;
thinking of all these things, yet loving Ronald none the less,
except that a certain kind of fear began to mingle with her love.

Gradually, slowly, but surely, the fascination of the gay and
brilliant society in which Ronald was so eagerly courted laid
hold of him.  He did not sin willfully or consciously; little by
little a distaste for his own home and a weariness of Dora's
society overcame him.  He was never unkind to her, for Ronald was
a gentleman; but he lingered no more through the long sunny
morning by her side.  He gave up all attempts to educate her.  He
ceased to tease her about books; he never offered to read to her;
and pretty, simple Dora, taught by the keen instinct of love,
noted it all.

Ronald saw some little change in her.  The dimples and smiles had
almost vanished from her face.  He seldom heard the laugh that
had once been so sweet to him. There was retiring grace in her
manner that suited her well.  He thought she was catching the
"tone of good society," and liked the change.

Some natures become ennobled under the pressure of adversity; but
limited means and petty money cares had no good effect upon
Ronald Earle.  He fretted under them.  He could do nothing as
other people did.  He could not purchase a magnificent bouquet
for the countess; his means would not permit it.  He could not
afford a horse such as all his gentlemen friends rode.  Adversity
developed no good qualities in him; the discipline was harder and
sterner still that made of him a true man at last.

Ronald went on with his painting fitfully, sometimes producing a
good picture, but often failing.

The greatest patron of the fine arts in Florence was the Prince
di Borgezi.  His magnificent palace was like one picture gallery.
He saw some sketches of Ronald's, and gave an order to him to
paint a large picture, leaving him to choose the subject.  In
vain by night and by day did Ronald ponder on what that subject
should be.  He longed to make his name immortal by it.  He
thought once of Tennyson's "Dora," and of sketching his wife for
the principal figure.  He did make a sketch, but he found that he
could not paint Dora's face; he could not place the dimpling
smiles and bright blushes on canvas, and they were the chief
charm.  He therefore abandoned the idea.

Standing one day where the sunbeams fell lightly through the
thick myrtles, an inspiration came to him.  He would paint a
picture of Queen Guinevere in her gay sweet youth and bright
innocent beauty--Guinevere with her lovely face and golden hair,
the white plumes waving and jewels flashing; the bright figure on
the milk-white palfrey shining in the mellow sunlight that came
through the green trees.

Lancelot should ride by her side; he could see every detail of
the picture; he knew just the noble, brave, tender face Sir
Lancelot should have; but where could he find a model for
Guinevere?  Where was there a face that would realize his artist
dreams of her?  The painting was half completed before he thought
of Valentine Charteris and her magnificent blonde beauty--the
very ideal of Queen Guinevere.

With renewed energy Ronald set to work.  Every feature of that
perfect face was engraved upon his mind.  He made sketch after
sketch, until, in its serene, sweet loveliness, Valentine's face
smiled upon him.


Chapter XI

"Queen Guinevere" was a success far beyond Ronald's dearest
hopes.  Artists and amateurs, connoisseurs of all ranks and
degrees were delighted with it.  The great charm of the picture
was the lovely young face.  "Whom was it like?  Where had he
found his model?"  "Was ever any woman so perfectly beautiful?:"
Such were the questions that people never seemed tired of
repeating.

The picture was hung in the gallery of the palace, and the Prince
di Borgezi became one of Ronald's best patrons.

The prince gave a grand ball in honor of a beautiful English
lady, who, with her family, had just arrived in Florence.
Countess Rosali raved about her, wisely making a friend where any
one else would have feared a rival.

Ronald had contrived an invitation, but was prevented from
attending.  All the elite of Florence were there, and great was
the excitement when Countess Rosali entered the ball room with an
exceedingly beautiful woman--a queenly blonde--the lady about
whom all Florence was interested--an English heiress, clever as
she was fair, speaking French with a courtly grace and Italian
with fluent skill; and when the prince stood before her he
recognized in one moment the original of his famous "Guinevere."

The countess was in danger--a fairer, brighter star had arisen.
Valentine Charteris was the belle of the most brilliant hall ever
given in Florence.

When the prince had received his guest, and danced once with Miss
Charteris, he asked her if she would like to see his celebrated
picture, the "Guinevere," whose fame was spreading fast.

"Nothing," she said, "would please her better;" and as the
Countess Rosali stood near, the prince included her in the
invitation.

"Certainly; I never tire of the 'Guinevere,' never weary of the
artist's triumph, for he is one of the most valued of my
friends."

Prince di Borgesi smiled, thinking how much of the fair
coquette's admiration went to the artist's talent, and how much
to his handsome face.

They entered the long gallery, where some of the finest pictures
in Italy were hung.  The prince led the ladies to the southern
end.  Valentine saw before her a magnificent painting--tall
forest trees, whose thick branches were interwoven, every green
leaf distinct and clear; she saw the mellow light that fell
through them, the milk-white palfrey and the jeweled harness, the
handsome knight who rode near; and then she saw her own face,
bright, smiling, glowing with beauty, bright in innocence, sweet
in purity.  Valentine stared in astonishment, and her companion
smiled.

"There can be no doubt about the resemblance," said the countess.
"The artist has made you Queen Guinevere, Miss Charteris."

"Yes," said Valentine, wonderingly; "it is my own face.  How came
it there?  Who is the artist?"

"His name is Ronald Thorne," replied the countess.  "There is
quite a romance about him."

The countess saw Miss Charteris grow pale and silent.

"Have you ever seen him?" inquired the countess.  "Do you know
him?"

"Yes," said Valentine, "my family and his have been on intimate
terms for years.  I knew that he was in Italy with his wife."

"Ah," rejoined the countess, eagerly, "then perhaps you know all
about his marriage?  Who was Mrs. Thorne?  Why did he quarrel
with his father?  Do tell us, Miss Charteris."

"Nay," said Valentine; "if Mrs. Thorne has any secrets, I shall
not reveal them.  I must tell mamma they are in Florence.  We
must call and see them."

"I was fond of Mrs. Thorne once," said the countess, plaintively,
"but really there is nothing in her."

"There must be something both estimable and lovable," replied
Valentine quickly, "or Mr. Thorne would never have married her."

Prince di Borgesi smiled approval of the young lady's reply.

"You admire my picture, Miss Charteris?" he asked.

"The more so because it is the work of an old friend," said
Valentine; and again the prince admired the grace of her words.

"Any other woman in her place," he thought, "would have blushed
and coquetted.  How charming she is!"

From that moment Prince di Borgezi resolved to win Valentine if
he could.

Lady Charteris was half pleased, half sorry, to hear that Ronald
was in Florence.  No one deplored his rash, foolish marriage more
than she did.  She thought Lord Earle stern and cruel; she pitied
the young man she had once liked so well, yet for all that she
did not feel inclined to renew the acquaintance.  When Valentine
asked her to drive next morning to the little villa on the banks
of the Arno, she at first half declined.

"I promised to be Ronald's friend years ago," said Valentine,
calmly; "and now, mamma, you must allow me to keep my word.  We
must visit his wife, and pay her every attention.  To refuse
would imply a doubt of me, and that I could not endure."

"You shall do as you like, my dear," replied Lady Charteris; "the
young man's mother is my dearest friend, and for her sake we will
be kind to him."

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

It was one of those Italian mornings when the fair face of Nature
seemed bathed in beauty.  The air was full of the music of birds;
the waters of the Arno rolled languidly on; oleanders and myrtles
were in full bloom; birds sang as they sing only under the blue
sky of Italy.

It was not yet noon when Lady Charteris and her daughter reached
the little villa.  Before they came to the house, Valentine
caught one glimpse of a pretty, pale face with large dark eyes.
Could that be pretty, smiling Dora?  There were the shining rings
of dark hair; but where were the smiles Ronald had described?
That was not a happy face.  Care and sorrow were in every line of
it.

They were told that Mr. Thorne was in his studio, and would see
them there.  They had sent no card, and Ronald believed the "two
ladies" to have called on some business connected with pictures.
He started with surprise when Lady Charteris and Valentine
entered.  There were a few words of confused greeting, a hurried
explanation of the circumstances that led Sir Hugh to Florence;
and then Valentine looked long and steadily at the only man she
had ever cared for.  He was altered; the frank, handsome face
looked worn and thin; it had a restless expression.  He did not
look like a man who had found peace.  Lady Charteris told him of
her last visit to Earlescourt--how his mother never ceased
speaking of him, and his father still preserved the same rigid,
unbending silence.

"I have seen your picture," said Lady Charteris.  "How well you
remembered my daughter's face."

"It is one not easily forgotten," he replied; and then another
deep silence fell upon him.

"Where is Mrs. Earle?" asked Valentine.  "Our visit is chiefly to
her.  Pray introduce her to mamma.  I know her already by
description."

"I left my wife in the garden," said Ronald; "shall we join her
there?"

They followed him into the pretty sunlit garden, where Valentine
had seen the pale, sad face.

"My wife is timid," said Ronald, "always nervous with strangers."

Dora was sitting under the shade of a large flowering tree, her
hands folded, and her eyes riveted on the distant hills; there
was something in her listless manner that touched both ladies
more than any words could have done.  A deep flush crimsoned her
face when Ronald and his guests stood before her.  She rose, not
ungracefully; her eyelids drooped in their old shy manner.  As
Ronald introduced his wife, something in the girl's wistful face
went straight to Lady Charteris's heart.  She spoke not a word,
but folded Dora in her arms and kissed her as her own mother
might have done.

"You must learn to love us," said Valentine; "we are your
husband's dearest friends."

Poor Dora had no graceful words ready; her heart was full of
gratitude, but she knew not how to express it.  Ronald looked at
her anxiously, and she caught his glance.

"Now," thought Dora, "he will not be pleased."  She tried to say
something of her pleasure in seeing them, but the words were so
stiff and ungracious that Ronald hastened to interrupt them.

A luncheon of fruit and wine was brought out into the garden, and
they talked merrily--of Earlescourt and the dear old friends
there; of the ball and Prince di Borgesi; in all of which Dora
felt that she had no share.

Who was this beautiful lady, with her fair face and golden hair?

The same face she saw that Ronald had painted in his picture, and
every one admired.  How graceful she was!  How she talked!  The
words seemed to ripple like music over her perfect lips.  Where
had Ronald known her?  Why had he never told her of Miss
Charteris?

"Ah!" thought Dora, "if I could be like her!"  And a sudden sense
of wonder struck her that Ronald had not loved and married this
fair and gracious lady.

Valentine neither forgot nor neglected her.  She tried to draw
her into their conversation, but Dora replied so uneasily and so
briefly to all her remarks that she saw the truest kindness was
to leave her alone.

They spent a few hours pleasantly, and Lady Charteris would not
leave until Ronald promised to take his wife to spend a long day
with them.

"I can hardly promise for Dora," said Ronald, kindly; "she seldom
leaves home."

"Mrs. Earle will not refuse me," said Valentine, with that smile
which no one ever resisted.  "She will come with you, and we will
make her happy."

When the day was settled, the ladies drove away, and Ronald
watched the carriage until it was out of sight.

"My dear Valentine," cried Lady Charteris when they were out of
hearing, "my dear child, what could possess Ronald Earle?  What
could he see in that shy, awkward girl to induce him to give up
everything and go into exile for her sake?  She is not even
pretty."

"She is altered, mamma," began Valentine.

"Altered!" interrupted Lady Charteris.  "I should imagine she is,
and unhappy, too.  She is frightened to speak--she has no style,
no manner, no dignity.  He must have been insane."

"I am quite sure he loved her," said Valentine, warmly, "and
loves her now."

"That is just the mystery," replied her mother--"a clever man
like he is, accustomed to intelligent and beautiful women.  I
shall never understand it."

"Do not try," said Valentine, calmly.  "She is evidently nervous
and sensitive.  I mean to be a true friend to Ronald, mamma; I
shall try to train and form his wife."

Poor Dora! She was already trained and formed, but no one would
understand that.  People do not expect the perfume of the rose in
a wild strawberry blossom, or the fragrance of the heliotrope in
a common bluebell.  Yet they wondered that in this simple girl,
ignorant of the world and it ways, they did not find a cultivated
mind, a graceful manner, and a dignified carriage.  Their only
thought was to train and form her, whereas Nature and not Art had
done both.

"Dora," said Ronald, as the carriage disappeared from view, "try
to like Lady Charteris and her daughter; they are so kindly
disposed toward you.  I shall be so pleased to see you good
friends"

"I will try," she replied, cheerfully.  "How beautiful she is,
Ronald!  Tell me about her.  You remember her face exactly;
should you remember mine as well?"

It was the first touch of jealousy stirring in the simple, loving
heart.

"Far better," said Ronald, with a smile; and then he looked up in
alarm, for Dora was weeping wildly, and clinging to him.

"Oh, Ronald!" she said, "for your sake I wish I was like her.
Shall you ever tire of me, or wish you had not married me?"

Ronald soothed and comforted his wife, and did not return to his
studio that day, but sat talking to her, telling her how noble
and good Valentine Charteris was.


Chapter XII

It is very seldom that a man of good disposition goes wrong
willfully.  Ronald Earle would have felt indignant if any one had
accused him of dishonor or even neglect.  He thought Dora enjoyed
herself more at home than in society, consequently he left her
there.  Habits soon grow.  The time came when he thought it was
the wiser course.  He felt more at ease without her.  If Dora by
chance accompanied him, he watched her anxiously, fearful lest
others should discover and comment upon the little deficiencies
she felt so acutely.

The visit to Lady Charteris was duly paid--a day that Ronald
enjoyed, and Dora thought would never end.  She could not feel at
home with these fine ladies, although Lady Charteris was kind to
her and Valentine laid herself out to please; not even when
Valentine, pitying her shy, timid manner and evident constraint,
took her out into the garden and tried hard to win her
confidence.  Dora's heart seemed to close against the beautiful,
brilliant lady who knew her husband and all his friends so well.
A fierce, hot breath of jealousy stirred the simple nature.
Ronald talked to Miss Charteris of things all unknown to her;
they seemed to have the same thoughts and feelings, while she was
outside the charmed circle, and could never enter it.  She
watched the growing admiration on Ronald's face when Valentine
played and sang, and her restless heart grew weary and faint.
She had never felt jealous before.  When Countess Rosali talked
and laughed with her husband, treating him sometimes as a captive
and again as a victor, Dora never cared; but every smile on this
woman's fair face pained her--she hardly knew why.

When Miss Charteris, under pretense of showing her favorite
flower, took Dora away from the others, and condescended to her
as she had never done to any other, actually caressing the
anxious little face and herself offering to be Mrs. Earle's true
friend, Dora's heart closed against her.  She only replied by
faint monosyllables, and never raised her dark eyes to the face
turned so kindly upon her.

When Ronald had taken his young wife away, Lady Charteris sat
with her daughter in an unbroken silence.

"Poor boy!" said the other lady at length, "and poor Dora!  This
is one more added to the list of unhappy marriages.  How will it
end?"

As she watched the sun set in the golden west, Valentine asked
herself the same question: "How will it end?"

If any one had told Dora she was jealous, she would have denied
it indignantly, although Valentine was seldom out of her mind.

From pure kindness Lady Charteris wished Ronald to paint her
daughter's portrait; it was to be a large picture they could take
back to Greenoke.  He was pleased with the commission, and began
to work at it eagerly.  Lady Charteris came with Valentine, and
remained with her during the long sittings, doing everything in
her power to please and win the artist's timid wife.

The fair face, in its calm, Grecian beauty, grew upon the canvas.
Many a long hour, when Ronald was absent, Dora lingered over it.
The portrait had a strange fascination for her.  She dwelt upon
every feature until, if the lips had opened and smiled a mocking
smile at her, she would not have felt greatly surprised.  It was
less a picture to her than a living, breathing reality.  She
would watch Ronald as he worked at it, eager and enthusiastic;
then, looking up and finding her dark eyes riveted upon him with
so strange an expression, he would call her to see what progress
he had made; and, never dreaming of the growing jealousy in
Dora's heart, speak with an artist's delight of the peerless
features.

Without any great or sudden change, day by day Dora grew more
silent and reserved.  She was learning to hide her thoughts, to
keep her little troubles in her own heart and ponder them.  The
time was past when she would throw herself into Ronald's arms and
weep out her sorrows there.

Ronald did not notice the change.  Home seemed very dull.  It was
a great pleasure to leave the solitary little villa and sit in
the brilliant salon of Lady Charteris's well-appointed home.  It
was pleasant to exchange dull monotony for sparkling conversation
and gay society.

Valentine had many admirers.  Every one knew the Prince di
Borgesi would gladly have laid his fortune and title at her feet;
but she cared for neither.  Ronald often watched her as noble and
learned men offered their homage to her.  She smiled brightly,
spoke well and gracefully; but he never saw in her face the look
he once remembered there.  Lady Charteris deplored her daughter's
obstinacy.  She took Ronald into her confidence, and confided to
him her annoyance when one suitor after another was dismissed.

Ronald was not particularly vain.  Like most men, he had a
pleasing consciousness of his own worth; but he could not help
remembering his mother's assurance that Valentine cared for him.
Could it have been true?  Was there ever a time when that
beautiful girl, so indifferent to all homage, cared for him?
Could there have been a time when the prize for which others
sighed in vain was within his grasp and he slighted it?

He did not dwell upon these thoughts, but they would come into
his mind.  It was seldom that a day passed without his calling at
the pretty home where Lady Charteris always welcomed him kindly.
She was sorry for him.  He was never de trop with her.
Occasionally, too, she drove out to see his wife; but the visits
were rather of duty than of pleasure.

Then Dora's health failed.  She grew weak and languid--irritable
at times--as unlike the smiling, blushing girl Ronald had met at
Earlescourt gardens as it was possible for her to be.  He wrote
to tell his mother that at length there was hope of an heir to
their ancient house.  He was very kind and patient to his ailing,
delicate wife, giving up parties and soirees to sit with her, but
never able to guess why Dora's dark eyes looked so strangely upon
him.

Lady Charteris had planned an excursion to some picturesque ruin
that had pleased her daughter, who wished to make a sketch of it.
Ronald was asked to join them, and he had been looking forward
for many days to a few pleasant hours away from all care and
anxiety--out in the beautiful country with Valentine.  But when
the morning came Dora looked pale and ill.  She did not ask him
to stay with her, but he read the wish in her face.

"I will not go, Dora," said her husband; "I will not leave you.
I shall send a note of excuse to Lady Charteris, and take care of
you all day."

"Is Miss Charteris going?" she asked, quietly.

"Yes, and several others," he replied.

"Then never mind me," said Dora; "do not give up a day's pleasure
for me."

Ronald might have guessed there was something wrong from the tone
of her voice, but Ronald was not of a suspicious nature.

"Now, Dora," he said, gently, "you know I would give up every
pleasure in the world for you."

He bent over her, and kissed her pale little face.  Time had been
when the simple heart would have thrilled with happiness at his
words; but Dora grew cold and hard.

"It used to be always so," she thought, "before she came with her
beauty and took him from me."

How much misery would have been averted had she told Ronald of
her jealous thoughts and fears!  He never suspected them.  When
he returned home, looking bright and happy, she would ask him,
"Have you seen Miss Charteris today?" and he, glad of her
interest in his friends, would reply that he had been to her
mother's house, and tell her of music he had heard or people he
had met, or of Valentine's messages to her.  So Dora fed the
dark, bitter jealousy that had crept into her heart.

It was a proud but anxious day for Ronald when he wrote to tell
his mother that he was now the father of little twin daughters,
two pretty, fair babies, in place of the long looked-for heir of
Earlescourt.

Lady Charteris was very kind to the lonely young mother--so kind
that, had she borne any other name, Dora must have loved her.  A
glimpse of the old happiness came back, for Ronald was proud and
pleased with the little twin sisters.

One bright morning, when Dora had been taken down into the pretty
room where the infants lay sleeping, Lady Charteris and her
daughter came in.  Ronald joined them and there was a long
discussion as to the names.

"You must have an eye to the future," said Valentine, smiling.
"These little ladies will be very grand personages some day.  It
would be a nice compliment to Lady Earle if you called one
Helena."

"I have made my choice," said Dora, in a clear, ringing voice.
"I shall call this little one with the fair hair Lillian, the
other Beatrice."

A faint flush rose to her face as she spoke.  She would allow of
no interference here.  This smiling beauty should not give names
to her children.

"I admire your choice," said Lady Charteris; "Beatrice and
Lillian are very pretty names."

When Valentine bent over the cradle and kissed the children
before taking leave, Dora said, "I have had my own way, you see,
Miss Charteris, with my little ones.  Mr. Earle did not oppose
me."

Valentine thought the words harsh and strange; she had no clew to
their meaning.  She could not have imagined Dora jealous of her.
She made some laughing reply, and passed on.  Dora was not lonely
now, the care of the little ones occupying her whole time; but,
far from their binding Ronald to his home, he became more
estranged from it than ever.

The pretty, picturesque villa was very small; there was no room
available for a nursery.  Wherever Dora sat, there must the
little ones be; and although they were very charming to the
mother and the nurse, the continued cries and noise irritated
Ronald greatly.  Then he grew vexed; Dora cried, and said he did
not love them, and so the barrier grew day by day between those
who should have been all in all to each other.

The children grew.  Little Beatrice gave promise of great beauty.
She had the Earle face, Ronald said.  Lillian was a fair, sweet
babe, too gentle, her mother thought, to live.  Neither of them
resembled her, and at times Dora wished it had been otherwise.

Perhaps in all Ronald Earle's troubled life he never spent a more
unsettled or wretched year than this.  "It is impossible to
paint," he said to himself, "when disturbed by crying babies."
So the greater part of his time was spent away from home.  Some
hours of every day were passed with Valentine; he never stopped
to ask himself what impulse led him to seek her society; the calm
repose of her fair presence contrasted so pleasantly with the
petty troubles and small miseries of home.  When Miss Charteris
rode out he accompanied her; he liked to meet her at parties and
balls.  He would have thought a day sad and dark wherein he did
not see her.

When the little ones reached their first birthday, Valentine,
with her usual kind thought, purchased a grand assortment of
toys, and drove over quite unexpectedly to the villa.  It was not
a very cheerful scene which met her gaze.

Ronald was busily engaged in writing.  Dora, flushed and worn,
was vainly trying to stop the cries of one child, while the other
pulled at her dress.  The anxious, dreary face struck Valentine
with pain.  She laid the parcel of toys down, and shook hands
with Ronald, who looked somewhat ashamed of the aspect of
affairs.  Then, turning to Dora, she took the child from her
arms, and little Beatrice, looking at her with wondering eyes,
forgot to cry.

"You are not strong enough, Dora, to nurse this heavy child,"
said Miss Charteris.  "Why do you not find some one to help you?"

"We can not afford it," said Ronald, gloomily.

"We spend too much in gloves and horses," added Dora, bitterly;
but no sooner were the words spoken than she would have given the
world to recall them.

Ronald made no reply, and Valentine, anxious to avert the storm
she had unwittingly raised, drew attention to the toys.

When Valentine left them, Dora and Ronald had their first quarrel
long and bitter.  He could ill brook the insult her words
implied--spoken before Valentine, too!--and she for the first
time showed him how an undisciplined, untrained nature can throw
off the restraint of good manners and good breeding.  It was a
quarrel never to be forgotten, when Ronald in the height of his
rage wished that he had never seen Dora, and she re-echoed the
wish.  When such a quarrel takes place between man and wife, the
bloom and freshness are gone from love.  They may be reconciled,
but they will never again be to each other what they once were.
A strong barrier is broken down, and nothing can be put in its
place.


Chapter XIII

The angry, passionate words spoken by Ronald--almost the first
he had ever uttered--soon faded from his mind, but they rankled
like poisoned arrows in Dora's heart.  She believed them.  Before
evening her husband repented of his anger, and called himself a
coward for having scolded Dora.  He went up to her and raised her
face to his.

"Little wife," He said, "we have both been wrong.  I am very
sorry--let us make friends."

There was just a suspicion of sullenness in Dora's nature, and it
showed itself in full force now.

"It is no matter," she replied, coolly; "I knew long ago that you
were tired of me."

Ronald would not answer, lest they should quarrel again, but he
thought to himself that perhaps she was not far wrong.

From that day the breach between them widened.  In after years
Dora saw how much she was to blame.  She understood then how
distasteful her quiet, sullen reserve must have been to a high-
bred, fastidious man like Ronald.  She did not see it then, but
nursed in her heart imaginary wrongs and injuries; and, above
all, she yielded to a wild, fierce jealousy of Valentine
Charteris.

For some weeks Miss Charteris saw the cloud deepening on Ronald's
face.  He grew silent, and lost the flow of spirit that had once
seemed never to fail; and during the few weeks that followed, a
strong resolution grew in her mind.  She was his true friend, and
she would try to restore peace and harmony between him and his
wife.  She waited for some days, but at her mother's house it was
impossible to see him alone.  Yet she honestly believed that, if
she could talk to him, remind him of his first love for Dora, of
her simplicity and many virtues, she might restore peace and
harmony to her old friend's house.  She thought Ronald to blame.
He had voluntarily taken active duties upon himself, and to her
clearly, rightly judging mind, there was no earthly reason why he
should not fulfill them.  He would not feel hurt at her speaking,
she felt sure, for he had voluntarily sought her aid years ago.
So Valentine waited day after day, hoping to find a chance for
those few words she thought would do so much good; but, as no
opportunity came, she resolved to make one.  Taking her little
jeweled pencil, she wrote the following lines that were in after-
time a death warrant:

"Dear Mr. Earle,--I wish to speak to you particularly and
privately.  I shall be in our grounds tomorrow morning about ten;
let me see you there before you enter the house.  Your sincere
friend, Valentine Charteris."

All the world might have read the note--there was nothing wrong
in it--good intentions and a kindly heart dictated it, but it
worked fatal mischief.  When Ronald was leaving her mother's
house, Miss Charteris openly placed the letter in his hands.

"This is the first note I have ever written to you," she said,
with a smile.  "You must not refuse the request it contains."

"I will send him home happy tomorrow," she thought, "he is easily
influenced for good.  He must make up the misunderstanding with
his pretty little wife--neither of them look happy."

Ronald did not open the letter until he reached home.  Then he
read it with a half-consciousness of what Valentine wanted him
for.

"She is a noble woman," he thought.  "Her words made me brave
before--they will do me good again."

He left the folded paper upon the table in his studio; and
jealous little Dora, going in search of some work she had left,
found it there.  She read it word by word, the color dying slowly
out of her face as she did so, and a bitter, deadly jealousy
piercing her heart like a two-edged sword.  It confirmed her
worst fears, her darkest doubts.  How dared this brilliant,
beautiful woman lure Ronald from her?  How dared she rob her of
his love?

Ronald looked aghast at his wife's face as she re-entered the
sitting room.  He had been playing with the children, and had
forgotten for the time both Valentine and her note.  He cried out
in alarm as she turned her white, wild face to him in dumb,
silent despair.

"What is the matter, Dora?" he cried.  "Are you ill or
frightened?  You look like a ghost."

She made no reply, and her husband, thinking she had relapsed
into one of her little fits of temper, sighed heavily and bade
her good night.

Poor, foolish, jealous heart--she never lay down to rest!

She had quite resolved she would go and meet the husband who was
tired of her and the woman who lured him away.  She would listen
to all they had to say, and then confront them.  No thought of
the dishonor of such a proceeding struck her.  Poor Dora was not
gifted with great refinement of feeling--she looked upon the
step she contemplated rather as a triumph over an enemy than a
degradation to herself.  She knew the place in the grounds where
they should be sure to meet.  Miss Charteris called it her bower;
it was a thick cluster of trees under the shade of which stood a
pretty, rustic seat; and Dora thought that, if she placed herself
behind the trees, she would be able to hear all unseen.

Before Ronald partook of breakfast, Dora had quitted the house on
her foolish errand.  She knew the way to the house and the
entrance to the garden.  She had no fear; even were she
discovered there, no one could surmise more than that she was
resting on her way to the house.  She crouched behind the trees
and waited.  It was wrong, weak, and wicked; but there was
something so pitiful in the white face full of anguish, that one
would hardly know whether to pity or blame her.

The sunshine reached her, the birds were singing in the trees,
the flowers were all blooming--she, in her sorrow and
desolation, heeded nothing.  At length she saw them--Valentine
in her white morning dress, her beautiful face full of deep,
earnest emotion, and Ronald by her side.  As she surmised, they
walked straight to the trees, and Valentine signed to Ronald to
take a seat by her side.  Sweetly and clearly every word she
uttered sounded to Ronald, but they fell like drops of molten
lead on the jealous heart of Ronald's wife.

"You must try," Valentine was saying; "I used to think you would
be a hero.  You are proving yourself a very weak and erring man."

Dora could not distinguish Ronald's words so plainly; he said
something about life and its mistakes.

"I told you once," said Valentine, "that the man who could endure
so bravely the consequences of his own actions was a true hero.
Grant the worst--that you have made a mistake.  You must make
the best you can of it, and you are not doing that now."

"No," he said gravely.  "I am very unhappy--more so than you can
imagine, Valentine.  Life seems to have lost all its charms for
me.  I had such great hopes once, but they are all dead now."

"You are too young to say that," she replied; "a little courage,
a little patience, and all will be well.  If it comforts you to
know that my warmest, deepest sympathy is with you--"

Valentine Charteris never finished her sentence; a pale, angry
face and dark, gleaming eyes full of passion suddenly flashed
before her.

"You may spare your pity, Miss Charteris," cried a hoarse voice.
"Why have you made my husband dissatisfied with me?  Why have you
taken his love from me?  Why do you write notes asking him to
meet you, that you may both speak evil and wrong of his low-born
wife?"

"Hush!" said Ronald, sternly, grasping her arm.  "Stop those wild
words, Dora! Are you mad?"

"No, not yet," she cried; "but this false woman will drive me
so!"

Then Miss Charteris rose, her calm, grand face unruffled, not a
quiver on her proud lips.

"Stay, Miss Charteris, one moment, I pray you," said Ronald,
"while my wife apologizes for her folly."

"It is all true," cried Dora.  "She wrote and asked you to meet
her here."

"Dora," said her husband, gravely, "did you read the letter Miss
Charteris wrote to me?"

"I did," she replied.

"And you deliberately came here to listen to what she had to say
to me?" he continued.  "You deliberately listened to what you
were never intended to hear?"

His grave, stern dignity calmed her angry passion, and she looked
half-frightened into his quiet white face.

"Answer me!" he said.  "Have you crouched behind those trees
deliberately and purposely to listen?

"Yes," she said; "and I would do so again if any one tried to
take my husband from me."

"Then may I be forgiven for the dishonor I have brought to my
name and race!" said Ronald.  "May I be forgiven for thinking
such a woman fit to be my wife!  Hear me," he continued, and the
passion in his voice changed to contempt: "Miss Charteris is your
friend; she asked me to meet her here that she might plead your
cause, Dora--that she might advise me to remain more at home
with you, to go less into society, to look more at the bright
side of our married life, and be a better husband than I have
been lately; it was for that she summoned me here."

"I--I do not believe it," sobbed his wife.

"That is at your option," he replied coolly.  "Miss Charteris, I
should kneel to ask your pardon for the insults you have
received.  If a man had uttered them, I would avenge them.  The
woman who spoke them bears my name.  I entreat your pardon."

"It is granted," she replied; "your wife must have been mad, or
she would have known I was her friend.  I deeply regret that my
good intentions have resulted so unhappily.  Forget my annoyance,
Mr. Earle, and forgive Dora; she could not have known what she
was saying."

"I forgive her," said Ronald; "but I never wish to look upon her
face again.  I see nothing but dishonor there.  My love died a
violent death ten minutes since.  The woman so dead to all
delicacy, all honor as to listen and suspect will never more be
wife of mine."

"Be pitiful," said Valentine, for Dora was weeping bitterly now;
all her fire and passion, all her angry jealousy, had faded
before his wrath.

"I am pitiful," he replied.  "Heaven knows I pity her.  I pity
myself.  We Earles love honorable women when we love at all.  I
will escort you to your house, Miss Charteris, and then Mrs.
Earle and myself will make our arrangements."

In her sweet, womanly pity, Valentine bent down and kissed the
despairing face.

"Try to believe that you are wrong and mistaken, Mrs. Earle," she
said gently.  "I had no thought save to be your friend."

They spoke no word as they passed through the pretty grounds.
Valentine was full of pity for her companion, and of regret for
her own share in that fatal morning's work.

When Ronald reached the cluster of trees again, Dora was not
there.  Just at that moment he cared but little whither she had
gone.  His vexation and sorrow seemed almost greater than he
could bear.


Chapter XIV

The passion and despair of that undisciplined heart were
something painful to see.  Reason, sense, and honor, for a time
were all dead.  If Dora could have stamped out the calm beauty of
Valentine's magnificent face, she would have done so.  Ronald's
anger, his bitter contempt, stung her, until her whole heart and
soul were in angry revolt, until bitter thoughts raged like a
wild tempest within her.  She could not see much harm in what she
had done; she did not quite see why reading her own husband's
letter, or listening to a private conversation of his was a
breach of honor.  She thought but little at the time of what she
had done; her heart was full of anger against Ronald and
Valentine.  She clasped her hands angrily after Mrs. Charteris
had kissed her, crying out that she was false, and had lured
Ronald from her.  Any one passing her on the high-road would have
thought her mad, seeing the white face, the dark, gleaming eyes,
the rigid lips only opening for moans and cries that marred the
sweet silence.  He should keep his word; never--come what might
never should he look upon her fair face again--the face he had
caressed so often and thought so fair.  She would go away--he
was quite tired of her, and of her children, too.  They would
tease him and intrude upon him no more.  Let him go to the fair,
false woman, who had pretended to pity her.

The little nurse-maid, a simple peasant girl, looked on in mute
amazement when her mistress entered the room where the children
were.

"Maria," she said, "I am going home, over the seas to England. 
Will you come with me?"

The only thing poor Dora had learned during those quiet years was
a moderate share of Italian.  The young nurse looked up in wonder
at the hard voice, usually soft as the cooing of a ring-dove.

"I will go," she replied, "if the signora will take me.  I leave
none behind that I love."

With trembling, passionate hands and white, stern face, Dora
packed her trunks and boxes--the children's little wardrobe and
her own, throwing far from her every present, either of dress or
toys, that Valentine had brought.

She never delayed to look round and think of the happy hours
spent in those pretty rooms.  She never thought of the young
lover who had given up all the world for her.  All she remembered
was the wrathful husband who never wished to see her more--who,
in presence of another, had bitterly regretted having made her
his wife.  She could not weep--the burning brain and jealous,
angry heart would have been better for that, but the dark eyes
were bright and full of strange, angry light.  The little ones,
looking upon her, wept for fear.  With eager, passionate love she
caught them in her arms, crying the while that they should never
remain to be despised as she was.

In the white-faced, angry woman, roused to the highest pitch of
passion, there was no trace of pretty, blushing Dora.  Rapidly
were the boxes packed, corded, and addressed.  Once during that
brief time Maria asked, "Where are you going, signora?"  And the
hard voice answered, "To my father's--my own home in England."

When everything was ready, the wondering children dressed, and
the little maid waiting, Dora sat down at her husband's desk and
wrote the following lines.  No tears fell upon them; her hand did
not tremble, the words were clear and firmly written:

"I have not waited for you to send me away.  Your eyes shall not
be pained again by resting on the face where you read dishonor.
I saw months ago that you were tired of me.  I am going to my
father's house, and my children I shall take with me--you care
no more for them than for me.  They are mine--not yours.  I
leave you with all you love in the world.  I take all I love with
me.  If you prayed for long years, I would never return to you
nor speak to you again."

She folded the note and addressed it to her husband.  She left no
kiss warm from her lips upon it.  As she passed forever from the
little villa, she never turned for one last look at its vine-clad
walls.

The gaunt, silent Italian servant who had lived with Dora since
the first day she reached Florence came to her in wonder and
alarm, barely recognizing her pretty, gentle mistress in the
pale, determined woman who looked like one brought to bay.  To
her Dora spoke of the letter; it was to be given to her husband
as soon as he returned.  Not one word did she utter in reply to
the woman's question.  She hurried with the keen desperation of
despair, lest Ronald should return and find her still there.

Soon after noon, and while Ronald lingered with some friends upon
the steps of the Hotel d'Italia, his wife reached the busy
railway station at Florence.  She had money enough to take her
home, but none to spare.  She knew no rest; every moment seemed
like an age to her, until the train was in motion, and fair,
sunny Florence left far behind.

Without the stimulus of anger Dora would have shrunk in terror
from the thought of a long journey alone--she who had never been
without the escort of a kind and attentive husband. But no
prospect daunted her now--the wide seas, the dangers of rail and
road had no terror for her.  She was flying in hot haste and
anger from one who had said before her rival that he never wished
to see her face again.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

The sun shining so brightly on the waters of the Arno lingered
almost lovingly on the fair, quiet English landscape.  Far down
in the fertile and beautiful county of Kent, where the broad
channel washes the shore, stands the pretty, almost unknown
village of Knutsford.

The world is full of beauty, every country has its share 
Switzerland its snow-clad mountains, Germany its dark woods and
broad streams, France its sunny plains, Italy its "thousand
charms of Nature and Art;" but for quiet, tranquil loveliness,
for calm, fair beauty, looking always fresh from the mighty hand
that created it, there is nothing like English scenery.

The white cliffs of Knutsford, like "grand giants," ran along the
shore; there was a broad stretch of yellow sand, hidden when the
tide was in, shining and firm when it ebbed.  The top of the
cliff was like a carpet of thick green grass and springing
heather.  Far away, in the blue distance, one could see, of a
bright, sunny day, the outline of the French coast.  The waves
rolled in, and broke upon the yellow sands; the sea-birds flew by
with busy wings, white sails gleamed in the sunshine.
Occasionally a large steamer passed; there was no sound save the
rich, never-changing music of Nature, the rush of wind and waves,
the grand, solemn anthem that the sea never tires of singing.

Far down the cliff ran the zigzag path that led to the village;
there was no sign of the sea on the other side of the white
rocks.  There the green fields and pretty hop-gardens stretched
out far and wide, and the Farthinglow Woods formed a belt around
them.  In the midst of a green, fertile valley stood the lovely
village of Knutsford.  It had no regular street; there were a few
cottages, a few farm houses, a few little villas, one grand
mansion, three or four shops, and quiet homesteads with thatched
roofs and eaves of straw.

The prettiest and most compact little farm in the village was the
one where Stephen Thorne and his wife dwelt.  It was called the
elms, a long avenue of elms leading to the little house and
skirting the broad green meadows.  It was at a short distance
from the village, so quiet, so tranquil, that, living there, one
seemed out of the world.

Stephen Thorne and his wife were not rich.  In spite of Lady
Earle's bounty, it was hard for them at times to make both ends
meet.  Crops, even in that fair and fertile county, would fail,
cattle would die, rain would fall when it should not, and the sun
refuse to shine.  But this year everything had gone on well; the
hay stood in great ricks in the farm yard, the golden corn waved
in the fields ripe and ready for the sickle, the cows and sheep
fed tranquilly in the meadows, and all things had prospered with
Stephen Thorne.  One thing only weighed upon his heart--his wife
would have it that Dora's letters grew more and more sad; she
declared her child was unhappy, and he could not persuade her to
the contrary.

It was a fair August evening.  Ah!  How weak and feeble are the
words.  Who could paint the golden flush of summer beauty that
lay over the meadows and corn fields--the hedge rows filled with
wild flowers, the long, thick grass studded with gay blossoms,
the calm, sullen silence only broken by the singing of the birds,
the lowing of cattle, the rustling of green leaves in the sweet
soft air?

Stephen Thorne had gone with his guest and visitor, Ralph Holt,
to fetch the cattle home.  In Ralph's honor, good, motherly Mrs.
Thorne had laid out a beautiful tea--golden honey that seemed
just gathered from the flowers, ripe fruits, cream from the dairy
everything was ready; yet the farmer and his guest seemed long
in coming.  She went to the door and looked across the meadows.
The quiet summer beauty stole like a spell over her.

Suddenly, down in the meadows, Mrs. Thorne caught sight of a lady
leading a little child by the hand.  She was followed by a young
maid carrying another.  As the lady drew nearer, Mrs. Thorne
stood transfixed and bewildered.  Could the summer sun or the
flickering shade be mocking her?  Was she dreaming or awake?  Far
off still, through the summer haze, she saw a white, wan face;
dark eyes, shadowed and veiled, as though by long weeping; lips,
once rosy and smiling, rigid and firm.  She saw what seemed to
her the sorrowful ghost of the pretty, blooming child that had
left her long ago.  She tried to call out, but her voice failed
her.  She tried to run forward and meet the figure coming slowly
through the meadows, but she was powerless to move.  She never
heard the footsteps of her husband and his guest.  She only
stirred when Stephen Thorne placed his hand upon her shoulder,
and in a loud, cheery voice, asked what ailed her.

"Look," she said, hoarsely, "look down the meadow there and tell
me--if that is Dora or Dora's ghost?"

She drew near more swiftly now, for she had seen the three
figures at the door.  The white face and wild eyes seemed aflame
with anxiety.

"Dora, Dora!" cried Mrs. Thorne, "is it really you?"

"It is," said a faint, bitter voice.  "I am come home, mother.
My heart is broken and I long to die."

They crowded around her, and Ralph Holt, with his strong arms,
carried the fragile, drooping figure into the house.  They laid
her upon the little couch, and drew the curling rings of dark
hair back from her white face.  Mrs. Thorne wept aloud, crying
out for her pretty Dora, her poor, unhappy child.  The two men
stood watching her with grave, sad eyes.  Ralph clenched his hand
as he gazed upon her, the wreck of the simple, gentle girl he had
loved so dearly.

"If he has wronged her," he said to Stephen Thorne, "if he has
broken her heart, and sent her home to die, let him beware!"

"I knew it would never prosper," groaned her father; "such
marriages never do."

When Dora opened her eyes, and saw the three anxious faces around
her, for a moment she was bewildered.  They knew when the torture
of memory returned to her, for she clasped her hands with a low
moan.

"Dora," said her mother, "what has happened?  Trust us, dear
child--we are your best friends.  Where is your husband?  And
why have you left him?"

"Because he has grown tired of me," she cried, with passion and
anger flaming again in her white, worn face.  "I did something he
thought wrong, and he prayed to Heaven to pardon him for making
me his wife."

"What did you do?" asked her father, anxiously.

"Nothing that I thought wrong," she replied.  "Ask me no
questions, father.  I would rather die any death than return to
him or see him again.  Yet do not think evil of him.  It was all
a mistake.  I could not think his thoughts or live his life--we
were quite different, and very unhappy.  He never wishes to see
me again, and I will suffer anything rather than see him."

The farmer and his wife looked at each other in silent dismay.
This proud, angry woman and her passionate words frightened them.
Could it be their Dora, who had ever been sunshine and music to
them?

"If you do not like to take me home, father," she said, in a hard
voice, "I can go elsewhere; nothing can surprise or grieve me
now."

But kindly Mrs. Thorne had drawn the tired head to her.

"Do you not know, child," she said, gently, "that a mother's love
never fails?"

Ralph had raised the little one in his arms, and was looking with
wondering admiration at the proud, beautiful face of the little
Beatrice, and the fair loveliness of Lillian.  The children
looked with frank, fearless eyes into his plain, honest face.

"This one with dark hair has the real Earle face," said Stephen
Thorne, proudly; "that is just my lord's look--proud and quiet.
And the little Lillian is something like Dora, when she was quite
a child."

"Never say that!" cried the young mother.  "Let them grow like
any one else, but never like me!"

They soothed her with gentle, loving words.  Her father said she
should share his home with her children, and he would never give
her up again.  They bade her watch the little ones, who had
forgotten their fears, and laughed over the ripe fruit and golden
honey.  They also drew aside the white curtain, and let her tired
eyes fall upon the sweet summer beauty of earth and sky.  Was not
everything peaceful?  The sun sinking in the west, the birds
singing their evening song, the flowers closing their bright
eyes, the wind whispering "good night" to the shimmering,
graceful elms--all was peace, and the hot, angry heart grew calm
and still.  Bitter tears rose to the burning eyes--tears that
fell like rain, and seemed to take away the sharpest sting of her
pain.

With wise and tender thought they let Dora weep undisturbed.  The
bitter sobbing ceased at last.  Dora said farewell to her love.
She lay white and exhausted, but the anger and passion had died
away.

"Let me live with you, father," she said, humbly.  "I will serve
you, and obey you.  I an content, more than content, with my own
home.  But for my little children, let all be as it was years
ago."

When the little ones, like the flowers, had gone to sleep, and
Dora had gone into the pretty white room prepared for her, Ralph
rose to take his leave.

"Surely," said Thorne, "you are not leaving us.  You promised to
stay a whole week."

"I know," said the young farmer; "but you have many to think for
now, Mr. Thorne.  The time will come when the poor, wearied girl
sleeping above us will be Lady Earle.  Her husband knew I loved
her.  No shadow even of suspicion must rest upon her.  While your
daughter remains under your roof, I shall not visit you again."

Dora's father knew the young man was right.

"Let me see the little ones sometimes," continued Ralph; "and if
large parcels of toys and books find their way to the Elms, you
will know who sent them.  But I must not come in Dora's way; she
is no loner Dora Thorne."

As Stephen watched the young man walking quickly through the long
gray fields, he wished that Dora had never seen Ronald Earle.

Poor Dora's troubles were not yet ended.  When the warm August
sun peeped into her room on the following morning, she did not
see it shine; when the children crept to her side and called for
mamma, she was deaf to their little voices.  The tired head
tossed wearily to and fro, the burning eyes would not close.  A
raging fever had her in its fierce clutches.  When Mrs. Thorne,
alarmed by the children's cries, came in, Dora did not know her,
but cried out loudly that she was a false woman, who had lured
her husband from her.

They sent in all haste for aid; but the battle was long and
fierce.  During the hours of delirium, Mrs. Thorne gleaned
sorrowfully some portions of her daughter's story.  She cried out
incessantly against a fair woman--one Valentine--whom Ronald
loved--cried in scorn and anger.  Frequently she was in a
garden, behind some trees; then confronting some one with flaming
eyes, sobbing that she did not believe it; then hiding her face
and crying out:

"He has ceased to love me--let me die!"

But the time came when the fierce fever burned itself out, and
Dora lay weak and helpless as a little child.  She recovered
slowly, but she was never the same again.  Her youth, hope, love,
and happiness were all dead.  No smile or dimple, no pretty
blush, came to the changed face; the old coy beauty was all gone.

Calm and quiet, with deep, earnest eyes, and lips that seldom
smiled, Dora seemed to have found another self.  Even with her
children the sad restraint never wore off nor grew less.  If they
wanted to play, they sought the farmer in the fields, the good-
natured nurse, or the indulgent grandmamma--never the sad, pale
mother.  If they were in trouble then they sought her.

Dora asked for work.  She would have been dairy maid, house maid,
or anything else, but her father said "No."  A pretty little room
was given to her, with woodbines and roses peeping in at the
window.  Here for long hours every day, while the children played
in the meadows, she sat and sewed.  There, too, Dora, for the
first time, learned what Ronald, far away in sunny Italy, failed
to teach her--how to think and read.  Big boxes of books came
from the town of Shorebeach.  Stephen Thorne spared no trouble or
expense in pleasing his daughter.  Dora wondered that she had
never cared for books, now that deeper and more solemn thoughts
came to her.  The pale face took a new beauty; no one could have
believed that the thoughtful woman with the sweet voice and
refined accent was the daughter of the blunt farmer Thorne and
his homely wife.

A few weeks passed, and but for the little ones Dora would have
believed the whole to have been but a long, dark dream.  She
would not think of Ronald; she would not remember his love, his
sacrifices for her; she thought only of her wrongs and his cruel
words.

The children grew and throve.  Dora had no care at present as to
their education.  From her they learned good English, and between
herself and the faithful young nurse they could learn, she
thought, tolerable Italian.  She would not think of a future that
might take these beloved children from her.  She ignored Ronald's
claim to them--they were hers.  He had tired of them when he
tired of her.  She never felt the days monotonous in that quiet
farm house, as others might have done.  A dead calm seemed to
surround her; but it was destined soon to be broken.


Chapter XV

Ronald did not return in the evening to the pretty villa where he
had once been so happy.  In the warmth of his anger, he felt that
he never could look again upon his wife.  To his sensitive,
refined nature there was something more repulsive in the
dishonorable act she had committed than there would have been in
a crime of deeper dye.  He was shocked and startled--more so
than if he awoke some fair summer morning to find Dora dead by
his side.  She was indeed dead to him in one sense.  The ideal
girl, all purity, gentleness, and truth, whom he had loved and
married, had, it appeared, never really existed after all.  He
shrank from the idea of the angry, vehement words and foul
calumnies.  He shrank from the woman who had forgotten every rule
of good breeding, every trace of good manners, in angry, fierce
passion.

How was he ever to face Miss Charteris again?  She would never
mention one word of what had happened, but he could ill brook the
shame Dora had brought upon him.  He remembered the summer
morning in the woods when he told Valentine the story of his
love, and had pictured his pretty, artless Dora to her.  Could
the angry woman who had dared to insult him, and to calumniate
the fairest and truest lady in all England, possibly be the same?

Ronald had never before been brought into close contact with
dishonor.  He had some faint recollection at college of having
seen and known a young man, the son of a wealthy nobleman,
scorned and despised, driven from all society, and he was told
that it was because he had been detected in the act of listening
at the principal's door.  He remembered how old and young had
shunned this young man as though he were plague-stricken; and now
his own wife Dora had done the very same thing under
circumstances that rendered the dishonor greater.  He asked
himself, with a cynical smile, what he could expect?  He had
married for love of a pretty, child-like face, never giving any
thought to principle, mind, or intellect.  The only wonder was
that so wretched and unequal a match had not turned out ten times
worse.  His father's warning rang in his ears.  How blind, how
foolish he had been!

Every hope of his own life was wrecked, every hope and plan of
his father's disappointed and dead.  There seemed to him nothing
left to care for.  His wife--oh, he would not think of her!  The
name vexed him.  He could not stand in Valentine's presence
again, and for the first time he realized what she had been to
him.  Home, and consequently England, was closed to him; the
grand mansion he had once believed his had faded from his mind.

Thinking of all these things, Ronald's love for his young wife
seemed changed to dislike.  Three days passed before he returned
home; then he was somewhat startled to find her really gone.  He
had anticipated sullen temper, renewed quarrels, and then perhaps
a separation, but he was startled to find her actually gone.  The
servant gave him the cold farewell letter, written without tears,
without sorrow.  He tore it into shreds and flung it from him.

"The last act in the farce," he said, bitterly. "If I had not
been mad, I should have foreseen this."

The silent, deserted rooms did not remind him of the loving young
wife parted from him forever.  He was too angry, too annoyed, for
any gentle thoughts to influence him.  She had left him--so much
the better; there could never again be peace between them.  He
thought with regret of the little ones--they were too young for
him to undertake charge of them, so that they were best left with
their mother for a time.  He said to himself that he must make
the best use he could of his life; everything seemed at an end.
He felt very lonely and unhappy as he sat in his solitary home;
and the more sorrow present upon him, the more bitter his
thoughts grew, the deeper became his dislike to this unhappy
young wife.

Ronald wrote to his mother, but said no word to her of the cause
of their quarrel.

"Dora and I," he said, "will never live together again--perhaps
never meet.  She has gone home to her father; I am going to
wander over the wide earth.  Will you induce my father to receive
my children at Earlescourt?  And will you see Mr. Burt, and
arrange that half of my small income is settled upon Dora?"

But to all his wife's entreaties Lord Earle turned a deaf ear.
He declared that never during his life time should the children
of Dora Thorne enter Earlescourt.  His resolution was fixed and
unalterable.  How, he asked, was he to trust the man who had once
deceived him?  For aught he knew, the separation between Ronald
and his wife might be a deeply laid scheme, and, the children
once with him, there would be a grand reconciliation between the
parents.

"I am not surprised," he said, "that the unhappy boy is weary of
his pretty toy.  It could not be otherwise; he must bear the
consequences of his own folly.  He had time for thought, he made
his own choice--now let him abide by it.  You have disregarded
my wish, Lady Helena, in even naming the matter to me.  Let all
mention of it cease.  I have no son.  One thing remember--I am
not hard upon you--you can go where you like, see whom you like,
and spend what money you will, and as you will."

Lady Earle was not long in availing herself of the permission.
There was great excitement at the Elms one morning, caused by the
receipt of a letter from Lady Earle saying that she would be
there on the same day to visit the son's wife and children.

"Look into my face! and say what horrid writ of infamy you fancied
was apparent there, that my nails may destroy it."

"I am all base," he answered, "and yet not so profoundly base as
you suppose. Nay, believe me, I had never hoped to win even
such scornful kindness as you might accord your lapdog. I have
but dared to peep at heaven while I might, and only as lost
Dives peeped. Ignoble as I am, I never dreamed to squire
an angel down toward the mire and filth which is henceforward
my inevitable kennel."
"The masque is done," said Melicent, "and yet you talk, and talk,
and talk, and mimic truth so cunningly--Well, I will send some
trusty person to you. And now, for God's sake!--nay, for the
fiend's love who is your patron!--let me not ever see you again,
Messire de la Forêt."

2.

_How the Vicomte Was Very Gay_
There was dancing afterward and a sumptuous supper. The Vicomte
de Puysange was generally accounted that evening the most excellent
of company. He mingled affably with the revellers and found a
prosperous answer for every jest they broke upon the projected
marriage of Dame Melicent and King Theodoret; and meanwhile hugged
the reflection that half the realm was hunting Perion de la Forêt
in the more customary haunts of rascality.

The springs of Perion's turbulent mirth were that to-morrow every
person in the room would discover how impudently every person had
been tricked, and that Melicent deliberated even now, and could not
but admire, the hunted outlaw's insolence, however much she loathed
its perpetrator; and over this thought in particular Perion laughed
like a madman.

"You are very gay to-night, Messire de Puysange," said the Bishop
of Montors.

This remarkable young man, it is necessary to repeat, had reached
Bellegarde that evening, coming from Brunbelois.

It was he (as you have heard) who had arranged the match with
Theodoret. The bishop himself loved his cousin Melicent; but, now
that he was in holy orders and possession of her had become
impossible, he had cannily resolved to utilise her beauty, as he
did everything else, toward his own preferment.

"Oh, sir," replied Perion, "you who are so fine a poet must surely
know that _gay_ rhymes with _to-day_ as patly as _sorrow_ goes with
_to-morrow_."

"Yet your gay laughter, Messire de Puysange, is after all but
breath:
and _breath_ also"--the bishop's sharp eyes fixed Perion's--"has a
hackneyed rhyme."

"Indeed, it is the grim rhyme that rounds off and silences all our
rhyming," Perion assented. "I must laugh, then, without rhyme or
reason."

Still the young prelate talked rather oddly. "But," said he, "you
have an excellent reason, now that you sup so near to heaven."

And his glance at Melicent did not lack pith.

"No, no, I have quite another reason," Perion answered; "it is that
to-morrow I breakfast in hell."

"Well, they tell me the landlord of that place is used to cater to
each according to his merits," the bishop, shrugging, returned.

And Perion thought how true this was when, at the evening's
end, he was alone in his own room. His life was tolerably secure.
He trusted Ahasuerus the Jew to see to it that, about dawn,
one of the ship's boats would touch at Fomor Beach near Manneville,
according to their old agreement.

Aboard the _Tranchemer_ the Free Companions awaited their captain;
and the savage land they were bound for was a thought beyond the
reach of a kingdom's lamentable curiosity concerning the whereabouts
of King Helmas' treasure. The worthless life of Perion was safe.

For worthless, and far less than worthless, life seemed to
Perion as he thought of Melicent and waited for her messenger.
He thought of her beauty and purity and illimitable loving-kindness
toward every person in the world save only Perion of the Forest.
He thought of how clean she was in every thought and deed; of that,
above all, he thought, and he knew that he would never see
her any more.

"Oh, but past any doubting," said Perion, "the devil caters to
each according to his merits."

3.

_How Melicent Wooed_
Then Perion knew that vain regret had turned his brain, very
certainly, for it seemed the door had opened and Dame Melicent
herself had come, warily, into the panelled gloomy room. It seemed
that Melicent paused in the convulsive brilliancy of the
firelight, and stayed thus with vaguely troubled eyes like those
of a child newly wakened from sleep.

And it seemed a long while before she told Perion very quietly
that she had confessed all to Ayrart de Montors, and had, by
reason of de Montors' love for her, so goaded and allured
the outcome of their talk--"ignobly," as she said,--that a
clean-handed gentleman would come at three o'clock for Perion
de la Forêt, and guide a thief toward unmerited impunity.

   All this she spoke quite levelly, as one reads aloud from a book;
and then, with a signal change of voice, Melicent said: "Yes, that
is true enough.

Yet why, in reality, do you think I have in my own person
come to tell you of it?"
"Madame, I may not guess. Hah, indeed, indeed," Perion cried,
because he knew the truth and was unspeakably afraid, "I dare
not guess!"

"You sail to-morrow for the fighting oversea----" she began,
but her sweet voice trailed and died into silence. He heard the
crepitations of the fire, and even the hurried beatings of
his own heart, as against a terrible and lovely hush of all created
life. "Then take me with you."
Perion had never any recollection of what he answered. Indeed,
he uttered no communicative words, but only foolish
babblements.

"Oh, I do not understand," said Melicent. "It is as though some
spell were laid upon me. Look you, I have been cleanly reared, I
have never wronged any person that I know of, and throughout
my quiet, sheltered life I have loved truth and honour most
of all. My judgment grants you to be what you are confessedly.
And there is that in me more masterful and surer than my judgment,
that which seems omniscient and lightly puts aside your confessings
as unimportant."

"Lackey, impostor, and thief!" young Perion answered. "There
you have the catalogue of all my rightful titles fairly earned."

"And even if I believed you, I think I would not care!
Is that not strange? For then I should despise you. And even
then, I think, I would fling my honour at your feet, as I do now,
and but in part with loathing, I would still entreat you to make
of me your wife, your servant, anything that pleased you . .
. . Oh, I had thought that when love came it would be sweet!"

Strangely quiet, in every sense, he answered:

"It is very sweet. I have known no happier moment in my life. For
you stand within arm's reach, mine to touch, mine to possess and
do with as I elect.

And I dare not lift a finger. I am as a man that has lain for a
long while in a dungeon vainly hungering for the glad light
of day--who, being freed at last, must hide his eyes from the
dear sunlight he dare not look upon as yet. Ho, I am past speech
unworthy of your notice! and I pray you now speak harshly with
me, madame, for when your pure eyes regard me kindly, and your
bright and delicate lips have come thus near to mine, I
am so greatly tempted and so happy that I fear lest heaven grow
jealous!"
"Be not too much afraid--" she murmured.

"Nay, should I then be bold? and within the moment wake Count
Emmerick to say to him, very boldly, 'Beau sire, the thief half
Christendom is hunting has the honour to request your sister's
hand in marriage'?"
"You sail to-morrow for the fighting oversea.

Take me with you."
"Indeed the feat would be worthy of me. For you are a lady
tenderly nurtured and used to every luxury the age affords. There
comes to woo you presently an excellent and potent monarch, not
all unworthy of your love, who will presently share with you many
happy and honourable years.

Yonder is a lawless naked wilderness where I and my fellow
desperadoes hope to cheat offended justice and to preserve
thrice-forfeited lives in savagery. You bid me aid you to go into
this country, never to return! Madame, if I obeyed you, Satan
would protest against pollution of his ageless fires by any soul
so filthy."
"You talk of little things, whereas I think of great things.

Love is not sustained by palatable food alone, and is not served
only by those persons who go about the world in satin."

"Then take the shameful truth. It is undeniable I swore I loved
you, and with appropriate gestures, too. But, dompnedex, madame!
I am past master in these specious ecstasies, for somehow
I have rarely seen the woman who had not some charm or
other to catch my heart with. I confess now that you alone
have never quickened it. My only purpose was through hyperbole to
wheedle you out of a horse, and meanwhile to have my recreation,
you handsome jade!--and that is all you ever meant to me. I swear
to you that is all, all, all!"

sobbed Perion, for it appeared that he must die. "I have amused
myself with you, I have abominably tricked you--"
Melicent only waited with untroubled eyes which seemed to
plumb his heart and to appraise all which Perion had ever thought
or longed for since the day that Perion was born; and she was as
beautiful, it seemed to him, as the untroubled, gracious angels
are, and more compassionate.

"Yes," Perion said, "I am trying to lie to you. And even at lying
I fail."
She said, with a wonderful smile:

"Assuredly there were never any other persons so mad as we.
For I must do the wooing, as though you were the maid, and
all the while you rebuff me and suffer so that I fear to look on
you.

Men say you are no better than a highwayman; you confess yourself
to be a thief: and I believe none of your accusers. Perion
de la Forêt," said Melicent, and ballad-makers have never shaped
a phrase wherewith to tell you of her voice, "I know that
you have dabbled in dishonour no more often than an archangel
has pilfered drying linen from a hedgerow. I do not guess,
for my hour is upon me, and inevitably I know! and there is nothing
dares to come between us now."
"Nay,--ho, and even were matters as you suppose them, without any
warrant,--there is at least one silly stumbling knave that dares
as much.

Saith he: 'What is the most precious thing in the world?--Why,
assuredly, Dame Melicent's welfare. Let me get the keeping of
it, then.
For I have been entrusted with a host of common priceless things--with
youth and vigour and honour, with a clean conscience and a child's
faith, and so on--and no person alive has squandered them more
gallantly.

So heartward ho! and trust me now, my timorous yoke-fellow, to win
and squander also the chiefest jewel of the world.' Eh, thus
he chuckles and nudges me, with wicked whisperings.

Indeed, madame, this rascal that shares equally in my least faculty
is a most pitiful, ignoble rogue!

and he has aforetime eked out our common livelihood by
such practices as your unsullied imagination could scarcely
depicture.
Until I knew you I had endured him.

But you have made of him a horror.
A horror, a horror! a thing too pitiful for hell!"

Perion turned away from her, groaning. He flung himself into a
chair.

He screened his eyes as if before some physical abomination.

The girl kneeled close to him, touching him.

"My dear, my dear!

then slay for me this other Perion of the Forest."

And Perion laughed, not very mirthfully.

"It is the common usage of women to ask of men this little
labour, which is a harder task than ever Hercules, that mighty-muscled
king of heathenry, achieved.

Nay, I, for all my sinews, am an attested weakling. The craft
of other men I do not fear, for I have encountered no formidable
enemy save myself; but that same midnight stabber unhorsed me long
ago.

I had wallowed in the mire contentedly enough until you came....
Ah, child, child!

why needed you to trouble me! for to-night I want to be clean as
you are clean, and that I may not ever be.

I am garrisoned with devils, I am the battered plaything of
every vice, and I lack the strength, and it may be, even the will,
to leave my mire.

Always I have betrayed the stewardship of man and god alike that
my body might escape a momentary discomfort! And loving you as I
do, I cannot swear that in the outcome I would not betray you too,
to this same end! I cannot swear--Oh, now let Satan laugh, yet
not unpitifully, since he and I, alone, know all the reasons why
I may not swear! Hah, Madame Melicent!" cried Perion, in his great
agony, "you offer me that gift an emperor might not accept save
in awed gratitude; and I refuse it."

Gently he raised her to her feet. "And now, in God's name,
go, madame, and leave the prodigal among his husks."
"You are a very brave and foolish gentleman," she said, "who chooses
to face his own achievements without any paltering.

To every man, I think, that must be bitter work; to the woman who
loves him it is impossible."
Perion could not see her face, because he lay prone at the feet
of Melicent, sobbing, but without any tears, and tasting
very deeply of such grief and vain regret as, he had thought,
they know in hell alone; and even after she had gone, in silence,
he lay in this same posture for an exceedingly long while.

   And after he knew not how long a while, Perion propped his chin
between his hands and, still sprawling upon the rushes, stared hard
into the little, crackling fire.

He was thinking of a Perion de la Forêt that once had been. In
him might have been found a fit mate for Melicent had this boy
not died very long ago.

It is no more cheerful than any other mortuary employment, this
disinterment of the person you have been, and are not any longer;
and so did Perion find his cataloguing of irrevocable old follies
and evasions.

Then Perion arose and looked for pen and ink. It was the
first letter he ever wrote to Melicent, and, as you will presently
learn, she never saw it.

In such terms Perion wrote:

"Madame--It may please you to remember that when Dame Mélusine
and I were interrogated, I freely confessed to the murder of
King Helmas and the theft of my dead master's jewels. In
that I lied. For it was my manifest duty to save the woman whom,
as I thought, I loved, and it was apparent that the guilty person
was either she or I.

"She is now at Brunbelois, where, as I have heard, the splendour
of her estate is tolerably notorious.

I have not ever heard she gave a thought to me, her cat's-paw.
Madame, when I think of you and then of that sleek, smiling
woman, I am appalled by my own folly. I am aghast by my
long blindness as I write the words which no one will believe.
To what avail do I deny a crime which every circumstance imputed
to me and my own confession has publicly acknowledged?

"But you, I think, will believe me. Look you, madame, I have nothing
to gain of you. I shall not ever see you any more.

I go into a perilous and an eternal banishment; and in the immediate
neighbourhood of death a man finds little sustenance for romance.
Take the worst of me: a gentleman I was born, and as a wastrel I
have lived, and always very foolishly; but without dishonour.
I have never to my knowledge--and God judge me as I speak
the truth!--wronged any man or woman save myself.
My dear, believe me! believe me, in spite of reason! and understand
that my adoration and misery and unworthiness when I think of
you are such as I cannot measure, and afford me no judicious
moment wherein to fashion lies.

For I shall not see you any more.

"I thank you, madame, for your all-unmerited kindnesses, and,
oh, I pray you to believe!"

4.

_How the Bishop Aided Perion_
Then at three o'clock, as Perion supposed, someone tapped upon the
door.

Perion went out into the corridor, which was now unlighted, so that
he had to hold to the cloak of Ayrart de Montors as the
young prelate guided Perion through the complexities of unfamiliar
halls and stairways into an inhospitable night.

There were ready two horses, and presently the men were mounted
and away.

Once only Perion shifted in the saddle to glance back at Bellegarde,
black and formless against an empty sky; and he dared not
look again, for the thought of her that lay awake in the Marshal's
Tower, so near at hand as yet, was like a dagger. With set teeth
he followed in the wake of his taciturn companion.

The bishop never spoke save to growl out some direction.

Thus they came to Manneville and, skirting the town, came to Fomor
Beach, a narrow sandy coast.

It was dark in this place and very still save for the encroachment
of the tide. Yonder were four little lights, lazily heaving
with the water's motion, to show them where the _Tranchemer_
lay at anchor. It did not seem to Perion that anything mattered.

"It will be nearing dawn by this," he said.

"Ay," Ayrart de Montors said, very briefly; and his tone
evinced his willingness to dispense with further conversation.
Perion of the Forest was an unclean thing which the bishop
must touch in his necessity, but could touch with loathing only,
as a thirsty man takes a fly out of his drink. Perion conceded
it, because nothing would ever matter any more; and so, the horses
tethered, they sat upon the sand in utter silence for the space
of a half hour.

A bird cried somewhere, just once, and with a start Perion
knew the night was not quite so murky as it had been, for he could
now see a broken line of white, where the tide crept up and
shattered and ebbed.
Then in a while a light sank tipsily to the water's level and
presently was bobbing in the darkness, apart from those other
lights, and it was growing in size and brilliancy.

Said Perion, "They have sent out the boat."
"Ay," the bishop answered, as before.

A sort of madness came upon Perion, and it seemed that he must
weep, because everything fell out so very ill in this world.

"Messire de Montors, you have aided me. I would be grateful if
you permitted it."
De Montors spoke at last, saying crisply:

"Gratitude, I take it, forms no part of the bargain.

I am the kinsman of Dame Melicent. It makes for my interest and
for the honour of our house that the man whose rooms she visits
at night be got out of Poictesme--"
Said Perion, "You speak in this fashion of the most lovely lady God
has made--of her whom the world adores!"

"Adores!" the bishop answered, with a laugh; "and what poor gull
am I to adore an attested wanton?" Then, with a sneer, he spoke
of Melicent, and in such terms as are not bettered by repetition.

Perion said:

"I am the most unhappy man alive, as surely as you are the
most ungenerous. For, look you, in my presence you have spoken
infamy of Dame Melicent, though knowing I am in your debt so
deeply that I have not the right to resent anything you may
elect to say. You have just given me my life; and armoured by
the fire-new obligation, you blaspheme an angel, you condescend
to buffet a fettered man--"

But with that his sluggish wits had spied an honest way out of the
imbroglio.

Perion said then, "Draw, messire! for, as God lives, I may yet
repurchase, at this eleventh hour, the privilege of destroying
you."
"Heyday! but here is an odd evincement of gratitude!" de Montors
retorted; "and though I am not particularly squeamish, let me
tell you, my fine fellow, I do not ordinarily fight with
lackeys."
"Nor are you fit to do so, messire. Believe me, there is not a
lackey in this realm--no, not a cut-purse, nor any pander--who
would not in meeting you upon equal footing degrade himself.

For you have slandered that which is most perfect in the world;
yet lies, Messire de Montors, have short legs; and I design
within the hour to insure the calumny against an echo."
"Rogue, I have given you your very life within the hour--"
"The fact is undeniable. Thus I must fling the bounty back to
you, so that we sorry scoundrels may meet as equals." Perion
wheeled toward the boat, which was now within the reach of wading.

"Who is among you?
Gaucelm, Roger, Jean Britauz--" He found the man he sought.
"Ahasuerus, the captain that was to have accompanied the Free
Companions oversea is of another mind. I cede my leadership to
Landry de Bonnay. You will have the kindness to inform him of
the unlooked-for change, and to tender your new captain every
appropriate regret and the dying felicitations of Perion
de la Forêt."
He bowed toward the landward twilight, where the sand hillocks
were taking form.
"Messire de Montors, we may now resume our vigil. When yonder vessel
sails there will be no conceivable happening that can keep breath
within my body two weeks longer. I shall be quit of every debt to
you.
You will then fight with a man already dead if you so elect; but
otherwise--if you attempt to flee this place, if you decline to
cross swords with a lackey, with a convicted thief, with a suspected
murderer, I swear upon my mother's honour! I will demolish you
without compunction, as I would any other vermin."
"Oh, brave, brave!" sneered the bishop, "to fling away your life,
and perhaps mine too, for an idle word--" But at that he fetched a
sob. "How foolish of you! and how like you!" he said, and Perion
wondered at this prelate's voice.
"Hey, gentlemen!" cried Ayrart de Montors, "a moment if you please!"
He splashed knee-deep into the icy water, wading to the boat, where
he snatched the lantern from the Jew's hands and fetched this light
ashore. He held it aloft, so that Perion might see his face, and
Perion perceived that, by some wonder-working, the person in man's
attire who held this light aloft was Melicent. It was odd that
Perion always remembered afterward most clearly of all the loosened
wisp of hair the wind tossed about her forehead.
"Look well upon me, Perion," said Melicent. "Look well, ruined
gentleman! look well, poor hunted vagabond! and note how proud I
am.
Oh, in all things I am very proud! A little I exult in my high
station and in my wealth, and, yes, even in my beauty, for I know
that I am beautiful, but it is the chief of all my honours that you
love me--and so foolishly!"
"You do not understand--!" cried Perion.Vyvian or puzzled over it themselves.  With these two exceptions
Dora had become a thoughtful, gentle woman.  As her mind became
more cultivated she understood better the dishonor of the fault
which had robbed her of Ronald's love.  Her fair face grew
crimson when she remembered what she had done.

It was a fair and tranquil womanhood; the dark eyes retained
their wondrous light and beauty; the curling rings of dark hair
were luxuriant as ever; the lips wore a patient, sweet
expression.  The clear, healthy country air had given a delicate
bloom to the fair face.  Dora looked more like the elder sister
of the young girls than their mother.

The quiet, half-dreamy monotony was broken at last.  Mrs. Vyvian
was suddenly summoned home.  Her mother, to whom she was warmly
attached, was said to be dying, and she wished her last few days
to be spent with her daughter.  At the same time Lady Earle wrote
to say that her husband was so ill that it was impossible for her
to look for any lady to supply Mrs. Vyvian's place.  The
consequence was that, for the first time in their lives, the
young girls were left for a few weeks without a companion and
without surveillance.


Chapter XVII

One beautiful morning in May, Lillian went out alone to sketch.
The beauty of the sky and sea tempted her; fleecy-white clouds
floated gently over the blue heavens; the sun shone upon the
water until, at times, it resembled a huge sea of rippling gold.
Far off in the distance were the shining white sails of two
boats; they looked in the golden haze like the brilliant wings of
some bright bird.  The sun upon the white sails struck her fancy,
and she wanted to sketch the effect.

It was the kind of morning that makes life seem all beauty and
gladness, even if the heart is weighed down with care.  It was a
luxury merely to live and breathe.  The leaves were all springing
in the woods; the meadows were green; wild flowers blossomed by
the hedge-rows; the birds sang gayly of the coming summer; the
white hawthorn threw its rich fragrance all around, and the
yellow broom bloomed on the cliffs.

As she sat there, Lillian was indeed a fair picture herself on
that May morning; the sweet, spirituelle face; the noble head
with its crown of golden hair; the violet eyes, so full of
thought; the sensitive lips, sweet yet firm; the white forehead,
the throne of intellect.  The little fingers that moved rapidly
and gracefully over the drawing were white and shapely; there was
a delicate rose-leaf flush in the pretty hand.  She looked fair
and tranquil as the morning itself.

The pure, sweet face had no touch of fire or passion; its
serenity was all unmoved; the world had never breathed on the
innocent, child-like mind.  A white lily was not more pure and
stainless than the young girl who sat amid the purple heather,
sketching the white, far-off sails.

So intent was Lillian upon her drawing that she did not hear
light, rapid steps coming near; she was not aroused until a rich
musical voice called, "Lillian, if you have not changed into
stone or statue, do speak."  Then, looking up, she saw Beatrice
by her side.

"Lay down your pencils and talk to me," said Beatrice,
imperiously.  "How unkind of you, the only human being in this
place who can talk, to come here all by yourself!  What do you
think was to become of me?"

"I thought you were reading to mamma," said Lillian, quietly.

"Reading!" exclaimed Beatrice.  "You know I am tired of reading,
tired of writing, tired of sewing, tired of everything I have to
do."

Lillian looked up in wonder at the beautiful, restless face.

"Do not look 'good' at me," said Beatrice, impatiently.  "I am
tired to death of it all.  I want some change.  Do you think any
girls in the world lead such lives as we do--shut up in a
rambling old farm house, studying from morn to night; shut in on
one side by that tiresome sea, imprisoned on the other by fields
and woods?  How can you take it so quietly, Lillian?  I am
wearied to death."

"Something has disturbed you this morning," said Lillian, gently.

"That is like mamma," cried Beatrice; "just her very tone and
words. She does not understand, you do not understand; mamma's
life satisfies her, your life contents you; mine does not content
me--it is all vague and empty.  I should welcome anything that
changed this monotony; even sorrow would be better than this dead
level--one day so like another, I can never distinguish them."

"My dear Beatrice, think of what you are saying," said Lillian. 

"I am tired of thinking," said Beatrice; "for the last ten years
I have been told to 'think' and 'reflect.'  I have thought all I
can; I want a fresh subject."

"Think how beautiful those far-off white sails look," said
Lillian--"how they gleam in the sunshine.  See, that one looks
like a mysterious hand raised to beckon us away."

"Such ideas are very well for you, Lillian," retorted Beatrice.
"I see nothing in them.  Look at the stories we read; how
different those girls are from us!  They have fathers, brothers,
and friends; they have jewels and dresses; they have handsome
admirers, who pay them homage; they dance, ride, and enjoy
themselves.  Now look at us, shut up here with old and serious
people."

"Hush, Beatrice," said Lillian; "mamma is not old."

"Not in years, perhaps," replied Beatrice; "but she seems to me
old in sorrow.  She is never gay nor light-hearted.  Mrs. Vyvian
is very kind, but she never laughs.  Is every one sad and
unhappy, I wonder?  Oh, Lillian, I long to see the world--the
bright, gay world--over the sea there.  I long for it as an
imprisoned bird longs for fresh air and green woods."

"You would not find it all happiness," said Lillian, sagely.

"Spare me all truism," cried Beatrice.  "Ah, sister, I am tired
of all this; for eleven years the sea has been singing the same
songs; those waves rise and fall as they did a hundred years
since; the birds sing the same story; the sun shines the same;
even the shadow of the great elms fall over the meadow just as it
did when we first played there.  I long to away from the sound of
the sea and the rustling of the elm trees.  I want to be where
there are girls of my own age, and do as they do.  It seems to
me we shall go on reading and writing, sewing and drawing, and
taking what mamma calls instructive rambles until our heads grow
gray."

"It is not so bad as that, Beatrice," laughed Lillian. "Lady
Earle says papa must return some day; then we shall all go to
him."

"I never believe one word of it," said Beatrice, undauntedly.
"At times I could almost declare papa himself was a myth.  Why do
we not live with him?  Why does he never write?  We never hear of
or from him, save through Lady Earle; besides, Lillian, what do
you think I heard Mrs. Vyvian say once to grandmamma?  It was
that we might not go to Earlescourt at all--that if papa did not
return, or died young, all would go to a Mr. Lionel Dacre, and we
should remain here.  Imagine that fate--living a long life and
dying at the Elms!"

"It is all conjecture," said her sister.  "Try to be more
contented, Beatrice.  We do not make our own lives, we have not
the control of our own destiny."

"I should like to control mine," sighed Beatrice.

"Try to be contented, darling," continued the sweet, pleading
voice.  "We all love and admire you.  No one was ever loved more
dearly or better than you are.  The days are rather long at
times, but there are all the wonders and beauties of Nature and
art."

"Nature and Art are all very well," cried Beatrice; "but give me
life."

She turned her beautiful, restless face from the smiling sea; the
south wind dancing over the yellow gorse caught up the words
uttered in that clear, musical voice and carried them over the
cliff to one who was lying with half-closed eyes under the shade
of a large tree--a young man with a dark, half-Spanish face 
handsome with a coarse kind of beauty.  He was lying there,
resting upon the turf, enjoying the beauty of the morning.  As
the musical voice reached him, and the strange words fell upon
his ear, he smiled and raised his head to see who uttered them.
He saw the young girls, but their faces were turned from him;
those words range in his ears--"Nature and Art are all very
well, but give me life."

Who was it longed for life?  He understood the longing; he
resolved to wait there until the girls went away.  Again he heard
the same voice.

"I shall leave you to your sails, Lillian.  I wish those same
boats would come to carry us away--I wish I had wings and could
fly over the sea and see the bright, grand world that lies beyond
it.  Goodbye; I am tired of the never-ending wash of those long,
low waves."

He saw a young girl rise from the fragrant heather and turn to
descend the cliff.  Quick as thought he rushed down by another
path, and, turning back, contrived to meet her half-way.
Beatrice came singing down the cliff.  Her humor, never the same
ten minutes together, had suddenly changed.  She remembered a new
and beautiful song that Lady Earle had sent, and determined to go
home and try it.  There came no warning to her that bright summer
morning.  The south wind lifted the hair from her brow and wafted
the fragrance of hawthorn buds and spring flowers to greet her,
but it brought no warning message; the birds singing gayly, the
sun shining so brightly could not tell her that the first link in
a terrible chain was to be forged that morning.

Half-way down the cliff, where the path was steep and narrow,
Beatrice suddenly met the stranger.  A stranger was a rarity at
the Elms.  Only at rare intervals did an artist or a tourist seek
shelter and hospitality at the old farm house.  The stranger
seemed to be a gentleman.  For one moment both stood still; then,
with a low bow, the gentleman stepped aside to let the young girl
pass.  As he did so, he noted the rare beauty of that brilliant
face--he remembered the longing words.

"No wonder," he thought; "it is a sin for such a face as that to
be hidden here."

The beauty of those magnificent eyes startled him.  Who was she?
What could she be doing here?  Beatrice turning again, saw the
stranger looking eagerly after her, with profound admiration
expressed in every feature of his face; and that admiring gaze,
the first she had ever received in her life, sank deep into the
vain, girlish heart.

He watched the graceful, slender figure until the turn of the
road hid Beatrice from his view.  He followed her at a safe
distance, and saw her cross the long meadows that led to the
Elms.  Then Hugh Fernely waited with patience until one of the
farm laborers came by.  By judicious questioning he discovered
much of the history of the beautiful young girl who longed for
life.  Her face haunted him--its brilliant, queenly beauty, the
dark, radiant eyes.  Come what might, Hugh Fernely said to
himself, he must see her again.

On the following morning he saw the girls return to the cliff.
Lillian finished her picture.  Ever and anon he heard Beatrice
singing, in a low, rich voice, a song that had charmed her with
its weird beauty:

"For men must work, and women must weep; 
And the sooner it's over, the sooner to sleep 
And goodbye to the bar and its moaning."

"I like those words, Lillian," he heard her say.  "I wonder how
soon it will be 'over' for me.  Shall I ever weep, as the song
says?  I have never wept yet."

This morning the golden-haired sister left the cliff first, and
Beatrice sat reading until the noonday sun shone upon the sea.
Her book charmed her; it was a story telling of the life she
loved and longed for--of the gay, glad world.  Unfortunately all
the people in the book were noble, heroic, and ideal.  The young
girl, in her simplicity, believed that they who lived in the
world she longed for were all like the people in her book.

When she left the path that led to the meadows, she saw by her
side the stranger who had met her the day before.  Again he bowed
profoundly, and, with many well-expressed apologies, asked some
trifling question about the road.

Beatrice replied briefly, but she could not help seeing the
wonder of admiration in his face.  Her own grew crimson under his
gaze--he saw it, and his heart beat high with triumph.  As
Beatrice went through the meadows he walked by her side.  She
never quite remembered how it happened, but in a few minutes he
was telling her how many years had passed since he had seen the
spring in England.  She forgot all restraint, all prudence, and
raised her beautiful eyes to his.

"Ah, then," she cried, "you have seen the great world that lies
over the wide sea."

"Yes," he replied, "I have seen it.  I have been in strange,
bright lands, so different from England that they seemed to
belong to another world.  I have seen many climes, bright skies,
and glittering seas, where the spice islands lie."

As he spoke, in words that were full of wild, untutored
eloquence, he saw the young girl's eyes riveted upon him.  Sure
of having roused her attention, he bowed, apologized for his
intrusion, and left her.

Had Dora been like other mothers, Beatrice would have related
this little adventure and told of the handsome young traveler who
had been in strange climes.  As it was, knowing her mother's
utter dread of all men--her fear lest her children should ever
love and marry--Beatrice never named the subject.  She thought
much of Hugh Fernely--not of him himself, but of the world he
had spoken about--and she hoped it might happen to her to meet
him again. 

"If we had some one here who could talk in that way," she said to
herself, "the Elms would not be quite so insupportable."

Two days afterward, Beatrice, wandering on the sands, met Hugh
Fernely.  She saw the startled look of delight on his face, and
smiled at his pleasure.

"Pray forgive me," he said.  "I--I can not pass you without one
word.  Time has seemed to me like one long night since I saw you
last."

He held in his hand some beautiful lilies of the valley--every
little white warm bell was perfect.  He offered them to her with
a low bow.

"This is the most beautiful flower I have seen for many years,"
he said.  "May I be forgiven for begging permission to offer it
to the most beautiful lady I have ever seen?"

Beatrice took it from him, blushing at his words.  He walked by
her side along the yellow sands, the waves rolling in and
breaking at their feet.  Again his eloquence charmed her.  He
told her his name, and how he was captain of a trading vessel.
Instinctively he seemed to understand her character--her
romantic, ideal way of looking at everything.  He talked to her
of the deep seas and their many wonders; of the ocean said to be
fathomless; of the coral islands and of waters in whose depths
the oyster containing the pale, gleaming pearl is found; of the
quiet nights spent at sea, where the stars shine as they never
seem to shine on land; of the strange hush that falls upon the
heaving waters before a storm.  He told of long days when they
were becalmed upon the green deep, when the vessel seemed

"A painted ship upon a painted ocean."

With her marvelous fancy and quick imagination she followed him
to the wondrous depth of silent waters where strange shapes,
never seen by human eye, abound.  She hung upon his words; he saw
it, and rejoiced in his success.  He did not startle her by any
further compliment, but when their walk was ended he told her
that morning would live in his memory as the happiest time of his
life.

After a few days it seemed to become a settled thing that
Beatrice should meet Hugh Fernely.  Lillian wondered that her
sister so often preferred lonely rambles, but she saw the
beautiful face she loved so dearly grow brighter and happier,
never dreaming the cause.

For many long days little thought of Hugh Fernely came to
Beatrice.  Her mind ran always upon what he had told her--upon
his description of what he had seen and heard.  He noted this,
and waited with a patience born of love for the time when she
should take an interest in him.

Words were weak in which to express the passionate love he felt
for this beautiful and stately young girl.  It seemed to him like
a fairy tale.  On the morning he first saw Beatrice he had been
walking a long distance, and had lain down to rest on the cliffs.
There the beautiful vision had dawned upon him.  The first moment
he gazed into that peerless face he loved Beatrice with a passion
that frightened himself.  He determined to win her at any cost.

At last and by slow degrees he began to speak of her and himself,
slowly and carefully, his keen eyes noting every change upon her
face; he began to offer her delicate compliments and flattery so
well disguised that it did not seem to her flattery at all.  He
made her understand that he believed her to be the most beautiful
girl he had ever beheld.  He treated her always as though she
were a queen, and he her humblest slave.

Slowly but surely the sweet poison worked its way; the day came
when that graceful, subtle flattery was necessary to the very
existence of Beatrice Earle.  There was much to excuse her; the
clever, artful man into whose hands she had fallen was her first
admirer--the first who seemed to remember she was no longer a
child, and to treat her with deferential attention.  Had she
been, as other girls are, surrounded by friends, accustomed to
society, properly trained, prepared by the tender wisdom of a
loving mother, she would never have cast her proud eyes upon Hugh
Fernely; she would never have courted the danger or run the risk.

As it was, while Dora preferred solitude, and nourished a keen
dislike to her husband in her heart--while Ronald yielded to
obstinate pride, and neglected every duty--while both preferred
the indulgence of their own tempers, and neglected the children
the Almighty intrusted to them, Beatrice went on to her fate.

It was so sad a story, the details so simple yet so pitiful.
Every element of that impulsive, idealistic nature helped on the
tragedy.  Hugh Fernely understood Beatrice as perhaps no one else
ever did.  He idealized himself.  To her at length he became a
hero who had met with numberless adventures--a hero who had
traveled and fought, brave and generous.  After a time he spoke
to her of love, at first never appearing to suppose that she
could care for him, but telling her of his own passionate worship
how her face haunted him, filled his dreams at night, and shone
before him all day--how the very ground she stood upon was
sacred to him--how he envied the flowers she touched--how he
would give up everything to be the rose that died in her hands.
It was all very pretty and poetical, and he knew how to find
pretty, picturesque spots in the woods where the birds and the
flowers helped him to tell his story.

Beatrice found it very pleasant to be worshiped like a queen;
there was no more monotony for her.  Every morning she looked
forward to seeing Hugh--to learning more of those words that
seemed to her like sweetest music.  She knew that at some time or
other during the day she would see him; he never tired of
admiring her beauty.  Blameworthy was the sad mother with her
stern doctrines, blameworthy the proud, neglectful father, that
she knew not how wrong all this was.  He loved her; in a thousand
eloquent ways he told her so.  She was his loadstar, beautiful
and peerless.  It was far more pleasant to sit on the sea shore,
or under the greenwood trees, listening to such words than to
pass long, dreary hours indoors.  And none of those intrusted
with the care of the young girl ever dreamed of her danger.

So this was the love her mother dreaded so much.  This was the
love poets sung of and novelists wrote about.  It was pleasant;
but in after days, when Beatrice herself came to love, she knew
that this had been but child's play.

It was the romance of the stolen meeting that charmed Beatrice.
If Hugh had been admitted to the Elms she would have wearied of
him in a week; but the concealment gave her something to think
of.  There was something to occupy her mind; every day she must
arrange for a long ramble, so that she might meet Hugh.  So,
while the corn grew ripe in the fields, and the blossoms died
away--while warm, luxurious summer ruled with his golden wand 
Ronald Earle's daughter went on to her fate.


Chapter XVIII

At length there came an interruption to Hugh Fernely's love
dream.  The time drew near when he must leave Seabay.  The vessel
he commanded was bound for China, and was to sail in a few days.
The thought that he must leave the beautiful girl he loved so
dearly and so deeply struck him with unendurable pain; he seemed
only to have lived since he had met her, and he knew that life
without her would be a burden too great for him to bear.  He
asked himself a hundred times over: "Does she love me?"  He could
not tell.  He resolved to try.  He dared not look that future in
the face which should take her from him.

The time drew near; the day was settled on which the "Seagull"
was to set sail, and yet Hugh Fernely had won no promise from
Beatrice Earle.

One morning Hugh met her at the stile leading from the field into
the meadow lane--the prettiest spot in Knutsford.  The ground
was a perfectly beautiful carpet of flowers--wild hyacinths,
purple foxgloves, pretty, pale strawberry blossoms all grew
there. The hedges were one mass of wild roses and woodbine; the
tall elm trees that ran along the lane met shadily overhead; the
banks on either side were radiant in different colored mosses;
huge ferns surrounded the roots of the trees.

Beatrice liked the quiet, pretty, green meadow lane.  She often
walked there, and on this eventful morning Hugh saw her sitting
in the midst of the fern leaves.  He was by her side in a minute,
and his dark, handsome face lighted up with joy.

"How the sun shines!" he said.  "I wonder the birds begin to sing
and the flowers to bloom before you are out, Miss Earle."

"But I am not their sun," replied Beatrice with a smile.

"But you are mine," cried Hugh; and before she could reply he was
kneeling at her feet, her hands clasped in his, while he told her
of the love that was wearing his life away.

No one could listen to such words unmoved; they were true and
eloquent, full of strange pathos.  He told her how dark without
her the future would be to him, how sad and weary his life;
whereas if she would only love him, and let him claim her when he
returned, he would make her as happy as a queen.  He would take
her to the bright sunny lands--would show her all the beauties
and wonders she longed to see--would buy her jewels and dresses
such as her beauty deserved--would be her humble, devoted slave,
if she would only love him.

It was very pleasant--the bright morning, the picturesque glade,
the warmth and brightness of summer all around.  Beatrice looked
at the handsome, pale face with emotion, she felt Hugh's warm
lips pressed to her hand, she felt hot tears rain upon her
fingers, and wondered at such love.  Yes, this was the love she
had read of and thought about.

"Beatrice," cried Hugh, "do not undo me with one word.  Say you
love me, my darling--say I may return and claim you as my own.
Your whole life shall be like one long, bright summer's day."

She was carried away by the burning torrent of passionate words.
With all her spirit and pride she felt weak and powerless before
the mighty love of this strong man.  Almost unconscious of what
she did, Beatrice laid her white hands upon the dark, handsome
head of her lover.

"Hush, Hugh," she said, "you frighten me.  I do love you; see,
you tears wet my hand."

It was not a very enthusiastic response, but it satisfied him.
He clasped the young girl in his arms, and she did not resist; he
kissed the proud lips and the flushed cheek.  Beatrice Earle said
no word; he was half frightened, half touched, and wholly
subdued.

"Now you are mine," cried Hugh--"mine, my own peerless one;
nothing shall part us but death!"

"Hush!" cried Beatrice, again shuddering as with cold fear.
"That is a word I dislike and dread so much, Hugh--do not use
it."

"I will not," he replied; and then Beatrice forgot her fears.  He
was so happy--he loved her so dearly--he was so proud of
winning her.  She listened through the long hours of that sunny
morning.  It was the fifteenth of July--he made her note the day
and in two years he would return to take her forever from the
quiet house where her beauty and grace alike were buried.

That was the view of the matter that had seized upon the girl's
imagination.  It was not so much love for Hugh--she liked him.
His flattery--the excitement of meeting him--his love, had
become necessary to her; but had any other means of escape from
the monotony she hated presented itself, she would have availed
herself of it quite as eagerly.  Hugh was not so much a lover to
her as a medium of escape from a life that daily became more and
more unendurable.

She listened with bright smiles when he told her that in two
years he should return to fetch her; and she, thinking much of
the romance, and little of the dishonor of concealment, told him
how her sad young mother hated and dreaded all mention of love
and lovers.

"Then you must never tell her," he said--"leave that for me
until I return.  I shall have money then, and perhaps the command
of a fine vessel.  She will not refuse me when she knows how
dearly I love you, and even should your father--the father you
tell of--come home, you will be true to me, Beatrice, will you
not?"

"Yes, I will be true," she replied--and, to do her justice, she
meant it at the time.  Her father's return seemed vague and
uncertain; it might take place in ten or twenty years--it might
never be.  Hugh offered her freedom and liberty in two years.

"If others should seek your love," he said, "should praise your
beauty, and offer you rank or wealth, you will say to yourself
that you will be true to Hugh?"

"Yes," she said, firmly, "I will do so."

"Two years will soon pass away," said he.  "Ah, Beatrice," he
continued, "I shall leave you next Thursday; give me all the
hours you can.  Once away from you, all time will seem to me a
long, dark night."

It so happened that the farmer and his men were at work in a
field quite on the other side of Knutsford.  Dora and Lillian
were intent, the one upon a box of books newly arrived, the other
upon a picture; so Beatrice had every day many hours at her
disposal.  She spent them all with Hugh, whose love seemed to
increase with every moment.

Hugh was to leave Seabay on Thursday, and on Wednesday evening he
lingered by her side as though he could not part with her.  To do
Hugh Fernely justice, he loved Beatrice for herself.  Had she
been a penniless beggar he would have loved her just the same.
The only dark cloud in his sky was the knowledge that she was far
above him.  Still, he argued to himself, the story she told of
her father was an impossible one.  He did not believe that Ronald
Earle would ever take his daughters home--he did not quite know
what to think, but he had no fear on that score.

On the Wednesday evening they wandered down the cliff and sat
upon the shore, watching the sun set over the waters.  Hugh took
from his pocket a little morocco case and placed it in Beatrice's
hands.  She opened it, and cried out with admiration; there lay
the most exquisite ring she had ever seen, of pure pale gold,
delicately and elaborately chased, and set with three gleaming
opals of rare beauty.

"Look at the motto inside," said Hugh.

She held the ring in her dainty white fingers, and read: "Until
death parts us."

"Oh, Hugh," she cried, that word again?" I dread it; why is it
always coming before me?"

He smiled at her fears, and asked her to let him place the ring
upon her finger.

"In two years," he said, "I shall place a plain gold ring on this
beautiful hand.  Until then wear this, Beatrice, for my sake; it
is our betrothal ring."

"It shall not leave my finger," she said. "Mamma will not notice
it, and every one else will think she has given it to me
herself."

"And now," said Hugh, "promise me once more, Beatrice, you will
be true to me--you will wait for me--that when I return you
will let me claim you as my own?"

"I do promise," she said, looking at the sun shining on the
opals.

Beatrice never forgot the hour that followed.  Proud, impetuous,
and imperial as she was, the young man's love and sorrow touched
her as nothing had ever done.  The sunbeams died away in the
west, the glorious mass of tinted clouds fell like a veil over
the evening sky, the waves came in rapidly, breaking into sheets
of white, creamy foam in the gathering darkness, but still he
could not leave her.

"I must go, Hugh," said Beatrice, at length; "mamma will miss
me."

She never forgot the wistful eyes lingering upon her face.

"Once more, only once more," he said.  "Beatrice, my love, when I
return you will be my wife?"

"Yes," she replied, startled alike by his grief and his love.

"Never be false to me," he continued.  "If you were--"

"What then?" she asked, with a smile, as he paused.

"I should either kill myself or you," he replied, "perhaps both.
Do not make me say such terrible things.  It could not be.  The
sun may fall from the heavens, the sea rolling there may become
dry land.  Nature--everything may prove false, but not you, the
noblest, the truest of women.  Say 'I love you, Hugh,' and let
those be your last words to me.  They will go with me over the
wide ocean, and be my rest and stay."

"I love you, Hugh," she said, as he wished her.

Something like a deep, bitter sob came from his white lips.
Death itself would have been far easier than leaving her.  He
raised her beautiful face to his--his tears and kisses seemed to
burn it--and then he was gone.

Gone!  The romance of the past few weeks, the engrossing
interest, all suddenly collapsed.  Tomorrow the old monotonous
life must begin again, without flattery, praise, or love.  He had
gone; the whole romance was ended; nothing of it remained save
the memory of his love and the ring upon her finger.

At first there fell upon Beatrice a dreadful blank.  The
monotony, the quiet, the simple occupations, were more
unendurable than ever; but in a few days that feeling wore off,
and then she began to wonder at what she had done. The glamour
fell from before her eyes; the novelty and excitement, the
romance of the stolen meetings, the pleasant homage of love and
worship no longer blinded her.  Ah, and before Hugh Fernely had
been many days and nights upon the wide ocean, she ended by
growing rather ashamed of the matter, and trying to think of it
as little as she could!  Once she half tried to tell Lillian; but
the look of horror on the sweet, pure face startled her, and she
turned the subject by some merry jest.

Then there came a letter from Mrs. Vyvian announcing her return.
The girls were warmly attached to the lady, who had certainly
devoted the ten best years of her life to them.  She brought with
her many novelties, new books, new music, amusing intelligence
from the outer world.  For some days there was no lack of
excitement and amusement; then all fell again into the old
routine.

Mrs. Vyvian saw a great change in Beatrice.  Some of the old
impetuosity had died away; she was as brilliant as ever, full of
life and gayety, but in some way there was an indescribable
change.  At times a strange calm would come over the beautiful
face, a far-off, dreamy expression steal into the dark, bright
eyes.  She had lost her old frankness.  Time was when Mrs. Vyvian
could read all her thoughts, and very rebellious thoughts they
often were.  But now there seemed to be a sealed chamber in the
girl's heart.  She never spoke of the future, and for the first
time her watchful friend saw in her a nervous fear that
distressed her.  Carefully and cautiously the governess tried to
ascertain the cause; she felt sure at last that, young as she
was, carefully as she had been watched, Beatrice Earle had a
secret in her life that she shared with no one else.


Chapter XIX

There were confusion and dismay in the stately home of the
Earles.  One sultry morning in August Lord Earle went out into
the garden, paying no heed to the excessive heat.  As he did not
return to luncheon, the butler went in search of him and found
his master lying as one dead on the ground.  He was carried to
his own room, doctors were summoned in hot haste from far and
near; everything that science or love, skill or wisdom could
suggest was done for him, but all in vain.  The hour had come
when he must leave home, rank, wealth, position--whatever he
valued most--when he must answer for his life and what he had
done with it--when he must account for wealth, talent, for the
son given to him--when human likings, human passions, would seem
so infinitely little.

But while Lord Earle lay upon the bed, pale and unconscious, Lady
Earle, who knelt by him and never left him, felt sure that his
mind and heart were both active.  He could not speak; he did not
seem to understand.  Who knows what passes in those dread moments
of silence, when the light of eternity shows so clearly all that
we have done in the past?  It may be that while he lay there,
hovering as it were between two worlds, the remembrance of his
son struck him like a two-edged sword--his son, his only child
given to him to train, not only for earth but for heaven--the
boy he had loved and idolized, then cast off, and allowed to
become a wanderer on the face of the earth.  It may be that his
stern, sullen pride, his imperious self-will, his resolute
trampling upon the voice of nature and duty, confronted him in
the new light shining upon him.  Perhaps his own words returned
to him, that until he lay dead Ronald should never see
Earlescourt again; for suddenly the voice they thought hushed
forever sounded strangely in the silence of that death chamber.

"My son!" cried the dying man, clasping his hands--"my son!"

Those who saw it never forgot the blank, awful terror that came
upon the dying face as he uttered his last words.

They bore the weeping wife from the room.  Lady Earle, strong,
and resolute though she was, could not drive that scene from her
mind.  She was ill for many days, and so it happened that the
lord of Earlescourt was laid in the family vault long ere the
family at the Elms knew of the change awaiting them.

Ronald was summoned home in all haste; but months passed ere
letters reached him, and many more before he returned to England.

Lord Earle's will was brief, there was no mention of his son's
name.  There was a handsome provision for Lady Earle, the pretty
little estate of Roslyn was settled upon her; the servants
received numerous legacies; Sir Harry Laurence and Sir Hugh
Charteris were each to receive a magnificent mourning ring; but
there was no mention of the once-loved son and heir.

As the heir at law, everything was Ronald's--the large amount of
money the late lord had saved, title, estates, everything
reverted to him.  But Ronald would have exchanged all for one
line of forgiveness, one word of pardon from the father he had
never ceased to love.

It was arranged that until Ronald's return his mother should
continue to reside at Earlescourt, and the management of the
estates was intrusted to Mr. Burt, the family solicitor.

Lady Earle resolved to go to the Elms herself; great changes must
be made there.  Ronald's wife and children must take their places
in the world; and she felt a proud satisfaction in thinking that,
thanks to her sensible and judicious management, Dora would fill
her future position with credit.  She anticipated Ronald's
delight when he should see his beautiful and accomplished
daughters.  Despite her great sorrow, the lady of Earlescourt
felt some degree of hope for the future.  She wrote to the Elms,
telling Dora of her husband's death, and announcing her own
coming; then the little household understood that their quiet and
solitude had ended forever.

The first thing was to provide handsome mourning.  Dora was
strangely quiet and sad through it all.  The girls asked a
hundred questions about their father, whom they longed to see.
They knew he had left home in consequence of some quarrel with
his father--so much Lady Earle told them--but they never
dreamed that his marriage had caused the fatal disagreement; they
never knew that, for their mother's sake, Lady Earle carefully
concealed all knowledge of it from them.

Lady Earle reached the Elms one evening in the beginning of
September.  She asked first to see Dora alone.

During the long years Dora had grown to love the stately, gentle
lady who was Ronald's mother.  She could not resist her sweet,
gracious dignity and winning manners.  So, when Lady Earle,
before seeing her granddaughters, went to Dora's room, wishing
for a long consultation with her, Dora received her with gentle,
reverential affection.

"I wish to see you first," said Lady Helena Earle, "so that we
may arrange our plans before the children know anything of them.
Ronald will return to England in a few months.  Dora, what course
shall you adopt?"

"None," she replied.  "Your son's return has nothing whatever to
do with me."

"But, surely," said lady Helena, "for the children's sake you
will not refuse at least an outward show of reconciliation?"

"Mr. Earle has not asked it," said Dora--"he never will do so,
Lady Helena.  It is as far from his thoughts as from mine."

Lady Earle sat for some moments too much astounded for speech.

"I never inquired the cause of your separation, Dora," she said,
gently, "and I never wish to know it.  My son told me you could
live together no longer.  I loved my own husband; I was a devoted
and affectionate wife to him.  I bore with his faults and loved
his virtues, so that I can not imagine what I should do were I in
your place.  I say to you what I should say to Ronald--they are
solemn words--'What therefore God hath joined together, let no
man put asunder.'  Now let me tell you my opinion.  It is this,
that nothing can justify such a separation as yours--nothing but
the most outrageous offenses or the most barbarous cruelty.  Take
the right course, Dora; submit to your husband. Believe me,
woman's rights are all fancy and nonsense; loving, gentle
submission is the fairest ornament of woman.  Even should Ronald
be in the wrong, trample upon all pride and temper, and make the
first advances to him."

"I can not," said Dora gravely.

"Ronald was always generous and chivalrous," continued Lady
Earle.  "Oh, Dora, have you forgotten how my son gave up all the
world for you?"

"No," she replied, bitterly; "nor has he forgotten it, Lady
Earle."

The remembrance of what she thought her wrongs rose visibly
before her.  She saw again the magnificent face of Valentine
Charteris, with its calm, high-bred wonder.  She saw her
husband's white, angry, indignant countenance--gestures full of
unutterable contempt.  Ah, no, never again!  Nothing could heal
that quarrel.

"You must take your place in the world," continued Lady Earle.
"You are no longer simply Mrs. Earle of the Elms; you are Lady
Earle, of Earlescourt, wife of its lord, the mother of his
children.  You have duties too numerous for me to mention, and
you must not shrink from them."

"I refuse all," she replied, calmly; "I refuse to share your
son's titles, his wealth, his position, his duties; I refuse to
make any advances toward a reconciliation; I refuse to be
reconciled."

"And why?" asked Lady Helena, gravely.

A proud flush rose to Dora's face--hot anger stirred in her
heart.

"Because your son said words to me that I never can and never
will forget," she cried. "I did wrong--Lady Helena, I was mad,
jealous, blind--I did wrong--I did what I now know to be
dishonorable and degrading.  I knew no better, and he might have
pardoned me, remembering that.  But before the woman I believe to
be my rival he bitterly regretted having made me his wife."

"They were hard words," said Lady Earle.

"Very hard," replied Dora; "they broke my heart--they slew me in
my youth; I have never lived since then."

"Can you never forgive and forget them, Dora?" asked Lady Helena.

"Never," she replied; "they are burned into my heart and on my
brain.  I shall never forget them; your son and I must be
strangers, Lady Earle, while we live."

"I can say no more," sighed Lady Earle.  "Perhaps a mightier
voice will call to you, Dora, and then you will obey."

A deep silence fell upon them.  Lady Helena was more grieved and
disconcerted than she cared to own.  She had thought of taking
her son's wife and children home in triumph, but it was not to
be.

"Shall we speak of the children now?" she asked at length.  "Some
arrangements must be made for them."

"Yes," said Dora, "their father has claims upon them.  I am ready
to yield to them.  I do not believe he will ever love them or
care for them, because they are mine.  At the same time, I give
them up to him and to you, Lady Earle.  The sweetest and best
years of their lives have been spent with me; I must therefore
not repine.  I have but one stipulation to make, and it is that
my children shall never hear one word against me."

"You know little of me," said Lady Helena, "if you think such a
thing is possible.  You would rather part with your children than
accompany them?"

"Far rather," she replied.  "I know you will allow them to visit
me, Lady Earle.  I have known for many years that such a time
must come, and I am prepared for it."

"But, my dear Dora," said Lady Earle, warmly, "have you
considered what parting with your children implies--the
solitude, the desolation?"

"I know it all," replied Dora.  "It will be hard, but not so hard
nor so bitter as living under the same roof with their father."

Carefully and quietly Dora listened to Lady Earle's plans and
arrangements--how her children were to go to Earlescourt and
take the position belonging to them.  Mrs. Vyvian was to go with
them and remain until Lord Earle returned.  Until then they were
not to be introduced into society; it would take some time to
accustom them to so great a change.  When Lord Earl returned he
could pursue what course he would.

"He will be so proud of them!" said Lady Earle. "I have never
seen a girl so spirited and beautiful as Beatrice, nor one so
fair and gentle as Lillian.  Oh, Dora, I should be happy if you
were going with us."

Never once during the few days of busy preparation did Dora's
proud courage give way.  The girls at first refused to leave her;
they exhausted themselves in conjectures as to her continued
residence at the Elms, and were forced to be satisfied with Lady
Earle's off-hand declaration that their mother could not endure
any but a private life.

"Mamma has a title now," said Beatrice, wonderingly; "why will
she not assume it?"

"Your mother's tastes are simple and plain," replied Lady Earle.
"Her wishes must be treated with respect."

Dora did not give way until the two fair faces that had
brightened her house vanished.  When they were gone, and a
strange, hushed silence fell upon the place, pride and courage
gave way.  In that hour the very bitterness of death seemed to be
upon her.


Chapter XX

It was a proud moment for Lady Earle when she led the two young
girls through the long line of servants assembled to receive
them.  They were both silent from sheer wonder.  They had left
Florence at so early an age that they had not the faintest
remembrance of the pretty villa on the banks of the Arno.  All
their ideas were centered in the Elms--they had never seen any
other home.

Lady Earle watched the different effect produced upon them by the
glimpse of Earlescourt.  Lillian grew pale; she trembled, and her
wondering eyes filled with tears.  Beatrice, on the contrary,
seemed instantly to take in the spirit of the place.  Her face
flushed; a proud light came into her glorious eyes; her haughty
head was carried more regally than ever.  There was no timidity,
no shyly expressed wonder, no sensitive shrinking from new and
unaccustomed splendor.

They were deeply impressed with the magnificence of their new
home.  For many long days Lady Earle employed herself in showing
the numerous treasures of art and vertu the house contained.  The
picture gallery pleased Beatrice most; she gloried in the
portraits of the grand old ancestors, "each with a story to his
name."  One morning she stood before Lady Helena's portrait,
admiring the striking likeness.  Suddenly turning to the stately
lady by her side, she said: "All the Ladies Earle are here; where
is my own mamma?  Her face is sweet and fair as any of these.
Why is there no portrait of her?"

"There will be one some day," said Lady Helena.  "When your
father returns all these things will be seen to."

"We have no brother," continued Beatrice.  "Every baron here
seems to have been succeeded by his son--who will succeed my
father?"

"His next of kin," replied Lady Earle, sadly--"Lionel Dacre; he
is a third cousin of Lord Earle.  He will have both title and
estate."

She signed deeply; it was a real trouble to Lady Helena that she
should never see her son's son, never love and nurse, never bless
the heir of Earlescourt.

Lillian delighted most in the magnificent gardens, the thickly
wild wooded park, where every dell was filled with flowers and
ferns, every knoll crowned with noble trees.  The lake, with
white lilies sleeping on its tranquil bosom and weeping willows
touching its clear surface, pleased her most of all.  As they
stood on its banks, Beatrice, looking into the transparent
depths, shuddered, and turned quickly away.

"I am tired of water," she said; "nothing wearied me so much at
Knutsford as the wide, restless sea.  I must have been born with
a natural antipathy to water."

Many days passed before they were familiar with Earlescourt.
Every day brought its new wonders.

A pretty suite of rooms had been prepared for each sister; they
were in the western wing, and communicated with each other.  The
Italian nurse who had come with them from Florence had preferred
remaining with Dora.  Lady Earle had engaged two fashionable
ladies' maids, had also ordered for each a wardrobe suitable to
the daughters of Lord Earle.

Mrs. Vyvian had two rooms near her charges.  Knowing that some
months might elapse before Ronald returned, Lady Helena settled
upon a course of action.  The young girls were to be kept in
seclusion, and not to be introduced to the gay world, seeing only
a few old friends of the family; they were to continue to study
for a few hours every morning, to drive or walk with Lady Earle
after luncheon, to join her at the seven o'clock dinner, and to
pass the evening in the drawing room.

It was a new and delightful life.  Beatrice reveled in the luxury
and grandeur that surrounded her.  She amused Lady Earle by her
vivacious description of the quiet home at the Elms.

"I feel at home here," she said, "and I never did there.  At
times I wake up, half dreading to hear the rustling of the tall
elm trees, and old Mrs. Thorne's voice asking about the cows.
Poor mamma!  I can not understand her taste."

When they became more accustomed to the new life, the strange
incongruity in their family struck them both.  On one side a
grand old race, intermarried with some of the noblest families in
England--a stately house, title, wealth, rank, and position; on
the other a simple farmer and his homely wife, the plain old
homestead, and complete isolation from all they considered
society.

How could it be?  How came it that their father was lord of
Earlescourt and their mother the daughter of a plain country
farmer?  For the first time it struck them both that there was
some mystery in the life of their parents.  Both grew more shy of
speaking of the Elms, feeling with the keen instinct peculiar to
youth that there was something unnatural in their position.

Visitors came occasionally to Earlescourt.  Sir Harry and Lady
Laurence of Holtham often called; Lady Charteris came from
Greenoke, and all warmly admired the lovely daughters of Lord
Earle.

Beatrice, with her brilliant beauty, her magnificent voice, and
gay, graceful manner, was certainly the favorite.  Sir Harry
declared she was the finest rider in the county.

There was an unusual stir of preparation once when Lady Earle
told them that the daughter of her devoted friend, Lady
Charteris, was coming to spend a few days at Earlescourt.  Then,
for the first time, they saw the beautiful and stately lady whose
fate was so strangely interwoven with theirs.

Valentine Charteris was no longer "the queen of the county."
Prince di Bergezi had won the beautiful English woman.  He had
followed her to Greenoke and repeated his question.  There was
neither coquetry nor affectation in Valentine--she had thought
the matter over, and decided that she was never likely to meet
with any one else she liked and respected so much as her Italian
lover.  He had the virtues, without the faults, of the children
of the South; a lavishly generous, princely disposition; well-
cultivated artistic tastes; good principles and a chivalrous
sense of honor.  Perhaps the thing that touched her most was his
great love for her.  In many respects he resembled Ronald Earle
more nearly than any one else she had ever met.

To the intense delight of both parents, Miss Charteris accepted
him.  For her sake the prince consented to spend every alternate
year in England.

Three times had the whole country side welcomed the stately
Italian and his beautiful wife.  This was their fourth visit to
England, and, when the princess heard from Lady Charteris that
Ronald's two daughters, whom she remembered as little babes, were
at Earlescourt, nothing would satisfy her but a visit there.

The young girls looked in admiring wonder at the lady.  They had
never seen any one so dazzling or so bright.  The calm, grand,
Grecian face had gained in beauty; the magnificent head, with its
wealth of golden hair, the tall, stately figure, charmed them.
And when Valentine took them in her arms and kissed them her
thoughts went back to the white, wild face in the garden and the
dark eyes that had flamed in hot anger upon her.

"I knew your mother years ago," she said; "has she never
mentioned my name?  I used to nurse you both in the little villa
at Florence.  I was one of your father's oldest friends."

No, they had never heard her name; and Beatrice wondered that her
mother could have known and forgotten one so beautiful as the
princess.

The week she remained passed like a long, bright dream. Beatrice
almost worshiped Valentine; this was what she had dreamed of long
ago; this was one of the ideal ladies living in the bright, gay
world she was learning to understand.

When the prince and princess left Earlescourt they made Lady
Helena promise that Beatrice and Lillian should visit them at
Florence.  They spoke of the fair and coquettish Countess Rosali,
still a reigning belle, and said how warmly she would welcome
them for their father's sake.

"You talk so much of Italy," said Valentine to Beatrice.  "It is
just the land for the romance you love.  You shall see blue skies
and sunny seas, vines, and myrtles, and orange trees in bloom;
you shall see such luxuriance and beauty that you will never wish
to return to this cold, dreary England."

It was thus arranged that, when Lord Earle returned, the visit
should be paid.  The evening after their guests' departure seemed
long and triste.

"I will write to mamma," said Beatrice; "it is strange she never
told us anything of her friend.  I must tell her all about the
visit."

Not daring to ask the girls to keep any secret from Dora, Lady
Earle was obliged to let the letter go.  The passionate, lonely
heart brooded over every word.  Beatrice dwelt with loving
admiration on the calm, grand beauty of the princess, her sweet
and gracious manner, her kindly recollection of Dora, and her
urgent invitation to them.  Dora read it through calmly, each
word stabbing her with cruel pain.  The old, fierce jealousy rose
in her heart, crushing every gentle thought.  She tore the
letter, so full of Valentine, into a thousand shreds.

"She drew my husband from me," she cried, "with the miserable
beauty of her fair face, and now she will win my children."

Then across the fierce tempest of jealous anger came one thought
like a ray of light.  Valentine was married; she had married the
wealthy, powerful prince who had been Ronald's patron; so that,
after all, even if she had lured Ronald from her, he had not
cared for her, or she had soon ceased to care for him.

Beatrice thought it still more strange when her mother's reply to
that long, enthusiastic letter came.  Dora said simply that she
had never named the Princess di Borgesi because she was a person
whom she did not care to remember.

Fifteen months passed, and at length came a letter from Lord
Earle, saying that he hoped to reach England before Christmas,
and in any case would be with them by Christmas day.  It was a
short letter, written in the hurry of traveling; the words that
touched his children most, were "I am glad you have the girls at
Earlescourt; I am anxious to see what they are like.  Make them
happy, mother; let hem have all they want; and, if it be
possible, after my long neglect, teach them to love me."

The letter contained no mention of their mother; no allusion was
made to her.  The girls marked the weeks go by in some little
trepidation.  What if, after all, this father, whom they did not
remember, should not like them: Beatrice did not think such a
thing very probable, but Lillian passed many an hour in nervous,
fanciful alarm.

It was strange how completely all the old life had died away.
Both had felt a kind of affection for the homely farmer and his
wife--they sent many presents to them--but Beatrice would curl
her proud lip in scorn when she read aloud that "Mr. And Mrs.
Thorne desired their humble duty to Lady Earle."

Lady Earle felt no anxiety about her son's return; looking at his
daughters, she saw no fault in them.  Beautiful, accomplished,
and graceful, what more could he desire?  She inwardly thanked
Providence that neither of them bore the least resemblance to the
Thornes.  Beatrice looked like one of the Ladies Earle just
stepped out from a picture; Lillian, in her fair, dove-like
loveliness, was quite as charming.  What would Lady Earle--so
truthful, so honorable--have thought or said had she known that
their bright favorite with the Earle face had plighted her troth,
unknown to any one, to the captain of a trading vessel, who was
to claim her in two years for his wife?

Lady Earl had formed her own plans for Beatrice; she hoped the
time would come when she would be Lady Earle of Earlescourt.
Nothing could be more delightful, nothing easier, provided
Beatrice would marry the young heir, Lionel Dacre.

One morning, as the sisters sat in Lillian's room, Lady Earle
entered with an unusual expression of emotion on her fair, high-
bred face.  She held an open letter in her hand.

"My dear children," she said, "you must each look your very best
this evening.  I have a note here--your father will be home
tonight."

The calm, proud voice faltered then, and the stately mistress of
Earlescourt wept at the thought of her son's return as she had
never wept since he left her.


Chapter XXI

Once more Ronald Earle stood upon English shores; once again he
heard his mother tongue spoken all around him, once again he felt
the charm of quiet, sweet English scenery.  Seventeen years had
passed since he had taken Dora's hand in his and told her he
cared nothing for all he was leaving behind him, nothing for any
one in the world save herself--seventeen years, and his love-
dream had lasted but two!  Then came the cruel shock that blinded
him with anger and shame; then came the rude awakening from his
dream when, looking his life bravely in the face, he found it
nothing but a burden--hope and ambition gone--the grand
political mission he had once believed to be his own impossible 
nothing left to him of his glorious dreams but existence--and
all for what?  For the mad, foolish love of a pretty face.  He
hated himself for his weakness and folly.  For that--for the
fair, foolish woman who had shamed him so sorely--he had half
broken his mother's heart, and had imbittered his father's life.
For that he had made himself an exile, old in his youth, worn and
weary, when life should have been all smiling around him.

These thoughts flashed through his mind as the express train
whirled through the quiet English landscape.  Winter snows had
fallen, the great bare branches of the tall trees were gaunt and
snow-laden, the fields were one vast expanse of snow, the frost
had hardened the icicles hanging from hedges and trees.  The
scene seemed strange to him after so many years of the tropical
sun.  Yet every breath of the sharp, frosty air invigorated him
and brought him new life and energy.

At length the little station was reached, and he saw the carriage
with his liveried servants awaiting him.  A warm flush rose to
Lord Earle's face; for a moment he felt almost ashamed of meeting
his old domestics.  They must all know now why he had left home.
His own valet, Morton, was there.  Lord Earle had kept him, and
the man had asked permission to go and meet his old master.

Ronald was pleased to see him; there were a few words of
courteous greeting from Lord Earle to all around, and a few still
kinder words to Morton.

Once again Ronald saw the old trees of which he had dreamed so
often, the stately cedars, the grand spreading oaks, the tall
aspens, the lady beeches, the groves of poplars--every spot was
familiar to him.  In the distance he saw the lake shining through
the trees; he drove past the extensive gardens, the orchards now
bare and empty.  He was not ashamed of the tears that rushed
warmly to his eyes when the towers and turrets of Earlescourt
came in sight.

A sharp sense of pain filled his heart--keen regret, bitter
remorse, a longing for power to undo all that was done, to recall
the lost miserable years--the best of his life.  He might
return; he might do his best to atone for his error; but neither
repentance nor atonement would give him back the father whose
pride he had humbled in the dust.

As the carriage rolled up the broad drive, a hundred instances of
his father's love and indulgence flashed across him--he had
never refused any request save one.  He wisely and tenderly tried
to dissuade him from the false step that could never be retraced
but all in vain.

He remembered his father's face on that morning when, with
outstretched hands, he bade him leave his presence and never seek
it more--when he told him that whenever he looked upon his dead
face he was to remember that death itself was less bitter than
the hour in which he had been deceived.

Sad, bitter memories filled his heart when the carriage stopped
at the door and Ronald caught sight of the old familiar faces,
some in smiles, some in tears.

The library door was thrown open.  Hardly knowing whither he
went, Lord Earle entered, and it was closed behind him.  His
eyes, dimmed with tears, saw a tall, stately lady, who advanced
to meet him with open arms.

The face he remembered so fair and calm bore deep marks of
sorrow; the proud, tender eyes were shadowed; the glossy hair was
threaded with silver; but it was his mother's voice that cried to
him, "My son, my son, thank Heaven you have returned!"

He never remembered how long his mother held him clasped in her
arms.  Earth has no love like a mother's love--none so tender,
so true, so full of sweet wisdom, so replete with pity and
pardon.  It was her own son whom Lady Earle held in her arms.
She forgot that he was a man who had incurred just displeasure.
He was her boy, her own treasure, and so it was that her words of
greeting were all of loving welcome.

"How changed you are," she said, drawing him nearer to the fast-
fading light.  "Your face is quite bronzed, and you look so many
years older--so sad, so worn!  Oh, Ronald, I must teach you to
grow young and happy again!"

He sighed deeply, and his mother's heart grew sad as she watched
his restless face.

"Old-fashioned copy-books say, mother, that 'to be happy one must
be good.'  I have not been good," he said with a slight smile,
"and I shall never be happy."

In the faint waning light, through which the snow gleamed
strangely, mother and son sat talking.  Lady Earle told Ronald of
his father's death--of the last yearning cry when all the pent-
up love of years seemed to rush forth and overpower him with its
force.  It was some comfort to him, after all, that his father's
last thoughts and last words had been of him.

His heart was strangely softened; a new hope came to him.
Granted that the best part of his life was wasted, he would do
his best with the remainder.

"And my children," he said, "my poor little girls!  I will not
see them until I am calm and refreshed.  I know they are well and
happy with you."

Then, taking advantage of his mood, Lady Helena said what she had
been longing to say.

"Ronald," she began, "I have had much to suffer.  You will never
know how my heart has been torn between my husband and my son.
Let my last few years be spent in peace."

"They shall, mother," he said.  "Your happiness shall be my
study."

"There can be no rest for me," continued his mother, "unless all
division in our family ends.  Ronald, I, who never asked you a
favor before, ask one now.  Seek Dora and bring her home
reconciled and happy."

A dark angry frown such as she had never seen there before came
into Lord Earle's face.

"Anything but that," he replied, hastily; "I can not do it,
mother.  I could not, if I lay upon my death bed."

"And why?" asked Lady Helena, simply, as she had asked Dora.

"For a hundred reasons, the first and greatest of which is that
she has outraged all my notions of honor, shamed and disgraced me
in the presence of one whom I esteemed and revered; she has--But
no, I will not speak of my wife's errors, it were unmanly.  I can
not forgive her, mother.  I wish her no harm; let her have every
luxury my wealth can procure, but do not name her to me.  I
should be utterly devoid of all pride if I could pardon her."

"Pride on your side," said Lady Earle, sadly, "and temper on
hers!  Oh, Ronald, how will it end?  Be wise in time; the most
honest and noble man is he who conquers himself.  Conquer
yourself, my son, and pardon Dora."

"I could more easily die," he replied, bitterly.

"Then," said Lady Earle, sorrowfully, "I must say to you as I
said to Dora--beware; pride and temper must bend and break. Be
warned in time."

"Mother," interrupted Ronald, bending over the pale face so full
of emotion, "let this be the last time.  You distress yourself
and me; do not renew the subject.  I may forgive her in the hour
of death--not before."

Lady Helena's last hope died away; she had thought that in the
first hour of his return, when old memories had softened his
heart, she would prevail on him to seek his wife whom he had
ceased to love, and for their children's sake bring her home. She
little dreamed that the coming home, the recollection of his
father, the ghost of his lost youth and blasted hopes rising
every instant, had hardened him against the one for whom he had
lost all.

"You will like to see the children now," said Lady Helena.  "I
will ring for lights.  You will be charmed with both.  Beatrice
is much like you--she has the Earle face, and, unless I am
mistaken, the Earle spirit, too."

"Beatrice," said Lillian, as they descended the broad staircase,
"I am frightened.  I wish I could remember something of papa 
his voice or his smile; it is like going to see a stranger.  And
suppose, after all, he does not like us!"

"Suppose what is of greater importance," said Beatrice proudly 
"that we do not like him!"

But, for all her high spirits and hauteur, Beatrice almost
trembled as the library door opened and Lady Earle came forward
to met them.  Beatrice raised her eyes dauntlessly and saw before
her a tall, stately gentleman with a handsome face, the saddest
and noblest she had ever seen--clear, keen eyes that seemed to
pierce through all disguise and read all thoughts.

"There is Beatrice," said Lady Helena, as she took her hand
gently; and Ronald looked in startled wonder at the superb beauty
of the face and figure before him.

"Beatrice," he said, kissing the proud, bright face, "can it be
possible?  When I saw you last you were a little, helpless
child."

"I am not helpless now," she replied, with a smile; "and I hope
you are going to love me very much, papa.  You have to make up
for fifteen years of absence.  I think it will not be very
difficult to love you."

He seemed dazzled by her beauty--her frank, high spirit and
fearless words.  Then he saw a golden head, with sweet, dove-like
eyes, raised to his.

"I am Lillian, papa," said a clear, musical voice.  "Look at me,
please--and love me too."

He did both, charmed with the gentle grace of her manner, and the
fair, pure face.  Then Lord Earle took both his children in his
arms.

"I wish," he said, in a broken voice and with tears in his eyes,
"that I had seen you before.  They told me my little twin
children had grown into beautiful girls, but I did not realize
it."

And again, when she saw his proud happiness, Lady Helena longed
to plead for the mother of his children, that she might also
share in his love; but she dared not.  His words haunted her.
Dora would be forgiven only in the hour of death.


Chapter XXII

The evening of his return was one of the happiest of Lord Earle's
life.  He was charmed with his daughters.  Lady Helena thought,
with a smile, that it was difficult to realize the relationship
between them.  Although her son looked sad and care-worn, he
seemed more like an elder brother than the father of the two
young girls.

There was some little restraint between them at first.  Lord
Earle seemed at a loss what to talk about; then Lady Helena's
gracious tact came into play.  She would not have dinner in the
large dining room, she ordered it to be served in the pretty
morning room, where the fire burned cheerfully and the lamps gave
a flow of mellow light.  It was a picture of warm, cozy English
comfort, and Lord Earle looked pleased when he saw it.

Then, when dinner was over, she asked Beatrice to sing, and she,
only pleased to show Lord Earle the extent of her
accomplishments, obeyed.  Her superb voice, with its clear,
ringing tones, amazed him.  Beatrice sang song after song with a
passion and fire that told how deep the music lay in her soul.

Then Lady Helena bade Lillian bring out her folio of drawings,
and again Lord Earle was pleased and surprised by the skill and
talent he had not looked for.  He praised the drawings highly.
One especially attracted his attention--it was the pretty scene
Lillian had sketched on the May day now so long passed--the sun
shining upon the distant white sails, and the broad, beautiful
sweep of sea at Knutsford.

"That is an excellent picture," he said; "it ought to be framed.
It is too good to be hidden in a folio.  You have just caught the
right coloring, Lillian; one can almost see the sun sparkling on
the water.  Where is this sea-view taken from?"

"Do you not know it?" she asked, looking at him with wonder in
her eyes.  "It is from Knutsford--mamma's home."

Ronald looked up in sudden, pained surprise.

"Mamma's home!"  The words smote him like a blow.  He remembered
Dora's offense--her cold letter, her hurried flight, his own
firm resolve never to receive her in his home again--but he had
not remembered that the children must love her--that she was
part of their lives.  He could not drive her memory from their
minds.  There before him lay the pretty picture of "mamma's
home."

"This," said Lillian, "is the Elms.  See those grand old trees,
papa!  This is the window of Mamma's room, and this was our
study."

He looked with wonder.  This, then, was Dora's home--the pretty,
quaint homestead standing in the midst of the green meadows.  As
he gazed, he half wondered what the Dora who for fifteen years
had lived there could be like.  Did the curling rings of black
hair fall as gracefully as ever?  Had the blushing dimpled face
grown pale and still?  And then, chasing away all softened
thought, came the remembrance of that hateful garden scene.  Ah,
no, he could never forgive--he could not speak of her even to
these, her children!  The two pictures were laid aside, and no
more was said of framing them.

Lord Earle said to himself, after his daughters had retired, that
both were charming; but, though he hardly owned it to himself, if
he had a preference, it was for brilliant, beautiful Beatrice.
He had never seen any one to surpass her.  After Lady Helena had
left him, he sat by the fire dreaming, as his father long years
ago had done before him.

It was not too late yet, he thought, to retrieve the fatal
mistake of his life.  He would begin at once.  He would first
give all his attention to his estate; it should be a model for
all others.  He would interest himself in social duties; people
who lamented his foolish, wasted youth should speak with warm
admiration of his manhood; above all matters he dreamed of great
things for his daughters, especially Beatrice.  With her beauty
and grace, her magnificent voice, her frank, fearless spirit, and
piquant, charming wit, she would be a queen of society; through
his daughter his early error would be redeemed.  Beatrice was
sure to marry well; she would bring fresh honors to the grand old
race ha had shamed.  When the annals of the family told, in years
to come, the story of his mistaken marriage, it would be amply
redeemed by the grand alliance Beatrice would be sure to
contract.

His hopes rested upon her and centered in her.  As he sat
watching the glowing embers, there came to him the thought that
what Beatrice was to him he had once been to the father he was
never more to see.  Ah!  If his daughter should be like himself 
if she should ruin his hopes, throw down the air castle he had
built--should love unworthily, marry beneath her, deceive and
disappoint him!  But no, it should not be--he would watch over
her.  Lord Earle shuddered at the thought.

During breakfast on the morning following his return Lady Helena
asked what his plans were for the day--whether he intended
driving the girls over to Holte.

"No," said Lord Earle.  "I wish to have a long conversation with
my daughters.  We shall be engaged during the morning.  After
luncheon we will go to Holte."

Ronald, Lord Earle, had made up his mind.  In the place where his
father had warned him, and made the strongest impression upon
him, he would warn his children, and in the same way; so he took
them to the picture gallery, where he had last stood with his
father.

With gentle firmness he said: "I have brought you here as I have
something to say to you which is best said here.  Years ago,
children, my father brought me, as I bring you, to warn and
advise me--I warn and advise you.  We are, though so closely
related, almost strangers.  I am ready to love you and do love
you.  I intend to make your happiness my chief study.  But there
is one thing I must have--that is, perfect openness, one thing I
must forbid--that is, deceit of any kind, on any subject.  If
either of you have in your short lives a secret, tell it to me
now; if either of you love any one, even though it be one
unworthy, tell me now.  I will pardon any imprudence, any folly,
any want of caution--everything save deceit.  Trust me, and I
will be gentle as a tender woman; deceive me, and I will never
forgive you."

Both fair faces had grown pale--Beatrice's from sudden and
deadly fear; Lillian's from strong emotion.

"The men of our race," said Lord Earle, "have erred at times, the
women never.  You belong to a long line of noble, pure, and high-
bred woman; there must be nothing in your lives less high, and
less noble than in theirs; but if there had been--if, from want
of vigilance, of training, and of caution there should be
anything in this short past, tell it to me now, and I will forget
it."

Neither spoke to him one word, and a strange pathos came into his
voice.

"I committed one act of deceit in my life," continued Lord Earle;
"it drove me from home, and it made me an exile during the best
years of my life.  It matters little what it was--you will never
know; but it has made me merciless to all deceit.  I will never
spare it; it has made me harsh and bitter.  You will both find in
me the truest, the best of friends; if in everything you are
straightforward and honorable; but, children, dearly as I love
you, I will never pardon a lie or an act of deceit."

"I never told a lie in my life," said Lillian, proudly.  "My
mother taught us to love the truth."

"And you, my Beatrice?" he asked, gently as he turned to the
beautiful face half averted from him.

"I can say with my sister," was the haughty reply, "I have never
told a lie."

Even as she spoke her lips grew pale with fear, as she remembered
the fatal secret of her engagement to Hugh Fernely.

"I believe it," replied Lord Earle.  "I can read truth in each
face.  Now tell me--have no fear--have you any secret in that
past life?  Remember, no matter what you may have done, I shall
freely pardon it.  If you should be in any trouble or difficulty,
as young people are at times, I will help you.  I will do
anything for you, if you will trust me."

And again Lillian raised her sweet face to his.

"I have no secret," she said, simply. "I do not think I know a
secret, or anything like one.  My past life is an open book,
papa, and you can read every page in it."

"Thank Heaven!" said Lord Earle, as he placed his hand
caressingly upon the fair head.

It was strange, and he remembered the omission afterward, that he
did not repeat the question to Beatrice--he seemed to consider
that Lillian's answer included her.  He did not know her heart
was beating high with fear.

"I know," he continued, gently, "that some young girls have their
little love secrets.  You tell me you have none.  I believe you.
I have but one word more to say.  You will be out in the great
world soon, and you will doubtless both have plenty of admirers.
Then will come the time of trial and temptation; remember my
words--there is no curse so great as a clandestine love, no
error so great or degrading.  One of our race was so cursed, and
his punishment was great.  No matter whom you love and who loves
you, let all be fair, honorable, and open as the day.  Trust me,
do not deceive me.  Let me in justice say I will never oppose any
reasonable marriage, but I will never pardon a clandestine
attachment.

"However dearly I might love the one who so transgressed,"
continued Lord Earle, "even if it broke my heart to part from
her, I should send her from me at once; she should never more be
a child of mine.  Do not think me harsh or unkind; I have weighty
reasons for every word I have uttered.  I am half ashamed to
speak of such things to you, but it must be done.  You are
smiling, Lillian, what is it?"

"I should laugh, papa," she replied, "if you did not look so very
grave.  We must see people in order to love them.  Beatrice, how
many do we know in the world?  Farmer Leigh, the doctor at
Seabay, Doctor Goode, who came to the Elms when mamma was ill,
two farm laborers, and the shepherd--that was the extent of our
acquaintance until we came to Earlescourt.  I may now add Sir
Henry Holt and Prince Borgesi to my list.  You forget, papa, we
have lived out of the world."

Lord Earle remembered with pleasure that it was true.  "You will
soon be in the midst of a new world," he said, "and before you
enter society I thought it better to give you this warning.  I
place no control over your affections; the only thing I forbid,
detest, and will never pardon, is any underhand, clandestine love
affair.  You know not what they would cost."

He remembered afterward how strangely silent Beatrice was, and
how her beautiful, proud face was turned from him.

"It is a disagreeable subject," said Lord Earle, "and I am
pleased to have finished with it--it need never be renewed.  Now
I have one more thing to say--I shall never control or force
your affections, but in my heart there is one great wish."

Lord Earle paused for a few minutes; he was looking at the face
of Lady Alicia Earle, whom Beatrice strongly resembled.

"I have no son," he continued, "and you, my daughters, will not
inherit title or estate--both go to Lionel Dacre.  If ever the
time should come when Lionel asks either of you to be his wife,
my dearest wish will be accomplished.  And now, as my long
lecture is finished, and the bell has rung, we will prepare for a
visit to Sir Harry and Lady Laurence."

There was not much time for thought during the rest of the day;
but when night came, and Beatrice was alone, she looked the
secret of her life in the face.

She had been strongly tempted, when Lord Earle had spoken so
kindly, to tell him all.  She now wished she had done so; all
would have been over.  He would perhaps have chided her simple,
girlish folly, and have forgiven her.  He would never forgive her
now that she had deliberately concealed the fact; the time for
forgiveness was past.  A few words, and all might have been told;
it was too late now to utter them.  Proud of her and fond of her
as she saw Lord Earle was, there would be no indulgence for her
if her secret was discovered.

She would have to leave the magnificent and luxurious home, the
splendor that delighted her, the glorious prospects opening to
her, and return to the Elms, perhaps never to leave it again.
Ah, no!  The secret must be kept!  She did not feel much alarmed;
many things might happen.  Perhaps the "Seagull" might be lost 
she thought, without pain or sorrow, of the possible death of the
man who loved her as few love.

Even if he returned, he might have forgotten her or never find
her.  She did not feel very unhappy or ill at ease--the chances,
she thought, were many in her favor.  She had but one thing to do
to keep all knowledge of her secret from Lord Earle.


Chapter XXIII

As time passed on all constraint between Lord Earle and his
daughters wore away; Ronald even wondered himself at the force of
his own love for them.  He had made many improvements since his
return.  He did wonders upon the estate; model cottages seemed to
rise by magic in place of the wretched tenements inhabited by
poor tenants; schools, almshouses, churches, all testified to his
zeal for improvement.  People began to speak with warm admiration
of the Earlescourt estate and of their master.

Nor did he neglect social duties; old friends were invited to
Earlescourt; neighbors were hospitably entertained.  His name was
mentioned with respect and esteem; the tide of popularity turned
in his favor.  As the spring drew near, Lord Earle became anxious
for his daughters to make their debut in the great world.  They
could have no better chaperone than his own mother.  Lady Helena
was speaking to him one morning of their proposed journey, when
Lord Earle suddenly interrupted her.

"Mother," he said, "where are all your jewels?  I never see you
wearing any."

"I put them all away," said Lady Earle, "when your father died.
I shall never wear them again.  The Earle jewels are always worn
by the wife of the reigning lord, not by the widow of his
predecessor.  Those jewels are not mine."

"Shall we look them over?" asked Ronald.  "Some of them might be
reset for Beatrice and Lillian."

Lady Helena rang for her maid, and the heavy cases of jewelry
were brought down.  Beatrice was in raptures with them, and her
sister smiled at her admiration.

The jewels might have sufficed for a king's ransom; the diamonds
were of the first water; the rubies flashed crimson; delicate
pearls gleamed palely upon their velvet beds; there were emeralds
of priceless value.  One of the most beautiful and costly jewels
was an entire suite of opals intermixed with small diamonds.

"These," said Lord Earle, raising the precious stones in his
hands, "are of immense value.  Some of the finest opals ever seen
are in this necklace; they were taken from the crown of an Indian
price and bequeathed to one of our ancestors.  So much is said
about the unlucky stone--the pierre du malheur, as the French
call the opal--that I did not care so much for them."

"Give me the opals, papa," said Beatrice, laughing; "I have no
superstitious fears about them.  Bright and beautiful jewels
always seemed to me one of the necessaries of life.  I prefer
diamonds, but these opals are magnificent."

She held out her hands, and for the first time Lord Earle saw the
opal ring upon her finger.  He caught the pretty white hand in
his own.

"That is a beautiful ring," he said.  "These opals are splendid.
Who gave it to you, Beatrice?"

The question came upon her suddenly like a deadly shock; she had
forgotten all about the ring, and wore it only from habit.

For a moment her heart seemed to stand still and her senses to
desert her.  Then with a self-possession worthy of a better
cause, Beatrice looked up into her father's face with a smile.

"It was given to me at the Elms," she said, so simply that the
same thought crossed the minds of her three listeners--that it
had been given by Dora and her daughter did not like to say so.

Lord Earle looked on in proud delight while his beautiful
daughters chose the jewels they liked best.  The difference in
taste struck and amused him. Beatrice chose diamonds, fiery
rubies, purple amethysts; Lillian cared for nothing but the
pretty pale pearls and bright emeralds.

"Some of those settings are very old-fashioned," said Lord Earle.
"We will have new designs from Hunt and Boskell.  They must be
reset before you go to London."

The first thing Beatrice did was to take off the opal ring and
lock it away.  She trembled still from the shock of her father's
question.  The fatal secret vexed her.  How foolish she had been
to risk so much for a few stolen hours of happiness--for praise
and flattery--she could not say for love.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

The time so anxiously looked for came at last.  Lord Earle took
possession of his town mansion, and his daughters prepared for
their debut.  It was in every respect a successful one.  People
were in raptures with the beautiful sisters, both so charming yet
so unlike.  Beatrice, brilliant and glowing, her magnificent face
haunted those who saw it like a beautiful dream--Lillian, fair
and graceful, as unlike her sister as a lily to a rose.

They soon became the fashion.  No ball or soiree, no dance or
concert was considered complete without them. Artists sketched
them together as "Lily and Rose," "Night and Morning," "Sunlight
and Moonlight."  Poets indited sonnets to them; friends and
admirers thronged around them.  As Beatrice said, with a deep-
drawn sigh of perfect contentment, "This is life"--and she
reveled in it.

That same year the Earl of Airlie attained his majority, and
became the center of all fashionable interest.  Whether he would
marry and whom he would be likely to marry were two questions
that interested every mother and daughter in Belgravia.  There
had not been such an eligible parti for many years.  The savings
of a long minority alone amounted to a splendid fortune.

The young earl had vast estates in Scotland.  Lynnton Hall and
Craig Castle, two of the finest seats in England, were his.  His
mansion in Belgravia was the envy of all who saw it.

Young, almost fabulously wealthy, singularly generous and
amiable, the young Earl of Airlie was the center of at least half
a hundred of matrimonial plots; but he was not easily managed.
Mammas with blooming daughters found him a difficult subject.  He
laughed, talked, danced, walked, and rode, as society wished him
to do; but no one had touched his heart, or even his fancy.  Lord
Airlie was heart-whole, and there seemed no prospect of his ever
being anything else.  Lady Constance Tachbrook, the prettiest,
daintiest coquette in London, brought all her artillery of
fascination into play, but without success.  The beautiful
brunette, Flora Cranbourne, had laid a wager that, in the course
of two waltzes, she would extract three compliments from him, but
she failed in the attempt.  Lord Airlie was pronounced
incorrigible.

The fact was that his lordship had been sensibly brought up.  He
intended to marry when he could find some one to love him for
himself, and not for his fortune.  This ideal of all that was
beautiful, noble, and true in woman the earl was always searching
for, but as yet had not found.

On all sides he had heard of the beauty of Lord Earle's
daughters, but it did not interest him.  He had been hearing of,
seeing, and feeling disappointed in beautiful women for some
years.  Many people made the point of meeting the "new beauties,"
but he gave himself no particular trouble.  They were like every
one else, he supposed.

One morning, having nothing else to do, Lord Airlie went to a
fete given in the beautiful grounds of Lady Downham.  He went
early, intending to remain only a short time.  He found but a few
guests had arrived.  After paying the proper amount of homage to
Lady Downham, the young earl wandered off into the grounds.

It was all very pretty and pleasant, but he had seen the same
before, and was rather tired of it.  The day was more Italian
than English, bright and sunny, the sky blue, the air clear and
filled with fragrance, the birds singing as they do sing under
bright, warm skies. 

Flags were flying from numerous tents, bands of music were
stationed in different parts of the grounds, the fountains played
merrily in the sunlit air.  Lord Airlie walked mechanically on,
bowing in reply to the salutations he received.

A pretty little bower, a perfect thicket of roses, caught his
attention.  From it one could see all over the lake, with its gay
pleasure boats.  Lord Airlie sat down, believing himself to be
quite alone; but before he had removed a large bough that
interfered with the full perfection of the view he heard voices
on the other side of the thick, sheltering rose bower.

He listened involuntarily, for one of the voices was clear and
pure, the other more richly musical than any he had ever heard 
at times sweet as the murmur of the cushat dove, and again
ringing joyously and brightly.

"I hope we shall not have to wait here long, Lillian," the blithe
voice was saying.  "Lady Helena promised to take us on the lake."

"It is very pleasant," was the reply; "but you always like to be
in the very center of gayety."

"Yes," said Beatrice; "I have had enough solitude and quiet to
last me for life.  Ah, Lillian, this is all delightful.  You
think so, but do not admit it honestly as I do."

There was a faint, musical laugh, and then the sweet voice
resumed:

"I am charmed, Lillian, with this London life; this is worth
calling life--every moment is a golden one.  If there is a
drawback, it consists in not being able to speak one's mind."

"What do you mean?" asked Lillian.

"Do you not understand?" was the reply.  "Lady Helena is always
talking to me about cultivating what she calls 'elegant repose.'
Poor, dear grandmamma!  Her perfect idea of good manners seems to
me to be a simple absence--in society, at least--of all emotion
and all feeling.  I, for one, do not admire the nil admirari
system."

"I am sure Lady Helena admires you, Bee," said her sister.

"Yes," was the careless reply.  "Only imagine, Lillian,
yesterday, when Lady Cairn told me some story about a favorite
young friend of hers the tears came to my eyes.  I could not help
it, although the drawing room was full.  Lady Helena told me I
should repress all outward emotion.  Soon after, when Lord
Dolchester told me a ridiculous story about Lady Everton, I
laughed--heartily, I must confess, though not loudly--and she
looked at me.  I shall never accomplish 'elegant repose.'"

"You would not be half so charming if you did," replied her
sister.

"Then it is so tempting to say at times what one really thinks!
I can not resist it.  When Lady Everton tells me, with that
tiresome simper of hers, that she really wonders at herself, I
long to tell her other people do the same thing.  I should enjoy,
for once, the luxury of telling Mrs. St. John that people flatter
her, and then laugh at her affectation.  It is a luxury to speak
the truth at all times, is it not, Lily?  I detest everything
false, even a false word; therefore I fear Lady Helena will never
quite approve of my manner."

"You are so frank and fearless!  At the Elms, do you remember how
every one seemed to feel that you would say just the right thing
at the right time?" asked Lillian.

"Do not mention that place," replied Beatrice; "this life is so
different.  I like it so much, Lily--all the brightness and
gayety.  I feel good and contented now.  I was always restless
and longing for life; now I have all I wish for."

There was a pause then, and Lord Airlie longed to see who the
speakers were--who the girl was that spoke such frank, bright
words--that loved truth, and hated all things false--what kind
of face accompanied that voice.  Suddenly the young earl
remembered that he was listening, and he started in horror from
his seat.  He pushed aside the clustering roses.  At first he saw
nothing but the golden blossoms of a drooping laburnum; then, a
little further on, he saw a fair head bending over some fragrant
flowers; then a face so beautiful, so perfect, that something
like a cry of surprise came from Lord Airlie's lips.

He had seen many beauties, but nothing like this queenly young
girl.  Her dark, bright eyes were full of fire and light; the
long lashes swept her cheek, the proud, beautiful lips, so
haughty in repose, so sweet when smiling, were perfect in shape.
From the noble brow a waving mass of dark hair rippled over a
white neck and shapely shoulders.  It was a face to think and
dream of, peerless in its vivid, exquisite coloring and
charmingly molded features.  He hardly noticed the fair-haired
girl.

"Who can she be?" thought Lord Airlie.  "I believed that I had
seen every beautiful woman in London."

Satisfied with having seen what kind of face accompanied the
voice, the young earl left the pretty rose thicket.  His friends
must have thought him slightly deranged.  He went about asking
every one, "Who is here today?"  Among others, he saluted Lord
Dolchester with that question.

"I can scarcely tell you,"replied his lordship.  "I am somewhat
in a puzzle.  If you want to know who is the queen of the fete, I
can tell you.  It is Lord Earle's daughter, Miss Beatrice Earle.
She is over there, see with Lady Downham."

Looking in the direction indicated, Lord Airlee saw the face that
haunted him.

"Yes," said Lord Dolchester, with a gay laugh; "and if I were
young and unfettered, she would not be Miss Earle much longer."


Chapter XXIV

Lord Airlie gazed long and earnestly at the beautiful girl who
looked so utterly unconscious of the admiration she excited.

"I must ask Lady Downham to introduce me," he said to himself,
wondering whether the proud face would smile upon him, and, if
she carried into practice her favorite theory of saying what she
thought, what she would say to him.

Lady Downham smiled when the young earl made his request.

"I have been besieged by gentlemen requesting introductions to
Miss Earle," she said.  "Contrary to your general rule, Lord
Airlie, you go with the crowd."

He would have gone anywhere for one word from those perfect lips.
Lady Downham led him to the spot where Beatrice stood, and in a
few courteous words introduced him to her.

Lord Airlie was celebrated for his amiable, pleasing manner.  He
always knew what to say and how to say it, but when those
magnificent eyes looked into his own, the young earl stood silent
and abashed.  In vain he tried confusedly to utter a few words;
his face flushed, and Beatrice looked at him in wonder.--Could
this man gazing so ardently at her be the impenetrable Lord
Airlie?

He managed at length to say something about the beauty of the
grounds and the brightness of the day.  Plainly as eyes could
speak, hers asked: Had he nothing to say?

He lingered by her side, charmed and fascinated by her grace; she
talked to Lillian and to Lady Helena; she received the homage
offered to her so unconscious of his presence and his regard that
Lord Airlie was piqued.  He was not accustomed to being
overlooked.

"Do you never grow tired of flowers and fetes, Miss Earle?" he
asked at length.

"No," replied Beatrice, "I could never grow tired of flowers--
who could?  As for fetes, I have seen few, and have liked each
one better than the last."

"Perhaps your life has not been, like mine, spent among them," he
said.

"I have lived among flowers," she replied, "but not among fetes;
they have all the charm of novelty for me."

"I should like to enjoy them as you do," he said. "I wish you
would teach me, Miss Earle."

She laughed gayly, and the sound of that laugh, like a sweet,
silvery chime, charmed Lord Airlie still more.

He found out the prettiest pleasure boat, and persuaded Beatrice
to let him row her across the lake.  He gathered a beautiful
water lily for her.  When they landed, he found out a seat in the
prettiest spot and placed her there.

Her simple, gay manner delighted him.  He had never met any one
like her.  She did not blush, or look conscious, or receive his
attentions with the half-fluttered sentimental air common to most
young ladies of his acquaintance.

She never appeared to remember that he was Lord Airlie, nor
sought by any artifice to keep him near her.  The bright, sunny
hours seemed to pass rapidly as a dream.  Long before the day
ended, the young earl said to himself that he had met his fate;
that if it took years to win her he would count them well spent 
that in all the wide world she was the wife for him.

Lord Earle was somewhat amused by the solicitude the young
nobleman showed in making his acquaintance and consulting his
tastes.  After Lady Downham's fete he called regularly at the
house.  Lady Helena liked him, but could hardly decide which of
her grandchildren it was that attracted him.

The fastidious young earl, who had smiled at the idea of love and
had disappointed half the fashionable mothers in Belgravia, found
himself a victim at last.

He was diffident of his own powers, hardly daring to hope that he
should succeed in winning the most beautiful and gifted girl in
London.  He was timid in her presence, and took refuge with
Lillian.

All fashionable London was taken by surprise when Lord Airlie
threw open his magnificent house, and, under the gracious
auspices of his aunt, Lady Lecomte, issued invitations for a
grand ball.

Many were the conjectures, and great was the excitement.  Lord
Earle smiled as he showed Lady Helena the cards of invitation.

"Of course you will go," he said.  "We have no engagement for
that day.  See that the girls look their best, mother."

He felt very proud of his daughters--Lillian, looking so fair
and sweet in her white silk dress and favorite pearls!  Beatrice,
like a queen, in a cloud of white lace, with coquettish dashes of
crimson.  The Earle diamonds shone in her dark hair, clasped the
fair white throat, and encircled the beautiful arms.  A
magnificent pomegranate blossom lay in the bodice of her dress,
and she carried a bouquet of white lilies mixed with scarlet
verbena.

The excitement as to the ball had been great.  It seemed like a
step in the right direction at last.  The great question was,
with whom would Lord Airlie open the ball?  Every girl was on the
qui vive.

The question was soon decided.  When Beatrice Earle entered the
room, Lord Airlie went straight to meet her and solicited her
hand for the first dance.  She did not know how much was meant by
that one action.

He wondered, as he looked upon her, the queen of the most
brilliant ball of the season, whether she would ever love him 
if it was within the bounds of possibility that she should ever
care for him.  That evening, for the first time, he touched the
proud heart of Beatrice Earle.  On all sides she had heard
nothing but praises of Lord Airlie  his wealth, his talents, his
handsome person and chivalrous manner.  The ladies were eloquent
in praise of their young host.  She looked at him, and for the
first time remarked the noble, dignified carriage, the tall,
erect figure, the clear-cut patrician face--not handsome
according to the rules of beauty, but from the truth and honor
written there in nature's plainest hand.

Then she saw--and it struck her with surprise  how Lord Airlie,
so courted and run after, sought her out.  She saw smiles on
friendly faces, and heard her name mingled with his.

"My dear Miss Earle," said Lady Everton, "you have accomplished
wonders--conquered the unconquerable.  I believe every eligible
young lady in London has smiled upon Lord Airlie, and all in
vain.  What charm have you used to bring him to your feet?"

"I did not know that he was at my feet," replied Beatrice.  "You
like figurative language, Lady Everton."

"You will find I am right," returned lady Everton.  "Remember I
was the first to congratulate you."

Beatrice wondered, in a sweet, vague way, if there could be
anything in it.  She looked again at Lord Airlie.  Surely any one
might be proud of the love of such a man.  He caught her glance,
and her face flushed.  In a moment he was by her side.

"Miss Earle," he said, eagerly, "you told me the other day you
liked flowers.  If you have not been in the conservatory, may I
escort you there?"

She silently accepted his arm, and they went through the
magnificent suite of rooms into the cool, fragrant conservatory.

The pretty fountain in the midst rippled musically, and the lamps
gleamed like pale stars among masses of gorgeous color.

Beatrice was almost bewildered by the profusion of beautiful
plants.  Tier upon tier of superb flowers rose until the eye was
dazzled by the varied hues and brightness--delicate white heaths
of rare perfection, flaming azaleas, fuchsias that looked like
showers of purple-red wine.  The plant that charmed Beatrice most
was one from far-off Indian climes--delicate, perfumed blossoms,
hanging like golden bells from thick, sheltering green leaves.
Miss Earle stood before it, silent in sheer admiration.

"You like that flower?" said Lord Airlie.

"It is one of the prettiest I ever saw," she replied.

In a moment he gathered the fairest sprays from the precious
tree.  She cried out in dismay at the destruction.

"Nay," said Lord Airlie, "if every flower here could be
compressed into one blossom, it would hardly be a fitting
offering to you."

She smiled at the very French compliment, and he continued--"I
shall always have a great affection for that tree."

"Why?" she asked, unconsciously.

"Because it has pleased you," he replied.

They stood by the pretty plant, Beatrice touching the golden
bells softly with her fingers.  Something of the magic of the
scene touched her.  She did not know why the fountain rippled so
musically, why the flowers seemed doubly fair as her young lover
talked to her.  She had been loved.  She had heard much of love,
but she herself had never known what it really meant.  She did
not know why, after a time, her proud, bright eyes drooped, and
had never met Lord Airlie's gaze, why her face flushed and grew
pale, why his words woke a new, strange, beautiful music in her
heart--music that never died until--

"I ask for one spray--only one--to keep in memory of this
pleasant hour," said Lord Airlie, after a pause.

She gave him a spray of the delicate golden bells.

"I should like to be curious and rude," he said, "and ask if you
ever gave any one a flower before?"

"No," she replied.

"Then I shall prize this doubly," he assured her.

That evening Lord Airlie placed the golden blossom carefully
away.  The time came when he would have parted with any treasure
on earth rather than that.

But his question had suddenly disturbed Beatrice.  For a moment
her thoughts flew to the sea shore at Knutsford.  The present
faded from her; she saw Hugh Fernely's face as it looked when he
offered her the beautiful lily.  The very remembrance of it made
her shudder as though seized with deathly cold--and Lord Airlie
saw it.

"You are cold," he said; "how careless I am to keep you standing
here!"  He helped her to draw the costly lace shawl around her
shoulders, and Beatrice was quickly herself again, and they
returned to the ball room; but Lord Airlie lingered by Miss
Earle.

"You have enjoyed the ball, Beatrice," said Lord Earle, as he
bade his daughters good night.

"I have, indeed, papa," she replied.  "This has been the happiest
evening of my life."

"I can guess why," thought Lord Earle, as he kissed the bright
face upraised to him; "there will be no wretched underhand love
business there."

He was not much surprised on the day following when Lord Airlie
was the first morning caller, and the last to leave, not going
until Lady Helena told him that they should all be at the opera
that evening and should perhaps see him there.  He regretted that
he had promised Lady Morton his box for the night, when Lady
Earle felt herself bound to ask him to join them in theirs.

All night Beatrice had dreamed of the true, noble face which
began to haunt her.  She, usually so regardless of all flattery,
remembered every word Lord Airlie had spoken.  Could it be true,
as Lady Everton had said, that he cared for her?

Her lover would have been spared many anxious hours could he have
seen how the golden blossoms were tended and cared for.  Long
afterward they were found with the little treasures which young
girls guard so carefully.

When Lord Airlie had taken his departure and Lord Earle found
himself alone with his mother, he turned to her with the happiest
look she had ever seen upon his face.

"That seems to me a settled affair," he said.  "Beatrice will
make a grand countess--Lady Airlie of Lynnton.  He is the finest
young fellow and the best match in England.  Ah, mother, my folly
might have been punished more severely.  There will no
mesalliance there."

"No," said Lady Earle, "I have no fears for Beatrice; she is too
proud ever to do wrong."


Chapter XXV

It was a pretty love story, although told in crowded London ball
rooms instead of under the shade of green trees.  Beatrice Earle
began by wondering if Lord Airlie cared for her; she ended by
loving him herself.

It was no child's play this time.  With Beatrice, to love once
was to love forever, with fervor and intensity which cold and
worldly natures can not even understand.

The time came when Lord Airlie stood out distinct from all the
world, when the sound of his name was like music, when she saw no
other face, heard no other voice, thought of nothing else save
him.  He began to think there might be some hope for him; the
proud, beautiful face softened and brightened for him as it did
for no other, and the glorious dark eyes never met his own, the
frank, bright words died away in his presence.  Seeing all these
things, Lord Airlie felt some little hope.

For the first time he felt proud and pleased with the noble
fortune and high rank that were his by birthright.  The harbor
of St. Augustine is a portion of the sea cut off by Anastasia
Island. Southward, the Matanzas River extends from the harbor; and
in all these waters there is fine fishing.

On the sea-beaches there is good bathing, for the water is not too
cold even in winter. St. Augustine is an attractive place at all
seasons of the year, and its three superb hotels--the Ponce
de Leon, the Alcazar, and the Cordova--are among the most celebrated
in America. In winter people come down from the North because its
air is so warm and pleasant, and in summer people from the
Southern States visit it because its sea-breezes are so cool and
refreshing.

It is a favorable resort for yachts, and in its wide, smooth harbor
may often be seen some of the most beautiful vessels of this
class.

St. Augustine is not only a delightful place in which to stay,
but it is easy to reach from there some points which are of great
interest to travelers.

The great St. John's River is only fourteen miles away, and is
connected with the town by a little railroad. At Tocoi, the river
terminus of the railroad, people who wish to penetrate into the
heart of Florida, with its great forests and lakes and beautiful
streams, can take a steamer and sail up the St. John's, which,
by the way, flows northward some two hundred miles. In some parts
the river is six miles wide, resembling a lake, and in its narrow
portions the shores are very beautiful.

About forty miles above Tocoi the Ocklawaha River runs into the
St.
John's, and there are few visitors to St. Augustine who do not
desire to take a trip up the little river which is in many respects
the most romantic and beautiful stream in the world.

At Tocoi we take a small steamboat which looks like a very narrow
two-story house mounted upon a little canal-boat, and in this we
go up the St. John's until we see on the right an opening in
the tree-covered banks. This is the mouth of the Ocklawaha, and,
entering it, we steam directly into the heart of one of the great
forests of Florida.

The stream is very narrow, and full of turns and bends. Indeed,
its name, which is Indian, signifies "crooked water"; and
sometimes the bow of the boat has even to be pushed around
by men with long poles. Of course we go slowly, but no one
objects to that, for we do not wish to hurry through such
scenery as this. On each side we see green trees with their thick
evergreen foliage, with vines and moss hanging from many of
them, and the ground beneath covered with the luxuriant shrubbery
which grows in these warm regions.

Sometimes we can see through the trees into the distant recesses
of the forest, and then again we are shut in by walls of foliage.
Now and then we may see an alligator sunning himself on a log,
and as our boat approaches he rolls over into the water and plumps
out of sight.

Water-turkeys, whose bodies are concealed in the bushes,
run out their long necks to look at us, presenting the appearance
of snakes darting from between the leaves; while curlews, herons,
and many other birds are seen on the banks and flying across the
river. In some places the stream widens, and in the shallower
portions near the banks grow many kinds of lilies, beautiful
reeds, and other water-plants. For long distances there is no
solid ground on either side of the river, the water penetrating
far into the forest and forming swamps.

Near the edge of the river we frequently see myriads of
tree-roots bent almost at right angles, giving the trees the
appearance of standing on spider-legs in the water.

Sometimes the forest opens overhead, but nearly all the way we are
covered by a roof of green, and at every turn appear new scenes of
beauty and luxuriance.

Occasionally the banks are moderately high, and we see long
stretches of solid ground covered with verdure. There is one spot
where two large trees stand, one on each bank, close to the
water, and the distance between the two is so small that
as our boat glides through this natural gateway there is scarcely
a foot of room to spare on either side.

Although the river is such a little one that we are apt to
think all the time we are sailing on it that we must soon come
to the end of its navigation, we go on more than a hundred miles
before we come to the place where we stop and turn back. The
trip up the Ocklawaha requires all the hours of a day and a great
part of a night; and this night trip is like a journey through
fairyland.

On the highest part of the boat is a great iron basket, into which,
as soon as it becomes dark, are thrown quantities of pine-knots.
These are lighted in order that the pilot may see how to steer.
The blazing of the resinous fuel lights up the forest for
long distances in every direction, and, as may easily be imagined,
the effect is wonderfully beautiful. When the fire blazes high
the scene is like an illuminated lacework of tree-trunks, vines,
leaves, and twigs, the smallest tendril shining out bright
and distinct; while through it all the river gleams like a
band of glittering silver.

Then, as the pine-knots gradually burn out, the illumination
fades and fades away until we think the whole glorious scene is
about to melt into nothing, when more sticks are thrown on, the
light blazes up again, and we have before us a new scene with
different combinations of illuminated foliage and water.

It often happens that during the night our little steamer crowds
itself to one side of the river and stops.

Then we may expect to see a splendid sight. Out of the dark depths
of the forest comes a glowing, radiant apparition, small at
first, but getting larger and larger until it moves down upon
us like a tangle of moon and stars drifting through the trees.

This is nothing but another little steamboat coming down the
river with its lighted windows and decks, and its blazing basket
of pine-knots.

There is just room enough for her to squeeze past us, and
then her radiance gradually fades away in the darkness
behind us.

[Illustration: FORT MARION--VIEW FROM WATER-BATTERY.]
We travel thus, night and day, until we reach Silver Springs,
which is the end of our journey. This is a small lake so transparent
that we can see down to the very bottom of it, and watch the turtles
and fishes as they swim about.

A silver coin or any small object thrown into the water may be
distinctly seen lying on the white sand far beneath us.

The land is high and dry about Silver Springs, and the passengers
generally go on shore and stroll through the woods for an hour or
two.

Then we reëmbark and return to St. Augustine as we came.

It must not be supposed that St. Augustine contains nothing but
buildings of the olden time.

Although many parts of the town are the same as they were in
the old Spanish days, and although we may even find the descendants
of the Minorcans who were once its principal citizens, the city
now contains many handsome modern dwellings and hotels, some of
which are exceptionally large and grand.

Hundreds of people from the North have come down to this city
of orange-scented air, eternal verdure, and invigorating
sea-breezes, and have built handsome houses; and during the winter
there is a great deal of bustle and life in the narrow streets, in
the Plaza, and on the sunny front of the town.

Many of the shops are of a kind only to be found in semi-tropical
towns by the sea, and have for sale bright-colored sea-beans,
ornaments made of fish-scales of every variety of hue, corals,
dried sea-ferns, and ever so many curiosities of the kind.

We may even buy, if we choose, some little black alligators, alive
and brisk and about a foot long.

As to fruit, we can get here the best oranges in the world, which
come from the Indian River in the southern part of Florida, and
many sorts of tropical fruits that are seldom brought to Northern
cities.

If St. Augustine were like most American cities, and had
been built by us or by our immediate ancestors, and presented an
air of newness and progress and business prosperity, its delightful
climate and its natural beauties would make it a most charming place
to visit.

But if we add to these attractions the fact that here alone we
can see a bit of the old world without leaving our young Republic,
and that in two or three days from the newness and busy din of New
York or Chicago we may sit upon the ramparts of a medieval fort,
and study the history of those olden days when the history of Spain,
England, and France was also the history of this portion of our own
land,--we cannot fail to admit that this little town of coquina
walls and evergreen foliage and traditions of old-world antiquity
occupies a position which is unique in the United States.

CATCHING TERRAPIN
BY ALFRED KAPPES

In the shoal waters along the coast south of Cape Henlopen,
terrapin are caught in various ways. Dredges dragged along in
the wake of a sailing vessel pick them up.

Nets stretched across some narrow arm of river or bay entangle
the feet of any stray terrapin in their meshes; but these
require the constant attendance of the fisherman to save the catch
from drowning.

In the winter, in the deeper water, the terrapin rise from their
muddy quarters on mild sunny days and crawl along the bottom.

They are then taken by tongs, their whereabouts being often
betrayed by bubbles.

The method shown in the drawing is resorted to only in the spring
and in water not over a foot or two in depth.

Turtles will rise at any noise, and usually the fisherman only claps
his hands, though each hunter has his own way of attracting the
terrapin.

One hunter whom I saw when I made the drawing uttered a queer
guttural noise that seemed to rise from his boots.

[Illustration: CATCHING TERRAPIN IN THE SPRING.]
Whatever the noise, all turtles within hearing--whether terrapin
or "snapper"--will put their heads above water.

Both are welcome and are quickly sold to the market-men. The
snapper slowly appears and disappears, leaving scarcely a
ripple; and the hunter cautiously approaching usually takes him
by the tail.

The terrapin, on the contrary, is quick, and will descend in an
oblique direction, so that a hand-net is needed unless he happens
to come up near by.

If he is near enough the man jumps for him. The time for hunting
is the still hour at either sunrise or sunset.

"LOCOED"
(_A story of a Texan girl._)

BY EDWARD MARSHALL

John Fredding had laughingly taken his sister Martha as a partner
in his Texas saddle store.

She made a good partner although she was only thirteen years old.
There were other women on the ranch (the saddle store was only
an adjunct of the big cattle-ranch itself), but the
grandmother was very old, and the servant-girl was Welsh and would
not learn to speak more English than was required in the daily
routine of housework.

Not far away was the town of Amarilla (pronounced Ah-ma-ree-ah).
There were plenty of women and girls there, but Martha knew none
of them well except the preacher's daughter, Scylla.

Martha and Scylla were great friends. They saw each other as often
as Martha could get time and permission to ride in to Amarilla.
Scylla could seldom visit the ranch, for she was an invalid.
When she had been a very little girl, a horse had kicked her.
She was ill for many weeks, and after the doctor had told her
parents that she would live, he had added that she might never
have full use of her right side again. It was partially
paralyzed.

But Martha was seldom lonely. For in the daytime there was
always something to do around the ranch or store. She had her
pet calf to attend to, for one thing. He was given to her by a
cow-boy who bought a saddle from her brother one day, and who cried
that evening when Martha played "Home, Sweet Home" for him on her
guitar.

The calf was in several respects remarkable. In the first place,
he was almost black--an unusual thing among Texas cattle. In the
second place, he was not quite black, for he had a white spot
on his forehead shaped almost exactly like Martha's guitar.

That was why they called him "Gitter."

In the third place, Martha had taught him several tricks. He had
learned to low three times when he was thirsty, and twice when
he was hungry; he would stand on his hind legs and paw the
air with his front legs for a moment when Martha cried,
"Up, Gitter!" and he would lie down and roll over on the grass
when she commanded "Down, Gitter!" She had a cat that
would climb up on her shoulder whenever he got the chance, and
a clever dog that liked the cat. She had two horses, also. One
of them was an ordinary "cow-pony," but the other was a big
black Spanish horse who seemed to love Martha as well as she loved
him.

When she was on his back he never varied his long, swinging,
graceful gallop by jumping or shying, but if any one else rode
him, he was apt to make them hold fast when he went around corners.

His name was "Dan." Martha thought almost as much of the cow-pony,
though, as she did of Dan, and called him "Texas," after the
great State she lived in.

Her brother, too, did many things to make her happy.

In the long winter evenings he often read to her for hours, or
taught her new airs on the guitar, of which he was a master; and
sometimes, when summer came, they took long rides off on the prairie
together.

These occurred when there was a band of cow-boys camped near by,
and John generally combined business with pleasure by talking with
them about cattle and saddles.

But that did not detract at all from Martha's enjoyment of the
rides.
She always carried her guitar swung over her shoulder by a strap
when she went out with her brother to see the cow-boys.

[Illustration: "SOMETIMES WHEN SUMMER CAME THEY TOOK LONG RIDES
ON THE PRAIRIE TOGETHER."]
The little girl's life was a queer one, but then, she was a queer
little girl and among queer people. For instance, there was
"Mister Jim," who came up to the store every few weeks to lay
in supplies. Mister Jim was one of the men who were hired to
keep wild animals out of the Cañon. The Cañon was a favorite
place for Amarilla's excursions and picnics, and was very beautiful;
but it communicated with other cañons into which picnics could never
penetrate, and in which there were wild beasts of many kinds.

To prevent these unpleasant visitors from wandering where they
were not wanted, men were stationed at various places to shoot
them.

Mister Jim was the one nearest to Martha's home, and he was
Martha's stanch friend. He never went to the ranch without some
gift for her--the soft pelt of an animal he had shot, the gay wings
of a strange bird, or some crystal or stone he had found in his
explorations of the Cañon.

Martha returned his admiration. He lived in a cave, and that
interested her--she thought she might like to try it herself
some time.
She considered his clothes very grand and impressive. In the
Cañon he wore a leather suit; but when he visited the ranch he was
always dressed in black velvet trimmed with gold braid, and wore a
high, pointed hat wound with red ribbons like those of the
seldom-appearing Mexican cow-boys, only much finer.

But the "loco men" were Martha's favorites. There were three
of them--Big Billy, Little Billy, and One-eyed Saylo. Why Saylo
was called "one-eyed" was a mystery, for he had two of the very
best eyes for spying the hated loco-weed ever known in that
region.

Loco-weed grows, when unmolested, to a height of sixteen or
eighteen inches, and its queer leaves shine and sparkle in the
sunlight like silver and crystals.
Its effects on horses or cattle that happen to eat it are worse
than deadly. One good, big meal of loco-weed will ruin an animal
forever.

A locoed horse, once locoed, is locoed until he dies. Apparently
he may recover wholly, but he is not a safe animal to
ride, for at any moment he may stagger and fall, or go suddenly
mad. A locoed horse is almost certain to show it when he
becomes heated by rapid traveling or hard work. The great
danger from locoed cattle is, that they will begin to tumble around
in the midst of a herd and frighten their fellows into a stampede.

As it can work such ruin, in order to avoid the danger of having
their animals locoed, the ranchmen, in those regions where the
weed is plentiful, hire men to search for it, cut it down, and
destroy it.

Of these men who make their living in searching for the dreaded
loco-weed and destroying it wherever found were Big Billy, Little
Billy, and One-eyed Saylo.

One summer night John told Martha to get her guitar, while he saddled
Texas and his own pony for a ride.

In a few moments they were galloping over the prairie on their
way to a cow-boy camp about three miles away.
When they reached it, they found all the five men, but one,
rolled up from top to toe in their tarpaulins, and asleep on
the prairie. The one who was awake welcomed them in effusive
cow-boy style, and then with a "Wake up, you-uns! Yar's John
Fredding an' 'is little woman!" kicked each of his sleeping
companions into consciousness with his foot. They were all
glad to see John and Martha, for they knew them of old.

In the twinkling of an eye the smoldering fire was livened into a
cheery blaze, the visitors' ponies were picketed, and the men were
grouped around Martha and the fire.

For a little while John talked business with them; but,
before long, one of the men arose and, deferentially taking
off his broad hat to Martha, asked her if she wouldn't give
them a "chune."

The music of her guitar was indescribably sweet, there in the little
oasis of light in the prairie's desert of darkness, and for a time
the men sat silently, with their hands clasped about their knees,
enjoying it.

Then she struck into a rollicking cow-boy song, and they joined
in shouting it out. It is a favorite among the cow-boys of southern
Texas, and begins thus:

I'd rather hear a rattler rattle, I'd rather do a Greaser battle,
I'd rather buck stampeding cattle, Than Than to Than to fight Than
to fight the bloody In-ji-ans.

I'd rather eat a pan of dope, I'd rather ride without a rope, I'd
rather from this country lope, Than Than to Than to fight
Than to fight the bloody In-ji-ans.

After that came "I'm Gwine Back to Dixie," and "'Way Down Upon the
Suwanee River," and then John said it was time to start home
again.

Loud were the protests of the cow-boys, and when John and Martha
went, the whole party went with them except one man, who was left
to watch the cattle. They were "full of sing," as one of them put
it, and it was a jolly ride back to the ranch.

When it was finally reached, the cow-boys gave them a "send-off"
that could have been heard a mile away.

They shouted and yelled like the wild "In-ji-ans" they had sung
about, and as they wheeled around to gallop back to camp, they
fired all the charges in their revolvers into the air as a parting
courtesy.

Then there was a mad scamper of horses' hoofs, the yells grew
fainter, and the cow-boys were gone.

When John went into the house he found two letters which had been
brought up by some passing friend from Amarilla.

One of them was from an old schoolmate of his, who had become
a professor in a Northern college, asking for some loco-weed,
to be added to the college botanical collection. The other was
from Scylla's father, saying that if it would be convenient
he would bring his little daughter out to the ranch in a few days
for a long-promised visit to Martha.

This second letter sent Martha to bed a very happy little girl.

Several days passed before Scylla arrived at the ranch; but
when she did come there was great rejoicing.

After she was comfortably ensconced in her wheeled chair on
the porch, she held a mimic reception.

   John and Martha did the honors, and every human being within call
was introduced to the little invalid.

In the store there were a dozen leather-decked cow-boys, and
Scylla felt quite like a queen as each one scrambled up to her,
and with his broad sombrero in one hand took her tiny fingers
in the other as he turned red and tried to say something
polite. Nor did her impromptu court end with that. After the
introductions were over, all the visitors sat down on the porch
or the grass before it, while Martha exhibited her pets to her
friend.

Gitter, the calf, was put through all his tricks, the cat was placed
in Scylla's poor little arms, where he purred contentedly,
and the dog chased sticks thrown by whoever could find any to
throw. After Gitter had been led away, Martha came up from
the stables with her two horses--Texas and Dan. Big black Dan was
inclined to frisk a bit and jump about at the unusual scene; but
little Texas worked his way right into Scylla's heart by marching
steadily and straight up to her, despite Martha's laughing pulls
on the lariat looped about his neck.

With ears pricked forward, he made friendly overtures to the
new-comer on the spot. He poked his nose into her lap and rubbed
it against her hands and ate sugar from her fingers.

[Illustration: MARTHA RIDES DAN OVER THE HURDLE.]

"Oh, I wish I could ride him!" said Scylla.

"He never was so cordial before, not even with me," said
Martha.

Then she suddenly thought of something, and after intrusting her
horses to one of the cow-boys, went and talked it over in whispers
with her brother, Scylla's father, and the doctor, who had been
discussing politics together on one end of the porch.

After this mysterious conversation had lasted a little while,
Martha danced back to Scylla, so happy that she "just _had_ to
hop."

"Oh, Scylla!" she exclaimed, "you _can_ ride him. Your papa says
so and the doctor says so and Brother says so. John is going
to fix up one of my saddles for you with an extra strap to keep
you from falling, and Texas likes you so much he will be gentle
and careful as he can be, I know. And the doctor says he thinks
it will do you good, if John and I keep close by you all the time,
so there won't be any danger."

The following days at the ranch were very pleasant ones for Martha
and her visitor. In the morning after the work was done--Martha
always did some of the light house duties--they would watch with
never-flagging interest the great herds of cattle as they were
driven on their way for shipment from Amarilla, and gossip as girls
do. Sometimes the cattle passed quite near to the house, but oftener
they were half a mile or more away on the prairie--sometimes
so far that the great herds seemed to be mere black blots moving
over the dun brown of the Texas grass.

Every afternoon the two girls went riding, escorted either by
John or one of the men employed about the ranch. John had fixed
one of Martha's saddles so that poor little Scylla could not fall,
and Texas seemed to bear his tiny burden with more than ordinary
care.

At first they rode very slowly, and for only a few moments at
a time; but Scylla gained strength daily, and by the end of the
second week had improved so much that she could ride for an hour
without great fatigue, and Texas was occasionally allowed to start
his gentle gallop.

It was as they were returning from one of these rides that
Scylla's sharp eyes spied the figure of a horseman rushing
out to them from the ranch. He waved his hat and yelled, firing
his revolver between whoops and generally conducted himself like
a madman.

Martha recognized him at once.

"It's One-eyed Saylo," she said.

"He always acts like that--he thinks it wouldn't be showing
proper respect to a lady unless he wasted half a dozen
cartridges and showed off his horsemanship."
He did not like
Scotland, and was as homeless as a wealthy young peer with
several estates could well be.  I allowed him to bewilder himself
with confused excuses and blunders, and then asked him to join us
at Earlescourt.  He almost 'jumped for joy,' as the children say.
He will follow us in a week or ten days.  Lionel will come with
us."

"I am very pleased," said Lady Earle.  "Next to you, Ronald, I
love Lionel Dacre; his frank, proud, fearless disposition has a
great charm for me.  He is certainly like Beatrice.  How he
detests everything false, just as she does!"

"Yes," said Ronald, gravely; "I am proud of my children.  There
is no taint of untruth or deceit there, mother; they are worthy
of their race.  I consider Beatrice the noblest girl I have ever
known; and I love my sweet Lily just as well."

"You would not like to part with them now?" said Lady Earle.

"I would sooner part with my life!" he replied.  "I am not given
to strong expressions, mother, but even you could never guess how
my life is bound up in theirs."

"Then let me say one word, Ronald," said his mother; "remember
Dora loves them as dearly and as deeply as you do.  Just think
for a moment what it has cost her to give them up to you!  She
must see them soon, with your full consent and permission.  They
can go to her if you will."

"You are right, mother," he said, after a few minutes.  "They are
Dora's children, and she ought to see them; but they must not
return to that farm house--I can not bear the thought of it.
Surely they can meet on neutral ground--at your house, say, or
in London; and let it be at Christmas."

"It had better be in London," said Lady Helena.  "I will write to
Dora, and tell her.  The very anticipation of it will make her
happy until the time arrives--she loves the children so dearly."

And again a softened thought of Dora came to her husband.  Of
course she loved them.  The little villa at Florence rose before
him; he saw vividly, as though he had left it but yesterday, the
pretty vine-shaded room where Dora used to sit nursing the little
ones.  He remembered her sweet patience, her never-failing,
gentle love.  Had he done right to wound that sad heart afresh by
taking those children from her?  Was it a just and fitting reward
for the watchful love and care of those lonely years?

He would fain have pardoned her, but he could not; and he said to
himself again: "In the hour of death! I will forgive her then."

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

The glowing August, so hot and dusty in London, was like a dream
of beauty at Earlescourt.  The tall trees gave grateful shelter,
baffling the sun's warm rays; the golden corn stood in the broad
fields ready for the sickle; the hedge-rows were filled with
flowers.  The beech trees in the park were in full perfection.
Fruit hung ripe and heavy in the orchards.  It was no longer the
blossoming promise of spring, but the perfect glory of summer.

For many long years Earlescourt had not been so gay.  The whole
country-side rang with fashionable intelligence.  The house was
filled with visitors, Lord Airlie heading the list.  Lionel
Dacre, thinking but little of the time when the grand old place
would be his own, was full of life and spirits.

Long arrears of hospitalities and festivities had to be repaid to
the neighborhood.  Beatrice and Lillian had to make their debut
there.  Lady Helena decided upon commencing the programme with a
grand dinner party, to be followed by a ball in the evening.
Ronald said something about the weather being warm for dancing.

"We danced in London, papa," said Beatrice, "when the heat was so
great that I should not have felt any surprise if the whole
roomful of people had dissolved.  Here we have space--large,
cool rooms, fresh air, a conservatory as large as a London house;
it will be child's play in comparison with what we have gone
through."

"Miss Earle is quite right," said Lord Airlie.  "A ball during
the season in London is a toil; here it would be nothing but a
pleasure."

"Then a ball let it be," said Lord Earle.  "Lillian, make out a
list of invitations, and head it with Sir Harry and Lady Laurence
of Holtham Hall.  That reminds me, their eldest son, Gaspar, came
home yesterday from Germany; do not forget to include him."

"Little Gaspar," cried Lady Helena--"has he returned?  I should
like to see him."

"Little Gaspar," said Lord Earle, laughing, "is six feet high
now, mother.  You forget how time flies; he is taller than
Lionel, and a fine, handsome young fellow he is.  He will be
quite an acquisition."

Lord Earle was too much engrossed to remark the uneasiness his
few words had caused.  Lord Airlie winced at the idea of a rival
a handsome man, and sentimental, too, as all those people
educated in Germany are!

"I can not understand what possesses English people to send their
sons abroad for education," he said to Beatrice--"and to Germany
of all places in the world."

"Why should they not?" she asked.

"The people are so absurdly sentimental," he replied.  "Whenever
I see a man with long hair and dreamy eyes, I know he is a
German."

"You are unjust," said Beatrice, as she left him to join Lillian.

"You are jealous," said Lionel, who had overheard the
conversation.  "Look out for a rival in the lists, my lord."

"I wish this tiresome ball were over," sighed Lord Airlie.  "I
shall have no chance of speaking while it is on the tapis."

But he soon forgot his chagrin.  The formidable Gaspar appeared
that very morning, and, although Lord Airlie could perceive that
he was at once smitten with Beatrice's charms, he also saw that
she paid no heed whatever to the new-comer; indeed, after a few
words of courteous greeting, she returned to the point under
discussion--what flowers would look best in the ball room.

"If we have flowers at all," she said, imperiously, "let them be
a gorgeous mass of bloom--something worth looking at; not a few
pale blossoms standing here and there like 'white sentinels'; let
us have flowers full of life and fragrance.  Lillian, you know
what I mean; you remember Lady Manton's flowers--tier after tier
of magnificent color."

"You like to do everything en reine, Beatrice," said Lady Helena,
with a well-pleased smile.

"If you have not flowers sufficient, Miss Earle," said Lord
Airlie, "I will send to Lynnton.  My gardener considers himself a
past master of his art."

"My dear Lord Airlie," said Lady Earle, "we have flowers in
profusion.  You have not been through the conservatories. It
would while away the morning pleasantly for you all.  Beatrice,
select what flowers you will, and have them arranged as you
like."

"See," said the triumphant beauty, "what a grand thing a strong
will is!  Imagine papa's saying he thought thirty or forty plants
in full flower would be sufficient!  We will surprise him.  If
the gardener loses his reason, as Lady Earle seems to think
probable, he must be taken care of."

Lord Airlie loved Beatrice best in such moods; imperious and
piquant, melting suddenly into little gleams of tenderness, then
taking refuge in icy coldness and sunny laughter.  Beautiful,
dazzling, capricious, changing almost every minute, yet charming
as she changed, he would not have bartered one of her proudest
smiles or least words for anything on earth.

He never forgot that morning spent among the flowers.  It was a
glimpse of elysium to him.  The way in which Beatrice contrived
to do as she liked amused him; her face looked fairer than ever
among the blooming flowers.

"There is the bell for lunch," she said at last.  "We have been
here nearly three hours."

"Most of your attendants look slightly deranged," said Lionel.
"I am sure I saw poor Donald weeping over his favorite plants.
He told me confidentially they would be fit for nothing after the
heat of the ball room."

"I shall invent some means of consolation for him," she replied.
"I like dancing among the bright flowers.  Why should we not have
everything gay and bright and beautiful, if we can?"

"Why not?" said Lionel, gravely.  "Ah, Miss Earle, why are we not
always young and beautiful and happy?  Why must flowers die,
beauty fade, love grow old?  Ask a philosopher--do not ask me.
I know the answer, but let some one else give it to you."

"Philosophy does not interest me at present," she said.  "I like
flowers, music, and dancing better.  I hope I shall never tire of
them; sometimes--but that is only when I am serious or tired--I
feel that I shall never live to grow old.  I can not imagine my
eyes dim or my hair gray.  I can not imagine my heart beating
slowly.  I can not realize a day when the warmth and beauty of
life will have changed into cold and dullness."

Even as she spoke a gentle arm stole round her, a fair,
spirituelle face, eyes full of clear, saintly light looked into
hers, and a soft voice whispered to her of something not earthly,
not of flowers and music, not of life and gayety, something far
beyond these, and the proud eyes for a moment grew dim with
tears.

"Lily," she said, "I am not so good as you, but I will endeavor
to be.  Let me enjoy myself first, just for a short time; I will
be good, dear."

Her mood changed then, and Lord Airlie thought her more
entrancing than ever.

"That is the kind of wife I want," thought Lionel Dacre to
himself, looking at Lillian--"some one to guide me, to teach me.
Ah, if women only understood their mission!  That girl looked as
I can imagine only guardian angels look--I wish she would be
mine."

Lord Airlie left the conservatory, with its thousand flowers,
more in love than ever.

He would wait, he said to himself, until the ball was over; then
he would ask Beatrice Earle to be his wife.  If she refused him,
he would go far away where no one knew him; if she accepted him,
he would be her devoted slave.  She should be a queen, and he
would be her knight.

Ah!  What thanks would he return to Heaven if so great a blessing
should be his.


Chapter XXVIII

Lord Airlie muttered something that was not a benediction when,
on the morning following, Gaspar Laurence made his appearance at
Earlescourt.

"We can not receive visitors this morning," said Beatrice, half
impatiently.  "Mr. Laurence must have forgotten the ball
tonight."

But Mr. Laurence had forgotten nothing of the kind.  It was a
delicious morning, the sun shining brightly and clearly, the
westerly breeze blowing fresh and cool.  He had thought it likely
that the young ladies would spend the morning out-of-doors, and
begged permission to join them.

Lady Earle was pleased with the idea.  Lord Airlie mentioned
something about fatigue, but he was overruled.

"Stroll in the grounds," said Lady Helena; "go down by the lake;
I will join you there afterward.  A few hours in the fresh air
will be the best preparation for the ball."

They went together.  Gaspar's preference soon became apparent 
he would not leave Beatrice, and Lord Airlie devotedly wished him
at the antipodes.

They sat down under the shade of a tall lady-birch, the deep,
sunlit lake shining through the trees.  Then Gaspar, taking a
little book in his hands, asked:

"Have you read 'Undine,' Miss Earle--Fonque's 'Undine?'"

"No," she replied; "I am half ashamed to say so."

"It is the sweetest, saddest story ever written," he continued.
"This is just the morning for it.  May I read it to you?"

There was a general and pleased murmur of assent.  Lord Airlie
muttered to himself that he knew the fellow would air his German
sentiment--at their expense.

Still it was very pleasant.  There was a gentle ripple on the
deep lake, the water washed among the tall reeds, and splashed
with a faint, musical murmur on the stones; the thick leafy
branches rustled in the wind; the birds sang in the trees.

Gaspar Laurence read well; his voice was clear and distinct; not
a word of the beautiful story was lost.

Beatrice listened like one in a dream.  Her proud, bright face
softened, her magnificent eyes grew tender and half sad.  Gaspar
read on--of the fair and lovely maiden, of the handsome young
knight and his love, of the water sprite, grim old Kuhlehorn, and
the cottage where Undine dwelt, of the knight's marriage, and
then of proud, beautiful Bertha.

The rippling of the lake and the singing of the birds seemed like
an accompaniment to the words, so full of pathos.  Then Gaspar
came to Bertha's love for the knight--their journey on the river
to the huge hand rising and snatching the jewel from Undine's
soft fingers, while the knight's love grew cold.

Even the waters of the lake seemed to sob and sigh as Gaspar read
on of sweet, sad Undine and of her unhappy love, of Bertha's
proud triumph, her marriage with the knight, and the last, most
beautiful scene of all--Undine rising from the unsealed fountain
and going to claim her love.

"How exquisite!" said Beatrice, drawing a long, deep breath. "I
did not know there was such a story in the world.  That is indeed
a creation of genius.  I shall never forget Undine."

Her eyes wandered to the sweet spirituelle face and fair golden
hair of her sister.  Lionel Dacre's glance followed hers.

"I know what you are thinking of," he said--"Miss Lillian is a
perfect Undine.  I can fancy her, with clasped hands and sad
eyes, standing between the knight and Bertha, or rising with
shadowy robes from the open fountain."

"It is a beautiful creation," said Beatrice, gently.  "Lillian
would be an ideal Undine--she is just as gentle, as fair, as
true.  I am like Bertha, I suppose; at least I know I prefer my
own way and my own will."

"You should give some good artist a commission to paint a
picture," said Lord Airlie.  "Choose the scene in the boat 
Undine bending over the water, a dreamy expression on her fair
face; Bertha sitting by the knight, proud, bright, and half
scornful of her companion.  Imagine the transparent water 
Undine's little hand half lost in it, and the giant fingers
clasping hers.  I wonder that an artist has never painted that
scene."

"Who would do for the knight?" said Beatrice.  "Lillian and I
will never dispute over a knight."

"Artists would find some difficulty in that picture," said
Lillian.  "How could one clothe a beautiful ideal like Undine?
Sweeping robes and waving plumes might suit Bertha; but how could
one depict Undine?"

"The knight is the difficulty," laughed Lionel.

"Why should we not go out on the lake now?" said Gaspar; "I will
row."

"I have been wishing for the last ten minutes," replied Beatrice,
"to be upon the lake.  I want to put my hand in the water and see
what comes."

Gaspar was not long in getting a pleasure boat out of the boat
house.  Lionel managed to secure a seat near his Undine, and Lord
Airlie by his Beatrice.

It was even more pleasant on the water than on the land; the boat
moved easily along, the fresh, clear breeze helping it.

"Steer for those pretty water lilies," said Beatrice, "they look
so fresh and shining in the sun."

And as they floated over the water, her thoughts went back to
that May morning when Lillian sat upon the cliffs and sketched
the white far-off sails.  How distant it seemed!  She longed then
for life.  Now every sweet gift which life could bestow was here,
crowned with love.  Yet she sighed as Hugh Fernely's face rose
before her.  If she could but forget it!  After all it had been
on her side but a mockery of love.  Yet another sigh broke from
her lips, and then Lord Airlie looked anxiously at her.

"Does anything trouble you, Miss Earle?" he asked.  "I never
remember to have seen you so serious before."

She looked for a moment wistfully into his face.  Ah, if he could
help her, if he could drive this haunting memory from her, if
ever it could be that she might tell him of this her trouble and
ask him to save her from Hugh Fernely!  But that was impossible.
Almost as though in answer to her thought, Gaspar Laurence began
to tell them of an incident that had impressed him.  A gentleman,
a friend of his, after making unheard-of sacrifices to marry a
lady who was both beautiful and accomplished, left her suddenly,
and never saw her again, the reason being that he discovered that
she had deceived him by telling him a willful lie before her
marriage.  Gaspar seemed to think she had been hardly used.  Lord
Airlie and Lionel differed from him.

"I am quite sure," said Lord Airlie, "that I could pardon
anything sooner than a lie; all that is mean, despicable, and
revolting to me is expressed in the one word, 'liar.'  Sudden
anger, passion, hot revenge--anything is more easily forgiven.
When once I discover that a man or woman has told me a lie, I
never care to see their face again."

"I agree with you," said Lionel; "perhaps I even go further.  I
would never pardon an air of deceit; those I love must be
straightforward, honest, and sincere always." 

"Such a weight of truth might sink the boat," said Beatrice,
carelessly; but Lord Airlie's words had gone straight to her
heart.  If he only knew.  But he never would.  And again she
wished that in reply to her father's question she had answered
truthfully.

The time came when Lillian remembered Mr. Dacre's words, and knew
they had not been spoken in vain.

Beatrice had taken off her glove, and drew her hand trough the
cool, deep water; thinking intently of the story she had just
heard--of Undine and the water-sprites--she leaned over the
boat's side and gazed into the depths.  The blue sky and white
fleecy clouds, the tall green trees and broad leaves, were all
reflected there.  There was a strange, weird fascination in the
placid water--what went on in the depths beneath?  What lay
beneath the ripples?  Suddenly she drew back with a startled cry
a cry that rang out in the clear summer air, and haunted Lord
Airlie while he lived.  He looked at her; her face had grown
white, even to the very lips, and a nameless, awful dread lay in
her dark eyes.

"What is it?" he asked, breathlessly.  She recovered herself with
a violent effort, and tried to smile.

"How foolish I am!" she said; "and what is worse you will all
laugh at me.  It was sheer fancy and nonsense, I know; but I
declare that looking down into the water, I saw my own face there
with such a wicked, mocking smile that it frightened me."

"It was the simple reflection," said Lionel Dacre. "I can see
mine.  Look again, Miss Earle."

"No," she replied, with a shudder; "it is only nonsense, I know,
but it startled me.  The face seemed to rise from the depths and
smile--oh, oh, such a smile!  When shall I forget it?"

"It was only the rippling of the water which distorted the
reflection," said Lord Airlie.

Beatrice made no reply, but drew her lace shawl around her as
though she were cold.

"I do not like the water," she said presently; "it always
frightens me.  Let us land, Mr. Laurence, please.  I will never
go on the lake again."

Gaspar laughed, and Mr. Dacre declared Beatrice had had too
strong a dose of Undine and the water-sprites.  Lord Airlie felt
her hand tremble as he helped her to leave the boat.  He tried to
make her forget the incident by talking of the ball and the
pleasure it would bring.  She talked gayly, but every now and
then he saw that she shuddered as though icily cold.

When they were entering the house she turned round, and, in her
charming, imperious way, said:

"None of you must tell papa about my fright.  I should not like
him to think that an Earle could be either fanciful or a coward.
I am brave enough on land."

The heat had tried both girls, and Lady Helena said they must
rest before dinner.  She made Beatrice lie down upon the cosy
little couch in her dressing room.  She watched the dark eyes
close, and thought how beautiful the young face looked in repose.

But the girl's sleep was troubled.  Lady Earle, bending over her,
heard her sigh deeply and murmur something about the "deep
water." She awoke, crying out that she saw her own face, and Lady
Earle saw great drops of perspiration standing in beads upon her
brow.

"What have you been dreaming of, child?" she asked.  "Young girls
like you ought to sleep like flowers."

"Flowers never quite close their eyes," said Beatrice, with a
smile.  "I shut mine, but my brain is active, it seems, even in
sleep.  I was dreaming of the lake, Lady Helena.  Dreams are very
wonderful; do they ever come true?"

"I knew one that did," replied Lady Earle.  "When I was young, I
had a friend whom I loved very dearly--Laura Reardon.  A
gentleman, a Captain Lemuel, paid great attention to her.  She
loved him--my poor Laura--as I hope few people love.  For many
months he did everything but make an offer--saw her ever day,
sent her flowers, books, and music, won her heart by a thousand
sweet words and gentle deeds.  She believed he was in earnest,
and never suspected him of being a male flirt.  He left London,
suddenly, saying goodbye to her in the ordinary way, and speaking
of his return in a few weeks.

"She came to me one morning and told me a strange dream.  She
dreamed she was dead, and lay buried in the center aisle of an
old country church.  At the same time, and in the usual vague
manner of dreams, she was conscious of an unusual stir.  She
heard carriages drive up to the church door; she heard the
rustling of dresses, the sound of footsteps above her head, the
confused murmur of a crowd of people; then she became aware that
a marriage was going on.  She heard the minister ask:

"'George Victor Lemuel, will you have this woman for your lawful
wedded wife?'

"The voice she knew and loved best in the world replied:

"'I will.'

"'Alice Ferrars, will you take this man for your lawful wedded
husband?"

"'I will,' replied the clear, low voice.

"She heard the service finished, the wedding bells peal, the
carriages drive away.  I laughed at her, Beatrice; but the
strange thing is, Captain George Lemuel was married on the very
day Laura dreamed the dream.  He married a young lady, Alice
Ferrars, and Laura had never heard of the name before she dreamed
it.  The marriage took place in an old country church.  That
dream came true, Beatrice; I never heard of another dream like
it."

"Did your friend die?" she asked.

"No," replied Lady Helena; "she did not die, but her life was
spoiled by her unhappy love."

"I should have died had it been my disappointment," said
Beatrice; "the loss of what one loves must be more bitter than
death."

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

Far and near nothing was spoken of but the ball at Earlescourt.
Anything so brilliant or on so grand a scale had not been given
in the county for many years.

Lord Earle felt proud of the arrangements as he looked through
the ball room and saw the gorgeous array of flowers, tier upon
tier of magnificent bloom, a sight well worth coming many miles
to see.  Here and there a marble statue stood amid the flowers.
Little fountains of scented water rippled musically.  He stopped
for a few moments looking at the blossoms and thinking of his
beautiful child.

"How she loves everything bright and gay!" he said to himself.
"She will be queen of the ball tonight."

As Lord Earle stood alone in his library that evening, where he
had been reading, stealing a quiet half hour, there came a gentle
knock at the door.

"Come in," he said, and there stood before him something that he
thought must be a vision.

"Grandmamma sent me," said Beatrice, blushing, "to see if I
should do.  You are to notice my diamonds, papa, and tell me if
you approve of the setting."

As he looked at the radiant figure a sense of wonder stole over
him.  Could this magnificent beauty really be Dora's daughter--
Dora who had stained her pretty hand with strawberry juice so
many years ago?

He knew nothing of the details of the dress, he saw only the
beautiful face and glorious eyes, the crowns of waving hair, the
white, stately neck and exquisite arms.  Before him was a gleam
of pale pink satin, shrouded with lace so fine and delicate that
it looked like a fairy web; and the Earle diamonds were not
brighter than the dark eyes.  They became the wearer well.  They
would have eclipsed a fair, faded beauty; they added radiance to
Beatrice's.

"Where is Lillian?" he asked; and she knew from the tone of his
voice how proud and satisfied he was.

"I am here, papa," said a gentle voice.  "I wanted you to see
Beatrice first."

Lord Earle hardly knew which to admire the more.  Lillian looked
so fair and graceful; the pure, spiritual face and tender eyes
had new beauty; the slender, girlish figure contrasted well with
the stately dignity of Beatrice.

"I hope it will be a happy evening for you both," he said.

"I feel sure it will for me," said Beatrice, with a smile.  "I am
thoroughly happy, and am looking forward to the ball with
delight."

Lord Earle smiled half sadly as he gazed at her bright face,
wondering whether, in years to come, it would be clouded or
shadowed.

"Will you dance, papa?" asked Beatrice, with a gleam of mischief
in her dark eyes.

"I think not," he replied; and Ronald Earle's thoughts went back
to the last time he had ever danced--with Valentine Charteris.
He remembered it well.  Ah, no!  All those pleasant, happy days
were over for him.


Chapter XXIX

The dinner party was over, and carriage after carriage rolled up
to the Hall; the rooms began to fill; there was a faint sound of
music, a murmur of conversation and laughter.

"You have not forgotten your promise to me, Miss Earle?" said
Lord Airlie. "I am to have the first dance and the last,
certainly, and as many more as you can spare."

"I have not forgotten," replied Beatrice.  She was never quite at
her ease with him, although she loved him better than any one
else on earth.  There was ever present with her the consciousness
that she did so love him, and the wonder whether he cared for
her.

They opened the ball, and many significant comments were made
upon the fact.  Gaspar Laurence was present.  He was deeply
engaged for more than two hours in making up his mind whether he
should ask Beatrice to dance with him or not--she looked so
beautiful, so far above him.  Gaspar could not help loving her--
that was impossible; the first moment he saw her he was
entranced.  But his was a humble, hopeless kind of adoration.  He
would sooner have dreamed of wooing and winning a royal princess
than of ever asking Beatrice to be his wife.

At length he summoned up courage, and was rewarded by a bright
smile and kind words.  Poor Gaspar!  When the beautiful face was
near him, and her hand rested on his shoulder, he thought he must
be dreaming.

"There," he said, when the dance was over; "I shall not dance
again.  I should not like to lose the memory of that waltz."

"Why not?" she asked, wonderingly.

"I must be candid with you," said Gaspar, sadly.  "Perhaps my
confession is a vain one; but I love you, Miss Earle--so dearly
that the ground on which you stand is sacred to me."

"That is not a very timid declaration," said Beatrice with a
smile.  "You are courageous, Mr. Laurence.  I have only seen you
three times."

"It would make no difference," said Gaspar, "whether I had seen
you only once, or whether I met you every day.  I am not going to
pain you, Miss Earle.  Think kindly of me--I do not ask more;
only remember that living in this world there is one who would
stand between you and all peril--who would sacrifice his life
for you.  You will not forget?"

"I will not,"said Beatrice, firmly.  "Never could I forget such
words.  I am willing to be your friend--I know how to value
you."

"I shall be happier with your friendship than with the love of
any other woman," said Gaspar, gratefully.

Just then Lord Earle came and took Mr. Laurence away.  Beatrice
stood where he had left her, half screened from sight by the
luxuriant foliage and magnificent flowers of a rare American
plant.  There was a thoughtful, tender expression on her face
that softened it into wondrous beauty.  She liked Gaspar, and was
both pleased and sorry that he loved her.  Very pleasant was this
delicious homage of love--pleasant was it to know that strong,
brave, gifted men laid all they had in the world at her feet--to
know that her looks, smiles, and words moved them as nothing else
could.

Yet she was sorry for Gaspar.  It must be sad to give all one's
love and expect no return.  She would be his friend, but she
could never be anything more.  She could give him her sincere
admiration and esteem, but not her love.

The proud, beautiful lips quivered, and the bright eyes grew dim
with tears.  No, not her love--that was given, and could never
be recalled; in all the wide world, from among all men's, Lord
Airlie's face stood out clear and distinct.  Living or dying,
Lord Earle's daughter knew she could care for no other man.

She had taken in her hand one of the crimson flowers of the plant
above her, and seemed lost in contemplating it.  She saw neither
the blossom nor the leaves.  She was thinking of Lord Airlie's
face, and the last words he had said to her, when suddenly a
shadow fell before her, and looking up hastily, she saw him by
her side.  He appeared unlike himself, pale and anxious.

"Beatrice," said he, "I must speak with you.  Pray come with me,
away from all these people.  I can bear this suspense no longer."

She looked at him, and would have refused; but she saw in his
face that which compelled obedience.  For Lord Airlie had watched
Gaspar Laurence--he had watched the dance and the interview that
followed it.  He saw the softened look on her face, and it half
maddened him.  For the first time in his life Lord Airlie was
fiercely jealous.  He detested this fair-haired Gaspar, with his
fund of German romance and poetry.

Could it be that he would win the prize he himself would have
died to secure?  What was he saying to her that softened the
expression on her face?  What had he said that left her standing
there with a tender light in her dark eyes which he had never
seen before?  He could not bear the suspense; perhaps a ball room
might not be the most appropriate place for an offer of marriage,
but he must know his fate, let it be what it might.  He went up
to her and made his request.

"Where are you going?" asked Beatrice, suddenly, for Lord Airlie
had walked rapidly through the suite of rooms, crowded with
people, and through the long conservatory.

"We are not alone," he replied.  "See, Lady Laurence and Mr.
Gresham prefer the rose garden here to those warm rooms.  I must
speak with you, Miss Earle.  Let me speak now."

They stood in the pretty garden, where roses of varied hues hung
in rich profusion; the air was heavy with perfume.  The moon
shone brightly in the evening sky; its beams fell upon the
flowers, bathing them in floods of silver light.

A little rustic garden seat stood among the sleeping roses; and
there Beatrice sat, wondering at the strong emotion she read in
her lover's face.

"Beatrice," he said, "I can bear it no longer.  Why did Gaspar
Laurence bend over you?  What was he saying?  My darling, do you
not know how I love you--so dearly and so deeply that I could
not live without you?  Do you not know that I have loved you from
the first moment I ever beheld you?  Beatrice, my words are weak.
Look at me--read the love in my face that my lips know not how
to utter."

But she never raised her eyes to him; the glorious golden light
of love that had fallen upon her dazzled her.

"You must not send me from you, Beatrice," he said, clasping her
hands in his.  "I am a strong man, not given to weakness; but,
believe me, if you send me from you, it will kill me.  Every hope
of my life is centered in you.  Beatrice, will you try to care
for me?"

She turned her face to his--the moonlight showed clearly the
bright tears in her dark eyes.  For answer she said, simply:

"Do not leave me--I care for you now; my love--my love--did
you not know it?"

The sweet face and quivering lips were so near him that Lord
Airlie kissed the tears away; he also kissed the white hands that
clasped his own.

"You are mine--my own," he whispered, "until death; say so,
Beatrice."

"I am yours," she said, "even in death."

It was a stolen half hour, but so full of happiness that it could
never fade from memory.

"I must go," said Beatrice, at length, unclasping the firm hand
that held her own.  "Oh, Lord Airlie, how am I to meet all my
friends?  Why did you not wait until tomorrow?"

"I could not," he said; "and you perhaps would not then have been
so kind."

He loved her all the more for her simplicity.  As they left the
garden, Lord Airlie gathered a white rose and gave it to
Beatrice.  Long afterward, when the leaves had become yellow and
dry, the rose was found.

They remained in the conservatory a few minutes, and then went
back to the ball room.

"Every waltz must be mine now," said Lord Airlie.  "And,
Beatrice, I shall speak to Lord Earle tonight.  Are you willing?"

Yes, she was willing.  It was very pleasant to be taken
possession of so completely.  It was pleasant to find a will
stronger than her own.  She did not care how soon all the world
knew that she loved him.  The only thing she wondered at was why
he should be so unspeakably happy.


Chapter XXX

Beatrice never recollected how the ball ended; to her it was one
long trance of happiness.  She heard the music, the murmur of
voices, as though in a dream.  There were times when everything
seemed brighter than usual--that was when Lord Airlie stood by
her side.  Her heart was filled with unutterable joy.

It was strange, but in that hour of happiness she never even
thought of Hugh Fernely; the remembrance of him never once
crossed her mind.  Nothing marred the fullness of her content.

She stood by Lord Earle's side as guest after guest came up to
say adieu.  She saw Lord Airlie waiting for her father.

"Lord Earle will be engaged for some time, I fear," he said; "I
must see him tonight.  Beatrice, promise me you will not go to
rest until your father has given us his consent."

She could not oppose him.  When girls like Beatrice Earle once
learn to love, there is something remarkable in the complete
abandonment of their will.  She would fain have told him, with
gay, teasing words, that he had won concession enough for one
night; as it was, she simply promised to do as he wished.

Lord Earle received the parting compliments of his guests,
wondering at the same time why Lord Airlie kept near him and
seemed unwilling to lose sight of him.  The happy moment arrived
when the last carriage rolled away, and the family at Earlescourt
were left alone.  Lady Earle asked the two young girls to go into
her room for half an hour to "talk over the ball."  Lionel, sorry
the evening was over, retired to his room; then Hubert Airlie
went to Lord Earle and asked if he might speak with him for ten
minutes.

"Will it not do tomorrow?" inquired Ronald, smiling, as he held
up his watch.  "See, it is past three o'clock."

"No," replied Lord Airlie; "I could not pass another night in
suspense."

"Come with me, then," said the master of Earlescourt, as he led
the way to the library, where the lamps were still alight.

"Now, what is it?" he asked, good-humoredly, turning to the
excited, anxious lover.

"Perhaps I ought to study my words," said Lord Airlie; "but I can
not.  Lord Earle, I love your daughter Beatrice.  Will you give
her to me to be my wife?"

"Sooner than to any one else in the world," replied Ronald.  "Is
she willing?"

"I think so," was the answer, Lord Airlie's heart thrilling with
happiness as he remembered her words.

"Let us see," said Lord Earle.  He rang the bell, and sent for
his daughter.

Lord Airlie never forgot the beautiful, blushing face half turned
from him as Beatrice entered the room.

"Beatrice," said her father, clasping her in his arms, "is this
true?  Am I to give you to Lord Airlie?"

"If you please, papa," she whispered.

"I do please," he cried.  "Hubert, I give you a treasure beyond
all price.  You may judge of my daughter's love from her own
word.  I know it has never been given to any one but you.  You
are my daughter's first lover, and her first love.  You may take
her to your heart, well satisfied that she has never cared for
any one else.  It is true, Beatrice, is it not?"

"Yes," she said, faltering for a moment as, for the first time,
she remembered Hugh.

"Tomorrow," continued Lord Earle, "we will talk of the future; we
are all tired tonight.  You will sleep in peace, Airlie, I
suppose?"

"If I sleep at all," he replied.

"Well, you understand clearly that, had the choice rested with me
I should have selected you from all others to take charge of my
Beatrice," said Lord Earle.  "Do not wait to thank me.  I have a
faint idea of how much a grateful lover has to say.  Good night."

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

"What is it, Beatrice?" asked Lillian, as the two sisters stood
alone in the bright little dressing room.

"I can hardly tell you in sober words," she replied. "Lord Airlie
has asked me to be his wife--his wife; and oh, Lily, I love him
so dearly!"

Pride and dignity all broke down; the beautiful face was laid
upon Lillian's shoulder, and Beatrice wept happy tears.

"I love him so, Lily," she went on; "but I never thought he cared
for me.  What have I ever done that I should be so happy?"

The moonbeams never fell upon a sweeter picture than these fair
young sisters; Lillian's pure, spirituelle face bent over
Beatrice.

"I love him, Lily," she continued, "for himself.  He is a king
among men.  Who is so brave, so generous, so noble?  If he were a
beggar, I should care just as much for him."

Lillian listened and sympathized until the bright, dark eyes
seemed to grow weary; then she bade her sister goodnight, and
went to her own room.

Beatrice Earle was alone at last--alone with her happiness and
love.  It seemed impossible that her heart and brain could ever
grow calm or quiet again.  It was all in vain she tried to sleep.
Lord Airlie's face, his voice, his words haunted her.

She rose, and put on a pretty pink dressing gown.  The fresh air,
she thought, would make her sleep, so she opened the long window
gently, and looked out.

The night was still and clear; the moon hung over the dark trees;
floods of silvery light bathed the far-off lake, the sleeping
flowers, and the green grass.  There was a gentle stir amid the
branches; the leaves rustled in the wind; the blue, silent
heavens above bright and calm.  The solemn beauty of the starlit
sky and the hushed murmur appealed to her.  Into the proud,
passionate heart there came some better, nobler thoughts.  Ah, in
the future that lay so brilliant and beautiful before her she
would strive to be good, she would be true and steadfast, she
would think more of what Lily loved and spoke about at times.
Then her thoughts went back to her lover, and that happy half
hour in the rose garden.  From her window she could see it--the
moon shone full upon it.  The moonlight was a fair type of her
life that was to be, bright, clear, unshadowed.  Even as the
thought shaped itself in her mind, a shadow fell among the trees.
She looked, and saw the figure of a tall man walking down the
path that divided the little garden from the shrubbery.  He stood
still there, gazing long and earnestly at the windows of the
house, and then went out into the park, and disappeared.

She was not startled.  A passing wonder as to who it might be
struck her.  Perhaps it was one of the gamekeepers or gardeners,
but she did not think much about it.  A shadow in the moonlight
did not frighten her.

Soon the cool, fresh air did its work; the bright, dark eyes grew
tired in real earnest, and at length Beatrice retired to rest.

The sun was shining brightly when she awoke.  By her side lay a
fragrant bouquet of flowers, the dew-drops still glistening upon
them, and in their midst a little note which said:

"Beatrice, will you come into the garden for a few minutes before
breakfast, just to tell me all that happened last night was not a
dream?"

She rose quickly.  Over her pretty morning-dress she threw a
light shawl, and went down to meet Lord Airlie.

"It was no dream," she said, simply, holding out her hand in
greeting to him.

"Dear Beatrice, how very good of you!" replied Lord Airlie;
adding presently: "we have twenty minutes before the breakfast
bell will ring; let us make the best of them."

The morning was fresh, fair, and calm, a soft haze hanging round
the trees.

"Beatrice," said Lord Airlie, "you see the sun shining there in
the high heavens.  Three weeks ago I should have thought it
easier for that same sun to fall than for me to win you.  I can
scarcely believe that my highest ideal of woman is realized.  It
was always my ambition to marry some young girl who had never
loved any one before me.  You never have.  No man ever held your
hand as I hold it now, no man ever kissed your face as I kissed
it last night."

As he spoke, a burning flush covered her face.  She remembered
Hugh Fernely.  He loved her better for the blush, thinking how
pure and guileless she was.

"I fear I shall be a very jealous lover," he continued.  "I shall
envy everything those beautiful eyes rest upon.  Will you ride
with me this morning?  I want to talk to you about Lynnton--my
home, you know.  You will be Lady Airlie of Lynnton, and no king
will be so proud as I shall."

The breakfast bell rang at last.  When Beatrice entered the room,
Lady Earle went up to her.

"Your papa has told me the news," she said.  "Heaven bless you,
and make you happy, dear child!"

Lionel Dacre guessed the state of affairs, and said but little.
The chief topic of conversation was the ball, interspersed by
many conjectures on the part of Lord Earle as to why the post-bag
was so late.

It did not arrive until breakfast was ended.  Lord Earle
distributed the letters; there were three for Lord Airlie, one to
Lady Earle from Dora, two for Lionel, none for Lillian.  Lord
Earle held in his hand a large common blue envelope.

"Miss Beatrice Earle," he said; "from Brookfield.  What large
writing!  The name was evidently intended to be seen."

Beatrice took the letter carelessly from him; the handwriting was
quite unknown to her; she knew no one in Brookfield, which was
the nearest post-town--it was probably some circular, some
petition for charity, she thought.  Lord Airlie crossed the room
to speak to her, and she placed the letter carelessly in the
pocket of her dress, and in a few minutes forgot all about it.

Lord Airlie was waiting; the horses had been ordered for an early
hour.  Beatrice ran upstairs to put on her riding habit, and
never gave a thought to the letter.

It was a pleasant ride; in the after-days she looked back upon it
as one of the brightest hours she had ever known.  Lord Airlie
told her all about Lynnton, his beautiful home--a grand old
castle, where every room had a legend, every tree almost a
tradition.

For he intended to work wonders; a new and magnificent wing
should be built, and on one room therein art, skill, and money
should be lavished without stint.

"Her boudoir" he said, "should be fit for a queen and for a
fairy."

So they rode through the pleasant, sunlit air.  A sudden thought
struck Beatrice.

"I wonder," she said, "what mamma will think?  You must go to see
her, Hubert.  She dreaded love and marriage so much.  Poor
mamma!"

She asked herself, with wondering love, what could have happened
that her mother should dread what she found so pleasant?  Lord
Airlie entered warmly into all her plans and wishes.  Near the
grand suite of rooms that were to be prepared for his beautiful
young wife, Lord Airlie spoke of rooms for Dora, if she would
consent to live with them.

"I must write and tell mamma today," said Beatrice.  "I should
not like her to hear it from any one but myself."

"Perhaps you will allow me to inclose a note," suggested Lord
Airlie, "asking her to tolerate me."

"I do not think that will be very difficult," laughingly replied
his companion.

Their ride was a long one.  On their return Beatrice was slightly
tired, and went straight to her own room.  She wrote a long
letter to Dora, who must have smiled at her description of Lord
Airlie.  He was everything that was true, noble, chivalrous, and
grand.  The world did not hold such another.  When the letter was
finished it was time to dress for dinner.

"Which dress will you wear, miss?" asked the attentive maid.

"The prettiest I have," said the young girl, her bright face
glowing with the words she had just written.

What dress could be pretty enough for him?  One was found at last
that pleased her--a rich, white crepe.  But she would wear no
jewels--nothing but crimson roses.  One lay in the thick coils
of her dark hair, another nestled against her white neck, others
looped up the flowing skirt.

Beatrice's toilet satisfied her--this, too, with her lover's
fastidious taste to please.  She stood before the large mirror,
and a pleased smile overspread her face as she saw herself
reflected therein.

Suddenly she remembered the letter.  The morning-dress still hung
upon a chair.  She took the envelope from the pocket.

"Shall you want me again, Miss Earle?" asked her maid.

"No," replied Beatrice, breaking the seal; "I am ready now."

The girl quitted the room, and Beatrice, standing before the
mirror, drew out a long, closely written letter, turning
presently, in amazement, to the signature, wondering who could be
the writer.


Chapter XXXI

The sun shone brightly upon the roses that gleamed in her hair
and nestled against the white neck.  Could it be lingering in
cruel mockery upon the pale face and the dark eyes so full of
wild horror?  As Beatrice Earle read that letter, the color left
even her lips, her heart seemed to stand still, a vague, nameless
dread took hold of her, the paper fell from her hands, and with a
long, low cry she fell upon her knees, hiding her face in her
hands.

It had fallen at last--the cruel blow that even in her dreams
and thoughts she had considered impossible.  Hugh Fernely had
found her out, and claimed her as his own!

This letter, which had stricken joy and beauty from the proud
face and left it white and cold almost as the face of the dead
was from him; and the words it contained were full of such
passionate love that they terrified her.  The letter ran as
follows:

"My own Beatrice,--From peril by sea and land I have returned to
claim you.  Since we parted I have stood face to face with death
in its most terrible form.  Each time I conquered because I felt
I must see you again.  It is a trite saying that death is
immortal.  Death itself would not part me from you--nay, if I
were buried, and you came to my grave and whispered my name, it
seems to me I must hear you.

"Beatrice, you promised to be my wife--you will not fail me?
Ah, no, it can not be that the blue heavens above will look on
quietly and witness my death blow!  You will come to me, and give
me a word, a smile to show how true you have been.

"Last evening I wandered round the grounds, wondering which were
the windows of my love's chamber, and asking myself whether she
was dreaming of me.  Life has changed for you since we sat upon
the cliffs at Knutsford and you promised to be my wife.  I heard
at the farm all about the great change, and how the young girl
who wandered with me through the bonny green woods is the
daughter of Lord Earle.  Your home, doubtless, is a stately one.
Rank and position like yours might frighten some lovers--they do
not daunt me.  You will not let them stand between us.  You can
not, after the promises you uttered.

"Beatrice, my voyage has been a successful one; I am not a rich
man, but I have enough to gratify every wish to your heart.  I
will take you away to sunny lands over the sea where life shall
be so full of happiness that you will wish it never to end.

"I wait your commands.  Rumor tells me Lord Earl is a strange,
disappointed man.  I will not yet call upon you at your own home;
I shall await your reply at Brookfield.  Write at once, Beatrice,
and tell me how and when I may meet you.  I will go anywhere, at
any time.  Do not delay--my heart hungers and thirsts for one
glance of your peerless face.  Appoint an hour soon.  How shall I
live until it comes? Until then think of me as 

"Your devoted lover, Hugh Fernely.

"Address Post Office, Brookfield."

She read every word carefully and then slowly turned the letter
over and read it again.  Her white lips quivered with indignant
passion.  How dared he presume so far?  His love! Ah, if Hubert
Airlie could have read those words!  Fernely's love!  She loathed
him; she hated, with fierce, hot hatred, the very sound of his
name.  Why must this most wretched folly of her youth rise up
against her now?  What must she do?  Where could she turn for
help and counsel?

Could it be possible that this man she hated so fiercely had
touched her face and covered her hands with kisses and tears?
She struck the little white hands which held the letter against
the marble stand, and where Hugh Fernely's tears had fallen a
dark bruise purpled the fair skin; white hard, fierce words came
from the beautiful lips.

"Was I blind, foolish, mad?" she cried.  "Dear Heaven, save me
from the fruits of my own folly!"

Then hot anger yielded to despair.  What should she do?  Look
which way she might, there was no hope.  If Lord Earle once
discovered that she had dealt falsely with him, she would be
driven from the home she had learned to love.  He would never
pardon such concealment, deceit, and folly as hers.  She knew
that.  If Lord Airlie ever discovered that any other man had
called her his love, had kissed her face, and claimed her as his
own, she would lose his affection.  Of that she was also quite
sure.

If she would remain at Earlescourt, if she would retain her
father's affection and Lord Airlie's love, they must never hear
of Hugh Fernely.  There could be no doubt on that head.

What should she do with him?  Could she buy him off?  Would money
purchase her freedom?  Remembering his pride and his love, she
thought not.  Should she appeal to his pity--tell him all her
heart and life were centered in Lord Airlie?  Should she appeal
to his love for pity's sake?

Remembering his passionate words, she knew it would be useless.
Had she but been married before he returned--were she but Lady
Airlie of Lynnton--he could not have harmed her.  Was the man
mad to think he could win her--she who had had some of the most
noble-born men in England at her feet?  Did he think she would
exchange her grand old name for his obscure one--her
magnificence for his poverty.

There was no more time for thought; the dinner bell had sounded
for the last time, and she must descend.  She thrust the letter
hastily into a drawer, and locked it, and then turned to her
mirror.  She was startled at the change.  Surely that pale face,
with its quivering lips and shadowed eyes could not be hers.
What should she do to drive away the startled fear, the vague
dread, the deadly pallor?  The roses she wore were but a ghastly
contrast.

"I must bear it better," she said to herself.  "such a face as
this will betray my secret.  Let me feel that I do not care 
that it will all come right in the end."

She said the words aloud, but the voice was changed and hoarse.

"Women have faced more deadly peril than this," she continued,
"and have won.  Is there any peril I would not brave for Hubert
Airlie's sake?"

Beatrice Earle left the room.  She swept, with her beautiful head
erect, through the wide corridors and down the broad staircase.
She took her seat at the sumptuous table, whereon gold and silver
shone, whereon everything recherche and magnificent was
displayed.  But she had with her a companion she was never again
to lose, a haunting fear, a skeleton that was never more to quit
her side, a miserable consciousness of folly that was bringing
sore wretchedness upon her.  Never again was she to feel free
from fear and care.

"Beatrice," said Lady Earle when dinner was over, "you will never
learn prudence."

She started, and the beautiful bloom just beginning to return,
vanished again.

"Do not look alarmed, my dear," continued Lady Helena; "I am not
angry.  I fear you were out too long today.  Lord Airlie must
take more care of you; the sun was very hot, and you look quite
ill.  I never saw you look as you do tonight."

"We had very little sun," replied Beatrice, with a laugh as she
tried to make a gay one; "we rode under the shade in the park.  I
am tired, but not with my ride."

It was a pleasant evening, and when the gentlemen joined the
ladies in the drawing room, the sunbeams still lingered on flower
and tree.  The long windows were all open, and the soft summer
wind that came in was laden with the sweet breath of the flowers.

Lord Airlie asked Beatrice to sing.  It was a relief to her; she
could not have talked; all the love and sorrow, all the fear and
despair that tortured her, could find vent in music.  So she sat
in the evening gloaming, and Lord Airlie, listening to the superb
voice, wondered at the pathos and sadness that seemed to ring in
every note.

"What weird music, Beatrice!" he said, at length.  "You are
singing of love, but the love is all sorrow.  Your songs are
generally so bright and happy.  What has come over you?"

"Nothing," was the reply, but he, bending over her, saw the dark
eyes were dim with tears.

"There," cried Lord Airlie, "you see I am right.  You have
positively sung yourself to tears."

He drew her from the piano, and led her to the large bay window
where the roses peeped in.  He held her face up to the mellow
evening light, and looked gravely into her beautiful eyes.

"Tell me," he said, simply, "what has saddened you, Beatrice 
you have no secrets from me.  What were you thinking of just now
when you sang that dreamy 'Lebenwold?'  Every note was like a
long sigh."

"Shall you laugh if I tell you?" she asked.

"No," he replied; "I can not promise to sigh, but I will not
smile."

"I was thinking what I should do if--if anything happened to
part us."

"But nothing ever will happen," he said; "nothing can part us but
death.  I know what would happen to me if I lost you, Beatrice."

"What?" she asked, looking up into the handsome, kindly face.

"I should not kill myself," he said, "for I hold life to be a
sacred gift; but I should go where the face of no other woman
would smile upon me.  Why do you talk so dolefully, Beatrice?
Let us change the subject. Tell me where you would like to go
when we are married--shall it be France, Italy, or Spain?"

"Would nothing ever make you love me less, Hubert?" she asked.
"Neither poverty nor sickness?"

"No," he replied; "nothing you can think of or invent."

"Nor disgrace?" she continued; but he interrupted her half
angrily.

"Hush!" he said, "I do not like such a word upon your lips; never
say it again.  What disgrace can touch you?  You are too pure,
too good."

She turned from him, and he fancied a low moan came from her
trembling lips.

"You are tired, and--pray forgive me, Beatrice--nervous too,"
said Lord Airlie; "I will be your doctor.  You shall lie down
here upon this couch.  I will place it where you can see the sun
set in the west, and I will read to you something that will drive
all fear away.  I thought during dinner that you looked ill and
worn."

Gently enough he drew the couch to the window, Lady Earle
watching him the while with smiling face.  He induced Beatrice to
lie down, and then turned her face to the garden where the
setting sun was pleasantly gilding the flowers.

"Now, you have something pleasant to look at," said Lord Airlie,
"and you shall have something pleasant to listen to.  I am going
to read some of Schiller's 'Marie Stuart.'"

He sat at her feet, and held her white hands in his.  He read the
grand, stirring words that at times seemed like the ring of
martial music, and again like the dirge of a soul in despair.

His clear, rich voice sounded pleasantly in the evening calm.
Beatrice's eyes lingered on the western sky all aflame, but her
thoughts were with Hugh Fernely.

What could she do?  If she could but temporize with him, if she
could but pacify him, for a time, until she was married, all
would be safe.  He would not dare to talk of claiming Lady Airlie
it would be vain if he did.  Besides, she would persuade Lord
Airlie to go abroad; and, seeing all pursuit useless, Hugh would
surely give her up.  Even at the very worst, if Hubert and she
were once married, she would not fear; if she confessed all to
him, he would forgive her.  He might be very angry, but he would
pardon his wife.  If he knew all about it before marriage, there
was no hope for her.

She must temporize with Fernely--write in a style that would
convey nothing, and tell him that he must wait.  He could not
refuse.  She would write that evening a letter that should give
him no hope, nor yet drive him to despair.

"That is a grand scene, is it not?" said Lord Airlie suddenly;
then he saw by Beatrice's startled look that she had not
listened.

"I plead guilty at once," she replied.  "I was thinking--do not
be angry--I was thinking of something that relates to yourself.
I heard nothing of what you read, Hubert. Will you read it
again?"

"Certainly not," he said, with a laugh of quiet amusement.
"Reading does not answer; we will try conversation.  Let us
resume the subject you ran away from before--where shall we go
for our wedding trip?"

Only three days since she would have suggested twenty different
places; she would have smiled and blushed, her dark eyes growing
brighter at every word.  Now she listened to her lover's plans as
if a ghostly hand had clutched her heart and benumbed her with
fear.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

That evening it seemed to Beatrice Earle as though she would
never be left alone.  In the drawing room stood a dainty little
escritoire used by the ladies of Earlescourt.  Here she dared not
write lest Lord Airlie should, as he often did, linger by her,
pretending to assist her.  If she went into the library, Lord
Earle would be sure to ask to whom she was writing.  There was
nothing to be done but to wait until she retired to her own room.

First came Lady Earle, solicitous about her health, recommending
a long rest and a quiet sleep; then Lillian, full of anxiety,
half longing to ask Beatrice if she thought Lionel Dacre
handsomer and kinder than any one else; then the maid Suzette,
who seemed to linger as though she would never go.

At length she was alone, the door locked upon the outer world.
She was soon seated at her little desk, where she speedily wrote
the following cold letter, that almost drove Hugh Fernely mad:

"My dear Hugh,--Have you really returned?  I thought you were
lost in the Chinese Seas, or had forgotten the little episode at
Knutsford.  I can not see you just yet.  As you have heard, Lord
Earle has peculiar notions--I must humor them.  I will write
again soon, and say when and where I can see you.  Yours
sincerely, Beatrice Earle."

She folded the letter and addressed it as he wished; then she
left her room and went down into the hall, where the post-bag lay
open upon the table.  She placed the missive inside, knowing that
no one would take the trouble to look at the letters; then she
returned, as she had come, silently.

The letter reached Brookfield at noon the following day.  When
Hugh Fernely opened it he bit his lips with rage.  Cold,
heartless lines!  Not one word was there of welcome.  Not one of
sorrow for his supposed death; no mention of love, truth, or
fidelity; no promise that she would be his.  What could such a
letter mean?

He almost hated the girl whom he had loved so well.  Yet he could
not, would not, believe anything except that perhaps during his
long absence she had grown to think less kindly of him.  She had
promised to be his wife, and let come what might, he would make
her keep her word.

So he said, and Hugh Fernely meant it.  His whole life was
centered in her and he would not tamely give her up.

The letter dispatched, Beatrice awaited the reply with a suspense
no words can describe.  A dull wonder came over her at times why
she must suffer so keenly.  Other girls had done what she had
done--nay, fifty times worse--and no Nemesis haunted them.  Why
was this specter of fear and shame to stand by her side every
moment and distress her?

It was true it had been very wrong of her to meet this tiresome
Hugh Fernely in the pleasant woods and on the sea shore; but it
had broken the monotony that had seemed to be killing her.  His
passionate love had been delicious flattery; still she had not
intended anything serious.  It had only been a novelty and an
amusement to her, although to him perhaps it had been a matter of
life or death.  But she had deceived Lord Earle.  If, when he had
questioned her, and sought with such tender wisdom to win her
confidence, if she had told him her story then, he would have
saved her from further persecution and from the effects of her
own folly; if she had told him then, it would not have mattered 
there would have been no obstacle to her love for Lord Airlie.

It was different now.  If she were to tell Lord Earle, after his
deliberate and emphatic words, she could expect no mercy; yet,
she said to herself, other girls have done even worse, and
punishment had not overtaken them so swiftly.

At last she slept, distressed and worn out with thought.


Chapter XXXII

For the first time in her life, when the bright sun shone into
her room, Beatrice turned her face to the wall and dreaded the
sight of day.  The post-bag would leave the hall at nine in the
morning--Hugh would have the letter at noon.  Until then she was
safe.

Noon came and went, but the length of the summer's day brought
nothing save fresh misery.  At every unusual stir, every loud
peal of the bell, every quick footstep, she turned pale, and her
heart seemed to die within her.

Lady Earle watched her with anxious eyes.  She could not
understand the change that had come over the brilliant young girl
who had used to be the life of the house.  Every now and then she
broke out into wild feverish gayety.  Lillian saw that something
ailed her sister--she could not tell what.

For the fiftieth time that day, when the hall door bell sounded,
Beatrice looked up with trembling lips she vainly tried to still.
At last Lady Earle took the burning hands in her own.

"My dear child," she said, "you will have a nervous fever if you
go on in this way.  What makes you start at every noise?  You
look as though you were waiting for something dreadful to
happen."

"No one ever called me nervous," replied Beatrice, with a smile,
controlling herself with an effort; "mamma's chief complaint
against me was that I had no nerves;" adding presently to
herself: "This can not last.  I would rather die at once that
live in this agony."

The weary day came to a close, however, and it was well for
Beatrice that Lord Airlie had not spent it with her.  The
gentlemen at Earlescourt had all gone to a bachelor's dinner,
given by old Squire Newton of the Grange.  It was late when they
returned, and Lord Airlie did not notice anything unusual in
Beatrice.

"I call this a day wasted," he said, as he bade her goodnight;
"for it has been a day spent away from you.  I thought it would
never come to an end."

She sighed, remembering what a dreary day it had been to her.
Could she live through such another?  Half the night she lay
awake, wondering if Hugh's answer to her letter would come by the
first post, and whether Lord Earle would say anything if he
noticed another letter from Brookfield.  Fortune favored her.  In
the morning Lord Earle was deeply engrossed by a story Lionel was
telling, and asked Beatrice to open the bag for him.  She again
saw a hated blue envelope bearing her own name.  When all the
other letters were distributed, she slipped hers into the pocket
of her dress, without any one perceiving the action.

Breakfast was over at last; and leaving Lord Airlie talking to
Lillian, Beatrice hastened to read the letter.  None of Hugh's
anger was there set down; but if she had cared for him her heart
must have ached at the pathos of his simple words.  He had
received her note, he said--the note so unworthy of her--and
hastened to tell her that he was obliged to go to London on some
important business connected with his ship, and that he should be
absent three weeks.  He would write to her at once on his return,
and he should insist upon seeing her then, as well as exact the
fulfillment of her promise.

It was a respite; much might happen in three weeks.  She tore the
letter into shreds, and felt as though relieved of a deadly
weight.  If time could but be gained, she thought--if something
could happen to urge on her marriage with Hubert Airlie before
Hugh returned!  At any rate, for the moment she was free.

She looked like herself again when Lord Airlie came to ask her if
she would ride or walk.  The beautiful bloom had returned to her
face and the light to her eyes.  All day she was in brilliant
spirits.  There was no need now to tremble at a loud ring or a
rapid step.  Three weeks was a long time--much might happen.
"Oh, if Lord Airlie would but force me to marry him soon!"

That very evening Lord Airlie asked her if she would go out with
him.  He wanted to talk to her alone, for he was going away on
the morrow, and had much to say to her.

"Where are you going?" she asked with sad, wondering eyes, her
chance of escaping seeming rapidly to diminish.

"I am going to Lynnton," he replied, "to see about plans for the
new buildings.  They should be begun at once.  For even if we
remain abroad a whole year they will then be hardly finished.  I
shall be away ten days or a fortnight.  When I return, Beatrice,
I shall ask you a question.  Can you guess what it will be?"

There was no answering smile on her face.  Perhaps he would be
absent three weeks.  What chance of escape had she now?

"I shall ask you when you will fulfill your promise," he
continued--"when you will let me make you in deed and in word my
wife.  You must not be cruel to me, Beatrice.  I have waited long
enough.  You will think about it while I am gone, will you not?"

Lord Earle smiled as he noted his daughter's face.  Airlie was
going away, and therefore she was dull--that was just as it
should be.  He was delighted that she cared so much for him.  He
told Lady Helena that he had not thought Beatrice capable of such
deep affection.  Lady Helena told him she had never known any one
who could love so well or hate so thoroughly as Beatrice.

The morning came, and Lord Airlie lingered so long over his
farewell that Lady Helena began to think he would alter his mind
and remain where he was.  He started at last, however, promising
to write every day to Beatrice, and followed by the good wishes
of the whole household.

He was gone, and Hugh was gone; for three weeks she had nothing
to fear, nothing to hope, and a settled melancholy calm fell upon
her.  Her father and Lady Helena thought she was dull because her
lover was away; the musical laugh that used to gladden Lord
Earle's heart was hushed; she became unusually silent; the
beautiful face grew pale and sad.  They smiled and thought it
natural.  Lillian, who knew every expression of her sister's
face, grew anxious, fearing there was some ailment either of body
or mind of which none of them were aware.

They believed she was thinking of her absent lover and feeling
dull without him.  In reality her thoughts were centered upon one
idea--what could she do to get rid of Hugh Fernely?  Morning,
noon, and night that one question was always before her.  She
talked when others did, she laughed with them; but if there came
an interval of silence the beautiful face assumed a far-off
dreamy expression Lillian had never seen there before. Beatrice
was generally on her guard, watchful and careful, but there were
times when the mask she wore so bravely fell off, and Lillian,
looking at her then, knew all was not well with her sister.

What was to be done to get free from Hugh?  Every hour in the day
fresh plans came to her--some so absurd as to provoke feverish,
unnatural laughter, but none that were feasible.  With all her
daring wit, her quick thought, her vivid fancy--with all her
resource of mind and intellect, she could do nothing.  Day and
night the one question was still there--what could she do to get
free from Hugh Fernely?


Chapter XXXIII

A whole week passed, and the "something" Beatrice longed for had
not happened.  Life went on quietly and smoothly.  Her father and
Lady Earle busied themselves in talking of preparations for the
marriage.  Lionel Dacre and Lillian slowly drifted into the
fairyland of hope, Lord Airlie wrote every day.  No one dreamed
of the dark secret that hung over Earlescourt.

Every morning Beatrice, with the sanguine hopefulness of youth,
said to herself, "Something will happen today;" every night she
thought, "Something must happen tomorrow;" but days and nights
went on calmly, unbroken by any event or incident such as she
wished.

The time of reprieve was rapidly passing.  What should she do if,
at the end of three weeks, Lord Airlie returned and Hugh Fernely
came back to Earlescourt?  Through the long sunny hours that
question tortured her--the suspense made her sick at heart.
There were times when she thought it better to die at once than
pass through this lingering agony of fear.

But she was young, and youth is ever sanguine; she was brave, and
the brave rarely despair.  She did not realize the difficulties
of her position, and she did not think it possible that anything
could happen to take her from Hubert Airlie.

Only one person noted the change in Beatrice, and that was her
sister, Lillian Earle.  Lillian missed the high spirits, the
brilliant repartee, the gay words that had made home so bright;
over and over again she said to herself all was not well with her
sister.

Lillian had her own secret--one she had as yet hardly whispered
to herself.  From her earliest childhood she had been accustomed
to give way to Beatrice.  Not that there was any partiality
displayed, but the willful young beauty generally contrived to
have her own way.  By her engaging manners and high spirits she
secured every one's attention; and thus Lillian was in part
overlooked.

She was very fair and gentle, this golden-haired daughter of
Ronald Earle.  Her face was so pure and spirituelle that one
might have sketched it for the face of a seraph; the tender
violet eyes were full of eloquence, the white brow full of
thought.  Her beauty never dazzled, never took any one by storm;
it won by slow degrees a place in one's heart.

She was of a thoughtful, unobtrusive nature; nothing could have
made her worldly, nothing could have made her proud.

Sweet, calm, serene, ignorant alike of all the height of
happiness and the depths of despair--gifted, too with a
singularly patient disposition and amiable temper, no one had
ever seen Lillian Earle angry or hasty; her very presence seemed
full of rest and peace.

Nature had richly endowed her.  She had a quick, vivid fancy, a
rare and graceful imagination; and perhaps her grandest gift was
a strong and deep love for things not of this world.  Not that
Lillian was given to "preaching," or being disagreeably "goody,"
but high and holy thoughts came naturally to her.  When Lord
Earle wanted amusement, he sent for Beatrice--no one could while
away long hours as she could; when he wanted comfort, advice, or
sympathy, he sought Lillian.  Every one loved her, much as one
loves the sunbeams that bring bright light and warmth.

Lionel Dacre loved her best of all.  His only wonder was that any
one could even look at Beatrice when Lillian was near.  He
wondered sometimes whether she had not been made expressly for
him--she was so strong where he was weak, her calm serene
patience controlled his impetuosity, her gentle thoughtfulness
balanced his recklessness, her sweet, graceful humility corrected
his pride.

She influenced him more than he knew--one word from her did
wonders with him.  He loved her for her fair beauty, but most of
all for the pure, guileless heart that knew no shadow of evil 
upon which the world had never even breathed.

Lionel Dacre had peculiar ideas about women.  His mother, who had
been a belle in her day, was essentially worldly.  The only
lessons she had ever taught him were how to keep up appearance,
how to study fashionable life and keep pace with it.

She had been a lady of fashion, struggling always with narrow
means; and there were times when her son's heart grew sick,
remembering the falseness, the meanness, the petty cunning
maneuvers she had been obliged to practice.

As he grew older and began to look around the world, he was not
favorably impressed.  The ladies of his mother's circle were all
striving together to get the foremost place.  He heard of envy,
jealousy, scandal, untruth, until he wondered if all women were
alike.

He himself was of a singularly truthful, honorable nature--all
deceit, all false appearances were hateful to him.  He had formed
to himself an ideal of a wife, and he resolved to live and die
unmarried unless he could find some one to realize it.

Lillian Earle did.  He watched her keenly; she was truthful and
open as the day.  He never heard a false word from her  not even
one of the trifling excuses that pass current in society for
truth.  He said to himself, if any one was all but perfect,
surely she was.  To use his own expression, he let his heart's
desire rest in her; all he had ever hoped for or dreamed of was
centered in her.  He set to work deliberately and with all the
ardor of his impetuous nature to win her love.

At first she did not understand him; then by degrees he watched
the pure young heart awaken to consciousness.  It was as pretty a
development of love as ever was witnessed.  At the sound of his
footsteps or his voice the faint color flushed into her face,
light came into her eyes; and when he stood by her side, bending
his handsome head to read her secret, she would speak a word or
two, and then hurry away from him.  If he wished to join her in
her walks or rides, she begged to be excused with trembling lips
and drooping eyes.

She hardly knew herself what had come to her--why the world
seemed suddenly to have grown so fair--what made fresh luster in
the sky above.  A vague, delicious happiness stirred in the
gentle heart.  She longed for, yet half dreaded, Lionel's
presence. When he was near her, the little hands trembled and
the sweet face grew warm and flushed.  Yet the measure of her
content and happiness seemed full.

Lionel saw it all, and he wondered why such a precious treasure
as the love of this pure, innocent girl should be his.  What had
he ever done to deserve it?  Through her he began to respect all
other women, through her he began to value the high and holy
teachings he had hitherto overlooked.  She was his ideal
realized.  If ever the time should come for him to be
disappointed in her, then he would believe all things false--but
it never could be.

How should he tell her of his love?  It would be like trying to
cage a startled, timid bird.  He stood abashed before her sweet
innocence.

But the time came when he resolved to woo and win her--when he
felt that his life would be unbearable without her; and he said
to himself that sweet Lillian Earle should be his wife, or he
would never look upon a woman's face again.

Lionel felt some slight jealousy of Beatrice; he paid dearly
enough for it in the dark after-days.  He fancied that she
eclipsed Lillian.  He thought that if he spoke to Lord Earle of
his love, he would insist upon both marriages taking place on one
day; and then his fair gentle love would, as usual, be second to
her brilliant sister.

"That shall never be," he said to himself.  "Lillian shall have a
wedding day of her own, the honors unshared.  She shall be the
one center of attraction."

He determined to say nothing to Lord Earle until Beatrice was
married; surely her wedding must take place soon--Lord Airlie
seemed unable to exist out of her presence.  When they were
married and gone, Lillian should have her turn of admiration and
love.  It was nothing but proud, jealous care for her that made
him delay.

And Lillian discovered her own secret at last.  She knew she
loved Lionel.  He was unlike every one else.  Who was so
handsome, so brave, so good?  She liked to look shyly at the
frank, proud face and the careless wave of hair thrown back from
his brow; his voice made music in her heart, and she wondered
whether he really cared for her.

In her rare sweet humility she never saw how far she was above
him; she never dreamed that he looked up to her as a captain to
his queen.  He was always by her side, he paid her a thousand
graceful attentions, he sought her advice and sympathy, some
unspoken words seemed ever on his lips.  Lillian Earle asked
herself over and over again whether he loved her.

She was soon to know.  From some careless words of Lord Earle's,
Lionel gathered that Beatrice's marriage would take place in
November.  Then he decided, if he could win her consent, that
Lillian's wedding should be when the spring flowers were
blooming.

August, with its sunny days, was at an end.  Early in September
Lillian stood alone on the shore of the deep, clear lake.  Lionel
saw her there, and hastened to join her, wondering at the grave
expression on her face.

"What are you thinking of, Lillian?" he asked.  "You look sad and
anxious."

"I was thinking of Beatrice," she replied.  "She seems so
changed, so different.  I can not understand it."

"I can," said Lionel.  "You forget that she will soon leave the
old life far behind her.  She is going into a new world; a change
so great may well make one thoughtful."

"She loves Lord Airlie," returned Lillian--she could hear even
then the musical voice saying, "I love him so dearly, Lily"-- 
"she can not be unhappy."

"I do not mean that," he replied; "thought and silence are not
always caused by unhappiness.  Ah, Lily," he cried, "I wonder if
you guess ever so faintly at the thoughts that fill my heart!  I
wonder if you know how dearly I love you.  Nay, do not turn from
me, do not look frightened.  To me you are the truest, noblest,
and fairest woman in the world.  I love you so dearly, Lily, that
I have not a thought or wish away from you.  I am not worthy to
win you, I know--you are as far above me as the sun shining
overhead  but, if you would try, you might make me what you
would.  Could you like me?"

The sweet flushed face was raised to his; he read the happiness
shining in the clear eyes.  But she could not speak to him; words
seemed to die upon her lips.  Lionel took the little white hands
and clasped them in his own.

"I knew I should frighten you, Lily," he said, gently.  "Forgive
me if I have spoken too abruptly.  I do not wish you to decide at
once.  Take me on trial--see if you can learn to love me weeks,
months, or years hence.  I am willing to wait a whole life time
for you, my darling, and should think the time well spent.  Will
it be possible for you ever to like me?"

"I like you now," she said, simply.

"Then promise to endeavor to love me," he persisted; "will you,
Lily?  I will do anything you wish me; I will try my best to be
half as good as you are.  Promise me, darling--my life hangs on
your answer."

"I promise," she said; and he knew how much the words meant.

On the little hand that rested in his own he saw a pretty ring;
it was a large pearl set in gold.  Lionel drew it from her
finger.

"I shall take this, Lily," he said; "and, when Beatrice is
married and gone, I shall go to Lord Earle and ask him to give
you to me.  I will not go now; we will keep our secret for a
short time.  Two love affairs at once would be too much.  You
will learn to love me, and when the spring time comes, perhaps
you will make me happy as Beatrice will by then have made Lord
Airlie.  I shall keep the ring.  Lillian, you are my pearl, and
this will remind me of you.  Just to make me very happy, say you
are pleased."

"I will say more than that," she replied, a happy smile rippling
over her face; "I have more than half learned my lesson."

He kissed the pretty hand, and looked at the fair, flushed face
he dared not touch with his lips.

"I can not thank you," he said, his voice full of emotion.  "I
will live for you, Lily, and my life shall prove my gratitude.  I
begin to wish the spring were nearer.  I wonder if you will have
learned your lesson then."


Chapter XXXIV

Lord Airlie's return to Earlescourt had been delayed.  The
changes to take place at Lynnton involved more than he thought.
It was quite three weeks before he could leave the Hall and seek
again the presence he loved best on earth.

Three weeks, yet nothing had happened.  Beatrice had watched each
day begin and end until her heart grew faint with fear; she was
as far as ever from finding herself freed from Hugh Fernely.

Lord Airlie, on his arrival, was startled by the change in her
brilliant face.  Yet he was flattered by it.  He thought how
intensely she must love him if his absence could affect her so
strongly.  He kissed her pale face over and over again, declaring
that he would not leave her any more--no one else knew how to
take care of her.

They were all pleased to welcome him for every one liked Lord
Airlie, and the family circle did not seem complete without him.
That very night he had an interview with Lord Earle and besought
him to allow the marriage to take place as soon as possible.  He
had been miserable away from Beatrice, he declared, and he
thought she looked pale and grave.  Would Lord Earle be willing
to say November, or perhaps the latter end of October?

"My daughter must arrange the time herself" said Lord Earle;
"whatever day she chooses will meet with my approval."

Lord Airlie went to the drawing room where he had left Beatrice,
and told her Lord Earle's answer; she smiled, but he saw the
white lips quiver as she did so.

Only one month since his passionate, loving words would have made
the sweetest music to her; she listened and tried to look like
herself, but her heart was cold with vague, unutterable dread.

"The fourteenth of October"--clever Lord Airlie, by some system
of calculation known only to himself, persuaded Beatrice that
that was the "latter end of the month."

"Not another word," he said, gayly.  "I will go and tell Lord
Earle.  Do not say afterward that you have changed your mind, as
many ladies do. Beatrice, say to me, 'Hubert, I promise to
marry you on the fourteenth of October.'"

She repeated the words after him.

"It will be almost winter," he added; "the flowers will have
faded, the leaves will have fallen from the trees; yet no summer
day will ever be so bright to me as that."

She watched him quit the room, and a long, low cry came from her
lips.  Would it ever be?  She went to the window and looked at
the trees.  When the green leaves lay dead she would be Lord
Airlie's wife, or would the dark cloud of shame and sorrow have
fallen, hiding her forever from his sight?

Ah, if she had been more prudent!  How tame and foolish, how
distasteful the romance she had once thought delightful seemed
now!  If she had but told all to Lord Earle!

It was too late now!  Yet, despite the deadly fear that lay at
her heart, Beatrice still felt something like hope.  Hope is the
last thing to die in the human breast--it was not yet dead in
hers.

At least for that one evening--the first after Lord Airlie's
return--she would be happy.  She would throw the dark shadow
away from her, forget it, and enjoy her lover's society.  He
could see smiles on her face, and hear bright words such as he
loved.  Let the morrow bring what it would, she would be happy
that night.  And she kept her word.

Lord Airlie looked back afterward on that evening as one of the
pleasantest of his life.  There was no shadow upon the beautiful
face he loved so well.  Beatrice was all life and animation; her
gay, sweet words charmed every one who heard them.  Even Lionel
forgot to be jealous, and admired her more than he ever had
before.

Lord Earle smiled as he remarked to Lady Helena that all her
fears for her grandchild's health were vain--the true physician
was come at last.

When Lord Airlie bade Beatrice good night, he bent low over the
white, jeweled hand.

"I forget all time when with you," he said; "it does not seem an
hour since I came to Earlescourt."

The morrow brought the letter she had dreaded yet expected to
see.

It was not filled with loving, passionate words, as was the first
Hugh had written.  He said the time had come when he must have an
answer--when he must know from her own lips at what period he
might claim the fulfillment of her promise--when she would be
his wife.

He would wait no longer.  If it was to be war, let the war begin
he should win.  If peace, so much the better.  In any case he
was tired of suspense, and must know at once what she intended to
do.  He would trust to no more promises; that very night he would
be at Earlescourt, and must see her.  Still, though he intended
to enforce his rights, he would not wantonly cause her pain.  He
would not seek the presence of her father until she had seen him
and they had settled upon some plan of action.

"I know the grounds around Earlescourt well," he wrote.  "I
wandered through them for many nights three weeks ago.  A narrow
path runs from the gardens to the shrubbery--meet me there at
nine; it will be dark then, and you need not fear being seen.
Remember, Beatrice, at nine tonight I shall be there; and if you
do not come, I must seek you in the house, for see you I will."

The letter fell from her hands; cold drops of fear and shame
stood upon her brow; hatred and disgust filled her heart.  Oh,
that she should ever have placed herself in the power of such a
man! 

The blow had fallen at last.  She stood face to face with her
shame and fear.  How could she meet Hugh Fernely?  What should
she say to him?  How must such a meeting end?  It would but anger
him the more.  He should not even touch her hand in greeting, she
said to herself; and how would he endure her contempt?

She would not see him.  She dared not.  How could she find time?
Lord Airlie never left her side.  She could not meet Hugh.  The
web seemed closing round her, but she would break through it.

She would send him a letter saying she was ill, and begging him
to wait yet a little longer.  Despite his firm words, she knew he
would not refuse it if she wrote kindly.  Again came the old hope
something might happen in a few days.  If not, she must run
away; if everything failed and she could not free herself from
him, then she would leave home; in any case she would not fall
into his hands--rather death than that.

More than once she thought of Gaspar's words.  He was so true, so
brave--he would have died for her.  Ah, if he could but help
her, if she could but call him to her aid!  In this, the dark
hour of her life by her own deed she had placed herself beyond
the reach of all human help.

She would write--upon that she was determined; but who would
take the letter?  Who could she ask to stand at the shrubbery
gate and give to the stranger a missive from herself?  If she
asked such a favor from a servant, she would part with her secret
to one who might hold it as a rod of iron over her.  She was too
proud for that.  There was only one in the world who could help
her, and that was her sister Lillian.

She shrank with unutterable shame from telling her.  She
remembered how long ago at Knutsford she had said something that
had shocked her sister, and the scared, startled expression of
her face was with her still.  It was a humiliation beyond all
words.  Yet, if she could undergo it, there would be comfort in
Lillian's sympathy.  Lillian would take the letter, she would see
Hugh, and tell him she was ill.  Ill she felt in very truth.
Hugh would be pacified for a time if he saw Lillian.  She could
think of no other arrangement.  That evening she would tell her
sister--there was rest even in the thought.

Long before dinner Lady Helena came in search of Beatrice--it
was high time, she said, that orders should be sent to London for
her trousseau, and the list must be made out at once.

She sat calmly in Lady Helena's room, writing in obedience to her
words, thinking all the time how she should tell Lillian, how
best make her understand the deadly error committed, yet save
herself as much as she could.  Lady Earle talked of laces and
embroidery, of morning dresses and jewels, while Beatrice went
over in her mind every word of her confession.

"That will do," said Lady Earle, with a smile; "I have been very
explicit, but I fear it has been in vain.  Have you heard
anything I have said, Beatrice?"

She blushed, and looked so confused that Lady Helena said,
laughingly:

"You may go--do not be ashamed.  Many years ago I was just as
much in love myself, and just as unable to think of anything else
as you are now."

There was some difficulty in finding Lillian; she was discovered
at last in the library, looking over some fine old engravings
with Mr. Dacre.  He looked up hastily when Beatrice asked her
sister to spare her half an hour.

"Do not go, Lily," he said, jestingly; "it is only some nonsense
about wedding dresses.  Let us finish this folio."

But Beatrice had no gay repartee for him.  She looked grave,
although she tried to force a smile.

"I can not understand that girl," he said to himself, as the
library door closed behind the two sisters.  "I could almost
fancy that something was distressing her."

"Lily," said Beatrice, "I want you very much.  I am sorry to take
you from Lionel; you like being with him, I think."

The fair face of her sister flushed warmly.

"But I want you, dear," said Beatrice.  "Oh, Lily, I am in bitter
trouble!  No one can help me but you."

They went together into the little boudoir Beatrice called her
own.  She placed her sister in the easy lounging chair drawn near
the window, and then half knelt, half sat at her feet.

"I am in such trouble, Lily!" she cried.  "Think how great it is
when I know not how to tell you."

The sweet, gentle eyes looked wonderingly into her own.  Beatrice
clasped her sister's hands.

"You must not judge me harshly," she said, "I am not good like
you, Lily; I never could be patient and gentle like you.  Do you
remember, long ago, at Knutsford, how I found you one morning
upon the cliffs, and told you that I hated my life?  I did hate
it, Lillian," she continued.  "You can never tell how much; its
quiet monotony was killing me.  I have done wrong; but surely
they are to blame who made my life what it was then--who shut me
out from the world, instead of giving me my rightful share of its
pleasures.  I can not tell you what I did, Lily."

She laid her beautiful, sad face on her sister's hands.  Lillian
bent over her, and whispered how dearly she loved her, and how
she would do anything to help her.

"That very morning," she said, never raising her eyes to her
sister's face--"that morning, Lily, I met a stranger--a
gentleman he seemed to me--and he watched me with admiring eyes.
I met him again, and he spoke to me.  He walked by my side
through the long meadows, and told me strange stories of foreign
lands he had visited--such stories!  I forgot that he was a
stranger, and talked to him as I am talking to you now.  I met
him again and again.  Nay, do not turn from me; I shall die if
you shrink away."

The gentle arms clasped her more closely.

"I am not turning from you," replied Lillian.  "I can not love
you more than I do now."

"I met him" continued Beatrice, "every day, unknown to every one
about me.  He praised my beauty, and I was filled with joy; then
he talked to me of love, and I listened without anger.  I swear
to you," she said, "that I did it all without thought; it was the
novelty, the flattery, the admiration that pleased me, not he
himself, I believe Lily.  I rarely thought of him.  He interested
me; he had eloquent words at his command, and seeing how I loved
romance, he told me stories of adventure that held me enchanted
and breathless.  I lost sight of him in thinking of the wonders
he related.  They are to blame, Lily, who shut me out from the
living world.  Had I been in my proper place here at home, where
I could have seen and judged people rightly, it would not have
happened.  At first it was but a pleasant break in a life dreary
beyond words; then I looked for the daily meed of flattery and
homage.  I could not do without it.  Lily, will you hold me to
have been mad when I tell you the time came when I allowed that
man to hold my hands as you are doing, to kiss my face, and win
from me a promise that I would be his wife?"

Beatrice looked up then and saw the fair, pitying face almost as
white as snow.

"Is it worse than you thought?" she asked.

"Oh, yes," said Lillian; "terrible, irretrievable, I fear!"


Chapter XXXV

There was unbroken silence for some minutes; then Lillian bent
over her sister, and said:

"Tell me all, darling; perhaps I can help you."

"I promised to be his wife, Lily," continued Beatrice.  "I am
sure I did not mean it.  I was but a child.  I did not realize
all that the words meant.  He kissed my face, and said he should
come to claim me.  Believe me, Lily, I never thought of marriage.
Brilliant pictures of foreign lands filled my mind; I looked upon
Hugh Fernely only as a means of escape from a life I detested.
He promised to take me to places the names of which filled me
with wonder.  I never thought of leaving you or mamma--I never
thought of the man himself as of a lover."

"You did not care for him, then, as you do for Lord Airlie?"
interposed Lillian.

"Do not pain me!" begged Beatrice.  "I love Hubert with the love
that comes but once in life; that man was nothing to me except
that his flattery, and the excitement of contriving to meet him,
made my life more endurable.  He gave me a ring, and said in two
years' time he should return to claim me.  He was going on a long
voyage.  Lily, I felt relieved when he was gone--the novelty was
over--I had grown tired.  Besides, when the glamour fell from my
eyes, I was ashamed of what I had done.  I tried to forget all
about him; every time the remembrance of him came to my mind I
drove it from me.  I did not think it possible he would ever
return.  It was but a summer's pastime.  That summer has darkened
my life.  Looking back, I own I did very wrong.  There is great
blame attaching to me, but surely they who shut me out from the
living world were blameworthy also.

"Remember all through my story, darling, that I am not so good,
not so patient and gentle as you. I was restless at the Elms,
like a bird in a cage; you were content.  I was vain, foolish,
and willful; but, looking back at the impetuous, imperious child,
full of romance, untrained, longing for the strife of life,
longing for change, for excitement, for gayety, chafing under
restraint, I think there was some little excuse for me.  There
was no excuse for what followed.  When papa spoke to us--you
remember it, Lily--and asked so gently if we had either of us a
secret in our lives--when he promised to pardon anything,
provided we kept nothing from him--I ought to have told him
then.  There is no excuse for that error.  I was ashamed.
Looking round upon the noble faces hanging on the wall, looking
at him, so proud, so dignified, I could not tell him what his
child had done.  Oh, Lily, if I had told him, I should not be
kneeling here at your feet now."

Lillian made no reply, but pressed the proud, drooping figure
more closely to her side.

"I can hardly tell the rest," said Beatrice; "the words frighten
me as I utter them.  This man, who has been the bane of my life,
was going away for two years.  He was to claim me when he
returned.  I never thought he would return; I was so happy, I
could not believe it."  Here sobs choked her utterance.

Presently she continued: "Lily, he is here; he claims me, and
also the fulfillment of my promise to be his wife."

A look of unutterable dread came over the listener's fair,
pitying face.

"He wrote to me three weeks since; I tried to put him off.  He
wrote again this morning, and swears he will see me.  He will be
here tonight at nine o'clock.  Oh, Lily, save me, save me, or I
shall die!"

Bitter sobs broke from the proud lips.

"I never knelt to any one before," Beatrice said; "I kneel to
you, my sister.  No one else can help me.  You must see him for
me, give him a letter from me, and tell him I am very ill.  It is
no untruth, Lily.  I am ill, my brain burns, and my heart is cold
with fear.  Will you do this for me?"

"I would rather almost give you my life," said Lillian gently.

"Oh, do not say that, Lily!  Do you know what there is at stake?
Do you remember papa's words--that, if ever he found one of us
guilty of any deceit, or involved in any clandestine love affair,
even if it broke his heart he would send the guilty one from him
and never see her again?  Think, darling, what it would be for me
to leave Earlescourt--to leave all the magnificence I love so
dearly, and drag out a weary life at the Elms.  Do you think I
could brook Lord Earle's angry scorn and Lady Helena's pained
wonder?  Knowing our father as you know him, do you believe he
would pardon me?"

"I do not," replied Lily, sadly.

"That is not all," continued Beatrice.  "I might bear anger,
scorn, and privation, but, Lily, if this miserable secret is
discovered, Lord Airlie will cease to love me.  He might have
forgiven me if I had told him at first; he would not know that I
had lied to him and deceived him.  I can not lose him--I can not
give him up.  For our mother's sake, for my sake, help me, Lily.
Do what I have asked!"

"If I do it," said Lillian, "it will give you but a few days'
reprieve; it will avail nothing; he will be here again."

"I shall think of some means of escape in a few days," answered
Beatrice wistfully.  "Something must happen, Lily, fortune could
not be so cruel to me; it could not rob me of my love.  If I can
not free myself, I shall run away.  I would rather suffer
anything than face Lord Airlie or my father.  Say you will help
me for my love's sake!  Do not let me lose my love!"

"I will help you," said Lillian; "it is against my better
judgment--against my idea of right--but I can not refuse you.
I will see the man, and give him your letter. Beatrice, let me
persuade you.  You can not free yourself.  I see no way--running
away is all nonsense--but to tell Lord Earle and your lover;
anything would be better than to live as you do, a drawn sword
hanging over your heart.  Tell them, and trust to their kindness;
at least you will have peace of mind then.  They will prevent him
from annoying you."

"I can not," she said, and the breath came gasping from her lips.
"Lillian, you do not know what Lord Airlie is to me.  I could
never meet his anger.  If ever you love any one you will
understand better.  He is everything to me.  I would suffer any
sorrow, even death, rather than see his face turned coldly from
me."

She loosened her grasp of Lillian's hands and fell upon the
floor, weeping bitterly and passionately.  Her sister, bending
over her, heard the pitiful words--"My love, my love!  I can not
lose my love!"

The passionate weeping ceased, and the proud, sad face grew calm
and still.

"You can not tell what I have suffered, Lily," she said, humbly.
"See, my pride is all beaten down, only those who have had a
secret, eating heart and life away, can tell what I have endured.
A few more days of agony like this, and I shall be free forever
from Hugh Fernely."

Her sister tried to soothe her with gentle words, but they
brought no comfort.

"He will be here at nine," she said; "it is six now.  I will
write my letter.  He will be at the shrubbery gate.  I will
manage so that you shall have time.  Give him the note I will
write, speak to him for me, tell him I am ill and can not see
him.  Shall you be frightened?"

"Yes," replied Lillian, gently; "but that will not matter.  I
must think of you, not of myself."

"You need not fear him," said Beatrice.  "Poor Hugh, I could pity
him if I did not hate him.  Lily, I will thank you when my agony
is over; I can not now."

She wrote but a few words, saying she was ill and unable to see
him; he must be satisfied, and willing to wait yet a little
longer.

She gave the letter to her sister.  Lillian's heart ached as she
noted the trembling hands and quivering lips.

"I have not asked you to keep my secret, Lily," said Beatrice,
sorrowfully.

"There is no need," was the simple reply.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

Sir Harry and Lady Laurence dined that day at Earlescourt, and it
was nearly nine before the gentlemen, who did not sit long over
their wine, came into the drawing room.  The evening was somewhat
chilly; a bright fire burned in the grate, and the lamps were
lighted.  Sir Harry sat down to his favorite game of chess with
Lady Helena; Lord Earle challenged Lady Laurence to a game at
ecarte.  The young people were left to themselves.

"In twenty years' time," said Lionel to Lillian, "we may seek
refuge in cards; at present music and moonlight are preferable,
Lily.  You never sing to me; come to the piano now."

But she remembered the dreaded hour was drawing near.

"Pray excuse me," she begged; "I will sing for you presently."

He looked surprised; it was the first time she had ever refused
him a favor.

"Shall we finish the folio of engravings?" he asked.

Knowing that, when once she was seated by his side, it would be
impossible to get away, she again declined; but this time the
fair face flushed, and the sweet eyes drooped.

"How guilty you look," he said.  "Is there any mystery on hand?
Are you tired of me?  Or is there to be another important
consultation over the wedding dresses?"

"I have something to attend to," she replied, evasively.  "Get
the folio ready--I shall not be long."

Beatrice, who had listened to the brief dialogue in feverish
suspense, now came to the rescue, asking Lionel to give them the
benefit of his clear, ringing tenor in a trio of Mendelssohn's.

"My 'clear, ringing tenor' is quite at your service," he said
with a smile.  "Lily is very unkind to me tonight."

They went to the piano, where Lord Airlie awaited them; and
Lillian, looking at her small, jeweled watch--Lord Earle's
present--saw that it wanted three minutes to nine.

She at once quitted the room, unobserved, as she thought; but
Lionel saw her go.

No words can tell how distasteful and repugnant was the task she
had undertaken.  She would have suffered anything almost to have
evaded it.  She, who never had a secret; she, whose every word
and action were open as the day; she, who shrank from all deceit
and untruth as from a deadly plague, to be mixed up with a
wretched clandestine love affair like this!  She, to steal out of
her father's house at night, to meet a stranger, and plead her
sister's cause with him!  The thought horrified her; but the
beautiful face in its wild sorrow, the sad voice in its
passionate anguish, urged her on.

Lillian went hastily to her own room.  She took a large black
shawl and drew it closely round her, hiding the pretty evening
dress and the rich pearls.  Then, with the letter in her hand,
she went down the staircase that led from her rooms to the
garden.

The night was dark; heavy clouds sailed swiftly across the sky,
the wind moaned fitfully, bending the tall trees as it were in
anger, then whispering round them as though suing for pardon.
Lillian had never been out at night alone before, and her first
sensation was one of fear.  She crossed the gardens where the
autumn flowers were fading; the lights shone gayly from the Hall
windows; the shrubbery looked dark and mysterious.  She was
frightened at the silence and darkness, but went bravely on.  He
was there.  By the gate she saw a tall figure wrapped in a
traveling cloak; as she crossed the path, he stepped hastily
forward, crying with a voice she never forgot:

"Beatrice, at last you have come!"

"It is not Beatrice," she said, shrinking from the outstretched
arms.  "I am Lillian Earle.  My sister is ill, and has sent you
this."


Chapter XXXVI

Hugh Fernely took the letter from Lillian's hands, and read it
with a muttered imprecation of disappointment.  The moon, which
had been struggling for the last hour with a mass of clouds,
shone out faintly; by its light Lillian saw a tall man with a
dark, handsome face browned with the sun of warm climes, dark
eyes that had in them a wistful sadness, and firm lips.  He did
not look like the gentlemen she was accustomed to.  He was polite
and respectful.  When he heard her name, he took off his hat, and
stood uncovered during the interview.

"Wait!" he cried.  "Ah, must I wait yet longer?  Tell your sister
I have waited until my yearning wish to see her is wearing my
life away."

"She is really ill,"returned Lillian. "I am alarmed for her.  Do
not be angry with me if I say she is ill through anxiety and
fear."

"Has she sent you to excuse her?" he asked, gloomily.  "It is of
no use.  Your sister is my promised wife, Miss Lillian, and see
her I will."

"You must wait at least until she is willing," said Lillian, and
her calm, dignified manner influenced him even more than her
words, as she looked earnestly into Hugh Fernely's face.

It was not a bad face, she thought; there was no cruelty or
meanness there.  She read love so fierce and violent in it that
it startled her.  He did not look like one who would wantonly and
willfully make her sister wretched for life.  Hope grew in her
heart as she gazed.  She resolved to plead with him for Beatrice,
to ask him to forget a childish, foolish promise--a childish
error.

"My sister is very unhappy," she said, bravely; "so unhappy that
I do not think she can bear much more; it will kill her or drive
her mad."

"It is killing me," he interrupted.

"You do not look cruel, Mr. Fernely," continued Lillian. "Your
face is good and true--I would trust you.  Release my sister.
She was but a foolish, impetuous child when she made you that
promise.  If she keeps it, all her life will be wretched.  Be
generous and release her."

"Did she bid you ask me?" he interrogated.

"No," she replied; "but do you know what the keeping of the
promise will cost her?  Lord Earle will never forgive her.  She
will have to leave home, sister, friends--all she loves and
values most.  Judge whether she could ever care for you, if you
brought this upon her."

"I can not help it," he said gloomily.  "She promised to be my
wife, Miss Lillian--Heaven knows I am speaking truthfully--and
I have lived on her words.  You do not know what the strong love
of a true man is.  I love her so that if she chose to place her
little foot upon me, and trample the life out of me, I would not
say her nay.  I must see her--the hungry, yearning love that
fills my heart must be satisfied."  Great tears shone in his
eyes, and deep sobs shook his strong frame.

"I will not harm her," he said, "but I must see her.  Once, and
once only, her beautiful face lay on my breast--that beautiful,
proud face!  No mother ever yearned to see her child again more
than I long to see her.  Let her come to me, Miss Lillian; let me
kneel at her feet as I did before,--If she sends me from her,
there will be pity in death; but she can not.  There is not a
woman in the world who could send such love as mine away!  You
can not understand," he continued. "It is more than two years
since I left her; night and day her face has been before me.  I
have lived upon my love; it is my life--my everything.  I could
no more drive it from my breast than I could tear my heart from
my body and still live on."

"Even if my sister cared for you," said Lillian, gently--for
his passionate words touched her--"you must know that Lord Earle
would never allow her to keep such a promise as she made."

"She knew nothing of Lord Earle when it was made," he replied,
"nor did I.  She was a beautiful child, pining away like a bright
bird shut up in a cage.  I promised her freedom and liberty; she
promised me her love.  Where was Lord Earle then?  She was safe
with me.  I loved her.  I was kinder to her than her own father;
I took care of her--he did not."

"It is all changed now," said Lillian.

"But I can not change," he answered.  "If fortune had made me a
king, should I have loved your sister less!  Is a man's heart a
plaything?  Can I call back my love?  It has caused me woe
enough."

Lillian knew not what to say in the presence of this mighty love;
her gentle efforts at mediation were bootless.  She pitied him 
she pitied Beatrice.

"I am sure you can be generous," she said, after a short silence.
"Great, true, noble love is never selfish.  My sister can never
be happy with you; then release her.  If you force her, or rather
try to force her, to keep this rash promise, think how she will
dislike you.  If you are generous, and release her, think how she
will esteem you."

"Does she not love me?" he asked; and his voice was hoarse with
pain.

"No," replied Lillian, gently; "it is better for you to know the
truth.  She does not love you--she never will."

"I do not believe it," he cried.  "I will never believe it from
any lips but her own!  Not love me!  Great Heaven!  Do you know
you are speaking of the woman who promised to be my wife?  If she
tells me so, I will believe her."

"She will tell you," said Lillian, "and you must not blame her.
Come again when she is well."

"No," returned Hugh Fernely; "I have waited long enough.  I am
here to see her, and I swear I will not leave until she has
spoken to me."

He drew a pencil case from his pocket, and wrote a few lines on
the envelope which Beatrice had sent.

"Give that to your sister," he said, softly; "and, Miss Lillian,
I thank you for coming to me.  You have been very kind and
gentle.  You have a fair, true face.  Never break a man's heart
for pastime, or because the long sunny hours hang heavy upon your
hands."

"I wish I could say something to comfort you," she said.  He held
out his hand and she could not refuse hers.

"Goodbye, Miss Lillian!  Heaven bless you for your sympathy."

"Goodbye," she returned, looking at the dark, passionate face she
was never more to see.

The moon was hidden behind a dense mass of thick clouds.  Hugh
Fernely walked quickly down the path.  Lillian, taking the folded
paper, hastened across the gardens.  But neither of them saw a
tall, erect figure, or a pale, stricken face; neither of them
heard Lionel Dacre utter a low cry as the shawl fell from
Lillian's golden head.

He had tried over the trio, but it did not please him; he did not
want music--he wanted Lillian.  Beatrice played badly, too, as
though she did not know what she was doing.  Plainly enough Lord
Airlie wanted him out of the way.

"Where are you going?" asked Beatrice, as he placed the music on
the piano.

"To look for a good cigar," he replied.  "Neither Airlie nor you
need pretend to be polite, Bee, and say you hope I will not leave
you."  He quitted the drawing room, and went to his own room,
where a box of cigars awaited him.  He selected one, and went out
into the garden to enjoy it.  Was it chance that led him to the
path by the shrubbery?  The wind swayed the tall branches, but
there came a lull, and then he heard a murmur of voices.  Looking
over the hedge, he saw the tall figure of a man, and the slight
figure of a young girl shrouded in a black shawl.

"A maid and her sweetheart," said Lionel to himself.  "Now that
is not precisely the kind of thing Lord Earle would like; still,
it is no business of mine."

But the man's voice struck him--it was full of the dignity of
true passion.  He wondered who he was.  He saw the young girl
place her hand in his for a moment, and then hasten rapidly away.

He thought himself stricken mad when the black shawl fall and
showed in the faint moonlight the fair face and golden hair of
Lillian Earle.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

When Lillian re-entered the drawing room, the pretty ormulu clock
was chiming half past nine.  The chess and card tables were just
as she had left them.  Beatrice and Lord Airlie were still at the
piano.  Lionel was nowhere to be seen.  She went up to Beatrice
and smilingly asked Lord Airlie if he could spare her sister for
five minutes.

"Ten, if you wish it," he replied, "but no longer;" and the two
sisters walked through the long drawing room into the little
boudoir.

"Quick, Lillian," cried Beatrice, "have you seen him?  What does
he say?"

"I have seen him," she replied; "there is no time now to tell all
he said.  He sent this note," and Lillian gave the folded paper
into her sister's hand, and then clasped both hands in her own.

"Let me tell you, Beatrice darling, before you read it," she
said, "that I tried to soften his heart; and I think, if you will
see him yourself, and ask for your freedom, you will not ask in
vain."

A light that was dazzling as sunshine came into the beautiful
face.

"Oh, Lily," she cried, "can it be true?  Do not mock me with
false hopes; my life seems to tremble in the balance."

"He is not cruel," said Lillian. "I am sorry for him.  If you see
him I feel sure he will release you.  See what he says."

Beatrice opened the letter; it contained but a few penciled
lines.  She did not give them to Lillian to read.

"Beatrice," wrote Hugh Fernely, "you must tell me with your own
lips that you do not love me.  You must tell me yourself that
every sweet hope you gave me was a false lie.  I will not leave
Earlescourt again without seeing you.  On Thursday night, at ten
o'clock, I will be at the same place--meet me, and tell me if
you want your freedom.  Hugh."

"I shall win!" she cried.  "Lily, hold my hands--they tremble
with happiness. See, I can not hold the paper.  He will release
me, and I shall not lose my love--my love, who is all the world
to me.  How must I thank you?  This is Tuesday; how shall I live
until Thursday?  I feel as though a load, a burden, the weight of
which no words can tell, were taken from me.  Lily, I shall be
Lord Airlie's wife, and you will have saved me."

"Beatrice," said Lord Earle, as the sisters, in returning, passed
by the chess table, "our game is finished, will you give us a
song?"

Never had the magnificent voice rung out so joyously, never had
the beautiful face looked so bright.  She sang something that was
like an air of triumph--no under current of sadness marred its
passionate sweetness.  Lord Airlie bent over her chair
enraptured.

"You sing like one inspired, Beatrice," he said.

"I was thinking of you," she replied; and he saw by the dreamy,
rapt expression of her face that she meant what she had said.

Presently Lord Airlie was summoned to Lady Helena's assistance in
some little argument over cards, and Beatrice, while her fingers
strayed mechanically over the keys, arrived at her decision.  She
would see Hugh.  She could not avert that; and she must meet him
as bravely as she could.  After all, as Lillian had said, he was
not cruel, and he did love her.  The proud lip curled in scornful
triumph as she thought how dearly he loved her.  She would appeal
to his love, and beseech him to release her.

She would beseech him with such urgency that he could not refuse.
Who ever refused her?  Could she not move men's hearts as the
wind moves the leaves?  He would be angry at first, perhaps
fierce and passionate, but in the end she would prevail.  As she
sat there, dreamy, tender melodies stealing, as it were, from her
fingers, she went in fancy through the whole scene.  She knew how
silent the sleeping woods would be--how dark and still the
night.  She could imagine Hugh's face, browned by the sun and
travel.  Poor Hugh!  In the overflow of her happiness she felt
more kindly toward him.

She wished him well.  He might marry some nice girl in his own
station of life, and be a prosperous, happy man, and she would be
a good friend to him if he would let her.  No one would ever know
her secret.  Lillian would keep it faithfully, and down the fair
vista of years she saw herself Lord Airlie's beloved wife, the
error of her youth repaired and forgotten.

The picture was so pleasant that it was no wonder her songs grew
more triumphant.  Those who listened to the music that night
never forgot it.


Chapter XXXVII

Lionel Dacre stood for some minutes stunned with the shock and
surprise.  He could not be mistaken; unless his senses played him
false, it was Lillian Earle whom he had mistaken for a maid
meeting her lover.  It was Lillian he had believed so pure and
guileless who had stolen from her father's home under the cover
of night's darkness and silence--who had met in her father's
grounds one whom she dared not meet in the light of day.

If his dearest friend had sworn this to Lionel he would not have
believed it.  His own senses he could not doubt.  The faint,
feeble moonlight had as surely fallen on the fair face and golden
hair of Lillian Earle as the sun shone by day in the sky.

He threw away his cigar, and ground his teeth with rage.  Had the
skies fallen at his feet he could not have been more startled and
amazed.  Then, after all, all women were alike.  There was in
them no truth; no goodness; the whole world was alike.  Yet he
had believed in her so implicitly--in her guileless purity, her
truth, her freedom from every taint of the world.  That fair,
spirituelle form had seemed to him only as a beautiful casket
hiding a precious gem.  Nay, still more, though knowing and
loving her, he had begun to care for everything good and pure
that interested her.  Now all was false and hateful.

There was no truth in the world, he said to himself.  This girl,
whom he had believed to be the fairest and sweetest among women,
was but a more skillful deceiver than the rest.  His mother's
little deceptions, hiding narrow means and straitened
circumstances, were as nothing compared with Lillian's deceit.

And he had loved her so!  Looking into those tender eyes, he had
believed love and truth shone there; the dear face that had
blushed and smiled for him had looked so pure and guileless.

How long was it since he had held her little hands clasped within
his own, and, abashed before her sweet innocence, had not dared
to touch her lips, even when she had promised to love him?  How
he had been duped and deceived!  How she must have laughed at his
blind folly!

Who was the man?  Some one she must have known years before.
There was no gentleman in Lord Earle's circle who would have
stolen into his grounds like a thief by night.  Why had he not
followed him, and thrashed him within an inch of his life? Why
had he let him escape?

The strong hands were clinched tightly.  It was well for Hugh
Fernely that he was not at that moment in Lionel's power.  Then
the fierce, hot anger died away, and a passion of despair seized
him.  A long, low cry came from his lips, a bitter sob shook his
frame.  He had lost his fair, sweet love.  The ideal he had
worshiped lay stricken; falsehood and deceit marked its fair
form.

While the first smart of pain was upon him, he would not return
to the house; he would wait until he was calm and cool.  Then he
would see how she dared to meet him.

His hands ceased to tremble; the strong, angry pulsating of his
heart grew calmer.  He went back to the drawing room; and, except
that the handsome face was pale even to the lips, and that a
strange, angry light gleamed in the frank, kindly eyes, there was
little difference in Lionel Dacre.

She was there, bending over the large folio he had asked her to
show him; the golden hair fell upon the leaves.  She looked up as
he entered; her face was calm and serene; there was a faint pink
flush on the cheeks, and a bright smile trembled on her features.

"Here are the drawings," she said; "will you look over them?"

He remembered how he had asked her to sing to him, and she
refused, looking confused and uneasy the while.  He understood
now the reason why.

He took a chair by her side; the folio lay upon a table placed in
a large room, lighted by a silver lamp.  They were as much alone
there as though they had been in another room.  She took out a
drawing, and laid it before him.  He neither saw it nor heard
what she remarked.

"Lillian," he said, suddenly, "if you were asked what was the
most deadly sin a woman could commit, what should you reply?"

"That is a strange question," she answered. "I do not know,
Lionel.  I think I hate all sin alike."

"Then I will tell you," he said bitterly; "it is false, foul
deceit--black, heartless treachery."

She looked up in amazement at his angry tone; then there was for
some moments unbroken silence.

"I can not see the drawings," he said; "take them away.  Lillian
Earle, raise your eyes to mine; look me straight in the face.
How long is it since I asked you to be my wife?"

Her gentle eyes never wavered, they were fixed half in wonder on
his, but at his question the faint flush on her cheeks grew
deeper.

"Not very long," she replied; "a few days."

"You said you loved me," he continued.

"I do," she said.

"Now, answer me again.  Have you ever loved or cared for any one
else, as you say you do for me?"

"Never," was the quiet reply.

"Pray pardon the question--have you received the attentions of
any lover before receiving mine?"

"Certainly not," she said, wondering still more.

"I have all your affection, your confidence, your trust; you have
never duped or deceived me; you have been open, truthful, and
honest with me?"

"You forget yourself, Lionel," she said, with gentle dignity;
"you should not use such words to me."

"Answer!" he returned.  "You have to do with a desperate man.
Have you deceived me?"

"Never," she replied, "In thought, word, or deed."

"Merciful Heaven!" he cried.  "That one can be so fair and so
false!"

There was nothing but wonder in the face that was raised to his.

"Lillian," he said, "I have loved you as the ideal of all that
was pure and noble in woman.  In you I saw everything good and
holy.  May Heaven pardon you that my faith has died a violent
death."

"I can not understand you," she said, slowly.  "Why do you speak
to me so?"

"I will use plainer words," he replied--"so plain that you can
not mistake them.  I, your betrothed husband, the man you love
and trust, ask you, Lillian Earle, who was it you met tonight in
your father's grounds?"

He saw the question strike her as lightning sometimes strikes a
fair tree.  The color faded from her lips; a cloud came over the
clear, dove-like eyes; she tried to answer, but the words died
away in a faint murmur.

"Do you deny that you were there?" he asked.  "Remember, I saw
you, and I saw him.  Do you deny it?"

"No," she replied.

"Who was it?" he cried; and his eyes flamed so angrily upon her
that she was afraid.  "Tell me who it was.  I will follow him to
the world's end.  Tell me."

"I can not, Lionel," she whispered; "I can not.  For pity's sake,
keep my secret!"

"You need not be afraid," he said, haughtily.  "I shall not
betray you to Lord Earle.  Let him find out for himself what you
are, as I have done.  I could curse myself for my own trust.  Who
is he?"

"I can not tell you," she stammered, and he saw her little white
hands wrung together in agony.  "Oh, Lionel, trust me--do not be
angry with me."

"You can not expect me," he said, although he was softened by the
sight of her sorrow, "to know of such an action and not to speak
of it, Lillian.  If you can explain it, do so.  If the man was an
old lover of yours, tell me so; in time I may forget the deceit,
if you are frank with me now.  If there be any circumstance that
extenuates or explains what you did, tell it to me now."

"I can not," she said, and her fair face drooped sadly away from
him.

"That I quite believe," he continued, bitterly.  "You can not and
will not.  You know the alternative, I suppose?"

The gentle eyes were raised to his in mute, appealing sorrow, but
she spoke not.

"Tell me now," he said, "whom it was you stole out of the house
to meet--why you met him?  Be frank with me; and, if it was but
girlish nonsense, in time I may pardon you.  If you refuse to
tell me, I shall leave Earlescourt, and never look upon your
false, fair face again."

She buried her face in her hands, and he heard a low moan of
sorrow come from her white lips.

"Will you tell me, Lillian?" he asked again--and he never
forgot the deadly anguish of the face turned toward him.

"I can not," she replied; her voice died away, and he thought she
was falling from her chair.

"That is your final decision; you refuse to tell me what, as your
accepted lover, I have a right to know?"

"Trust me, Lionel," she implored.  "Try, for the love you bear
me, to trust me!"

"I will never believe in any one again," he said.  "Take back
your promise, Lillian Earle; you have broken a true and honest
heart, you have blighted a whole life.  Heaven knows what I shall
become, drifted from you.  I care not.  You have deceived me.
Take back your ring.  I will say goodbye to you.  I shall not
care to look upon your false, fair face again."

"Oh, Lionel, wait!" she cried.  "Give me time--do not leave me
so!"

"Time will make little difference," he answered; "I shall not
leave the Hall until tomorrow morning; you can write to me if you
wish me to remain."

He laid the ring upon the table, refusing to notice the
trembling, outstretched hand.  He could not refrain from looking
back at her as he quitted the room.  He saw the gentle face, so
full of deadly sorrow, with its white quivering lips; and yet he
thought to himself, although she looked stricken with anguish,
there was no guilt on the clear, fair brow.

He turned back from the door and went straight to Lord Earle.

"I shall leave Earlescourt tomorrow," he said, abruptly.  "I must
go, Lord Earle; do not press to stay."

"Come and go as you will, Lionel," said Ronald, surprised at the
brusqueness of his manner; "we are always pleased to see you and
sorry to lose you.  You will return soon, perhaps?"

"I will write to you in a few days," he replied. "I must say
goodbye to Lady Earle."

She was astounded.  Beatrice and Lord Airlie came up to him 
there was a general expression of surprise and regret.  He,
unlike himself, was brusque, and almost haughty.

Sir Harry and Lady Laurence had gone home.  Beatrice, with a
vague fear that something had gone wrong, said she was tired;
Lord Airlie said goodnight; and in a few minutes Lady Helena and
her son were left alone.

"What has come over Lionel?" asked Ronald.  "Why, mother, how
mistaken I am!  Do you know that I quite believed he was falling
in love with Lillian?"

"He did that long ago," replied Lady Helena, with a smile.  "Say
nothing about it.  Lionel is very proud and impetuous.  I fancy
he and Lillian have had some little dispute.  Matters of that
kind are best left alone--interference always does harm.  He
will come back in a few days; and all be right again.  Ronald,
there is one question I have been wishing to ask you--do not be
angry if I pain you, my son.  Beatrice will be married soon--do
you not intend her mother to be present at the wedding?"

Lord Earle rose from his chair, and began, as he always did in
time of anxiety, to pace up and down the room.

"I had forgotten her claim," he said.  "I can not tell what to
do, mother.  It would be a cruel, unmerited slight to pass her
over, but I do not wish to see her.  I have fought a hard battle
with my feelings, but I can not bring myself to see her."

"Yet you loved her very much once," said Lady Helena.

"I did," he replied, gently.  "Poor Dora."

"It is an awful thing to live at enmity with any one," said Lady
Helena--"but with one's own wife!  I can not understand it,
Ronald."

"You mistake, mother," he said, eagerly; "I am not at enmity with
Dora.  She offended me--she hurt my honor--she pained me in a
way I can never forget."

"You must forgive her some day," replied Lady Earle; "why not
now?"

"No," he said, sadly.  "I know myself--I know what I can do and
what I can not do.  I could take my wife in my arms, and kiss her
face--I could not live with her.  I shall forgive her, mother,
when all that is human is dying away from me.  I shall forgive
her in the hour of death."


Chapter XXXVIII

Lillian Earle was no tragedy queen.  She never talked about
sacrifice or dying, but there was in her calm, gentle nature a
depth of endurance rarely equaled.  She had never owned, even to
herself, how dearly she loved Lionel Dacre--how completely every
thought and hope was centered in him.  Since she had first
learned to care for him, she had never looked her life in the
face and imagined what it would be without him.

It never entered her mind to save herself at the expense of her
sister; the secret had been intrusted to her, and she could not
conceive the idea of disclosing it.  If the choice had been
offered her between death and betraying Beatrice, she would have
chosen death, with a simple consciousness that she was but doing
her duty.

So, when Lionel uttered those terrible words--when she found
that he had seen her--she never dreamed of freeing herself from
blame, and telling the story of her sister's fault.  His words
were bitterly cruel; they stung her with sharp pain.  She had
never seen contempt or scorn before on that kindly, honest face;
now, she read both.  "I know that He was the Messiah, Lord."
"And yet you do not worship Him."

The Jew said:

"It was not altogether worship He desired. He asked that men should
love Him. He does not ask love of me."
"I find that an obscure saying," Demetrios considered.

"It is a true saying, King of Kings. In time it will be made
plain.
That time is not yet come. I used to pray it would come soon.
Now I do not pray any longer. I only wait."
Demetrios tugged at his chin, his eyes narrowed, meditating.

He laughed.

Demetrios said:

"It is no affair of mine. What am I that I am called upon to have
prejudices concerning the universe?

It is highly probable there are gods of some sort or another, but
I do not so far flatter myself as to consider that any possible god
would be at all interested in my opinion of him.

In any event, I am Demetrios. Let the worst come, and in whatever
baleful underworld I find myself imprisoned I shall maintain myself
there in a manner not unworthy of Demetrios."

The proconsul shrugged at this point. "I do not find you amusing,
Ahasuerus. You may go."

"I hear, and I obey," the Jew replied. He went away patiently.

Then Demetrios turned toward Melicent, rejoicing that his
chattel had golden hair and was comely beyond comparison with all
other women he had ever seen.

Said Demetrios:

"I love you, Melicent, and you do not love me. Do not be
offended because my speech is harsh, for even though I know my
candour is distasteful I must speak the truth.

You have been obdurate too long, denying Kypris what is due to her.

I think that your brain is giddy because of too much exulting
in the magnificence of your body and in the number of men who
have desired it to their own hurt.

I concede your beauty, yet what will it matter a hundred years from
now?

"I admit that my refrain is old. But it will presently take on a
more poignant meaning, because a hundred years from now you--even
you, dear Melicent!--and all the loveliness which now causes
me to estimate life as a light matter in comparison with your love,
will be only a bone or two.

Your lustrous eyes, which are now more beautiful than it is possible
to express, will be unsavoury holes and a worm will crawl through
them; and what will it matter a hundred years from now?

"A hundred years from now should anyone break open our gilded tomb,
he will find Melicent to be no more admirable than Demetrios.

One skull is like another, and is as lightly split with a mattock.
You will be as ugly as I, and nobody will be thinking of your eyes
and hair.

Hail, rain and dew will drench us both impartially when I lie
at your side, as I intend to do, for a hundred years and
yet another hundred years.

You need not frown, for what will it matter a hundred years from
now?

"Melicent, I offer love and a life that derides the folly of
all other manners of living; and even if you deny me, what will
it matter a hundred years from now?"

His face was contorted, his speech had fervent bitterness, for
even while he wooed this woman the man internally was raging over
his own infatuation.

And Melicent answered:

"There can be no question of love between us, seignior. You
purchased my body. My body is at your disposal under God's will."

Demetrios sneered, his ardours cooled. He said, "I have already
told you, my girl, I do not care for that which can be
purchased."

In such fashion Melicent abode among these odious persons as a
lily which is rooted in mire. She was a prisoner always, and
when Demetrios came to Nacumera--which fell about irregularly, for
now arose much fighting between the Christians and the pagans--a
gem which he uncased, admired, curtly exulted in, and then, jeering
at those hot wishes in his heart, locked up untouched when he went
back to warfare.

To her the man was uniformly kind, if with a sort of sneer she could
not understand; and he pillaged an infinity of Genoese and Venetian
ships--which were notoriously the richest laden--of jewels, veils,
silks, furs, embroideries and figured stuffs, wherewith to enhance
the comeliness of Melicent.

It seemed an all-engulfing madness with this despot daily to aggravate
his fierce desire of her, to nurture his obsession, so that he
might glory in the consciousness of treading down no puny
adversary.

Pride spurred him on as witches ride their dupes to a foreknown
destruction.

"Let us have patience," he would say.

Meanwhile his other wives peered from screened alcoves at these
two and duly hated Melicent.

"Let us have patience!"

they said, also, but with a meaning that was more sinister.

PART THREE 

DEMETRIOS
_Of how Dame Melicent's fond lovers go As comrades, working each
his fellow's woe:
Each hath unhorsed the other of the twain, And knoweth that nowhither
'twixt Ukraine And Ormus roameth any lion's son More eager in the
hunt than Perion, Nor any viper's sire more venomous Through jealous
hurt than is Demetrios._ 

11.

_How Time Sped with Perion_
It is a tale which they narrate in Poictesme, telling of
what befell Perion de la Forêt after he had been ransomed out of
heathenry.

They tell how he took service with the King of Cyprus. And the tale
tells how the King of Cyprus was defeated at sea by the Emir
of Arsuf; and how Perion came unhurt from that battle, and by land
relieved the garrison at Japhe, and was ennobled therefor; and was
afterward called the Comte de la Forêt.

Then the King of Cyprus made peace with heathendom, and Perion left
him.

Now Perion's skill in warfare was leased to whatsoever lord would
dare contend against Demetrios and the proconsul's magic sword
Flamberge: and Perion of the Forest did not inordinately
concern himself as to the merits of any quarrel because of which
battalions died, so long as he fought toward Melicent.

Demetrios was pleased, and thrilled with the heroic joy of an
athlete who finds that he unwittingly has grappled with his
equal.

So the duel between these two dragged on with varying fortunes,
and the years passed, and neither duellist had conquered as
yet. Then King Theodoret, third of that name to rule, and once
(as you have heard) a wooer of Dame Melicent, declared a crusade;
and Perion went to him at Lacre Kai.

It was in making this journey, they say, that Perion passed through
Pseudopolis, and had speech there with Queen Helen, the delight
of gods and men: and Perion conceded this Queen was well-enough
to look at.

"She reminds me, indeed, of that Dame Melicent whom I serve in
this world, and trust to serve in Paradise," said Perion. "But
Dame Melicent has a mole on her left cheek."
"That is a pity," said an attendant lord. "A mole disfigures a
pretty woman."
"I was speaking, messire, of Dame Melicent."
"Even so," the lord replied, "a mole is a blemish."

"I cannot permit these observations," said Perion. So they fought,
and Perion killed his opponent, and left Pseudopolis that
afternoon.

Such was Perion's way.

He came unhurt to King Theodoret, who at once recognised in the
famous Comte de la Forêt the former Vicomte de Puysange, but
gave no sign of such recognition.

"Heaven chooses its own instruments," the pious King reflected:
"and this swaggering Comte de la Forêt, who affects so many
names has also the name of being a warrior without any peer in
Christendom.

Let us first conquer this infamous proconsul, this adversary
of our Redeemer, and then we shall see. It may be that heaven
will then permit me to detect this Comte de la Forêt in some
particularly abominable heresy.

For this long-legged ruffian looks like a schismatic, and would
singularly grace a rack."
So King Theodoret kissed Perion upon both cheeks, and created
him generalissimo of King Theodoret's forces. It was upon St.
George's day that Perion set sail with thirty-four ships of great
dimensions and admirable swiftness.

"Do you bring me back Demetrios in chains," said the King,
fondling Perion at parting, "and all that I have is yours."
"I mean to bring back my stolen wife, Dame Melicent," was Perion's
reply: "and if I can manage it I shall also bring you this Demetrios,
in return for lending me these ships and soldiers."

"Do you think," the King asked, peevishly, "that monarchs nowadays
fit out armaments to replevin a woman who is no longer young, and
who was always stupid?"

"I cannot permit these observations--" said Perion.

Theodoret hastily explained that his was merely a general observation,
without any personal bearing.

12.

_How Demetrios Was Taken_
Thus it was that war awoke and raged about the province of Demetrios
as tirelessly as waves lapped at its shores.

Then, after many ups and downs of carnage,[1: Nicolas de Caen gives
here a minute account of the military and naval evolutions, with
a fullness that verges upon prolixity.

It appears expedient to omit all this.]

Perion surprised the galley of Demetrios while the proconsul slept
at anchor in his own harbour of Quesiton. Demetrios fought nakedly
against accoutred soldiers and had killed two of them with his
hands before he could be quieted by an admiring Perion.

Demetrios by Perion's order was furnished with a sword of ordinary
attributes, and Perion ridded himself of all defensive armour.

The two met like an encounter of tempests, and in the outcome
Demetrios was wounded so that he lay insensible.

Demetrios was taken as a prisoner toward the domains of King
Theodoret.

"Only you are my private capture," said Perion; "conquered by my
own hand and in fair fight.

Now I am unwilling to insult the most valiant warrior whom I
have known by valuing him too cheaply, and I accordingly fix
your ransom as the person of Dame Melicent."
Demetrios bit his nails.

"Needs must," he said at last. "It is unnecessary to inform
you that when my property is taken from me I shall endeavour to
regain it. I shall, before the year is out, lay waste whatever
kingdom it is that harbours you. Meanwhile I warn you it is
necessary to be speedy in this ransoming. My other wives abhor
the Frankish woman who has supplanted them in my esteem.

My son Orestes, who succeeds me, will be guided by his mother.

Callistion has thrice endeavoured to kill Melicent. If any harm
befalls me, Callistion to all intent will reign in Nacumera,
and she will not be satisfied with mere assassination. I cannot
guess what torment Callistion will devise, but it will be no child's
play--" 
"Hah, infamy!"

cried Perion. He had learned long ago how cunning the heathen were
in such cruelties, and so he shuddered.

Demetrios was silent. He, too, was frightened, because this
despot knew--and none knew better--that in his lordly house far
oversea Callistion would find equipment for a hundred curious
tortures.

"It has been difficult for me to tell you this," Demetrios then
said, "because it savours of an appeal to spare me. I think you
will have gleaned, however, from our former encounters, that I
am not unreasonably afraid of death.

Also I think that you love Melicent. For the rest, there is no
person in Nacumera so untutored as to cross my least desire
until my death is triply proven. Accordingly, I who am
Demetrios am willing to entreat an oath that you will not permit
Theodoret to kill me."
"I swear by God and all the laws of Rome--" cried Perion.

"Ey, but I am not very popular in Rome," Demetrios interrupted.

"I would prefer that you swore by your love for Melicent.

I would prefer an oath which both of us may understand, and I
know of none other."
So Perion swore as Demetrios requested, and set about the
conveyance of Demetrios into King Theodoret's realm.

13.

_How They Praised Melicent_
The conqueror and the conquered sat together upon the
prow of Perion's ship. It was a warm, clear night, so brilliant
that the stars were invisible. Perion sighed. Demetrios
inquired the reason. Perion said:

"It is the memory of a fair and noble lady, Messire Demetrios,
that causes me to heave a sigh from my inmost heart. I cannot
forget that loveliness which had no parallel.

Pardieu, her eyes were amethysts, her lips were red as the berries
of a holly tree. Her hair blazed in the light, bright as the
sunflower glows; her skin was whiter than milk; the down of a
fledgling bird was not more grateful to the touch than were her
hands.

There was never any person more delightful to gaze upon, and
whosoever beheld her forthwith desired to render love and
service to Dame Melicent."

Demetrios gave his customary lazy shrug. Demetrios said:

"She is still a brightly-coloured creature, moves gracefully, has
a sweet, drowsy voice, and is as soft to the touch as rabbit's fur.

Therefore, it is imperative that one of us must cut the other's
throat.
The deduction is perfectly logical.

Yet I do not know that my love for her is any greater than my hatred.

I rage against her patient tolerance of me, and I am often tempted
to disfigure, mutilate, even to destroy this colourful, stupid
woman, who makes me wofully ridiculous in my own eyes.

I shall be happier when death has taken the woman who ventures
to deal in this fashion with Demetrios."

Said Perion:
"When I first saw Dame Melicent the sea was languid, as if outworn
by vain endeavours to rival the purple of her eyes.

Sea-birds were adrift in the air, very close to her and their
movements were less graceful than hers. She was attired in a robe
of white silk, and about her wrists were heavy bands of silver.

A tiny wind played truant in order to caress her unplaited hair,
because the wind was more hardy than I, and dared to love her.
I did not think of love, I thought only of the noble deeds I might
have done and had not done. I thought of my unworthiness, and
it seemed to me that my soul writhed like an eel in sunlight, a
naked, despicable thing, that was unworthy to render any love and
service to Dame Melicent."

Demetrios said:

"When I first saw the girl she knew herself entrapped, her
body mine, her life dependent on my whim. She waved aside such
petty inconveniences, bade them await an hour when she had leisure
to consider them, because nothing else was of any importance so
long as my porter went in chains. I was an obstacle to her
plans and nothing more; a pebble in her shoe would have perturbed
her about as much as I did.
Here at last, I thought, is genuine common-sense--a clear-headed
decision as to your actual desire, apart from man-taught ethics,
and fearless purchase of your desire at any cost.

There is something not unakin to me, I reflected, in the
girl who ventures to deal in this fashion with Demetrios."
Said Perion:

"Since she permits me to serve her, I may not serve
unworthily.

To-morrow I shall set new armies afield. To-morrow it will delight
me to see their tents rise in your meadows, Messire Demetrios,
and to see our followers meet in clashing combat, by hundreds
and thousands, so mightily that men will sing of it when we are
gone.

To-morrow one of us must kill the other. To-night we drink our
wine in amity. I have not time to hate you, I have not time to
like or dislike any living person, I must devote all faculties
that heaven gave me to the love and service of Dame Melicent."

Demetrios said:

"To-night we babble to the stars and dream vain dreams as other
fools have done before us. To-morrow rests--perhaps--with heaven;
but, depend upon it, Messire de la Forêt, whatever we may do
to-morrow will be foolishly performed, because we are both
besotted by bright eyes and lips and hair. I trust to find our
antics laughable. Yet there is that in me which is murderous
when I reflect that you and she do not dislike me.

It is the distasteful truth that neither of you considers me to
be worth the trouble. I find such conduct irritating, because no
other persons have ever ventured to deal in this fashion with
Demetrios."

"Demetrios, already your antics are laughable, for you pass blindly
by the revelation of heaven's splendour in heaven's masterwork;
you ignore the miracle; and so do you find only the stings of
the flesh where I find joy in rendering love and service to
Dame Melicent."
"Perion, it is you that play the fool, in not recognising that
heaven is inaccessible and doubtful. But clearer eyes perceive
the not at all doubtful dullness of wit, and the gratifying
accessibility of every woman when properly handled,--yes, even of
her who dares to deal in this fashion with Demetrios."

Thus they would sit together, nightly, upon the prow of Perion's
ship and speak against each other in the manner of a Tenson, as
these two rhapsodised of Melicent until the stars grew lustreless
before the sun.

14.

_How Perion Braved Theodoret_
The city of Megaris (then Theodoret's capital) was ablaze with
bonfires on the night that the Comte de la Forêt entered it at the
head of his forces.

Demetrios, meanly clothed, his hands tied behind him, trudged
sullenly beside his conqueror's horse.

Yet of the two the gloomier face showed below the count's coronet,
for Perion did not relish the impendent interview with King
Theodoret.

They came thus amid much shouting to the Hôtel d'Ebelin, their
assigned quarters, and slept there.

Next morning, about the hour of prime, two men-at-arms accompanied
a fettered Demetrios into the presence of King Theodoret.

Perion of the Forest preceded them. He pardonably swaggered, in
spite of his underlying uneasiness, for this last feat, as he could
not ignore, was a performance which Christendom united to applaud.

They came thus into a spacious chamber, very inadequately
lighted. The walls were unhewn stone. There was but one window,
of uncoloured glass; and it was guarded by iron bars. The floor
was bare of rushes. On one side was a bed with tattered
hangings of green, which were adorned with rampant lions worked
in silver thread much tarnished; to the right hand stood a _prie-dieu_.

Between these isolated articles of furniture, and behind an
unpainted table sat, in a high-backed chair, a wizen and
shabbily-clad old man. This was Theodoret, most pious and
penurious of monarchs.

In attendance upon him were Fra Battista, prior of the Grey
Monks, and Melicent's near kinsman, once the Bishop, now the
Cardinal, de Montors, who, as was widely known, was the actual
monarch of this realm.

The latter was smartly habited as a cavalier and showed in nothing
like a churchman.

The infirm King arose and came to meet the champion who had performed
what many generals of Christendom had vainly striven to achieve.

He embraced the conqueror of Demetrios as one does an equal.

Said Theodoret:

"Hail, my fair friend! you who have lopped the right arm of
heathenry!
To-day, I know, the saints hold festival in heaven. I cannot
recompense you, since God alone is omnipotent.

Yet ask now what you will, short of my crown, and it is yours."

The old man kissed the chief of all his treasures, a bit of the
True Cross, which hung upon his breast supported by a chain of
gold.

"The King has spoken," Perion returned. "I ask the life of
Demetrios."

Theodoret recoiled, like a small flame which is fluttered by its
kindler's breath. He cackled thinly, saying:

"A jest or so is privileged in this high hour.

Yet we ought not to make a jest of matters which concern the
Church.

Am I not right, Ayrart?

Oh, no, this merciless Demetrios is assuredly that very Antichrist
whose coming was foretold. I must relinquish him to Mother Church,
in order that he may be equitably tried, and be baptised--since
even he may have a soul--and afterward be burned in the market-place."

"The King has spoken," Perion replied. "I too have spoken."
There was a pause of horror upon the part of King Theodoret. He
was at first in a mere whirl.

Theodoret said:

"You ask, in earnest, for the life of this Demetrios, this arch-foe
of our Redeemer, this spawn of Satan, who has sacked more of
my towns than I have fingers on this wasted hand! Now, now that
God has singularly favoured me--!" Theodoret snarled and gibbered
like a frenzied ape, and had no longer the ability to articulate.

"Beau sire, I fought the man because he infamously held Dame Melicent,
whom I serve in this world without any reservation, and trust to
serve in Paradise.He
turned to her at length, and she heard the rising passion in his
voice.

"You promised me," he said, "and you must keep your promise.  You
said you would be my wife.  No other man must dare to speak to
you of love," he cried, grasping her arm.  "In the sight of
Heaven you are mine, Beatrice Earle."

"I am not," she answered proudly; "and I never will be; no man
would, or could take advantage of a promise obtained from a
willful, foolish child."

"I will appeal to Lord Earle," he said; I will lay my claim
before him."

"You may do so," she replied; "and, although he will never look
upon me again, he will protect me from you."

She saw the angry light flame in his eyes; she heard his breath
come in quick, short gasps, and the danger of quarreling with him
struck her.  She laid her hand upon his arm, and he trembled at
the gentle touch.

"Hugh," she said, "do not be angry.  You are a brave man; I know
that in all your life you never shrank from danger or feared
peril.  The brave are always generous, always noble; think of
what I am going to say.  Suppose that, by the exercise of any
power, you could really compel me to be your wife, what would it
benefit you?  I should not love you, I tell you candidly.  I
should detest you for spoiling my life--I would never see you.
What would you gain by forcing me to keep my promise?"

He made no reply.  The wind bent the reeds, and the water came up
the bank with a long, low wash.

"I appeal to your generosity," she said--"your nobility of
character.  Release me from a promise I made in ignorance; I
appeal to your very love for me--release me, that I may be
happy.  Those who love truly," she continued, receiving no reply,
"never love selfishly.  If I cared for any one as you do for me,
I should consider my own happiness last or all.  If you love me,
release me, Hugh.  I can never be happy with you."

"Why not?" he asked, tightening his grasp upon her arm.

"Not from mercenary motives," she replied, earnestly; "not
because my father is wealthy, my home magnificent, and you belong
to another grade of society--not for that, but because I do not
love you.  I never did love you as a girl should love the man she
means to marry."

"You are very candid," said he, bitterly; "pray, is there any one
else you love in this way?"

"That is beside the question," she replied, haughtily; "I am
speaking of you and myself.  Hugh, if you will give me my freedom
if you will agree to forget the foolish promise of a foolish
child--I will respect and esteem you while I live; I shall bless
you every day; your name will be a sacred one enshrined in my
heart, your memory will be a source of pleasure to me.  You shall
be my friend, Hugh, and I will be a true friend to you."

"Beatrice," he cried, "do not tempt me!"

"Yes, be tempted," she said; "let me urge you to be generous, to
be noble!  See, Hugh, I have never prayed to any man--I pray to
you; I would kneel here at your feet and beseech you to release
me from a promise I never meant to give."

Her words touched him.  She saw the softened look upon his face,
the flaming anger die out of his eyes.

"Hugh," she said, softly, "I, Beatrice Earle, pray you, by the
love you bear me, to release me from all claim, and leave me in
peace.

"Let me think," he replied; "give me a few minutes; no man could
part so hastily with the dearest treasure he has.  Let me think
what I lose in giving you up."


Chapter XL

They stood for some time in perfect silence; they had wandered
down to the very edge of the lake.  The water rippled in the
moonlight, and while Hugh Fernely thought, Beatrice looked into
the clear depths.  How near she was to her triumph!  A few
minutes more and he would turn to her and tell her she was free.
His face was growing calm and gentle.  She would dismiss him with
grateful thanks; she would hasten home.  How calm would be that
night's sleep!  When she saw Lord Airlie in the morning, all her
sorrow and shame would have passed by.  Her heart beat high as
she thought of this.

"I think it must be so," said Hugh Fernely, at last; "I think I
must give you up, Beatrice.  I could not bear to make you
miserable.  Look up, my darling; let me see your face once more
before I say goodbye."

She stood before him, and the thick dark shawl fell from her
shoulders upon the grass; she did not miss it in the blinding joy
that had fallen upon her.  Hugh Fernely's gaze lingered upon the
peerless features.

"I can give you up," he said, gently; "for your own happiness,
but not to another, Beatrice.  Tell me that you have not learned
to love another since I left you."

She made no reply--not to have saved her life a thousand times
would she have denied her love for Lord Airlie.  His kiss was
still warm on her lips--those same lips should never deny him.

"You do not speak," he added, gloomily.  "By Heaven, Beatrice, if
I thought you had learned to love another man--if I thought you
wanted to be free from me to marry another--I should go mad 
mad with jealous rage!  Is it so?  Answer me."

She saw a lurid light in his eyes, and shrank from him.  He
tightened his grasp upon her arm.

"Answer me!" he cried, hoarsely. "I will know."

Not far from her slept the lover who would have shielded her with
his strong arm--the lover to whom every hair upon her dear head
was more precious than gold or jewels.  Not far from her slept
the kind, loving father, who was prouder and fonder of her than
of any one on earth.  Gaspar Laurence, who would have died for
her, lay at that moment not far away, awake and thinking of her.
Yet in the hour of her deadly peril, when she stood on the shore
of the deep lake, in the fierce grasp of a half-maddened man,
there was no one near to help her or raise a hand in her defense.
But she was no coward, and all the high spirit of her race rose
within her.

"Loosen your grasp, Hugh," she said, calmly; "you pain me."

"Answer me!" he cried.  "Where is the ring I gave you?"

He seized both her hands and looked at them; they were firm and
cool--they did not tremble.  As his fierce, angry eyes glanced
over them, not a feature of her beautiful face quivered.

"Where is my ring?" he asked.  "Answer me, Beatrice."

"I have not worn it lately," she replied.  "Hugh, you forget
yourself.  Gentlemen do not speak and act in this way."

"I believe I am going mad," he said, gloomily.  "I could
relinquish my claim to you, Beatrice for your own sake, but I
will never give you up to be the wife of any other man.  Tell me
it is not so.  Tell me you have not been so doubly false as to
love another, and I will try to do all you wish."

"Am I to live all my life unloved and unmarried?" she answered,
controlling her angry indignation by a strong effort, "because
when I was a lonely and neglected girl, I fell into your power?
I do not ask such a sacrifice from you.  I hope you will love and
marry, and be happy."

"I shall not care," he said, "what happens after I am gone--it
will not hurt my jealous, angry heart then, Beatrice; but I
should not like to think that while you were my promised wife and
I was giving you my every thought, you were loving some one else.
The first she has managed by a very cunning suggestion of the
mingled jealousy, curiosity and boredom that drove _Stella_ into
the arms of her elderly suitor; the second by a variety of devices,
to indicate which would be to give away the whole intrigue--one, I
may say, whose climax is not nearly so visible from afar as that
of most triangle tales.

One point only I will reveal: Mrs. PERRIN has had the courage,
while vindicating her own common-sense judgment upon such
folk, to introduce a second girl, daughter and pupil of one of
the spoon-fed idealists who would govern India with the
platitudes of ignorance, and not only to make her sympathetic, but
to convince me of her attractions, which (especially just now) was
not easy work.

"Perhaps I shall know then why you wish to be freed from
me.  Whose face is lying near your heart?  Let me see.  If it is
that of any one who has outwitted me, I will throw it into the
depths of the lake."

"You shall not see it," she said, raising her hand, and clasping
the little locket tightly.  "I am not afraid, Hugh Fernely.  You
will never use violence to me."

But the hot anger leaped up in his heart; he was mad with cruel
jealousy and rage, and tried to snatch the locket from her.  She
defended it, holding it tightly clasped in one hand, while with
the other she tried to free herself from his grasp.

It will never be know how that fatal accident happened.  Men will
never know whether the hapless girl fell, or whether Hugh
Fernely, in his mad rage, flung her into the lake.  There was a
startled scream that rang through the clear air, a heavy fall, a
splash amid the waters of the lake!  There was one awful,
despairing glance from a pale, horror-stricken face, and then the
waters closed, the ripples spread over the broad surface, and the
sleeping lilies trembled for a few minutes, and then lay still
again!  Once, and once only, a woman's white hand, thrown up, as
it were, in agonizing supplication, cleft the dark water, and
then all was over; the wind blew the ripples more strongly; they
washed upon the grass, and the stir of the deep waters subsided!

Hugh Fernely did not plunge into the lake after Beatrice--it was
too late to save her; still, he might have tried.  The cry that
rang through the sleeping woods, seemed to paralyze him--he
stood like one bereft of reason, sense and life.  Perhaps the
very suddenness of the event overpowered him.  Heaven only knows
what passed in his dull, crazed mind while the girl he loved sank
without help.  Was it that he would not save her for another 
that in his cruel love he preferred to know her dead, beneath the
cold waters, rather than the living, happy wife of another man?
Or was it that in the sudden shock and terror he never thought of
trying to save her?

He stood for hours--it seemed to him as years--watching the
spot where the pale, agonized face had vanished--watching the
eddying ripples and the green reeds.  Yet he never sought to save
her--never plunged into the deep waters whence he might have
rescued her had he wished.  He never moved.  He felt no fatigue.
The first thing that roused him was a gleam of gray light in the
eastern sky, and the sweet, faint song of a little bird.

Then he saw that the day had broken.  He said to himself, with a
wild horrible laugh, that he had watched all night by her grave.

He turned and fled.  One meeting him, with fierce, wild eyes full
of the fire of madness, with pale, haggard face full of despair,
would have shunned him.  He fled through the green park, out on
the high-road, away through the deep woods--he knew not whither
never looking back; crying out at times, with a hollow, awful
voice that he had been all night by her grave; falling at times
on his face with wild, woeful weeping, praying the heavens to
fall upon him and hide him forever from his fellow men.

He crept into a field where the hedge-rows were bright with
autumn's tints.  He threw himself down, and tried to close his
hot, dazed eyes, but the sky above him looked blood-red, the air
seemed filled with flames.  He then resumed his clothes,
brushed his teeth, which were beautiful, and of which he evidently
took great care; and during this process talked with animation.

This morning seems to have been a fortunate exception, as Hugo
declares that he found Chateaubriand on other occasions a man of
freezing politeness, stiff, arousing rather respect than sympathy--a
genius rather than a man.

The royal carelessness of his character was shown in his financial
affairs.

He kept always on his mantelpiece piles of five-franc pieces,
and when his servant brought him begging letters--a thing
which took place constantly--he took a piece from the pile,
wrapped it in the letter and sent it out by the servant. Money
ran through his fingers.

   

The forest birds awoke and began to sing; they flew
from branch to branch; the flowers began to open their "dewy
eyes," the stately swans came out upon the lake, bending their
arched necks, sailing round the water lilies and the green
sedges.

The sun shone out at length in his majesty, warming and
brightening the fair face of nature--it was full and perfect
day.  The gardeners came through the park to commence their work;
the cows out in the pasture land stood to be milked, the busy
world began to rouse itself; but the fatal secret hidden beneath
the cold, dark water remained still untold.


Chapter XLI

The sun shone bright and warm in the breakfast room at
Earlescourt.  The rays fell upon the calm, stately face of Lady
Helena, upon the grave countenance of her son, upon the bright,
handsome features of Lord Airlie.  They sparkled on the delicate
silver, and showed off the pretty china to perfection.  The
breakfast was upon the table, but the three occupants of the room
had been waiting.  Lady Helena took her seat.

"It seems strange," she said to Lord Earle, "to breakfast without
either of the girls.  I would not allow Lillian to rise; and from
some caprice Beatrice forbade her maid to call her, saying she
was tired."

Lord Earle made some laughing reply, but Lady Helena was not
quite pleased.  Punctuality with her had always been a favorite
virtue.  In case of real illness, allowance was of course to be
made; but she herself had never considered a little extra fatigue
as sufficient reason for absenting herself from table.

The two gentlemen talked gayly during breakfast.  Lord Earle
asked Hubert if he would go with him to Holte, and Lord Airlie
said he had promised to drive Beatrice to Langton Priory.

Hearing that, Lady Helena thought it time to send some little
warning to her grandchild.  She rang for Suzette, the maid who
waited upon Beatrice, and told her to call her young mistress.

She stood at her writing table, arranging some letters, when the
maid returned.  Lady Helena looked at her in utter wonder--the
girl's face was pale and scared.

"My lady," she said, "will you please come here?  You are wanted
very particularly."

In this case the gentleman could, without compromising his dignity,
have sent a courteous reply, assuring the lady that he perfectly
understood her motives, and begging her not to give herself any
uneasiness upon his account in having felt compelled to withdraw
the invitation.

By doing so he would have made the lady his firm friend, and had
she appreciated his politeness as it would have deserved to be
appreciated, she would have lost no opportunity of showing her sense
of it.

There is no better test of ladies and gentlemen than the manner in
which they receive being left out of a general invitation. They
may feel ever so keenly the omission, but it should never betray
itself in a shadow of change either in look or in tone.

If the invitation is not a general one, why should any one feel
hurt by being omitted?

No one but the entertainer can know all the motives that influence
her in her selections.

And here might be mentioned several reasonable points of etiquette
which may control her.

When a first invitation has not been accepted, it is to be
supposed that no other will be expected until the recipient of
the invitation has returned the courtesy in some way, be it ever
so simple.

In cases where previous invitations have been accepted, even
those who are not in the habit of balancing the exchange of
hospitalities cannot continue to extend them year after year, however
much they may wish to do so, when not the slightest disposition is
shown to make any return.

Then, too, many ladies are not willing to overlook the
omission of leaving cards after their entertainments, and they
very naturally feel that a distinction should be made between such
young men as have shown an appreciation of their past courtesies
and those who have not.

And again, a lady may often be deterred from sending invitations
to those whom she heartily wishes to invite, from her dislike
of making any advance to persons who are older residents, or from
a fear of being considered pushing or patronizing.

A lady who never makes first calls upon those who have lived
longer than herself in the city where she resides (unless in cases
where age or infirmities upon the part of those inviting her makes
it her province to do so), learned just before giving an entertainment
that the wife of a gentleman from whom she had received assistance
in the charitable labors which occupied some of her leisure hours
was a native of another city; and in writing a note upon business
to the gentleman she expressed her intention of calling upon his
wife, explaining why she had not sooner done so.

I locked it, and shot the bolts.  It is
unfastened now, and I have found this lying by it.  Miss Earle
wore it last evening on her dress."

"Something terrible must have happened," exclaimed Lady Helena.
"Suzette, ask Lord Earle to come to me.  Do not say a word to any
one."

He stood by her side in a few minutes, looking in mute wonder at
her pale, scared face.

"Ronald," she said, "Beatrice has not slept in her room all
night.  We can not find her."

He smiled at first, thinking, as she had done, that there must be
some mistake, and that his mother was fanciful and nervous; but,
when Lady Helena, in quick, hurried words, told him of the
unfastened door and the ribbon, his face grew serious.  He took
the ribbon from the maid's hand--it seemed a living part of his
daughter.  He remembered that he had seen it the night before on
her dress, when he had held up the beautiful face to kiss it.  He
had touched that same ribbon with his face.

"She may have gone out into the grounds, and have been taken
ill," he said.  "Do not frighten Airlie, mother; I will look
round myself."

He went through every room of the house one by one, but there was
no trace of her.  Still Lord Earle had no fear; it seemed so
utterly impossible that any harm could have happened to her.

Then he went out into the grounds, half expecting the beautiful
face to smile upon him from under the shade of her favorite
trees.  He called aloud, "Beatrice!"  The wind rustled through
the trees, the birds sang, but there came no answer to his cry.
Neither in the grounds nor in the garden could he discover any
trace of her.  He returned to Lady Helena, a vague fear coming
over him.

"I can not find her," he said.  "Mother, I do not understand
this.  She can not have left us.  She was not unhappy--my
beautiful child."

There was no slip of paper, no letter, no clew to her absence.
Mother and son looked blankly at each other.

"Ronald," she cried, "where is she?  Where is the poor child?"

He tried to comfort her, but fear was rapidly mastering him.

"Let me see if Airlie can suggest anything," he said.

They went down to the breakfast room where Lord Airlie still
waited for the young girl he was never more to meet alive.  He
turned round with a smile, and asked if Beatrice were coming.
The smile died from his lips when he saw the pale, anxious faces
of mother and son.

"Hubert," said Lord Earle, "we are alarmed--let us hope without
cause.  Beatrice can not be found.  My mother is frightened."
Lady Helena had sunk, pale and trembling, upon a couch.  Lord
Airlie looked bewildered.  Lord Earle told him briefly how they
had missed her, and what had been done.

"She must be trying to frighten us," he said; "she must have
hidden herself.  There can not be anything wrong."  Even as he
spoke he felt how impossible it was that his dignified Beatrice
should have done anything wrong.

He could throw no light upon the subject.  He had not seen her
since he had kissed her when bidding her goodnight.  Her maid was
the last person to whom she had spoken.  Suzette had left her in
her own room, and since then nothing had been seen or heard of
Beatrice Earle.

Father and lover went out together.  Lord Airlie suggested that
she had perhaps gone out into the gardens and had met with some
accident there.  They went carefully over every part--there was
no trace of Beatrice.  They went through the shrubbery out into
the park, where the quiet lake shone amid the green trees.

Suddenly, like the thrust of a sharp sword, the remembrance of
the morning spent upon the water came to Lord Airlie.  He called
to mind Beatrice's fear--the cold shudder that seized her when
she declared that her own face with a mocking smile was looking
up at her from the depths of the water.

He walked hurriedly toward the lake.  It was calm and clear--the
tall trees and green sedges swaying in the wind, the white lilies
rising and falling with the ripples.  The blue sky and green
trees were reflected in the water, the pleasure boat was fastened
to the boat house.  How was he to know the horrible secret of the
lake?

"Come away, Airlie!" cried Lord Earle.  "I shall go mad!  I will
call all the servants, and have a regular search."

In a few minutes the wildest confusion and dismay reigned in the
Hall; women wept aloud, and men's faces grew pale with fear.
Their beautiful, brilliant young mistress had disappeared, and
none knew her fate.  They searched garden, park, and grounds; men
in hot haste went hither and thither; while Lady Earle lay half
dead with fear, and Lillian rested calmly, knowing nothing of
what had happened.

It was Lord Airlie who first suggested that the lake should be
dragged.  The sun rode high in the heavens then, and shone
gloriously over water and land.

They found the drags, and Hewson, the butler, with Lee and
Patson, two gardeners, got into the boat.  Father and lover stood
side by side on the bank.  The boat glided softly over the water;
the men had been once round the lake, but without any result.
Hope was rising again in Lord Airlie's heart, when he saw those
in the boat look at each other, then at him.

"My lord," said Cowden, Lord Earle's valet, coming up to Hubert,
"pray take my master home; they have found something at the
bottom of the lake.  Take him home; and please keep Lady Earle
and the women all out of the way."

"What is it?" cried Lord Earle.  "Speak to me, Airlie.  What is
it?"

"Come away," said Lord Airlie.  "The men will not work while we
are here."

They had found something beneath the water; the drags had caught
in a woman's dress; and the men in the boat stood motionless
until Lord Earle was out of sight.

Through the depths of water they saw the gleam of a white, dead
face, and a floating mass of dark hair.  They raised the body
with reverent hands.  Strong men wept aloud as they did so.  One
covered the quiet face, and another wrung the dripping water from
the long hair.  The sun shone on, as though in mockery, while
they carried the drowned girl home.

Slowly and with halting steps they carried her through the warm,
sunny park where she was never more to tread, through the bright,
sunlit gardens, through the hall and up the broad staircase, the
water dripping from her hair and falling in large drops, into the
pretty chamber she had so lately quitted full of life and hope.
They laid her on the white bed wherefrom her eyes would never
more open to the morning light, and went away.

"Drowned, drowned! Drowned and dead!" was the cry that went from
lip to lip, till it reached Lord Earle where he sat, trying to
soothe his weeping mother.  "Drowned! Quite dead!" was the cry
that reached Lillian, in her sick room, and brought her down pale
and trembling.  "Drowned and dead hours ago," were the words that
drove Lord Airlie mad with the bitterness of his woe.

They could not realize it.  How had it happened?  What had taken
her in the dead of the night to the lake?

They sent messengers right and left to summon doctors in hot
haste, as though human skill could avail her now.

"I must see her," said Lord Airlie.  "If you do not wish to kill
me, let me see her."

They allowed him to enter, and Lord Earle and his mother went
with him.  None in that room ever forgot his cry--the piercing
cry of the strong man in his agony--as he threw himself by the
dead girl's side.

"Beatrice, my love, my darling, why could I not have died for
you?"

And then with tears of sympathy they showed him how even in death
the white cold hand grasped his locket, holding it so tightly
that no ordinary foe could remove it.

"In life and in death!" she had said, and she had kept her word.


Chapter XLII

While the weeping group still stood there, doctors came; they
looked at the quiet face, so beautiful in death, and said she had
been dead for hours.  The words struck those who heard them with
unutterable horror.  Dead, while those who loved her so dearly,
who would have given their lives for her, had lain sleeping near
her, unconscious of her doom--dead, while her lover had waited
for her, and her father had been intently thinking of her
approaching wedding.

What had she suffered during the night?  What awful storm of
agony had driven her to the lake?  Had she gone thither
purposely?  Had she wandered to the edge and fallen in, or was
there a deeper mystery?  Had foul wrong been done to Lord Earle's
daughter while he was so near her, and yet knew nothing of it?

She still wore her pretty pink evening dress.  What a mockery it
looked!  The delicate laces were wet and spoiled; the pink
blossoms she had twined in her hair clung to it still; the
diamond arrow Lord Airlie had given her fastened them, a diamond
brooch was in the bodice of her dress, and a costly bracelet
encircled the white, cold arm.  She had not, then, removed her
jewels or changed her dress.  What could have taken her down to
the lake?  Why was Lord Airlie's locket so tightly clinched in
her hand?

Lord Airlie, when he was calm enough to speak, suggested that she
might have fallen asleep, tired, before undressing--that in her
sleep she might have walked out, gone to the edge of the lake,
and fallen in.

That version spread among the servants.  From them it spread like
wildfire around the whole country-side; the country papers were
filled with it, and the London papers afterward told how "the
beautiful Miss Earle" had been drowned while walking in her
sleep.

But Lord Airlie's suggestion did not satisfy Ronald Earle; he
would not leave the darkened chamber.  Women's gentle hands
removed the bright jewels and the evening dress.  Lady Helena,
with tears that fell like rain, dried the long, waving hair, and
drew it back from the placid brow.  She closed the eyes, but she
could not cross the white hands on the cold breast.  One held the
locket in the firm, tight clasp of death, and it could not be
moved.

Ronald would not leave the room.  Gentle hands finished their
task.  Beatrice lay in the awful beauty of death--no pain, no
sorrow moving the serene loveliness of her placid brow.  He knelt
by her side.  It was his little Beatrice, this strange, cold,
marble statue--his little baby Beatrice, who had leaped in his
arms years ago, who had cried and laughed, who had learned in
pretty accents to lisp his name--his beautiful child, his proud,
bright daughter, who had kissed him the previous night while he
spoke jesting words to her about her lover.  And he had never
heard her voice since--never would hear it again.  Had she
called him when the dark waters closed over her bright head?

Cold, motionless, no gleam of life or light--and this was Dora's
little child!  He uttered a great cry as the thought struck him:
"What would Dora say?"  He loved Beatrice; yet for all the long
years of her childhood he had been absent from her.  How must
Dora love the child who had slept on her bosom, and who was now
parted from her forever.

And then his thoughts went back to the old subject: "How had it
happened?  What had taken her to the lake?"

One knelt near who might have told him, but a numb, awful dread
had seized upon Lillian.  Already weak and ill, she was unable to
think, unable to shape her ideas, unable to tell right from
wrong.

She alone held the clew to the mystery, and she knelt by that
death bed with pale, parted lips and eyes full of terror.  Her
face startled those who saw it.  You are inexplicable, you are
stupid, and you are resistless. Again I see my Melicent, who
is not just a pair of purple eyes and so much lovely flesh."
His face was as she had not ever known it now, and very
tender.
Ahasuerus said:

"My way to victory is plain enough. And yet there is an obstacle.
For my fancy is taken by the soul of Melicent, and not by that
handsome piece of flesh which all men--even Perion, madame!--have
loved so long with remarkable infatuation. Accordingly I had not
ever designed that the edifice on which I laboured should be the
stable of my lusts.

Accordingly I played my cunning music--and accordingly I give you
Perion. I that am Ahasuerus win for you all which righteousness
and honour could not win. At the last it is I who give you
Perion, and it is I who bring you to his embrace.

He must still be about his magnanimous butchery, I think, in the
Court of Stars."

Ahasuerus knelt, kissing her hand.

"Fair Melicent, such abominable persons as Demetrios and I are
fatally alike.

We may deny, deride, deplore, or even hate, the sanctity of any
noble lady accordingly as we elect; but there is for us no
possible escape from worshipping it. Your wind-fed Ferions, who
will not ever acknowledge what sort of world we live in, are
less quick to recognise the soul of Melicent. Such is our sorry
consolation. Oh, you do not believe me yet. You will believe in the
oncoming years. Meanwhile, O all-enduring and all-conquering!In vain they entreated him to
move, to take food or wine, to go to his own room.  He remained
by her, trying to glean from that silent face the secret of her
death. 

And when night fell again, he sunk exhausted.  Feverish slumbers
came to him, filled with a haunted dream of Beatrice sinking in
the dark water and calling upon him for help.  Kindly faces
watched over him, kindly hands tended him.  The morning sun found
him still there.

Lady Helena brought him some tea and besought him to drink it.
The parched, dried lips almost refused their office.  It was an
hour afterward that Hewson entered the room, bearing a letter in
his hand.  It was brought, he said by Thomas Ginns, who lived at
the cottage past Fair Glenn hills.  It had been written by a man
who lay dying there, and who had prayed him to take it at once
without delay.

"I ventured to bring it to you, my lord," said the butler; "the
man seemed to think it a matter of life or death."

Lord Earle took the letter from his hands--he tried to open it,
but the trembling fingers seemed powerless.  He signed to Hewson
to leave the room, and, placing the letter upon the table,
resumed his melancholy watch.  But in some strange way his
thoughts wandered to the missive.  What might it not contain,
brought to him, too, in the solemn death chamber?  He opened it,
and found many sheets of closely covered paper.  On the first was
written "The Confession of Hugh Fernely."

The name told him nothing.  Suddenly an idea came to him--could
this confession have anything to do with the fate of the beloved
child who lay before him?  Kneeling by the dead child's side, he
turned over the leaf and read as follows:

"Lord Earle, I am dying--the hand tracing this will soon be
cold.  Before I die I must confess my crime.  Even now, perhaps,
you are kneeling by the side of the child lost to you for all
time.  My lord, I killed her.

"I met her first nearly three years ago, at Knutsford; she was
out alone, and I saw her.  I loved her then as I love her now.
By mere accident I heard her deplore the lonely, isolated life
she led, and that in such terms that I pitied her.  She was
young, beautiful, full of life and spirits; she was pining away
in that remote home, shut out from the living world she longed
for with a longing I can not put into words.  I spoke to her--do
not blame her, she was a beautiful, ignorant child--I spoke to
her, asking some questions about the road, and she replied.
Looking at her face, I swore that I would release her from the
life she hated, and take her where she would be happy.

"I met her again and again.  Heaven pardon me if I did my best to
awake an interest in her girlish heart!  I told her stories of
travel and adventure that stirred all the romance in her nature.
With the keen instinct of love I understood her character, and
played upon its weakness while I worshiped its strength.

"She told me of a sad, patient young mother who never smiled, of
a father who was abroad and would not return for many years.
Pardon me, my lord, if, in common with many others, I believed
this story to be one to appease her.  Pardon me, if I doubted 
as many others did--whether the sad young mother was your wife.

"I imagined that I was going to rescue her from a false position
when I asked her to be my wife.  She said her mother dreaded all
mention of love and lovers, and I prayed her to keep my love a
secret from all the world.

"I make no excuses for myself; she was young and innocent as a
dreaming child.  I ought to have looked on her beautiful face and
left her.  My lord, am I altogether to blame?  The lonely young
girl at Knutsford pined for what I could give her--happiness and
pleasure did not seem so far removed from me.  Had she been in
her proper place I could never have addressed her.

"Not to you can I tell the details of my love story--how I
worshiped with passionate love the beautiful, innocent child who
smiled into my face and drank in my words.  I asked her to be my
wife, and she promised.  My lord, I never for a moment dreamed
that she would ever have a home with you--it did not seem to me
possible.  I intended to return and marry her, firmly believing
that in some respects my rank and condition in life were better
than her own.  She promised to be true to me, to love no one
else, to wait for me, and to marry me when I returned.

"I believe now that she never loved me.  My love and devotion
were but a pleasant interruption in the monotony of her life.
They were to blame also who allowed her no pleasures--who
forced her to resort to this stolen one.

"My lord, I placed a ring upon your daughter's finger, and
pledged my faith to her.  I can not tell you what my love was
like; it was a fierce fire that consumed me night and day.

"I was to return and claim her in two years.  Absence made me
love her more.  I came back, rich in gold, my heart full of
happiness, hope making everything bright and beautiful.  I went
straight to Knutsford--alas! she was no longer there!  And then
I heard that the girl I loved so deeply and so dearly was Lord
Earle's daughter.

"I did not dream of losing her; birth, title, and position seemed
as nothing beside my mighty, passionate love.  I thought nothing
of your consent, but only of her; and I went to Earlescourt.  My
lord, I wrote to her, and my heart was in every line.  She sent
me a cold reply.  I wrote again; I swore I would see her.  She
sent her sister to me with the reply.  Then I grew desperate, and
vowed I would lay my claim before you.  I asked her to meet me
out in the grounds, at night, unseen and unknown.  She consented,
and on Thursday night I met her near the shrubbery.

"How I remember her pretty pleading words, her beautiful proud
face!  She asked me to release her.  She said that it had all
been child's play--a foolish mistake--and that if I would give
her her freedom from a foolish promise she would always be my
friend.  At first I would not hear of it; but who could have
refused her?  If she had told me to lie down at her feet and let
her trample the life out of me, I should have submitted.

"I promised to think of her request, and we walked on to the
border of the lake.  Every hair upon her head was sacred to me;
the pretty, proud ways that tormented me delighted me, too.  I
promised I would release her, and give her the freedom she asked,
if she told me I was not giving her up to another.  She would
not.  Some few words drove me mad with jealous rage--yes, mad;
the blood seemed to boil in my veins.  Suddenly I caught sight of
a golden locket on her neck, and I asked her whose portrait it
contained.  She refused to tell me.  In the madness of my rage I
tried to snatch it from her.  She caught it in her hands, and,
shrinking back from me, fell into the lake.

"I swear it was a sheer accident--I would not have hurt a hair
of her head; but, oh! My lord, pardon me--pardon me, for
Heaven's sake--I might have saved her and I did not; I might
have plunged in after her and brought her back, but jealousy
whispered to me, 'Do not save her for another--let her die.'  I
stood upon the bank, and saw the water close over her head.  I
saw the white hand thrown up in wild appeal, and never moved or
stirred.  I stood by the lake-side all night, and fled when the
morning dawned in the sky.

"I killed her.  I might have saved her, but did not.  Anger of
yours can add nothing to my torture; think what it has been.  I
was a strong man two days since; when the sun sets I shall be
numbered with the dead.  I do not wish to screen myself from
justice.  I have to meet the wrath of Heaven, and that appalls me
as the anger of man never could.  Send the officers of the law
for me.  If I am not dead, let them take me; if I am, let them
bury me as they would a dog.  I ask no mercy, no compassion nor
forgiveness; I do not merit it.

"If by any torture, any death, I could undo what I have done, and
save her, I would suffer the extremity of pain; but I can not.
My deed will be judged in eternity.

"My lord, I write this confession partly to ease my own
conscience, party to shield others from unjust blame.  Do not
curse me because, through my mad jealousy, my miserable revenge,
as fair and pure a child as father ever loved has gone to her
rest."

So the strange letter concluded.  Lord Earle read every word,
looking over and anon at the quiet, dead face that had kept the
secret hidden.  Every word seemed burned in upon his brain; every
word seemed to rise before him like an accusing spirit.

He stood face to face at last with the sin of his youth; it had
found him out.  The willful, wanton disobedience, the marriage
that had broken his father's heart, and struck Ronald himself
from the roll of useful men; the willful, cruel neglect of duty;
the throwing off of all ties; the indulgence in proud,
unforgiving temper, the abandonment of wife and children--all
ended there.  But for his sins and errors, that white, still
figure might now have been radiant with life and beauty.

The thought stung him with cruel pain.  It was his own fault.
Beatrice might have erred in meeting Hugh Fernely; Fernely had
done wrong in trying to win that young child-like heart for his
own; but he who left his children to strange hands, who neglected
all duties of parentage, had surely done the greatest wrong.

For the first time his utter neglect of duty came home to him.
He had thought himself rather a modern hero, but now he caught a
glimpse of himself as he was in reality.  He saw that he was not
even a brave man; for a brave man neglects no duty.  It was
pitiful to see how sorrow bent his stately figure and lined his
proud face.  He leaned over his dead child, and cried to her to
pardon him, for it was all his fault.  Lady Helena, seeking him
in the gloom of that solemn death chamber, found him weeping as
strong men seldom weep.

He did not give her the letter, nor tell her aught of Hugh
Fernely's confession.  He turned to her with as sad a face as man
ever wore.

"Mother," he said, "I want my kinsman, Lionel Dacre.  Let him be
sent for, and ask him to come without delay."

In this, the crowning sorrow of his life, he could not stand
alone.  He must have some one to think and to plan for him, some
one to help him bear the burden that seemed too heavy for him to
carry.  Some one must see the unhappy man who had written that
letter, and it should be a kinsman of his own.

Not the brave, sad young lover, fighting alone with his sorrow 
he must never know the tragedy of that brief life, to him her
memory must be sacred and untarnished, unmarred by the knowledge
of her folly.

Lady Helena was not long in discovering Lionel Dacre's
whereabouts.  One of the footmen who had attended him to the
station remembered the name of the place for which he had taken a
ticket.  Lady Helena knew that Sir William Greston lived close
by, and she sent at once to his house.

Fortunately the messenger found him.  Startled and horrified by
the news, Lionel lost no time in returning.  He could not realize
that his beautiful young cousin was really dead.  Her face, in
its smiling brightness, haunted him.  Her voice seemed to mingle
with the wild clang of the iron wheels.  She was dead, and he was
going to console her father.

No particulars of her death had reached him; he now only knew
that she had walked out in her sleep, and had fallen into the
lake.

Twenty-four hours had not elapsed since Lord Earle cried out in
grief for his young kinsman, yet already he stood by his side.

"Persuade him to leave that room," said Lady Helena.  "Since our
darling was carried there he has never left her side."

Lionel did as requested.  He went straight to the library, and
sent for Lord Earle, saying that he could not at present look
upon the sad sight in the gloomy death chamber.

While waiting there, he heard of Lillian's dangerous illness.
Lady Helena told him how she had changed before her sister's
death; and, despite the young man's anger, his heart was sore and
heavy.

He hardly recognized Lord Earle in the aged, altered man who soon
stood before him.  The long watch, the bitter remorse, the
miserable consciousness of his own folly and errors had written
strange lines upon his face.

"I sent for you, Lionel," he said, "because I am in trouble--so
great that I can no longer bear it alone.  You must think and
work for me; I can do neither for myself."

Looking into his kinsman's face, Lionel felt that more than the
death of his child weighed upon the heart and mind of Ronald
Earle.

"There are secrets in every family," said Ronald; "henceforth
there will be one in mine--and it will be the true story of my
daughter's death.  While I knelt yesterday by her side, this
letter was brought to me.  Read it, Lionel; then act for me."

He read it slowly, tears gathering fast in his eyes, his lips
quivering, and his hands tightly clinched.

--JUNE, 1862.--NO. LVI.

* * * * *

WALKING.

I wish to speak a word for Nature, for absolute freedom and wildness,
as contrasted with a freedom and culture merely civil,--to regard
man as an inhabitant, or a part and parcel of Nature, rather
than a member of society. I wish to make an extreme statement,
if so I may make an emphatic one, for there are enough champions
of civilization: the minister, and the school-committee, and every
one of you will take care of that.

I have met with but one or two persons in the course of my life who
understood the art of Walking, that is, of taking walks,--who had
a genius, so to speak, for _sauntering_: which word is beautifully
derived "from idle people who roved about the country, in the Middle
Ages, and asked charity, under pretence of going _à la Sainte
Terre_," to the Holy Land, till the children exclaimed, "There goes
a _Sainte-Terrer_" a Saunterer,--a Holy-Lander.

They who never go to the Holy Land in their walks, as they
pretend, are indeed mere idlers and vagabonds; but they who do
go there are saunterers in the good sense, such as I mean. Some,
however, would derive the word from _sans terre_, without land or
a home, which, therefore, in the good sense, will mean, having no
particular home, but equally at home everywhere.

For this is the secret of successful sauntering. He who sits still
in a house all the time may be the greatest vagrant of all; but
the saunterer, in the good sense, is no more vagrant than
the meandering river, which is all the while sedulously seeking
the shortest course to the sea. But I prefer the first, which,
indeed, is the most probable derivation. For every walk is a
sort of crusade, preached by some Peter the Hermit in us, to go
forth and reconquer this Holy Land from the hands of the Infidels.

It is true, we are but faint-hearted crusaders, even the
walkers, nowadays, who undertake no persevering, never-ending
enterprises. Our expeditions are but tours, and come round again
at evening to the old hearth-side from which we set out. Half the
walk is but retracing our steps. We should go forth on the
shortest walk, perchance, in the spirit of undying adventure, never
to return,--prepared to send back our embalmed hearts only as relics
to our desolate kingdoms.

If you are ready to leave father and mother, and brother and
sister, and wife and child and friends, and never see them again,--if
you have paid your debts, and made your will, and settled all your
affairs, and are a free man, then you are ready for a walk.

To come down to my own experience, my companion and I, for I
sometimes have a companion, take pleasure in fancying ourselves
knights of a new, or rather an old, order,--not Equestrians or
Chevaliers, not Ritters or Riders, but Walkers, a still more ancient
and honorable class, I trust.

The chivalric and heroic spirit which once belonged to the Rider
seems now to reside in, or perchance to have subsided into, the
Walker,--not the Knight, but Walker Errant.

Two hours later they went in to persuade him to
take some food, and found him lying dead, his face turned to the
morning sky.

Lionel Dacre entered the room.  The hot anger died out of his
heart as he saw the anguish death had marked upon the white
countenance.  What torture must the man have suffered, what hours
of untold agony, to have destroyed him in so short a time!  The
dark, handsome face appeared to indicate that the man had been
dying for years.

Lionel turned reverently away.  Man is weak and powerless before
death.  In a few words he told the woman that she should be amply
rewarded for her kindness, and that he himself would defray all
expenses.

"He was perhaps an old servant of my lord's?" she said.

"No," was the reply; "Lord Earle did not know him--had never
seen him; but the poor man was well known to one of Lord Earle's
friends."

Thanks to Lionel's words, the faintest shadow of suspicion was
never raised.  Of the two deaths, that of Miss Earle excited all
attention and aroused all sympathy.  No one spoke of Hugh
Fernely, or connected him with the occurrence at the Hall.

There was an inquest, and men decided that he had "died by the
visitation of God."  No one knew the agony that had cast him
prostrate in the thick, dank grass, no one knew the unendurable
anguish that had shortened his life.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

When Lionel returned to the Hall, he went straight to Lord Earle.

"I was too late," he said; "the man had been dead some hours."

His name was not mentioned between them again.  Lord Earle never
inquired where he was buried--he never knew.

The gloom had deepened at the Hall.  Lillian Earle lay nigh unto
death.  Many believed that the master of Earlescourt would soon
be a childless man.  He could not realize it.  They told him how
she lay with the cruel raging fever sapping her life, but he
seemed to forget the living child in mourning for the one that
lay dead.

In compliance with Lionel's prayer, Lady Helena took him into the
sick room where Lillian lay.  She did not know him; the gentle,
tender eyes were full of dread and fear; the fair, pure face was
burning with the flush of fever; the hot, dry lips were never
still.  She talked incessantly--at times of Knutsford and
Beatrice--then prayed in her sweet, sad voice that Lionel would
trust her--only trust her; when Beatrice was married she would
tell him all.

He turned away; her eyes had lingered on his face, but no gleam
of recognition came into them.

"You do not think she will die?" he asked of Lady Helena; and she
never forgot his voice or his manner.

"We hope not," she said; "life and death are in higher hands than
ours.  If you wish to help her, pray for her."

In after years Lionel Dacre like to remember that the best and
most fervent prayers of his life had been offered for gentle,
innocent Lillian Earle.

As he turned to quit the chamber he heard her crying for her
mother.  She wanted her mother--why was she not there?  He
looked at Lady Helena; she understood him.

"I have written," she said.  "I sent for Dora yesterday; she will
be here soon."


Chapter XLIII

On the second day succeeding that on which Dora had been sent
for, Beatrice Earle was to be laid in her grave.  The servants of
the household, who had dearly loved their beautiful young
mistress, had taken their last look at her face.  Lady Helena had
shed her last tears over it.  Lord Airlie had asked to be alone
for a time with his dead love.  They had humored him, and for
three long hours he had knelt by her, bidding her a sorrowful
farewell, taking his last look at the face that would never again
smile on earth for him.

They respected the bitterness of his uncontrollable sorrow; no
idle words of sympathy were offered to him; men passed him by
with an averted face--women with tearful eyes.

Lord Earle was alone with his dead child.  In a little while
nothing would remain of his beautiful, brilliant daughter but a
memory and a name.  He did not weep; his sorrow lay too deep for
tears.  In his heart he was asking pardon for the sins and
follies of his youth; his face was buried in his hands, his head
bowed over the silent form of his loved child; and when the door
opened gently, he never raised his eyes--he was only conscious
that some one entered the room, and walked swiftly up the gloomy,
darkened chamber to the bedside.  Then a passionate wailing that
chilled his very blood filled the rooms.

"My Beatrice, my darling!  Why could I not have died for you?"

Some one bent over the quiet figure, clasping it in tender arms,
calling with a thousand loving words upon the dear one who lay
there--some one whose voice fell like a strain of long-forgotten
music upon his ears.  Who but a mother could weep as she did? 
Who but a mother forget everything else in the abandonment of
her sorrow, and remember only the dead?

Before he looked up, he knew it was Dora--the mother bereft of
her child--the mother clasping in her loving arms the child she
had nursed, watched, and loved for so many years.  She gazed at
him, and he never forgot the woeful, weeping face.

"Ronald," she cried, "I trusted my darling to you; what has
happened to her?"

The first words for many long years--the first since he had
turned round upon her in his contempt, hoping he might be
forgiven for having made her his wife.

She seemed to forget him then, and laid her head down upon the
quiet heart; but Ronald went round to her.  He raised her in his
arms, he laid the weeping face on his breast, he kissed away the
blinding tears, and she cried to him:

"Forgive me, Ronald--forgive me!  You can not refuse in the hour
of death."

How the words smote him.  They were his own recoiling upon him.
Altogether it gives an unusual sidelight on the history of two
Capitals; and incidentally, if the reading of it puts others in
the same resolve as myself, an extra turn-stile will be needed
in the Marylebone Road.

* * * * *
Mr. HARRY TIGHE is something of a problem to me.

With the best will in the world to appreciate what looked like
unusual promise I can only regard him at present as one who is
neglecting the good gifts of heaven in the pursuit apparently of
some Jack-o'-lanthorn idea of popularity.

No doubt you recall his first novel, _The Sheep Path_, a sincere
and well-observed study of feminine temperament. This was
followed by one that (though it had its friends) marked, to my
thinking, a lamentable fall from grace.

He has now published a third, _Day Dawn_ (WESTALL). Here, though
popularity of a kind may be its reward, the work is still woefully
beneath what should be Mr.
TIGHE'S level.

Certainly not one of the demands of the circulating libraries is
unfulfilled. We have a fair-haired heroine (victim to cocaine),
a dark and villainous foreigner, a dashing hero, a middle-aged
woman who adores him despite the presence of her husband, himself
called throughout _Baron Brinthall_, a style surely more common in
pantomimic circles than in the drawing-rooms of Mayfair; and the
incidents embrace both murder and suicide.

Moreover there is "plenty of conversation," and the intrigue moves
sufficiently quickly (if jerkily) to keep one curious about the
next page.

But having very willingly admitted so much I return to my contention,
that for Mr.

TIGHE to neglect his sensitive and delicate art for the antics
of these tawdry dolls is to betray both himself and the craft of
which he may still become a distinguished exponent.

   

* * * * *
From the official who is interested in officialdom to the Infantry
officer who is interested in tactics, from the mechanical expert
who can appreciate the technical details of diagrams to the child
who revels in faultless photographs of hair-raising monsters ("I
may read it, mother, mayn't I, when I've unstickied my fingers?"

She seemed in some
vague way to understand that her mother was near.  Lady Dora's
hand soothed and calmed her, her gentle motherly ways brought
comfort and rest; but many long days passed before Lillian knew
those around her, or woke from her troubled, feverish dream.
When she did so, her sister had been laid to rest in her long,
last home.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

People said afterward that no fairer day had ever been than that
on which Beatrice Earle was buried.  The sun shone bright and
warm, the birds were singing, the autumn flowers were in bloom,
as the long procession wound its way through the trees in the
park; the leaves fell from the trees, while the long grass
rustled under the tread of many feet.

Lord Earle and Hubert Airlie were together.  Kindly hearts knew
not which to pity the more--the father whose heart seemed broken
by his sorrow, or the young lover so suddenly bereft of all he
loved best.  From far and near friends and strangers gathered to
that mournful ceremony; from one to another the story flew how
beautiful she was, and how dearly the young lord had loved her, 
how she had wandered out of the house in her sleep and fallen
into the lake.

They laid her to rest in the green church-yard at the foot of the
hill--the burial place of the Earles.

   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

The death bell had ceased ringing; the long white blinds of the
Hall windows were drawn up; the sunshine played once more in the
rooms; the carriages of sorrowing friends were gone; the funeral
was over.  Of the beautiful, brilliant Beatrice Earle there
remained but a memory.

They told afterward how Gaspar Laurence watched the funeral
procession, and how he had lingered last of all in the little
church-yard.  He never forgot Beatrice; he never looked into the
face of another woman with love on his own.

It was all over, and on the evening of that same day a quiet,
deep sleep came to Lillian Earle.  It saved her life; the wearied
brain found rest.  When she awoke, the lurid light of fever died
out of her eyes, and they looked in gratified amazement upon Lady
Dora who sat by her side.

"Mamma," she whispered, "am I at home at Knutsford?"

Dora soothed her, almost dreading the time when memory should
awaken in full force.  It seemed partly to return then, for
Lillian gave vent to a wearied sigh, and closed her eyes.

Then Dora saw a little of wild alarm cross her face.  She sprang
up crying:

"Mamma, is it true?  Is Beatrice dead?"

"It is true, my darling," whispered her mother, gently.  "Dead,
but not lost to us--only gone before."

The young girl recovered very slowly.  The skillful doctor in
attendance upon her sad that, as soon as it was possible to
remove her, she should be carried direct from her room to a
traveling carriage, taken from home, and not allowed to return to
the Hall until she was stronger and better.

They waited until that day came, and meanwhile Lady Dora Earle
learned to esteem Lord Airlie very dearly.  He seemed to find
more comfort with her than with any one else.  They spoke but of
one subject--the loved, lost Beatrice.

Her secret was never known.  Lord Earle and Lionel Dacre kept it
faithfully.  No allusion to it ever crossed their lips.  To Lord
Airlie, while he lived, the memory of the girl he had loved so
well was pure and untarnished as the falling snow.  Not even to
her mother was the story told.  Dora believed, as did every one
else, that Beatrice had fallen accidentally into the lake.

When Lillian grew stronger--better able to bear the mention of
her sister's name--Lord Earle went to her room one day, and,
gently enough, tried to win her to speak to him of what she knew.

She told him all--of her sister's sorrow, remorse, and tears;
her longing to be free from the wretched snare in which she was
caught; how she pleaded with her to interfere.  She told him of
her short interview with the unhappy man, and its sad
consequences for her.

Then the subject dropped forever.  Lord Earle said nothing to her
of Lionel, thinking it would be better for the young lover to
plead his own cause.

One morning, when she was able to rise and sit up for a time,
Lionel asked permission to see her.  Lady Dora, who knew nothing
of what had passed between them, unhesitatingly consented.

She was alarmed when, as he entered the room, she saw her
daughter's gentle face grow deathly pale.

"I have done wrong," she said.  "Lillian is not strong enough to
see visitors yet."

"Dear Lady Dora," explained Lionel, taking her hand, "I love
Lillian; and she loved me before I was so unhappy as to offend
her.  I have come to beg her pardon.  Will you trust her with me
for a few minutes?"

Lady Dora assented, and went away, leaving them together.

"Lillian," said Lionel, "I do not know in what words to beg your
forgiveness.  I am ashamed and humbled.  I know your sister's
story, and all that you did to save her.  When one was to be
sacrificed, you were the victim.  Can you ever forgive me?"

"I forgive you freely," she gently answered.  "I have been in the
Valley of the Shadow of Death, and all human resentment and
unkindness seem as nothing to me."

"And may I be to you as I was before?" he asked.

"That is another question," she said.  "I can not answer it now.
You did not trust me, Lionel."

Those were the only words of reproach she ever uttered to him.
He did not annoy her with protestation; he trusted that time
would do for him what he saw just then he could not do for
himself.

He sat down upon the couch by her side, and began to speak to her
of the tour she was about to make; of the places she should visit
carefully avoiding all reference to the troubled past.

Three days afterward Lillian started on her journey to the south
of France insisted upon by the doctor.  Lord Earle and his wife
took charge of their child; Lord Airlie, declaring he could not
yet endure Lynnton, went with them.  Lady Helena and Lionel Dacre
remained at home, in charge of the Hall and the estate.

One thing the latter had resolved upon--that, before the
travelers returned, the lake should be filled up, and green trees
planted over the spot where its waters now glistened in the sun.

No matter how great the expense and trouble, he was resolved that
it should be done.

"Earlescourt would be wretched," he said, "if that fatal lake
remained."

The day after the family left Earlescourt, he had workmen
engaged.  No one was sorry at his determination.  Lady Helena
highly approved of it.  The water was drained off, the deep basin
filled with earth, and tall saplings planted where once the water
had glistened in the sun.  The boat house was pulled down, and
all vestige of the lake was done away with.

Lionel Dacre came home one evening from the works in very low
spirits.  Imbedded in the bottom of the lake they had found a
little slipper--the fellow to it was locked away in Dora's
drawer.  He saved it to give it to her when she returned.


Chapter XLIV

Two years passed away, and the travelers thought of returning.
Lillian had recovered health and strength, and, Lord Earle said,
longed for home.

One bright June day they were expected back.  Lionel Dacre had
driven to the station.  Lady Earle had laid aside her mourning
dress, and sat anxiously awaiting her son.  She wished the
homecoming were over, and that they had all settled down to the
new life.

Her wish was soon gratified.  Once again she gazed upon the face
of her only and beloved son.  He was little changed--somewhat
sunburned, it was true; but there was less of the old pride and
sternness, a kindly smile playing round his lips.  There was,
too, a shade of sadness that plainly would never leave him; Lord
Earle could never forget his lost child.

Lady Helena looked anxiously at Dora, but there was no cause for
fear.  The rosy, dimpled beauty of youth had passed away, but a
staid dignity had taken its place.  She looked a graceful amiable
woman, with eyes of wondrous beauty thickly veiled by long
lashes, and a wealth of rippling black hair.  Lady Helena thought
her far more beautiful now than when the coy smiles and dimples
had been the chief charm.  She admired, too, the perfect and easy
grace with which Dora fell at once into her proper place as
mistress of that vast establishment.

The pretty, musical voice was trained and softened; the delicate,
refined accent retained no trace of provincialism.  Everything
about Dora pleased the eye and gratified the taste; the girlish
figure had grown matronly and dignified; the sweet face had in it
a tinge of sadness one may often see in the face of a mother who
has lost a child.  Lady Helena, fastidious and critical, could
find no fault with her son's wife.

She welcomed her warmly, giving up to her, in her own graceful
way, all rule and authority.  Helping her if in any way she
required it, but never interfering, she made Dora respected by
the love and esteem she always evinced for her.

But it was on Lillian's face that Lady Helena gazed most
earnestly.  The pallor of sickness had given way to a rosy and
exquisite bloom.  The fair, sweet face in its calm loveliness
seemed to her perfect, the violet eyes were full of light.
Looking at her, Lady Helena believed there were years of life in
store for Ronald's only child.

There was much to talk about.  Lord Earle told his mother how
Hubert Airlie had gone home to Lynnton, unable to endure the
sight of Earlescourt.  He had never regained his spirits.  In the
long years to come it was possible, added Ronald, that Lord
Airlie might marry, for the sake of his name; but if ever the
heart of living man lay buried in a woman's grave, his was with
the loved, lost Beatrice.

Lionel Dacre knew he had done wisely and well to have the bed of
the lake filled up.  In the morning he saw how each member of the
family shrank from going out into the grounds.  He asked Lord
Earle to accompany him, and then the master of Earlescourt saw
that the deep, cruel water no longer shimmered amid the trees.

From the forest and wilderness come the tonics and barks which
brace mankind. Our ancestors were savages. The story of Romulus
and Remus being suckled by a wolf is not a meaningless
fable. The founders of every State which has risen to eminence
have drawn their nourishment and vigor from a similar wild
source.

It was because the children of the Empire were not suckled by
the wolf that they were conquered and displaced by the children
of the Northern forests who were.

I believe in the forest, and in the meadow, and in the night
in which the corn grows. We require an infusion of hemlock-spruce
or arbor-vitae in our tea.

There is a difference between eating and drinking for strength and
from mere gluttony. The Hottentots eagerly devour the marrow
of the koodoo and other antelopes raw, as a matter of course.

Some of our Northern Indians eat raw the marrow of the Arctic
reindeer, as well as various other parts, including the summits of
the antlers, as long as they are soft.

And herein, perchance, they have stolen a march on the cooks of
Paris. They get what usually goes to feed the fire. This is
probably better than stall-fed beef and slaughter-house pork to
make a man of.

Give me a wildness whose glance no civilization can endure,--as
if we lived on the marrow of koodoos devoured raw.

There are some intervals which border the strain of the wood-thrush,
to which I would migrate,--wild lands where no settler has
squatted; to which, methinks, I am already acclimated.

   The African hunter Cummings tells us that the skin of the eland,
as well as that of most other antelopes just killed, emits the most
delicious perfume of trees and grass.

I would have every man so much like a wild antelope, so much
a part and parcel of Nature, that his very person should thus
sweetly advertise our senses of his presence, and remind us of
those parts of Nature which he most haunts.

I feel no disposition to be satirical, when the trapper's coat
emits the odor of musquash even; it is a sweeter scent to me
than that which commonly exhales from the merchant's or the
scholar's garments. When I go into their wardrobes and handle
their vestments, I am reminded of no grassy plains and flowery
meads which they have frequented, but of dusty merchants' exchanges
and libraries rather.

A tanned skin is something more than respectable, and perhaps olive
is a fitter color than white for a man,--a denizen of the woods.
"The pale white man!" I do not wonder that the African pitied him.She gave him the answer he longed to hear, and Lionel Dacre went
straight to Lord Earle.  He was delighted--it was the very
marriage upon which he had set his heart years before.  Lady Dora
was delighted, too; she smiled more brightly over it than she had
smiled since the early days of her married life.  Lady Helena
rejoiced when they told her, although it was not unexpected news
to her, for she had been Lionel's confidante during Lillian's
illness.

There was no reason why the marriage should be delayed; the June
roses were blooming then, and it was arranged that it should take
place in the month of August.

There were to be no grand festivities--no one had heart for
them; the wedding was to be quiet, attended only by a few
friends; and Lord Earle succeeded in obtaining a promise from
Lionel which completely set his heart at rest.  It was that he
would never seek another home--that he and Lillian would consent
to live at Earlescourt.  Her father could not endure the thought
of parting with her.

"It will be your home, Lionel," he said, "in the course of after-
years.  Make it so now.  We shall be one family, and I think a
happy one."

So it was arranged, much to everybody's delight.  A few days
before the wedding took place, a letter came which seemed to
puzzle Lord Earle very much.  He folded it without speaking, but,
when breakfast was over, he drew his wife's hand within his own.

"Dora," he said, "there will never be any secrets between us for
the future.  I want you to read this letter--it is from
Valentine Charteris that was, Princess Borgezi that is.  She is
in England, at Greenoke, and asks permission to come to Lillian's
wedding; the answer must rest with you, dear."

She took the letter from him and read it through; the noble heart
of the woman spoke in every line, yet in some vague way Dora
dreaded to look again upon the calm, grand beauty of Valentine's
face.

"Have no fear, Dora, in saying just what you think," said her
husband; "I would not have our present happiness clouded for the
world.  One word will suffice--if you do not quite like the
thought, I will write to her and ask her to defer the visit."

But Dora would not be outdone in magnanimity.  With resolute
force, she cast from her every unworthy thought.

"Let her come, Ronald," she said, raising her clear, dark eyes to
his.  "I shall be pleased to see her.  I owe her some amends."

He was unfeignedly pleased, and so was every one else.  Lady
Helena alone felt some little doubts as to Dora's capability of
controlling herself.

The Princess Borgezi was to come alone; she had not said at what
hour they might expect her.

Lady Dora had hardly understood why her thoughts went back so
constantly to her lost child.  Beatrice had loved the beautiful,
gracious woman who was coming to visit them.  It may have been
that which prompted her, on the day before Lillian's marriage,
when the house was alive with the bustle and turmoil of
preparation, to go to the silent, solitary rooms where her
daughter's voice had once made sweetest music.

She was there alone for some time; it was Lord Earle who found
her, and tried to still her bitter weeping.

"It is useless, Ronald," she cried; "I can not help asking why my
bright, beautiful darling should be lying there.  It is only two
years since a wedding wreath was made for her."

Nothing would comfort her but a visit to her daughter's grave.
It was a long walk, but she preferred taking it alone.  She said
she should feel better after it.  They yielded to her wish.
Before she had quitted the house many minutes, the Princess
Borgezi arrived.

There was no restraint in Ronald's greeting.  He was heartily
glad to see her--glad to look once more on the lovely Grecian
face that had seemed to him, years ago, the only model for Queen
Guinivere.  They talked for a few minutes; then Valentine,
turning to him, said:

"Now let me see Lady Dora.  My visit is really to her."

They told her whither she had gone; and Lady Helena whispered
something to her with brought tears to Valentine's eyes.

"Yes," she said; "I will follow her.  I will ask her to kiss me
over her daughter's grave."

Some one went with her to point out the way, but Valentine
entered the church yard alone.

Through the thick green foliage she saw the shining of the white
marble cross, and the dark dress of Dora, who knelt by the grave.

She went up to her.  Her footsteps, falling noiselessly on the
soft grass, were unheard by the weeping mother.

Valentine knelt by her side.  Dora, looking up, saw the calm face
beaming down upon her, ineffable tenderness in the clear eyes.
She felt the clasp of Valentine's arms, and heard a sweet voice
whisper:

"Dora, I have followed you here to ask you to try to love me, and
to pardon me for my share in your unhappy past.  For the love of
your dead, who loved me, bury here all difference and dislike."

She could not refuse.  For the first time, Lord Earle's wife laid
her head upon that noble woman's shoulder and wept away her
sorrow, while Valentine soothed her with loving words.

Over the grave of a child the two women were reconciled--all
dislike, jealousy, and envy died away forever.  Peace and love
took their place.

In the after-time there was something remarkable in Dora's
reverential love for Valentine.  Lord Earle often said that in
his turn he was jealous of her.  His wife had no higher ideal, no
truer friend than the Princess Borgezi.

The wedding day dawned at last; and for a time all trace of
sadness was hidden away.  Lord Earle would have it so.  He said
that that which should be the happiest day of Lillian's life must
not be clouded.  Such sad thoughts of the lost Beatrice as came
into the minds of those who had loved her remained unspoken.

The summer sun never shone upon a more lovely bride, nor upon a
fairer scene than that wedding.  The pretty country church was
decorated with flowers and crowded with spectators.

Side by side at the altar stood Lady Dora Earle and Valentine.
People said afterward they could not decide whom they admired
most--Lady Helena's stately magnificence, Dora's sweet, simple
elegance, or the Princess Borgezi's statuesque Grecian beauty.

Lord Earle had prepared a surprise for Dora.  When the little
wedding party returned from the church, the first to greet them
was Stephen Thorne, now a white-headed old man, and his wife.
The first to show them all honor and respect were Lord Earle and
his mother.  Valentine was charmed with their homely simplicity.

For months after they returned to Knutsford the old people talked
of "the lady with the beautiful face, who had been so kind and
gracious to them."

Our sympathies in Massachusetts are not confined to New England;
though we may be estranged from the South, we sympathize with the
West.

There is the home of the younger sons, as among the Scandinavians
they took to the sea for their inheritance.
Relatives, friends, and servants had crowded round
them; and Lillian's courage gave way at last.  She turned to
Lionel, as though praying him to shorten their time of parting.

"Heaven bless you, my darling!" whispered Dora to her child.
"And mind, never--come what may--never be jealous of your
husband."

"Goodbye, Lionel," said Lord Earle, clasping the true, honest
hand in his; "and, if ever my little darling here tries you, be
patient with her."

The story of a life time was told in these two behests.


Chapter XLV

Ten years had passed since the wedding bells chimed for the
marriage of Lillian Earle.  New life had come to Earlescourt.
Children's happy voices made music there; the pattering of little
feet sounded in the large, stately rooms, pretty, rosy faces made
light and sunshine.

He turned round cordially, and said, "Ah! good-day, Monsieur Victor
Hugo. I expected you. Sit down.
Have you been working since I saw you? have you made many verses?"

Hugo replied that he wrote a few every day.
"You are right," said Chateaubriand.Gaspar Laurence was still abroad, and there was apparently no
likelihood of his return.  The Princess Borgezi with her husband
and children, had paid several visits to the Hall.  Valentine had
one pretty little daughter, upon whom Lionel's son was supposed
to look with most affection.  She had other daughters--the
eldest, a tall, graceful girl, inherited her father's Italian
face and dark, dreamy eyes.  Strange to say, she was not unlike
Beatrice.  It may have been that circumstance which first
directed Lord Airlie's attention to her.  Think of a man's
swinging dumb-bells for his health, when those springs are bubbling
up in far-off pastures unsought by him!

Moreover, you must walk like a camel, which is said to be the only
beast which ruminates when walking.She knew his story, and how much of
his heart lay in the grave of his lost love.  He was kind,
gentle, and affectionate to her, and Helena valued his
thoughtful, faithful attachment more than she would have valued
the deepest and most passionate love of another man.

One room at Lynnton was never unlocked; strange feet never
entered it; curious eyes never looked round it.  It was the
pretty boudoir built, but never furnished, for Hubert Airlie's
first love.

Time softened his sorrow; his fair, gentle wife was devoted to
him, blooming children smiled around him; but he never forgot
Beatrice.  In his dreams, at times, Helena heard her name on his
lips; but she was not jealous of the dead.  No year passed in
which she did not visit the grave where Beatrice Earle slept her
last long sleepPerhaps we should be more susceptible to some influences important
to our intellectual and moral growth, if the sun had shone and the
wind blown on us a little less; and no doubt it is a nice matter
to proportion rightly the thick and thin skin.

    

Lady Helena, with zealous eyes, looked
after Bertrand, the future lord of Earlescourt, a brave, noble
boy, his father's pride and Lillian's torment and delight, who
often said he was richer than any other lad in the country, for
he had three mothers, while others had but one.

   *  *  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

The sun was setting over the fair broad lands of Earlescourt, the
western sky was all aflame; the flowers were thirsting for the
soft dew which had just begun to fall. 

Out in the rose garden, where long ago a love story had been
told, were standing a group that an artist would have been
delighted to sketch.

Lionel had some choice roses in bloom, and after dinner the whole
party had gone out to see them.  Lady Helena Earle was seated on
the garden chair whereon Beatrice had once sat listening to the
words which had gladdened her brief life.  A number of fair
children played around her.

Looking on them with pleased eyes was a gentle, graceful lady.
Her calm, sweet face had a story in it, the wondrous dark eyes
had in them a shadow as of some sorrow not yet lived down.  Lady
Dora Earle was happy; the black clouds had passed away.  She was
her husband's best friend, his truest counselor; and Ronald had
forgotten that she was ever spoken of as "lowly born."  The
dignity of her character, acquired by long years of stern
discipline, asserted itself; no one in the whole country side was
more loved or respected than Lady Dora Earle.

Ronald, Lord Earle, was lying on the grass at his wife's feet.
He looked older, and the luxuriant hair was threaded with silver;
but there was peace and calm in his face.

He laughed at Lillian and her husband conversing so anxiously
over the roses.

"They are lovers yet," he said to Dora; and she glanced smilingly
at them.

The words were true.  Ten years married, they were lovers yet.
There was gentle forbearance on one side, an earnest wish to do
right on the other.  It is too late to be studying Hebrew; it is
more important to understand even the slang of to-day.

Some months ago I went to see a panorama of the Rhine. It was like
a dream of the Middle Ages. I floated down its historic stream
in something more than imagination, under bridges built by the
Romans, and repaired by later heroes, past cities and castles
whose very names were music to my ears, and each of which
was the subject of a legend. There were Ehrenbreitstein and
Rolandseck and Coblentz, which I knew only in history.There was no night or day during which Lionel
Dacre did not thank Heaven for that crown of all great gifts, a
good and gentle wife.

There was a stir among the children; a tall, dark gentleman was
seen crossing the lawn, and Lionel cried: "Here is Gaspar
Laurence with his arms full of toys--those children will be
completely spoiled!"

The little ones rushed forward, and Bertrand, in his hurry, fell
over a pretty child with large dark eyes and dark hair.  Lord
Earle jumped up and caught her in his arms.

"Bertie, my boy," he said, "always be kind to little Beatrice!"
The child clasped her arms round his neck.  He kissed the dark
eyes and murmured to himself, "Poor little Beatrice!"

The summer wind that played among the roses, lifting the golden,
rippling hair from Lillian's forehead and tossing her little
girl's curls into Lord Earle's face, was singing a sweet, low
requiem among the trees that shaded the grave of Beatrice Earle.