KELLY LIBRARY OF ST. GREGORY'S UNIVERSITY; THANKS TO ALEV AKMAN.


The Path Of Empire, A Chronicle Of The United States As A World Power

by Carl Russell Fish


CONTENTS

I. THE MONROE DOCTRINE
II. CONTROVERSIES WITH GREAT BRITAIN
III. ALASKA AND ITS PROBLEMS
IV. BLAINE AND PAN-AMERICANISM
V. THE UNITED STATES AND THE PACIFIC
VI. VENEZUELA
VII. THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR WITH SPAIN
VIII. DEWEY AND MANILA BAY
IX. THE BLOCKADE OF CUBA
X. THE PREPARATION OF THE ARMY
XI. THE CAMPAIGN OF SANTIAGO DE CUBA
XII. THE CLOSE OF THE WAR
XIII. A PEACE WHICH MEANT WAR
XIV. THE OPEN DOOR
XV. THE PANAMA CANAL
XVI. PROBLEMS OF THE CARIBBEAN
XVII. WORLD RELATIONSHIPS
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


THE PATH OF EMPIRE


CHAPTER I. The Monroe Doctrine

In 1815 the world found peace after twenty-two years of continual
war. In the next carriage-house stands a gorgeous _char-à-banc_,
presented to Her Majesty by Louis Philippe. Then come the carriages
of the household, weighing about fifteen hundredweight each. The
most curious-looking vehicles, however, are the long-shafted
Russian droschkies, meant to be drawn by three horses abreast.

In another carriage-house is a vehicle replete with historical
and pathetic interest. This is none other than the post-chaise
in which Her Majesty and the late Prince Consort travelled all
through Germany about seven years after their marriage. It is
fitted up with a writing-case, and all sorts of conveniences,
and hung on C springs.

The cheerful tap-tap of a hammer, and a keen, pungent scent as
of something burning, warn us that we are in the vicinity of the
Royal smithy.

A handsome grey carriage-horse is being shod, one hoof doubled
up between the farrier's legs, as that worthy, with quick taps,
drives in a long nail, and makes the shoe fast.

The Royal mews, which were built in 1841, cover a space of
no less than four acres of ground, and, together with those at
Buckingham Palace, are under the able supervision of Colonel
Sir George Maude, K.C.B., R.A., &c., who also purchases
most of Her Majesty's horses. It is no light testimonial to the
care of their management when we hear that, although sometimes
as many as one hundred horses are accommodated at Windsor, the
veterinary surgeon's account only amounts for the year to a
most insignificant sum.

We cannot take our leave, for the present, of the Royal pets without
again returning our hearty thanks to all with whom we have been
brought in contact, for their kindness, courtesy, and desire to
assist us in our mission. To all loyal subjects who wish to
see a model of a good Queen's home we can give no better advice
than to go to Royal Windsor.

[Illustration: DIEU ET MON DROIT.]
(The Editors of _The Idler_ return their most sincere thanks to
General Sir Henry Ponsonby, G.C.B., &c., &c., for his kind
correction and revision of the above article.)

PEOPLE I HAVE NEVER MET.

BY SCOTT RANKIN.

-----
[Illustration: HEINRIK IBSEN.]
"We are all of us ghosts.... It is not only what we have inherited
from our father and mother that 'walks' in us. It is all sorts of
dead ideas, and lifeless old beliefs, and so forth. They have no
vitality, but they cling to us all the same, and we can't get rid
of them. Whenever I take up a newspaper I seem to see ghosts gliding
between the lines.They particularly desired freedom to buy the
products of British factories, which cost less and satisfied
better than those previously furnished by the Spanish merchants,
secure in their absolute monopoly. With peace came renewed
monopoly, haughty officials, and oppressive laws dictated by that
most stupid of the restored sovereigns, Ferdinand VII of Spain.
Buenos Aires, however, never recognized his rule, and her
general, the knightly San Martin, in one of the most remarkable
campaigns of history, scaled the Andes and carried the flag of
revolution into Chili and Peru. Venezuela, that hive of
revolution, sent forth Bolivar to found the new republics of
Colombia and Bolivia. Mexico freed herself, and Brazil separated
herself from Portugal. By 1822 European rule had been practically
swept off the American mainland, from Cape Horn to the borders of
Canada, and, except for the empire of Dom Pedro in Brazil, the
newly born nations had adopted the republican form of government
which the European monarchs despised. The spirit of unrest leaped
eastward across the Atlantic. Revolutions in Spain, Portugal, and
Naples sought impiously and with constitutions to bind the hands
of their kings. Even the distant Greeks and Serbians sought their
independence from the Turk.

Divine Right, just rescued from the French Revolution, was
tottering and had yet to test the strength of its new props, the
"Holy" and the "Quadruple" alliances, and the policy of
intervention to maintain the status quo. Congresses at
Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, at Troppau in 1820, and at Laibach in
1821, decided to refuse recognition to governments resting on
such revolutions, to offer mediation to restore the old order,
and, if this were refused, to intervene by force. In the United
States, on the other hand, founded on the right of revolution and
dedicated to government by the people, these popular movements
were greeted with enthusiasm. The fiery Clay, speaker and leader
of the House of Representatives, made himself champion of the
cause of the Spanish Americans; Daniel Webster thundered forth
the sympathy of all lovers of antiquity for the Greeks; and
Samuel Gridley Howe, an impetuous young American doctor, crossed
the seas, carrying to the Greeks his services and the gifts of
Boston friends of liberty. A new conflict seemed to be shaping
itself--a struggle of absolutism against democracy, of America
against Europe.

Between the two camps, both in her ideas and in her geographical
situation, stood England. Devoted as she was to law and order,
bulwark against the excesses of the French Terror and the world
dominion that Napoleon sought, she was nevertheless equally
strong in her opposition to Divine Right. Her people and her
government alike were troubled at the repressive measured by
which the Allies put down the Revolution of Naples in 1821 and
that of Spain in 1823. Still more were they disturbed at the hint
given at the Congress of Verona in 1822 that, when Europe was
once quieted, America would engage the attention of Europe's
arbiters. George Canning, the English foreign minister, soon
discovered that this hint foreshadowed a new congress to be
devoted especially to the American problem. Spain was to be
restored to her sovereignty, but was to pay in liberal grants of
American territory to whatever powers helped her. Canning is
regarded as the ablest English foreign minister of the nineteenth
century; at least no one better embodied the fundamental
aspirations of the English people. He realized that liberal
England would be perpetually a minority in a united Europe, as
Europe was then organized. He believed that the best security for
peace was not a union but a balance of powers. He opposed
intervention in the internal affairs of nations and stood for the
right of each to choose its own form of government. Particularly
he fixed his eyes on America, where he hoped to find weight to
help him balance the autocrats of the Old World. He wished to see
the new American republics free, and he believed that in freedom
of trade England would obtain from them all that she needed.
Alarmed at the impending European intervention to restore the
rule of Spain or of her monarchical assignees in America, he
sought an understanding with the United States. He proposed to
Richard Rush, the United States minister in London, that the two
countries declare concurrently that the independence of Spanish
America, was a fact, that the recognition of the new governments
was a matter of time and circumstance, that neither country
desired any portion of Spain's former dominions, but that neither
would look with indifference upon the transfer of any portion of
them to another power.

On October 9, 1823, this proposal reached Washington. The answer
would be framed by able and most experienced statesmen. The
President, James Monroe, had been almost continuously in public
service since 1782. He had been minister to France, Spain, and
England, and had been Secretary of State. In his earlier missions
he had often shown an unwise impetuosity and an independent
judgment which was not always well balanced. He had, however,
grown in wisdom. He inspired respect by his sterling qualities of
character, and he was an admirable presiding officer. William H.
Crawford, his Secretary of the Treasury, John C. Calhoun, his
Secretary of War, William Wirt, his Attorney-General, and even
John McLean, his Postmaster-General, not then a member of the
Cabinet, were all men who were considered as of presidential
caliber.

Foremost in ability and influence, however, was John Quincy
Adams, the Secretary of State. Brought up from early boyhood in
the atmosphere of diplomacy, familiar with nearly every country
of Europe, he had nevertheless none of those arts of suavity
which are popularly associated with the diplomat. Short,
baldheaded, with watery eyes, he on the one hand repelled
familiarity, and on the other hand shocked some sensibilities, as
for example when he appeared in midsummer Washington without a
neckcloth. His early morning swim in the Potomac and his
translations of Horace did not conquer a temper which embittered
many who had business with him, while the nightly records which
he made of his interviews show that he was generally suspicious
of his visitors. Yet no American can show so long a roll of
diplomatic successes. Preeminently he knew his business. His
intense devotion and his native talent had made him a master of
the theory and practice of international law and of statecraft.
Always he was obviously honest, and his word was relied on.
Fundamentally he was kind, and his work was permeated by a
generous enthusiasm. Probably no man in America, had so intense a
conviction not only of the correctness of American principles and
the promise of American greatness but of the immediate strength
and greatness of the United States as it stood in 1823.

Fully aware as Adams was of the danger that threatened both
America and liberty, he was not in favor of accepting Canning's
proposal for the cooperation of England and the United States. He
based his opposition upon two fundamental objections. In the
first place he was not prepared to say that the United States
desired no more Spanish territory. Not that Adams desired or
would tolerate conquest. At the time of the Louisiana Purchase he
had wished to postpone annexation until the assent of the people
of that province could be obtained. But he believed that all the
territory necessary for the geographical completeness of the
United States had not yet been brought under the flag. He had
just obtained Florida from Spain and a claim westward to the
Pacific north of the forty-second parallel, but he considered the
Southwest--Texas, New Mexico, and California--a natural field of
expansion. These areas, then almost barren of white settlers, he
expected time to bring into the United States, and he also
expected that the people of Cuba would ultimately rejoice to
become incorporated in the Union. He wished natural forces to
work out their own results, without let or hindrance.

Not only was Adams opposed to Canning's proposed self-denying
ordinance, but he was equally averse to becoming a partner with
England. Such cooperation might well prove in time to be an
"entangling alliance," involving the United States in problems of
no immediate concern to its people and certainly in a partnership
in which the other member would be dominant. If Canning saw
liberal England as a perpetual minority in absolutist Europe,
Adams saw republican America as a perpetual inferior to
monarchical England. Although England, with Canada, the West
Indies, and her commerce, was a great American power, Adams
believed that the United States, the oldest independent nation in
America, with a government which gave the model to the rest,
could not admit her to joint, leadership, for her power was in,
not of, America, and her government was monarchical. Already
Adams had won a strategic advantage over Canning, for in the
previous year, 1822, the United States had recognized the new
South American republics.

Great as were the dangers involved in cooperation with England,
however, they seemed to many persons of little moment compared
with the menace of absolutist armies and navies in the New World
or of, perhaps, a French Cuba and a Russian Mexico. The only
effective obstacle to such foreign intervention was the British
Navy. Both President Monroe and Thomas Jefferson, who in his
retirement was still consulted on all matters of high moment,
therefore favored the acceptance of Canning's proposal as a means
of detaching England from the rest of Europe. Adams argued,
however, that England was already detached; that, for England's
purposes, the British Navy would still stand between Europe and
America, whatever the attitude of the United States; that
compromise or concession was unnecessary; and that the country
could as safely take its stand toward the whole outside world as
toward continental Europe alone. The grey's wardrobe, when he came
to England, consisted of the following gorgeous trappings:--Saddle
of red and green cloth, under felt, pad for saddle, embroidered
saddle-cloth, embroidered bridle, plume, hood in cloth of gold,
leg-ring and pad, embroidered neckpiece, embroidered quarter-piece,
four bunches of woollen tassels, and a silk scarf.
Arrayed in all this splendour and ridden by a native attendant,
he was brought into the Grand Quadrangle at Windsor to be presented
to Her Majesty with due and appropriate ceremonies.

He is tall for an Arab, with whitish body, dark grey legs,
pink muzzle, and silky black mane, which hangs over the near
or left side of his neck. In the next stable stand twelve
beautiful brougham horses, ranging from dark brown to light chestnut
in colour.In making
such a statement, however, it was necessary to offer compensation
in some form. The United States was not prepared to offer
Canning's self-denying ordinance barring the way to further
American expansion, but something it must offer. This
compensating offset Adams found in the separation of the New
World from the Old and in abstention from interference in Europe.
Such a renunciation involved, however, the sacrifice of generous
American sympathies with the republicans across the seas. Monroe,
Gallatin, and many other statesmen wished as active a policy in
support of the Greeks as of the Spanish Americans. Adams
insisted, however, that the United States should create a sphere
for its interests and should confine itself to that sphere. His
plan for peace provided that European and American interests
should not only not clash but should not even meet.

The President's message of December 2, 1823, amounted to a
rejection of the Holy Alliance as guardian of the world's peace,
of Canning's request for an entente, and of the proposal that the
United States enter upon a campaign to republicanize the world.
It stated the intention of the Government to refrain from
interference in Europe, and its belief that it was "impossible
that the allied powers should extend their political system to
any portion of either continent [of America] without endangering
our peace and happiness." The message contained a strong defense
of the republican system of government and of the right of
nations to control their own internal development. It completed
the foreign policy of the United States by declaring, in
connection with certain recent encroachments of Russia along the
northwest coast, that the era of colonization in the Americas was
over. The United States was to maintain in the future that
boundaries between nations holding land in America actually
existed and could be traced--a position which invited arbitration
in place of force.

Both Canning and Adams won victories, but neither realized his
full hopes. Canning prevented the interference of Europe in
Spanish America, broke up the Quadruple Alliance, rendered the
Holy Alliance a shadow, and restored a balance of power that
meant safety for England for almost a hundred years; but he
failed to dictate American policy. Adams on his part detached the
United States from European politics without throwing England
into the arms of Europe. He took advantage of the divisions of
the Old World to establish the priority of the United States in
American affairs; but he failed in his later attempt to unite all
the Americas in cordial cooperation. I think a true democracy
is necessarily inefficient in a way. The only really efficient
government in the world is the one which we intend to pull down,
or else go down ourselves, trying to!

Can't you imagine, in the dim Valhalla beyond, how the archer of
Pharaoh, the swordsman from the plains before Troy, and the Roman
legionary will greet the hurrying souls of the aviator, the
bomb-thrower, and the bayonet-man with, "Brother, what were you?"

I'd hate to have to explain to their uncomprehending ears what a
conscientious objector is!

DECEMBER 2.

[Sidenote: Assuming command.]
Well, to-day is one of the big days of my life, for I
assumed command of this little packet. I put on my sword and
fixings and reported to Captain Paine, who was most benevolent.
Several of us went on shore to celebrate with a little dinner.
Some of the boys just over joined in, and we became involved with
some Highland officers of a fighting regiment famous throughout
Europe for the last three hundred years.

One's first ship, like the first baby is an event that cannot
be duplicated.

DECEMBER 21.

[Sidenote: A jammed rudder leaves the destroyer unmanageable.]

I needed your letter, being about twenty years older than I was a
week ago. No, no harm done. Just had my first experience of what
it means under certain circumstances to be in command.
Went out with certain others on a certain job. All went well,
though we had a poor grade of oil in our bunkers and were burning
more than we should ordinarily.

Then, through certain chances, we had to go farther than
expected.
Still, I figured to get back with a moderate margin, when the
gale struck us. You may have read of Biscay storms; well,
believe me, they are not over-rated. I have seen just as bad,
perhaps, but not from the deck of a destroyer. And while I
am frantically calculating whether I shall have enough fuel
to make port or not, there is a wild yell from the bridge that
the rudder is jammed at hard-a-starboard and can't be moved. She,
of course, at once fell off into the trough of the sea, and the
big green combers swept clear over her at every roll, raising
merry hob. All the boats were smashed to kindling-wood; chests,
and everything on deck not riveted down, went over the side. In
that sea you could no more manoeuvre by your engines alone
than you could dam Niagara with a handful of sand. A man
alongside of me aft, where we were working on the
steering-gear, was swept overboard, but, having a line around
his waist, was hauled back like a hooked fish.

All I could do was to steam in a big circle, and at one point would
be running before it, and could work for an instant or two with the
seas running up to our waists.

When they get over your head, you probably won't be there any longer.
At that time I didn't really expect to stay afloat, but was
too busy with the matters in hand to care. Well, we finally got
it fixed, though we could only use about 15 degrees of rudder
instead of full.

[Sidenote: Lack of fuel causes worry.]
All this time we were drifting merrily to leeward at a rate that I
hated even to guess at, with the certainty, unless matters mended,
of eventually piling up on the Spanish coast, then not far away,
though I hadn't had sight of sun or stars in days, and didn't know
within fifty miles where I was. Well, when I finally headed up into
it, I could just about hold her, without making any headway to speak
of. You cannot drive a destroyer dead into a heavy sea at full speed
without bursting her in two. Still, the situation would have been
nothing to worry about much if I had had sufficient fuel. Now, you
on shore may fancy that a ship just keeps on steaming till she gets
there, whether it takes a month or more; but such is far from the
case.The American
continents are no longer separated from the rest of the world by
their national institutions, because the spirit of these
institutions has permeated much of Europe, Asia, and even Africa.
No boundaries, not even oceans, can today prohibit international
interference. But while the particular method followed in 1823
is no longer appropriate, the ends which the United States set
out to attain have remained the same. Independence, absolute and
complete, including the absence of all entanglements which might
draw the country into other peoples' quarrels; the recognition of
a similar independence in all other peoples, which involves both
keeping its own hands off and also strongly disapproving of
interference by one nation with another--these have been the
guiding principles of the United States. These principles the
Government has maintained by such means as seemed appropriate to
the time. In colonial days the people of America fought in
courts for their charter rights; at the time of the Revolution,
by arms for their independence from England; during the
Napoleonic wars, for their independence from the whole system of
Europe. The Monroe Doctrine declared that to maintain American
independence from the European system it was necessary that the
European system be excluded from the Americas. In entering the
Great War in the twentieth century the United States has
recognized that the system of autocracy against which Monroe
fulminated must disappear from the entire world if, under modern
industrial conditions, real independence is to exist anywhere.

It is the purpose of the following chapters to trace the
expansion of American interests in the light of the Monroe
Doctrine and to explain those controversies which accompanied
this growth and taxed the diplomatic resources of American
Secretaries of State from the times of Adams and Webster and
Seward to those of Blaine and Hay and Elihu Root. The diplomacy
of the Great War is reserved for another volume in this Series.


CHAPTER II. Controversies With Great Britain

No two nations have ever had more intimate relationships than the
United States and Great Britain. Speaking the same language and
owning a common racial origin in large part, they have traded
with each other and in the same regions, and geographically
their territories touch for three thousand miles. During the
nineteenth century the coastwise shipping of the United States
was often forced to seek the shelter of the British West Indies.
The fisherfolk of England and America mingled on the Grand Bank
of Newfoundland and on the barren shores of that island and of
Labrador, where they dried their fish. Indians, criminals, and
game crossed the Canadian boundary at will, streams flowed across
it, and the coast cities vied for the trade of the interior,
indifferent to the claims of national allegiance. One cannot but
believe that this intimacy has in the long run made for
friendship and peace; but it has also meant constant controversy,
often pressed to the verge of war by the pertinacious insistence
of both nations on their full rights as they saw them.

The fifteen years following Adams's encounter with Canning saw
the gradual accumulation of a number of such disputes, which made
the situation in 1840 exceptionally critical. Great Britain was
angered at the failure of the United States to grant her the
right to police the seas for the suppression of the slave trade,
while the United States, with memories of the vicious English
practice of impressment before the War of 1812, distrusted the
motives of Great Britain in asking for this right. Nearly every
mile of the joint boundary in North America was in dispute, owing
to the vagueness of treaty descriptions or to the errors of
surveyors. Twelve thousand square miles and a costly American
fort were involved; arbitration had failed; rival camps of
lumberjacks daily imperiled peace; and both the Maine Legislature
and the National Congress had voted money for defense. In a New
York jail Alexander McLeod was awaiting trial in a state court
for the murder of an American on the steamer Caroline, which a
party of Canadian militia had cut out from the American shore
near Buffalo and had sent to destruction over Niagara Falls. The
British Government, holding that the Caroline was at the time
illegally employed to assist Canadian insurgents, and that the
Canadian militia were under government orders justifiable by
international law, assumed the responsibility for McLeod's act
and his safety. Ten thousand Americans along the border, members
of "Hunters' Lodges," were anxious for a war which would unleash
them for the conquest of Canada. Delay was causing all these
disputes to fester, and the public mind of the two countries was
infected with hostility.

Fortunately in 1841 new administrations came into power in both
England and the United States. Neither the English Tories nor the
American Whigs felt bound to maintain all the contentions of
their predecessors, and both desired to come to an agreement. The
responsibility on the American side fell upon Daniel Webster,
the new Secretary of State. With less foreign experience than
John Quincy Adams, he was more a man of the world and a man among
men. His conversation was decidedly less ponderous than his
oratory, and there was no more desirable dinner guest in America.
Even in Webster's lightest moments, his majestic head gave the
impression of colossal mentality, and his eyes, when he was in
earnest, almost hypnotized those upon whom he bent his gaze. A
leading figure in public life for twenty-five years, he now
attained administrative position for the first time, and his
constant practice at the bar had given something of a lawyerlike
trend to his mind.

The desire of the British Government for an agreement with the
United States was shown by the selection of Washington instead of
London as the place of negotiation and of Lord Ashburton as
negotiator. The head of the great banking house of Baring
Brothers, he had won his title by service and was, moreover,
known to be a friend of the United States. While in Philadelphia
in his youth, he had married Miss Bingham of that city, and she
still had American interests. In the controversies before the War
of 1812 Lord Ashburton had supported many of the American
contentions. He knew Webster personally, and they both looked
forward to the social pleasure of meeting again during the
negotiations. The two representatives came together in this
pleasant frame of mind and did most of their business at the
dinner table, where it is reported that more than diplomatic
conversation flowed. They avoided an exchange of notes, which
would bind each to a position once taken, but first came to an
agreement and then prepared the documents.

It must not be supposed, however, that either Ashburton or
Webster sacrificed the claims of his own Government. Webster
certainly was a good attorney for the United States in settling
the boundary disputes, as is shown by the battle of the maps. The
territorial contentions of both countries hung largely upon the
interpretation of certain clauses of the first American treaty of
peace. Webster therefore ordered a search for material to be made
in the archives of Paris and London. In Paris there was brought
to light a map with the boundary drawn in red, possibly by
Franklin, and supporting the British contention. Webster
refrained from showing this to Ashburton and ordered search in
London discontinued. Ironically enough, however, a little later
there was unearthed in the British Museum the actual map used by
one of the British commissioners in 1782, which showed the
boundary as the United States claimed it to be. Though they had
been found too late to affect the negotiations, these maps
disturbed the Senate discussion of the matter. Yet, as they
offset each other, they perhaps facilitated the acceptance of the
treaty.

Rapidly Webster and Ashburton cleared the field. Webster obtained
the release of McLeod and effected the passage of a law to
prevent a similar crisis in the future by permitting such cases
to be transferred to a federal court. The Caroline affair was
settled by an amicable exchange of notes in which each side
conceded much to the other. They did not indeed dispose of the
slave trade, but they reached an agreement by which a joint
squadron was to undertake to police efficiently the African seas
in order to prevent American vessels from engaging in that trade.

Upon the more important matter of boundary, both Webster and
Ashburton decided to give up the futile task of convincing each
other as to the meaning of phrases which rested upon half-known
facts reaching back into the misty period of first discovery and
settlement. They abandoned interpretation and made compromise and
division the basis of their settlement. This method was more
difficult for Webster than for Ashburton, as both Maine and
Massachusetts were concerned, and each must under the
Constitution be separately convinced. Here Webster used the "Red
Line" map, and succeeded in securing the consent of these States.
They finally settled upon a boundary which was certainly not that
intended in 1782 but was a compromise between the two conceptions
of that boundary and divided the territory with a regard for
actual conditions and geography. From Passamaquoddy Bay to the
Lake of the Woods, accepted lines were substituted for
controversy, and the basis of peace was thus made more secure.
The treaty also contained provision for the mutual extradition of
criminals guilty of specified crimes, but these did not include
embezzlement, and "gone to Canada" was for years the epitaph of
many a dishonest American who had been found out.

The friendly spirit in which Webster and Ashburton had carried on
their negotiations inaugurated a period of reasonable amity
between their two nations. The United States annexed Texas
without serious protest; in spite of the clamor for "fifty-four
forty or fight," Oregon was divided peacefully; and England did
not take advantage of the war with Mexico. Each of these events,
however, added to American territory, and these additions gave
prominence to a new and vexing problem. The United States was now
planted solidly upon the Pacific, and its borders were
practically those to which Adams had looked forward. Natural and
unified as this area looks upon the map and actually is today, in
1850 the extent of territorial expansion had overreached the
means of transportation. The Great Plains, then regarded as the
Great American Desert, and the Rockies presented impossible
barriers to all but adventurous individuals. These men, uniting
in bands for self-protection and taking their lives in their
hands, were able with good luck to take themselves but little
else across this central region and the western barrier. All
ordinary communication, all mail and all freight, must go by sea.
The United States was actually divided into two very unequal
parts, and California and Oregon were geographically far distant
colonies.

The ocean highroad belonged to the United States in common with
all nations, but it took American ships to the opposite ends of
the earth. No regular shuttle of traffic sufficient to weave the
nation together could be expected to pass Cape Horn at every
throw. The natural route lay obviously through the Caribbean,
across some one of the isthmuses, and up the Pacific coast. Here
however, the United States would have to use territory belonging
to other nations, and to obtain the right of transit and security
agreement was necessary. All these isthmus routes, moreover,
needed improvement. Capital must be induced to do the work, and
one necessary inducement was a guarantee of stable conditions of
investment.

This isthmus route became for a time the prime object of American
diplomacy. The United States made in 1846 satisfactory
arrangements with the Republic of New Granada (later Colombia),
across which lay the most southern route, and in 1853 with
Mexico, of whose northern or Tehuantepec route many had great
expectations; but a further difficulty was now discovered. The
best lanes were those of Panama and of Nicaragua. When the
discovery of gold in California in 1848 made haste a more
important element in the problem, "Commodore" Vanderbilt, at that
time the shipping king of the United States, devoted his
attention to the Nicaragua route and made it the more popular.
Here however, the United States encountered not only the local
independent authorities but also Great Britain. Just to the north
of the proposed route Great Britain possessed Belize, now British
Honduras, a meager colony but with elastic boundaries. For many
generations, too, she had concerned herself with securing the
rights of the Mosquito Indians, who held a territory, also with
elastic boundaries, inconveniently near the San Juan River, the
Caribbean entrance to the Nicaraguan thoroughfare. From Great
Britain, moreover, must come a large portion of the capital to be
employed in constructing the canal which was expected soon to cut
the isthmus.

The local situation soon became acute. Costa Rica, Nicaragua, and
the Mosquitoes all claimed the mouth of the San Juan; Honduras
and Nicaragua, the control of the Pacific outlet. British
diplomatic and naval officers clashed with those of the United
States until, in their search for complete control, both exceeded
the instructions which they had received from home. The British
occupied Greytown on the San Juan and supported the Mosquitoes
and Costa Rica. The Americans won favor in Nicaragua and
Honduras, framed treaties allowing transit and canal
construction, and proposed the annexation of Tigre Island, which,
commanded the proposed Pacific outlet.

To untie these knots, Sir Henry Bulwer was sent to Washington to
negotiate with John M. Clayton, President Taylor's Secretary of
State. Neither of these negotiators was of the caliber of Webster
and Ashburton, and the treaty which they drew up proved rather a
Pandora's box of future difficulties than a satisfactory
settlement. In the first place it was agreed that any canal to be
constructed over any of the isthmuses was to be absolutely
neutral, in time of war as well as of peace. Both nations were to
guarantee this neutrality, and other nations were invited to join
with them. No other nations did join, however, and the project
became a dual affair which, owing to the superiority of the
British Navy, gave Britain the advantage, or would eventually
have done so if a canal had been constructed. Subsequently the
majority of Americans decided that such a canal must be under the
sole control of the United States, and the treaty then stood as a
stumbling block in the way of the realization of this idea.

More immediately important, however, and a great wrench to
American policies, was the provision that neither power "will ever
erect or maintain any fortifications commanding" the canal "or
occupy, or fortify, or colonize, or assume or exercise any
dominion over...any part of Central America." This condition
violated Adams's principle that the United States was not on the
same footing with any European power in American affairs and
should not be bound by any self-denying ordinance, and actually
it reversed the principle against the United States. An
explanatory note accompanying the treaty recognized that this
provision did not apply to Belize and her dependencies, and Great
Britain promptly denied that it applied to any rights she already
possessed in Central America, including the Mosquito protectorate
and certain Bay Islands which were claimed by Great Britain as
dependencies of Belize and by Honduras as a part of her
territory.

In vain did Webster, who succeeded Clayton, seek an agreement.
His term of office passed, and the controversy fell into the
hands of Lord Palmerston, the jingoistic spirit who began at this
time to dominate British foreign policy, and of James Buchanan,
who, known to us as a spineless seeker after peace where there
was no peace, was at this time riding into national leadership on
a wave of expansionist enthusiasm. Buchanan and Palmerston
mutually shook the stage thunder of verbal extravagance, but
probably neither intended war. Poker was at this time the
national American game, and bluff was a highly developed art. The
American player won a partial victory. In 1856 Great Britain
agreed to withdraw her protectorate over the Mosquitoes, to
acknowledge the supremacy of Honduras over the Bay Islands, and
to accept a reasonable interpretation of the Belize boundary.
Though this convention was never ratified, Great Britain carried
out its terms, and in 1860 Buchanan announced himself satisfied.

The dreams of 1850, however, were not satisfied. A railroad was
completed across Panama in 1855, but no canal was constructed
until years after the great transcontinental railroads had bound
California to the East by bonds which required no foreign
sanction. Yet the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty remained an entangling
alliance, destined to give lovers of peace and amity many more
uncomfortable hours.

During the Civil War other causes of irritation arose between the
United States and Great Britain. The proclamation of neutrality,
by which the British Government recognized the Confederacy as a
belligerent, seemed to the North an unfriendly act. Early in the
war occurred the Trent affair, which added to the growing
resentment.* It was held to be a violation of professed
neutrality that Confederate commerce destroyers were permitted to
be built and fitted out in British yards. The subsequent transfer
of hundreds of thousands of tons of American shipping to British
registry, owing to the depredations of these raiders, still
further incensed the American people. It was in the midst of
these strained relations that the Fenian Brotherhood in the
United States attempted the invasion of Canada.

* See Stephenson, "Abraham Lincoln and the Union," in "The
Chronicles of America."


America laid claims against Great Britain, based not merely on
the actual destruction of merchantmen by the Alabama, the
Florida, and other Confederate vessels built in British yards,
but also on such indirect losses as insurance, cost of pursuit,
and commercial profits. There is one point, however, in which
the Roman work is quite different. In Sicily and southern
Italy the bands and borders of geometrical patterns are largely
made up of glass or composition, while the Cosmati confined
themselves to the use of colored marbles. In the south, and
particularly in Sicily, gold is freely used, but this
is lacking in the work of the Cosmati. As a result of this
difference in material a wider range of color is possible in the
southern mosaics than in those of Rome; and this is especially
noticeable in the use of blues, which give much of the
character to the beautiful examples shown in our plates,
which we regret we cannot reproduce in color. The altar, pulpit,
and bishop's throne in the churches of SS. Nerone ed Achille
and S.
Cesario in Rome may be taken as additional examples.

This is a form of decoration which may be found in many of
the Byzantine churches of the eleventh and twelfth centuries and
also in the Tuscan churches of the same epoch, notably in the
Baptistery at Pisa and in the church of San Miniato al Monte in
Florence.

The mosaic floors, dados, and solid railings of the Palermitan
monuments all seem to belong to this class: a ground of gray
or white marble slabs with large panels of colored marble,
mosaic bands of geometrical pattern let into the marble,
and sometimes a plain framework of one member with a carved row
of conventional leaves. In Palermo a grayish veined Greek marble
similar to that used in Venice and Ravenna was almost exclusively
used as a background. It formed a most admirable setting for the
inlaid marble mosaics which were laid in rebated panels in the
marble slabs, making a perfectly smooth surface.Had an irresponsible member of Congress made these demands, they
might have been dismissed as another effort to twist the British
lion's tail; but Charles Sumner took himself seriously, expected
others to take him seriously, and unhappily was taken seriously
by a great number of his fellow countrymen. The explanation of
his preposterous demand appeared subsequently in a memorandum
which he prepared. To avoid all possible future clashes with
Great Britain, he would have her withdraw from the American
continents and the Western Hemisphere. Great Britain might
discharge her financial obligations by transferring to the United
States the whole of British America! And Sumner seems actually to
have believed that he was promoting the cause of international
good will by this tactless proposal.

For a time it was believed that Sumner spoke for the
Administration, and public opinion in the United States was
disposed to look upon his speech as a fair statement of American
grievances and a just demand for compensation. The British
Government, too, in view of the action of the Senate and the
indiscreet utterances of the new American Minister in London,
John Lothrop Motley, believed that President Grant favored an
aggressive policy. Further negotiations were dropped. Both
Governments, nevertheless, were desirous of coming to an
understanding, though neither wished to take the first step.

Fortunately it happened that Caleb Cushing for the United States
and John Rose for Canada were then engaged at Washington in the
discussion of some matters affecting the two countries. In the
course of informal conversations these accomplished diplomats
planned for a rapprochement. Rose presented a memorandum
suggesting that all questions in dispute be made the subject of a
general negotiation and treaty. It was at this moment that Sumner
came forward with his plan of compensation and obviously he stood
in the way of any settlement. President Grant, however, already
incensed by Motley's conduct and by Sumner's opposition to his
own favorite project, the annexation of Santo Domingo, now broke
definitely with both by removing Motley and securing Sumner's
deposition from the chairmanship of the Committee on Foreign
Affairs. The way was now prepared for an agreement with Great
Britain.

On February 27, 1871, a Joint High Commission, composed of five
distinguished representatives from each Government, began its
memorable session at Washington. The outcome was the Treaty of
Washington, signed on May 8, 1871. The most important
question--the "Alabama Claims"--was by this agreement to be
submitted to a tribunal of five arbitrators, one to be selected
by the President of the United States, another by the Queen of
Great Britain, a third by the King of Italy, a fourth by the
President of the Swiss Republic, and a fifth by the Emperor of
Brazil. This tribunal was to meet at Geneva and was to base its
award on three rules for the conduct of neutral nations: "First,
to use due diligence to prevent the fitting out, ...within its
jurisdiction, of any vessel which it has reasonable ground to
believe is intended to cruise...against a Power with which
it is at peace...; secondly, not to permit...either
belligerent to make use of its ports or waters as a base of naval
operations...; thirdly, to exercise due diligence in its own
ports and waters...to prevent any violation of the foregoing
obligations and duties."

Another but less elaborate tribunal was to decide all other
claims which had arisen out of the Civil War. Still another
arbitration commission was to assess the amount which the United
States was to pay by way of compensation for certain privileges
connected with the fisheries. The vexed question of the
possession of the San Juan Islands was to be left to the decision
of the Emperor of Germany. A series of articles provided for the
amicable settlement of border questions between the United States
and Canada. Never before in history had such important
controversies been submitted voluntarily to arbitration and
judicial settlement.

The tribunal which met at Geneva in December was a body of
distinguished men who proved fully equal to the gravity of their
task. Charles Francis Adams was appointed to represent the United
States; Sir Alexander Cockburn, to represent Great Britain; the
commissioners from neutral States were also men of distinction.
J. C. Bancroft Davis was agent for the United States, and William
M. Evarts, Caleb Cushing, and Morrison R. Waite acted as counsel.
The case for the United States was not presented in a manner
worthy of the occasion. According to Adams the American
contentions "were advanced with an aggressiveness of tone and
attorneylike smartness, more appropriate to the wranglings of a
quarter-sessions court than to pleadings before a grave
international tribunal." The American counsel were instructed to
insist not, indeed, on indemnity for the cost of two years of
war, but on compensation because of the transfer of our commerce
to the British merchant marine, by virtue of the clause of the
treaty which read "acts committed by the several vessels which
have given rise to the claims generally known as the 'Alabama
Claims.'" British public opinion considered this contention an
act of bad faith. Excitement in England rose to a high pitch and
the Gladstone Ministry proposed to withdraw from the arbitration.

That the tribunal of arbitration did not end in utter failure was
due to the wisdom and courage of Adams. At his suggestion the
five arbitrators announced on June 19, 1872, that they would not
consider claims for indirect damages, because such claims did
"not constitute, upon the principles of international law
applicable to such cases, good foundation for an award of
compensation, or computations of damages between nations." These
claims dismissed, the arbitrators entered into an examination of
the direct American claims and on September 14, 1872, decided
upon an award of fifteen and a half million dollars to the United
States. The Treaty of Washington and the Geneva Tribunal
constituted the longest step thus far taken by any two nations
toward the settlement of their disputes by judicial process.


CHAPTER III. Alaska And Its Problems

The impulse for expansion upon which Buchanan floated his
political raft into the presidency was not a party affair. It was
felt by men of all party creeds, and it seemed for a moment to be
the dominant national ideal. Slaveholders and other men who had
special interests sought to make use of it, but the fundamental
feeling did not rest on their support. American democracy, now
confident of its growing strength, believed that the happiness of
the people and the success of the institutions of the United
States would prove a loadstone which would bring under the flag
all peoples of the New World, while those of the Old World would
strike off their shackles and remold their governments on the
American pattern. Attraction, not compulsion, was the method to
be used, and none of the paeans of American prophets in the
editorials or the fervid orations of the fifties proposed an
additional battleship or regiment.

No one saw this bright vision more clearly than did William H.
Seward, who became Secretary of State under Lincoln. Slight of
build, pleasant, and talkative, he gave an impression of
intellectual distinction, based upon fertility rather than
consistency of mind. He was a disciple of John Quincy Adams, but
his tireless energy had in it too much of nervous unrest to allow
him to stick to his books as did his master, and there was too
wide a gap between his beliefs and his practice. He held as
idealistic views as any man of his generation, but he believed so
firmly that the right would win that he disliked hastening its
victory at the expense of bad feeling. He was shrewd, practical--
maliciously practical, many thought. When, in the heat of one of
his perorations, a flash of his hidden fires would arouse the
distrust of the conservative, he would appear to retract and try
to smother the flames in a cloud of conciliatory smoke. Only the
restraining hand of Lincoln prevented him from committing fatal
blunders at the outset of the Civil War, yet his handling of the
threatening episode of the French in Mexico showed a wisdom, a
patient tact, and a subtle ingenuity which make his conduct of
the affair a classic illustration of diplomacy at almost its
best.*

* See "Abraham Lincoln and the Union" and "The Hispanic Nations
of the New World" (in "The Chronicles of America").


In 1861 Seward said that he saw Russia and Great Britain building
on the Arctic Ocean outposts on territory which should belong to
his own country, and that he expected the capital of the great
federal republic of the future would be in the valley of Mexico.
Yet he nevertheless retained the sentiment he had expressed in
1846: "I would not give one human life for all the continent that
remains to be annexed." The net size of the space allowed for
advertisement is 5-1/2 inches wide and 8 inches high. No
restriction upon the design is made, except that it shall not
go beyond these dimensions. Drawings must be made one half larger
than the advertisement would be. They are not to bear the
designer's name, or any distinguishing device, but a sealed envelope
containing his name and address is to be securely attached to
the back of the drawing, or of each drawing should a designer
submit two or more.
They must be in black ink upon white paper, and sent postpaid
to the Editor of THE BROCHURE SERIES, 6 Beacon Street,
Boston, Mass.

The designing of effective architectural advertisements presents a
good field for draughtsmen to cultivate.

In both THE BROCHURE SERIES and the _Architectural Review_ a
considerable quantity of such work could be used if it were
the right kind. The publishers are in hopes this competition
will bring out designs that will serve as a guide to securing
special work for which there is a more or less constant
demand.
If this competition proves successful in bringing out the proper
kind of material, others will be arranged for in future, and
larger prizes offered.

* * * * *

The Brochure Series
of Architectural Illustration.

PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY
BATES & GUILD, 6 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.

Subscription Rates per year 50 cents, in advance Special Club
Rates for five subscriptions $2.00
Entered at the Boston Post Office as Second-class Matter.

* * * * *
SPECIAL NOTICE.

Back numbers of THE BROCHURE SERIES _are not_ kept in stock.
All subscriptions will be dated from the time received and
subscribers who wish for the current numbers must place their
subscriptions at once.

The placing in position of the great decorative wall painting
of Puvis de Chavannes in the Boston Public Library again directs
public attention to this remarkable building. To us this last
addition to the architectural work (for every feature of the
building, whether constructional, utilitarian, or purely decorative,
is architectural in the sense of forming an essential part of an
otherwise incomplete composition) is the one feature thus far
introduced which does most to bind together the varying elements
in the decorative scheme of the interior.

It occupies the most important position in the building, at the
head of the monumental staircase, and forms not only a centre
of interest aesthetically, but serves as a connecting link
between the other features, which have before seemed more or
less unrelated. The grand staircase, built of Siena marble, the
finest example of the intelligent use of colored marble in this
country, has until now lacked its foil, which the dull blue walls
now give. The added pleasure which is apparent in viewing the
stairway emphasizes the importance of the guiding intelligence which
has made all this possible. There is in our experience only one
other building in the country in the interior treatment of which
this intelligence is evident in anything like the same degree. The
house built by Messrs. McKim, Mead, and White for Mr.Carl Schurz a little later argued
that we had already taken in all those regions the climate of
which would allow healthy self-government and that we should
annex no tropics. Hamilton Fish, then Secretary of State, wrote
in 1873 that popular sentiment was, for the time being, against
all expansion. In fact, among the people of the United States the
idea was developing that expansion was contrary to their national
policy, and their indisposition to expand became almost a
passion. They rejected Santo Domingo and the Danish Islands and
would not press any negotiations for Canada.

What saved the Alaska Treaty from a similar disapproval was not
any conviction that Alaska was worth seven million dollars,
although Sumner convinced those who took the trouble to read,
that the financial bargain was not a bad one. The chief factor in
the purchase of Alaska was almost pure sentiment. Throughout
American history there has been a powerful tradition of
friendliness between Russia and the United States, yet surely no
two political systems have been in the past more diametrically
opposed. The chief ground for friendship has doubtless been the
great intervening distance which has reduced intercourse to a
minimum. Some slight basis for congeniality existed in the fact
that the interests of both countries favored a similar policy of
freedom upon the high seas. What chiefly influenced the public
mind, however, was the attitude which Russia had taken during the
Civil War. When the Grand Duke Alexis visited the United States
in 1871, Oliver Wendell Holmes greeted him with the lines:

Bleak are our coasts with the blasts of December,
Thrilling and warm are the hearts that remember
Who was our friend when the world was our foe.

This Russian friendship had presented itself dramatically to the
public at a time when American relations with Great Britain were
strained, for Russian fleets had in 1863 suddenly appeared in the
harbors of New York and San Francisco. These visits were actually
made with a sole regard for Russian interests and in anticipation
of the outbreak of a general European war, which the Czar then
feared. The appearance of the fleets, however, was for many years
popularly supposed to signify sympathy with the Union and a
willingness to defend it from attack by Great Britain and France.
Many conceived the ingenuous idea that the purchase price of
Alaska was really the American half of a secret bargain of which
the fleets were the Russian part. Public opinion, therefore,
regarded the purchase of Alaska in the light of a favor to Russia
and demanded that the favor be granted.

Thus of all the schemes of expansion in the fifty years between
the Mexican and the Spanish wars, for the Gadsden Purchase of
1853 was really only a rectification of boundary, this alone came
to fruition. Seward could well congratulate himself on his
alertness in seizing an opportunity and on his management of the
delicate political aspects of the purchase. Without his
promptness the golden opportunity might have passed and never
recurred. Yet he could never have saved this fragment of his
policy had not the American people cherished for Russia a
sentimental friendship which was intensified at the moment by
anger at the supposed sympathy of Great Britain for the South.

If Russia hoped by ceding Alaska to involve the United States in
difficulties with her rival Great Britain, her desire was on one
occasion nearly gratified. The only profit which the United
States derived from this new possession was for many years drawn
from the seal fishery. The same generation of Americans which
allowed the extermination of the buffalo for lap robes found in
the sealskin sack the hall mark of wealth and fashion. While,
however, the killing of the buffalo was allowed to go on without
official check, the Government in 1870 inaugurated a system to
preserve the seal herds which was perhaps the earliest step in a
national conservation policy. The sole right of killing was given
to the Alaska Commercial Company with restrictions under which it
was believed that the herds would remain undiminished. The
catch was limited to one hundred thousand a year; it was to
include only male seals; and it was to be limited to the breeding
grounds on the Pribilof Islands.

The seals, however, did not confine themselves to American
territory. During the breeding season they ranged far and wide
within a hundred miles of their islands; and during a great part
of the year they were to be found far out in the Pacific. The
value of their skins attracted the adventurous of many lands, but
particularly Canadians; and Vancouver became the greatest center
for deep-sea sealing. The Americans saw the development of the
industry with anger and alarm. Considering the seals as their
own, they naturally resented this unlimited exploitation by
outsiders when Americans themselves were so strictly limited by
law. They also believed that the steady diminution of the herds
was due to the reckless methods of their rivals, particularly the
use of explosives which destroyed many animals to secure a few
perfect skins.

Public opinion on the Pacific coast sought a remedy and soon
found one in the terms of the treaty of purchase. That document,
in dividing Alaska from Siberia, described a line of division
running through Bering Sea, and in 1881 the Acting Secretary of
the Treasury propounded the theory that this line divided not
merely the islands but the water as well. There was a widespread
feeling that all Bering Sea within this line was American
territory and that all intruders from other nations were
poachers. In accordance with this theory, the revenue cutter
Corwin in 1886 seized three British vessels and hauled their
skippers before the United States District Court of Sitka. Thomas
F. Bayard, then Secretary of State under President Cleveland, did
not recognize this theory of interpreting the treaty, but
endeavored to right the grievance by a joint agreement with
France, Germany, Japan, Russia, and Great Britain, the sealing
nations, "for the better protection of the fur seal fisheries in
Bering Sea."

A solution had been almost reached, when Canada interposed. Lord
Morley has remarked, in his "Recollections," how the voice of
Canada fetters Great Britain in her negotiations with the United
States. While Bayard was negotiating an agreement concerning
Bering Sea which was on the whole to the advantage of the United
States, he completed a similar convention on the more complicated
question of the northeastern or Atlantic fisheries which was
more important to Canada. This latter convention was unfavorably
reported by the Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs, which
foreshadowed rejection. Thereupon, in May, 1888, Lord Salisbury,
the British Foreign Minister, withdrew from the Bering Sea
negotiation.

At this critical moment Cleveland gave place to Harrison, and
Bayard was succeeded by James G. Blaine, the most interesting
figure in our diplomatic activities of the eighties. These years
marked the lowest point in the whole history of our relations
with other countries, both in the character of our agents and in
the nature of the public opinion to which they appealed. Blaine
was undoubtedly the most ill-informed of our great diplomats; yet
a trace of greatness lingers about him. The exact reverse of John
Quincy Adams, he knew neither law nor history, and he did not
always inspire others with confidence in his integrity. On the
other hand, the magnetic charm of his personality won many to a
devotion such as none of our great men except Clay has received.
Blaine saw, moreover, though through a glass darkly, farther
along the path which the United States was to take than did any
of his contemporaries. It was his fate to deal chiefly in
controversy with those accomplished diplomats, Lord Salisbury and
Lord Granville, and it must have been among the relaxations of
their office to point out tactfully the defects and errors in his
dispatches. Nevertheless when he did not misread history or
misquote precedents but wielded the broadsword of equity, he
often caught the public conscience, and then he was not an
opponent to be despised.

Blaine at once undertook the defense of the contention that
Bering Sea was "closed" and the exclusive property of the United
States, in spite of the fact that this position was opposed to
the whole trend of American opinion, which from the days of the
Revolution had always stood for freedom of the high seas and the
limitation of the water rights of particular nations to the
narrowest limits. The United States and Great Britain had
jointly protested against the Czar's ukase of 1821, which had
asserted Russia's claim to Bering Sea as territorial waters; and
if Russia had not possessed it in 1821, we certainly could not
have bought it in 1867. In the face of Canadian opinion, Great
Britain could never consent, even for the sake of peace, to a
position as unsound as it was disadvantageous to Canadian
industry. Nor did Blaine's contention that the seals were
domestic animals belonging to us, and therefore subject to our
protection while wandering through the ocean, carry conviction to
lawyers familiar with the fascinating intricacies of the law,
domestic and international, relating to migratory birds and
beasts. To the present generation it seems amusing that Blaine
defended his basic contention quite as much on the ground of the
inhumanity of destroying the seals as of its economic
wastefulness. Yet Blaine rallied Congress to his support, as well
as a great part of American sentiment.

The situation, which had now become acute, was aggravated by the
fact that most American public men of this period did not
separate their foreign and domestic politics. Too many sought to
secure the important Irish vote by twisting the tail of the
British lion. The Republicans, in particular, sought to identify
protection with patriotism and were making much of the fact that
the recall of Lord Sackville-West, the British Minister, had been
forced because he had advised a correspondent to vote for
Cleveland. It spoke volumes for the fundamental good sense of the
two nations that, when relations were so strained, they could
agree to submit their differences to arbitration. For this happy
outcome credit must be given to the cooler heads on both sides,
but equal credit must be given to their legacy from the cool
heads which had preceded them. The United States and Great
Britain had acquired the habit of submitting to judicial decision
their disputes, even those closely touching honor, and this habit
kept them steady.

In accepting arbitration in 1892, the United States practically
gave up her case, although Blaine undoubtedly believed it could
be defended, and in spite of the fact that it was ably presented
by John W. Foster from a brief prepared by the American counsel,
Edward J. Phelps, Frederic R. Coudert, and James C. Carter. The
tribunal assembled at Paris decided that Bering Sea was open and
determined certain facts upon which a subsequent commission
assessed damages of nearly half a million against the United
States for the seizure of British vessels during the period in
which the American claim was being asserted. Blaine, however, did
not lose everything. The treaty contained the extraordinary
provision that the arbitration tribunal, in case it decided
against the United States, was to draw up regulations for the
protection of the seal herds. These regulations when drafted did
not prove entirely satisfactory, and bound only the United States
and Great Britain. It required many years and much tinkering to
bring about the reasonably satisfactory arrangement that is now
in force. Yet to leave to an international tribunal not merely
the decision of a disputed case but the legislation necessary to
regulate an international property was in itself a great step in
the development of world polity. The charlatan who almost brought
on war by maintaining an indefensible case was also the statesman
who made perhaps the greatest single advance in the conservation
of the world's resources by international regulation.


CHAPTER IV. Blaine And Pan-Americanism

During the half century that intervened between John Quincy Adams
and James G. Blaine, the Monroe Doctrine, it was commonly
believed, had prevented the expansion of the territories of
European powers in the Americas. It had also relieved the United
States both of the necessity of continual preparation for war and
of that constant tension in which the perpetual shifting of the
European balance of power held the nations of that continent.
But the Monroe Doctrine was not solely responsible for these
results. Had it not been for the British Navy, the United States
would in vain have proclaimed its disapproval of encroachment.
Nor, had Europe continued united, could the United States have
withstood European influence; but Canning's policy had
practically destroyed Metternich's dream of unity maintained by
intervention, and in 1848 that whole structure went hopelessly
tumbling before a new order. Yet British policy, too, failed of
full realization, for British statesmen always dreamed of an even
balance in continental Europe which Great Britain could incline
to her wishes, whereas it usually proved necessary, in order to
preserve a balance at all, for her to join one side or the other.
Divided Europe therefore stood opposite united America, and our
inferior strength was enhanced by an advantageous position.

The insecurity of the American position was revealed during the
Civil War. When the United States divided within, the strength of
the nation vanished. The hitherto suppressed desires of European
nations at once manifested themselves. Spain, never satisfied
that her American empire was really lost, at once leaped to take
advantage of the change. On a trumped up invitation of some of
the inhabitants of Santo Domingo, she invaded the formerly
Spanish portion of the island and she began war with Peru in the
hope of acquiring at least some of the Pacific islands belonging
to that state.

More formidable were the plans of Napoleon III, for the French,
too, remembered the glowing promise of their earlier American
dominions. They had not forgotten that the inhabitants of the
Americas as far north as the southern borders of the United
States were of Latin blood, at least so far as they were of
European origin. In Montevideo there was a French colony, and
during the forties France had been active in proffering her
advice in South American disputes. When the second French
Republic had been proclaimed in 1848, one of the French ministers
in South America saw a golden chance for his country to assume
the leadership of all Latin America, which was at that time
suspicious of the designs of the United States and alarmed by its
rapid expansion at the expense of Mexico. With the power of the
American Government neutralized in 1861, and with the British
Navy immobilized by the necessity of French friendship, which the
"Balance" made just then of paramount interest to Great Britain,
Napoleon III determined to establish in Mexico an empire under
French influence.

It is instructive to notice that General Bernhardi states, in
"Germany and the Next War" which has attracted such wide
attention and which has done so much to convince Americans of the
bad morals of autocracy, that Great Britain lost her great chance
of world dominance by not taking active advantage of this
situation, as did France and Spain. It is indeed difficult to see
what would have been the outcome had Great Britain also played at
that time an aggressive and selfish part. She stayed her hand,
but many British statesmen were keenly interested in the
struggle, from the point of view of British interests. They did
not desire territory, but they foresaw that the permanent
separation of the two parts of the United States would leave the
country shorn of weight in the affairs of the Western Hemisphere.
North and South, if separated, would each inevitably seek
European support, and the isolation of the United States and its
claim to priority in American affairs would disappear. The
balance of power would extend itself to the Western Hemisphere
and the assumption of a sphere of influence would vanish with the
unity of the United States.

Nor did the close of the Civil War reveal less clearly than its
beginning the real international position of the United States.
When the country once more acquired unity, these European
encroachments were renounced, and dreams of colonial empire in
America vanished. There was a moment's questioning as to the
reality of the triumph of the North--a doubt that the South might
rise if foreign war broke out; but the uncertainty was soon
dispelled. It was somewhat embarrassing, if not humiliating, for
the Emperor of the French to withdraw from his Mexican
undertaking, but the way was smoothed for him by the finesse of
Seward. By 1866 the international position of the United States
was reestablished and was perhaps the stronger for having been
tested.

In all these years, however, the positive side of the Monroe
Doctrine, the development of friendly cooperation between the
nations of America under the leadership of the United States, had
made no progress. In fact, with the virtual disappearance of the
American merchant marine after the Civil War, the influence of
the United States diminished. Great Britain with her ships, her
trade, and her capital, at that time actually counted for much
more, while German trade expanded rapidly in the seventies and
eighties and German immigration into Brazil gave Prussia a lever
hold, the ultimate significance of which is not even yet fully
evident.

Under these circumstances, Blaine planned to play a brilliant
role as Secretary of State in President Garfield's Cabinet.
Though the President was his personal friend, Blaine regarded him
as his inferior in practical statecraft and planned to make his
own foreign policy the notable feature of the Administration. His
hopes were dashed, however, by the assassination of Garfield and
by the accession of President Arthur. The new Secretary of State,
F T. Frelinghuysen, reversed nearly all of his predecessor's
policies. When Blaine returned to the Department of State in
1889, he found a less sympathetic chief in President Harrison and
a less brilliant role to play. Whether his final retirement
before the close of the Harrison Administration was due directly
to the conflict of views which certainly existed or was a play on
his part for the presidency and for complete control is a
question that has never been completely settled.

Narrow as was Blaine's view of world affairs, impossible as was
his conception of an America divided from Europe economically and
spiritually as well as politically and of an America united in
itself by a provoked and constantly irritated hostility to
Europe, he had an American program which, taken by itself, was
definite, well conceived, and in a sense prophetic. It is
interesting to note that in referring to much the same
relationship, Blaine characteristically spoke of the United
States as "Elder Sister" of the South American republics, while
Theodore Roosevelt, at a later period, conceived the role to be
that of a policeman wielding the "Big Stick."

Blaine's first aim was to establish peace in the Western
Hemisphere by offering American mediation in the disputes of
sister countries. When he first took office in 1881, the
prolonged and bitter war existing between Chili, Bolivia, and
Peru for the control of the nitrate fields which lay just where
the territories of the three abutted, provided a convenient
opportunity. If he could restore peace on an equitable basis
here, he would do much to establish the prestige of the United
States as a wise and disinterested counselor in Spanish American
affairs. In this his first diplomatic undertaking, there
appeared, however, one of the weaknesses of execution which
constantly interfered with the success of his plans. He did not
know how to sacrifice politics to statesmanship, and he appointed
as his agents men so incompetent that they aggravated rather than
settled the difficulty. Later he saw his mistake and made a new
and admirable appointment in the case of Mr. William H. Trescot
of South Carolina. Blaine himself, however, lost office before
new results could be obtained; and Frelinghuysen recalled Trescot
and abandoned the attempt to force peace.

A second object of Blaine's policy was to prevent disputes
between Latin American and European powers from becoming
dangerous by acting as mediator between them. When he took
office, France was endeavoring to collect from Venezuela a claim
which was probably just. When Venezuela proved obdurate, France
proposed to seize her custom houses and to collect the duties
until the debt was paid. Blaine protested, urged Venezuela to
pay, and suggested that the money be sent through the American
agent at Caracas. He further proposed that, should Venezuela not
pay within three months, the United States should seize the
custom houses, collect the money, and pay it to France. Again his
short term prevented him from carrying out his policy, but it is
nevertheless of interest as anticipating the plan actually
followed by President Roosevelt in the case of Santo Domingo.

Blaine was just as much opposed to the peaceful penetration of
European influence in the Western Hemisphere as to its forceful
expression. The project of a canal across the Isthmus of Panama,
to be built and owned by a French company, had already aroused
President Hayes on March 8, 1880, to remark: "The policy of this
country is a canal under American control. The United States
cannot consent to the surrender of this control to any European
power or to any combination of European powers." Blaine added
that the passage of hostile troops through such a canal when
either the United States or Colombia was at war, as the terms of
guarantee of the new canal allowed, was "no more admissible than
on the railroad lines joining the Atlantic and Pacific shores of
the United States."

It is characteristic of Blaine that, when he wrote this dispatch,
he was apparently in complete ignorance of the existence of the
Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, in which the United States accepted the
exactly opposite principles--had agreed to a canal under a joint
international guarantee and open to the use of all in time of war
as well as of peace. Discovering this obstacle, he set to work to
demolish it by announcing to Great Britain that the treaty was
antiquated, thirty years old, that the development of the
American Pacific slope had changed conditions, and that, should
the treaty be observed and such a canal remain unfortified, the
superiority of the British fleet would give the nation complete
control. Great Britain, however, could scarcely be expected to
regard a treaty as defunct from old age at thirty years,
especially as she also possessed a developing Pacific coast.
Moreover, if the treaty was to British advantage, at least the
United States had accepted it. Great Britain, therefore, refused
to admit that the treaty was not in full force. Blaine then urged
the building of an American canal across the Isthmus of
Nicaragua, in defiance of the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty--a plan which
received the support of even President Arthur, under whom a
treaty for the purpose was negotiated with the Republic of
Nicaragua. Before this treaty was ratified by the Senate,
however, Grover Cleveland, who had just become President,
withdrew it. He believed in the older policy, and refused his
sanction to the new treaty on the ground that such a canal "must
be for the world's benefit, a trust for mankind, to be removed
from the chance of domination by any single power."

The crowning glory of Blaine's system, as he planned it, was the
cooperation of the American republics for common purposes. He did
not share Seward's dream that they would become incorporated
States of the Union, but he went back to Henry Clay and the
Panama Congress of 1826 for his ideal. During his first term of
office he invited the republics to send representatives to
Washington to discuss arbitration, but his successor in office
feared that such a meeting of "a partial group of our friends"
might offend Europe, which indeed was not improbably part of
Blaine's intention. On resuming office, Blaine finally arranged
the meeting of a Pan-American Congress in the United States.
Chosen to preside, he presented an elaborate program, including a
plan for arbitrating disputes; commercial reciprocity; the
establishment of uniform weights and measures, of international
copyright, trade-marks and patents, and, of common coinage;
improvement of communications; and other subjects. At the same
time he exerted himself to secure in the McKinley Tariff Bill,
which was just then under consideration, a provision for
reciprocity of trade with American countries. This meeting was
not a complete success, since Congress gave him only half of what
he wanted by providing for reciprocity but making it general
instead of purely American. Nevertheless one permanent and solid
result was secured in the establishment of the Bureau of American
Republics at Washington, which has become a clearing house of
ideas and a visible bond of common interests and good feeling.

Throughout the years of Blaine's prominence, the public took more
interest in his bellicose encounters with Europe, and
particularly with Great Britain, than in his constructive
American policy; and he failed to secure for either an assured
popular support. His attempt to widen the gulf between Europe and
America was indeed absurd at a time when the cable, the railroad,
and the steamship were rendering the world daily smaller and more
closely knit, and when the spirit of democracy, rapidly
permeating western Europe, was breaking down the distinction in
political institutions which had given point to the pronouncement
of 1823. Nevertheless Blaine did actually feel the changing
industrial conditions at home which were destroying American
separateness, and he made a genuine attempt to find a place for
the United States in the world, without the necessity of sharing
the responsibilities of all the world, by making real that
interest in its immediate neighbors which his country had
announced in 1823. Even while Blaine was working on his plan of
"America for the Americans," events were shaping the most
important extension of the interests of the United States which
had taken place since 1823.


CHAPTER V. The United States And The Pacific

Long before the westward march of Americans had brought their
flag to the Pacific, that ocean was familiar to their mariners.
>From Cape Horn to Canton and the ports of India, there ploughed
the stately merchantmen of Salem, Providence, and Newburyport,
exchanging furs and ginseng for teas, silks, the "Canton blue"
which is today so cherished a link with the past, and for the
lacquer cabinets and carved ivory which give distinction to many
a New England home. Meanwhile the sturdy whalers of New Bedford
scoured the whole ocean for sperm oil and whalebone, and the
incidents of their self-reliant three-year cruises acquainted
them with nearly every coral and volcanic isle. Early in the
century missionaries also began to brave the languor of these
oases of leisure and the appetite of their cannibalistic
inhabitants.

The interest of the Government was bound to follow its
adventurous citizens. In 1820 the United States appointed a
consular agent at Honolulu; in the thirties and forties it
entered into treaty relations with Siam, Borneo, and China; and
owing to circumstances which were by no means accidental it had
the honor of persuading Japan to open her ports to the world. As
early as 1797 an American vessel chartered by the Dutch had
visited Nagasaki. From time to time American sailors had been
shipwrecked on the shores of Japan, and the United States had
more than once picked up and sought to return Japanese castaways.
In 1846 an official expedition under Commodore Biddle was sent to
establish relationships with Japan but was unsuccessful. In 1853
Commodore Perry bore a message from the President to the Mikado
which demanded--though the demand was couched in courteous
language--"friendship, commerce, a supply of coal and provisions,
and protection for our shipwrecked people." After a long
hesitation the Mikado yielded. Commodore Perry's success was due
not solely to the care with which his expedition was equipped for
its purpose nor to his diplomatic skill but in part to the
fact that other countries were known to be on the very point of
forcing an entrance into the seclusion of Japan. Few Americans
realize how close, indeed, were the relations established with
Japan by the United States. The treaty which Townsend Harris
negotiated in 1858 stated that "The President of the United
States, at the request of the Japanese Government, will act as a
friendly mediator in such matters of difference as may arise
between the Government of Japan and any European power." Through
his personal efforts Harris may almost be said to have become the
chief adviser of the Japanese Government in the perplexities
which it encountered on entering international society.

Not only did the United States allow itself a closer intimacy
with this new Pacific power than it would have done with a state
of Europe, but it exhibited a greater freedom in dealing with the
European powers themselves in the Far East than at home or in
America. In 1863 the United States joined--in fact, in the
absence of a naval force it strained a point by chartering a
vessel for the purpose--with a concert of powers to force the
opening of the Shimonoseki Straits; subsequently acting with
Great Britain, France, and the Netherlands, the United States
secured an indemnity to pay the cost of the expedition; and in
1866 it united with the same powers to secure a convention by
which Japan bound herself to establish certain tariff
regulations.

Nor were the relations of the United States with the Pacific
Ocean and its shores confined to trade and international
obligations. The American flag waved over more than ships and a
portion of the Pacific coast. Naval officers more than once
raised it over islands which they christened, and Congress
authorized the President to exercise temporary authority over
islands from which American citizens were removing guano and to
prevent foreign encroachment while they were so engaged. In the
eighties, fifty such islands of the Pacific were in the
possession of the United States.

In 1872 an American naval officer made an agreement with the
local chieftain of Tutuila, one of the Samoan Islands, for the
use of Pago Pago, which was the best harbor in that part of the
ocean. The United States drifted into more intimate relationship
with the natives until in 1878 it made a treaty with the Samoan
king allowing Americans to use Pago Pago as a coaling station. In
return the United States agreed: "If unhappily, any differences
should have arisen, or shall hereafter arise, between the Samoan
government and any other government in amity with the United
States, the government of the latter will employ its good offices
for the purpose of adjusting those differences upon a
satisfactory and solid foundation." In 1884 the Senate insisted
on securing a similar harbor concession from Hawaii, and within
the next few years the American Navy began to arise again from
its ashes. The obligation incurred in exchange for this
concession, however, although it resembled that in the Japanese
treaty, was probably an unreflecting act of good nature for, if
it meant anything, it was an entangling engagement such as the
vast majority of Americans were still determined to avoid.

The natives of Samoa did not indulge in cannibalism but devoted
the small energy the climate gave them to the social graces and
to pleasant wars. They were governed by local kings and were
loosely united under a chief king. At Apia, the capital, were
three hundred foreigners, nearly all connected in one way or
another with trade. This commerce had long been in the hands of
English and Americans, but now the aggressive Germans were
rapidly winning it away. Three consuls, representing the United
States, Great Britain, and Germany, spent their time in
exaggerating their functions and in circumventing the plots of
which they suspected each other. The stage was set for comic
opera, the treaty with the United States was part of the plot,
and several acts had already been played, when Bismarck suddenly
injected a tragic element.

In 1884, at the time when the German statesman began to see the
vision of a Teutonic world empire and went about seeking places
in the sun, the German consul in Samoa, by agreement with King
Malietoa, raised the German flag over the royal hut, with a
significance which was all too obvious. In 1886 the American
consul countered this move by proclaiming a United States
protectorate. The German consul then first pressed home a quarrel
with the native king at a time opportunely coinciding with the
arrival of a German warship, the Adler; he subsequently deposed
him and put up Tamasese in his stead. The apparently more
legitimate successor, Mataafa, roused most of the population
under his leadership. The Adler steamed about the islands
shelling Mataafa villages, and the American consul steamed after
him, putting his launch between the Adler and the shore. In the
course of these events, on December 18, 1888, Mataafa ambushed a
German landing party and killed fifty of its members.

German public opinion thereupon vociferously demanded a
punishment which would establish the place of Germany as a
colonial power in the Pacific. Great Britain, however, was not
disposed to give her growing rival a free hand. The United States
was appealed to under the Treaty of 1878, and American sentiment
determined to protect the Samoans in their heroic fight for
self-government. All three nations involved sent warships to
Apia, and through the early spring of 1889 their chancelleries
and the press were prepared to hear momentarily that some one's
temper had given way in the tropic heat and that blood had been
shed--with what consequences on the other side of the globe no
man could tell.

Very different, however, was the news that finally limped in, for
there was no cable. On March 16, 1889, a hurricane had swept the
islands, wrecking all but one of the warships. The common
distress had brought about cooperation among all parties. Tales
of mutual help and mutual praise of natives and the three nations
filled the dispatches. The play turned out to be a comedy after
all. Yet difficulties remained which could be met only by joint
action. A commission of the three nations therefore was arranged
to meet in Berlin. The United States insisted on native
government; Germany, on foreign control. Finally they agreed to a
compromise in the form of a General Act, to which Samoa
consented. The native government was retained, but the control
was given to a Chief Justice and a President of the Municipal
Council of Apia, who were to be foreigners chosen by the three
powers. Their relative authority is indicated by the fact that
the king was to receive $1800 a year, the Chief Justice, $6000,
and the President, $5000.

Small as was the immediate stake, this little episode was
remarkably significant of the trend of American development.
Begun under Grant and concluded under Blaine and Harrison, the
policy of the United States was the creation of no one mind or
party nor did it accord with American traditions. Encountering
European powers in the Pacific, with no apparent hesitation
though without any general intent, the United States entered into
cooperative agreements with them relating to the native
governments which it would never have thought proper or possible
in other parts of the world. The United States seemed to be
evolving a new policy for the protection of its interests in the
Pacific. This first clash with the rising colonial power of
Germany has an added interest because it revealed a fundamental
similarity in colonial policy between the United States and Great
Britain, even though they were prone to quarrel when adjusting
Anglo-American relations.

While the Samoan affair seemed an accidental happening, there was
taking shape in the Pacific another episode which had a longer
history and was more significant of the expansion of American
interests in that ocean. Indeed, with the Pacific coast line of
the United States, with the superb harbors of San Francisco,
Portland, and Puget Sound, and with Alaska stretching its finger
tips almost to Asia, even Blaine could not resist the lure of the
East, though he endeavored to reconcile American traditions of
isolation with oceanic expansion. Of all the Pacific
archipelagoes, the Hawaiian Islands lie nearest to the shores of
the United States. Although they had been discovered to the
European world by the great English explorer, Captain Cook, their
intercourse had, for geographic reasons, always been chiefly with
the United States. Whalers continually resorted to them for
supplies. Their natives shipped on American vessels and came in
numbers to California in early gold-mining days. American
missionaries attained their most striking success in the Hawaiian
Islands and not only converted the majority of the natives but
assisted the successive kings in their government. The
descendants of these missionaries continued to live on the
islands and became the nucleus of a white population which waxed
rich and powerful by the abundant production of sugar cane on
that volcanic soil.

In view of this tangible evidence of intimacy on the part of the
United States with the Hawaiian Islands, Webster in 1842 brought
them within the scope of the Monroe Doctrine by declaring that
European powers must not interfere with their government. Marcy,
Secretary of State, framed a treaty of annexation in 1853, but
the Hawaiian Government withdrew its assent. Twenty years later
Secretary Fish wrote: "There seems to be a strong desire on the
part of many persons in the islands, representing large interests
and great wealth, to become annexed to the United States and
while there are, as I have already said, many and influential
persons in the country who question the policy of any insular
acquisition, perhaps even any extension of territorial limits,
there are also those of influence and wise foresight who see a
future that must extend the jurisdiction and the limits of this
nation, and that will require a resting spot in the mid-ocean,
between the Pacific coast and the vast domains of Asia, which are
now opening to commerce, and Christian civilization."

All immediate action, however, was confined to a specially
intimate treaty of reciprocity which was signed in 1875, and
which secured a substantial American domination in commerce. When
Blaine became Secretary of State in 1881, he was, or at least he
affected to be, seriously alarmed at the possibility of foreign
influence in Hawaiian affairs, particularly on the part of Great
Britain. The native population was declining, and should it
continue to diminish, he believed that the United States must
annex the islands. "Throughout the continent, north and south,"
he wrote, "wherever a foothold is found for American enterprise,
it is quickly occupied, and the spirit of adventure, which seeks
its outlet, in the mines of South America and the railroads of
Mexico, would not be slow to avail itself of openings of assured
and profitable enterprise even in mid-ocean." As the feeling grew
in the United States that these islands really belonged to the
American continent, Blaine even invited Hawaii to send
representatives to the Pan-American Congress of 1889. When he
again became Secretary of State, he was prepared to give indirect
support at least to American interests, for the new queen,
Liliuokalani, was supposed to be under British influence. On the
arrival of a British gunboat in Honolulu, J. L. Stevens, the
American Minister, went so far as to write on February 8, 1892:
"At this time there seems to be no immediate prospect of its
being safe to have the harbor of Honolulu left without an
American vessel of war."

Revolution was, indeed, impending in Hawaii. On January 14, 1893,
the Queen abolished the later constitution under which the
Americans had exercised great power, and in its place she
proclaimed the restoration of the old constitution which
established an absolutism modified by native home rule. At two
o'clock on the afternoon of the 16th of January, the resident
Americans organized a committee of safety; at half-past four
United States marines landed at the call of Stevens. The Queen
was thereupon deposed, a provisional government was organized,
and at its request Stevens assumed for the United States the
"protection" of the islands. Without delay, John W. Foster, who
had just succeeded Blaine as Secretary of State, drew up a treaty
of annexation, which he immediately submitted to the Senate.

On March 4, 1893, Cleveland became President for the second time.
He at once withdrew the treaty and appointed James H. Blount
special commissioner to investigate the facts of the revolt.
While the report of Commissioner Blount did not, indeed, convict
Stevens of conspiring to bring about the uprising, it left the
impression that the revolt would not have taken place and
certainly could not have succeeded except for the presence of the
United States marines and the support of the United States
Minister. Cleveland recalled Stevens and the marines, and
requested the provisional government to restore the Queen. This
Sanford Ballard Dole, the President of the new republic, refused
to do, on the contention that President Cleveland had no right to
interfere in the domestic affairs of Hawaii. On the legality or
propriety of Stevens's conduct, opinion in Congress was divided;
but with regard to Dole's contention, both the Senate and the
House were agreed that the islands should maintain their own
domestic government without interference from the United States.
Thus left to themselves, the Americans in Hawaii bided their time
until public opinion in the United States should prove more
favorable to annexation.


CHAPTER VI. Venezuela

Probably no President ever received so much personal abuse in his
own day as did Grover Cleveland. In time, however, his sterling
integrity and fundamental courage, his firm grasp of the higher
administrative duties of his office, won the approval of his
countrymen, and a repentant public sentiment has possibly gone
too far in the other direction of acclaiming his statesmanship.
Unlike Blaine, Cleveland thought soundly and consistently; but he
was more obstinate, his vision was often narrower, and he was
notably lacking both in constructive power and in tact,
particularly in foreign relations. In his first Administration,
through his Secretary of State, Thomas F. Bayard, Cleveland had
negotiated fairly amicably with Great Britain, and when he failed
to secure the Senate's assent to a treaty on the irritating
question of the northeastern fisheries, he arranged a modus
vivendi which served for many years. In American affairs he
opposed not only the annexation of Hawaii but also the
development of the spirit of Pan-Americanism. He was, however, no
more disposed than was Blaine to permit infractions of that
negative side of the Monroe Doctrine which forbade European
interference in America. His second Administration brought to the
forefront of world diplomacy an issue involving this traditional
principle.

The only European possession in South America at this time was
Guiana, fronting on the Atlantic north of Brazil and divided
among France, Holland, and Great Britain. Beyond British Guiana,
the westernmost division, lay Venezuela. Between the two
stretched a vast tract of unoccupied tropical jungle. Somewhere
there must have been a boundary, but where, no man could tell.
The extreme claim of Great Britain would have given her command
of the mouth of the Orinoco, while that of Venezuela would
practically have eliminated British Guiana. Efforts to settle
this long-standing dispute were unavailing. Venezuela had from
time to time suggested arbitration but wished to throw the whole
area into court. Great Britain insisted upon reserving a minimum
territory and would submit to judicial decision only the land
west of what was known as the Schomburgk line of 1840. As early
as 1876 Venezuela appealed to the United States, "the most
powerful and oldest of the Republics of the new continent," for
its "powerful moral support in disputes with European nations."
Several times the United States proffered its good offices to
Great Britain, but to no effect. The satisfactory settlement of
the question grew more difficult as time went on, particularly
after the discovery of gold in the disputed region had given a
new impulse to occupation.

President Cleveland took a serious view of this controversy
because it seemed to involve more than a boundary dispute. To his
mind it called into question the portion of Monroe's message
which, in 1823, stated that "the American continents...are
henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future
colonization by any European powers." According to this dictum,
boundaries existed between all nations and colonies of America;
the problem was merely to find these boundaries. If a European
power refused to submit such a question to judicial decision, the
inference must be made that it was seeking to extend its
boundaries. In December, 1894, Cleveland expressed to Congress
his hope that an arbitration would be arranged and instructed his
Secretary of State to present vigorously to Great Britain the
view of the United States.

Richard Olney of Boston, a lawyer of exceptional ability and of
the highest professional standing, was then Secretary of State.
His Venezuela dispatch, however, was one of the most undiplomatic
documents ever issued by the Department of State. He did not
confine himself to a statement of his case, wherein any amount of
vigor would have been permissible, but ran his unpracticed eye
unnecessarily over the whole field of American diplomacy. "That
distance and three thousand miles of intervening ocean make any
permanent political union between a European and an American
state unnatural and inexpedient," may have been a philosophic
axiom to many in Great Britain as well as in the United States,
but it surely did not need reiteration in this state paper, and
Olney at once exposed himself to contradiction by adding the
phrase, "will hardly be denied." Entirely ignoring the sensitive
pride of the Spanish Americans and thinking only of Europe, he
continued: "Today the United States is practically sovereign on
this continent, and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it
confines its interposition."

The President himself did not run into any such uncalled-for
extravagance of expression, but his statement of the American
position did not thereby lose in vigor. When he had received the
reply, of the British Government refusing to recognize the
interest of the United States in the case, Cleveland addressed
himself, on December 17, 1895, to Congress. In stating the
position of the Government of the United States, he declared that
to determine the true boundary line was its right, duty, and
interest. He recommended that the Government itself appoint a
commission for this purpose, and he asserted that this line, when
found, must be maintained as the lawful boundary. Should Great
Britain continue to exercise jurisdiction beyond it, the United
States must resist by every means in its power. "In making these
recommendations I am fully alive to the responsibility incurred,
and keenly realize all the consequences that may follow." Yet
"there is no calamity which a great nation can invite which
equals that which follows a supine submission to wrong and
injustice and the consequent loss of national self-respect and
honor beneath which axe shielded and defended a people's safety
and greatness."

Perhaps no American document relating to diplomacy ever before
made so great a stir in the world. Its unexpectedness enhanced
its effect, even in the United States, for the public had not
been sufficiently aware of the shaping of this international
episode to be psychologically prepared for the imminence of war.
Unlike most Anglo-American diplomacy, this had been a long-range
negotiation, with notes exchanged between the home offices
instead of personal conferences. People blenched at the thought
of war; stocks fell; the attention of the whole world was
arrested. The innumerable and intimate bonds of friendship and
interest which would thus have to be broken merely because of an
insignificant jog in a boundary remote from both the nations made
war between the United States and Great Britain seem absolutely
inconceivable, until people realized that neither country could
yield without an admission of defeat both galling to national
pride and involving fundamental principles of conduct and policy
for the future.

Great Britain in particular stood amazed at Cleveland's position.
The general opinion was that peace must be maintained and that
diplomats must find a formula which would save both peace and
appearances. Yet before this public opinion could be
diplomatically formulated, a new episode shook the British sense
of security. Germany again appeared as a menace and, as in the
case of Samoa, the international situation thus produced tended
to develop a realization of the kinship between Great Britain and
the United States. Early in January, 1896, the Jameson raid into
the Transvaal was defeated, and the Kaiser immediately
telegraphed his congratulations to President Krtiger. In view of
the possibilities involved in this South African situation,
British public opinion demanded that her diplomats maintain peace
with the United States, with or without the desired formula.

The British Government, however, was not inclined to act with
undue haste. It became apparent even to the most panicky that war
with the United States could not come immediately, for the
American Commission of Inquiry must first report. For a time Lord
Salisbury hoped that Congress would not support the President--a
contingency which not infrequently happened under Cleveland's
Administration. On this question of foreign relations, however,
Congress stood squarely behind the President. Lord Salisbury then
toyed with the hope that the matter might be delayed until
Cleveland's term expired, in the hope he might have an
opportunity of dealing with a less strenuous successor.

In the summer of 1896, John Hay, an intimate friend of Major
McKinley, the probable Republican candidate for the presidency,
was in England, where he was a well-known figure. There he met
privately Arthur J. Balfour, representing Lord Salisbury, and Sir
William Harcourt, the leader of the Opposition. Hay convinced
them that a change in the Administration of his country would
involve no retreat from the existing American position. The
British Government thereupon determined to yield but attempted to
cover its retreat by merging the question with one of general
arbitration. This proposal, however, was rejected, and Lord
Salisbury then agreed to "an equitable settlement" of the
Venezuela question by empowering the British Ambassador at
Washington to begin negotiations "either with the representative
of Venezuela or with the Government of the United States acting
as the friend of Venezuela."

The achievement of the Administration consisted in forcing Great
Britain to recognize the interest of the United States in the
dispute with Venezuela, on the ground that Venezuela was one of
the nations of the Western Hemisphere. This concession
practically involved recognition of the interest of the United
States in case of future disputes with other American powers. The
arbitration treaty thus arranged between Great Britain and
Venezuela under the auspices of the United States submitted the
whole disputed area to judicial decision but adopted the rule
that fifty years of occupation should give a sufficient title for
possession. The arbitration tribunal, which met in Paris in 1899,
decided on a division of the disputed territory but found that
the claim of Great Britain was, on the whole, more nearly correct
than that of Venezuela.

Cleveland's startling and unconventional method of dealing with
this controversy has been explained by all kinds of conjectures.
For example, it has been charged that his message was the product
of a fishing trip on which whisky flowed too freely; on the other
hand, it has been asserted that the message was an astute
political play for the thunder of patriotic applause. More
seriously, Cleveland has been charged by one set of critics with
bluffing, and by another with recklessly running the risk of war
on a trivial provocation. The charge of bluffing comes nearer the
fact, for President Cleveland probably had never a moment's doubt
that the forces making for peace between the two nations would be
victorious. If he may be said to have thrown a bomb, he certainly
had attached a safety valve to it, for the investigation which he
proposed could not but give time for the passions produced by his
message to cool. It is interesting to note in passing that delay
for investigation was a device which that other great Democrat,
William Jennings Bryan, Cleveland's greatest political enemy,
sought, during his short term as Secretary of State under
President Wilson, to make universal in a series of arbitration
treaties--treaties which now bind the United States and many
other countries, how tightly no man can tell.

While, however, Cleveland's action was based rather on a belief
in peace than on an expectation of war, it cannot be dismissed as
merely a bluff. Not only was he convinced that the principle
involved was worth establishing whatever the cost might be, but
he was certain that the method he employed was the only one which
could succeed, for in no other way was it possible to wake
England to a realization of the fact that the United States was
full-grown and imbued with a new consciousness of its strength.
So far was Cleveland's message from provoking war that it caused
the people of Great Britain vitally to realize for the first time
the importance of friendship with the United States. It marks a
change in their attitude toward things American which found
expression not only in diplomacy, but in various other ways, and
which strikingly revealed itself in the international politics of
the next few years. Not that hostility was converted into
affection, but a former condescension gave way to an appreciative
friendliness towards the people of the United States.

The reaction in America was somewhat different. Cleveland had
united the country upon a matter of foreign policy, not
completely, it is true, but to a greater degree than Blaine had
ever succeeded in doing. More important than this unity of
feeling throughout the land, however, was the development of a
spirit of inquiry among the people. Suddenly confronted by
changes of policy that might bring wealth or poverty, life or
death, the American people began to take the foreign relations of
the United States more seriously than they had since the days of
the Napoleonic wars. Yet it is not surprising that when the
Venezuela difficulty had been settled and Secretary Olney and Sir
Julian Pauncefote, the British Ambassador, had concluded a
general treaty of arbitration, the Senate should have rejected
it, for the lesson that caution was necessary in international
affairs had been driven home. Time was needed for the new
generation to formulate its foreign policy.


CHAPTER VII. The Outbreak Of The War With Spain

Before the nineteenth century ended, the Samoan, Hawaiian, and
Venezuelan episodes had done much to quicken a national
consciousness in the people of the United States and at the same
time to break down their sense of isolation from the rest of the
world. Commerce and trade were also important factors in
overcoming this traditional isolation. Not only was American
trade growing, but it was changing in character. Argentina was
beginning to compete with the United States in exporting wheat
and meat, while American manufacturers were reaching the point
where they were anxious for foreign markets in which they felt
they could compete with the products of Great Britain and
Germany.

In a thousand ways and without any loss of vigor the sense of
American nationality was expressing itself. The study of American
history was introduced into the lower schools, and a new group of
historians began scientifically to investigate whence the
American people had come and what they really were. In England,
such popular movements find instant expression in literature; in
the United States they take the form of societies. Innumerable
patriotic organizations such as the "Daughters of the American
Revolution" and a host of others, sought to trace out American
genealogy and to perpetuate the memory of American military and
naval achievements. Respect for the American flag was taught in
schools, and the question was debated as to whether its use in
comic opera indicated respect or insult. This new nationalism was
unlike the expansionist movement of the fifties in that it laid
no particular stress upon the incorporation of the neighboring
republics by a process of federation. On the whole, the people
had lost their faith in the assimilating influence of republican
institutions and did not desire to annex alien territory and
races. They were now more concerned with the consolidation of
their own country and with its place in the world. Nor were they
as neglectful as their fathers had been of the material means by
which to accomplish their somewhat indefinite purposes.

The reconstruction of the American Navy, which had attained such
magnitude and played so important a part in the Civil War but
which had been allowed to sink into the merest insignificance,
was begun by William E. Chandler, the Secretary of the Navy under
President Arthur. William C. Whitney, his successor under
President Cleveland, continued the work with energy. Captain
Alfred T. Mahan began in 1883 to publish that series of studies
in naval history which won him world-wide recognition and did so
much to revolutionize prevailing conceptions of naval strategy. A
Naval War College was established in 1884, at Newport, Rhode
Island, where naval officers could continue the studies which
they had begun at Annapolis.

The total neglect of the army was not entirely the result of
indifference. The experience with volunteers in the Civil War had
given almost universal confidence that the American people could
constitute themselves an army at will. The presence of several
heroes of that war in succession in the position of
commander-in-chief of the army had served to diffuse a sense of
security among the people. Here and there military drill was
introduced in school and college, but the regular army attracted
none of the romantic interest that clung about the navy, and the
militia was almost totally neglected. Individual officers, such
as young Lieutenant Tasker Bliss, began to study the new
technique of warfare which was to make fighting on land as
different from that of the wars of Napoleon as naval warfare was
different from that of the time of Nelson. Yet in spite of
obviously changing conditions, no provision was made for the
encouragement of young army officers in advanced and up-to-date
Studies. While their contemporaries in other professions were
adding graduate training to the general education which a college
gave, the graduates of West Point were considered to have made
themselves in four years sufficiently proficient for all the
purposes of warfare.

By the middle nineties thoughtful students of contemporary
movements were aware that a new epoch in national history was
approaching. What form this national development would take was,
however, still uncertain, and some great event was obviously
required to fix its character. Blaine's Pan-Americanism had
proved insufficient and, though the baiting of Great Britain was
welcome to a vociferous minority, the forces making for peace
were stronger than those in favor of war. Whatever differences
there were did not reach to fundamentals but were rather in the
nature of legal disputes between neighbors whom a real emergency
would quickly bring to the assistance of each other. A crisis
involving interest, propinquity, and sentiment, was needed to
shake the nation into an activity which would clear its views.

At the very time of the Venezuela difficulty, such a crisis was
taking shape in the Caribbean. Cuba had always been an object of
immediate concern to the United States. The statesmen of the
Jeffersonian period all looked to its eventually becoming part of
American territory. Three quarters of a century before, when the
revolt of the Spanish colonies had halted on the shores of the
mainland, leaving the rich island of Cuba untouched, John Quincy
Adams, on April 28, 1823, in a lengthy and long-considered
dispatch to Mr. Nelson, the American Minister to Spain, asserted
that the United States could not consent to the passing of Cuba
from the flag of Spain to that of any other European power, that
under existing conditions Cuba was considered safer in the hands
of Spain than in those of the revolutionaries, and that the
United States stood for the maintenance of the status quo, with
the expectation that Cuba would ultimately become American
territory.

By the late forties and the fifties, however, the times had
changed, and American policy had changed with them. It was
becoming more and more evident that, although no real revolution
had as yet broken out, the "Pearl of the Antilles" was bound to
Spain by compulsion rather than by love. In the United States
there was a general feeling that the time had at last come to
realize the vision of Jefferson and Adams and to annex Cuba. But
the complications of the slavery question prevented immediate
annexation. As a slave colony which might become a slave state,
the South wanted Cuba, but the majority in the North did not.

After the Civil War in the United States was over, revolution at
length flared forth in 1868, from end to end of the island.
Sympathy with the Cubans was widespread in the United States. The
hand of the Government, however, was stayed by recent history.
Americans felt keenly the right of governments to exert their
full strength to put down rebellion, for they themselves were
prosecuting against Great Britain a case based on what they
contended was her too lax enforcement of her obligations to the
American Government and on the assistance which she had given to
the South. The great issue determined the lesser, and for ten
years the United States watched the Cuban revolution without
taking part in it, but not, however, without protest and
remonstrance. Claiming special rights as a close and necessarily
interested neighbor, the United States constantly made
suggestions as to the manner of the contest and its settlement.
Some of these Spain grudgingly allowed, and it was in part by
American insistence that slavery was finally abolished in the
island. Further internal reform, however, was not the wish and
was perhaps beyond the power of Spain. Although the revolution
was seemingly brought to a close in 1878, its embers continued to
smolder for nearly a score of years until in 1895 they again
burst into flame.

War in Cuba could not help affecting in a very intimate way the
people of the United States. They bought much the greater part of
the chief Cuban crops, sugar and tobacco. American capital had
been invested in the island, particularly in plantations. For
years Cubans of liberal tendencies had sent their sons to be
educated in the United States, very many of whom had been
naturalized before returning home. Cuba was but ninety miles from
Florida, and much of our coastwise shipping passed in sight of
the island. And so, we bid farewell.

* * * * *
Life's sun at setting, may shed brighter rays Than when it rose,
and threescore years and ten May wear a beauty that youth fails
to reach:
The beauty of a fitness for the skies,-- Such nearness to
the angels, that their song "Peace and good will," like key-tone
rules the soul, And the pure reflex of their smile illumes The
meekly lifted brow.

She taught us this,-- And then went home.

MISS ALICE BECKWITH,
Died at Hartford, September 23d, 1859.

The beautiful hath fled To join the spirit-train; Earth interposed
with strong array, Love stretch'd his arms to bar her
way, All,--all in vain.

There was a bridal hope Before her crown'd with flowers; The orange
blossoms took the hue With which the cypress dank with dew
Darkeneth our bowers.

Affections strong and warm Sprang round her gentle way, Young
Childhood, with a moisten'd eye, And Friendship's tenderest sympathy
Watch'd her decay.

Disease around her couch Long held a tyrant sway, Till vanished
from her cheek, the rose, And the fair flesh like vernal snows
Wasted away.

Yet the dark Angel's touch Dissolv'd that dire control, And
where the love-knot cannot break Nor pain nor grief intrusion
make, Bore the sweet soul.

MARY SHIPMAN DEMING,
Died at Hartford, Nov. 11th, 1839, aged 4 years and 6 months.

The garner'd Jewel of our heart, The Darling of our tent!
Cold rains were falling thick and fast, When forth from us she
went.

The sweetest blossom on our tree, When droop'd her fairy
head, We might not lay her 'mid the flowers, For all the
flowers were dead.

The youngest birdling of our nest, Her song from us hath fled; Yet
mingles with a purer strain That floats above our head.

We gaze,--her wings we may not see:
We listen,--all in vain:
But when this wintry life is o'er, We'll hear her voice again.

REV. DR. F. W. HATCH,
Died at Sacramento, California, January 16th, 1860, aged
70.

A pleasant theme it is to think of him That parted friend, whose
noble heart and mind Were ever active to the highest ends.
Even sceptics paid him homage 'mid their doubts, Perceiving that
his life made evident A goodness not of earth.

His radiant brow And the warm utterance of his lustrous eye Told
how the good of others triumph'd o'er All narrowness of
self. He deem'd it not A worthy aim of Christ's true ministry
To chaffer for the gold that perisheth Or waste its God-given
powers on lifeless forms; But love of souls, and love of Him who
died That they might live, gave impulse to his zeal.

--And so, while half a century chronicled The change of
empires, and the fall of kings And death of generations like the
leaves That strew the forest 'neath autumnal skies, He toil'd
unswerving in that One Great Cause To which the vigor of his youth
was given.

--And as his life, its varied tasks well done Shrouded its head and
trustful went to Him Who giveth rest and peace and rich reward Unto
his faithful servants, it behooves Us to rejoice who have so long
beheld His pure example.

From it may we learn Oh sainted Friend, wherever duty calls
With fervent hearts to seek for others' good, And wear thy
spirit-smile, and win even here Some foretaste of the bliss
that ne'er shall end.

MRS. PAYNE,
Wife of Right Rev. Bishop PAYNE, died at Monrovia, Liberia.

Oh true and faithful! Twice ten earnest years Of mission-toil
in Afric's sultry clime Attest thy patience in thy
Master's cause, Thy self-denial and humility.

Now, neath the shadow of the princely palm, And where Liberia's
church-crown'd summits rise, Are sighs from sable bosoms, swelling
deep With gratitude for all thy hallow'd care.

--The Prelate, unto whom thy heart of hearts Was link'd so
tenderly,--who found in thee Solace for exile from his native shore,
Laments thy loss, as the lone hours go by.

He mourns thee deepest, for he knew thee best, Thy purity, thy
sublimated search For added holiness. With angel hand Press
thou thy pattern on us,--we who dwell Amid the fullness of the
bread from Heaven, Forgetful of our heathen brother's need.
Now thou dost sweetly sleep, where pain and woe Follow thee
not. Their trial-time is o'er, Their discipline perfected. For thy
will Was subjugated to the Will Divine, And through a dear
Redeemer's strength, thy soul Hath won the victory.

MRS. MARY MILDENSTEIN ROBERTSON,
Wife of Rev. WILLIAM H. C. ROBERTSON, died at Magnolia, East
Florida, January 13th, aged 34.

Our buds have faded,--winter's frigid breath Sigh'd o'er their
bosoms, and they fell away, So in these household bowers the
ice of death Bids rose and lily ere their prime decay, And see a
Passion-Flower from tropic skies Beneath our drifted snows,
not without requiem lies.

A brilliant daughter of the Cuban vales Of generous mind,
impulsive, strong and high Twined the home-tendril where our
northern gales Sweep grove and forest with their minstrelsy,
Labor'd for classic lore with studious part, And planted friendship's
germ in many an answering heart.

Her filial piety intensely warm Whose gushing tenderness
no limit knew, Clasp'd day and night, a Mother's wasted form And
o'er her failing powers protection threw, Cheering the darken'd
soul with comfort sweet And girding it anew, life's latest
pang to meet.

Then came the sacred vow for good or ill, The life-long
study of another's joy, The raptur'd and unutterable thrill
With which a mother greets her first-born boy, The climax of those
hopes and duties dear Which Heaven's unerring hand accords to
Woman's sphere.

And then the scene was ended, and she found What here her ardent
nature vainly sought, Unwithering flowers and music's tuneful
sound Without a shadow or discordant thought, And entered through
a dear Redeemer's love The never-changing clime of perfect
rest above.

MADAM WILLIAMS,
Widow of the late EZEKIEL WILLIAMS, Esq., and Daughter of Chief
Justice Oliver Ellsworth, died at Hartford, February 28th, 1860,
aged 87.

She was a link that bound us to the past,-- To the great days of
Washington, when men Loving their country better than themselves
Show'd to the world what patriot virtue meant.
She on the knee of her majestic sire Drew to her listening heart
when life was new Those principles that made his honored name
Synonymous with wisdom, and the might Of holy truth.

So when in woman's sphere She took her post of duty, still in all
The delicate proprieties of life, The inner sanctities of household
weal, In social elegance, and in the deeds That christian pity
to the poor extends, She was our model; and we saw in her The
perfect lady of the olden time.
Thus on the pleasant hill-top where she dwelt In her green-terraced
home, o'ercanopied By graceful elm, mid evergreens and flowers, The
years stole over her, and slowly wrote Their more than fourscore
on her faded scroll, While the kind care of unexhausted love Guarded
her long decline.

And now she sleeps Where thro' the riven snows, the quickening
turf Gives emblem of the never-ending Spring, That wraps the
accepted soul in robes of joy.

SAMUEL G. OGDEN, ESQ.,
Died at Astoria, New York, April 5th, 1860.

Upon his suffering couch he lay, Whose noble form and mind The
stress of fourscore years had tried, Yet left a charm behind.

The charm of heaven-born happiness Whose beauty may not fade,
The charm of unimpair'd regard For all whom God had made.

Upon his suffering couch he lay, While sadly gathering there,
Were loved and loving ones, who made That honored life their care;
And 'mid the group, a daughter's voice Of wondrous sweetness read
Brief portions from the Book Divine, As his dictation led.

"Bow down thine ear, Most Merciful, Oh, hearken while I speak,
Now in my time of utmost need, To Thee alone I seek.
Shew me some token, Lord, for good, Before I pass away, For Thou
hast ever been my strength, My comforter and stay."[1]
So when that precious breath went forth, Her gentle hand was laid
To close those pale and trembling lids In slumber's dreamless
shade, And then, the pure and sacred flowers She for his
burial twined, And bade her struggling grief be still Till
the last rite declined.

Through every trial change of life Had reign'd within her
breast A holy zeal of filial love, That could not be represt;
Its memories, like a music strain, Still in that casket swell,
And wake perchance, some fond response Where watching angels
dwell.

[1] The 86th Psalm, one of his favorites, as death drew nigh
was often read to him by his daughter, who never left him,
day or night, during his sickness, and "out of whose arms," says
one who was present, "when he drew his last breath, the angels
took him."

MR. GEORGE BEACH,
Died at Hartford, May 4th, 1860.

Aye, robe yourselves in black, light messengers Whose letter'd
faces to the people tell The pulse and pressure of the
passing hour.
'Tis fitting ye should sympathize with them, And tint your tablets
with a sable hue Who bring them tidings of a loss so great.

What have they lost?
An upright man, who scorn'd All subterfuge, who faithful to
his trust Guarded the interests they so highly prized, With power
and zeal unchang'd, from youth to age.

Yet there's a sadder sound of bursting tears From woe-worn
helpless ones, from widow'd forms O'er whom he threw
a shelter, for his name Long mingled with their prayers,
both night and morn.
The Missionary toward the setting sun Will miss his liberal hand
that threw so wide Its secret alms. The sons of want
will miss His noble presence moving thro' our streets Intent on
generous deeds; and in the Church He loved so well, a silence
and a chasm Are where the fervent and responsive voice, And kingly
beauty of the hoary head So long maintained their place.
Sudden he sank, Though not unwarn'd.

A chosen band had kept Watch through the night, and earnest love
took note Of every breath. But when approaching dawn Kindled the
east, and from the trees that bowered His beautiful abode, awakening
birds Sent up their earliest carol, he went forth To meet the
glories of the unsetting sun, And hear with unseal'd ear the
song of heaven.

--So they who truest loved and deepest mourn'd, Had highest call
to praise, for best they knew The soul that had gone home
unto its God.

MISS MARGARET C. BROWN,
Died at Hartford, May 12th, 1860.

Gone, pure in heart! unto thy fitting home, Where nought of ill
can follow. O'er thy life There swept no stain, and o'er
its placid close No shadow.
As for us, who saw thee move From childhood onward, loving
and serene, To every duty faithful, we who feel The bias toward
self too often make Our course unequal, or beset with thorns,
Give thanks to Him, the Giver of all good, For what thou wert,
but most for what thou art.

* * * * *
Thy meek and reverent nature cheer'd the heart Of hoary Age even
in thine early bloom, And with sweet tenderness of filial care, And
perfect sympathy, thy shielding arm Pillow'd a Mother's head, till
life went out.
We yield thee back, with sound of holy hymns, Flowers in thy hand,
and bosom,--parting gifts Of Spring, that makes our earth so
beautiful, Faintly prefiguring thine eternal gain Of flowers that
never fade and skies that need Not sun nor moon to light them.
So farewell, Our grief is selfish, yet it hath its way, Nor can we
stand beside thine open grave Without a tear.
Yet still doth chasten'd faith Ask help of God, to render back with
praise A soul to which He gave the victory.
MISS FRANCES WYMAN TRACY,
Adopted daughter of Mrs. WILLIAM TRACY, died at New York, in 1860,
aged 17.
O young and beautiful, thy step Was light with fairy grace, And
well the music of thy voice Accorded with thy face,
And blent with those attractive charms How fair it was to see Thy
tenderness for her who fill'd A Mother's place to thee.
Yet all the pure and holy ties Thus round thy being wove, They are
not lost, they are not dead, They have a life above.
What though the sleepless care of love Might not avail to save, And
sorrow with her dropping tear Keeps vigil o'er thy grave,
Faith hath a rainbow for the cloud, A solace for the pain, A promise
from the Book Divine To rise, nor part again.
DEACON NORMAND SMITH, 
Died at Hartford, May 22d, 1860, aged 87.
One saintly man the less, to teach us how Wisely to live,--one blest
example more To teach us how to die.
Fourscore and seven, Swept not the beauty of his brow away, Nor
quell'd his voice of music, nor impair'd The social feeling that
through all his life Ran like a thread of gold.
In filial arms Close wrapp'd with watchful tenderness, he trod
Jordan's cold brink.
The world was beautiful, But Christ's dear love so wrought within
his heart That to depart seem'd better.
Many a year He lent his influence to the church he loved, For unity
and peace, and countless gems Dropp'd from his lips when the last
sickness came, To fortify young pilgrims in the course That leads
to glory and eternal life.
As the frail flesh grew weak, the soul look'd forth With added
brightness thro' the clear, dark eye, As though it saw unutterable
things, Or heard the welcome of beloved ones Who went to rest before
him.
So, with smiles, And prayers and holy hymns, and loving words He
laid the burden of the body down, And slept in Jesus.
MRS. HELEN TYLER BEACH,
Wife of Mr. C. N. BEACH, died at Philadelphia, July 30th, 1860.
How strange that One who yesterday Shed radiance round her sphere,
Thus, in the prime of life and health, Should slumber on the
bier.
How sad that One who cheer'd her home With love's unvarying grace,
Should leave at hearth-stone and at board Nought save a vacant
place.
The beaming hope that bright and fair Around her cradle shone, Made
cloudless progress year by year, With lustre all its own,
While still unselfish and serene Her daily course she drew, To every
generous impulse warm To every duty true:
Yet all these pure and hallowed charms To favor'd mortals given,
That make their loss to earth so great, Enhance the gain of
Heaven.

MRS. ELIZABETH HARRIS,
Died at Hartford, Sunday evening, September 9th, 1860, aged 80.
Oh sorrowing Daughter, left alone In home's deserted sphere, Where
every object group'd around, In pleasant room, or garden's bound
Is twined by links of sight or sound With the lost Mother dear;

Yet take sweet thoughts thy grief to soothe Of what she was below,
Her years to faithful duty given, Her comfort in the Book of Heaven,
Her ready trust when life was riven, To Christ, her Lord, to go.
And take sweet memories of the care That smoothed her couch of pain,
The grateful love that o'er her way Kept tender vigil, night and
day, And let its pure, reflected ray Thy drooping heart sustain.
So shall thy faith the pang assuage That heaves thy mourning breast;
For nearer brings each setting sun Their blessed meeting who have
won The plaudit of the Judge, "Well done, Come, enter to my rest."Public opinion in
Spain was therefore no less inflamed than in America, but it was
less well-informed. Cartoons represented the American hog, which
would readily fall before the Spanish rapier accustomed to its
nobler adversary the bull. Spanish pride, impervious to facts and
statistics, would brook no supine submission on the part of its
people to foreign demands. It was a question how far the Spanish
Government could bring itself to yield points in season which it
fully realized must be yielded in the end.

The negotiation waxed too hot for the aged John Sherman, and was
conducted by the Assistant Secretary, William Rufus Day, a close
friend of the President, but a man comparatively unknown to the
public. When Day officially succeeded Sherman (April 26, 1898) he
had to face as fierce a light of publicity as ever beat upon a
public man in the United States. Successively in charge of the
Cuban negotiations, Secretary of State from April to September,
1898, President of the Paris Peace Commission in October, in
December, after a career of prime national importance for nine
months in which he had demonstrated his high competence, Day
retired to the relative obscurity of the United States circuit
bench. Although later raised to the Supreme Court, he has never
since been a national figure. As an example of a meteoric career
of a man of solid rather than meteoric qualities, his case is
unparalleled in American history.

The acting Secretary of State telegraphed the ultimatum of the
Government on March 27, 1898, to General Stewart L. Woodford,
then Minister to Spain. By the terms of this document, in the
first place there was to be an immediate amnesty which would last
until the 1st of October and during which Spain would communicate
with the insurgents through the President of the United States;
in the second place, the reconcentrado policy was to cease
immediately, and relief for the suffering Cubans was to be
admitted from the United States. Then, if satisfactory terms were
not reached by the 1st of October, the President was to be
recognized as arbiter between the Spaniards and the insurgents.

On the 30th of March, Spain abrogated the reconcentrado policy in
the "western provinces of Cuba," and on the following day offered
to arbitrate the questions arising out of the sinking of the
Maine. On Sunday, the 3d of April, a cablegram from General
Woodford was received by the State Department indicating that
Spain was seeking a formula for an armistice that should not too
obviously appear to be submission and suggesting that the
President ask the Pope to intervene and that the United States
abstain from all show of force. "If you can still give me time
and reasonable liberty of action," ran Woodford's message, "I
will get you the peace you desire so much and for which you have
labored so hard." To this the Secretary of State immediately
replied that the President would not ask the intervention of the
Pope, and that the Government would use the fleet as it saw fit.
"Would the peace you are so confident of securing," asked the
Secretary, "mean the independence of Cuba? The President cannot
hold his message longer than Tuesday." On Tuesday, the 5th of
April, General Woodford cabled:

"Should the Queen proclaim the following before twelve o'clock
noon of Wednesday, April 6th, will you sustain the Queen, and can
you prevent hostile action by Congress? "At the request of the
Holy Father, in this Passion Week and in the name of Christ, I
proclaim immediate and unconditional suspension of hostilities in
the island of Cuba. This suspension is to become immediately
effective as soon as accepted by the insurgents of that island,
and is to continue for the space of six months to the 5th day of
October, 1898. I do this to give time for passions to cease, and
in the sincere hope and belief that during this suspension
permanent and honorable peace may be obtained between the insular
government of Cuba and those of my subjects in that island who
are now in rebellion against the authority of Spain...."
Please read this in the light of all my previous telegrams and
letters. I believe this means peace, which the sober judgment of
our people will approve long before next November, and which must
be approved at the bar of final history."

To this message the Secretary of State replied:

"The President highly appreciates the Queen's desire for peace.
He cannot assume to influence the action of the American Congress
beyond a discharge of his constitutional duty in transmitting the
whole matter to them with such recommendations as he deems
necessary and expedient."

On the 9th of April the Queen granted the amnesty, on the formula
of a request by the European powers. On the next day, General
Woodford cabled that the United States could obtain for Cuba a
satisfactory autonomy, or independence, or the cession of the
island.

It was evident that there was no difference of opinion among
those in authority in the United States as to the fact that Cuba
must be severed from Spain. There were, however, differences of
judgment as to which of the three methods suggested by Woodford
was preferable, and there was a substantial disagreement as to
the means necessary to realize the aims of the American
Government. General Woodford believed that Spain would grant the
demands of the United States, if she were given time and were not
pressed to the point of endangering her dignity. The overwhelming
majority in Congress, and particularly the leaders of the
dominant Republican party with the exception of Speaker Reed,
refused to believe in the sincerity of the Spanish Government.
The Administration could not overlook the fact that the Spanish
Government, however sincere it might be, might not be able to
execute its promises. Great Britain had just recognized the
United States as intermediary in a dispute between herself and
one of the American nations. Spain, in a dispute much more
serious to the United States, refused publicly to admit American
intervention, while she did recognize that of the Pope and the
European powers. Was it then possible that a Government which was
either unwilling or afraid openly to acknowledge American
interest in April would, by October, yield to the wishes of the
Administration? Was it certain or likely that if the Spanish
Government did so yield, it would remain in power?

Reluctantly President McKinley decided that he could not announce
to Congress that he had secured the acceptance of the American
policy. In his message to Congress on the 11th of April, he
reviewed the negotiation and concluded by recommending forcible
intervention. On the 19th of April, Congress, by joint
resolution, called upon Spain to withdraw from Cuba and
authorized the President to use force to compel her to do so.
Congress, however, was not content to leave the future of the
island merely indefinite, but added that the United States did
not desire Cuba and that the "people of the island of Cuba are,
and of right ought to be, free and independent." This decision
ruled out both autonomy and cession as solutions of the problem.
It put an end to the American century-long dream of annexing
Cuba, unless the people of the island themselves desired such a
relation; and it practically determined the recognition of the
unstable Cuban Government then in existence. This decision on the
part of Congress, however, reflected the deep-seated conviction
of the American people regarding freedom and plainly put the
issue where the popular majority wished it to be--upon a basis of
unselfish sympathy with struggling neighbors.

The resolution was signed by the President on the 20th of April.
On the following day, Admiral Sampson's fleet left Key West with
orders to blockade the coast of Cuba, and, in the absence of a
formal declaration of war, this strategic move may be considered
as its actual beginning. On the 25th of April, Congress declared
"that, war be, and the same is hereby, declared to exist, and
that war has existed since the twenty-first of April, Anno
Domini, eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, including the said
day, between the United States of America and the Kingdom of
Spain."


CHAPTER VIII. Dewey And Manila Day

War had begun, but the majority of the American people had hardly
considered seriously how they were to fight. Fortunately their
navy already existed, and it was upon it that they had to rely in
the opening moments of hostility. Ton for ton, gun for gun, it
stood on fairly even terms with that of Spain. Captain, later
Admiral, Mahan, considered that the loss of the Maine shifted a
slight paper advantage from the United States to Spain. In
personnel, however, the American Navy soon proved its
overwhelming superiority, which was due not solely to innate
ability but also to sound professional training.

The Secretary of the Navy, John D. Long, had a thorough
appreciation of values. Although Congress had not provided for a
general staff, he himself appointed a Naval War Board, which
served many of the same purposes. Upon this Board he appointed
Rear Admiral Sicard, who but for ill health would have commanded
the main fleet; Captain A. S. Crowninshield; and, most important,
Captain A. T. Mahan, whose equal as master of the theory and
history of naval warfare no navy of the world could show. The
spirit of the fighting force was speedily exhibited by such
exploits as that of Lieutenant Victor Blue in boldly plunging
into the Cuban wilderness to obtain information regarding the
position of Admiral Cervera's fleet, though in this dangerous
sort of work the individual palm must be given to Lieutenant A.
S. Rowan of the army, whose energy and initiative in overcoming
obstacles are immortalized in Elbert Hubbard's "Message to
Garcia," the best American parable of efficient service since the
days of Franklin.

Efficient, however, as was the navy, it was far from being a
complete fighting force. Its fighting vessels were totally
unsupplied with that cloud of servers--colliers, mother ships,
hospital ships, and scouts--which we now know must accompany a
fleet. The merchant marine, then at almost its lowest point, was
not in a position entirely to fill the need. The United States
had no extensive store of munitions. Over all operations there
hung a cloud of uncertainty. Except for the short campaign of the
Chino-Japanese War of 1894, modern implements of sea war remained
untested. Scientific experiment, valuable and necessary as it
was, did not carry absolute conviction regarding efficient
service. Would the weapons of offense or defense prove most
effective? Accidents on shipboard and even the total destruction
of vessels had been common to all navies during times of peace.
That the Maine had not been a victim of the failure of her own
mechanism was not then certain. Such misgivings were in the minds
of many officers. Indeed, a report of the total disappearance of
two battling fleets would not have found the watchful naval
experts of the world absolutely incredulous. So much the higher,
therefore, was the heroism of those who led straight to battle
that complex and as yet unproved product of the brain--the modern
warship.

While negotiations with Spain were in their last stages, at the
orders of Secretary Long a swift vessel left San Francisco for
Honolulu. There its precious cargo was transferred to the warship
Baltimore, which then made hurriedly for Hongkong. It contained
the ammunition which was absolutely necessary if Commodore George
Dewey, in command of the Asiatic squadron, was to play a part in
the war. The position of his squadron, even after it received its
ammunition, was indeed singular. After the war began, it was
unable to obtain coal or other supplies from any neutral port and
at the same time it was equally unable to remain in any such port
without being interned for the duration of the war. There
remained but one course of action. It must not be forgotten that
the Spanish empire stretched eastward as well as westward.
Already William Pitt, when he had foreseen in 1760 the entrance
of Spain into the war which England was then waging with France,
had planned expeditions against both Cuba and the Philippines.
Now in 1898 the Navy Department of the United States,
anticipating war, saw in the proximity of the American squadron
to the Spanish islands of the Philippines an opportunity rather
than a problem. Commodore George Dewey, the commander of the
Asiatic squadron, was fully prepared to enter into the plan. As
early as the seventies, when the Virginius affair* threatened war
between Spain and the United States, Dewey, then a commander on
the west coast of Mexico, had proposed, in case war were
declared, that he sail for the Philippines and capture Manila.
Now he was prepared to seek in the hostile ports of those islands
the liberty that international law forbade him in the neutral
ports of Asia. How narrow a margin of time he had in which to
make this bold stroke may be realized from the fact that the
Baltimore, his second vessel in size, reached Hongkong on the 22d
of April and went into dry dock on the 23d, and that on the
following day the squadron was ordered either to leave the port
or to intern.

* A dispute between the United States and Spain, arising out of
the capture of the Virginius, an American vessel engaged in
filibustering off the coast of Cuba, and the execution at
Santiago of the captain and a number of the crew and passengers.
The vessel and the surviving passengers were finally restored by
the Spanish authorities, who agreed to punish the officials
responsible for the illegal acts.


The little armada of six vessels with which Dewey started for the
Philippines was puny enough from the standpoint of today; yet it
was strong enough to cope with the larger but more old-fashioned
Spanish fleet, or with the harbor defenses unless these included
mines--of whose absence Dewey was at the moment unaware. If,
however, the Spanish commander could unite the strength of his
vessels and that of the coast defenses, Dewey might find it
impossible to destroy the Spanish fleet. In that case, the plight
of the American squadron would be precarious, if its ultimate
self-destruction or internment did not become necessary.

Commodore Dewey belonged to that school of American naval
officers who combine the spirit of Farragut's "Damn the
torpedoes" with a thorough knowledge of the latest scientific
devices. Though he would take all precautions, he would not allow
the unknown to hold him back. After a brief rendezvous for tuning
up at Mirs Bay near Hongkong on the Chinese coast, Dewey steered
straight for Subig Bay in the Philippines, where he expected to
meet his opponent. Finding the Bay empty, he steamed on without
pause and entered the Boca Grande, the southern channel leading
to Manila Bay, at midnight of the 30th of April. Slowly, awaiting
daylight, but steadily he approached Manila. Coming within three
miles of the city, he discovered the Spanish fleet, half a dozen
miles to the southeast, at the naval station of Cavite. Still
without a pause, the American squadron moved to the attack.

The Spanish Admiral Montojo tried, though ineffectually, to come
to close quarters, for his guns were of smaller caliber than
those of the American ships, but he was forced to keep his
vessels for the most part in line between the Americans and the
shore. Commodore Dewey sailed back and forth five times, raking
the Spanish ships and the shore batteries with his fire. Having
guns of longer range than those of the Spaniards, he could have
kept out of their fire and slowly hammered them to pieces; but he
preferred a closer position where he could use more guns and
therefore do quicker work. How well he was justified in taking
this risk is shown by the fact that no man was killed on the
American fleet that day and only a few were wounded. After a few
hours' fighting, with a curious interval when the Americans
withdrew and breakfasted, Dewey completed the destruction or
capture of the Spanish fleet, and found himself the victor with
his own ships uninjured and in full fighting trim. By the 3d of
May, the naval station at Cavite and the batteries at the
entrance of Manila Bay were in the hands of Commodore Dewey, and
the Asiatic squadron had wrested a safe and commodious harbor
from the enemy.

Secure for the moment and free, Dewey found himself in as
precarious a strategic position as has ever confronted a naval
officer. With his six war vessels and 1707 men, he was
unsupported and at least a month's voyage from America. It was
two months, indeed, before any American troops or additional
ships reached him. Meanwhile the Spaniards held Manila, and a
Spanish fleet, formidable under the circumstances, began to sail
for the Philippines. Nevertheless Dewey proceeded to blockade
Manila, which was besieged on the land side by the Filipino
insurgents under Aguinaldo. This siege was indeed an advantage to
the Americans as it distressed the enemy and gave an opportunity
to obtain supplies from the mainland. Dewey, however, placed no
confidence in Aguinaldo, and further was instructed by Secretary
Long on the 26th of May as follows: "It is desirable, as far as
possible, and consistent for your success and safety, not to have
political alliances with the insurgents or any faction in the
islands that would incur liability to maintain their cause in the
future." Meanwhile foreign nations were rushing vessels to this
critical spot in the Pacific. On the 17th of June, Dewey sent a
cable, which had to be relayed to Hongkong by boat, reporting
that there were collected, in Manila Bay, a French and a Japanese
warship, two British, and three German. Another German man-of-war
was expected, which would make the German squadron as strong as
the American.

The presence of so large a German force, it was felt, could
hardly fail to have definite significance, and therefore caused
an anxiety at home which would, indeed, have been all the keener
had Admiral Dewey not kept many of his troubles to himself.
European sympathy was almost wholly with Spain. The French, for
instance, had invested heavily in Spanish bonds, many of which
were secured on the Cuban revenues. There was also perhaps some
sense of solidarity among the Latin races in Europe and a feeling
that the United States was a colossus willfully exerting itself
against a weak antagonist. It was not likely that this feeling
was strong enough to lead to action, but at least during that
summer of 1898 it was somewhat unpleasant for American tourists
in Paris, and an untoward episode might easily have brought
unfriendly sentiment to a dangerous head. Austria had never been
very friendly to the United States, particularly since the
execution of the Emperor Maximilian in Mexico, which his brother
Francis Joseph believed the United States could have prevented,
and was tied to Spain by the fact that the Queen Regent was an
Austrian Hapsburg.

It was evident, moreover, that in Europe there was a vague but
nevertheless real dread of the economic potentialities of the
United States--a fear which led, in the next few years, to the
suggestion that the American invasion of trade should be resisted
by a general European economic organization which would even
overrule the natural tendency of powers to group themselves into
hostile camps. In 1898 it seemed possible that the United States
was consciously planning to become a world military power also,
and a feeling, not exactly like Blaine's "America for the
Americans" but rather of "the world for Europeans," gathered
force to meet any attempt at American expansion.

Even before war had broken out between Spain and the United
States, this sentiment had sufficiently crystallized to result in
a not quite usual diplomatic action. On April 6, 1898, the
representatives of Great Britain, Germany, France,
Austro-Hungary, Russia, and Italy, presented a note to the
Government of the United States making "a pressing appeal to the
feelings of humanity and moderation of the President and of the
American people in their differences with Spain. They earnestly
hope that further negotiations will lead to an agreement which,
while securing the maintenance of peace, will afford all
necessary guarantees for the reestablishment of order in Cuba."

Of all the European powers none was more interested than Germany
in the situation in the Western Hemisphere. There seems to be no
doubt that the Kaiser made the remark to an Englishman with
reference to the Spanish American War: "If I had had a larger
fleet I would have taken Uncle Sam by the scruff of his neck."
Though the reason for Germany's attitude has never been proven by
documents, circumstantial evidence points convincingly to the
explanation. The quest for a colonial empire, upon which Bismarck
had embarked rather reluctantly and late, had been taken up with
feverish zeal by William II, his successor in the direction of
German policy. Not content with the commercial conquests which
German trade was making in all countries of the earth, the Kaiser
wanted a place in the sun exclusively his own. The world seemed,
however, as firmly closed to the late-comer in search of colonies
as it was open to him as the bearer of cheap and useful goods.
Such remnants of territory as lay on the counter he quickly
seized, but they hardly made an empire.

It is not, therefore, a daring conjecture that the Kaiser was as
carefully watching the decrepit empire of Spain as he was the
traditional sick man of Europe, the empire of Turkey. In 1898
revolutions were sapping both the extremities of the Spanish
dominions. The Kaiser, while he doubtless realized that Cuba
would not fall to him, in all probability expected that he would
be able to get the Philippines. Certain it is that at the close
of the Spanish American War he bought all the remaining Spanish
possessions in the Pacific. If such had been his expectations
with regard to the Philippines, the news of Dewey's victory must
have brought him a bitter disappointment, while at the same time
the careless and indiscreet remark of an American official to
certain Germans--"We don't want the Philippines; why don't you
take them?"--may well have given him a feeling that perhaps the
question was still open.

Under such circumstances, with Europe none too well-disposed and
the Kaiser watching events with a jealous eye, it was very
important to the United States not to be without a friend. In
England sympathy for America ran strong and deep. The British
Government was somewhat in alarm over the political solitude in
which Great Britain found herself, even though its head, Lord
Salisbury, described the position as one of "splendid isolation."
The unexpected reaction of friendliness on the part of Great
Britain which had followed the Venezuela affair continued to
augment, and relations between the two countries were kept smooth
by the new American Ambassador, John Hay, whom Queen Victoria
described as "the most interesting of all the ambassadors I have
known." More important still, in Great Britain alone was there a
public who appreciated the real sentiment of humanity underlying
the entrance of the United States into the war with Spain; and
this public actually had some weight in politics. The people of
both Great Britain and the United States were easily moved to
respond with money and personal service to the cry of suffering
anywhere in the world. Just before the Spanish American War,
Gladstone had made his last great campaign protesting against the
new massacres in Armenia; and in the United States the Republican
platform of 1896 had declared that "the massacres in Armenia have
aroused the deep sympathy and just indignation of the American
people, and we believe that the United States should exercise all
the influence it can properly exert to bring these atrocities to
an end."

John Hay wrote to Henry Cabot Lodge, of the Senate Committee on
Foreign Affairs, April 5, 1898, as follows: "For the first time
in my life I find the drawing-room sentiment altogether with us.
If we wanted it--which, of course, we do not--we could have the
practical assistance of the British Navy--on the do ut des
principle, naturally." On the 25th of May he added: "It is a
moment of immense importance, not only for the present, but for
all the future. It is hardly too much to say the interests of
civilization are bound up in the direction the relations of
England and America are to take in the next few months." Already
on the 15th of May, Joseph Chamberlain, the Colonial Secretary,
had said to the Birmingham Liberal Unionists: "What is our next
duty? It is to establish and to maintain bonds of permanent amity
with our kinsmen across the Atlantic. There is a powerful and a
generous nation.... Their laws, their literature, their
standpoint upon every question are the same as ours."

In Manila Harbor, where Dewey lay with his squadron, these
distant forces of European colonial policy were at work. The
presence of representative foreign warships to observe the
maintenance of the blockade was a natural and usual naval
circumstance. The arrival of two German vessels therefore caused
no remark, although they failed to pay the usual respects to the
blockading squadron. On the 12th of May a third arrived and
created some technical inconvenience by being commanded by an
officer who outranked Commodore Dewey. A German transport which
was in the harbor made the total number of German personnel
superior to that of the Americans, and the arrival of the Kaiser
on the 12th of June gave the Germans distinct naval preponderance.

The presence of so powerful a squadron in itself closely
approached an international discourtesy. Disregarding the laws of
blockade, as Dewey, trained in the Civil War blockade of the
South, interpreted them, the German officers were actively
familiar both with the Spanish officials of Manila and with the
insurgents. Finally they ensconced themselves in the quarantine
station at the entrance of the Bay, and Admiral Diedrichs took up
land quarters. Further, they interfered between the insurgents
and the Spaniards outside of Manila Bay. In the controversy
between Diedrichs and Dewey which grew out of these difficulties,
Captain Chichester, commanding the British squadron, supported
Dewey's course unqualifiedly and, moreover, let it be clearly
known that, in the event of hostilities, the British vessels
would take their stand with the Americans.


CHAPTER IX. The Blockade Of Cuba

While the first victory of the war was in the Far East and the
possibility of events of world-wide significance hung upon the
level-headedness of Commodore Dewey at Manila, it was realized
that the war must really be fought in the West. Both President
McKinley and the Queen Regent of Spain had issued proclamations
stating that they would adhere to the rules of the Declaration of
Paris and not resort to the use of privateers. The naval contest,
therefore, was confined to the regular navies. Actually the
American fleet was superior in battleships, monitors, and
protected cruisers; the Spanish was the better equipped in
armored cruisers, gunboats, and destroyers.

Both Spain and the United States hastily purchased, in the last
days of peace, a few vessels, but not enough seriously to affect
their relative strength. Both also drew upon their own merchant
marines. Spain added 18 medium-sized vessels to her navy; the
United States added in all 123, most of which were small and used
for scouting purposes. The largest and most efficient of these
additional American ships were the subsidized St. Paul, St.
Louis, New York, and Paris of the American line, of which the
last two, renamed the Harvard and Yale, proved to be of great
service. It was characteristic of American conditions that 28
were private yachts, of which the Mayflower was the most notable.
To man these new ships, the personnel of the American Navy was
increased from 13,750 to 24,123, of whom a large number were men
who had received some training in the naval reserves of the
various States.

The first duty of the navy was to protect the American coast. In
1885 the War Department had planned and Congress had sanctioned a
system of coast defense. Up to 1898, however, only one quarter of
the sum considered necessary had been appropriated. Mines and
torpedoes were laid at the entrances to American harbors as soon
as war broke out, but there was a lack of highpower guns. Rumors
of a projected raid by the fast Spanish armored cruisers kept the
coast cities in a state of high excitement, and many sought, by
petition and political pressure, to compel the Navy Department to
detach vessels for their defense. The Naval War Board, however,
had to remember that it must protect not only the coast but
commerce also, and that the United States was at war not to
defend herself but to attack. Cuba was the objective; and Cuba
must be cut off from Spain by blockade, and the seas must be made
safe for the passage of the American Army. If the navy were to
accomplish all these purposes, it must destroy the Spanish Navy.
To achieve this end, it would have to work upon the principle of
concentration and not dispersion.

For several months before the actual declaration of war with
Spain, the Navy Department had been effecting this concentration.
On the 21st of April, Captain William T. Sampson was appointed to
command the forces on the North Atlantic station. This included
practically the whole fleet, except the Pacific squadron under
Dewey, and the Oregon, a new battleship of unusual design, which
was on the Pacific coast. On the 1st of March she was ordered
from the Bremerton Yard, in the State of Washington, to San
Francisco, and thence to report in the Atlantic. Her voyage was
the longest emergency run undertaken up to that time by a modern
battleship. The outbreak of the war with Spain meant the sealing
of all ports in which she might have been repaired in case of
emergency. Rumors were rife of Spanish vessels ready to intercept
her, and the eyes not only of the United States but of the world
were upon the Oregon. A feeling of relief and rejoicing therefore
passed through the country when this American warship arrived at
Key West on the 26th of May, fit for immediate and efficient
service.

The fleet, though concentrated in the Atlantic within the region
of immediate hostility, was divided for purposes of operation
into a major division under the immediate command of Admiral
Sampson and a flying squadron under Commodore Schley.* The first
undertook the enforcement of the blockade which was declared on
the 21st of April against Cuba, and patrolled the northern coast
from Gardenas to Bahia. Key West was soon filled with Spanish
prizes. On the 27th of April a brush took place between batteries
at Matanzas and some of the American vessels, without loss of
life on either side, except for a mule which bids fair to become
immortal in history through being reported by the Spanish as
their only casualty and the first of the war. Admiral Sampson,
following the tradition of the American Navy of aiming at a vital
spot, wished to attack Havana; and a careful study of its
fortifications seems to show that he would have had a good chance
of success. Chance, however, might have caused the loss of some
of his vessels, and, with the small margin of naval superiority
at its disposal the Naval War Board was probably wise in not
allowing him to take the risk.

* A patrol squadron of cruisers under Commodore Howell was also
established to protect the coast from the Delaware capes to
eastern Maine. "It can scarcely be supposed," writes Admiral
Chadwick, "that such action was taken but in deference to the
unreasoning fear of dwellers on the coast."


It was, in fact, Spain which took the initiative and decided the
matter. Her West India Squadron was weak, even on paper, and was
in a condition which would have made it madness to attempt to
meet the Americans without reenforcement. She therefore decided
to dispatch a fighting fleet from her home forces. Accordingly on
the 29th of April, Admiral Cervera left the Cape Verde Islands
and sailed westward with one fast second-class battleship, the
Cristobal Colon, three armored cruisers, and two torpedo boat
destroyers. It was a reasonably powerful fleet as fleets went in
the Spanish War, yet it is difficult to see just what good it
could accomplish when it arrived on the scene of action. The
naval superiority in the West Indies would still be in the hands
of the concentrated American Navy, for the Spanish forces would
still be divided, only more equally, between Spanish and
Caribbean waters. The American vessels, moreover, would be within
easy distance of their home stations, which could supply them
with- every necessity. The islands belonging to Spain, on the
other hand, were ill equipped to become the base of naval
operations. Admiral Cervera realized to the full the difficulty
of the situation and protested against an expedition which he
feared would mean the fall of Spanish power, but public opinion
forced the ministry, and he was obliged to put to sea.

For nearly a month the Spanish fleet was lost to sight, and
dwellers on the American coast were in a panic of apprehension.
Cervera's objective was guessed to be everything from a raid on
Bar Harbor to an attack on the Oregon, then on its shrouded
voyage from the Pacific coast. Cities on the Atlantic seaboard
clamored for protection, and the Spanish fleet was magnified by
the mist of uncertainty until it became a national terror.
Sampson, rightly divining that Cervera would make for San Juan,
the capital and chief seaport of Porto Rico, detached from his
blockading force a fighting squadron with which he sailed east,
but not finding the Spanish fleet he turned back to Key West.
Schley, with the Flying Squadron, was then ordered to Cienfuegos.
In the meantime Cervera was escaping detection by the American
scouts by taking an extremely southerly course; and with the
information that Sampson was off San Juan, the Spanish Admiral
sailed for Santiago de Cuba, where he arrived on May 19, 1898.

Though Cervera was safe in harbor, the maneuver of the American
fleet cannot be called unsuccessful. Cervera would have preferred
to be at San Juan, where there was a navy yard and where his
position would have obliged the American fleet either to split
into two divisions separated by eight hundred miles or to leave
him free range of action. Next to San Juan he would have
preferred Havana or, Cienfuegos, which were connected by railroad
and near which lay the bulk of the Spanish Army. He found himself
instead at the extreme eastern end of Cuba in a port with no
railroad connection with Havana, partly blocked by the
insurgents, and totally unable to supply him with necessities.

Unless Cervera could leave Santiago, his expedition would
obviously have been useless. Though it was the natural function
of the American fleet to blockade him, for a week after his
arrival there was an interesting game of hide and seek between
the two fleets. The harbors of Cienfuegos and of Santiago are
both landlocked by high hills, and Cervera had entered Santiago
without being noticed by the Americans, as that part of the coast
was not under blockade. Schley thought Cervera was at Cienfuegos;
Sampson was of the opinion that he was at Santiago. When it
became known that the enemy had taken refuge in Santiago, Schley
began the blockade on the 28th of May, but stated that he could
not continue long in position owing to lack of coal. On the 1st
of June Sampson arrived and assumed command of the blockading
squadron.

With the bottling up of Cervera, the first stage of the war
passed. The navy had performed its primary function: it had
established its superiority and had obtained the control of the
seas. The American coast was safe; American commerce was safe
except in the vicinity of Spain; and the sea was open for the
passage of an American expeditionary force. Nearly the whole
island of Cuba was now under blockade, and the insurgents were
receiving supplies from the United States. It had been proved
that the fairly even balance of the two fleets, so anxiously
scanned when it was reported in the newspapers in April, was
entirely deceptive when it came to real efficiency in action.
Moreover, the skillful handling of the fleets by the Naval War
Board as well as by the immediate commanders had redoubled the
actual superiority of the American naval forces.

A fleet in being, even though inferior and immobilized, still
counts as a factor in naval warfare, and Cervera, though
immobilized by Sampson, himself immobilized the greater number of
American vessels necessary to blockade him. The importance of
this fact was evident to every one when, in the middle of June,
the remainder of the Spanish home fleet, whipped hastily into a
semblance of fighting condition, set out eastward under Admiral
Camara to contest the Philippines with Dewey. It was impossible
for the United States to detach a force sufficient to cross the
Atlantic and, without a base, meet this fleet in its home waters.
Even if a smaller squadron were dispatched from the Atlantic
round Cape Horn, it would arrive in the Philippines too late to
be of assistance to Dewey. The two monitors on the Pacific coast,
the Monterey and the Monadnock, had already been ordered across
the Pacific, a voyage perilous for vessels of their structure and
agonizing to their crews; but it was doubtful whether they or
Camara would arrive first in the Philippines.

The logic of the situation demanded that the main American fleet
be released. Cervera must be destroyed or held in some other way
than at the expense of inactivity on the part of the American
warships. Santiago could not be forced by the navy. Two methods
remained. The first and simpler expedient was to make the harbor
mouth impassable and in this way to bottle up the Spanish fleet.
It was decided to sink the collier Merrimac at a narrow point in
the channel, where, lying full length, she would completely
prevent egress. It was a delicate task and one of extraordinary
danger. It was characteristic of the spirit of the fleet that, as
Admiral Chadwick says, practically all the men were volunteers.
The honor of the command was given to Lieutenant Richmond Pearson
Hobson, Assistant Naval Constructor, who had been in charge of
the preparations. With a crew of six men he entered the harbor
mouth on the night of the 3d of June. A shell disabled the
steering gear of the Merrimac, and the ship sank too far within
the harbor to block the entrance entirely. Admiral Cervera
himself rescued the crew, assured Sampson of their safety in an
appreciative note; and one of the best designed and most heroic
episodes in our history just missed success.

The failure of the Merrimac experiment left the situation as it
had been and forced the American command to consider the second
method which would release the American fleet. This new plan
contemplated the reduction of Santiago by a combined military and
naval attack. Cervera's choice of Santiago therefore practically
determined the direction of the first American overseas military
expedition, which had been in preparation since the war began.


CHAPTER X. The Preparation Of The Army

When one compares the conditions under which the Spanish American
War was fought with those of the Great War, he feels himself
living in a different age. Twenty years ago hysteria and sudden
panics swept the nation. Cheers and waving handkerchiefs and
laughing girls sped the troops on their way. It cannot be denied
that the most popular song of the war time was "There'll be a hot
time in the old town to-night," though it may be believed that
the energy and swing of the music rather than the words made it
so. The atmosphere of the country was one of a great national
picnic where each one was expected to carry his own lunch. There
was apparent none of the concentration of effort and of the calm
foresight so necessary for efficiency in modern warfare. For
youth the Spanish American War was a great adventure; for the
nation it was a diversion sanctioned by a high purpose.

This abandon was doubtless in part due to a comfortable
consciousness of the vast disparity in resources between Spain
and the United States, which, it was supposed, meant
automatically a corresponding difference in fighting strength.
The United States did, indeed, have vast superiorities which
rendered unnecessary any worry over many of the essentials which
gripped the popular mind during the Great War. People believed
that the country could supply the munitions needed, and that of
facilities for transport it had enough. If the United States did
not have at hand exactly the munitions needed, if the
transportation system had not been built to launch an army into
Cuba, it was popularly supposed that the wealth of the country
rendered such trifles negligible, and that, if insufficient
attention had been given to the study of such matters in the
past, American ingenuity would quickly offset the lack of skilled
military experience. The fact that American soldiers traveled in
sleeping cars while European armies were transported in freight
cars blinded Americans for a while to the significant fact that
there was but a single track leading to Tampa, the principal
point of embarkation for Cuba; and no one thought of building
another.

Nothing so strongly marks the amateur character of the conduct of
the Spanish War as the activity of the American press. The navy
was dogged by press dispatch boats which revealed its every move.
When Admiral Sampson started upon his cruise to San Juan, he
requested the press boats to observe secrecy, and Admiral
Chadwick comments with satisfaction upon the fact that this
request was observed "fully and honorably...by every person
except one." When Lieutenant Whitney risked his life as a spy in
order to investigate conditions in Porto Rico; his plans and
purpose were blazoned in the press. Incredible as it may now
seem, the newspaper men appear to have felt themselves part of
the army. They offered their services as equals, and William
Randolph Hearst even ordered one of his staff to sink a vessel in
the Suez Canal to delay Camara on his expedition against Dewey.
This order, fortunately for the international reputation of the
United States, was not executed. With all their blare and
childish enthusiasm, the reporters do not seem to have been so
successful in revealing to Americans the plans of Spain as they
were in furnishing her with itemized accounts of all the doings
of the American forces.

While the press not only revealed but formulated courses of
action in the case of the army, the navy, at least, was able to
follow its own plans. For this difference there were several
causes, chief of which was the fact that the navy was a fully
professional arm, ready for action both in equipment and in
plans, and able to take a prompt initiative in carrying out an
aggressive campaign. The War Department had a more difficult task
in adjusting itself to the new conditions brought about by the
Spanish American War. The army was made up on the principle
traditionally held in the United States that the available army
force in time of peace should be just sufficient for the purposes
of peace, and that it should be enlarged in time of war. To allow
a fair amount of expansion without too much disturbance to the
organization in increasing to war strength, the regular army was
over-officered in peace times. The chief reliance in war was
placed upon the militia. The organization and training of this
force was left, however, under a few very general directions, to
the various States. As a result, its quality varied and it was
nowhere highly efficient in the military sense. Some regiments,
it is true, were impressive on parade, but almost none of the
officers knew anything of actual modern warfare. There had been
no preliminary sifting of ability in the army, and it was only as
experience gave the test that the capable and informed were
called into positions of importance. In fact, the training of the
regular officers was inferior to that of the naval officers. West
Point and Annapolis were both excellent in the quality of their
instruction, but what they offered amounted only to a college
course, and in the army there was no provision for systematic
graduate study corresponding to the Naval War College at Newport.

These difficulties and deficiencies, however, cannot fully
explain the woeful inferiority of the army to the navy in
preparedness. Fundamentally the defect was at the top. Russell A.
Alger, the Secretary of War, was a veteran of the Civil War and a
silver-voiced orator, but his book on the "Spanish-American War,"
which was intended as a vindication of his record, proves that
even eighteen months of as grueling denunciation as any American
official has ever received could not enlighten him as to what
were the functions of his office. Nor did he correct or
supplement his own incompetence by seeking professional advice.
There existed no general staff, and it did not occur to him, as
it did to Secretary Long, to create one to advise him
unofficially. He was on bad terms with Major General Nelson A.
Miles, who was the general in command. He discussed even the
details of questions of army strategy, not only with Miles but
with the President and members of the Cabinet. One of the most
extraordinary decisions made during his tenure of office was that
the act of the 9th of March, appropriating $50,000,000 "for
national defense," forbade money to be spent or even contracts to
be made by the quartermaster, the commissary, or the surgeon
general. In his book Secretary Alger records with pride the fact
that all this money was spent for coast defense. In view of the
fact that the navy did its task, this expenditure was absolutely
unnecessary and served merely to solace coast cities and munition
makers.

The regular army on April 1, 1898, consisted of 28,183 officers
and men. An act of the 26th of April authorized its increase to
about double that size. As enlistment was fairly prompt, by
August the army consisted of 56,365 officers and men, the number
of officers being but slightly increased. It was decided not to
use the militia as it was then organized, but to rely for numbers
as usual chiefly upon a volunteer army, authorized by the Act of
the 22d of April, and by subsequent acts raised to a total of
200,000, with an additional 3000 cavalry, 3500 engineers, and
10,000 "immunes," or men supposed not to be liable to tropical
diseases. The war seemed equally popular all over the country,
and the million who offered themselves for service were
sufficient to allow due consideration for equitable state quotas
and for physical fitness. There were also sufficient
Krag-Jorgensen rifles to arm the increased regular army and
Springfields for the volunteers.

To provide an adequate number of officers for the volunteer army
was more difficult. Even though a considerable number were
transferred from the regular to the volunteer army, they
constituted only a small proportion of the whole number
necessary. Some few of those appointed were graduates of West
Point, and more had been in the militia. The great majority,
however, had purely amateur experience, and many not even so
much. Those who did know something, moreover, did not have the
same knowledge or experience. This raw material was given no
officer training whatsoever but was turned directly to the task
of training the rank and file. Nor were the appointments of new
officers confined to the lower ranks. The country, still mindful
of its earlier wars, was charmed with the sentimental elevation
of confederate generals to the rank of major general in the new
army, though a public better informed would hardly have welcomed
for service in the tropics the selection of men old enough to be
generals in 1865 and then for thirty-three years without military
experience in an age of great development in the methods of
warfare. The other commanding officers were as old and were
mostly chosen by seniority in a service retiring at sixty-four.
The unwonted strain of active service naturally proved too great.
At the most critical moment of the campaign in Cuba, the
commanding general, William R. Shafter, had eaten nothing for
four days, and his plucky second in command, the wiry Georgian
cavalry leader of 1864 and 1865, General "Joe" Wheeler, was not
physically fit to succeed him. There is not the least doubt that
the fighting spirit of the men was strong and did not fail, but
the defect in those branches of knowledge which are required to
keep an army fit to fight is equally certain. The primary cause
for the melting of the American army by disease must be
acknowledged to be the insufficient training of the officers.

This hit or miss method, however, had its compensations, for it
brought about some appointments of unusual merit. Conspicuous
were those of Colonel Leonard Wood and Lieutenant Colonel
Theodore Roosevelt. The latter had resigned as Assistant
Secretary of the Navy, a position in which he had contributed a
great deal to the efficiency of that Department, in order to take
a more tangible part in the war. After raising among his friends
and the cowboys of the West a regiment of "Rough Riders," he
declined its command on plea of military inexperience. Roosevelt
made one of those happy choices which are a mark of his
administrative ability in selecting as colonel Leonard Wood, an
army surgeon whose quality he knew through common experiences in
the West.

To send into a midsummer tropical jungle an American army,
untrained to take care of its health, for the most part clothed
in the regulation army woolens, and tumbled together in two
months, was an undertaking which-could be justified only on the
ground that the national safety demanded immediate action. In
1898, however, it seemed to be universally taken for granted by
people and administration, by professional soldier as well as by
public sentiment, that the army must invade Cuba without regard
to its fitness for such active service. The responsibility for
this decision must rest upon the nation. The experience of
centuries had proved conspicuously that climate was the strongest
defense of the Caribbean islands against invasion, and it was in
large measure the very sacrifice of so many American soldiers
that induced the study of tropical diseases. In 1898 it could
hardly be expected that the American command, inexperienced and
eager for action, should have recognized the mosquito as the
carrier of yellow fever and the real enemy, or should have
realized the necessity of protecting the soldiers by inoculation
against typhoid fever.

Fixed as was the determination to send an army into Cuba at the
earliest possible moment, there had been a wide diversity of
opinion as to what should be the particular objective. General
Miles wavered between the choice of the island of Porto Rico and
Puerto Principe, a city in the interior and somewhat east of the
middle of Cuba; the Department hesitated between Tunas on the
south coast of Cuba, within touch of the insurgents, and Mariel
on the north, the seizure of which would be the first step in a
siege of Havana. The situation at Santiago, however, made that
city the logical objective of the troops, and on the 31st of May,
General Shafter was ordered to be prepared to move. On the 7th of
June he was ordered to sail with "not less than 10,000 men," but
an alarming, though unfounded, rumor of a Spanish squadron off
the north coast of Cuba delayed the expedition until the 14th.
With an army of seventeen thousand on thirty-two transports, and
accompanied by eighty-nine newspaper correspondents, Shafter
arrived on the 20th of June off Santiago.

The Spanish troops in Cuba--the American control of the sea made
it unnecessary to consider those available in Spain--amounted,
according to returns in April, 1898, to 196,820. This formidable
number, however, was not available at any one strategic spot
owing to the difficulty of transporting either troops or
supplies, particularly at the eastern end of the island, in the
neighborhood of Santiago. It was estimated that the number of men
of use about Santiago was about 12,000, with 5000 approaching to
assist. Perhaps 3000 insurgents were at hand under General
Garcia. The number sent, then, was not inadequate to the task.
Equal numbers are not, indeed, ordinarily considered sufficient
for an offensive campaign against fortifications, but the
American commanders counted upon a difference in morale between
the two armies, which was justified by results. Besides the
American Army could be reinforced as necessity arose.


CHAPTER XI. The Campaign Of Santiago De Cuba

In planning the campaign against Santiago, Admiral Sampson wished
the army immediately to assault the defenses at the harbor mouth
in order to open the way for the navy. General Shafter, however,
after conferring with General Garcia, the commander of the
insurgents, decided to march overland against the city. The army
did not have sufficient small vessels to effect a landing; but
the navy came to its assistance, and on the 22d of June the first
American troops began to disembark at Daiquiri, though it was not
until the 26th that the entire expedition was on shore. On the
second day Siboney, which had a better anchorage and was some six
miles closer to Santiago, was made the base. From Siboney there
stretched for eight or ten miles a rolling country covered with
heavy jungle brush and crossed by mere threads of roads. There
was indeed a railroad, but this followed a roundabout route by
the coast. Through this novel and extremely uncomfortable
country, infected with mosquitoes, the troops pressed, eager to
meet the enemy.

The first engagement took place at Las Guasimas, on the 24th of
June. Here a force of about a thousand dismounted cavalry, partly
regulars and partly Rough Riders, defeated nearly twice their
number of Spaniards. This was the only serious resistance which
the Americans encountered until they reached the advanced
defenses of Santiago. The next week they spent in getting
supplies ashore, improving the roads, and reconnoitering. The
newspapers considered this interval entirely too long! The 30th
of June found the Americans confronting the main body of
Spaniards in position, and on the 1st of July, the two armies
joined battle.

Between the opposing forces was the little river San Juan and its
tributaries. The Spanish left wing was at El Caney, supported by
a stone blockhouse, rifle pits, and barbed wire, but with no
artillery. About four miles away was San Juan Hill, with more
formidable works straddling the main road which led to Santiago.
Opposite El Caney, General Lawton was in command of about seven
thousand Americans. The fight here began at half-past six in the
morning, but the American artillery was placed at too great a
distance to be very effective. The result was a long and galling
exchange of rifle firing, which is apt to prove trying to raw
troops. The infantry, however, advanced with persistency and
showed marked personal initiative as they pushed forward under
such protection as the brush and grass afforded until they
finally rushed a position which gave opportunity to the
artillery. After this they speedily captured the blockhouse.

The fight lasted over eight hours instead of two, as had been
expected, and thus delayed General Lawton, who was looked for at
San Juan by the American left. The losses, too, were heavy, the
total casualties amounting to seven per cent of the force
engaged. The Americans, however, had gained the position, and
after a battle which had been long and serious enough to test
thoroughly the quality of the personnel of the army. Whatever
deficiencies the Americans may have had in organization,
training, and military education, they undoubtedly possessed
fighting spirit, courage, and personal ingenuity, and these are,
after all, the qualities for which builders of armies look.

The battle of El Caney was perhaps unnecessary, for the position
lay outside the main Spanish line anal would probably have been
abandoned when San Juan fell. For that more critical movement
General Shafter kept about eight thousand troops and the personal
command. Both he and General Wheeler, however, were suffering
from the climate and were unable to be with the troops. The
problem of making a concerted advance through the thick
underbrush was a difficult one, and the disposition of the
American troops was at once revealed by a battery of artillery
which used black powder, and by a captive balloon which was
injudiciously towed about.

The right wing here, after assuming an exposed position, was
unable to act, as Lawton, by whom it was expecting to be
reinforced, was delayed at El Caney. The advance regiments were
under the fire of the artillery, the infantry, and the skillful
sharpshooters of an invisible enemy and were also exposed to the
fierce heat of the sun, to which they were unaccustomed. The
wounded were carried back on litters, turned over to the
surgeons, who worked manfully with the scantiest of equipment,
and were then laid, often naked except for their bandages, upon
the damp ground. Regiment blocked regiment in the narrow road,
and officers carrying orders were again and again struck, as they
emerged from cover, by the sharpshooters' fire. The want of means
of communication paralyzed the command, for all the equipment of
a modern army was lacking: there were no aeroplanes, no wireless
stations, no telephones.

Throughout the morning the situation grew worse, but the nerve of
the men did not give way, and American individual initiative rose
to the boiling point. Realizing that safety lay only in advance,
the officers on the spot began to take control. General Hawkins,
with the Sixth and Sixteenth Regulars, advanced against the main
blockhouse, which crested a slope of two hundred feet, and the
men of the Seventy-first New York Volunteers joined promiscuously
in the charge.

To the right rose Kettle Hill, jutting out and Banking the
approach to the main position. Facing it and dismounted were the
First and Ninth Regular Cavalry, the latter a negro regiment, and
the Rough Riders under Colonel Roosevelt. The Tenth Infantry was
between the two wings, and divided in the support of both. A
battery of Gatling guns was placed in position. The Americans
steadily advanced in an irregular line, though kept in some sort
of formation by their officers. Breaking down brush and barbed
wire and sheltering themselves in the high grass, the men on the
right wing worked their way up Kettle Hill, but before they
reached the rifle pits of the enemy, they saw the Spaniards
retreating on the run. The audacity of the Americans at the
critical moment had insured the ultimate success of their attack
and they found the final capture of the hill easy.

The longer charge against the center of the enemy was in the
meantime being pressed home, under the gallant leadership of
General Hawkins, who at times was far in advance of his line. The
men of the right wing who looked down from their new position on
Kettle Hill, a quarter of a mile distant, saw the Spaniards give
way and the American center dash forward. In order to support
this advance movement, the Gatlings were brought to Kettle Hill,
and General S.S. Sumner and Colonel Roosevelt led their men down
Kettle and up San Juan Hill, where they swept over the northern
jut only a moment after Hawkins had carried the main blockhouse.

The San Juan position now in the hands of the Americans was the
key of Santiago, but that entrenched city lay a mile and a
quarter distant and had still to be unlocked--a task which
presented no little difficulty. The Americans, it is true, had an
advantageous position on a hilltop, but the enemy had retired
only a quarter of a mile and were supported by the complete
system of fortifications which protected Santiago. The American
losses totaled fifteen hundred, a number just about made good at
this moment by the arrival of General Duffield's brigade, which
had followed the main expedition. The number of the Spanish
force, which was unknown to the Americans, was increased on the
3d of July by the arrival of a relief expedition under Colonel
Escario, with about four thousand men whom the insurgent forces
had failed to meet and block, as had been planned.

On the 2d of July there was desultory fighting, and on the 3d,
General Shafter telegraphed to the Secretary of War that he was
considering the withdrawal of his troops to a strong position,
about five miles in the rear. The Secretary immediately replied:
"Of course you can judge the situation better than we can at this
end of the line. If, however, you could hold your present
position, especially San Juan Heights, the effect upon the
country would be much better than falling back."

The Spanish commanders, however, did not share General Shafter's
view as to the danger involving the Americans. Both Admiral
Cervera and General Blanco considered that the joint operations
of the American Army and Navy had rendered the reduction of
Santiago only a question of time, but they differed as to the
course to be pursued. In the end, General Blanco, who was in
supreme command, decided, after an exchange of views with the
Spanish Government and a consultation with the Captain of the
German cruiser Geier, then at Havana, to order the Spanish
squadron to attempt an escape from Santiago harbor. Cervera's
sailors had hitherto been employed in the defense of the city,
but with the arrival of the reinforcements under Escario he found
it possible to reman his fleet. An attempt to escape in the dark
seemed impossible because of the unremitting glare of the
searchlights of the American vessels. Downe, downe I come, like
glist'ring Phaeton, Wanting the manage of vnruly Iades.
In the base Court?

base Court, where Kings grow base, To come at Traytors Calls,
and doe them Grace.
In the base Court come down: down Court, down King, For night-Owls
shrike, where mou[n]ting Larks should sing
Bull. What sayes his Maiestie?
North. Sorrow, and griefe of heart Makes him speake fondly,
like a frantick man:
Yet he is come
Bull. Stand all apart, And shew faire dutie to his Maiestie.
My gracious Lord
Rich. Faire Cousin, You debase your Princely Knee, To make the
base Earth prowd with kissing it.
Me rather had, my Heart might feele your Loue, Then my
vnpleas'd Eye see your Courtesie.
Vp Cousin, vp, your Heart is vp, I know, Thus high at least,
although your Knee be low
Bull. My gracious Lord, I come but for mine owne
Rich. Your owne is yours, and I am yours, and all
Bull.

So farre be mine, my most redoubted Lord, As my true seruice
shall deserue your loue
Rich. Well you deseru'd:
They well deserue to haue, That know the strong'st, and surest
way to get.
Vnckle giue me your Hand: nay, drie your Eyes, Teares
shew their Loue, but want their Remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your Father, Though you are old
enough to be my Heire.
What you will haue, Ile giue, and willing to, For doe we must,
what force will haue vs doe.
Set on towards London:
Cousin, is it so?
Bull. Yea, my good Lord
Rich. Then I must not say, no.

Flourish.

Exeunt.

Scena Quarta.

Enter the Queene, and two Ladies
Qu. What sport shall we deuise here in this Garden, To driue
away the heauie thought of Care?
La. Madame, wee'le play at Bowles
Qu. 'Twill make me thinke the World is full of Rubs, And that
my fortune runnes against the Byas
La. Madame, wee'le Dance
Qu. My Legges can keepe no measure in Delight, When my poore Heart
no measure keepes in Griefe.

Therefore no Dancing (Girle) some other sport
La. Madame, wee'le tell Tales
Qu. Of Sorrow, or of Griefe?
La. Of eyther, Madame
Qu. Of neyther, Girle.
For if of Ioy, being altogether wanting, It doth remember me
the more of Sorrow:
Or if of Griefe, being altogether had, It addes more Sorrow to
my want of Ioy:
For what I haue, I need not to repeat; And what I want, it
bootes not to complaine
La. Madame, Ile sing
Qu. 'Tis well that thou hast cause:
But thou should'st please me better, would'st thou weepe
La. I could weepe, Madame, would it doe you good 
Qu.

And I could sing, would weeping doe me good, And neuer borrow any
Teare of thee.
Enter a Gardiner, and two Seruants.

But stay, here comes the Gardiners, Let's step into the shadow
of these Trees.
My wretchednesse, vnto a Rowe of Pinnes, They'le talke of State:
for euery one doth so, Against a Change; Woe is fore-runne
with Woe
Gard. Goe binde thou vp yond dangling Apricocks, Which like
vnruly Children, make their Syre Stoupe with oppression of their
prodigall weight:
Giue some supportance to the bending twigges.
Goe thou, and like an Executioner Cut off the heads of too fast
growing sprayes, That looke too loftie in our Common-wealth:
All must be euen, in our Gouernment.
You thus imploy'd, I will goe root away The noysome Weedes,
that without profit sucke The Soyles fertilitie from wholesome
flowers 
Ser.

Why should we, in the compasse of a Pale, Keepe Law and Forme,
and due Proportion, Shewing as in a Modell our firme Estate?
When our Sea-walled Garden, the whole Land, Is full of Weedes, her
fairest Flowers choakt vp, Her Fruit-trees all vnpruin'd,
her Hedges ruin'd, Her Knots disorder'd, and her wholesome
Hearbes Swarming with Caterpillers
Gard. Hold thy peace.
He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd Spring, Hath now himselfe
met with the Fall of Leafe.
The Weeds that his broad-spreading Leaues did shelter, That seem'd,
in eating him, to hold him vp, Are pull'd vp, Root and all, by
Bullingbrooke:
I meane, the Earle of Wiltshire, Bushie, Greene
Ser. What are they dead?
Gard. They are, And Bullingbrooke hath seiz'd the wastefull
King.
Oh, what pitty is it, that he had not so trim'd And drest
his Land, as we this Garden, at time of yeare, And wound the Barke,
the skin of our Fruit-trees, Least being ouer-proud with Sap and
Blood, With too much riches it confound it selfe?

Had he done so, to great and growing men, They might haue liu'd
to beare, and he to taste Their fruites of dutie. Superfluous
branches We lop away, that bearing boughes may liue:
Had he done so, himselfe had borne the Crowne, Which waste
and idle houres, hath quite thrown downe
Ser. What thinke you the King shall be depos'd?
Gar. Deprest he is already, and depos'd 'Tis doubted he will be.
Letters came last night To a deere Friend of the Duke of Yorkes,
That tell blacke tydings
Qu. Oh I am prest to death through want of speaking:
Thou old Adams likenesse, set to dresse this Garden:
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this vnpleasing newes What
Eue? what Serpent hath suggested thee, To make a second fall of
cursed man?
Why do'st thou say, King Richard is depos'd, Dar'st thou, thou
little better thing then earth, Diuine his downfall? Say, where,
when, and how Cam'st thou by this ill-tydings? Speake thou
wretch

Gard. Pardon me Madam. Little ioy haue I To breath these newes;
yet what I say, is true; King Richard, he is in the mighty
hold Of Bullingbrooke, their Fortunes both are weigh'd:
In your Lords Scale, is nothing but himselfe, And some few Vanities,
that make him light:
But in the Ballance of great Bullingbrooke, Besides himselfe, are
all the English Peeres, And with that oddes he weighes King
Richard downe.
Poste you to London, and you'l finde it so, I speake no more, then
euery one doth know 
Qu.

Nimble mischance, that art so light of foote, Doth not thy Embassage
belong to me?
And am I last that knowes it? Oh thou think'st To serue me last,
that I may longest keepe Thy sorrow in my breast. Come Ladies
goe, To meet at London, Londons King in woe.
What was I borne to this: that my sad looke, Should grace the
Triumph of great Bullingbrooke.
Gard'ner, for telling me this newes of woe, I would the Plants
thou graft'st, may neuer grow.
Enter.

G. Poore Queen, so that thy State might be no worse, I would my
skill were subiect to thy curse:
Heere did she drop a teare, heere in this place Ile set a Banke
of Rew, sowre Herbe of Grace:
Rue, eu'n for ruth, heere shortly shall be seene, In the remembrance
of a Weeping Queene.
Enter.

Actus Quartus. Scoena Prima.

Enter as to the Parliament, Bullingbrooke, Aumerle, Northumberland,
Percie, FitzWater, Surrey, Carlile, Abbot of Westminster. Herauld,
Officers, and Bagot.

Bullingbrooke. Call forth Bagot.
Now Bagot, freely speake thy minde, What thou do'st know of
Noble Glousters death:
Who wrought it with the King, and who perform'd The bloody
Office of his Timelesse end
Bag. Then set before my face, the Lord Aumerle
Bul. Cosin, stand forth, and looke vpon that man 
Bag.

My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue Scornes to vnsay, what
it hath once deliuer'd.
In that dead time, when Glousters death was plotted, I heard you
say, Is not my arme of length, That reacheth from the restfull
English Court As farre as Callis, to my Vnkles head.
Amongst much other talke, that very time, I heard you say, that you
had rather refuse The offer of an hundred thousand Crownes, Then
Bullingbrookes returne to England; adding withall, How blest this
Land would be, in this your Cosins death 
Aum.

Princes, and Noble Lords:
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonor my faire Starres, On equall termes to giue
him chasticement?
Either I must, or haue mine honor soyl'd With th' Attaindor of his
sland'rous Lippes.
There is my Gage, the manuall Seale of death That markes thee out
for Hell. Thou lyest, And will maintaine what thou hast said,
is false, In thy heart blood, though being all too base To
staine the temper of my Knightly sword
Bul. Bagot forbeare, thou shalt not take it vp
Aum. Excepting one, I would he were the best In all this
presence, that hath mou'd me so
Fitz. If that thy valour stand on sympathize:
There is my Gage, Aumerle, in Gage to thine:
By that faire Sunne, that shewes me where thou stand'st, I heard
thee say (and vauntingly thou spak'st it) That thou wer't cause
of Noble Glousters death.
If thou deniest it, twenty times thou lyest, And I will turne
thy falshood to thy hart, Where it was forged with my Rapiers
point
Aum. Thou dar'st not (Coward) liue to see the day
Fitz. Now by my Soule, I would it were this houre
Aum. Fitzwater thou art damn'd to hell for this
Per. Aumerle, thou lye'st: his Honor is as true In this Appeale,
as thou art all vniust:
And that thou art so, there I throw my Gage To proue it
on thee, to th' extreamest point Of mortall breathing. Seize
it, if thou dar'st
Aum.

And if I do not, may my hands rot off, And neuer brandish more
reuengefull Steele, Ouer the glittering Helmet of my Foe
Surrey. My Lord Fitzwater:
I do remember well, the very time Aumerle, and you did talke

Fitz. My Lord, 'Tis very true: You were in presence then, And you
can witnesse with me, this is true
Surrey. As false, by heauen, As Heauen it selfe is true
Fitz. Surrey, thou Lyest
Surrey. Dishonourable Boy; That Lye, shall lie so heauy on my
Sword, That it shall render Vengeance, and Reuenge, Till
thou the Lye-giuer, and that Lye, doe lye In earth as quiet, as
thy Fathers Scull.
In proofe whereof, there is mine Honors pawne, Engage it to the
Triall, if thou dar'st
Fitzw. How fondly do'st thou spurre a forward Horse?
If I dare eate, or drinke, or breathe, or liue, I dare meete Surrey
in a Wildernesse, And spit vpon him, whilest I say he Lyes, And
Lyes, and Lyes: there is my Bond of Faith, To tye thee to my strong
Correction.

As I intend to thriue in this new World, Aumerle is guiltie of my
true Appeale.
Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolke say, That thou Aumerle
didst send two of thy men, To execute the Noble Duke at
Callis
Aum. Some honest Christian trust me with a Gage, That Norfolke
lyes: here doe I throw downe this, If he may be repeal'd, to
trie his Honor
Bull. These differences shall all rest vnder Gage, Till Norfolke
be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be; And (though mine Enemie)
restor'd againe To all his Lands and Seignories: when hee's
return'd, Against Aumerle we will enforce his Tryall
Carl. That honorable day shall ne're be seene.
Many a time hath banish'd Norfolke fought For Iesu Christ, in
glorious Christian field Streaming the Ensigne of the Christian
Crosse, Against black Pagans, Turkes, and Saracens:
And toyl'd with workes of Warre, retyr'd himselfe To Italy, and
there at Venice gaue His Body to that pleasant Countries
Earth, And his pure Soule vnto his Captaine Christ, Vnder whose
Colours he had fought so long 
Bull.

Why Bishop, is Norfolke dead?

Carl. As sure as I liue, my Lord
Bull. Sweet peace conduct his sweet Soule To the Bosome of good
old Abraham.
Lords Appealants, your differe[n]ces shal all rest vnder gage, Till
we assigne you to your dayes of Tryall.
Enter Yorke.

Yorke. Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee From plume-pluckt
Richard, who with willing Soule Adopts thee Heire, and his
high Scepter yeelds To the possession of thy Royall Hand.
Ascend his Throne, descending now from him, And long liue
Henry, of that Name the Fourth
Bull. In Gods Name, Ile ascend the Regall Throne
Carl. Mary, Heauen forbid.
Worst in this Royall Presence may I speake, Yet best beseeming
me to speake the truth.

Would God, that any in this Noble Presence Were enough Noble, to
be vpright Iudge Of Noble Richard: then true Noblenesse would
Learne him forbearance from so foule a Wrong.
What Subiect can giue Sentence on his King?

And who sits here, that is not Richards Subiect?
Theeues are not iudg'd, but they are by to heare, Although apparant
guilt be seene in them:
And shall the figure of Gods Maiestie, His Captaine, Steward,
Deputie elect, Anoynted, Crown'd, planted many yeeres, Be iudg'd
by subiect, and inferior breathe, And he himselfe not present?
Oh, forbid it, God, That in a Christian Climate, Soules refin'de
Should shew so heynous, black, obscene a deed.
I speake to Subiects, and a Subiect speakes, Stirr'd vp by
Heauen, thus boldly for his King My Lord of Hereford here, whom
you call King, Is a foule Traytor to prowd Herefords King.
And if you Crowne him, let me prophecie, The blood of English
shall manure the ground, And future Ages groane for his foule
Act.
Peace shall goe sleepe with Turkes and Infidels, And in
this Seat of Peace, tumultuous Warres Shall Kinne with Kinne,
and Kinde with Kinde confound.
Disorder, Horror, Feare, and Mutinie Shall here inhabite, and
this Land be call'd The field of Golgotha, and dead mens Sculls.

Oh, if you reare this House, against this House It will the wofullest
Diuision proue, That euer fell vpon this cursed Earth.

Preuent it, resist it, and let it not be so, Least Child, Childs
Children cry against you, Woe
North. Well haue you argu'd Sir: and for your paines, Of Capitall
Treason we arrest you here.
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge, To keepe him safely,
till his day of Tryall.
May it please you, Lords, to grant the Commons Suit?
Bull. Fetch hither Richard, that in common view He may surrender:
so we shall proceede Without suspition
Yorke. I will be his Conduct.
Enter.

Bull. Lords, you that here are vnder our Arrest, Procure your
Sureties for your Dayes of Answer:
Little are we beholding to your Loue, And little look'd for at
your helping Hands.

Enter Richard and Yorke.

Rich. Alack, why am I sent for to a King, Before I haue shooke
off the Regall thoughts Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet haue
learn'd To insinuate, flatter, bowe, and bend my Knee.
Giue Sorrow leaue a while, to tuture me To this submission. Yet
I well remember The fauors of these men: were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, All hayle to me?
So Iudas did to Christ: but he in twelue, Found truth
in all, but one; I, in twelue thousand, none.
God saue the King: will no man say, Amen?
Am I both Priest, and Clarke? well then, Amen.
God saue the King, although I be not hee:
And yet Amen, if Heauen doe thinke him mee.
To doe what seruice, am I sent for hither?

Yorke. To doe that office of thine owne good will, Which tyred
Maiestie did make thee offer:
The Resignation of thy State and Crowne To Henry Bullingbrooke

Rich. Giue me the Crown. Here Cousin, seize y Crown:
Here Cousin, on this side my Hand, on that side thine.
Now is this Golden Crowne like a deepe Well, That owes two Buckets,
filling one another, The emptier euer dancing in the ayre, The
other downe, vnseene, and full of Water:
That Bucket downe, and full of Teares am I, Drinking my Griefes,
whil'st you mount vp on high
Bull. I thought you had been willing to resigne
Rich. My Crowne I am, but still my Griefes are mine:
You may my Glories and my State depose, But not my Griefes; still
am I King of those
Bull. Part of your Cares you giue me with your Crowne
Rich. Your Cares set vp, do not pluck my Cares downe.
My Care, is losse of Care, by old Care done, Your Care, is gaine
of Care, by new Care wonne:
The Cares I giue, I haue, though giuen away, They 'tend the Crowne,
yet still with me they stay:
Bull. Are you contented to resigne the Crowne?
Rich. I, no; no, I: for I must nothing bee:
Therefore no, no, for I resigne to thee.
Now, marke me how I will vndoe my selfe.
I giue this heauie Weight from off my Head, And this vnwieldie
Scepter from my Hand, The pride of Kingly sway from out my Heart.
With mine owne Teares I wash away my Balme, With mine owne Hands I
giue away my Crowne, With mine owne Tongue denie my Sacred State,
With mine owne Breath release all dutious Oathes; All Pompe and
Maiestie I doe forsweare:
My Manors, Rents, Reuenues, I forgoe; My Acts, Decrees, and Statutes
I denie:
God pardon all Oathes that are broke to mee, God keepe all Vowes
vnbroke are made to thee.
Make me that nothing haue, with nothing grieu'd, And thou with all
pleas'd, that hast all atchieu'd.
Long may'st thou liue in Richards Seat to sit, And soone lye Richard
in an Earthie Pit.
God saue King Henry, vn-King'd Richard sayes, And send him many
yeeres of Sunne-shine dayes.
What more remaines?
North. No more: but that you reade These Accusations, and these
grieuous Crymes, Committed by your Person, and your followers,
Against the State, and Profit of this Land:
That by confessing them, the Soules of men May deeme, that you are
worthily depos'd
Rich. Must I doe so? and must I rauell out My weau'd-vp follyes?
Gentle Northumberland, If thy Offences were vpon Record, Would it
not shame thee, in so faire a troupe, To reade a Lecture of them?
If thou would'st, There should'st thou finde one heynous Article,
Contayning the deposing of a King, And cracking the strong Warrant
of an Oath, Mark'd with a Blot, damn'd in the Booke of Heauen.
Nay, all of you, that stand and looke vpon me, Whil'st that my
wretchednesse doth bait my selfe, Though some of you, with Pilate,
wash your hands, Shewing an outward pittie: yet you Pilates Haue
here deliuer'd me to my sowre Crosse, And Water cannot wash away
your sinne
North. My Lord dispatch, reade o're these Articles
Rich. Mine Eyes are full of Teares, I cannot see:
And yet salt-Water blindes them not so much, But they can see a
sort of Traytors here.
Nay, if I turne mine Eyes vpon my selfe, I finde my selfe a Traytor
with the rest:
For I haue giuen here my Soules consent, T' vndeck the pompous Body
of a King; Made Glory base; a Soueraigntie, a Slaue; Prowd Maiestie,
a Subiect; State, a Pesant 
North. My Lord
Rich. No Lord of thine, thou haught-insulting man; No, nor no mans
Lord: I haue no Name, no Title; No, not that Name was giuen me at
the Font, But 'tis vsurpt: alack the heauie day, That I haue worne
so many Winters out, And know not now, what Name to call my selfe.
Oh, that I were a Mockerie, King of Snow, Standing before the Sunne
of Bullingbrooke, To melt my selfe away in Water-drops.
Good King, great King, and yet not greatly good, And if my word be
Sterling yet in England, Let it command a Mirror hither straight,
That it may shew me what a Face I haue, Since it is Bankrupt of his
Maiestie 
Bull. Goe some of you, and fetch a Looking-Glasse
North. Read o're this Paper, while y Glasse doth come
Rich. Fiend, thou torments me, ere I come to Hell
Bull. Vrge it no more, my Lord Northumberland
North. The Commons will not then be satisfy'd
Rich. They shall be satisfy'd: Ile reade enough, When I doe see the
very Booke indeede, Where all my sinnes are writ, and that's my
selfe.
Enter one with a Glasse.
Giue me that Glasse, and therein will I reade.
No deeper wrinckles yet? hath Sorrow strucke So many Blowes vpon
this Face of mine, And made no deeper Wounds? Oh flatt'ring Glasse,
Like to my followers in prosperitie, Thou do'st beguile me. Was
this Face, the Face That euery day, vnder his House-hold Roofe, Did
keepe ten thousand men? Was this the Face, That like the Sunne, did
make beholders winke?
Is this the Face, which fac'd so many follyes, That was at last
out-fac'd by Bullingbrooke?
A brittle Glory shineth in this Face, As brittle as the Glory, is
the Face, For there it is, crackt in an hundred shiuers.
Marke silent King, the Morall of this sport, How soone my Sorrow
hath destroy'd my Face
Bull. The shadow of your Sorrow hath destroy'd The shadow of your
Face 
Rich. Say that againe.
The shadow of my Sorrow: ha, let's see, 'Tis very true, my Griefe
lyes all within, And these externall manner of Laments, Are meerely
shadowes, to the vnseene Griefe, That swells with silence in the
tortur'd Soule.The Americans occupied
Guanica, Ponce, and Arroyo with little or no opposition, and were
soon in possession of the southern shores of the island.

Between the American forces and the main body of the enemy
stretched a range of mountains running east and west through the
length of the island. San Juan, the only fortress, which was the
main objective of the American Army, lay on the opposite side of
this mountain range, on the northern coast of the island. The
approach to the fortress lay along a road which crossed the hills
and which possessed natural advantages for defense. On the 7th of
August a forward movement was begun. While General Wilson's army
advanced from Ponce along the main road toward San Juan and
General Brooke moved north from Arroyo, General Schwan was to
clear the western end of the island and work his way around to
Arecibo, toward which General Henry was to advance through the
interior. The American armies systematically worked forward, with
an occasional skirmish in which they were always victorious, and
were received with a warm welcome by the teeming native
population. On the 13th of August, General Wilson was on the
point of clearing his first mountain range, General Schwan had
occupied Mayaguez, and General Henry had passed through the
mountains and was marching down the valley of the Arecibo, when
orders arrived from Washington to suspend operations.

The center of interest, however, remained in the far-away
Philippines. Dewey, who had suddenly burst upon the American
people as their first hero, remained a fixed star in their
admiration, a position in which his own good judgment and the
fortunate scarcity of newspaper correspondents served to maintain
him. From him action was expected, and it had been prepared for.
Even before news arrived on the 7th of May of Dewey's victory on
the 1st of May, the Government had anticipated such a result and
had decided to send an army to support him. San Francisco was
made a rendezvous for volunteers, and on the l2th of May, General
Wesley Merritt was assigned to command the expedition. Dewey
reported that he could at any time command the surrender of
Manila, but that it would be useless unless he had troops to
occupy the city.

On the 19th of May, General Merritt received the following
orders: "The destruction of the Spanish fleet at Manila, followed
by the taking of the naval station at Cavite, the paroling of the
garrisons, and the acquisition of the control of the bay, have
rendered it necessary, in the further prosecution of the measures
adopted by this Government for the purpose of bringing about an
honorable and durable peace with Spain, to send an army of
occupation to the Philippines for the twofold purpose of
completing the reduction of the Spanish power in that quarter and
giving order and security to the islands while in the possession
of the United States."

On the 30th of June the first military expedition, after a
bloodless capture of the island of Guam, arrived in Manila Bay. A
second contingent arrived on the 17th of July, and on the 25th,
General Merritt himself with a third force, which brought the
number of Americans up to somewhat more than 10,000. The
Spaniards had about 13,000 men guarding the rather antiquated
fortifications of old Manila and a semicircle of blockhouses and
trenches thrown about the city, which contained about 350,000
inhabitants.

It would have been easy to compel surrender or evacuation by the
guns of the fleet, had it not been for an additional element in
the situation. Manila was already besieged, or rather blockaded,
on the land side, by an army of nearly ten thousand Philippine
insurgents under their shrewd leader, Emilio Aguinaldo. It does
not necessarily follow that those who are fighting the same enemy
are fighting together, and in this case the relations between
the Americans and the insurgents were far from intimate, though
Dewey had kept the situation admirably in hand until the arrival
of the American troops.

General Merritt decided to hold no direct communication with
Aguinaldo until the Americans were in possession of the city, but
landed his army to the south of Manila beyond the trenches of the
Filipinos. On the 30th of July, General F. V. Greene made an
informal arrangement with the Filipino general for the removal of
the insurgents from the trenches directly in front of the
American forces, and immediately advanced beyond their original
position. The situation of Manila was indeed desperate and
clearly demanded a surrender to the American forces, who might be
relied upon to preserve order and protect property. The Belgian
Consul, M. Eduard Andre, urged this course upon the Spanish
commander. The Governor-General, Fermin Jaudenes, exhibited the
same spirit which the Spanish commanders revealed throughout the
war: though constitutionally indisposed to take any bold action,
he nevertheless considered it a point of honor not to recognize
the inevitable. He allowed it to be understood that he could not
surrender except to an assault, although well knowing that such a
melee might cause the city to be ravaged by the Filipinos. M.
Andre, however, succeeded by the 11th of August in arranging a
verbal understanding that the fleet should fire upon the city and
that the troops should attack, but that the Spaniards should make
no real resistance and should surrender as soon as they
considered that their honor was saved.

The chief contestants being thus amicably agreed to a spectacular
but bloodless battle, the main interest lay in the future action
of the interested and powerful spectators in the harbor. Admiral
Dewey, though relieved by the arrival of the monitor Monterey on
the 4th of August, was by no means certain that the German
squadron would stand by without interference and see the city
bombarded. On the 9th of August he gave notice of the impending
action and ordered foreign vessels out of the range of fire. On
the 13th of August Dewey steamed into position before the city.
As the American vessels steamed past the British Immortalite, her
guard paraded and her band played Admiral Dewey's favorite march.
Immediately afterwards the British commander, Captain Chichester,
moved his vessels toward the city and took a position between our
fleet and the German squadron. The foreign vessels made no
interference, but the Filipinos were more restless. Eagerly
watching the American assault, they rushed forward when they saw
it successful, and began firing on the Spaniards just as the
latter hoisted the white flag. They were quieted, though with
difficulty, and by nightfall the city was under the Stars and
Stripes, with American troops occupying the outworks facing the
forces of Aguinaldo, who were neither friends nor foes.

While the dispatch of Commodore Watson's fleet to Spain was still
being threatened and delayed, while General Miles was rapidly
approaching the capital of Porto Rico, and on the same day that
Admiral Dewey and General Merritt captured Manila, Spain yielded.
On the 18th of July Spain had taken the first step toward peace
by asking for the good offices of the French Government. On the
26th of July, M. Cambon, the French Ambassador at Washington,
opened negotiations with the United States. On the 12th of
August, a protocol was signed, but, owing to the difference in
time on the opposite side of the globe, to say nothing of the
absence of cable communication, not in time to prevent Dewey's
capture of Manila. This protocol provided for the meeting of
peace commissioners at Paris not later than the 1st of October.
Spain agreed immediately to evacuate and relinquish all claim to
Cuba; to cede to the United States ultimately all other islands
in the West Indies, and one in the Ladrones; and to permit the
United States to "occupy and hold the city, bay, and harbor of
Manila pending the conclusion of a treaty of peace which shall
determine the control, disposition, and government of the
Philippines."

President McKinley appointed the Secretary of State, William R.
Day, as president of the peace commission, and summoned John Hay
home from England to take his place. The other commissioners were
Senators Cushman K. Davis and William P. Frye, Republicans,
Senator George Gray, Democrat, and Whitelaw Reid, the editor of
the New York "Tribune". The secretary of the commission was the
distinguished student of international law, John Bassett Moore.
On most points there was general agreement as to what they were
to do. Cuba, of course, must be free. It was, moreover, too
obvious to need much argument that Spanish rule on the American
continent must come altogether to an end. As there was no
organized local movement in Porto Rico to take over the
government, its cession to the United States was universally
recognized as inevitable. Nevertheless when the two commissions
met in Paris, there proved to be two exciting subjects of
controversy, and at moments it seemed possible that the attempt
to arrange a peace would prove unsuccessful. However reassured
the people were by the successful termination of the war, for
those in authority the period of anxiety had not yet entirely
passed.

The first of these points was raised by the Spanish
commissioners. They maintained that the separation of Cuba from
Spain involved the rending of the Empire, and that Cuba should
therefore take responsibilities as well as freedom. The specific
question was that of debts contracted by Spain, for the security
of which Cuban revenues had been pledged. There was a manifest
lack of equity in this claim, for Cuba had not been party to the
contracting of the obligations, and the money had been spent in
stifling her own desire to be free rather than on the development
of her resources. Nevertheless the Spanish commissioners could
feel the support of a sustaining public opinion about them, for
the bulk of these obligations were held in France and investors
were doubtful of the ability of Spain, if bereft of her colonies,
to carry her enormous financial burdens. The point, then, was
stoutly urged, but the American commissioners as stoutly defended
the interests of their clients, the Cubans, and held their
ground. Thanks to their efforts, the Cuban republic was born free
of debt.

The other point was raised by the American commissioners, and was
both more important and more complicated, for when the
negotiation began the United States had not fully decided what it
wanted. It was necessary first to decide and then to obtain the
consent of Spain with regard to the great unsettled question of
the disposition of the Philippines. Dewey's victory came as an
overwhelming surprise to the great majority of Americans snugly
encased, as they supposed themselves to be, in a separate
hemisphere. Nearly all looked upon it as a military operation
only, not likely to lead to later complications. Many discerning
individuals, however, both in this country and abroad, at once
saw or feared that occupation would lead to annexation. Carl
Schurz, as early as the 9th of May, wrote McKinley expressing the
hope that "we remain true to our promise that this is a war of
deliverance and not one of greedy ambition, conquest,
self-aggrandizement." In August, Andrew Carnegie wrote in "The
North American Review" an article on "Distant Possessions--The
Parting of the Ways."

Sentiment in favor of retaining the islands, however, grew
rapidly in volume and in strength. John Hay wrote to Andrew
Carnegie on the 22d of August: "I am not allowed to say in my
present fix (ministerial responsibility) how much I agree with
you. The only question in my mind is how far it is now POSSIBLE
for us to withdraw from the Philippines. I am rather thankful it
is not given to me to solve that momentous question." On the 5th
of September, he wrote to John Bigelow: "I fear you are right
about the Philippines, and I hope the Lord will be good to us
poor devils who have to take care of them. I marvel at your
suggesting that we pay for them. I should have expected no less
of your probity; but how many except those educated by you in the
school of morals and diplomacy would agree with you? Where did I
pass you on the road of life? You used to be a little my senior
[twenty-one years]; now you are ages younger and stronger than I
am. And yet I am going to be Secretary of State for a little
while."

Not all those who advocated the retention of the Philippines did
so reluctantly or under the pressure of a feeling of necessity.
In the very first settlers of our country, the missionary impulse
beat strong. John Winthrop was not less intent than Cromwell on
the conquest of all humanity by his own ideals; only he believed
the most efficacious means to be the power of example instead of
force. Just now there was a renewed sense throughout the
Anglo-Saxon public that it was the duty of the civilized to
promote the civilization of the backward, and the Cromwellian
method waxed in popularity. Kipling, at the summit of his
influence, appealed to a wide and powerful public in his "White
Man's Burden," which appeared in 1899.

Take up the White Man's burden--
Send forth the best ye breed--
Go bind your sons to exile
To serve your captives' need;
To wait in heavy harness,
On fluttered folk and wild--
Your new caught, sullen peoples,
Half-devil and half-child.

Take up the White Man's burden--
And reap his old reward
The blame of those ye better,
The hate of those ye guard--
The cry of hosts ye humour
(Ah, slowly!) towards the light:--
Why brought ye us from bondage,
Our loved Egyptian night?

McKinley asked those having opinions on the subject of this
burden to write to him, and a strong call for the United States
to take up her share in the regeneration of mankind came from
important representatives of the religious public. Nor was the
attitude of those different who saw the possibilities of
increased traffic with the East. The expansion of the area of
home distribution seemed a halfway house between the purely
nationalistic policy, which was becoming a little irksome, and
the competition of the open world.

It was not, however, the urging of these forces alone which made
the undecided feel that the annexation of the Philippines was
bound to come. The situation itself seemed to offer no other
solution. Gradually evidence as to the local conditions reached
America. The Administration was anxious for the commissioners to
have the latest information, and, as Admiral Dewey remained
indispensable at Manila, General Merritt was ordered to report at
Paris, where he arrived on the 6th of October. He was of the
opinion that the Americans must remain in the Philippines, and
his reports were sustained by a cablegram from Dewey on the 14th
of October reading: "Spanish authority has been completely
destroyed in Luzon, and general anarchy prevails without the
limits of the city and Bay of Manila. Strongly probable that
islands to the south will fall into the same state soon." The
history of the previous few years and existing conditions made it
highly improbable that Spanish domination could ever be restored.
The withdrawal of the United States would therefore not mean the
reestablishment of Spanish rule but no government at all.

As to the regime which would result from our withdrawal, Admiral
Dewey judged from the condition of those areas where Spanish
authority had already ceased and that of the Americans had not
yet been established. "Distressing reports," he cabled, "have
been received of inhuman cruelty practised on religious and civil
authorities in other parts of these islands. The natives appear
unable to govern." It was highly probable, in fact, that if the
United States did not take the islands, Spain would sell her
vanishing equity in the property to some other power which
possessed the equipment necessary to conquer the Philippines. To
many this eventuality did not seem objectionable, as is indicated
by the remark, already quoted, of an American official to certain
Germans: "We don't want the Philippines; why don't you take
them?" That this attitude was foolishly Quixotic is obvious, but
more effective in the molding of public opinion was the feeling
that it was cowardly.

In such a changing condition of public sentiment, McKinley was a
better index of what the majority wanted than a referendum could
have been. In August he stated: "I do not want any ambiguity to
be allowed to remain on this point. The negotiators of both
countries are the ones who shall resolve upon the permanent
advantages which we shall ask in the archipelago, and decide upon
the intervention, disposition, and government of the
Philippines." His instructions to the commissioners actually went
farther:

"Avowing unreservedly the purpose which has animated all our
effort, and still solicitous to adhere to it, we cannot be
unmindful that, without any desire or design on our part, the war
has brought us new duties and responsibilities which we must meet
and discharge as becomes a great nation on whose growth and
career from the beginning the Ruler of Nations has plainly
written the high command and pledge of civilization.

"Incidental to our tenure in the Philippines is the commercial
opportunity to which American statesmanship cannot be
indifferent.... Asking only the open door for ourselves, we are
ready to accord the open door to others.

"In view of what has been stated, the United States cannot accept
less than the cession in full rights and sovereignty of the
island of Luzon."

The American commissioners were divided. Day favored the limited
terms of the instructions; Davis, Frye, and Reid wished the whole
group of the Philippines; Gray emphatically protested against
taking any part of the islands. On the 26th of October, Hay
telegraphed that the President had decided that "the cession must
be of the whole Archipelago or none." The Spanish commissioners
objected strongly to this new development, and threatened to
break off the negotiations which otherwise were practically
concluded. This outcome would have put the United States in the
unfortunate position of continuing a war which it had begun in
the interests of Cuba for the quite different purpose of securing
possession of the Philippines. The Spanish were probably not
without hopes that under these changed conditions they might be
able to bring to their active assistance that latent sympathy for
them which existed so strongly in Europe. Nor was the basis of
the claim of the United States entirely clear. On the 3d of
November the American commissioners cabled to the President that
they were convinced that the occupation of Manila did not
constitute a conquest of the islands as a whole.

By this time, however, the President had decided that the United
States must have the islands. On the 13th of November, Hay
telegraphed that the United States was entitled to an indemnity
for the cost of the war. This argument was not put forward
because the United States wished indemnity but to give a
technical basis for the American claim to the Philippines. In the
same cablegram, Hay instructed the commissioners to offer Spain
ten or twenty millions for all the islands. Upon this financial
basis the treaty was finally concluded; it was signed on December
10, 1898; and ratifications were exchanged on April 11, 1899.

The terms of the treaty provided, first, for the relinquishment
of sovereignty over Cuba by Spain. The island was to be occupied
by the United States, in whose hands its subsequent disposition
was left. All other Spanish islands in the West Indies, together
with Guam in the Ladrones, were ceded to the United States. The
whole archipelago of the Philippines, with water boundaries
carefully but not quite accurately drawn, was ceded to the United
States, which by the same article agreed to pay Spain
$20,000,000. All claims for indemnity or damages between the two
nations, or either nation and the citizens of the other, were
mutually relinquished, the United States assuming the
adjudication and settlement of all claims of her own citizens
against Spain.

This treaty, even more than the act of war, marked a turning
point in the relation of the United States to the outside world.
So violent was the opposition of those who disapproved, and so
great the reluctance of even the majority of those who approved,
to acknowledge that the United States had emerged from the
isolated path which it had been treading since 1823, that every
effort was made to minimize the significance of the beginning of
a new era in American history. It was argued by those delving
into the past that the Philippines actually belonged to the
Western Hemisphere because the famous demarcation line drawn by
Pope Alexander VI, in 1493, ran to the west of them; it was,
indeed, partly in consequence of that line that Spain had
possessed the islands. Before Spain lost Mexico her Philippine
trade had actually passed across the Pacific, through the Mexican
port of Acapulco, and across the Atlantic. Yet these interesting
historical facts were scarcely related in the mind of the public
to the more immediate and tangible fact that the annexation of
the Philippines gave the United States a far-flung territory
situated just where all the powerful nations of the world were
then centering their interest.

In opposition to those who disapproved of this extension of
territory, it was argued more cogently that, in spite of the
prevailing belief of the thirty preceding years, the United
States had always been an expanding power, stretching its
authority over new areas with a persistency and rapidity hardly
equaled by any other nation, and that this latest step was but a
new stride in the natural expansion of the United States. But
here again the similarity between the former and the most recent
steps was more apparent than real. Louisiana, Florida, Texas,
California, and Oregon, had all been parts of an obvious
geographical whole. Alaska, indeed, was detached, but its
acquisition had been partly accidental, and it was at least a
part of the American continent and would, in the opinion of many,
eventually become contiguous by the probable annexation of
Canada. Moreover, none of the areas so far occupied by the United
States had been really populated. It had been a logical
expectation that American people would soon overflow these
acquired lands and assimilate the inhabitants. In the case of the
Philippines, on the other hand, it was fully recognized that
Americans could at most be only a small governing class, and that
even Porto Rico, accessible as it was, would prove too thickly
settled to give hopes of Americanization.

The terms of the treaty with Spain, indeed, recognized these
differences. In all previous instances, except Alaska, the added
territory had been incorporated into the body of the United
States with the expectation, now realized except in Hawaii, of
reaching the position of self-governing and participating States
of the Union. Even in the case of Alaska it had been provided
that all inhabitants remaining in residence, except uncivilized
Indians, should become citizens of the United States. In the case
of these new annexations resulting from the war with Spain,
provision was made only for the religious freedom of the
inhabitants. "The civil rights and political status of the native
inhabitants of the territories hereby ceded to the United States
shall be determined by the Congress." There could therefore be no
doubt that for the first time the United States had acquired
colonies and that the question whether they should develop into
integral parts of the country or into dependencies of an
imperialistic republic was left to the future to decide.

It was but natural that such striking events and important
decisions should loom large as factors in the following
presidential campaign. The Republicans endorsed the
Administration, emphatically stated that the independence and
self-government of Cuba must be secured, and, with reference to
the other islands, declared that "the largest measure of
self-government consistent with their welfare and our duties
shall be secured to them by law." The Democrats asserted that "no
nation can long endure half republic and half empire," and
favored "an immediate declaration of the Nation's purpose to give
the Filipinos, first, a stable form of government; second,
independence; and third, protection from outside interference
such as has been given for nearly a century to the republics of
Central and South America." The Democrats were at a disadvantage
owing to the fact that, since so much had been irrevocably
accomplished, they could not raise the whole issue of colonial
expansion but only advocate a different policy for the handling
of what seemed to most people to be details. The distrust which
their financial program of 1896 had excited, moreover, still hung
over them and repelled many voters who might have supported them
on questions of foreign and colonial policies. Nevertheless the
reflection of President McKinley by a greatly increased majority
must be taken as indicating that the American people generally
approved of his policies and accepted the momentous changes which
had been brought about by the successful conclusion of the war
with Spain.


CHAPTER XIII. A Peace Which Meant War

In a large way, ever since the Spanish War, the United States has
been adjusting its policy to the world conditions of which that
struggle first made the people aware. The period between 1898 and
1917 will doubtless be regarded by the historian a hundred years
from now as a time of transition similar to that between 1815 and
1829. In that earlier period John Marshall and John Quincy Adams
did much by their wisdom and judgment to preserve what was of
value in the old regime for use in the new. In the later period
John Hay performed, though far less completely, a somewhat
similar function.

John Hay had an acquaintance with the best traditions of American
statesmanship which falls to the lot of few men. He was private
secretary to Lincoln during the Civil War, he had as his most
intimate friend in later life Henry Adams, the historian, who
lived immersed in the memories and traditions of a family which
has taken a distinguished part in the Government of the United
States from its beginning. Possessed of an ample fortune, Hay had
lived much abroad and in the society of the men who governed
Europe. He was experienced in newspaper work and in diplomacy,
and he came to be Secretary of State fresh from a residence in
England where as Ambassador he had enjoyed wide popularity. With
a lively wit and an engaging charm of manner, he combined a
knowledge of international law and of history which few of our
Secretaries have possessed. Moreover he knew men and how to
handle them. Until the death of McKinley in 1901 he was left
almost free in the administration of his office. He once said
that the President spoke to him of his office scarcely once a
month. In the years from 1901 to 1905 he worked under very
different conditions, for President Roosevelt discussed affairs
of state with him daily and took some matters entirely into his
own hands.

Hay found somewhat better instruments to work with than most
Americans were inclined to believe probable. It is true that the
American diplomatic service abroad has not always reflected
credit upon the country. It has contained extremely able and
distinguished men but also many who have been stupid, ignorant,
and ill-mannered. The State Department in Washington, however,
has almost escaped the vicissitudes of politics and has been
graced by the long and disinterested service of competent
officials. From 1897 to 1913, moreover, the service abroad was
built up on the basis of continuity and promotion.

One sign of a new epoch was the changed attitude of the American
public toward annexation. While the war was in progress the
United States yielded to the desires of Hawaii, and annexed the
islands as a part of the United States, with the hope of their
eventual statehood. In 1899 the United States consented to change
the cumbrous and unsuccessful arrangement by which, in
partnership with Great Britain and Germany, it had supervised the
native government of Samoa. No longer unwilling to acquire
distant territories, the United States took in full possession
the island of Tutuila, with its harbor of Pago Pago, and
consented to Germany's taking the remainder of the islands, while
Great Britain received compensation elsewhere. In 1900 the
Government paid over to Spain $100,000 for Sibutu and Cagayan
Sulu, two islands really belonging to the Philippines but
overlooked in the treaty. Proud of the navy and with a new
recognition of its necessities, the United States sought naval
stations in those areas where the fleet might have to operate. In
the Pacific the Government obtained Midway and Wake islands in
1900. In the West Indies, the harbor of Guantanamo was secured
from Cuba, and in 1903 a treaty was made with Denmark for the
purchase of her islands--which, however, finally became American
possessions only in 1917.

By her policy toward Cuba, the United States gave the world a
striking example of observing the plighted word even when
contrary to the national interest. For a century the United
States had expected to acquire the "Pearl of the Antilles." Spain
in the treaty of peace refused to recognize the Cuban Government
and relinquished the island into the hands of the United States.
The withdrawal of the Spanish troops left the Cuban Government
utterly unable to govern, and the United States was forced to
occupy the island. Nevertheless the Government had begun the war
with a recognition of Cuban independence and to that declaration
it adhered. The country gave the best of its talent to make the
islands self-governing as quickly as possible. Harvard University
invited Cuban teachers to be its guests at a summer session.
American medical men labored with a martyr's devotion to stamp
out disease. General Wood, as military governor, established
order and justice and presided over the evolution of a convention
assembled to draft a constitution for the people of Cuba and to
determine the relations of the United States and Cuba. These
relations, indeed, were already under consideration at Washington
and were subsequently embodied in the Platt Amendment.* This
measure directed the President to leave the control of Cuba to
the people of the island as soon as they should agree to its
terms. It also required that the Government of Cuba should never
allow a foreign power to impair its independence; that it would
contract no debt for which it could not provide a sinking fund
from the ordinary revenue; that it would grant to the United
States "lands necessary for coaling or naval stations"; that it
would provide for the sanitation of its cities; and that the
United States should have the right to intervene, "for the
preservation of Cuban independence, the maintenance of a
government adequate for the protection of life, property, and
individual liberty, and for discharging" certain obligations with
respect to Spanish subjects which the United States had assumed
in the treaty signed at Paris. By night I felt almost
confident we could, and I really slept some. Next day I
expected to make land, but, of course, had little idea how far I
might really be from my reckoning. Nevertheless, we sighted ----
Light about where I expected to, and laid a course from there into
the harbor. It was a rather thick, foggy day, and pretty soon I
noted a cunning little rock or two, dead ahead, where they didn't
by any means belong. So I rather hurriedly arrested further progress,
took soundings, and bearings of different landmarks, and found
that we were some twenty-five miles from our reckoning--so far,
in fact, as to have picked up the next light-house instead of the
one we thought.

After this 'twas plain sailing, though I had never been into that
port before.

Made it about noon, took possession of a convenient mooring-buoy
inside the breakwater--which buoy I found out later was
sacred to the French flag-ship or somebody like that--called on
our Admiral there, and was among friends. Yes, by heck, I let 'em
buy me a drink at the club--I needed it! Had oil enough left for
just about an hour more!

Copyright, Atlantic Monthly, April, 1918.

* * * * *
While the great campaigns were being waged on the western fronts,
there was being carried on in a more remote part of the world
a series of operations which involved as hard fighting and as many
difficulties as were encountered in any other field of action.

The campaigns in East Africa which resulted in driving the Germans
from their former colonies are described in the following
narrative.

EAST AFRICA
JAN CHRISTIAAN SMUTS

[Sidenote: Learned South Africa in The Boer War.]
In the strenuous days of the Boer War I learned to know my South
Africa from the Indian to the Atlantic Ocean as one learns a
country only under the searching test of war. I came to know the
unfrequented paths, the trackless parts of the bush, the wastes
where people do not often go. I believe it is generally admitted
that I covered more country than any other commander in the field
on either side--and my movement was not always in the
direction of the enemy!

[Sidenote: Obtaining water on the Kalahari Desert.]
When the present war broke out, I proceeded once more
on my extensive travels, and I became something of an expert
in the waterless, sandy wastes of the southern half of German
Southwest Africa. As for the Kalahari Desert, over which the
movement of men and transport was supposed to be quite impossible,
we did not rest until we had sunk bore-holes for water for
hundreds of miles, and until we had moved a large force of thousands
of mounted men across an area in which it was thought no
human being could ever move.

One of the reasons of our success in that campaign was that, moving
through the Kalahari Desert, we struck the enemy country at its
very heart. The travels of Livingstone, of Selous, who was
a comrade of mine in this war, and of other illustrious men in
those vast solitudes of southern Africa were as joy-rides to
what we had to undergo in conducting a big campaign against the
enemy, and still more against nature.

[Sidenote: A campaign in East Africa.]
[Sidenote: Careful study of topography necessary.]
[Sidenote: Books of travelers all wrong.]

When that campaign was over, and I thought my traveling days were
past, the call came to East Africa, and 1916 was spent in
traveling over the vast tropical expanses of that fascinating
country. I need scarcely say that a military commander has often
very special opportunities of learning geography. He has to
study the country with the eyes not of the scientist or the traveler
or the hunter, but of the soldier responsible for the lives and
the movements and supplies of large masses of men. It is one
thing to follow the track of the elephant or to stalk the lion
or antelope or to collect butterflies or other gorgeous
things; it is quite a different and, from the point of view
of learning geography, certainly a far more enlightening, task to
lead a large army over those virgin solitudes, where your
problem involves the careful study not only of topographical
features, but of all the numerous natural conditions which affect
your progress. To provide for the needs of a small _safari_ may
be a light or delightful task; but the difficulties and
requirements of a large force, moving forward against an alert,
ubiquitous foe, compel you to probe into everything: the nature of
the country, with its mountains and rivers, forests and deserts,
for scores of miles around; its animal and human diseases; its
capacity for supplies and transport; its climate and soil and
rainfall. And one of your first discoveries is that the books of
the travelers are mostly wrong. What to them was perhaps a paradise
of plant or animal life is to you, moving with your vast impedimenta,
a veritable purgatory.In March, General MacArthur began to move to the north, and on
the last day of that month he entered Malolos. On the 23d of
April he pushed farther northward toward Calumpit, where the
Filipino generalissimo, Luna, had prepared a position which he
declared to be impregnable. This brief campaign added a new
favorite to the American roll of honor, for it was here that
Colonel Funston, at the head of his gallant Kansans, crossed the
rivers Bag-bag and Rio Grande, under circumstances that gave the
individual American soldier a prestige in the eyes of the
Filipinos and a reputation which often ran far ahead of the army.

General Luna had torn up the ties and rails of the steel railroad
bridge over the Bag-bag, and had let down the span next the far
bank. Thus cut off from attack by a deep river two hundred feet
wide, the Filipino commander had entrenched his forces on the
farther side. Shielded by fields of young corn and bamboo
thickets, the Americans approached the bank of the river. A naval
gun on an armored train bombarded the Filipinos but could not
silence their trenches. It was therefore necessary to cross an
the bridge, and under fire. General Wheaton ordered Colonel
Funston to seize the bridge. With about ten men Funston rushed
the nearer end which stood in the open. Working themselves along
the girders, the men finally reached the broken span. Beyond
that, swimming was the only method of reaching the goal. Leaving
their guns behind them, Colonel Funston and three others swung
themselves off the bridge and into the stream. Quite unarmed, the
four landed and rushed the nearest trenches. Fortunately these
had been abandoned under American fire, and rifles and cartridges
had been left behind. Thus this aquatic charge by unarmed men
secured the bridge and enabled the American troops to cross.

Not far beyond was the Rio Grande, four hundred feet broad and
crossed by another railroad bridge that must be taken. Here again
the task was entrusted to Colonel Funston and the Twentieth
Kansas. This time they found an old raft. Two privates stripped
and swam across with a rope. Landing unarmed on the enemy's side
of the river, they fastened their rope to a part of the very
trench works of the Filipinos. With this connection established,
Colonel Funston improvised a ferry and was soon on the enemy's
side with supports. A stiff, unequal fight remained, as the ferry
carried but six men on each trip. The bank was soon won, however,
and the safe crossing of the army was assured. Such acts gave the
natives a respect for Americans as fighting men, which caused it
to be more and more difficult for the Filipino commanders to
bring their forces to battle in the open.

General Lawton in the meantime was conducting a brilliant
movement to the eastward. After breaking the enemy forces, he
returned to Manila and then marched southward into the Tagalog
country, where on the 13th of June, at Zapoti Bridge, he won the
most stoutly contested battle of the insurrection. The successful
conclusion of these operations brought the most civilized part of
the island under American control.

The fighting now became scattered and assumed gradually a
guerrilla character. The abler commanders of the American forces
found their way to the top, and the troops, with their natural
adaptability, constantly devised new methods of meeting new
situations. A war of strangely combined mountain and sea
fighting, involving cavalry and infantry and artillery, spread
over the islands in widening circles and met with lessening
resistance. An indication of the new character of the war was
given by the change of the military organization, in April, 1900,
from one of divisions and brigades, to a geographical basis. Each
commander was now given charge of a certain area and used his men
to reduce this district to order.

The insurgents fought in small groups and generally under local
chieftains. Their advantage lay in their thorough knowledge of
the country and in the sympathy of a part of the population and
the fear of another part, for outlaws living in concealment and
moving in the dark can often inspire a terror which regular
troops under discipline fail to engender. The Americans could not
trust the natives, as it was impossible to tell the truthful from
the treacherous. Nevertheless it was a kind of fighting which
gave unusual scope for that American individualism, so strongly
represented in the army, to which the romance of precisely this
sort of thing had drawn just the class of men best fitted for the
work. Scouting, counter scouting, surprise attacks, and
ambuscades formed the daily news transmitted from the front--
affairs not of regiments and companies but of squads and
individuals. When face to face, however, the Filipinos seldom
stood their ground, and the American ingenuity and eager
willingness to attempt any new thing gradually got the better of
the local knowledge and unscrupulousness as to the laws of war
which had at first, given the natives an advantage. Funston, now
Brigadier General, and his "suicide squad" continued to play an
active part, but a similar spirit of daring and ingenuity
pervaded the whole army.

Broken as were the Filipino field forces and widening as was the
area of peace, the result of the island campaign was still
uncertain. It rested upon two unknown quantities. The first was
the nature of the Filipinos. Would they remain irreconcilable,
ever ready to take advantage of a moment of weakness? If such
were to be the case, we could look for no real conquest, but only
a forcible occupation, which the people of the United States
would never consent to maintain. The second unknown quantity was
the American people themselves. Would they sustain the occupation
sufficiently long to give a reasonable test of the possibilities
of success?

Two events brought these uncertainties to an end. In the first
place, William Jennings Bryan was defeated for the presidency in
November, 1900, and President McKinley was given four more years
in which to complete the experiment. In the second place, on
March 23, 1901, Aguinaldo, who had been long in concealment, was
captured. Though there had long been no possibility of really
commanding the insurgent forces as a whole, Aguinaldo had
remained the center of revolt and occasionally showed his hand,
as in the attempt to negotiate a peace on the basis of
independence. In February an intercepted letter had given a clue
to his hiding place. Funston, in spite of his new rank,
determined personally to undertake the capture. The signature of
Lacuna, one of the insurgent leaders, was forged and letters were
sent to Aguinaldo informing him of the capture of five Americans,
who were being sent to headquarters. Among the five was Funston
himself. The "insurgent" guard, clad in captured uniforms,
consisted for the most part of Macabebes, hereditary enemies of
the Tagalogs--for the Americans had now learned the Roman trick
of using one people against another. The ruse succeeded
perfectly. The guard and its supposed prisoners were joyfully
received by Aguinaldo, but the tables were quickly turned and
Aguinaldo's capture was promptly effected.

On the 19th of April, Aguinaldo wrote: "After mature
deliberation, I resolutely proclaim to the world that I cannot
refuse to heed the voice of a people longing for peace, nor the
lamentations of thousands of families yearning to see their dear
ones enjoying the liberty and promised generosity of the great
American nation. By acknowledging and accepting the sovereignty
of the United States throughout the Philippine Archipelago, as I
now do, and without any reservation whatsoever, I believe that I
am serving thee, my beloved country."

On the 19th of May, General Wheaton, Chief of Staff in the
Philippines, sent the following dispatch to Washington: "Lacuna
having surrendered with all his officers and men today, I report
that all insurrectionary leaders in this department have been
captured or have surrendered. This is the termination of the
state of war in this department so far as armed resistance to the
authority of the United States is concerned."

There was subsequent fighting with other tribes and in other
islands, particularly with the Moros of the Sulu group, but by
the time Aguinaldo had accepted American rule, the uncertainty of
the American people had been resolved, and the execution of the
treaty with Spain had been actually accomplished. As seventy
thousand troops were no longer needed in the islands, the
volunteers and many of the regulars were sent home, and there
began an era of peace such as the Philippines had never before
known.

During the suppression of the insurrection the American Army had
resorted to severe measures, though they by no means went to the
extremes that were reported in the press. It was realized,
however, that the establishment of a permanent peace must rest
upon an appeal to the good will and self-interest of the natives.
The treatment of the conquered territories, therefore, was a
matter of the highest concern not only with reference to the
public opinion at home but to the lasting success of the military
operations which had just been concluded.

There was as yet no law in the United States relating to the
government of dependencies. The entire control of the islands
therefore rested, in the first instance, with the President and
was vested by him, subject to instructions, in the Military
Governor. The army fortunately reflected fully the democratic
tendencies of the United States as a whole. In June, 1899,
General Lawton encouraged and assisted the natives in setting up
in their villages governing bodies of their own selection. In
August, he issued a general order, based upon a law of the
islands, providing for a general system of local government into
which there was introduced for the first time the element of
really popular election. In 1900, a new code of criminal
procedure, largely the work of Enoch Herbert Crowder, at that
time Military Secretary, was promulgated, which surrounded the
accused with practically all the safeguards to which the
Anglo-Saxon is accustomed except jury trial, for which the people
were unprepared.

To advise with regard to a permanent system of government for the
Philippines President McKinley appointed in January, 1899, a
commission consisting of Jacob G. Schurman, President of Cornell
University, Dean C. Worcester, who had long been engaged in
scientific research in the Philippines, Colonel Charles Denby,
for many years previously minister to China, Admiral Dewey, and
General E. S. Otis. Largely upon their recommendation, the
President appointed a second commission, headed by Judge William
Howard Taft to carry on the work of organizing civil government
which had already begun under military direction and gradually to
take over the legislative power. The Military Governor was to
continue to exercise executive power. In 1901, Congress at length
took action, vesting all military, civil, and judicial powers in
such persons as the President might appoint to govern the
islands. McKinley immediately appointed Judge Taft to the new
governorship thus authorized. In 1901 in the "Insular Cases" the
Supreme Court also gave its sanction to what had been done. In
legislation for the territories, it held that Congress was not
bound by all the restrictions of the Constitution, as, for
instance, that requiring jury trial; that Porto Rico and the
Philippines were neither foreign countries nor completely parts
of the United States, though Congress was at liberty to
incorporate them into the Union.

There was, however, no disposition to incorporate the Philippines
into the United States, but there has always been a widespread
sentiment that the islands should ultimately be given their
independence, and this sentiment has largely governed the
American attitude toward them. A native Legislature was
established in 1907 under Governor Taft,* and under the Wilson
Administration the process toward independence has been
accelerated, and dates begin to be considered. The process of
preparation for independence has been threefold: the development
of the physical well-being of the islands, the education of the
islanders, and the gradual introduction of the latter into
responsible positions of government. The Cathedral of
Salerno was founded and dedicated to St. Matthew in 1084 by Robert
Guiscard, who plundered the temples of Paestum of their marbles
and sculptures to embellish it.

The two pulpits and that in the choir in front of the archbishop's
throne, which are said to have been executed by order of John of
Procida, are fine examples of the rich mosaic work of the
period. The two large pulpits are placed in the nave, before the
choir, which here has retained its original position in front
of the high altar. Stairs opening out of the choir, finely
decorated in mosaic, lead to each pulpit. In front of the larger
one on the right is a fine Paschal candelabrum, decorated
in mosaic. The pulpit itself is supported on twelve granite
columns, while the four supports of the opposite ambo are the very
rare black porphyry called _Porfido Nero-Bianco._ The raised space
between is paved in Opus Alexandrinum.

[Illustration: LXVIII. Pulpit in the Cathedral, Ravello.]

The Cathedral at Ravello, dedicated to S. Pantaleo, was founded
by Niccolo Rufolo, Duke of Sora and grand admiral under Count
Roger of Sicily.

The marble pulpit, or Gospel ambo, inlaid with mosaics, was
built, according to a Latin inscription which it bears, in the
year 1272, at the cost of Niccolo Rufolo, a descendant of the grand
admiral.

Another inscription records the fact that it was the work of Nicholas,
the son of Bartolommeus of Foggia.

[Illustration: LXIX. Ambo in the Cathedral, Ravello.]

The Epistle ambo, situated on the opposite side of the church
from the main pulpit, is of earlier date than the latter.
The mosaics represent on one side Jonah being swallowed by the
whale, and on the other his being ejected. It bears the name of
Costantino Rogadeo, the second bishop of Ravello, and
probably dates from about 1130.

[Illustration: LXX. Pulpit in the Church of S. Giovanni, Ravello.]

The church of San Giovanni del Toro also dates from the time of
King Roger. The story of Jonah will be seen again depicted
here.

[Illustration: LXXI. Ambo in S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura, Rome.]

The Basilica of S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura was originally only an
oratory over the Catacombs of S. Cyriaca, and was said to have
been founded by Constantine about A.D. 330. It was enlarged
and partly rebuilt in the fifth and sixth centuries, and in
1216 was again remodeled by Honorius III, who built the present
long nave and its portico, raised the chancel, and filled up with
rubbish the lower church. It is thus a grand collection of details
of various periods, but all of much interest.

Its two ambos stand on each side of the raised portion of the
floor which corresponds to the choir in the Basilica of Honorius.
The Gospel was chanted from the one on the south side with
the reading desk turned towards the choir; and the Epistle
from the one on the north, with a single desk towards the
high altar. Before the Gospel ambo is a fine mosaic candelabrum
standing on a Roman cippus reversed, having an olive branch and
birds sculptured on it.

The pavement as well as the work upon these two ambos is in
the style of the Cosmati.

[Illustration: LXXII. Pulpit in the Cathedral at Messina, Sicily.]

The Cathedral (S.M. Nuova) was founded by Count Roger in 1098,
and was finished by his son Roger. The interior is 305 feet in
length, and is a Latin cross with three aisles, separated by
twenty-six columns of Egyptian granite said to have been taken from
the temple of Neptune at Faro; they have gilt Corinthian capitals.

The roof is of wood and is a restoration by King Manfred of an
ancient roof burned in 1254 at the funeral of Conrad, son
of Emperor Frederick II, the canopy over the corpse having been
so high that the lights by which it was crowned set fire to the
rafters. The three apses are filled with fine mosaics.
The pulpit of white marble is attributed to Gogini, and the font
near it to Gaddo Gaddi of Florence.

* * * * *
Competition for Advertising Design.
The publishers of THE BROCHURE SERIES will give three prizes, valued
at $5.00 each, for the best three designs for a full-page advertisement
of the Boynton Furnace Co. These prizes will be:--
1. A complete set of Volume I of the _Architectural Review_ (see
advertisement in front pages of this number for description).
2. A subscription to Volume IV of the _Architectural Review_.
3. Details of Decorative Sculpture, both Italian and French Renaissance
(2 books).Japan had come of age in 1894 when, following the
example of Great Britain, the various powers had released her
from the obligation of exterritoriality imposed upon her by
treaties when their subjects were unwilling to trust themselves
to her courts. It was still uncertain, however, whether the
assumption of European methods by Japan was real, and her
position as a great power was not yet established. In the very
moment of her triumph over China she was forced to submit to the
humiliation of having the terms of peace supervised by a concert
of powers and of having many of the spoils of her victory torn
from her.

The chief fruits that remained to Japan from her brilliant
military victory were Formosa and the recognition of the
separation of Korea from China: These acquisitions gave her an
opportunity to show her capacity for real expansion, but whether
she would be able to hold her prize was yet to be proven. The
European states, however, claimed that by the Japanese victories
the balance of power in the Orient had been upset and that it
must be adjusted. The obvious method was for each power to demand
something for itself. In 1898 Germany secured a lease of
Kiao-chau Bay across the Yellow Sea from Korea, which she at once
fortified and where she proceeded to develop a port with the hope
of commanding the trade of all that part of China. Russia in the
same way secured, somewhat farther to the north, Port Arthur and
Talien-wan, and proceeded to build Dalny as the commercial outlet
of her growing railroad. Great Britain immediately occupied
Wei-hai-wei, which was midway between the German and Russian
bases and commanded from the south the entrance to Pekin, and
also, much farther to the south, Mirs Bay, which gave security to
her commercial center at Hong-kong. France took Kwang-chau, still
farther to the south, and Italy received Sanmen, somewhat to the
south of the Yangtszekiang. From these ports each power hoped to
extend a sphere of influence. It was axiomatic that such a sphere
would be most rapidly developed and most solidly held if special
tariff regulations were devised to throw the trade into the hands
of the merchants of the nation holding the port. The next step,
therefore, in establishing the solidity of an Asiatic base, would
be the formulation of special tariffs. The result would be the
practical division of China into districts having different and
opposed commercial interests.

The United States did not arrive in this energetic company as an
entire stranger. With both China and Japan her relations had long
been intimate and friendly. American merchants had traded ginseng
and furs for China silks and teas ever since the United States
had been a nation. In 1786 the Government had appointed a
commercial agent at Canton and in 1844 had made one of the first
commercial treaties with China. In 1854 the United States had
been the point of the foreign wedge that opened Japan to western
civilization and inaugurated that amazing period of national
reorganization and assimilation which has given the Japanese
Empire her place in they world today. American missionaries had
labored long and disinterestedly for the moral regeneration of
both China and Japan with results which are now universally
recognized as beneficial, though in 1900 there was still among
the Chinese much of that friction which is the inevitable
reaction from an attempt to change the fundamentals of an ancient
faith and long-standing habits. American merchants, it is true,
had been of all classes, but at any rate there had always been a
sufficient leaven of those of the highest type to insure a
reasonable reputation.

The conduct of the American Government in the Far East had been
most honorable and friendly. The treaty with Japan in 1858
contained the clause: "The President of the United States, at the
request of the Japanese Government, will act as a friendly
mediator in such matters of difference as may arise between the
Government of Japan and any European power." Under Seward the
United States did, indeed, work in concert with European powers
to force the opening of the Shimonoseki Straits in 1864, and a
revision of the tariff in 1866. Subsequently, however, the United
States cooperated with Japan in her effort to free herself from
certain disadvantageous features of early treaties. In 1883 the
United States returned the indemnity received at the time of the
Shimonoseki affair--an example of international equity almost
unique at the time but subsequently paralleled in American
relations with China. The one serious difficulty existing in the
relationships of the United States with both China and Japan
resulted from an unwillingness to receive their natives as
immigrants when people of nearly every other country were
admitted. The American attitude had already been expressed in the
Chinese Exclusion Act. As yet the chief difficulty was with that
nation, but it was inevitable that such distinctions would prove
particularly galling to the rising spirit of the Japanese.

John Hay was keenly aware of the possibilities involved in these
Far Eastern events. Of profound moment under any circumstances,
they were doubly so now that the United States was territorially
involved. To take a slice of this Eastern area was a course quite
open to the United States and one which some of the powers at
least would have welcomed. Hay, however, wrote to Paul Dana on
March 16, 1899, as follows: "We are, of course, opposed to the
dismemberment of that empire [China], and we do not think that
t2he public opinion of the United States would justify this
Government in taking part in the great game of spoliation now
going on." He felt also that the United States should not tie its
hands by "formal alliances with other Powers interested," nor was
he prepared "to assure China that we would join her in repelling
that demand by armed force."

It remained, then, for the Secretary of State to find a lever for
peaceful interference on the part of his country and a plan for
future operations. The first he found in the commercial interest
of the United States. Since the Government refrained from
pressing for special favors in any single part of the Chinese
Empire, it could demand that American interests be not infringed
anywhere. The Secretary of State realized that in a democracy
statesmen cannot overlook the necessity of condensing their
policies into popular catchwords or slogans. Today such phrases
represent in large measure the power referred to in the old
saying: "Let me make the songs of a nation, and I care not who
makes its laws." The single phrase, "scrap of paper," probably
cost Germany more than any one of her atrocious deeds in the
Great War. Hay's policy with regard to China had the advantage of
two such phrases. The "golden rule," however, proved less lasting
than the "open door," which was coined apparently in the
instructions to the Paris Peace Commission. This phrase expressed
just what the United States meant. The precise plan of the
American Government was outlined and its execution undertaken in
a circular note of September 6, 1899, which the Secretary of
State addressed to London, Berlin, and St. Petersburg. In this he
asked the powers to agree to respect all existing open ports and
established interests within their respective spheres, to enforce
the Chinese tariff and no other, and to refrain from all
discrimination in port and railroad charges. To make such a
proposal to the European powers required courage. In its
essential elements the situation in the Far East was not unlike
the internal economic condition prevailing at the same time in
the United States. In this country great transportation
monopolies had been built up, having an enormous capitalization,
and many of them were dependent for their profits on the
advantage of price fixing that monopoly may be expected to bring.
Then state and nation stepped in and asserted their right to fix
prices in the interest of the consumer. The consequent political
struggles illustrate the difficulties besetting the Secretary of
State in his somewhat similar attempt to take the chief fruits
from the powers which had just acquired Chinese territory--an
undertaking in which he had none of the support of legal powers
effective in the United States.

That Hay so promptly succeeded in putting at least a toe in the
door which he wished to open was due to a number of
circumstances. Great Britain, devoted to the principle of free
trade, heartily approved of his proposal and at once accepted its
terms. The other powers expressed their sympathy with the ideas
of the note, but, in the case of Russia at least, without the
faintest intention of paying any heed to it. Hay promptly
notified each power of the others' approval and stated that, with
this unanimous consent, he would regard its acceptance of the
proposals as "final and definitive."

The force which Hay had used was the moral influence of world
opinion. None of the powers dared, with its hands fresh filled
with Chinese plunder, openly to assert that it had taken the
spoils for selfish reasons alone--at least, after another power
had denied such purpose. Hay saw and capitalized the force of
conventional morality which, however superficial in many cases,
had influenced the European powers, particularly since the time
of the Holy Alliance. Accustomed to clothe their actions in the
garb of humanitarianism, they were not, when caught thus
red-handed, prepared to be a mark of scorn for the rest of the
world. The cult of unabashed might was still a closet philosophy
which even Germany, its chief devotee, was not yet ready to avow
to the world. Of course Hay knew that the battle was not won, for
the bandits still held the booty. He was too wise to attempt to
wrench it from them, for that indeed would have meant battle for
which the United States was not prepared in military strength or
popular intention. He had merely pledged these countries to use
their acquisitions for the general good. Though the promises
meant little in themselves, to have exacted them was an initial
step toward victory.

In the meantime the penetration of foreign influences into China
was producing a reaction. A wave of protest against the "foreign
devils" swept through the population and acquired intensity from
the acts of fanatic religious leaders. That strange character,
the Dowager Empress, yielded to the "Boxers," who obtained
possession of Pekin, cut off the foreigners from the outside
world, and besieged them in the legations. That some such
movement was inevitable must have been apparent to many European
statesmen, and that it would give them occasion, by interference
and punishment, to solidify their "spheres of influence" must
have occurred to them. The "open door" was in as immediate peril
as were the diplomats in Pekin.

Secretary Hay did not, however, yield to these altered
circumstances. Instead, he built upon the leadership which he had
assumed. He promptly accepted the international responsibility
which the emergency called for. The United States at once agreed
to take its share, in cooperation with the Great Powers, in
whatever measures should be judged necessary. The first obvious
measure was to relieve the foreign ministers who were besieged in
Pekin. American assistance was active and immediate. By the
efforts of the American Government, communication with the
legations was opened; the American naval forces were soon at
Tientsin, the port of Pekin; and five or six thousand troops were
hastily sent from the Philippines. The United States therefore
bore its full proportion of the task. The largest contingent of
the land forces was, indeed, from Germany, and the command of the
whole undertaking was by agreement given to the German commander,
Graf von Waldersee. Owing, however, to his remoteness from the
scene of action, he did not arrive until after Pekin had been
reached and the relief of the legations, which was the first if
not the main object of the expedition, had been accomplished.
After this, the resistance of the Chinese greatly decreased and
the country was practically at the mercy of the concert of
powers.

By thus bearing its share in the responsibilities of the
situation, the United States had won a vote in determining the
result. Secretary Hay, however, had not waited for the military
outcome, and he aimed not at a vote in the concert of powers but
at its leadership. While the international expedition was
gathering its forces, he announced in a circular note that "the
policy of the Government of the United States is to seek a
solution which may bring about permanent safety and peace to
China, preserve Chinese territorial and administrative entity,
protect all rights guaranteed to friendly powers by treaty and
international law, and safeguard for the world the principle of
equal and impartial trade with all parts of the Chinese Empire."
To this position he requested the powers to assent.

Again Hay had hit upon a formula which no self-respecting power
could deny. Receiving from practically all a statement of their
purpose to preserve the "integrity" of China and the "Open Door"
just when they were launching the greatest military movement ever
undertaken in the Far East by the western world, he made it
impossible to turn punishment into destruction and partition. The
legations were saved and so was China. After complicated
negotiations an agreement was reached which exacted heavy
pecuniary penalties, and in the case of Germany, whose minister
had been assassinated, a conspicuous and what was intended to be
an enduring record of the crime and its punishment. China,
however, remained a nation--with its door open.

Once more in 1904 the fate of China, and in fact that of the
whole Far East, was thrown into the ring. Japan and Russia
entered into a war which had practically no cause except the
collision of their advancing interests in Chinese territory.
Every land battle of the war, except those of the Saghalien
campaign, was fought in China, Chinese ports were blockaded,
Chinese waters were filled with enemy mines and torpedoes, and
the prize was Chinese territory or territory recently taken from
her. To deny these facts was impossible; to admit them seemed to
involve the disintegration of the empire. Here again Secretary
Hay, devising a middle course, gained by his promptness of action
the prestige of having been the first to speak. On February 8,
1904, he asked Germany, Great Britain, and France to join with
the United States in requesting Japan and Russia to recognize the
neutrality of China, and to localize hostilities within fixed
limits. On January 10, 1905, remembering how the victory of Japan
in 1894 had brought compensatory grants to all the powers, he
sent out a circular note expressing the hope on the part of the
American Government that the war would not result in any
"concession of Chinese territory to neutral powers." Accustomed
now to these invitations which decency forbade them to refuse,
all the powers assented to this suggestion. The results of the
war, therefore, were confined to Manchuria, and Japan promised
that her occupation of that province should be temporary and that
commercial opportunity therein should be the same for all. The
culmination of American prestige came with President Roosevelt's
offer of the good offices of the United States, on June 8, 1905.
As a result, peace negotiations were concluded in the Treaty of
Portsmouth (New Hampshire) in 1905. For this conspicuous service
to the cause of peace President Roosevelt was awarded the Nobel
prize.

Secretary Hay had therefore, in the seven years following the
real arrival of the United States in the Far East, evolved a
policy which was clear and definite, and one which appealed to
the American people. While it constituted a variation from the
precise methods laid down by President Monroe in 1823, in that it
involved concerted and equal cooperation with the great powers of
the world, Hay's policy rested upon the same fundamental bases: a
belief in the fundamental right of nations to determine their own
government, and the reduction to a minimum of intervention by
foreign powers. To have refused to recognize intervention at all
would have been, under the circumstances, to abandon China to her
fate. In protecting its own right to trade with her, the United
States protected the integrity of China. Hay had, moreover, so
ably conducted the actual negotiations that the United States
enjoyed for the moment the leadership in the concert of powers
and exercised an authority more in accord with her potential than
with her actual strength. Secretary Hay's death in 1905 brought
American leadership to an end, for, though his policies continued
to be avowed by all concerned, their application was thereafter
restricted. The integrity of Chinese territory was threatened,
though not actually violated, by the action of Great Britain in
Tibet and of Japan in Manchuria. Japan, recognized as a major
power since her war with Russia, seemed in the opinion of many to
leave but a crack of the door open in Manchuria, and her
relationship with the United States grew difficult as she
resented more and more certain discriminations against her
citizens which she professed to find in the laws of some of the
American States, particularly in those of California.

In 1908 Elihu Root, who succeeded Hay as Secretary of State,
effected an understanding with Japan. Adopting a method which has
become rather habitual in the relationship between the United
States and Japan, Root and the Japanese ambassador exchanged
notes. In these they both pointed out that their object was the
peaceful development of their commerce in the Pacific; that "the
policy of both governments, uninfluenced by any aggressive
tendencies, is directed to the maintenance of the existing status
quo in the region above mentioned, and to the defense of the
principle of equal opportunity for commerce and industry in
China"; that they both stood for the independence and integrity
of China; and that, should any event threaten the stability of
existing conditions, "it remained for the two governments to
communicate with each other in order to arrive at an
understanding as to what measures they may consider it useful to
take."

Kind, providing cares Which younglings often thoughtlessly receive
Or thankless claim, she gratefully repaid With glad obedience.
Pleas'd was she to bear Precocious part in household industry,
Round shining bars to involve the shortening thread, And see
the stocking grow, or side by side With her loved benefactresses
to work Upon some garment for the ill-clad poor, With busy needle.
As their almoner, 'Twas her delight to seek some lowly hut And
gliding thence, with noiseless footstep, leave With her kind dole,
a wonder whence it came.
--A heavenly blessing wrapp'd its wing around The adopted
orphanage.
Oh ye whose homes Are childless, know ye not some little heart
Collapsing, for the need of parent's love, That ye might
breathe upon? some outcast lamb That ye might shelter in your
fold? content To make the sad eye sparkle, guide the feet In
duty's path, bring a new soul to Heaven, And take your payment
from the Judge's Voice, At the Last Day?
--A tireless tide of joy, A world of pleasure in the garden
bound, Open'd to Leonore. From the first glance Of the frail Crocus
through its snowy sheath, On, to the ripen'd gatherings of the
Grape, And thorn-clad chestnut, all was sweet to her.
She loved to plant the seed and watch the germ, And nurse the
tender leaflet like a babe, And lead the tendril
right. To her they seem'd Like living friends. She sedulously
mark'd Their health and order, and was skill'd to prune The
too luxuriant spray, or gadding vine.
She taught the blushing Strawberry where to run, And stoop'd to
kiss the timid Violet, Blossoming in the shade, and sometimes
dream'd The Lily of the lakelet, calmly throned On its broad leaf,
like Moses in his ark, Spake words to her.

And so, as years fled by, Young Fancy, train'd by Nature, turn'd
to God.
Her clear, Teutonic mind, took hold on truth And found in every
season, change of joy.

--Yet her prime pleasure seem'd at wintry eve Tho' storms might
fall, when from its branching arms The antique candelabra
shed fair light On polished wainscot and rich curtains dropp'd
Close o'er the casements, she might draw her seat Near to her aged
friend and take her hand And frame her voice to join some
tuneful song, Treasuring whate'er of wise remark distill'd
From those loved lips.
Then, as her Mentor spoke Of God's great goodness in this
mortal life, Teaching us both by sorrow and by joy, And how
we ought to yield it back with trust And not with dread, whenever
He should call, Having such precious promises, through Christ
Of gain unspeakable, beyond the grave, The listening pupil
felt her heart expand With reverent love.
Friendship, 'tween youth and age Is gain to both,--nor least to
that which finds The germs of knowledge and experience drop And
twine themselves around the unfrosted locks, A fadeless coronet.
In this sweet home The lengthen'd day seem'd short for their
delights, And wintry evening brief.

The historic page Made vocal, brought large wealth to memory.

The lore of distant climes, that rose and fell Ere our New
World, like Lazarus came forth, The napkin round her forehead, and
sate down Beside her startled sisters.
Last of all, The large time-honor'd Bible loos'd its clasps
And shed its manna on their waiting souls; Then rose the
sacred hymn in blended tones, By Bertha's parlor-organ made
intense In melody of praise, and fervent Prayer Set its
pure crown upon the parted day, And kiss'd the Angel, Sleep.

Yet ere they rose From bended knee, there was a lingering pause, A
silent orison for one whose name But seldom pass'd their lips,
though in their hearts His image with its faults and sorrows
dwelt, Invoking pity of a pardoning God.

--Thus fled the years away, the cultured glebe Stirr'd
by the vernal plough-share, yielding charms To Summer, pouring
wealth o'er Autumn's breast, Pausing from weary toil, when
Winter comes, Bringing its Sabbath, as the man of eld With
snow upon his temples, peaceful sits In his arm-chair, to ruminate
and rest.
* * * * *
Once, at that season when the ices shrink Befere the vernal equinox,
at morn There was no movement in the Lady's room, Who prized the
early hours like molten gold, And ever rose before the kingly
Sun.
--On the white pillow still reposed her head, Her cheek upon her
hand. She had retired In health, affection's words, and trustful
prayers Hallowing her lips.On the accession of President Wilson, the United States promptly
led the way in recognizing the new republic in China. On March
18, 1913, the President announced: "The conditions of the loan
seem to us to touch nearly the administrative independence of
China itself; and this administration does not feel that it
ought, even by implication, to be a party to those conditions."
The former American policy of non-interference was therefore
renewed, but it still remained uncertain whether the entrance of
the United States into Far Eastern politics would do more than
serve to delay the European dominance which seemed to be
impending in 1898.


CHAPTER XV. The Panama Canal

While American troops were threading the mountain passes and the
morasses of the Philippines, scaling the walls of Pekin, and
sunning themselves in the delectable pleasances of the Forbidden
City, and while American Secretaries of State were penning
dispatches which determined the fate of countries on the opposite
side of the globe, the old diplomatic problems nearer home still
persisted. The Spanish War, however, had so thoroughly changed
the relationship of the United States to the rest of the world
that the conditions under which even these old problems were to
be adjusted or solved gave them entirely new aspects. The
American people gradually but effectually began to take foreign
affairs more seriously. As time went on, the Government made
improvements in the consular and diplomatic services. Politicians
found that their irresponsible threatenings of other countries
had ceased to be politically profitable when public opinion
realized what was at stake. Other countries, moreover, began to
take the United States more seriously. The open hostility which
they had shown on the first entrance of this nation into world
politics changed, on second thought, to a desire on their part to
placate and perhaps to win the support of this new and formidable
power.

The attitude of Germany in particular was conspicuous. The Kaiser
sent his brother, Prince Henry, to visit the United States. He
presented the nation with a statue of Frederick the Great and
Harvard with a Germanic museum; he ordered a Herreshoff yacht,
and asked the President's daughter, Alice Roosevelt, to christen
it; he established exchange professorships in the universities;
and he began a campaign aimed apparently at securing for Germany
the support of the entire American people, or, failing that, at
organizing for German purposes the German-born element within the
United States. France sought to revive the memory of her
friendship for the United States during the Revolution by
presenting the nation with a statue of Rochambeau, and she also
established exchange professorships. In England, Cecil Rhodes,
with his great dream of drawing together all portions of the
British race, devoted his fortune to making Oxford the mold where
all its leaders of thought and action should be shaped; and
Joseph Chamberlain and other English leaders talked freely and
enthusiastically of an alliance between Great Britain and the
United States as the surest foundation for world peace.

It need not be supposed, however, that these international
amenities meant that the United States was to be allowed to have
its own way in the world. The friendliness of Great Britain was
indeed sincere. Engaged between 1899 and 1901 in the Boer War,
she appreciated ever more strongly the need for the friendship of
the United States, and she looked with cordial approbation upon
the development of Secretary Hay's policy in China. The British,
however, like the Americans, are legalistically inclined, and
disputes between the two nations are likely to be maintained to
the limit of the law. The advantage of this legal mindedness is
that there has always been a disposition in both peoples to
submit to judicial award when ordinary negotiations have reached
a deadlock. But the real affection for each other which underlay
the eternal bickerings of the two nations had as yet not revealed
itself to the American consciousness. As most of the disputes of
the United States had been with Great Britain, Americans were
always on the alert to maintain all their claims and were
suspicious of "British gold."

It was, therefore, in an atmosphere by no means conducive to
yielding on the part of the United States, though it was one not
antagonistic to good feeling, that the representatives of the two
countries met. John Hay and Sir Julian Pauncefote, whose long
quiet service in this country had made him the first popular
British ambassador, now set about clearing up the problems
confronting the two peoples. The first question which pressed for
settlement was one of boundary. It had already taken ninety years
to draw the line from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and now the
purchase of Alaska by the United States had added new
uncertainties to the international boundary. The claims of both
nations were based on a treaty of 1825 between Great Britain and
Russia. Like most attempts to define boundaries running through
unexplored territories, the treaty terms admitted of two
interpretations. The boundary line from Portland Channel to Mount
St. Elias was stipulated to run everywhere a distance of ten
marine leagues from the coast and to follow its sinuosities. This
particular coast, however, is bitten into by long fiords
stretching far into the country. Great Britain held that these
were not part of the sea in the sense of the treaty and that the
line should cut across them ten marine leagues from the outer
coast line. On the other hand, the United States held that the
line should be drawn ten marine leagues from the heads of these
inlets.

The discovery of gold on the Yukon in 1897 made this boundary
question of practical moment. Action now became an immediate
necessity. In 1899 the two countries agreed upon a modus Vivendi
and in 1903 arranged an arbitration. The arbitrating board
consisted of three members from each of the two nations. The
United States appointed Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, ex-Senator
George Turner, and Elihu Root, then Secretary of War. Great
Britain appointed two Canadians, Louis A. Jette and A. B.
Aylesworth, and Lord Alverstone, Chief Justice of England. Their
decision was in accordance with the principle for which the
United States had contended, though not following the actual line
which it had sketched. It gave the Americans, however, full
control of the coast and its harbors, and the settlement provided
a mutually accepted boundary on every frontier.

With the discovery of gold in the far North, Alaska began a
period of development which is rapidly making that territory an
important economic factor in American life. Today the time when
this vast northern coast was valuable only as the breeding ground
for the fur seal seems long past. Nevertheless the fur seal
continued to be sought, and for years the international
difficulty of protecting the fisheries remained. Finally, in
1911, the United States entered into a joint agreement with Great
Britain, Japan, and Russia, which is actually serving as a sort
of international game law. The problems of Alaska that remain are
therefore those of internal development.

Diplomacy, however, is not concerned solely with sensational
episodes. American ministers and the State Department are engaged
for the most part in the humdrum adjustment of minor differences
which never find their way into the newspapers. Probably more
such cases arise with Great Britain, in behalf of Canada, than
with any other section of the globe. On the American continent
rivers flow from one country into the other; railroads carry
goods across the border and back again; citizens labor now in one
country, now in the other; corporations do business in both. All
these ties not only bind but chafe and give rise to constant
negotiation. More and more Great Britain has left the handling of
such matters to the Canadian authorities, and, while there can be
no interchange of ministers, there is an enormous transaction of
business between Ottawa and Washington.

While there has of late years been little talk of annexation,
there have been many in both countries who have desired to reduce
the significance of the boundary to a minimum. This feeling led
in 1911 to the formulation of a reciprocity agreement, which
Canada, however, was unwilling to accept. Yet, if tariff
restrictions were not removed, other international barriers were
as far as possible done away with. In 1898 a commission was
appointed to agree upon all points of difference. Working slowly
but steadily, the commissioners settled one question after
another, until practically all problems were put upon a permanent
working basis. Perhaps the most interesting of the results of
this activity was the appointment in 1908 of a permanent
International Fisheries Commission, which still regulates that
vexing question.

Another source of international complication arose out of the
Atlantic fisheries off Newfoundland, which is not part of Canada.
It is off these shores that the most important deep-sea fishing
takes place. This fishery was one of the earliest American
sources of wealth, and for nearly two centuries formed a sort of
keystone of the whole commercial life of the United States. When
in 1783 Great Britain recognized American independence, she
recognized also that American fishermen had certain rights off
these coasts. These rights, however, were not sufficient for the
conduct of the fisheries, and so in addition certain "liberties"
were granted, which allowed American fishers to land for the
purpose of drying fish and of doing other things not generally
permitted to foreigners. These concessions in fact amounted to a
joint participation with the British. The rights were permanent,
but the privileges were regarded as having lapsed after the War
of 1812. In 1818 they were partially renewed, certain limited
privileges being conceded. Ever since that date the problem of
securing the additional privileges desired has been a subject for
discussion between Great Britain and the United States. Between
1854 and 1866 the American Government secured them by
reciprocity; between 1872 and 1884 it bought them; after 1888 it
enjoyed them by a temporary modus vivendi arranged under
President Cleveland.

In 1902 Hay arranged with Sir Robert Bond, Prime Minister of
Newfoundland, a new reciprocity agreement. This, however, the
Senate rejected, and the Cleveland agreement continued.
Newfoundland, angry at the rejection of the proposed treaty, put
every obstacle possible in the way of American fishermen and used
methods which the Americans claimed to be contrary to the treaty
terms. After long continued and rather acrimonious discussions,
the matter was finally referred in 1909 to the Hague Court. As in
the Bering Sea case, the court was asked not only to judge the
facts but also to draw up an agreement for the future. Its
decision, on the whole, favored Newfoundland, but this fact is of
little moment compared with the likelihood that a dispute almost
a century and a half old has at last been permanently settled.

None of these international disputes and settlements to the
north, however, excited anything like the popular interest
aroused by one which occurred in the south. The Spanish War made
it abundantly evident that an isthmian canal between the Atlantic
and the Pacific must be built. The arguments of naval strategy
which Captain Mahan had long been urging had received striking
demonstration in the long and roundabout voyage which the Oregon
was obliged to take. The pressure of railroad rates on the trade
of the country caused wide commercial support for a project
expected to establish a water competition that would pull them
down. The American people determined to dig a canal.

The first obstacle to such a project lay in the Clayton-Bulwer
Treaty with Great Britain. That obstacle Blaine had attempted in
vain to remove; in fact his bungling diplomacy had riveted it yet
more closely by making Great Britain maintain it as a point of
honor. To this subject Hay now devoted himself, and as he
encountered no serious difficulties, a treaty was drawn up in
1900 practically as he wished it. It was not, however, popular in
the United States. Hay preferred and arranged for a canal
neutralized by international guarantee, on the same basis as the
Suez Canal; but American public sentiment had come to insist on a
canal controlled absolutely by the United States. The treaty was
therefore rejected by the Senate, or rather was so amended as to
prove unacceptable to Great Britain.

Hay believed that he had obtained what was most desirable as well
as all that was possible, that the majority of the American
people approved, and that he was beaten only because a treaty
must be approved by two-thirds of the Senate. He therefore
resigned. President McKinley, however, refused to accept his
resignation, and he and Lord Pauncefote were soon at work again
on the subject. In 1901 a new treaty was presented to the Senate.
This began by abrogating the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty entirely and
with it brushing away all restrictions upon the activity of the
United States in Central America. It specifically permitted the
United States to "maintain such military police along the canal
as may be necessary to protect it against lawlessness and
disorder." By interpreting this clause as allowing complete
fortification, the United States has made itself the guardian of
the canal. In return for the release from former obligations
which Great Britain thus allowed, the United States agreed that
any canal constructed should be regulated by certain rules which
were stated in the treaty and which made it "free and open to the
vessels of commerce and of war of all nations observing these
Rules, on terms of entire equality," in time of war as well as of
peace. This time the treaty proved satisfactory and was accepted
by the Senate. Thus one more source of trouble was done away
with, and the first obstacle in the way of the canal was removed.

The Clayton-Bulwer Treaty was, however, only a bit of the tangled
jungle which must be cleared before the first American shovel
could begin its work. For over twenty years a contest had been
waged between experts in the United States as to the relative
merits of the Panama and the Nicaragua routes. The latter was the
more popular, perhaps because it seemed at one time that Panama
was preempted by De Lesseps' French company. This contest as to
the better route led to the passage of a law, in 1902, which
authorized the President to acquire the rights and property
needed to construct a canal by the Panama route, on condition
that he could make satisfactory arrangements "within a reasonable
time and upon reasonable terms." Otherwise, Nicaragua was to be
chosen. Theodore Roosevelt was now President and, though at one
time not favoring Panama, he decided that there the canal should
be constructed and with his accustomed vigor set himself to the
task.

The first difficulty presented by this route was the prior right
which the French company still retained, although it had little,
if any, hope of carrying on the construction itself. It possessed
not only rights but also much equipment on the spot, and it had
actually begun excavation at certain points. The purchase of all
its properties complete for $40,000,000 was, therefore, not a bad
investment on the part of the Government. By this purchase the
United States was brought directly into relation with Colombia,
through one of whose federal states, Panama, the canal was to be
cut.

While the French purchase had removed one obstacle, the De
Lesseps charter alone would not suffice for the construction of
the canal, for the American Government had definite ideas as to
the conditions necessary for the success of the work. The
Government required a zone which should be under its complete
control, for not otherwise could satisfactory sanitary
regulations be enforced. It insisted also on receiving the right
to fortify the canal. It must have these and other privileges on
a long time grant. For them, it was willing to pay generously.
Negotiations would be affected, one could not say how, by the
Treaty of 1846 with Colombia,* by which the United States had
received the right of free use of the isthmus, with the right of
maintaining the neutrality of the district and in return had
guaranteed to Colombia sovereignty over the isthmus.