     Ancient custom, to have her ears cut off
     Caught the infection and had to laugh whether she would or no
     Gave them a claim on your person and also on your sorrows
     How could they find so much pleasure in such folly
     Of two evils it is wise to choose the lesser
     Prepared for the worst; then you are armed against failure
     Who can hope to win love that gives none
     Who can take pleasure in always seeing a gloomy face?


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 3.


CHAPTER X.

After the great excitement of the night Paula had thrown herself on her
bed with throbbing pulses. Sleep would not come to her, and so at rather
more than two hours after sunrise she went to the window to close the
shutters. As she did so she looked out, and she saw Hiram leap into a
boat and push the light bark from the shore. She dared neither signal nor
call to him; but when the faithful soul had reached open water he looked
back at her window, recognized her in her white morning dress and
flourished the oar high in the air. This could only mean that he had
fulfilled his commission and sold her jewel. Now he was going to the
other side to engage the Nabathaean.

When she had closed the shutters and darkened the room she again lay
down. Youth asserted its rights the weary girl fell into deep, dreamless
slumbers.

When she woke, with the heat drops on her forehead, the sun was nearly at
the meridian, only an hour till the Ariston would be served, the Greek
breakfast, the first meal in the morning, which the family eat together
as they also did the principal meal later in the clay. She had never yet
failed to appear, and her absence would excite remark.

The governor's household, like that of every Egyptian of rank, was
conducted more on the Greek than the Egyptian plan; and this was the case
not merely as regarded the meals but in many other things, and especially
the language spoken. From the Mukaukas himself down to the youngest
member of the family, all spoke Greek among themselves, and Coptic, the
old native dialect, only to the servants. Nay, many borrowed and foreign
words had already crept into use in the Coptic.

The governor's granddaughter, pretty little Mary, had learnt to speak
Greek fluently and correctly before she spoke Coptic, but when Paula had
first arrived she could not as yet write the beautiful language of Greece
with due accuracy. Paula loved children; she longed for some occupation,
and she had therefore volunteered to instruct the little girl in the art.
At first her hosts had seemed pleased that she should render this
service, but ere long the relation between the Lady Neforis and her
husband's niece had taken the unpleasant aspect which it was destined to
retain. She had put a stop to the lessons, and the reason she had
assigned for this insulting step was that Paula had dictated to her pupil
long sentences out of her Orthodox Greek prayerbook. This, it was true,
she had done; but without the smallest concealment; and the passages she
had chosen had contained nothing but what must elevate the soul of every
Christian, of whatever confession.

The child had wept bitterly over her grandmother's fiat, though Paula had
always taken the lessons quite seriously, for Mary loved her older
companion with all the enthusiasm of a half-grown girl--as a child of ten
really is in Egypt; her passionate little heart worshipped the beautiful
maiden who was in every respect so far above her, and Paula's arms had
opened wide to embrace the child who brought sunshine into the gloomy,
chill atmosphere she breathed in her uncle's house. But Neforis regarded
the child's ardent love for her Melchite relation as exaggerated and
morbid, imperilling perhaps her religious faith; and she fancied that
under Paula's influence Mary had transferred her affections from her to
the younger woman with added warmth. Nor was this idea wholly fanciful;
the child's strong sense of justice could not bear to see her friend
misunderstood and slighted, often simply and entirely misjudged and
hardly blamed, so Mary felt it her duty, as far as in her lay, to make up
for her grandmother's delinquencies in regard to the guest who in the
child's eyes was perfection.

But Neforis was not the woman to put up with this demeanor in a child.
Mary was her granddaughter, the only child of her lost son, and no one
should come between them. So she forbid the little girl to go to Paula's
room without an express message, and when a Greek teacher was engaged for
her, her instructions were that she should keep her pupil as much as
possible out of the Syrian damsel's way. All this only fanned the child's
vehement affection; and tenderly as her grandmother would sometimes
caress her--while Mary on her part never failed in dutiful
obedience--neither of them ever felt a true and steady warmth of heart
towards the other; and for this Paula was no doubt to blame, though
against her will and by her mere existence.

Often, indeed, and by a hundred covert hints Dame Neforis gave Paula to
understand that she it was who had alienated her grandchild; there was
nothing for it but to keep the child for whom she yearned, at a distance,
and only rarely reveal to her the abundance of her love. At last her life
was so full of grievance that she was hardly able to be innocent with the
innocent--a child with the child; Mary was not slow to note this, and
ascribed Paula's altered manner to the suffering caused by her
grandmother's severity.

Mary's most frequent opportunities of speaking to her friend were just
before meals; for at that time no one was watching her, and her
grandmother had not forbidden her calling Paula to table. A visit to her
room was the child's greatest delight--partly because it was
forbidden--but no less because Paula, up in her own room, was quite
different from what she seemed with the others, and because they could
there look at each other and kiss without interference, and say what ever
they pleased. There Mary could tell her as much as she dared of the
events in their little circle, but the lively and sometimes hoydenish
little girl was often withheld from confessing a misdemeanor, or even an
inoffensive piece of childishness, by sheer admiration for one who to her
appeared nobler, greater and loftier than other beings.

Just as Paula had finished putting up her hair, Mary, who would rush like
a whirlwind even into her grandmother's presence, knocked humbly at the
door. She did not fly into Paula's arms as she did into those of Susannah
or her daughter Katharina, but only kissed her white arm with fervent
devotion, and colored with happiness when Paula bent down to her, pressed
her lips to her brow and hair, and wiped her wet, glowing cheeks. Then
she took Mary's head fondly between her hands and said:

"What is wrong with you, madcap?"

In fact the sweet little face was crimson, and her eyes swelled as if she
had been crying violently.

"It is so fearfully hot," said Mary. "Eudoxia"--her Greek
governess--"says that Egypt in summer is a fiery furnace, a hell upon
earth. She is quite ill with the heat, and lies like a fish on the sand;
the only good thing about it is. . ."

"That she lets you run off and gives you no lessons?"

Mary nodded, but as no lecture followed the confession she put her head
on one side and looked up into Paula's face with large roguish eyes.

"And yet you have been crying!--a great girl like you?"

"I--I crying?"

"Yes, crying. I can see it in your eyes. Now confess: what has happened?"

"You will not scold me?"

"Certainly not."

"Well then. At first it was fun, such fun you cannot think, and I do not
mind the heat; but when the great hunt had gone by I wanted to go to my
grand mother and I was not allowed. Do you know, something very
particular had been going on in the fountain-room; and as they all came
out again I crept behind Orion into the tablinum--there are such
wonderful things there, and I wanted just to frighten him a little; we
have often played games together before. At first he did not see me, and
as he was bending over the hanging, from which the gem was stolen--I
believe he was counting the stones in the faded old thing--I just jumped
on to his shoulder, and he was so frightened--I can tell you, awfully
frightened! And he turned upon me like a fighting-cock and--and he gave
me a box on the ear; such a slap, it is burning now--and all sorts of
colors danced before my eyes. He always used to be so nice and kind to
me, and to you, too, and so I used to be fond of him--he is my uncle
too--but a box on the ears, a slap such as the cook might give to the
turnspit--I am too big for that; that I will certainly not put up with
it! Since my last birthday all the slaves and upper servants, too, have
had to treat me as a lady and to bow down to me! And now!--it was just
here.--How dare he?" She began to cry again and sobbed out: "But that was
not all. He locked me into the dark tablinum and left--left me. . . ."
her tears flowed faster and faster, "left me sitting there! It was so
horrible; and I might have been there now if I had not found a gold
plate; I seized my great-grandfather--I mean the silver image of Menas,
and hammered on it, and screamed Fire! Then Sebek heard me and fetched
Orion, and he let me out, and made such a fuss over me and kissed me. But
what is the good of that; my grandfather will be angry, for in my terror
I beat his father's nose quite flat on the plate."

But such utterly unsupported allegations served only to accentuate the
weakness of their cause and the hopelessness of their position;
since it would be difficult, from the origin of the Church to the
present time, to find any Council so free, so representative, and
so unanimous.

Pope Pius IX. (whom, it seems likely, we shall soon be called upon to
venerate as a canonised saint) convened the Vatican Council by the
Bull _Æterni Patris_, published on 29th June, 1868. It summoned all the
Archbishops, Bishops, Patriarchs, etc., throughout the Catholic
world to meet together in Rome on 8th December of the following
year, 1869.

When the appointed day arrived, and the Council was formally opened, there
were present 719 representatives from all parts of the world, and very
soon after, this number was increased to 769.

On 18th July, 1870--a day for ever memorable in the annals of the Church--the
fourth public session was held, and the constitution _Pater Æternus_,
containing the definition of the Papal Infallibility, was solemnly
promulgated. Of the 535 who were present on this grand occasion, 533 voted
for the definition (_placet_) and only two, one from Sicily, the other
from the United States, voted against it (_non placet_).
Fifty-five Bishops, who fully accepted the doctrine itself, but deemed
its actual definition at that moment inopportune, simply absented
themselves from this session. Finally, the Holy Father, in the exercise
of his supreme authority, sanctioned the decision of the Council,
and proclaimed officially, _urbi et orbi_ the decrees and the canons of
the "First Dogmatic Constitution of the Church of Christ".

It may be well here to clothe the Latin words of the Pope and the
assembled Bishops in an English dress.

They are as follows: "We (the Sacred Council approving) teach and
define that it is a dogma revealed, that the Roman Pontiff, _when_ he
speaks _ex cathedrâ_--that is, when discharging the office of
Pastor and Teacher of all Christians, by reason of his supreme
Apostolic authority, he defines a doctrine regarding faith or morals
to be held by the whole Church--in virtue of the Divine assistance
promised to him in Blessed Peter, possesses that Infallibility with
which the Divine Redeemer willed that His Church should be endowed
in defining doctrine regarding faith or morals, and that, therefore,
such definitions of the said Sovereign Pontiff are unalterable of
themselves, and not from the consent of the Church.

But if any one--which may God avert--presume to contradict this our
definition, let him be anathema."
"_Every Bishop in the Catholic world_, however inopportune some may have
at one time held the definition to be, submitted to the Infallible
ruling of the Church," says E.S. Purcell. "A very small and insignificant
number of priests and laymen in Germany apostatised and set up the Sect
of 'Old Catholics'. But all the rest of the Catholic world, true to
their faith, accepted, without reserve, the dogma of Papal
Infallibility

."[4]
For over eighteen hundred years the Infallible authority of the Pope-in-Council
had been admitted by all Catholics. And in any great emergency or
crisis in the Church's history, these Councils were actually held, and
presided over by the Pope, either in person or by his duly appointed
representatives, for the purpose of clearing up and adjusting disputed
points, or to smite, with a withering anathema, the various heresies as
they arose, century after century. But in the meantime, the Church, which
had been planted "like a grain of mustard seed, which is the least
of all seeds" (Mark iv. 31), was fulfilling the prophecy that had
been made in regard to her, and "was shooting out great branches"
(Mark iv. 32) and becoming more extended and more prolific than all
her rivals.

She enlarged her boundaries and spread farther and farther over the
face of the earth, while the number of her children rapidly multiplied
in every direction.

In course of time, the immense continents of America and Australia,
together with New Zealand and Tasmania and other hitherto unknown
regions, were discovered and thrown open to the influences of human
industry and enterprise.

When she laughed she showed a gleaming
row of small teeth, set rather wide apart, but as white as snow; and her
bright eyes beamed on the world as gladly as though they had nothing that
was not pleasing to look for, innocent mischief to dream of. She too,
tried to win Paula's favor; but with none of Mary's devoted and unvarying
enthusiasm. Often, to be sure, she would devote herself to Paula with
such stormy vehemence that the elder girl was forced to be repellent;
then, on the other hand, if she fancied her self slighted, or treated
more coolly than Mary, she would turn her back on Paula with sulky
jealousy, temper and pouting. It always was in Paula's power to put an
end to the "Water-wagtails tantrums"--which generally had their comic
side--by a kind word or kiss; but without some such advances Katharina
was quite capable of indulging her humors to the utmost.

On the present occasion she flew into Paula's arm, and when her friend
begged, more quietly than usual that she would allow her first to finish
dressing, she turned away without any display of touchiness and took the
necklace from Mary's hand to put it on herself. It was of fine
workmanship, set with pearls, and took her fancy greatly; only the empty
medallion from which Hiram had removed the emerald with his knife spoiled
the whole effect. Still, it was a princely jewel, and when she had also
taken from the chest a large fan of ostrich feathers she showed off to
her play-fellow, with droll, stiff dignity, how the empress and
princesses at Court curtsied and bowed graciously to their inferiors. At
this they both laughed a great deal. When Paula had finished her toilet
and proceeded to take the necklace off Katharina, the empty setting,
which Hiram's knife had bent, caught in the thin tissue of her dress.
Mary disengaged it, and Paula tossed the jewel back into the trunk.

While she was locking the box she asked Katharina whether she had met
Orion.

"Orion!" repeated the younger girl, in a tone which implied that she
alone had the right to enquire about him. "Yes, we came upstairs
together; he went to see the wounded man. Have you anything to say to
him?"

She crimsoned as she spoke and looked suspiciously at Paula, who simply
replied: "Perhaps," and then added, as she hung the ribbon with the key
round her neck: "Now, you little girls, it is breakfast time; I am not
going down to-day."

"Oh, dear!" cried Mary disappointed, "my grandfather is ailing and
grandmother will stay with him; so if you do not come I shall have to sit
alone with Eudoxia; for Katharina's chariot is waiting and she must go
home at once. Oh! do come. Just to please me; you do not know how odious
Eudoxia can be when it is so hot."

"Yes, do go down," urged Katharina. "What will you do up hereby yourself?
And this evening mother and I will come again."

"Very well," said Paula. "But first I must go to see the invalids."

"May I go with you?" asked the Water wagtail, coaxingly stroking Paula's
arm. But Mary clapped her hands, exclaiming:

"She only wants to go to Orion--she is so fond of him. . . ."

Katharina put her hand over the child's mouth, but Paula, with quickened
breath, explained that she had very serious matters to discuss with
Orion; so Katharina, turning her back on her with a hasty gesture of
defiance, sulkily went down stairs, while Mary slipped down the bannister
rail. Not many days since, Katharina, who was but just sixteen, would
gladly have followed her example.

Paula meanwhile knocked at the first of the sickrooms and entered it as
softly as the door was opened by a nursing-sister from the convent of St.
Katharine. Orion, whom she was seeking, had been there, but had just
left.

In this first room lay the leader of the caravan; in that beyond was the
crazy Persian. In a sitting-room adjoining the first room, which, being
intended for guests of distinction, was furnished with royal
magnificence, sat two men in earnest conversation: the Arab merchant and
Philippus the physician, a young man of little more than thirty, tall and
bony, in a dress of clean but very coarse stuff without any kind of
adornment. He had a shrewd, pale face, out of which a pair of bright
black eyes shone benevolently but with keen vivacity. His large
cheek-bones were much too prominent; the lower part of his face was
small, ugly and, as it were, compressed, while his high broad forehead
crowned the whole and stamped it as that of a thinker, as a fine cupola
may crown an insignificant and homely structure.

This man, devoid of charm, though his strongly-characterized
individuality made it difficult to overlook him even in the midst of a
distinguished circle, had been conversing eagerly with the Arab, who, in
the course of their two-days' acquaintance, had inspired him with a
regard which was fully reciprocated. At last Orion had been the theme of
their discourse, and the physician, a restless toiler who could not like
any man whose life was one of idle enjoyment, though he did full justice
to his brilliant gifts and well-applied studies, had judged him far more
hardly than the older man. To the leech all forms of human life were
sacred, and in his eyes everything that could injure the body or soul of
a man was worthy of destruction. He knew all that Orion had brought upon
the hapless Mandane, and how lightly he had trifled with the hearts of
other women; in his eyes this made him a mischievous and criminal member
of society. He regarded life as an obligation to be discharged by work
alone, of whatever kind, if only it were a benefit to society as a whole.
And such youths as Orion not only did not recognize this, but used the
whole and the parts also for base and selfish ends. The old Moslem, on
the contrary, viewed life as a dream whose fairest portion, the time of
youth, each one should enjoy with alert senses, and only take care that
at the waking which must come with death he might hope to find admission
into Paradise. How little could man do against the iron force of fate!
That could not be forefended by hard work; there was nothing for it but
to take up a right attitude, and to confront and meet it with dignity.
The bark of Orion's existence lacked ballast; in fine weather it drifted
wherever the breeze carried it, He himself had taken care to equip it
well; and if only the chances of life should freight it heavily--very
heavily, and fling it on the rocks, then Orion might show who and what he
was; he, Haschim, firmly believed that his character would prove itself
admirable. It was in the hour of shipwreck that a man showed his worth.

Here the physician interrupted him to prove that it was not Fate, as
imagined by Moslems, but man himself who guided the bark of life--but at
this moment Paula looked into the room, and he broke off. The merchant
bowed profoundly, Philippus respectfully, but with more embarrassment
than might have been expected from the general confidence of his manner.
For some years he had been a daily visitor in the governor's house, and
after carefully ignoring Paula on her first arrival, since Dame Neforis
had taken to treating her so coolly he drew her out whenever he had the
opportunity. Her conversations with him had now become dear and even
necessary to her, though at first his dry, cutting tone had displeased
her, and he had often driven her into a corner in a way that was hard to
bear. They kept her mind alert in a circle which never busied itself with
anything but the trivial details of family life in the decayed city, or
with dogmatic polemics--for the Mukaukas seldom or never took part in the
gossip of the women.

The leech never talked of daily events, but expressed his views as to
other and graver subjects in life, or in books with which they were both
familiar; and he had the art of eliciting replies from her which he met
with wit and acumen. By degrees she had become accustomed to his bold
mode of thought, sometimes, it is true, too recklessly expressed; and the
gifted girl now preferred a discussion with him to any other form of
conversation, recognizing that a childlike and supremely unselfish soul
animated this thoughtful reservoir of all knowledge. Almost everything
she did displeased her uncle's wife, and so, of course, did her familiar
intercourse with this man, whose appearance certainly had in it nothing
to attract a young girl.--The physician to a family of rank was there to
keep its members in good health, and it was unbecoming in one of them to
converse with him on intimate terms as an equal. She reproached
Paula--whose pride she was constantly blaming--for her unseemly
condescension to Philippus; but what chiefly annoyed her was that Paula
took up many a half-hour which otherwise Philippus would have devoted to
her husband; and in him and his health her life and thoughts were
centred.

The Arab at once recognized his foe of the previous evening; but they
soon came to a friendly understanding--Paula confessing her folly in
holding a single and kindly-disposed man answerable for the crimes of a
whole nation. Haschim replied that a right-minded spirit always came to a
just conclusion at last; and then the conversation turned on her father,
and the physician explained to the Arab that she was resolved never to
weary of seeking the missing man.

"Nay, it is the sole aim and end of my life," cried the girl.

"A great mistake, in my opinion," said the leech. But the merchant
differed: there were things, he said, too precious to be given up for
lost, even when the hope of finding them seemed as feeble and thin as a
rotten reed.

"That is what I feel!" cried Paula. "And how can you think differently,
Philip? Have I not heard from your own lips that you never give up all
hope of a sick man till death has put an end to it? Well, and I cling to
mine--more than ever now, and I feel that I am right. My last thought, my
last coin shall be spent in the search for my father, even without my
uncle and his wife, and in spite of their prohibition."

"But in such a task a young girl can hardly do without a man's succor,"
said the merchant. "I wander a great deal about the world, I speak with
many foreigners from distant lands, and if you will do me the honor, pray
regard me as your coadjutor, and allow me to help you in seeking for the
lost hero."

"Thanks--I fervently thank you!" cried Paula, grasping the Moslem's hand
with hearty pleasure. "Wherever you go bear my lost father in mind; I am
but a poor, lonely girl, but if you find him. . ."

"Then you will know that even among the Moslems there are men. . ."

"Men who are ready to show compassion and to succor friendless women!"
interrupted Paula.

"And with good success, by the blessing of the Almighty," replied the
Arab. "As soon as I find a clue you shall hear from me; now, however, I
must go across the Nile to see Amru the great general; I go in all
confidence for I know that my poor, brave Rustem is in good hands, friend
Philippus. My first enquiries shall be made in Fostat, rely upon that, my
daughter."

"I do indeed," said Paula with pleased emotion. "When shall we meet
again?"

"To-morrow, or the morning after at latest."

The young girl went up to him and whispered: "We have just heard of a
clue; indeed, I hope my messenger is already on his way. Have you time to
hear about it now?"

"I ought long since to have been on the other shore; so not to-day, but
to-morrow I hope." The Arab shook hands with her and the physician, and
hastily took his leave.

Paula stood still, thinking. Then it struck her that Hiram was now on the
further side of the Nile, within the jurisdiction of the Arab ruler, and
that the merchant could perhaps intercede for him, if she were to tell
him all she knew. She felt the fullest confidence in the old man, whose
kind and sympathetic face was still visible to her mind's eye, and
without paying any further heed to the physician she went quickly towards
the door of the sick-room. A crucifix hung close by, and the nun had
fallen on her knees before it, praying for her infidel patient, and
beseeching the Good Shepherd to have mercy on the sheep that was not of
His fold. Paula did not venture to disturb the worshipper, who was
kneeling just in the narrow passage; so some minutes elapsed before the
leech, observing her uneasiness, came out of the larger room, touched the
nun on the shoulder, and said in a low voice of genuine kindness:

"One moment, good Sister. Your pious intercession will be heard--but this
damsel is in haste." The nun rose at once and made way, sending a
wrathful glance after Paula as she hurried down the stairs.

At the door of the court-yard she looked out and about for the Arab, but
in vain. Then she enquired of a slave who told her that the merchant's
horse had waited for him at the gate a long time, that he had just come
galloping out, and by this time must have reached the bridge of boats
which connected Memphis with the island of Rodah and, beyond the island,
with the fort of Babylon and the new town of Fostat.


CHAPTER XI.

Paula went up-stairs again, distressed and vexed with herself. Was it the
heat that had enervated her and robbed her of the presence of mind she
usually had at her command? She herself could not understand how it was
that she had not at once taken advantage of the opportunity to plead to
Haschim for her faithful retainer. The merchant might have interested
himself for Hiram.

The slave at the gate had told her that he had not yet been taken; the
time to intercede, then, had not yet come. But she was resolved to do so,
to draw the wrath of her relations down on herself, and, if need should
be, to relate all she had seen in the course of the night, to save her
devoted servant. It was no less than her duty: still, before humiliating
Orion so deeply she would warn him. The thought of charging him with so
shameful a deed pained her like the need for inflicting an injury on
herself. She hated him, but she would rather have broken the most
precious work of art than have branded him--him whose image still reigned
in her heart, supremely glorious and attractive.

Instead of following Mary to breakfast, or offering herself as usual to
play draughts with her uncle, she went back to the sick-room. To meet
Neforis or Orion at this moment would have been painful, indeed odious to
her. It was long since she had felt so weary and oppressed. A
conversation with the physician might perhaps prove refreshing; after the
various agitations of the last few hours she longed for something, be it
what it might, that should revive her spirits and give a fresh turn to
her thoughts.

In the Masdakite's room the Sister coldly asked her what she wanted, and
who had given her leave to assist in tending the sufferers. The leech,
who at that moment was moistening the bandage on the wounded man's head,
at this turned to the nun and informed her decidedly that he desired the
young girl's assistance in attending on both his patients. Then he led
the way sitting-room, saying in subdued into the adjoining tones:

"For the present all is well. Let us rest here a little while."

She sat down on a divan, and he on a seat opposite, and Philippus began:

"You were seeking handsome Orion just now, but you must. . . ."

"What?" she asked gravely. "And I would have you to know that the son of
the house is no more to me than his mother is. Your phrase 'Handsome
Orion' seems to imply something that I do not again wish to hear. But I
must speak to him, and soon, in reference to an important matter."

"To what, then, do I owe the pleasure of seeing you here again? To
confess the truth I did not hope for your return."

"And why not?"

"Excuse me from answering. No one likes to hear unpleasant things. If one
of my profession thinks any one is not well. . . ."

"If that is meant for me," replied the girl, "all I can tell you is that
the one thing on which I still can pride myself is my health. Say what
you will--the very worst for aught I care. I want something to-day to
rouse me from lethargy, even if it should make me angry."

"Very well then," replied the leech, "though I am plunging into deep
waters!--As to health, as it is commonly understood, a fish might envy
you; but the higher health--health of mind: that I fear you cannot boast
of."

"This is a serious beginning," said Paula. "Your reproof would seem to
imply that I have done you or some one else a wrong."

"If only you had!" exclaimed he. "No, you have not sinned against us in
any way.--'I am as I am' is what you think of yourself; and what do you
care for others?"

"That must depend on whom you mean by 'others!'"

"Nothing less than all and each of those with whom you live--here, in
this house, in this town, in this world. To you they are mere air--or
less; for the air is a tangible thing that can fill a ship's sails and
drive it against the stream, whose varying nature can bring comfort or
suffering to your body."

"My world is within!" said Paula, laying her hand on her heart.

"Very true. And all creation may find room there; for what cannot the
human heart, as it is called, contain! The more we require it to take and
keep, the more ready it is to hold it. It is unsafe to let the lock rust;
for, if once it has grown stiff, when we want to open it no pulling and
wrenching will avail. And besides--but I do not want to grieve you.--You
have a habit of only looking backwards. . . ."

"And what that is pleasurable lies before me? Your blame is harsh and at
the same time unjust.--Indeed, and how can you tell which way I look?"

"Because I have watched you with the eye of a friend. In truth, Paula,
you have forgotten how to look around and forward. The life which lies
behind you and which you have lost is all your world. I once showed you
on a fragmentary papyrus that belonged to my foster father, Horus Apollo,
a heathen demon represented as going forwards, while his head was turned
on his neck so that the face and eyes looked behind him."

"I remember it perfectly."

"Well, you have long been just like him. 'All things move,' says
Heraclitus, so you are forced to float onwards with the great stream; or,
to vary the image, you must walk forwards on the high-road of life
towards the common goal; but your eye is fixed on what lies behind you,
feasting on the prospect of a handsome and wealthy home, kindness and
tenderness, noble and loving faces, and a happy, but alas! long-lost
existence. All the same, on you must go.--What must the result be?"

"I must stumble, you think, and fall?"

The physician's reproof had hit Paula all the harder because she could
not conceal from herself that there was much truth in it. She had come
hither on purpose to find encouragement, and these accusations troubled
even her sense of high health. Why should she submit to be taken to task
like a school-girl by this man, himself still young? If this went on she
would let him hear. . . . 'I am expecting him every minute--and here he
comes,' added Sanin, looking into the street.

Pantaleone got up, looked at his watch, straightened his topknot of hair,
and hurriedly stuffed into his shoe an end of tape which was sticking
out below his trouser-leg, and the young sub-lieutenant came in, as
red and embarrassed as ever.

Sanin presented the seconds to each other. 'M. Richter, sous-lieutenant,
M. Cippatola, artiste!'

The sub-lieutenant was slightly disconcerted by the old man's appearance
... Oh, what would he have said had any one whispered to him at that
instant that the 'artist' presented to him was also employed in
the culinary art!

But Pantaleone assumed an air as though taking part in the preliminaries
of duels was for him the most everyday affair: probably he was
assisted at this juncture by the recollections of his theatrical
career, and he played the part of second simply as a part.

Both he and the sub-lieutenant were silent for a little.

'Well? Let us come to business!' Pantaleone spoke first, playing with
his cornelian seal.

'By all means,' responded the sub-lieutenant, 'but ... the presence of one
of the principals ...'
'I will leave you at once, gentlemen,' cried Sanin, and with a bow
he went away into the bedroom and closed the door after him.

He flung himself on the bed and began thinking of Gemma ... but the
conversation of the seconds reached him through the shut door.
It was conducted in the French language; both maltreated it mercilessly,
each after his own fashion. Pantaleone again alluded to the dragoons in
Padua, and Principe Tarbuski; the sub-lieutenant to '_exghizes léchères_'
and '_goups de bistolet à l'amiaple_.' But the old man would not even
hear of any _exghizes_! To Sanin's horror, he suddenly proceeded to talk
of a certain young lady, an innocent maiden, whose little finger
was worth more than all the officers in the world ...

(_oune zeune damigella innoucenta, qu'a elle sola dans soun péti doa
vale pin que tout le zouffissié del mondo_.'), and repeated several times
with heat: 'It's shameful! it's shameful!' (_E ouna onta, ouna
onta_!)

The sub-lieutenant at first made him no reply, but presently an angry
quiver could be heard in the young man's voice, and he observed that he
had not come there to listen to sermonising.

'At your age it is always a good thing to hear the truth!' cried
Pantaleone.

The debate between the seconds several times became stormy; it lasted
over an hour, and was concluded at last on the following conditions:
'Baron von Dönhof and M. de Sanin to meet the next day at ten o'clock in
a small wood near Hanau, at the distance of twenty paces; each to have
the right to fire twice at a signal given by the seconds, the pistols
to be single-triggered and not rifle-barrelled.' Herr von Richter withdrew,
and Pantaleone solemnly opened the bedroom door, and after communicating
the result of their deliberations, cried again:
'_Bravo Russo_! _Bravo giovanotto_! You will be victor!'
A few minutes later they both set off to the Rosellis' shop. Sanin, as
a preliminary measure, had exacted a promise from Pantaleone to keep
the affair of the duel a most profound secret. In reply, the old
man had merely held up his finger, and half closing his eyes, whispered
twice over, _Segredezza_! He was obviously in good spirits, and even
walked with a freer step. All these unusual incidents, unpleasant though
they might be, carried him vividly back to the time when he himself
both received and gave challenges--only, it is true, on the stage.
Baritones, as we all know, have a great deal of strutting and
fuming to do in their parts.

XIX
Emil ran out to meet Sanin--he had been watching for his arrival
over an hour--and hurriedly whispered into his ear that his mother
knew nothing of the disagreeable incident of the day before, that
he must not even hint of it to her, and that he was being sent to
Klüber's shop again!... but that he wouldn't go there, but would
hide somewhere! Communicating all this information in a few seconds,
he suddenly fell on Sanin's shoulder, kissed him impulsively, and
rushed away down the street. Gemma met Sanin in the shop; tried to
say something and could not. Her lips were trembling a little, while
her eyes were half-closed and turned away.Kind fate
has fitted you above a hundred thousand others for being loved; and if
you do not forget the gratitude you owe for that, hearts will be turned
to you, though now they shun the tree which has beset itself
intentionally with thorns, and which lets its branches droop like the
weeping-willows by the Nile. Thus you will lead a new and beautiful life,
receiving and giving joy. The isolated and charmless existence you drag
through here, to the satisfaction of none and least of all to your own,
you can transform to one of fruition and satisfaction--breathing and
moving healthily and beneficently in the light of day. It lies in your
power. When you came up here to give your care to these poor injured
creatures, you took the first step in the new path I desire to show you,
to true happiness. I did not expect you, and I am thankful that you have
come; for I know that as you entered that door you may have started on
the road to renewed happiness, if you have the will to walk in it.--Thank
God! That is said and over!"

The leech rose and wiped his forehead, looking uneasily at Paula who had
remained seated; her breath came fast, and she was more confused and
undecided than he had ever seen her. She clasped her hand over her brow,
and gazed, speechless, into her lap as though she wished to smother some
pain.

The young physician beat his arms together, like a laborer in the winter
when his hands are frozen, and exclaimed with distressful emotion: "Yes,
I have spoken, and I cannot regret having done so; but what I foresaw has
come to pass: The greatest happiness that ever sweetened my daily life is
gone out of it! To love Plato is a noble rule, but greater than Plato is
the truth; and yet, those who preach it must be prepared to find that
truth scares away friends from the unpleasing vicinity of its ill-starred
Apostles!"

At this Paula rose, and following the impulse of her generous heart,
offered the leech her hand in all sincerity; he grasped it in both his,
pressing it so tightly that it almost hurt her, and his eyes glistened
with moisture as he exclaimed: "That is as I hoped; that is splendid,
that is noble! Let me but be your brother, high-souled maiden!--Now,
come. That poor, crazy, lovely girl will heal of her death-wound under
your hands if under any!"

"I will come!" she replied heartily; and there was something healthy and
cheerful in her manner as they entered the sick-room; but her expression
suddenly changed, and she asked pensively:

"And supposing we restore the unhappy girl--what good will she get by
it?"

"She will breathe and see the sunshine," replied the leech; "she will be
grateful to you, and finally she will contribute what she can to the
whole body. She will be alive in short, she will live. For life--feel it,
understand it as I do--life is the best thing we have." Paula gazed with
astonishment in the man's unlovely but enthusiastic face. How radiantly
joyful!

No one could have called it ugly at this moment, or have said that it
lacked charm.

He believed what he had asserted with such fervent feeling, though it was
in contradiction to a view he had held only yesterday and often defended:
that life in itself was misery to all who could not grasp it of their own
strength, and make something of it worth making. At this moment he really
felt that it was the best gift.

Paula went forward, and his eyes followed her, as the gaze of the pious
pilgrim is fixed on the holy image he has travelled to see, over seas and
mountains, with bruised feet.

They went up to the sick girl's bed. The nun drew back, making her own
reflections on the physician's altered mien, and his childlike, beaming
contentment, as he explained to Paula what particular peril threatened
the sufferer, and by what treatment he hoped to save her; how to make the
bandages and give the medicines, and how necessary it was to accept the
poor crazy girl's fancies and treat them as rational ideas so long as the
fever lasted.

At last he was forced to go and attend to other patients. Paula remained
sitting at the head of the bed and gazing at the face of the sufferer.

How fair it was! And Orion had snatched this rose in the bud, and trodden
it under foot! She had, no doubt, felt for him what Paula herself felt.
And now? Did she feel nothing but hatred of him, or could her heart, in
spite of her indignation and scorn, not altogether cast off the spell
that had once bound it?

What weakness was this! She was, she must, she would be his foe!

Her thoughts went back to the idle and futile life that she had led for
so many years. The physician had hit the mark; and he had been too easy
rather than severe. Yes, she would begin to make good use of her
powers--but how, in what way, here and among these people? How
transfigured poor Philippus had seemed when she had given him her hand;
with what energy had he poured forth his words.

"And how false," she mused, "is the saying that the body is the mirror of
the soul! If it were so, Philippus would have the face of Orion, and
Orion that of Philippus." But could Orion's heart be wholly reprobate?
Nay, that was impossible; her every impulse resisted the belief. She must
either love him or hate him, there was no third alternative; but as yet
the two passions were struggling within her in a way that was quite
intolerable.

The physician had spoken of being a brother to her, and she could not
help smiling at the idea. She could, she thought, live very happily and
calmly with him, with her nurse Betta, and with the learned old friend
who shared his home, and of whom he had often talked to her; she could
join him in his studies, help him in his calling, and discuss many things
well worth knowing. Such a life, she told herself, would be a thousand
times preferable to this, with Neforis. In him she had certainly found a
friend; and her glad recognition of the fact was the first step towards
the fulfilment of his promise, since it showed that her heart was still
ready to go forth to the kindness of another.

Amid these meditations, however, her anxiety for Hiram constantly
recurred to her, and it was clear to her mind that, if she and Orion
should come to extremities, she could no longer dwell under the
governor's roof. Often she had longed for nothing so fervently as to be
able to quit it; but to-day it filled her with dread, for parting from
her uncle necessarily involved parting from his son. She hated him;
still, to lose sight of him altogether would be very hard to bear. To go
with Philippus and live with him as his sister would never do; nay, it
struck her as something inconceivable, strangely incongruous.

Meanwhile she listened to Mandane's breathing and treated her in
obedience to the leech's orders, longing for his return; presently
however, not he but the nun came to the bed-side, laid her hand on the
girl's forehead, and without paying any heed to Paula, whispered kindly:
"That is right child, sleep away; have a nice long sleep. So long as she
can be kept quiet; if only she goes on like this!--Her head is cooler.
Philippus will certainly say there is scarcely any fever. Thank God, the
worst danger is over!"

"Oh, how glad I am!" cried Paula, and she spoke with such warmth and
sincerity that the nun gave her a friendly nod and left the sick girl to
her care, quite satisfied.

It was long since Paula had felt so happy. She fancied that her presence
had had a good affect on the sufferer, that Mandane had already been
brought by her nursing to the threshold of a new life. Paula, who but
just now had regarded herself as a persecuted victim of Fate, now
breathed more freely in the belief that she too might bring joy to some
one. She looked into Mandane's more than pretty face with real joy and
tenderness, laid the bandage which had slipped aside gently over her
ears, and breathed a soft kiss on her long silken lashes.

She rapidly grew in favor with the shrewd nun; when the hour for prayer
came round, the sister included in her petitions--Paula--the orphan under
a stranger's roof, the Greek girl born, by the inscrutable decrees of
God, outside the pale of her saving creed. At length Philippus returned;
he was rejoiced at his new friend's brightened aspect, and declared that
Mandane had, under her care, got past the first and worst danger, and
might be expected to recover, slowly indeed, but completely.

After Paula had renewed the compress--and he intentionally left her to do
it unaided, he said encouragingly:

"How quickly you have learnt your business.--Now, the patient is asleep
again; the Sister will keep watch, and for the present we can be of no
use to the girl; sleep is the best nourishment she can have. But with
us--or at any rate with me, it is different. We have still two hours to
wait for the next meal: my breakfast is standing untouched, and yours no
doubt fared the same; so be my guest. They always send up enough to
satisfy six bargemen."

Paula liked the proposal, for she had long been hungry. The nun was
desired to hasten to fetch some more plates, of drinking-vessels there
was no lack--and soon the new allies were seated face to face, each at a
small table. He carved the duck and the roast quails, put the salad
before her and some steaming artichokes, which the nun had brought up at
the request of the cook whose only son the physician had saved; he
invited her attention to the little pies, the fruits and cakes which were
laid ready, and played the part of butler; and then, while they heartily
enjoyed the meal, they carried on a lively conversation.

Paula for the first time asked Philippus to tell her something of his
early youth; he began with an account of his present mode of life, as a
partner in the home of the singular old priest of Isis, Horus Apollo, a
diligent student; he described his strenuous activity by day and his
quiet studies by night, and gave everything such an amusing aspect that
often she could not help laughing. But presently he was sad, as he told
her how at an early age he had lost his father and mother, and was left
to depend solely on himself and on a very small fortune, having no
relations; for his father had been a grammarian, invited to Alexandria
from Athens, who had been forced to make a road for himself through life,
which had lain before him like an overgrown jungle of papyrus and reeds.
Every hour of his life was devoted to his work, for a rough, outspoken
Goliath, such as he, never could find it easy to meet with helpful
patrons. He had managed to live by teaching in the high schools of
Alexandria, Athens, and Caesarea, and by preparing medicines from choice
herbs--drinking water instead of wine, eating bread and fruit instead of
quails and pies; and he had made a friend of many a good man, but never
yet of a woman--it would be difficult with such a face as his!

"Then I am the first?" said Paula, who felt deep respect for the man who
had made his way by his own energy to the eminent position which he had
long held, not merely in Memphis, but among Egyptian physicians
generally.

He nodded, and with such a blissful smile that she felt as though a
sunbeam had shone into her very soul. He noticed this at once, raised his
goblet, and drank to her, exclaiming with a flush on his cheek:

"The joy that comes to others early has come to me late; but then the
woman I call my friend is matchless!"

"Well, it is to be hoped she may not prove to be so wicked as you just
now described her.--If only our alliance is not fated to end soon and
abruptly."

"Ah!" cried the physician, "every drop of blood in my veins. . . ."

"You would be ready to shed it for me," Paula broke in, with a pathetic
gesture, borrowed from a great tragedian she had seen at the theatre in
Damascus. "But never fear: it will not be a matter of life and death--at
worst they will but turn me out of the house and of Memphis."

"You?" cried Philippus startled, "but who would dare to do so?"

"They who still regard me as a stranger.--You described the case
admirably. If they have their way, my dear new friend, our fate will be
like that of the learned Dionysius of Cyrene."

"Of Cyrene?"

"Yes. It was my father who told me the story. When Dionysius sent his son
to the High School at Athens, he sat down to write a treatise for him on
all the things a student should do and avoid. He devoted himself to the
task with the utmost diligence; but when, at the end of four years, he
could write on the last leaf of the roll. 'Here this book hath a happy
ending,' the young man whose studies it was intended to guide came home
to Cyrene, a finished scholar."

"And we have struck up a friendship . . . ?"

"And made a treaty of alliance, only to be parted ere long."

Philippus struck his fist vehemently on the little table in front of his
couch and exclaimed: "That I will find means to prevent!--But now, tell
me in confidence, what has last happened between you and the family
down-stairs?"

"You will know quite soon enough."

"Whichever of them fancies that you can be turned out of doors without
more ado and there will be an end between us, may find himself mistaken!"
cried the physician with an angry sparkle in his eyes. "I have a right to
put in a word in this house. It has not nearly come to that yet, and what
is more, it never shall. You shall quit it certainly; but of your own
free will, and holding your head high. . . ."

As he spoke the door of the outer room was hastily opened and the next
instant Orion was standing before them, looking with great surprise at
the pair who had just finished their meal. He said coldly:

"I am disturbing you, I see."

"Not in the least," replied the leech; and the young man, perceiving what
bad taste it would be and how much out of place to give expression to his
jealous annoyance, said, with a smile: "If only it had been granted to a
third person to join in this symposium!"

"We found each other all-sufficient company," answered Philippus.

"A man who could believe in all the doctrines of the Church as readily as
in that statement would be assured of salvation," laughed Orion. "I am no
spoilsport, respected friends; but I deeply regret that I must, on the
present occasion, disturb your happiness. The matter in question. . . ."
And he felt he might now abandon the jesting tone which so little
answered to his mood, "is a serious one. In the first instance it
concerns your freedman, my fair foe."

"Has Hiram come back?" asked Paula, feeling herself turn pale.

"They have brought him in," replied Orion. "My father at once summoned
the court of judges. Justice has a swift foot here with us; I am sorry
for the man, but I cannot prevent its taking its course. I must beg of
you to appear at the examination when you are called."

"The whole truth shall be told!" said Paula sternly and firmly.

"Of course," replied Orion. Then turning to the physician, he added: "I
would request you, worthy Esculapius, to leave me and my cousin together
for a few minutes. I want to give her a word of counsel which will
certainly be to her advantage."

Philippus glanced enquiringly at the girl; she said with clear decision:
"You and I can have no secrets. What I may hear, Philippus too may know."

Orion, with a shrug, turned to leave the room:

On the threshold he paused, exclaiming with some excitement and genuine
distress:

"If you will not listen to me for your own sake, do so at least, whatever
ill-feeling you may bear me, because I implore you not to refuse me this
favor. It is a matter of life or death to one human being, of joy or
misery to another. Do not refuse me.--I ask nothing unreasonable,
Philippus. Do as I entreat you and leave us for a moment alone."

Again the physician's eyes consulted the young girl's; this time she
said: "Go!" and he immediately quitted the room.

Orion closed the door.

"What have I done, Paula," he began with panting breath, "that since
yesterday you have shunned me like a leper--that you are doing your
utmost to bring me to ruin?"

"I mean to plead for the life of a trusty servant; nothing more," she
said indifferently.

"At the risk of disgracing me!" he retorted bitterly.

"At that risk, no doubt, if you are indeed so base as to throw your own
guilt on the shoulders of an honest man."

"Then you watched me last night?"

"The merest chance led me to see you come out of the tablinum. . . ."

"I do not ask you now what took you there so late," he interrupted, "for
it revolts me to think anything of you but the best, the highest.--But
you? What have you experienced at my hands but friendship--nay, for
concealment or dissimulation is here folly--but what a lover . . .?"

"A lover!" cried Paula indignantly. "A lover? Dare you utter the word,
when you have offered your heart and hand to another--you. . . ."

"Who told you so?" asked Orion gloomily.

"Your own mother."

"That is it; so that is it?" cried the young man, clasping his hands
convulsively. "Now I begin to see, now I understand. But stay. For if it
is indeed that which has roused you to hate me and persecute me, you must
love me, Paula--you do love me, and then, noblest and sweetest. . . ." He
held out his hand; but she struck it aside, exclaiming in a tremulous
voice:

"Be under no delusion. I am not one of the feeble lambs whom you have
beguiled by the misuse of your gifts and advantages; and who then are
eager to kiss your hands. I am the daughter of Thomas; and another
woman's betrothed, who craves my embraces on the way to his wedding, will
learn to his rueing that there are women who scorn his disgraceful suit
and can avenge the insult intended them. Go--go to your judges! You, a
false witness, may accuse Hiram, but I will proclaim you, you the son of
this house, as the thief! We shall see which they believe."

"Me!" cried Orion, and his eyes flashed as wrathfully and vindictively as
her own. "The son of the Mukaukas! Oh, that you were not a woman! I would
force you to your knees and compel you to crave my pardon. How dare you
point your finger at a man whose life has hitherto been as spotless as
your own white raiment? Yes, I did go to the tablinum--I did tear the
emerald from the hanging; but I did it in a fit of recklessness, and in
the knowledge that what is my father's is mine. I threw away the gem to
gratify a mere fancy, a transient whim. Cursed be the hour when I did
it!--Not on account of the deed itself, but of the consequences it may
entail through your mad hatred. Jealousy, petty, unworthy jealousy is at
the bottom of it! And of whom are you jealous?"

"Of no one; not even of your betrothed, Katharina," replied Paula with
forced composure. "What are you to me that, to spare you humiliation, I
should risk the life of the most honest soul living? I have said: The
judges shall decide between you."

"No, they shall not!" stormed Orion. "At least, not as you intend!
Beware, beware, I say, of driving me to extremities! I still see in you
the woman I loved; I still offer you what lies within my power: to let
everything end for the best for you. . . ."

"For me! Then I, too, am to suffer for your guilt?"

"Did you hear the barking of hounds just now?"

"I heard dogs yelping."

"Very well.--Your freedman has been brought in, the pack got on his scent
and have now been let into the house close to the tablinum. The dogs
would not stir beyond the threshold and on the white marble step, towards
the right-hand side, the print of a man's foot was found in the dust. It
is a peculiar one, for instead of five toes there are but three. Your
Hiram was fetched in, and he was found to have the same number of toes as
the mark on the marble, neither more nor less. A horse trod on his foot,
in your father's stable, and two of his toes had to be cut off: we got
this out of the stammering wretch with some difficulty.--On the other
side of the door-way there was a smaller print, but though the dogs paid
no heed to that I examined it, and assured myself--how, I need not tell
you--that it was you who had stood there. He, who has no business
whatever in the house, must have made his way last night into the
tablinum, our treasury. Now, put yourself in the judges' place. How can
such facts be outweighed by the mere word of a girl who, as every one
knows, is on anything rather than good terms with my mother, and who will
leave no stone unturned to save her servant."

"Infamous!" cried Paula. "Hiram did not steal the gem, as you must know
who stole it. The emerald he sold was my property; and were those stones
really so much alike that even the seller. . ."

"Yes, indeed. He could not tell one from the other. Evil spirits have
been at work all through, devilish, malignant demons. It would be enough
to turn one's brain, if life were not so full of enigmas! You yourself
are the greatest.--Did you give the Syrian your emerald to sell in order
to fly from this house with the money?--You are silent? Then I am right.
What can my father be to you--you do not love my mother--and the
son!--Paula, Paula, you are perhaps doing him an injustice--you hate him,
and it is a pleasure to you to injure him."

"I do not wish to hurt you or any one," replied the girl. "And you have
guessed wrongly. Your father refused me the means of seeking mine."

"And you wanted to procure money to search for one who is long since
dead!--Even my mother admits that you speak the truth; if she is right,
and you really take no pleasure in doing me a mischief, listen to me,
follow my advice, and grant my prayer! I do not ask any great matter."

"Speak on then."

"Do you know what a man's honor is to him? Need I tell you that I am a
lost and despised man if I am found guilty of this act of the maddest
folly by the judges of my own house? It may cost my father his life if he
hears that the word 'guilty' is pronounced on me; and I--I--what would
become of me I cannot foresee!--I--oh God, oh God, preserve me from
frenzy!--But I must be calm; time presses. . . . How different it is for
your servant; he seems ready even now to take the guilt on himself, for,
whatever he is asked, he still keeps silence. Do you do the same; and if
the judges insist on knowing what you had to do with the Syrian last
night--for the dogs traced the scent to your staircase--hazard a
conjecture that the faithful fellow stole the emerald in order to gratify
your desire to search for your father, his beloved master. If you can
make up your mind to so great a sacrifice--oh, that I should have to ask
it of you!--I swear to you by all I hold sacred, by yourself and by my
father's head, I will set Hiram free within three days, unbeaten and
unhurt, and magnificently indemnified; and I will myself help him on the
way whither he may desire to go, or you to send him, in search of your
father.--Be silent; remain neutral in the background; that is all I ask,
and I will keep my word--that, at any rate, you do not doubt?" She had
listened to him with bated breath; she pitied him deeply as he stood
there, a suppliant in bitter anguish of soul, a criminal who still could
not understand that he was one, and who relied on the confidence that,
only yesterday, he still had had the right to exact from all the world.
He appeared before her like a fine proud tree struck by lightning, whose
riven trunk, trembling to its fall, must be crushed to the earth by the
first storm, unless the gardener props it up. She longed to be able to
forget all he had brought upon her and to grasp his hand in friendly
consolation; but her deeply aggrieved pride helped her to preserve the
cold and repellent manner she had so far succeeded in assuming.

With much hesitation and reserve she consented to be silent as long as he
kept his promise. It was for his father's sake, rather than his own, that
she would so far become his accomplice: at the same time everything else
was at an end between them, and she should bless the hour which might see
her severed from him and his for ever.

The end of her speech was in a strangely hard and repellent tone; she
felt she must adopt it to disguise how deeply she was touched by his
unhappiness and by the extinction of the sunshine in him which had once
warmed her own heart too with bliss. To him it seemed that an icy rigor
breathed in her words--bitter contempt and hostile revulsion. He had some
difficulty in keeping himself from breaking out again in violent wrath.
He was almost sorry that he had trusted her with his secret and begged
her for mercy, instead of leaving things to run their course, and if it
had come to the worst, dragging her to perdition with him. Sooner would
he forfeit honor and peace than humble himself again before this pitiless
and cold-hearted foe. At this moment he really hated her, and only wished
it were possible to fight her, to break her pride, to see her vanquished
and crying for quarter at his feet. It was with a great effort--with
tingling cheeks and constrained utterance that he said:

"Severance from you is indeed best for us all.--Be ready: the judges will
send for you soon."

"Very well," she replied. "I will be silent; you have only to provide for
the Syrian's safety. You have given me your word."

"And so long as you keep yours I will keep mine. Or else . . ." the words
would come from his quivering lips--"or else war to the knife!"

"War to the knife!" she echoed with flashing eyes. "But one thing more. I
have proof that the emerald which Hiram sold belonged to me. By all the
saints--proof!"

"So much the better for you," he said. "Woe to us both, if you force me
to forget that you are a woman!"

And he left the room with a rapid step.


CHAPTER XII.

Orion went down stairs scowling and clenching his fists. His heart ached
to bursting.

What had he done, what had befallen him? That a woman should dare to
treat him so!--a woman whom he had deigned to love--the loveliest and
noblest of women; but at the same time the haughtiest, most vengeful, and
most hateful.

He had once read this maxim: "When a man has committed a base action, if
only one other knows of it he carries the death-warrant of his peace in
the bosom of his garment." He felt the full weight of this sentence; and
the other--the one who knew--was Paula, the woman of all others whom he
most wished should look up to him. But yesterday it had been a vision of
heaven on earth to dream of holding her in his arms and calling her his;
now he had but one wish: that he could humble and punish her. Oh, that
his hands should be tied, that he should be dependent on her mercy like a
condemned criminal! It was inconceivable--intolerable!

But she should be taught to know him. He had passed through life hitherto
as white as a swan; if this luckless hour and this woman made him appear
as a vulture, it was not his fault, it was hers. She should soon see
which was the stronger of the two. He would punish her in every way in
which a woman can be punished, even if the way to it led through crime
and misery! He was not afraid that the leech bad won her affections, for
he knew, with strange certainty that, in spite of the hostility she
displayed, her heart was his and his alone. "The gold coin called love,"
said he to himself, "has two faces: tender devotion and bitter aversion;
just now she is showing me the latter. But, however different the image
and superscription may be on the two sides, if you ring it, it always
gives out the same tone; and I can hear it even in her most insulting
words."

When the family met at table he made Paula's excuses; he himself ate only
a few mouthfuls, for the judges had assembled some time since and were
waiting for him.

The right of life and death had been placed in the hands of the ancestors
of the Mukaukas, powerful princes of provinces; they had certainly
wielded it even in the dynasty of Psammitichus, whose power had been put
to a terrible end by Cambyses the Persian. And still the Uraeus
snake--the asp whose bite caused almost instant death, reared its head as
the time-honored emblem of this privilege, by the side of St. George the
Dragon-slayer, over the palaces of the Mukaukas at Memphis, and at
Lykopolis in Upper Egypt. And in both these places the head of the family
retained the right of arbitrary judgment and capital punishment over the
retainers of his house and the inhabitants of the district he governed,
after Justinian first, and then the Emperor Heraclius, had confirmed them
in their old prerogative. The chivalrous St. George was placed between
the snakes so as to replace a heathen symbol by a Christian one. Formerly
indeed the knight himself had had the head of a sparrow-hawk: that is to
say of the god Horus, who had overthrown the evil-spirit, Seth-Typhon, to
avenge his father; but about two centuries since the heathen
crocodile-destroyer had been transformed into the Christian conqueror of
the dragon.

After the Arab conquest the Moslems had left all ancient customs and
rights undisturbed, including those of the Mukaukas.

The court which assembled to sit in judgment on all cases concerning the
adherents of the house consisted of the higher officials of the
governor's establishment. The Mukaukas himself was president, and his
grown-up son was his natural deputy. During Orion's absence, Nilus, the
head of the exchequer, a shrewd and judicious Egyptian, had generally
represented his invalid master; but on the present occasion Orion was
appointed to take his place, and to preside over the assembly.

The governor's son hastened to his father's bedroom to beg him to lend
him his ring as a token of the authority transferred to him; the Mukaukas
had willingly allowed him to take it off his finger, and had enjoined him
to exercise relentless severity. Generally he inclined to leniency; but
breaking into a house was punishable with death, and in this instance it
was but right to show no mercy, out of deference to the Arab merchant.
But Orion, mindful of his covenant with Paula, begged his father to give
him full discretion. The old Moslem was a just man, who would agree to a
mitigated sentence under the circumstances; besides, the culprit was not
in strict fact a member of the household, but in the service of a
relation.

The Mukaukas applauded his son's moderation and judgment. If only he had
been in rather better health he himself would have had the pleasure of
being present at the sitting, to see him fulfil for the first time so
important a function, worthy of his birth and position.

Orion kissed his father's hand with heart-felt but melancholy emotion,
for this praise from the man he so truly loved was a keen pleasure; and
yet he felt that it was of ill-omen that his duties as judge, of which he
knew the sacred solemnity, should be thus--thus begun.

It was in a softened mood, sunk in thought as to how he could best save
Hiram and leave Paula's name altogether out of the matter, that he went
to the hall of justice; and there he found the nurse Perpetua in eager
discussion with Nilus.

The old woman was quite beside herself. In the clatter of her loom she
had heard nothing of what had been going on till a few minutes ago; now
she was ready to swear to the luckless Hiram's innocence. The stone he
had sold had belonged to his young mistress, and thank God there was no
lack of evidence of the fact; the setting of the emerald was lying safe
and sound in Paula's trunk. Happily she had had an opportunity of
speaking to her; and that she, the daughter of Thomas, should be brought
before the tribunal, like a citizen's daughter or slave-girl, was unheard
of, shameful!

At this Orion roughly interfered; he desired the old gate-keeper to
conduct Perpetua at once to the storeroom next to the tablinum, where the
various stuffs prepared for the use of the household were laid by, and to
keep her there under safe guard till further notice. The tone in which he
gave the order was such that even the nurse did not remonstrate; and
Nilus, for his part obeyed in silence when Orion bid him return to his
place among the judges.

Nilus went back to the judgment-hall in uneasy consternation. Never
before had he seen his young lord in this mood. As he heard the nurse's
statement the veins had swelled in his smooth youthful forehead, his
nostrils had quivered with convulsive agitation, his voice had lost all
its sweetness, and his eyes had a sinister gleam.

Orion was now alone; he ground his teeth with rage. Paula had betrayed
him in spite of her promise, and how mean was her woman's cunning! She
could be silent before the judges--yes. Silent in all confidence now, to
the very last; but the nurse, her mouthpiece, had already put Nilus, the
keenest and most important member of the court, in possession of the
evidence which spoke for her and against him. It was shocking,
disgraceful! Base and deliberately malicious treachery. But the end was
not yet: he still was free to act and to ward off the spiteful stroke by
a counterthrust. How it should be dealt was clear from Perpetua's
statement; but his conscience, his instincts and long habits of
submission to what was right, good, and fitting held him back. Not only
had he never himself done a base or a mean action; he loathed it in
another, and the only thing he could do to render Paula's perfidy
harmless was, as he could not deny, original and bold, but at the same
time detestable and shameful.

Still, he could not and he would not succumb in this struggle. Time
pressed. Long reflection was impossible; suddenly he felt carried away by
a fierce and mad longing to fight it out--he felt as he had felt on a
race-day in the hippodrome, when he had driven his own quadriga ahead of
all the rest.

Onwards, then, onwards; and if the chariot were wrecked, if the horses
were killed, if his wheels maimed his comrades overthrown in the
arena-still, onwards, onwards!

A few hasty steps brought him to the lodge of the gate-keeper, a sturdy
old man who had held his post for forty years. He had formerly been a
locksmith and it still was part of his duty to undertake the repairs of
the simple household utensils. Orion as a youth had been a beautiful and
engaging boy and a great favorite with this worthy man; he had delighted
in sitting in his little room and handing him the tools for his work. He
himself had remarkable mechanical facility and had been the old man's apt
pupil; nay, he had made such progress as to be able to carve pretty
little boxes, prayer-book cases, and such like, and provide them with
locks, as gifts to his parents on their birth days--a festival always
kept with peculiar solemnity in Egypt, and marked by giving and receiving
presents. He understood the use of tools, and he now hastily selected
such as he needed. On the window-ledge stood a bunch of flowers which he
had ordered for Paula the day before, and which he had forgotten to fetch
this terrible morning. With this in one hand, and the tools in the breast
of his robe he hastened upstairs.

"Onwards, I must keep on!" he muttered, as he entered Paula's room,
bolted the door inside and, kneeling before her chest, tossed the flowers
aside. If he was discovered, he would say that he had gone into his
cousin's chamber to give her the bouquet.

"Onwards; I must go on!" was still his thought, as he unscrewed the hinge
on which the lid of the trunk moved. His hands trembled, his breath came
fast, but he did his task quickly. This was the right way to work, for
the lock was a peculiar one, and could not have been opened without
spoiling it. He raised the lid, and the first thing his hand came upon in
the chest was the necklace with the empty medallion--it was as though
some kind Genius were aiding him. The medallion hung but slightly to the
elegantly-wrought chain; to detach it and conceal it about his person was
the work of a minute.

But now the most resolute. "On, on. . . ." was of no further avail. This
was theft: he had robbed her whom, if she only had chosen it, he was
ready to load with everything wherewith fate had so superabundantly
blessed him. No, this--this. . . .

A singular idea suddenly flashed through his brain; a thought which
brought a smile to his lips even at this moment of frightful tension. He
acted upon it forth with: he drew out from within his under-garment a gem
that hung round his neck by a gold chain. This jewel--a masterpiece by
one of the famous Greek engravers of heathen antiquity--had been given
him in Constantinople in exchange for a team of four horses to which his
greatest friend there had taken a fancy. It was in fact of greater price
than half a dozen fine horses. Half beside himself, and as if
intoxicated, Orion followed the wild impulse to which he had yielded;
indeed, he was glad to have so precious a jewel at hand to hang in the
place of the worthless gold frame-work. It was done with a pinch; but
screwing up the hinge again was a longer task, for his hands trembled
violently--and as the moment drew near in which he meant to let Paula
feel his power, the more quickly his heart beat, and the more difficult
he found it to control his mind to calm deliberation.

After he had unbolted the door he stood like a thief spying the long
corridor of the strangers' wing, and this increased his excitement to a
frenzy of rage with the world, and fate, and most of all with her who had
compelled him to stoop to such base conduct. But now the charioteer had
the reins and goad in his hand. Onwards now, onwards!

He flew down stairs, three steps at a time, as he had been wont when a
boy. In the anteroom he met Eudoxia, Mary's Greek governess, who had just
brought her refractory pupil into the house, and he tossed her the
nosegay he still held in his hands; then, without heeding the languishing
glances the middle-aged damsel sent after him with her thanks, he
hastened back to the gate-keeper's lodge where he hurriedly disburdened
himself of the locksmith's tools.

A few minutes later he entered the judgment-hall. Nilus the treasurer
showed him to the governor's raised seat, but an overpowering bashfulness
kept him from taking this position of honor. It was with a burning brow,
and looks so ominously dark that the assembly gazed at him with timid
astonishment, that he opened the proceedings with a few broken sentences.
He himself scarcely knew what he was saying, and heard his own voice as
vaguely as though it were the distant roar of waves. However, he
succeeded in clearly stating all that had happened: he showed the
assembly the stone which had been stolen and recovered; he explained how
the thief had been taken; he declared Paula's freedman to be guilty of
the robbery, and called upon him to bring forward anything he could in
his own defence. But the accused could only stammer out that he was not
guilty. He was not able to defend himself, but his mistress could no
doubt give evidence that would justify him.

Orion pushed the hair from his forehead, proudly raised his aching head,
and addressed the judges:

"His mistress is a lady of rank allied to our house. Let us keep her out
of this odious affair as is but seemly. Her nurse gave Nilus some
information which may perhaps avail to save this unhappy man. We will
neglect nothing to that end; but you, who are less familiar with the
leading circumstances, must bear this in mind to guard yourselves against
being misled: This lady is much attached to the accused; she clings to
him and Perpetua as the only friends remaining to her from her native
home. Moreover, there is nothing to surprise me or you in the fact that a
noble woman, as she is, should assume the onus of another's crime, and
place herself in a doubtful light to save a man who has hitherto been
honest and faithful. The nurse is here; shall she be called, or have you,
Nilus, heard from her everything that her mistress can say in favor of
her freedman?"

"Perpetua told me, and told you, too, my lord, certain credible facts,"
replied the treasurer. "But I could not repeat them so exactly as she
herself, and I am of opinion that the woman should be brought before the
court."

"Then call her," said Orion, fixing his eyes on vacancy above the heads
of the assembly, with a look of sullen dignity.

After a long and anxious pause the old woman was brought in. Confident in
her righteous cause she came forward boldly; she blamed Hiram somewhat
sharply for keeping silence so long, and then explained that Paula, to
procure money for her search for her father, had made the freedman take a
costly emerald out of its setting in her necklace, and that it was the
sale of this gem that had involved her fellow-countryman in this
unfortunate suspicion.

The nurse's deposition seemed to have biased the greater part of the
council in favor of the accused; but Orion did not give them time to
discuss their impressions among themselves. Hardly had Perpetua ceased
speaking, when Orion took up the emerald, which was lying on the table
before him, exclaiming excitedly, nay, angrily:

"And the stone which is recognized by the man who sold it--an expert in
gems--as being that which was taken from the hanging, and unique of its
kind, is supposed, by some miracle of nature, to have suddenly appeared
in duplicate?--Malignant spirits still wander through the world, but
would hardly dare to play their tricks in this Christian house. You all
know what 'old women's tales' are; and the tale that old woman has told
us is one of the most improbable of its class. 'Tell that to Apelles the
Jew,' said Horace the Roman; but his fellow-Israelite, Gamaliel'--and he
turned to the jeweller who was sitting with the other witnesses will
certainly not believe it; still less I, who see through this tissue of
falsehood. The daughter of the noble Thomas has condescended to weave it
with the help of that woman--a skilled weaver, she--to spread it before
us in order to mislead us, and so to save her faithful servant from
imprisonment, from the mines, or from death. These are the facts.--Do I
err, woman, or do you still adhere to your statement?"

The nurse, who had hoped to find in Orion her mistress' advocate, had
listened to his speech with growing horror. The Houses at Half-way
Farms are done; the Gun House at Caldwell would have been done at this
time, had not the rain prevented, but I think it will be finished in three
or four days. The public farm is doing pretty well. The Millsburg farms
are doing very well. I think it would do you good to see that place at
this time.

The Missionaries, although they have been sick are now, I am happy
to inform you, recovered; and at present are able to attend to their
business, and I regard them as entirely out of danger.

I hope we shall be able to remove all the furniture into the new house
in two or three weeks.

Speaking of the celebration of the 4th of July under date of
July 15th, Mr. Cary remarked to Mr. Ashmun:

The companies observed strictly the orders of the day, which I think
were so arranged as to entitle the officers who drew them up to
credit.

Upon the whole, I am obliged to say, that I have never seen the American
Independence celebrated with so much spirit and propriety since
the existence of the Colony; the guns being all mounted and painted,
and previously arranged for the purpose, added very much to the
grand salute.

Two dinners were given, one by the Independent Volunteer Company, and one
by Captain Devany.

Mr. Cary wrote to the Secretary of the Colonization Society, July 19th,
1828:

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, forwarded
by Captain Chase of Providence, also your Report and Repository, directed
to Mr.

Ashmun, but owing to his absence, they have fallen into my hands; and
permit me to say, that these communications are read with pleasure, and
that nothing affords more joy to the Colony, than to hear of the
prosperity of the Colonization Society, and that you have some hopes of
aid from the General Government, which makes us more desirous to enlarge
our habitation and extend the borders of the Colony.

I must say, from the flattering prospects of your Society, I feel myself
very much at a loss how to proceed, in the absence of Mr.
Ashmun, with regard to making provisions for the reception of a large
number of emigrants, which appears to be indispensably necessary.
Therefore, after receiving your communication, we conceived the following
to be the most safe and prudent course.
_First_, to make arrangements to have erected at Millsburg, houses
to answer as receptacles sufficient to shelter from one hundred
and fifty to two hundred persons, I have therefore extended the
duties of Mr.

Benson so as to embrace that object. I was led to this course from the
following considerations.
_First_, from the productiveness of the Millsburg lands and the fewness
of their inhabitants. I know if Mr. Ashmun were present, it would be a
principal object with him to push that settlement forward with all
possible speed, and that for this purpose, he would send the emigrants by
the first two or three expeditions to that place. I think that those from
the fresh water rivers, if carried directly after their arrival here, up
to Millsburg, would suffer very little from change of climate. _Second_,
the fertility of the land is such a temptation to the farmer, that unless
he possesses laziness in its extreme degree, he cannot resist it; he
must and will go to work. _Thirdly_, it is important to strengthen that
settlement against any possible attack; and though we apprehend no
hostilities from the natives, yet we would have each settlement strong
enough to repel them.

I am happy to say, that the health, peace and prosperity of the
Colony, I think, is still advancing, and I hope that the Board of
Managers may have their wishes and expectations realized to their
fullest extent, with regard to the present and future prosperity
of the Colony.

Gurley, _Life of Jehudi Ashmun_, appendix, pp. 156-158.

Letter to the treasurer of the Massachusetts Baptist Education
Society:

Sir,
Here is a mite enclosed for your society. It is part of the proceeds
of a cotton field, for benevolent purposes. I helped to plough the ground,
plant, hoe, pick, gin and pack the cotton with my own hands. A part of the
proceeds is for the Colonization Society. My servants would shew their
large white teeth, when, to encourage them to do their work well, I
informed them that this cotton was designed to be a means of enlightening
their brethren in Africa.

Don't you think that Christians by and by, will act more like stewards
with the property God has given them? I think it better to give now
and then a mite, which the Lord may have bestowed upon me, to advance his
cause, than to lavish it on profligate and dissipated sons. Will not
God at a future day require the property he has loaned us?

We see you Northern folks seem conscious of this, by the exertions you are
using to advance the Redeemer's cause. This has become a fortunate
legatee, in comparison with what it was fifty years ago.

We, down here, so near the equator, think we can discover the upper
limb of the millennium sun already. Will he not get clear above
the horizon by 1866.

A Georgia Planter.

_The American Baptist Magazine_, Vol. IV, p. 181.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] These extracts were collected by Miles Mark Fisher.

BOOK REVIEWS

_The Master's Slave--Elijah John Fisher_. By MILES MARK FISHER.
The Judson Press, Philadelphia, Pa. Pp. 194.

This work is a biographical sketch of one of the most prominent Negro
Baptist preachers of his time.

The author, the son of the subject of the sketch, believes that too
little has been said concerning the Negro Church, which is largely
responsible for whatever advancement the race has made. To stimulate
interest in this institution and to give it the proper place in the
history of the race, this biography is given to the public.

The book contains an introduction by Dr. L. K. Williams, the popular
successor of Dr. Fisher at the Olivet Baptist Church in Chicago, where
the latter faithfully served many years. It contains also an
appreciation by Martin B.

Madden, Congressman from Illinois, who personally knew Dr. Fisher and
speaks most commendably of his character and achievements in that
State.

The actual sketch begins with the chapter entitled "Bound and Branded,"
presenting the life of Dr.

Fisher during the slavery of the last decade prior to emancipation. Herein
are set forth interesting facts showing the connection of the Negro with
Africa and his status in the slave-holding South. The effects of the
Civil War in this section appear also from page to page.

Then follows that part of his career when he as a youth undertook
to secure an education by which he might be qualified for the serious
duties of life.

How he began as a teacher during the beginning of Negro education of
the Reconstruction period, and how he finally became an exhorter and
developed into a minister acceptable to the communicants of his denomination,
make the story increasingly interesting. The sketch reaches its climax
through a detailed account of Dr. Fisher's work at Atlanta, Nashville, and
Chicago, emphasizing the last mentioned as the place of his most
successful labor.

The historian will find this work valuable in that it illuminates one of
the most interesting periods of Negro church history. It is not only
a sketch of one distinguished churchman but a narrative presenting an
important chapter of the story of the Baptists by relating the
many incidents connected with the leading churchmen and ecclesiastical
organizations interested in the uplift of the Negro since the Civil
War.

This narrative, moreover, shows how the Negro minister, in keeping with
the exigencies of the time, often had to be drawn into politics in self
defense and that in the case of unselfish service like that of Dr.
Fisher, he may come out of the controversy untarnished.

_History of the United States. Vol. V._ By EDWARD CHANNING. The
Macmillan Company, New York City. Pp. 615.

This is the most recent volume of Professor Channing's eight volume History
of the United States from the very beginning of our history to the
present time. This particular volume covers the years from 1815 to 1848
and is entitled "The Period of Transition." It is written in keeping
with the standard of thoroughness characteristic of the author and
is made further informing by the use of ten valuable maps illustrating
important facts in American History.

In this volume the author engages the attention of the reader with an
account of the wonderful century in which he writes. He then discusses
the westward movement of the population, urban migration, the rise
of labor unions, giving more attention to economic matters than his
predecessors have been accustomed to do in the treatment of this period.
A study of the documentary history of the United States has convinced the
author that these important factors in the making of this country
have been neglected.

His treatment, therefore, is a change in the point of view in American
historical writing.

This volume does not show the usual interest in slavery and abolition.

Only one chapter of this large work is devoted primarily to the plantation
life and abolitionism.

The author discusses the lot of the slave, accounting for his tendency
to escape from bondage, the traffic in human flesh, the free people
of color, the colonization movement in the South, and abolition in the
North. This chapter culminates in a discussion of the efforts of William
Lloyd Garrison, the agitating editor of the _Liberator_, of Wendell
Phillips, the abolition orator, of Prudence Crandall, the sacrificing
worker, and of Elijah Lovejoy, the martyr in the cause. Prof. Channing
does not go into details as to the achievements of the abolitionists.

His account is merely sufficient to connect this movement with other forces
at work in the country at that time.

Most of this volume is devoted to changes in religion, education, literature,
and politics, effected by such outstanding figures as James
Monroe, John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, John C.
Calhoun and Daniel Webster. The book shows an extensive treatment of the
territorial expansion of that time, especially the efforts to secure Texas,
California and Oregon, and the war with Mexico. On the whole, this book
has a decided economic and social trend. It is an effort to account for
the significant upheavals in our history through connection with
important industrial and economic events which have materially
influenced the history of the United States during the last century. The
book emphasizes the fact that current history can not be easily written,
that one must be far removed from situations in the past in order
to weigh the influences having a bearing thereon to determine exactly
how the country has become what it is today.

_Recent History of the United States_. By FREDERICK L. PAXSON.
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston. Pp. 588.

This book beginning with the inauguration of Hayes shows how he reestablished
home rule in the South, thus clearing the way for a realization of education
and economic reconstruction of both South and North.

The author then treats the civil and border strife as expressed in the
Mexican Revolution of 1876, Indian wars, social unrest, national labor
unions, and the War with Spain. Then follows the treatment of post-bellum
ideals as expressed by literary periodicals and new writers showing a
revolution in literature, and especially in historical writing.

In his treatment of silver, greenbacks, railroad and mine booms,
and the like, he shows that the country had reached a new stage in
its development when a transition both economic and political was
apparent.

This is made evident by his discussion of election frauds, Republican
factions, office holders in politics, the abuse of patronage and
the necessity for civil service reform.

Next the author takes up the era of prosperity, the disappearance of
the frontier, the land grants to railroads, the development of the
telephone, telegraph, typewriter, electrical appliances, and the like,
in their bearing on the industrial reconstruction of the whole
country.

The author then discusses events more in detail, directing his attention
to the tariff revision of the eighties, the "Mugwump Campaign" of 1884,
the Wild West, labor ideals, protection, populism, the revival of
the Democratic party through the leadership of Cleveland, industrial
unrest, political schism, the Spanish-American War, business in
politics, the career of Theodore Roosevelt, government control,
insurgency, the rise of Woodrow Wilson, watchful waiting, neutrality
and preparedness, the United States in the World War, and the League
of Nations.

Some attention is also given to the reconstruction and the election of
1920.

While the work is a valuable treatise from the point of view of a man
who is trying to write the history of a particular race, it does not come
up to the standard of history of the United States in all of its
national and racial ramifications.

So far as the Negro is concerned, it merely refers to his undoing as a
political factor in the Reconstruction, the efforts for his education
by northern sympathizers, the rise of Booker T.

Washington, the elimination of the Negro as a factor in the South, the
efforts to pass a force bill protecting the Negro in the exercise of
the right of suffrage, and the continued control of the South of the
Democratic party. A foreigner who reads this work might wonder whether
the Negroes by this political upheaval have been exterminated or have
emigrated from the country.

Any student of the history of the whole Southland knows that it
is centered largely around the Negro and any historian failing to
take this into account cannot be recognized as an authority.

_The Backbone of Africa. A Record of Travel during the Great War, with
some Suggestions for Administrative Reform._ By SIR ALFRED SHARPS, K. C.
M. G., C. B., formerly Governor of Nyasaland.

London, H. F. & G. Witherby, 1921. Pp. 232.

This is the reaction of a public functionary to the scenes of
colonial life as they appeared to him from a different angle in a
survey of the whole continent and under the circumstances of a
political upheaval.

He had in mind here the regions of Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Tanganyika, Ruanda,
the Congo, and the Upper Nile. The book is illustrated, well written and
suggestive throughout. It contains four valuable maps and has an
index largely of names.
Writing from the point of view of the exploiter of Africa, the
author considers such questions as the disposition of the German
Colonies coming into the possession of England at the close of the
Great War, the question of restitution, the partition of Africa,
the suggested union of the Protectorates in Eastern Africa under a
Governor General, the partition of German East Africa, the
redelimitation of boundaries, problems of railway construction and
a united East African Colony. He discusses also the Home Government,
native taxation, local representation, land along with land laws,
native rights, their education, the labor problem, migration,
industrial questions, and missions.
Treating the colonial policy in dealing with the natives, the author
shows some sympathy. He does not believe that the tax on natives
has been wisely imposed and, therefore, asks for a uniform and more
equitable system."That can easily be proved," said Orion. In a confident tone he desired
that the box should be placed on the table, and requested one of the
council, who understood such matters, to give his opinion. Paula knew the
man well. He was one of the most respected members of the household, the
chief mechanician whose duty it was to test and repair the water-clocks,
balances, measures and other instruments. He at once proceeded to examine
the lock and found it in perfect order, though the key, which was of
peculiar form, could certainly not have found a substitute in any false
key; and Paula was forced to admit that she had left the trunk locked at
noon and had worn the key round her neck ever since. Orion listened to
his opinion with a shrug, and before going to seek Katharina gave orders
that Paula and the nurse should be conducted to separate rooms. To arrive
at any clear decision in this matter, it was necessary that any
communication between these two should be rendered impossible. As soon as
the door was shut on them he hastened into the garden, where he hoped to
find Katharina.

The council looked after him with divided feelings. They were here
confronted by riddles that were hard to solve. No one of them felt that
he had a right to doubt the good intentions of their lord's son, whom
they looked up to as a talented and high-minded youth. His dispute with
Paula had struck them painfully, and each one asked himself how it was
that such a favorite with women should have failed to rouse any sentiment
but that of hatred in one of the handsomest of her sex. The marked
hostility she displayed to Orion injured her cause in the eyes of her
judges, who knew only too well how unpleasant her relations were with
Neforis. It was more than audacious in her to accuse the Mukaukas' son of
having broken open her trunk; only hatred could have prompted her to
utter such a charge. Still, there was something in her demeanor which
encouraged confidence in her assertions, and if Katharina could really
testify to having seen the empty medallion on the chain there would be no
alternative but to begin the enquiry again from a fresh point of view,
and to inculpate another robber. But who could have lavished such a
treasure as this gem in exchange for mere rubbish? It was inconceivable;
Ammonius the mechanician was right when he said that a woman full of
hatred was capable of anything, even the incredible and impossible.

Meanwhile it was growing dusk and the scorching day had turned to the
tempered heat of a glorious evening. The Mukaukas was still in his room
while his wife with Susannah and her daughter, Mary and her governess,
were enjoying the air and chatting in the open hall looking out on the
garden and the Nile. The ladies had covered their heads with gauze veils
as a protection against the mosquitoes, which were attracted in swarms
from the river by the lights, and also against the mists that rose from
the shallowing Nile; they were in the act of drinking some cooling
fruit-syrup which had just been brought in, when Orion made his
appearance.

"What has happened?" cried his mother in some anxiety, for she concluded
from his dishevelled hair and heated cheeks that the meeting had gone
anything rather than smoothly.

"Incredible things," he replied. "Paula fought like a lioness for her
father's freedman. . ."

"Simply to annoy us and put us in a difficulty," replied Neforis.

"No, no, Mother," replied Orion with some warmth. "But she has a will of
iron; a woman who never pauses at anything when she wants to carry her
point; and at the same time she goes to work with a keen wit that is
worthy of the greatest lawyer that I ever heard defend a cause in the
high court of the capital. Besides this her air of superiority, and her
divine beauty turn the heads of our poor household officers. It is fine
and noble, of course, to be so zealous in the cause of a servant; but it
can do no good, for the evidence against her stammering favorite is
overwhelming, and when her last plea is demolished the matter is ended.
She says that she showed a necklace to the child, and to you, charming
Katharina."

"Showed it?" cried the young girl. "She took it away from us--did not
she, Mary?"

"Well, we had taken it without her leave," replied the child.

"And she wants our children to appear in a court of justice to bear
witness for her highness?" asked Neforis indignantly.

"Certainly," replied Orion. "But Mary's evidence is of no value in law."

"And even if it were," replied his mother, "the child should not be mixed
up with this disgraceful business under any circumstances."

"Because I should speak for Paula!" cried Mary, springing up in great
excitement.

"You will just hold your tongue," her grandmother exclaimed.

"And as for Katharina," said the widow, "I do not at all like the notion
of her offering herself to be stared at by all those gentlemen."

"Gentlemen!" observed the girl. "Men--household officials and such like.
They may wait long enough for me!"

"You must nevertheless do their bidding, haughty rosebud," said Orion
laughing. "For you, thank God, are no longer a child, and a court of
justice has the right of requiring the presence of every grown person as
a witness. No harm will come to you, for you are under my protection.
Come with me. We must learn every lesson in life. Resistance is vain.
Besides, all you will have to do will be to state what you have seen, and
then, if I possibly can, I will bring you back under the tender escort of
this arm, to your mother once more. You must entrust your jewel to me
to-day, Susannah, and this trustworthy witness shall tell you afterwards
how she fared under my care."

Katharina was quite capable of reading the implied meaning of these
words, and she was not ill-pleased to be obliged to go off alone with the
governor's handsome son, the first man for whom her little heart had beat
quicker; she sprang up eagerly; but Mary clung to her arm, and insisted
so vehemently and obstinately on being taken with them to bear witness in
Paula's behalf, that her governess and Dame Neforis had the greatest
difficulty in reducing her to obedience and letting the pair go off
without her. Both mothers looked after them with great satisfaction, and
the governor's wife whispered to Susannah: "Before the judges to-day, but
ere long, please God, before the altar at Church!"

To reach the hall of judgment they could go either through the house or
round it. If the more circuitous route were chosen, it lay first through
the garden; and this was the course taken by Orion. He had made a very
great effort in the presence of the ladies to remain master of the
agitation that possessed him; he saw that the battle he had begun, and
from which he, at any rate, could not and would not now retire, was
raging more and more fiercely, obliging him to drag the young creature
who must become his wife--the die was already cast--into the course of
crime he had started on.

When he had agreed with his mother that he was not to prefer his suit for
Katharina till the following day, he had hoped to prove to her in the
interval that this little thing was no wife for him; and now--oh! Irony
of Fate--he found himself compelled to the very reverse of what he longed
to do: to fight the woman he loved--Yes, still loved--as if she were his
mortal foe, and pay his court to the girl who really did not suit him. It
was maddening, but inevitable; and once more spurring himself with the
word "Onwards!" he flung himself into the accomplishment of the unholy
task of subduing the inexperienced child at his elbow into committing
even a crime for his sake. His heart was beating wildly; but no pause, no
retreat was possible: he must conquer. "Onwards, then, onwards!"

When they had passed out of the light of the lamps into the shade he took
his young companion's slender hand-thankful that the darkness concealed
his features--and pressed the delicate fingers to his lips.

"Oh!--Orion!" she exclaimed shyly, but she did not resist.

"I only claim my due, sunshine of my soul!" he said insinuatingly. "If
your heart beat as loud as mine, our mothers might hear them!"

"But it does!" she joyfully replied, her curly head bent on one side.

"Not as mine does," he said with a sigh, laying her little hand on his
heart. He could do so in all confidence, for its spasmodic throbbing
threatened to suffocate him.

"Yes indeed," she said. "It is beating. . ."

"So that they can hear it indoors," he added with a forced laugh. "Do you
think your dear mother has not long since read our feelings?"

"Of course she has," whispered Katharina. "I have rarely seen her in such
good spirits as since your return."

"And you, you little witch?"

"I? Of course I was glad--we all were.--And your parents!"

"Nay, nay, Katharina! What you yourself felt when we met once more, that
is what I want to know."

"Oh, let that pass! How can I describe such a thing?"

"Is that quite impossible?" he asked and clasped her arm more closely in
his own. He must win her over, and his romantic fancy helped him to paint
feelings he had never had, in glowing colors. He poured out sweet words
of love, and she was only too ready to believe them. At a sign from him
she sat down confidingly on a wooden bench in the old avenue which led to
the northern side of the house. Flowers were opening on many of the
shrubs and shedding rich, oppressive perfume. The moonlight pierced
through the solemn foliage of the sycamores, and shimmering streaks and
rings of light played in the branches, on the trunks, and on the dark
ground. The heat of the day still lingered in the leafy roofs overhead,
sultry and heavy even now; and in this alley he called her for the first
time his own, his betrothed, and enthralled her heart in chains and
bonds. Each fervent word thrilled with the wild and painful agitation
that was torturing his soul, and sounded heartfelt and sincere. The scent
of flowers, too, intoxicated her young and inexperienced heart; she
willingly offered her lips to his kisses, and with exquisite bliss felt
the first glow of youthful love returned.

She could have lingered thus with him for a lifetime; but in a few
minutes he sprang up, anxious to put an end to this tender dalliance
which was beginning to be too much even for him, and exclaimed:

"This cursed, this infernal trial! But such is the fate of man! Duty
calls, and he must return from all the bliss of Paradise to the world
again. Give me your arm, my only love, my all!"

And Katharina obeyed. Dazzled and bewildered by the extraordinary
happiness that had come to meet her, she allowed him to lead her on,
listening with suspended breath as he added: "Out of this beatitude back
to the sternest of duties!--And how odious, how immeasurably loathesome
is the case in question! How gladly would I have been a friend to Paula,
a faithful protector instead of a foe!"

As he spoke he felt the girl's left hand clench tighter on his arm, and
this spurred him on in his guilty purpose. Katharina herself had
suggested to his mind the course he must pursue to attain his end. He
went on to influence her jealousy by praising Paula's charm and
loftiness, excusing himself in his own eyes by persuading himself that a
lover was justified in inducing his betrothed to save his happiness and
his honor.

Still, as he uttered each flattering word, he felt that he was lowering
himself and doing a fresh injustice to Paula. He found it only too easy
to sing her praises; but as he did so with growing enthusiasm Katharina
hit him on the arm exclaiming, half in jest and half seriously vexed:

"Oh, she is a goddess! And pray do you love her or me? You had better not
make me jealous! Do you hear?"

"You little simpleton!" he said gaily; and then he added soothingly: "She
is like the cold moon, but you are the bright warming sun. Yes,
Paula!--we will leave Paula to some Olympian god, some archangel. I
rejoice in my gladsome little maiden who will enjoy life with me, and all
its pleasures!"

"That we will!" she exclaimed triumphantly; the horizon of her future was
radiant with sunshine.

"Good Heavens!" he exclaimed as if in surprise. "The lights are already
shining in that miserable hall of justice! Ah, love, love! Under that
enchantment we had forgotten the object for which we came out.--Tell me,
my darling, do you remember exactly what the necklace was like that you
and Mary were playing with this afternoon?"

"It was very finely wrought, but in the middle hung a rubbishy broken
medallion of gold."

"You are a pretty judge of works of art! Then you overlooked the fine
engraved gem which was set in that modest gold frame?"

"Certainly not."

"I assure you, little wise-head!"

"No, my dearest." As she spoke she looked up saucily, as though she had
achieved some great triumph. "I know very well what gems are. My father
left a very fine collection, and my mother says that by his will they are
all to belong to my future husband."

"Then I can set you, my jewel, in a frame of the rarest gems."

"No, no," she cried gaily. "Let me have a setting indeed, for I am but a
fugitive thing; but only, only in your heart."

"That piece of goldsmith's work is already done.--But seriously my child;
with regard to Paula's necklace: it really was a gem, and you must have
happened to see only the back of it. That is just as you describe it: a
plain setting of gold."

"But Orion. . . ."

"If you love me, sweetheart, contradict me no further. In the future I
will always accept your views, but in this case your mistake might
involve us in a serious misunderstanding, by compelling me to give in to
Paula and make her my ally.--Here we are! But wait one moment
longer.--And once more, as to this gem. You see we may both be wrong--I
as much as you; but I firmly believe that I am in the right. If you make
a statement contrary to mine I shall appear before the judges as a liar.
We are now betrothed--we are but one, wholly one; what damages or
dignifies one of us humiliates or elevates the other. If you, who love
me--you, who, as it is already whispered, are soon to be the mistress of
the governor's house--make a statement opposed to mine they are certain
to believe it. You see, your whole nature is pure kindness, but you are
still too young and innocent quite to understand all the duties of that
omnipotent love which beareth and endureth all things. If you do not
yield to me cheerfully in this case you certainly do not love me as you
ought. And what is it to ask? I require nothing of you but that you
should state before the court that you saw Paula's necklace at noon
to-day, and that there was a gem hanging to it--a gem with Love and
Psyche engraved on it."

"And I am to say that before all those men?" asked Katharina doubtfully.

"You must indeed, you kind little angel!" cried Orion tenderly. "And do
you think it pretty in a betrothed bride to refuse her lover's first
request so grudgingly, suspiciously, and ungraciously? Nay, nay. If there
is the tiniest spark of love for me in your heart, if you do not want to
see me reduced to implore Paula for mercy. . . ."

"But what is it all about? How can it matter so much to any one whether a
gem or a mere plate of gold . . . ?"

"All that I will explain later," he hastily replied.

"Tell me now. . . ."

"Impossible. We have already put the patience of the judges to too severe
a test. We have not a moment to lose."

"Very well then; but I shall die of confusion and shame if I have to make
a declaration. . . ."

"Which is perfectly truthful, and by which you can prove to me that you
love me," he urged.

"But it is dreadful!" she exclaimed anxiously. "At least fasten my veil
closely over my face.--All those bearded men. . . ."

"Like the ostrich," said Orion, laughing as he complied. "If you really
cannot agree with your . . . What is it you called me just now? Say it
again."

"My dearest!" she said shyly but tenderly.

She helped Orion to fold her veil twice over her face, and did not thrust
him aside when he whispered in her ear: "Let us see if a kiss cannot be
sweet even through all that wrapping!--Now, come. It will be all over in
a few minutes."

He led the way into the anteroom to the great hall, begged her to wait a
moment, and then went in and hastily informed the assembly that Dame
Susannah had entrusted her daughter to him only on condition that he
should escort her back again as soon as she had given her testimony. Then
Paula was brought in and he desired her to be seated.

It was with a sinking and anxious heart that Katharina had entered the
anteroom. She had screened herself from a scolding before now by trivial
subterfuges, but never had told a serious lie; and every instinct
rebelled against the demand that she should now state a direct falsehood.
But could Orion, the noblest of mankind, the idol of the whole town, so
pressingly entreat her to do anything that was wrong? Did not love--as he
had said--make it her duty to do everything that might screen him from
loss or injury? It did not seem to her to be quite as it should be, but
perhaps she did not altogether understand the matter; she was so young
and inexperienced. She hated the idea, too, that, if she opposed her
lover, he would have to come to terms with Paula. She had no lack of
self-possession, and she told herself that she might hold her own with
any girl in Memphis; still, she felt the superiority of the handsome,
tall, proud Syrian, nor could she forget how, the day before yesterday,
when Paula had been walking up and down the garden with Orion the chief
officer of Memphis had exclaimed: "What a wonderfully handsome couple!"
She herself had often thought that no more beautiful, elegant and lovable
creature than Thomas' daughter walked the earth; she had longed and
watched for a glance or a kind word from her. But since hearing those
words a bitter feeling had possessed her soul against Paula, and there
had been much to foster it. Paula always treated her like a child instead
of a grown-up girl, as she was. Why, that very morning, had she sought
out her betrothed--for she might call him so now--and tried to keep her
away from him? And how was it that Orion, even while declaring his love
for her, had spoken more than warmly--enthusiastically of Paula? She must
be on her guard, and though others should speak of the great good fortune
that had fallen to her lot, Paula, at any rate, would not rejoice in it,
for Katharina felt and knew that she was not indifferent to Orion. She
had not another enemy in the world, but Paula was one; her love had
everything to fear from her--and suddenly she asked herself whether the
gold medallion she had seen might not indeed have been a gem? Had she
examined the necklace closely, even for a moment? And why should she
fancy she had sharper sight than Orion with his large, splendid eyes?

He was right, as he always was. Most engraved gems were oval in form, and
the pendant which she had seen and was to give evidence about, was
undoubtedly oval. Then it was not like Orion to require a falsehood of
her. In any case it was her duty to her betrothed to preserve from evil,
and prevent him from concluding any alliance with that false Siren. She
knew what she had to say; and she was about to loosen a portion of her
veil from her face that she might look Paula steadfastly in the eyes,
when Orion came back to fetch her into the hall where the Court was
sitting. To his delight--nay almost to his astonishment--she stated with
perfect confidence that a gem had been hanging to Paula's necklace at
noon that day; and when the onyx was shown her and she was asked if she
remembered the stone, she calmly replied:

"It may or it may not be the same; I only remember the oval gold back to
it: besides I was only allowed to have the necklace in my hands for a
very short time."

When Nilus, the treasurer, desired her to look more closely at the
figures of Eros and Psyche to refresh her memory, she evaded it by
saying: "I do not like such heathen images: we Jacobite maidens wear
different adornments."

At this Paula rose and stepped towards her with a look of stern reproof;
little Katharina was glad now that it had occurred to her to cover her
face with a double veil. But the utter confusion she felt under the
Syrian girl's gaze did not last long. Paula exclaimed reproach fully:
"You speak of your faith. Like mine, it requires you to respect the
truth. Consider how much depends on your declaration; I implore you,
child. . ."

But the girl interrupted her rival exclaiming with much irritation and
vehement excitement:

"I am no longer a child, not even as compared with you; and I think
before I speak, as I was taught to do."

She threw back her little head with a confident air, and said very
decidedly:

"That onyx hung to the middle of the chain."

"How dare you, you audacious hussy!" It was Perpetua, quite unable to
contain herself, who flung the words in her face. Katharina started as
though an asp had stung her and turned round on the woman who had dared
to insult her so grossly and so boldly. She was on the verge of tears as
she looked helplessly about her for a defender; but she had not long to
wait, for Orion instantly gave orders that Perpetua should be imprisoned
for bearing false witness. Paula, however, as she had not perjured
herself, but had merely invented an impossible tale with a good motive,
was dismissed, and her chest was to be replaced in her room.

At this Paula once more stepped forth; she unhooked the onyx from the
chain and flung it towards Gamaliel, who caught it, while she exclaimed:

"I make you a present of it, Jew! Perhaps the villain who hung it to my
chain may buy it back again. The chain was given to my great-grandmother
by the saintly Theodosius, and rather than defile it by contact with that
gift from a villain, I will throw it into the Nile!--You--you, poor,
deluded judges--I cannot be wroth with you, but I pity you!--My
Hiram . . ." and she looked at the freedman, "is an honest soul whom I
shall remember with gratitude to my dying day; but as to that unrighteous
son of a most righteous father, that man . . ." and she raised her voice,
while she pointed straight at Orion's face; but the young man interrupted
her with a loud:

"Enough!"

She tried to control herself and replied:

"I will submit. Your conscience will tell you a hundred times over what I
need not say. One last word. . ." She went close up to him and said in
his ear:

"I have been able to refrain from using my deadliest weapon against you
for the sake of keeping my word. Now you, if you are not the basest
wretch living, keep yours, and save Hiram."

His only reply was an assenting nod; Paula paused on the threshold and,
turning to Katharina, she added: "You, child--for you are but a
child--with what nameless suffering will not the son of the Mukaukas
repay you for the service you have rendered him!" Then she left the room.
Her knees trembled under her as she mounted the stairs, but when she had
again taken her place by the side of the hapless, crazy girl a merciful
God granted her the relief of tears. Her friend saw her and left her to
weep undisturbed, till she herself called him and confided to him all she
had gone through in the course of this miserable day.

Orion and Katharina had lost their good spirits; they went back to the
colonnade in a dejected mood. On the way she pressed him to explain to
her why he had insisted on her making this declaration, but he put her
off till the morrow. They found Susannah alone, for his mother had been
sent for by her husband, who was suffering more than usual, and she had
taken Mary with her.

After bidding the widow good-night and escorting her to her chariot, he
returned to the hall where the Court was still sitting. There he
recapitulated the case as it now stood, and all the evidence against the
freed man. The verdict was then pronounced: Hiram was condemned to death
with but one dissentient voice that of Nilus the treasurer.

Orion ordered that the execution of the sentence should be postponed; he
did not go back into the house, however, but had his most spirited horse
saddled and rode off alone into the desert. He had won, but he felt as
though in this race he had rushed into a morass and must be choked in it.


     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Love has two faces: tender devotion and bitter aversion
     Self-interest and egoism which drive him into the cave
     The man who avoids his kind and lives in solitude
     You have a habit of only looking backwards


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 4.


CHAPTER XIII.

Paula's report of the day's proceedings, of Orion's behavior, and of the
results of the trial angered the leech beyond measure; he vehemently
approved the girl's determination to quit this cave of robbers, this
house of wickedness, of treachery, of imbecile judges and false
witnesses, as soon as possible. But she had no opportunity for a quiet
conversation with him, for Philippus soon had his hands full in the care
of the sufferers.

Rustem, the Masdakite, who till now had been lying unconscious, had been
roused from his lethargy by some change of treatment, and loudly called
for his master Haschim. When the Arab did not appear, and it was
explained to him that he could not hope to see him before the morning,
the young giant sat up among his pillows, propping himself on his arms
set firmly against the couch behind him, looked about him with a
wandering gaze, and shook his big head like an aggrieved lion--but that
his thick mane of hair had been cut off--abusing the physician all the
time in his native tongue, and in a deep, rolling, bass voice that rang
through the rooms though no one understood a word. Philippus, quite
undaunted, was trying to adjust the bandage over his wound, when Rustem
suddenly flung his arms round his body and tried with all his might, and
with foaming lips, to drag him down. He clung to his antagonist, roaring
like a wild beast; even now Philippus never for an instant lost his
presence of mind but desired the nun to fetch two strong slaves. The
Sister hurried away, and Paula remained the eyewitness of a fearful
struggle. The physician had twisted his ancles round those of the
stalwart Persian, and putting forth a degree of strength which could
hardly have been looked for in a stooping student, tall and large-boned
as he was, he wrenched the Persian's hands from his hips, pressed his
fingers between those of Rustem, forced him back on to his pillows, set
his knees against the brazen frame of the couch, and so effectually held
him down that he could not sit up again. Rustem exerted every muscle to
shake off his opponent; but the leech was the stronger, for the Masdakite
was weakened by fever and loss of blood. Paula watched this contest
between intelligent force and the animal strength of a raving giant with
a beating heart, trembling in every limb. She could not help her friend,
but she followed his every movement as she stood at the head of the bed;
and as he held down the powerful creature before whom her frail uncle had
cowered in abject terror, she could not help admiring his manly beauty;
for his eyes sparkled with unwonted fire, and the mean chin seemed to
lengthen with the frightful effort he was putting forth, and so to be
brought into proportion with his wide forehead and the rest of his
features. Her spirit quaked for him; she fancied she could see something
great and heroic in the man, in whom she had hitherto discovered no merit
but his superior intellect.

The struggle had lasted some minutes before Philip felt the man's arms
grow limp, and he called to Paula to bring him a sheet--a rope--what
not--to bind the raving man. She flew into the next room, quite
collected; fetched her handkerchief, snatched off the silken girdle that
bound her waist, rushed back and helped the leech to tie the maniac's
hands. She understood her friend's least word, or a movement of his
finger; and when the slaves whom the nun had fetched came into the room,
they found Rustem with his hands firmly bound, and had only to prevent
him from leaping out of bed or throwing himself over the edge. Philippus,
quite out of breath, explained to the slaves how they were to act, and
when he opened his medicine-chest Paula noticed that his swollen, purple
fingers were trembling. She took out the phial to which he pointed, mixed
the draught according to his orders, and was not afraid to pour it
between the teeth of the raving man, forcing them open with the help of
the slaves.

The soothing medicine calmed him in a few minutes, and the leech himself
could presently wash the wound and apply a fresh dressing with the
practised aid of the Sister.

Meanwhile the crazy girl had been waked by the ravings of the Persian,
and was anxiously enquiring if the dog--the dreadful dog--was there. But
she soon allowed herself to be quieted by Paula, and she answered the
questions put to her so rationally and gently, that her nurse called the
physician who could confirm Paula in her hope that a favorable change had
taker place in her mental condition. Her words were melancholy and mild;
and when Paula remarked on this Philippus observed:

"It is on the bed of sickness that we learn to know our fellow-creatures.
The frantic girl, who perhaps fell on the son of this house with
murderous intent, now reveals her true, sweet nature. And as for that
poor fellow, he is a powerful creature, an honest one too; I would stake
my ten fingers on it!"

"What makes you so sure of that?"

"Even in his delirium he did hot once scratch or bite, but only defended
himself like a man.--Thank you, now, for your assistance. If you had not
flung the cord round his hands, the game might have ended very
differently."

"Surely not!" exclaimed Paula decidedly. "How strong you are, Philip. I
feel quite alarmed!"

"You?" said the leech laughing. "On the contrary, you need never be
alarmed again now that you have seen by chance that your champion is no
weakling.--Pfooh! I shall be glad now of a little rest." She offered him
her handkerchief, and while he thankfully used it to wipe his
brow--controlling with much difficulty the impulse to press it to his
lips, he added lightly:

"With such an assistant everything must go well. There is no merit in
being strong; every one can be strong who comes into the world with
healthy blood and well-knit bones, who keeps all his limbs well
exercised, as I did in my youth, and who does not destroy his inheritance
by dissipated living.--However, I still feel the struggle in my hands;
but there is some good wine in the next room yet, and two or three cups
of it will do me good." They went together into the adjoining room where,
by this time, most of the lamps were extinguished. Paula poured out the
wine, touched the goblet with her lips, and he emptied it at a draught;
but he was not to be allowed to drink off a second, for he had scarcely
raised it, when they heard voices in the Masdakite's room, and Neforis
came in. The governor's careful wife had not quitted her husband's
couch--even Rustem's storming had not induced her to leave her post; but
when she was informed by the slaves what had been going on, and that
Paula was still up-stairs with the leech, she had come to the strangers'
rooms as soon as her husband could spare her to speak to Philippus, to
represent to Paula what the proprieties required, and to find out what
the strange noises could be which still seemed to fill the house--at this
hour usually as silent as the grave. They proceeded from the sick-rooms,
but also from Orion, who had just come in, and from Nilus the treasurer,
who had been called by the former into his room, though the night was
fast drawing on to morning. To the governor's wife everything seemed
ominous at the close of this terrible day, marked in the calendar as
unlucky; so she made her way up-stairs, escorted by her husband's night
watcher, and holding in her hand a small reliquary to which she ascribed
the power of banning vile spirits.

She came into the sick-room swiftly and noiselessly, put the nun through
a strict cross-examination with the fretful sharpness of a person
disturbed in her night's rest. Then she went into the sitting-room where
Philippus was on the point of pledging Paula in his second cup of wine,
while she stood before him with dishevelled hair and robe ungirt. All
this was an offence against good manners such as she would not suffer in
her house, and she stoutly ordered her husband's niece to go to bed.
After all the offences that had been pardoned her this day--no,
yesterday--she exclaimed, it would have been more becoming in the girl to
examine herself in silence, in her own room, to exorcise the lying
spirits which had her in their power, and implore her Saviour for
forgiveness, than to pretend to be nursing the sick while she was
carrying on, with a young man, an orgy which, as the Sister had just told
her, had lasted since mid-day.

Paula spoke not a word, though the color changed in her face more than
once as she listened to this speech. But when Neforis finally pointed to
the door, she said, with all the cold pride she had at her command when
she was the object of unworthy suspicions:

"Your aim is easily seen through. I should scorn to reply, but that you
are the wife of the man who, till you set him against me, was glad to
call himself my friend and protector, and who is also related to me. As
usual, you attribute to me an unworthy motive. In showing me the door of
this room consecrated by suffering, you are turning me out of your house,
which you and your son--for I must say it for once--have made a hell to
me."

"I! And my--No! this is indeed--" exclaimed the matron in panting rage.
She clasped her hands over her heaving bosom and her pale face was dyed
crimson, while her eyes flashed wrathful lightnings. "That is too much; a
thousand times too much--a thousand times--do you hear?--And I--I
condescend to answer you! We picked her up in the street, and have
treated her like a daughter, spent enormous sums on her, and now. . . ."

This was addressed to the leech rather than to Paula; but she took up the
gauntlet and replied in a tone of unqualified scorn:

"And now I plainly declare, as a woman of full age, free to dispose of
myself, that to-morrow morning I leave this house with everything that
belongs to me, even if I should go as a beggar;--this house, where I have
been grossly insulted, where I and my faithful servant have been falsely
condemned, and where he is even now about to be murdered."

"And where you have been dealt with far too mildly," Neforis shrieked at
her audacious antagonist, "and preserved from sharing the fate of the
robber you smuggled into the house. To save a criminal--it is unheard
of:--you dared to accuse the son of your benefactor of being a corrupt
judge."

"And so he is," exclaimed Paula furious. "And what is more, he has
inveigled the child whom you destine to be his wife into bearing false
witness. More--much more could I say, but that, even if I did not respect
the mother, your husband has deserved that I should spare him."

"Spare him-spare!" cried Neforis contemptuously. "You--you will spare us!
The accused will be merciful and spare the judge! But you shall be made
to speak;--aye, made to speak! And as to what you, a slanderer, can say
about false witness. . ."

"Your own granddaughter," interrupted the leech, "will be compelled to
repeat it before all the world, noble lady, if you do not moderate
yourself."

Neforis laughed hysterically.

"So that is the way the wind blows!" she exclaimed, quite beside herself.
"The sick-room is a temple of Bacchus and Venus; and this disgraceful
conduct is not enough, but you must conspire to heap shame and disgrace
on this righteous house and its masters."

Then, resting her left hand which held the reliquary on her hip, she
added with hasty vehemence:

"So be it. Go away; go wherever you please! If I find you under this roof
to-morrow at noon, you thankless, wicked girl, I will have you turned out
into the streets by the guard. I hate you--for once I will ease my poor,
tormented heart--I loathe you; your very existence is an offence to me
and brings misfortune on me and on all of us; and besides--besides, I
should prefer to keep the emeralds we have left."

This last and cruelest taunt, which she had brought out against her
better feelings, seemed to have relieved her soul of a hundred-weight of
care; she drew a deep breath, and turning to Philippus, went on far more
quietly and rationally:

"As for you, Philip, my husband needs you. You know well what we have
offered you and you know George's liberal hand. Perhaps you will think
better of it, and will learn to perceive. . ."

"I! . . ." said the leech with a lofty smile. "Do you really know me so
little? Your husband, I am ready to admit, stands high in my esteem, and
when he wants me he will no doubt send for me. But never again will I
cross this threshold uninvited, or enter a house where right is trodden
underfoot, where defenceless innocence is insulted and abandoned to
despair.

"You may stare in astonishment! Your son has desecrated his father's
judgment-seat, and the blood of guiltless Hiram is on his
head.--You--well, you may still cling to your emeralds. Paula will not
touch them; she is too high-souled to tell you who it is that you would
indeed do well to lock up in the deepest dungeon-cell! What I have heard
from your lips breaks every tie that time had knit between us. I do not
demand that my friends should be wealthy, that they should have any
attractions or charm, any special gifts of mind or body; but we must meet
on common ground: that of honorable feeling. That you did not bring into
the world, or you have lost it; and from this hour I am a stranger to you
and never wish to see you again, excepting by the side of your husband
when he requires me."

He spoke the last words with such immeasurable dignity that Neforis was
startled and bereft of all self-control. She had been treated as a wretch
worthy of utter scorn by a man beneath her in rank, but whom she always
regarded as one of the most honest, frank and pure-minded she had ever
known; a man indispensable to her husband, because he knew how to
mitigate his sufferings, and could restrain him from the abuse of his
narcotic anodyne. He was the only physician of repute, far and wide. She
was to be deprived of the services of this valuable ally, to whom little
Mary and many of the household owed their lives, by this Syrian girl; and
she herself, sure that she was a good and capable wife and mother, was to
stand there like a thing despised and avoided by every honest man,
through this evil genius of her house!

It was too much. Tortured by rage, vexation, and sincere distress, she
said in a complaining voice, while the tears started to her eyes:

"But what is the meaning of all this? You, who know me, who have seen me
ruling and caring for my family, you turn your back upon me in my own
house and point the finger at me? Have I not always been a faithful wife,
nursing my husband for years and never leaving his sick-bed, never
thinking of anything but how to ease his pain? I have lived like a
recluse from sheer sense of duty and faithful lose, while other wives,
who have less means than I, live in state and go to entertainments.--And
whose slaves are better kept and more often freed than ours? Where is the
beggar so sure of an alms as in our house, where I, and I alone, uphold
piety?--And now am I so fallen that the sun may not shine on me, and that
a worthy man like you should withdraw his friendship all in a moment, and
for the sake of this ungrateful, loveless creature--because, because,
what did you call it--because the mind is wanting in me--or what did you
call it that I must have before you . . . ?"

"It is called feeling," interrupted the leech, who was sorry for the
unhappy woman, in whom he knew there was much that was good. "Is the word
quite new to you, my lady Neforis?--It is born with us; but a firm will
can elevate the least noble feeling, and the best that nature can bestow
will deteriorate through self-indulgence. But, in the day of judgment, if
I am not very much mistaken, it is not our acts but our feeling that will
be weighed. It would ill-become me to blame you, but I may be allowed to
pity you, for I see the disease in your soul which, like gangrene in the
body. . ."

"What next!" cried Neforis.

"This disease," the physician calmly went on--"I mean hatred, should be
far indeed from so pious a Christian. It has stolen into your heart like
a thief in the night, has eaten you up, has made bad blood, and led you
to treat this heavily-afflicted orphan as though you were to put stocks
and stones in the path of a blind man to make him fall. If, as it would
seem, my opinion still weighs with you a little, before Paula leaves your
house you will ask her pardon for the hatred with which you have
persecuted her for years, which has now led you to add an intolerable
insult--in which you yourself do not believe--to all the rest."

At this Paula, who had been watching the physician all through his
speech, turned to Dame Neforis, and unclasped her hands which were lying
in her lap, ready to shake hands with her uncle's wife if she only
offered hers, though she was still fully resolved to leave the house.

A terrible storm was raging in the lady's soul. She felt that she had
often been unkind to Paula. That a painful doubt still obscured the
question as to who had stolen the emerald she had unwillingly confessed
before she had come up here. She knew that she would be doing her husband
a great service by inducing the girl to remain, and she would only too
gladly have kept the leech in the house;--but then how deeply had she,
and her son, been humiliated by this haughty creature!

Should she humble herself to her, a woman so much younger, offer her
hand, make. . . .

At this moment they heard the tinkle of the silver bowl, into which her
husband threw a little ball when he wanted her. His pale, suffering face
rose before her inward eye, she could hear him asking for his opponent at
draughts, she could see his sad, reproachful gaze when she told him
to-morrow that she, Neforis, had driven his niece, the daughter of the
noble Thomas, out of the house--, with a swift impulse she went towards
Paula, grasping the reliquary in her left hand and holding out her right,
and said in a low voice.

"Shake hands, girl. I often ought to have behaved differently to you; but
why have you never in the smallest thing sought my love? God is my
witness that at first I was fully disposed to regard you as a daughter,
but you--well, let it pass. I am sorry now that I should--if I have
distressed you."

At the first words Paula had placed her hand in that of Neforis. Hers was
as cold as marble, the elder woman's was hot and moist; it seemed as
though their hands were typical of the repugnance of their hearts. They
both felt it so, and their clasp was but a brief one. When Paula withdrew
hers, she preserved her composure better than the governor's wife, and
said quite calmly, though her cheeks were burning:

"Then we will try to part without any ill-will, and I thank you for
having made that possible. To-morrow morning I hope I may be permitted to
take leave of my uncle in peace, for I love him; and of little Mary."

"But you need not go now! On the contrary, I urgently request you to
stay," Neforis eagerly put in.

"George will not let you leave. You yourself know how fond he is of you."

"He has often been as a father to me," said Paula, and even her eyes
shone through tears. "I would gladly have stayed with him till the end.
Still, it is fixed--I must go."

"And if your uncle adds his entreaties to mine?"

"It will be in vain."

Neforis took the maiden's hand in her own again, and tried with genuine
anxiety to persuade her,--but Paula was firm. She adhered to her
determination to leave the governor's house in the morning.

"But where will you find a suitable house?" cried Neforis. "A residence
that will be fit for you?"

"That shall be my business," replied the physician. "Believe me, noble
lady, it would be best for all that Paula should seek another home. But
it is to be hoped that she may decide on remaining in Memphis."

At this Neforis exclaimed:

"Here, with us, is her natural home!--Perhaps God may turn your heart for
your uncle's sake, and we may begin a new and happier life." Paula's only
reply was a shake of the head; but Neforis did not see it the metal
tinkle sounded for the third time, and it was her duty to respond to its
call.

As soon as she had left the room Paula drew a deep breath, exclaiming:

"O God! O God! How hard it was to refrain from flinging in her teeth the
crime her wicked son. . . . No, no; nothing should have made me do that.
But I cannot tell you how the mere sight of that woman angers me, how
light-hearted I feel since I have broken down the bridge that connected
me with this house and with Memphis."

"With Memphis?" asked Philippus.

"Yes," said Paula gladly. "I go away--away from hence, out of the
vicinity of this woman and her son!--Whither? Oh! back to Syria, or to
Greece--every road is the right one, if it only takes me away from this
place."

"And I, your friend?" asked Philippus.

"I shall bear the remembrance of you in a grateful heart."

The physician smiled, as though something had happened just as he
expected; after a moment's reflection he said:

"And where can the Nabathaean find you, if indeed he discovers your
father in the hermit of Sinai?"

The question startled and surprised Paula, and Philippus now adduced
every argument to convince her that it was necessary that she should
remain in the City of the Pyramids. In the first place she must liberate
her nurse--in this he could promise to help her--and everything he said
was so judicious in its bearing on the circumstances that had to be
reckoned with, and the facts actual or possible, that she was astonished
at the practical good sense of this man, with whom she had generally
talked only of matters apart from this world. Finally she yielded,
chiefly for the sake of her father and Perpetua; but partly in the hope
of still enjoying his society. She would remain in Memphis, at any rate
for the present, under the roof of a friend of the physician's--long
known to her by report--a Melchite like herself, and there await the
further development of her fate.

To be away from Orion and never, never to see him again was her heartfelt
wish. All places were the same to her where she had no fear of meeting
him. She hated him; still she knew that her heart would have no peace so
long as such a meeting was possible. Still, she longed to free herself
from a desire to see what his further career would be, which came over
her again and again with overwhelming and terrible power. For that
reason, and for that only, she longed to go far, far away, and she was
hardly satisfied by the leech's assurance that her new protector would be
able to keep away all visitors whom she might not wish to receive. And he
himself, he added, would make it his business to stand between her and
all intruders the moment she sent for him.

They did not part till the sun was rising above the eastern hills; as
they separated Paula said:

"So this morning a new life begins for me, which I can well imagine will,
by your help, be pleasanter than that which is past."

And Philippus replied with happy emotion: "The new life for me began
yesterday."


CHAPTER XIV.

Between morning and noon Mary was sitting on a low cane seat under the
sycamores which yesterday had shaded Katharina's brief young happiness;
by her side was her governess Eudoxia, under whose superintendence she
was writing out the Ten Commandments from a Greek catechism.

The teacher had been lulled to sleep by the increasing heat and the
pervading scent of flowers, and her pupil had ceased to write. Her eyes,
red with tears, were fixed on the shells with which the path was strewn,
and she was using her long ruler, at first to stir them about, and then
to write the words: "Paula," and "Paula, Mary's darling," in large
capital letters. Now and again a butterfly, following the motion of the
rod, brought a smile to her pretty little face from which the dark spirit
"Trouble" had not wholly succeeded in banishing gladness. Still, her
heart was heavy. Everything around her, in the garden and in the house,
was still; for her grandfather's state had become seriously worse at
sunrise, and every sound must be hushed. Mary was thinking of the poor
sufferer: what pain he had to bear, and how the parting from Paula would
grieve him, when Katharina came towards her down the path.

The young girl did little credit to-day to her nickname of "the
water-wagtail;" her little feet shuffled through the shelly gravel, her
head hung wearily, and when one of the myriad insects, that were busy in
the morning sunshine, came within her reach she beat it away angrily with
her fan. As she came up to Mary she greeted her with the usual "All
hail!" but the child only nodded in response, and half turning her back
went on with her inscription.

Katharina, however, paid no heed to this cool reception, but said in
sympathetic tones:

"Your poor grandfather is not so well, I hear?" Mary shrugged her
shoulders.

"They say he is very dangerously ill. I saw Philippus himself."

"Indeed?" said Mary without looking up, and she went on writing.

"Orion is with him," Katharina went on. "And Paula is really going away?"

The child nodded dumbly, and her eyes again filled with tears.

Katharina now observed how sad the little girl was looking, and that she
intentionally refused to answer her. At any other time she would not have
troubled herself about this, but to-day this taciturnity provoked her,
nay it really worried her; she stood straight in front of Mary, who was
still indefatigably busy with the ruler, and said loudly and with some
irritation:

"I have fallen into disgrace with you, it would seem, since yesterday.
Every one to his liking; but I will not put up with such bad manners, I
can tell you!"

The last words were spoken loud enough to wake Eudoxia, who heard them,
and drawing herself up with dignity she said severely:

"Is that the way to behave to a kind and welcome visitor, Mary?"

"I do not see one," retorted the child with a determined pout.

"But I do," cried the governess. "You are behaving like a little
barbarian, not like a little girl who has been taught Greek manners.
Katharina is no longer a child, though she is still often kind enough to
play with you. Go to her at once and beg her pardon for being so rude."

"I!" exclaimed Mary, and her tone conveyed the most positive refusal to
obey this behest. She sprang to her feet, and with flashing eyes, she
cried: "We are not Greeks, neither she nor I, and I can tell you once for
all that she is not my kind and welcome visitor, nor my friend any more!
We have nothing, nothing whatever to do with each other any more!"

"Are you gone mad?" cried Eudoxia, and her long face assumed a
threatening expression, while she rose from her easy-chair in spite of
the increasing heat, intending to capture her pupil and compel her to
apologize; but Mary was more nimble than the middle-aged damsel and fled
down the alley towards the river, as nimble as a gazelle.

Eudoxia began to run after her; but the heat was soon too much for her,
and when she stopped, exhausted and panting, she perceived that
Katharina, worthy once more of her name of "water-wagtail," had flown
past her and was chasing the little girl at a pace that she shuddered to
contemplate. Mary soon saw that no one but Katharina was in pursuit; she
moderated her pace, and awaited her cast-off friend under the shade of a
tall shrub. In a moment Katharina was facing her; with a heightened color
she seized both her hands and exclaimed passionately:

"What was it you said? You--you--If I did not know what a wrong-headed
little simpleton you were, I could . . . ."

"You could accuse me falsely!--But now, leave go of my hands or I will
bite you. And as Katharina, at this threat, released her she went on
vehemently.

"Oh! I know you now--since yesterday! And I tell you, once for all, I say
thank you for nothing for such friends. You ought to sink into the earth
for shame of the sin you have committed. I am only ten years old, but
rather than have done such a thing I would have let myself be shut up in
that hot hole with poor, innocent Perpetua, or I would have let myself be
killed, as you want poor, honest Hiram to be! Oh, shame!"

Katharina's crimson cheeks bad turned pale at this address and, as she
had no answer ready, she could only toss her head and say, with as much
pride and dignity as she could assume:

"What can a child like you know about things that puzzle the heads of
grown-up people?"

"Grown-up people!" laughed Mary, who was not three inches shorter than
her antagonist. "You must be a great deal taller before I call you grown
up! In two years time, you will scarcely be up to my eyes." At this the
irascible Egyptian fired up; she gave the child a slap in the face with
the palm of her hand. Mary only stood still as if petrified, and after
gazing at the ground for a minute or two without a cry, she turned her
back on her companion and silently went back into the shaded walk.

Katharina watched her with tears in her eyes. She felt that Mary was
justified in disapproving of what she had done the day before; for she
herself had been unable to sleep and had become more and more convinced
that she had acted wrongly, nay, unpardonably. And now again she had done
an inexcusable thing. She felt that she had deeply hurt the child's
feelings, and this sincerely grieved her. She followed Mary in silence,
at some little distance, like a maid-servant. She longed to hold her back
by her dress, to say something kind to her, nay, to ask her pardon. As
they drew near to the spot where the governess had dropped into her chair
again, a hapless victim to the heat of Egypt, Katharina called Mary by
her name, and when the child paid no heed, laid her hand on her shoulder,
saying in gentle entreaty: "Forgive me for having so far forgotten
myself. But how can I help being so little? You know very well when any
one laughs at me for it. . . ."

"You get angry and slap!" retorted the child, walking on. "Yesterday,
perhaps, I might have laughed over a box on the ear--it is not the
first--or have given it to you back again; but to-day!--Just now," and
she shuddered involuntarily, "just now I felt as if some black slave had
laid his dirty hand on my cheek. You are not what you were. You walk
quite differently, and you look--depend upon it you do not look as nice
and as bright as you used, and I know why: You did a very bad thing last
evening."

"But dear pet," said the other, "you must not be so hard. Perhaps I did
not really tell the judges everything I knew, but Orion, who loves me so,
and whose wife I am to be. . . ."

"He led you into sin!--Yes; and he was always merry and kind till
yesterday; but since--Oh, that unlucky day!"

Here she was interrupted by Eudoxia, who poured out a flood of reproaches
and finally desired her to resume her task. The child obeyed
unresistingly; but she had scarcely settled to her wax tablets again when
Katharina was by her side, whispering to her that Orion would certainly
not have asserted anything that he did not believe to be true, and that
she had really been in doubt as to whether a gem with a gold back, or a
mere gold frame-work, had been hanging to Paula's chain. At this Mary
turned sharply and quickly upon her, looked her straight in the eyes and
exclaimed--but in Egyptian that the governess might not understand, for
she had disdained to learn a single word of it:

"A rubbishy gold frame with a broken edge was hanging to the chain, and,
what is more, it caught in your dress. Why, I can see it now! And, when
you bore witness that it was a gem, you told a lie--Look here; here are
the laws which God Almighty himself gave on the sacred Mount of Sinai,
and there it stands written: 'Thou shalt not bear false witness against
thy neighbor.' And those who do, the priest told me, are guilty of mortal
sin, for which there is no forgiveness on earth or in Heaven, unless
after bitter repentance and our Saviour's special mercy. So it is
written; and you could actually declare before the judges a thing that
was false, and that you knew would bring others to ruin?"

The young criminal looked down in shame and confusion, and answered
hesitatingly:

"Orion asserted it so positively and clearly, and then--I do not know
what came over me--but I was so angry, so--I could have murdered her!"

"Whom?" asked Mary in surprise. "You know very well: Paula."

"Paula!" said Mary, and her large eyes again filled with tears. "Is it
possible? Did you not love her as much as I do? Have not you often and
often clung about her like a bur?"

"Yes, yes, very true. But before the judges she was so intolerably proud,
and then.--But believe me, Mary you really and truly cannot understand
anything of all this."

"Can I not?" asked the child folding her arms.

"Why do you think me so stupid?"

"You are in love with Orion--and he is a man whom few can match, over
head and ears in love; and because Paula looks like a queen by the side
of you, and is so much handsomer and taller than you are, and Orion, till
yesterday--I could see it all--cared a thousand times more for her than
for you, you were jealous and envious of her. Oh, I know all about
it.--And I know that all the women fall in love with him, and that
Mandaile had her ears cut off on his account, and that it was a lady who
loved him in Constantinople that gave him the little white dog. The
slave-girls tell me what they hear and what I like.--And after all, you
may well be jealous of Paula, for if she only made a point of it, how
soon Orion would make up his mind never to look at you again! She is the
handsomest and the wisest and the best girl in the whole world, and why
should she not be proud? The false witness you bore will cost poor Hiram
his life: but the merciful Saviour may forgive you at last. It is your
affair, and no concern of mine; but when Paula is forced to leave the
house and all through you, so that I shall never, never, never see her
any more--I cannot forget it, and I do not think I ever shall; but I will
pray God to make me."

She burst into loud sobs, and the governess had started up to put an end
to a dialogue which she could not understand, and which was therefore
vexatious and provoking, when the water-wagtail fell on her knees before
the little girl, threw her arms round her, and bursting into tears,
exclaimed:

"Mary--darling little Mary forgive me.

   [The German has the diminutive 'Mariechen'. To this Dr. Ebers
   appends this note. "An ignorant critic took exception to the use of
   the diminutive form of names (as for instance 'Irenchen', little
   Irene) in 'The Sisters,' as an anachronism. It is nevertheless a
   fact that the Greeks settled in Egypt were so fond of using the
   diminutive form of woman's names that they preferred them, even in
   the tax-rolls. This form was common in Attic Greek,"]

Oh, if you could but know what I endured before I came out here! Forgive
me, Mary; be my sweet, dear little Mary once more. Indeed and indeed you
are much better than I am. Merciful Saviour, what possessed me last
evening? And all through him, through the man no one can help
loving--through Orion!--And would you believe it: I do not even know why
he led me into this sin. But I must try to care for him no more, to
forget him entirely, although, although,--only think, he called me his
betrothed; but now that he has betrayed me into sin, can I dare to become
his wife? It has given me no peace all night. I love him, yes I love him,
you cannot think how dearly; still, I cannot be his! Sooner will I go
into a convent, or drown myself in the Nile!--And I will say all this to
my mother, this very day."

The Greek governess had looked on in astonishment, for it was indeed
strange to see the young girl kneeling in front of the child. She
listened to her eager flow of unintelligible words, wondering whether she
could ever teach her pupil--with her grandmother's help if need should
be--to cultivate a more sedate and Greek demeanor.

At this juncture Paula came down the path. Some slaves followed her,
carrying several boxes and bundles and a large litter, all making their
way to the Nile, where a boat was waiting to ferry her up the river to
her new home.

As she lingered unobserved, her eye rested on the touching picture of the
two young things clasped in each other's arms, and she overheard the last
words of the gentle little creature who had done her such cruel wrong.
She could only guess at what had occurred, but she did not like to be a
listener, so she called Mary; and when the child started up and flew to
throw her arms round her neck with vehement and devoted tenderness, she
covered her little face and hair with kisses. Then she freed herself from
the little girl's embrace, and said, with tearful eyes:

"Good-bye, my darling! In a few minutes I shall no longer belong here;
another and a strange home must be mine. Love me always, and do not
forget me, and be quite sure of one thing: you have no truer friend on
earth than I am."

At this, fresh tears flowed; the child implored her not to go away, not
to leave her; but Paula could but refuse, though she was touched and
astonished to find that she had reaped so rich a harvest of love, here
where she had sown so little. Then she gave her hand at parting to the
governess, and when she turned to Katharina, to bid farewell, hard as it
was, to the murderer of her happiness, the young girl fell at her feet
bathed in tears of repentance, covered her knees and hands with kisses,
and confessed herself guilty of a terrible sin. Paula, however, would not
allow her to finish; she lifted her up, kissed her forehead, and said
that she quite understood how she had been led into it, and that she,
like Mary, would try to forgive her.

Standing by the governor's many-oared barge, to which the young girls now
escorted her, she found Orion. Twice already this morning he had tried in
vain to get speech with her, and he looked pale and agitated. He had a
splendid bunch of flowers in his hand; he bestowed a hasty greeting on
Mary and his betrothed, and did not heed the fact that Katharina returned
it hesitatingly and without a word.

He went close up to Paula, told her in a low voice that Hiram was safe,
and implored her, as she hoped to be forgiven for her own sins, to grant
him a few minutes. When she rejected his prayer with a silent shrug, and
went on towards the boat he put out his hand to help her, but she
intentionally overlooked it and gave her hand to the physician. At this
he sprang after her into the barge, saying in her ear in a tremulous
whisper:

"A wretch, a miserable man entreats your mercy. I was mad yesterday. I
love you, I love you--how deeply!--you will see!"

"Enough," she broke in firmly, and she stood up in the swaying boat.
Philippus supported her, and Orion, laying the flowers in her lap, cried
so that all could hear: "Your departure will sorely distress my father.
He is so ill that we did not dare allow you to take leave of him. If you
have anything to say to him. . ."

"I will find another messenger," she replied sternly.

"And if he asks the reason for your sudden departure?"

"Your mother and Philippus can give him an answer."

"But he was your guardian, and your fortune, I know. . ."

"In his hands it is safe."

"And if the physician's fears should be justified?"

"Then I will demand its restitution through a new Kyrios."

"You will receive it without that! Have you no pity, no forgiveness?" For
all answer she flung the flowers he had given her into the river; he
leaped on shore, and regardless of the bystanders, pushed his fingers
through his hair, clasping his hands to his burning brow.

The barge was pushed off, the rowers plied their oars like men; Orion
gazed after it, panting with laboring breath, till a little hand grasped
his, and Mary's sweet, childish voice exclaimed:

"Be comforted, uncle. I know just what is troubling you."

"What do you know?" he asked roughly.

"That you are sorry that you and Katharina should have spoken against her
last evening, and against poor Hiram."

"Nonsense!" he angrily broke in. "Where is Katharina?"

"I was to tell you that she could not see you today. She loves you
dearly, but she, too, is so very, very sorry."

"She may spare herself!" said the young man. "If there is anything to be
sorry for it falls on me--it is crushing me to death. But what is
this!--The devil's in it! What business is it of the child's? Now, be off
with you this minute. Eudoxia, take this little girl to her tasks."

He took Mary's head between his hands, kissed her forehead with impetuous
affection, and then pushed her towards her governess, who dutifully led
her away.

When Orion found himself alone, he leaned against a tree and groaned like
a wounded wild beast. His heart was full to bursting.

"Gone, gone! Thrown away, lost! The best on earth!" He laid his hands on
the tree-stem and pressed his head against it till it hurt him. He did
not know how to contain himself for misery and self-reproach. He felt
like a man who has been drunk and has reduced his own house to ashes in
his intoxication. How all this could have come to pass he now no longer
knew. After his nocturnal ride he had caused Nilus the treasurer to be
waked, and had charged him to liberate Hiram secretly. But it was the
sight of his stricken father that first brought him completely to his
sober senses. By his bed-side, death in its terrible reality had stared
him in the face, and he had felt that he could not bear to see that
beloved parent die till he had made his peace with Paula, won her
forgiveness, brought her whom his father loved so well into his presence,
and besought his blessing on her and on himself.

Twice he had hastened from the chamber of suffering to her room, to
entreat her to hear him, but in vain; and now, how terrible had their
parting been! She was hard, implacable, cruel; and as he recalled her
person and individuality as they had struck him before their quarrel, he
was forced to confess that there was something in her present behavior
which was not natural to her. This inhuman severity in the beautiful
woman whose affection had once been his, and who, but now, had flung his
flowers into the water, had not come from her heart; it was deliberately
planned to make him feel her anger. What had withheld her, under such
great provocation, from betraying that she had detected him in the theft
of the emerald? All was not yet lost; and he breathed more freely as he
went back to the house where duty, and his anxiety for his father,
required his presence. There were his flowers, floating on the stream.

"Hatred cast them there," thought he, "but before they reach the sea many
blossoms will have opened which were mere hard buds when she flung them
away. She can never love any man but me, I feel it, I know it. The first
time we looked into each other's eyes the fate of our hearts was sealed.
What she hates in me is my mad crime; what first set her against me was
her righteous anger at my suit for Katharina. But that sin was but a
dream in my life, which can never recur; and as for Katharina--I have
sinned against her once, but I will not continue to sin through a whole,
long lifetime. I have been permitted to trifle with love unpunished so
often, that at last I have learnt to under-estimate its power. I could
laugh as I sacrificed mine to my mother's wishes; but that, and that
alone, has given rise to all these horrors. But no, all is not yet lost!
Paula will listen to me; and when she sees what my inmost feelings
are--when I have confessed all to her, good and evil alike--when she
knows that my heart did but wander, and has returned to her who has
taught me that love is no jest, but solemn earnest, swaying all mankind,
she will come round--everything will come right."

A noble and rapturous light came into his face, and as he walked on, his
hopes rose:

"When she is mine I know that everything good in me that I have inherited
from my forefathers will blossom forth. When my mother called me to my
father's bed-side, she said: 'Come, Orion, life is earnest for you and me
and all our house, your father. . .' Yes, it is earnest indeed, however
all this may end! To win Paula, to conciliate her, to bring her near to
me, to have her by my side and do something great, something worthy of
her--this is such a purpose in life as I need! With her, only with her I
know I could achieve it; without her, or with that gilded toy Katharina,
old age will bring me nothing but satiety, sobering and regrets--or, to
call it by its Christian designation: bitter repentance. As Antaeus
renewed his strength by contact with mother earth, so, father do I feel
myself grow taller when I only think of her. She is salvation and honor;
the other is ruin and misery in the future. My poor, dear Father, you
will, you must survive this stroke to see the fulfilment of all your
joyful hopes of your son. You always loved Paula; perhaps you may be the
one to appease her and bring her back to me; and how dear will she be to
you, and, God willing, to my mother, too, when you see her reigning by my
side an ornament to this house, to this city, to this country--reigning
like a queen, your son's redeeming and guardian angel!"

Uplifted, carried away by these thoughts, he had reached the viridarium.
He there found Sebek the steward waiting for his young master: "My lord
is asleep now," he whispered, "as the physician foretold, but his
face. . . . Oh, if only we had Philippus here again!"

"Have you sent the chariot with the fast horses to the Convent of St.
Cecilia?" asked Orion eagerly; and when Sebek had replied in the
affirmative and vanished again indoors, the young man, overwhelmed with
painful forebodings, sank on his knees near a column to which a crucifix
was hung, and lifted up his hands and soul in fervent prayer.


CHAPTER XV.

The physician had installed Paula in her new home, and had introduced her
to the family who were henceforth to be her protectors, and to enable her
to lead a happier life.

He had but a few minutes to devote to her and her hosts; for scarcely had
he taken her into the spacious rooms, gay with flowers, of which she now
took possession, when he was enquired for by two messengers, both anxious
to speak with him. Paula knew how critical her uncle's state was, and
now, contemplating the probability of losing him, she first understood
what he had been to her. Thus sorrow was her first companion in her new
abode--a sorrow to which the comfort of her pretty, airy rooms added
keenness.

One of the messengers was a young Arab from the other side of the river,
who handed to Philippus a letter from the merchant Haschim. The old man
informed him that, in consequence of a bad fall his eldest son had had,
he was forced to start at once for Djiddah on the Red Sea. He begged the
physician to take every care of his caravan-leader, to whom he was much
attached, to remove him when he thought fit from the governor's house,
and to nurse him till he was well, in some quiet retreat. He would bear
in mind the commission given him by the daughter of the illustrious
Thomas. He sent with this letter a purse well-filled with gold pieces.

The other messenger was to take the leech back again in the light chariot
with the fast horses to the suffering Mukaukas. He at once obeyed the
summons, and the steeds, which the driver did not spare, soon carried him
back to the governor's house.

A glance at his patient told him that this was the beginning of the end;
still, faithful to his principle of never abandoning hope till the heart
of the sufferer had ceased to beat, he raised the senseless man, heedless
of Orion, who was on his knees by his father's pillow, signed to the
deaconess in attendance, an experienced nurse, and laid cool, wet cloths
on the head and neck of the sufferer, who was stricken with apoplexy.
Then he bled him.

Presently the Mukaukas wearily opened his eyes, turned uneasily from side
to side, and recognizing his kneeling son and his wife, bathed in tears,
he murmured, almost inarticulately, for his paralyzed tongue no longer
did his will: "Two pillules, Philip!"

The physician unhesitatingly acceded to the request of the dying man, who
again closed his eyes; but only to reopen them, and to say, with the same
difficulty, but with perfect consciousness: "The end is at hand! The
blessing of the Church--Orion, the Bishop."

The young man hastened out of the room to fetch the prelate, who was
waiting in the viridarium with two deacons, an exorcist, and a sacristan
bearing the sacred vessels.

The governor listened in devout composure to the service of the last
sacrament, looked on at the ceremonies performed by the exorcist as, with
waving of hands and pious ejaculations he banned the evil spirits and
cast out from the dying man the devil that might have part in him; but he
could no longer swallow the bread which, in the Jacobite rite, was
administered soaked in the wine. Orion took the holy elements for him,
and the dying man, with a smile, murmured to his son:

"God be with thee, my son! The Lord, it seems, denies me His precious
Blood--and yet--let me try once more."

This time he succeeded in swallowing the wine and a few crumbs of bread;
and the bishop Ptolimus, a gentle old man of a beautiful and dignified
presence, spoke comfort to him, and asked him whether he felt that he was
dying penitent and in perfect faith in the mercy of his Lord and Saviour,
and whether he repented of his sins and forgave his enemies.

The sick man bowed his head with an effort and murmured:

"Even the Melchites who murdered my sons--and even the head of our
Church, the Patriarch, who was only too glad to leave it to me to achieve
things which he scrupled to do himself. That--that--But you, Ptolimus--a
wise and worthy servant of the Lord--tell me to the best of your
convictions: May I die in the belief that it was not a sin to conclude a
peace with the Arab conquerors of the Greeks?--May I, even at this hour,
think of the Melchites as heretics?"

The prelate drew his still upright figure to its full height, and his
mild features assumed a determined--nay a stern expression as he
exclaimed:

"You know the decision pronounced by the Synod of Ephesus--the words
which should be graven on the heart of every true Jacobite as on marble
and brass 'May all who divide the nature of Christ--and this is what the
Melchites do--be divided with the sword, be hewn in pieces and be burnt
alive!'--No Head of our Church has ever hurled such a curse at the
Moslems who adore the One God!"

The sufferer drew a deep breath, but he presently added with a sigh:

"But Benjamin the Patriarch, and John of Niku have tormented my soul with
fears! Still, you too, Ptolimus, bear the crosier, and to you I will
confess that your brethren in office, the shepherds of the Jacobite fold,
have ruined my peace for hundreds of days and nights, and I have been
near to cursing them. But before the night fell the Lord sent light into
my soul, and I forgave them, and now, through you, I crave their pardon
and their blessing. The Church has but reluctantly opened the doors to me
in these last years; but what servant can be allowed to complain of the
Master from whom he expects grace? So listen to me. I close my eyes as a
faithful and devoted adherent of the Church, and in token thereof I will
endow her to the best of my power and adorn her with rich and costly
gifts; I will--but I can say no more.--Speak for me, Orion. You know--the
gems--the hanging. . . ."

His son explained to the bishop what a splendid gift, in priceless
jewels, the dying man intended to offer to the Church. He desired to be
buried in the church of St. John at Alexandria by his father's side, and
to be prayed for in front of the mortuary chapel of his ancestors in the
Necropolis; he had set aside a sum of money, in his will, to pay for the
prayers to be offered for his soul. The priests were well pleased to hear
this, and they absolved him unconditionally and completely; then, after
blessing him fervently, they quitted the room.

Philippus heaved a sigh of relief when the ecclesiastics had departed,
and constantly renewed the wet compress, while the dying governor lay for
a long time in silence with his eyes shut. Presently he rubbed them as
though he felt revived, raised his head a little with the physician's
help, and looking up, said:

"Draw the ring off my finger, Orion, and wear it worthily.--Where is
little Mary, where is Paula? I should wish to bid them farewell too."

The young man and his mother exchanged uneasy glances, but Neforis
collected herself at once and replied:

"We have sent for Mary; but Paula--you know she never was happy with
us--and since the events of yesterday. . . ."

"Well?" asked the invalid.

"She hastily quitted the house; but we parted friends, I can assure you
of that; she is still in Memphis, and she spoke of you most
affectionately and wished to see you, and charged me with many loving
messages for you; so, if you really care to see her. . . ."

The sick man tried to nod his head, but in vain. He did not, however,
insist on her being sent for, but his face wore an expression of deep
melancholy and the words came faintly from his lips.

"Thomas' daughter! The noblest and loveliest of all."

"The noblest and loveliest," echoed Orion, in a voice that was tremulous
with strong, deep and sincere emotion; then he begged the leech and the
deaconess to leave him alone with his parents. As soon as they had left
the room the young man spoke softly but urgently into his father's ear:

"You are quite right, Father," he said. "She is better and more noble,
more beautiful and more highminded than any girl living. I love her, and
will stake everything to win her heart. Oh, God! Oh, God! Merciful
Heaven!--Are you glad, do you give your consent, Father? You dearest and
best of men; I see it in your face."

"Yes, yes, yes," murmured the governor; his yellow, bloodshot eyes looked
up to Heaven, and with a terrible effort he stammered out: "Blessing--my
blessing, on you and Paula.--Tell her from me. . . . If she had confided
in her old uncle, as she used to do, the freedman would never have robbed
us.--She is a brave soul; how she fought for the poor fellow. I will hear
more about it if my strength holds out.--Why is she not here?"

"She wished so much to bid you farewell," replied Neforis, "but you were
asleep."

"Was she in such a hurry to be gone?" asked her husband with a bitter
smile. "Fear about the emerald may have had something to do with it? But
how could I be angry with her? Hiram acted without her knowledge, I
suppose? Yes, I knew it!--Ah; that dear, sweet face! If I could but see
it once more. The joy--of my eyes, and my companion at draughts! A
faithful heart too; how she clung to her father! she was ready to
sacrifice everything for him.--And you, you, my old. . . . But no--no
reproaches at such a time. You, Mother--you, my Neforis, thanks, a
thousand thanks for all your love and kindness. What a mystical and magic
bond is that of a Christian marriage like ours? Mark that, Orion. And
you, Mother: I am anxious about this. You--do not hurt the girl's
feelings again. Say--say you bless this union; it will make me happier at
the last.--Paula and Orion; both of them-both.--I never dared before--but
what better could we wish?"

The matron clasped her hands and sobbed out:

"Anything, everything you wish! But Father, Orion, our faith!--And then,
merciful Saviour, that poor little Katharina!"

"Katharina!" repeated the sick man, and his feeble lips parted in a
compassionate smile. "Our boy and the water--water--you know what I would
say."

Then his eyes began to sparkle more brightly and he said in a low voice,
but still eagerly, as though death were yet far from him:

"My name is George, the son of the Mukaukas; I am the great Mukaukas and
our family--all fine men of a proud race; all: My father, my uncle, our
lost sons, and Orion here--all palms and oaks! And shall a dwarf, a mere
blade of rice be grafted on to the grand old stalwart stock? What would
come of that?--Oh, ho! a miserable little brood! But Paula! The cedar of
Lebanon--Paula; she would give new life to the grand old race."

"But our faith, our faith," moaned Neforis. "And you, Orion, do you even
know what her feeling is towards you?"

"Yes and no. Let that rest for the present," said the youth, who was
deeply moved. "Oh Father! if I only knew that your blessing. . ."

"The Faith, the Faith," interrupted the Mukaukas in a broken voice.

"I will be true to my own!" cried Orion, raising his father's hand to his
lips. "But think, picture to yourself, how Paula and I would reign in
this house, and how another generation would grow up in it worthy of the
great Mukaukas and his ancestors!"

"I see it, I see it," murmured the sick man sinking back on his pillows,
unconscious.

Philippus was immediately called in, and, with him, little Mary came
weeping into the room. The physician's efforts to revive the sufferer
were presently successful; again the sick man opened his eyes, and spoke
more distinctly and loudly than before:

"There is a perfume of musk. It is the fragrance that heralds the Angel
of Death."

After this he lay still and silent for a long time. His eyes were closed,
but his brows were knit and showed that he was thinking with a painful
effort. At length, with a sigh, he said, almost inaudibly: "So it was and
so it is: The Greek oppressed my people with arbitrary cruelty as if we
were dogs; the Moslem, too, is a stranger, but he is just. That which
happened it was out of my power to prevent; and it is well, it is very
well that it turned out so.--Very well," he repeated several times, and
then he shivered and said with a groan:

"My feet are so cold! But never mind, never mind, I like to be cool."

The leech and the deaconess at once set to work to heat blocks of wood to
warm his feet; the sick man looked up gratefully and went on: "At church,
in the House of God, I have often found it deliciously cool and to-day it
is the Church that eases my death-bed by her pardon. Do you, my Son, be
faithful to her. No member of our house should ever be an apostate. As to
the new faith--it is overspreading land after land with incredible power;
ambition and covetousness are driving thousands into its fold. But we--we
are faithful to Christ Jesus, we are no traitors. If I, I the Mukaukas,
had consented to go over to the Khaliff I might have been a prince in
purple, and have governed my own country in his name. How many have
deserted to the Moslems! And the temptation will come to you, too, and
their faith offers much that is attractive to the crowd. They imagine a
Paradise full of unspeakably alluring joys--but we, my son--we shall meet
again in our own, shall we not?"

"Yes, yes, Father!" cried the young man. "I will remain a Christian,
staunch and true. . ."

"That is right," interrupted the sick man. He was determined to forget
that his son wished to marry a Melchite and went on quickly:
"Paula. . . . But no more of that. Remain faithful to your own
creed--otherwise. . . . However, child, seek your own road; you are--but
you will walk in the right way, and it is because I know that, know it
surely, that I can die so calmly.

"I have provided abundantly for your temporal welfare. I have been a good
husband, a faithful father, have I not, O Saviour?--Have I not, Neforis?
And that which is my best and surest comfort is that for many long years
I have administered justice in this land, and never, never once--and Thou
my Refuge and Comforter art my witness!--never once consciously or
willingly have I been an unrighteous judge. Before me the poor were equal
with the rich, the powerful with the helpless widow. Who would have
dared. . . ." Here he broke off; his eyes, wandering feebly round the
room, fell on Mary who had sunk on her knees, opposite to Orion on the
other side of the bed. The dying man, who had thus summed up the outcome
of a long and busy life, ceased his reflections, and when the child saw
that he was vainly trying to turn his powerless head towards her, she
threw her arms round him with passionate grief; unscared by his fixed
gaze or the altered hue of his beloved face, she kissed his lips and
cheeks, exclaiming:

"Grandfather, dear grandfather, do not leave us; stay with us, pray, pray
stay with us!"

Something faintly resembling a smile parted his parched lips, and all the
tenderness with which his soul was overflowing for this sweet young bud
of humanity would have found expression in his voice but that he could
only mutter huskily:

"Mary, my darling! For your sake I should be glad to live a long while
yet, a very long while; but the other world--I am standing already on its
threshold. Good-bye--I must indeed say good-bye."

"No, no--I will pray; oh! I will pray so fervently that you may get well
again!" cried the child. But he replied:

"Nay, nay. The Saviour is already taking me by the hand. Farewell, and
again farewell. Did you bring Paula? I do not see her. Did you bring
Paula with you, sweetheart? She--did she leave us in anger? If she only
knew; ah! your Paula has treated us ill." The child's heart was still
full of the horrible crime which had so revolted her truthful nature, and
which had deprived her of rest all through an evening, a long night and a
morning; she laid her little head close to that of the old man--her
dearest and best friend. For years he had filled her father's place, and
now he was dying, leaving her forever! But she could not let him depart
with a false idea of the woman whom she worshipped with all the fervor of
her child's heart; in a subdued voice, but with eager feeling, she said,
close to his ear:

"But Grandfather, there is one thing you must know before the Saviour
takes you away to be happy in Heaven. Paula told the truth, and never,
never told a lie, not even for Hiram's sake. An empty gold frame hung to
her necklace and no gem at all. Whatever Orion may say, I saw it myself
and cannot be mistaken, as truly as I hope to see you and my poor father
in heaven! And Katharina, too, thought better of it, and confessed to me
just now that she had committed a great sin and had borne false witness
before the judges to please her dear Orion. I do not know what Hiram had
done to offend him; but on the strength of Katharina's evidence the
judges condemned him to death. But Paula--you must understand that Paula
had nothing, positively nothing whatever to do with the stealing of the
emerald."

Orion, kneeling there, was condemned to hear every word the little girl
so vehemently whispered, and each one pierced his heart like a
dagger-thrust. Again and again he felt inclined to clutch at her across
the bed and fling her on the ground before his father's eyes; but grief
and astonishment seemed to have paralyzed his whole being; he had not
even the power to interrupt her with a single word.

She had spoken, and all was told.

He clung to the couch like a shattered wretch; and when his father turned
his eyes on him and gasped out: "Then the Court--our Court of justice
pronounced an unrighteous sentence?" he bowed his head in contrition.

The dying man murmured even less articulately and incoherently than
before: "The gem--the hanging--you, you perhaps--was it you? that
emerald--I cannot. . ."

Orion helped his father in his vain efforts to utter the dreadful words.
Sooner would he have died with the old man than have deceived him in such
a moment; he replied humbly and in a low voice:

"Yes, Father--I took it. But as surely as I love you and my mother this,
the first reckless act of my life, which has brought such horrors in its
train. . . Shall be the last," he would have said; but the words "I took
it," had scarcely passed his lips when his father was shaken by a violent
trembling, the expression of his eyes changed fearfully, and before the
son had spoken his vow to the end the unhappy father was, by a tremendous
effort, sitting upright. Loud sobs of penitence broke from the young
man's heaving breast, as the Mukaukas wrathfully exclaimed, in thick
accents, as quickly as the heavy, paralyzed tongue would allow:

"You, you! A disgrace to our ancient and blameless Court! You?--Away with
you! A thief, an unjust judge, a false witness,--and the only descendant
of Menas! If only these hands were able--you--you--Go, villain!" And with
this wild outcry, George, the gentle and just Mukaukas, sank back on his
pillows; his bloodshot eyes were staring, fixed on vacancy; his gasping
lips repeated again and again, but less and less audibly the one word
"Villain;" his swollen fingers clutched at the light coverlet that lay
over him; a strange, shrill wheezing came through his open mouth, and the
heavy corpse of the great dignitary fell, like a falling palm-tree, into
Orion's arms.

Orion started up, his eyes inflamed, his hair all dishevelled, and shook
the dead man as though to compel him back to life again, to hear his oath
and accept his vow, to see his tears of repentance, to pardon him and
take back the name of infamy which had been his parting word to his loved
and spoilt child.

In the midst of this wild outbreak the physician came back, glanced at
the dead man's distorted features, laid a hand on his heart, and said
with solemn regret as he led little Mary away from the couch:

"A good and just man is gone from the land of the living."

Orion cried aloud and pushed away Mary, who had stolen close to him; for,
young as she was, she felt that it was she who had brought the worst woe
on her uncle, and that it was her part to show him some affection.

She ran then to her grandmother; but she, too, put her aside and fell on
her knees by the side of her wretched son to weep with him; to console
him who was inconsolable, and in whom, a few minutes since, she had hoped
to find her own best consolation; but her fond words of motherly comfort
found no echo in his broken spirit.


CHAPTER XVI.

When Philippus had parted from Paula he had told her that the Mukaukas
might indeed die at any moment, but that it was possible that he might
yet struggle with death for weeks to come. This hope had comforted her;
for she could not bear to think that the only true friend she had had in
Memphis, till she had become more intimate with the physician, should
quit the world forever without having heard her justification. Nothing
could be more unlikely than that any one in Neforis' household--excepting
her little grandchild should ever remember her with kindness; and she
scarcely desired it; but she rebelled against the idea of forfeiting the
respect she had earned, even in the governor's house. If her friend
should succeed in prolonging her uncle's life, by a confidential
interview with him she might win back his old affection and his good
opinion.

Her new home she felt was but a resting-place, a tabernacle in the
desert-journey of her solitary pilgrimage, and she here meant to avail
herself of the information she had gathered from her Melchite dependents.
Hope had now risen supreme in her heart over grief and disappointment.
Orion's presence alone hung like a threatening hail-cloud over the
sprouting harvest of her peace of mind. And yet, next to the necessity of
waiting at Memphis for the return of her messenger, nothing tied her to
the place so strongly as her interest in watching the future course of
his life, at any rate from a distance. What she felt for him-and she told
herself it was deep aversion-nevertheless constituted a large share of
her inner life, little as she would confess it to herself.

Her new hosts had received her as a welcome guest, and they certainly did
not seem to be poor. The house was spacious, and though it was old and
unpretentious it was comfortable and furnished with artistic taste. The
garden had amazed her by the care lavished on it; she had seen a
hump-backed gardener and several children at work in it. A strange
party-for every one of them, like their chief, was in some way deformed
or crippled.

The plot of ground--which extended towards the river to the road-way for
foot passengers, vehicles and the files of men towing the Nile-boats--was
but narrow, and bounded on either side by extensive premises. Not far
from the spot where it lay nearest to the river was the bridge of boats
connecting Memphis with the island of Rodah. To the right was the
magnificent residence--a palace indeed--belonging to Susannah; to the
left was an extensive grove, where tall palms, sycamores with spreading
foliage, and dense thickets of blue-green tamarisk trees cast their
shade. Above this bower of splendid shrubs and ancient trees rose a long,
yellow building crowned with a turret; and this too was not unknown to
her, for she had often heard it spoken of in her uncle's house, and had
even gone there now and then escorted by Perpetua. It was the convent of
St. Cecilia, the refuge of the last nuns of the orthodox creed left in
Memphis; for, though all the other sisterhoods of her confession had long
since been banished, these had been allowed to remain in their old home,
not only because they were famous sick-nurses, a distinction common to
all the Melchite orders, but even more because the decaying municipality
could not afford to sacrifice the large tax they annually paid to it.
This tax was the interest on a considerable capital bequeathed to the
convent by a certain wise predecessor of the Mukaukas', with the prudent
proviso, ratified under the imperial seal of Theodosius II., that if the
convent were at any time broken up, this endowment, with the land and
buildings which it likewise owed to the generosity of the same
benefactor, should become the property of the Christian emperor at that
time reigning.

Mukaukas George, notwithstanding his well-founded aversion for everything
Melchite, had taken good care not to press this useful Sisterhood too
hardly, or to deprive his impoverished capital of its revenues only to
throw them into the hands of the wealthy Moslems. The title-deed on which
the Sisters relied was good; and the governor, who was a good lawyer as
well as a just man, had not only left them unmolested, but in spite of
his fears--during the last few years--for his own safety, had shown
himself no respecter of persons by defending their rights firmly and
resolutely against the powerful patriarch of the Jacobite Church. The
Senate of the ancient capital naturally, approved his course, and had not
merely suffered the heretic Sisterhood to remain, but had helped and
encouraged it.

The Jacobite clergy of the city shut their eyes, and only opened them to
watch the convent at Easter-tide; for on the Saturday before Easter, the
nuns, in obedience to an agreement made before the Monophysite Schism,
were required to pay a tribute of embroidered vestments to the head of
the Christian Churches, with wine of the best vintages of Kochome near
the Pyramid of steps, and a considerable quantity of flowers and
confectionary. So the ancient coenobium of women was maintained, and
though all Egypt was by this time Jacobite or Moslem, and many of the
older Sisters had departed this life within the last year, no one had
thought of enquiring how it was that the number of the nuns remained
still the same, till the Jacobite archbishop Benjamin filled the
patriarchal throne of Alexandria in the place of the Melchite Cyrus.

To Benjamin the heretical Sisters at Memphis--the hawks in a dove-cote,
as he called them--were an offence, and he thought that the deed might
bear a new interpretation: that as there was no longer a Christian
emperor, and as the word "Christian" was used in the document, if the
convent were broken up the property should pass into the hands of the
only Christian magnate then existing in the country: himself, namely, and
his Church. The ill-feeling which the Patriarch fostered against the
Mukaukas had been aggravated to hostility by their antagonism on this
matter.

A musical dirge now fell on Paula's ear from the convent chapel. Was the
worthy Mother Superior dead? No, this lament must be for some other
death, for the strange skirling wail of the Egyptian women came up to her
corner window from the road, from the bridge, and from the boats on the
river. No Jacobite of Memphis would have dared to express her grief so
publicly for the death of a Melchite; and as the chorus of voices
swelled, the thought struck her with a chill that it must be her uncle
and friend who had closed his weary eyes in death.

It was with deep emotion and many tears that she perceived how sincerely
the death of this righteous man was bewailed by all his fellow-citizens.
Yes, he only, and no other Egyptian, could have called forth this great
and expressive regret. The wailing women in the road were daubing the mud
of the river on their foreheads and bosoms; men were standing in large
groups and beating their heads and breasts with passionate gestures. On
the bridge of boats the men would stop others, and from thence, too,
piercing shrieks came across to her.

At last Philippus came in and confirmed her fears. The governor's death
had shocked him no less than it did her, and he had to tell Paula all he
knew of the dead man's last hours.

"Still, one good thing has come out of this misery," he said. "There is
nothing so comforting as the discovery that we have been deceived in
thinking ill of a man and of his character. This Orion, who has sinned so
basely against himself and against you, is not utterly reprobate."

"Not?" interrupted Paula. "Then he has taken you in too!"

"Taken me in?" said the leech. "Hardly, I think. I have, alas! stood by
many a death-bed; for I am too often sent for when Death is already
beckoning the sick man away. I have met thousands of mourners in these
melancholy scenes, which, I can assure you, are the very best school for
training any one who desires to search the hearts of his
fellow-creatures. By the bed of death, or in the mart, where everything
is a question of Mine and Thine, it is easy to see how some--we for
instance--are as careful to hide from the world all that is great and
noble in us as others are to conceal what is petty and mean--we read
men's hearts as an open page. From my observations of the dying and of
those who sorrow for them, I, who am not Menander not Lucian, could draw
a series of portraits which should be as truthful likenesses as though
the men had turned themselves inside out before me."

"That a dying man should show himself as he really is I can well
believe," replied Paula. "He need have no further care for the opinions
of others; but the mourners? Why, custom requires them to assume an air
of grief and to shed tears."

And will it be very hard for you? Very? Tell me.'
'I love my betrothed, Maria Nikolaevna, and to be separated from
her is hard for me.'
'Ah! you're a heart of gold!' Maria Nikolaevna commented with a sigh.

'I promise not to torment you too much. Are you going?'
'It is late,' observed Sanin.

'And you want to rest after your journey, and your game of "fools" with
my husband. Tell me, were you a great friend of Ippolit Sidorovitch,
my husband?'

'We were educated at the same school.'
'And was he the same then?'
'The same as what?' inquired Sanin. Maria Nikolaevna burst out laughing,
and laughed till she was red in the face; she put her handkerchief to her
lips, rose from her chair, and swaying as though she were
tired, went up to Sanin, and held out her hand to him.

He bowed over it, and went towards the door.

'Come early to-morrow--do you hear?' she called after him.

He looked back as he went out of the room, and saw that she had
again dropped into an easy-chair, and flung both arms behind her
head.

The loose sleeves of her tea-gown fell open almost to her shoulders, and
it was impossible not to admit that the pose of the arms, that the
whole figure, was enchantingly beautiful.

XXXVI

Long after midnight the lamp was burning in Sanin's room. He sat down to
the table and wrote to 'his Gemma.' He told her everything; he
described the Polozovs--husband and wife--but, more than all, enlarged
on his own feelings, and ended by appointing a meeting with her
in three days!!!

(with three marks of exclamation). Early in the morning he took this letter
to the post, and went for a walk in the garden of the Kurhaus, where
music was already being played.

There were few people in it as yet; he stood before the arbour in which
the orchestra was placed, listened to an adaptation of airs from 'Robert
le Diable,' and after drinking some coffee, turned into a solitary side
walk, sat down on a bench, and fell into a reverie.

The handle of a parasol gave him a rapid, and rather vigorous, thump
on the shoulder. He started....

Before him in a light, grey-green barége dress, in a white tulle hat,
and _suède_ gloves, stood Maria Nikolaevna, fresh and rosy as a
summer morning, though the languor of sound unbroken sleep had not
yet quite vanished from her movements and her eyes.

'Good-morning,' she said. 'I sent after you to-day, but you'd already
gone out. I've only just drunk my second glass--they're making me
drink the water here, you know--whatever for, there's no telling ...
am I not healthy enough? And now I have to walk for a whole hour. Will
you be my companion? And then we'll have some coffee.'
'I've had some already,' Sanin observed, getting up; 'but I shall be
very glad to have a walk with you.'
'Very well, give me your arm then; don't be afraid: your betrothed
is not here--she won't see you.'
Sanin gave a constrained smile. He experienced a disagreeable sensation
every time Maria Nikolaevna referred to Gemma. However, he made
haste to bend towards her obediently.... Maria Nikolaevna's arm slipped
slowly and softly into his arm, and glided over it, and seemed to cling
tight to it.

'Come--this way,' she said to him, putting up her open parasol over her
shoulder. 'I'm quite at home in this park; I will take you to the best
places. And do you know what? (she very often made use of this
expression), we won't talk just now about that sale, we'll have a thorough
discussion of that after lunch; but you must tell me now about yourself
... so that I may know whom I have to do with. And afterwards, if you
like, I will tell you about myself.

Do you agree?'
'But, Maria Nikolaevna, what interest can there be for you ...'
'Stop, stop. You don't understand me. I don't want to flirt with
you.' Maria Nikolaevna shrugged her shoulders. 'He's got a betrothed like
an antique statue, is it likely I am going to flirt with him? But
you've something to sell, and I'm the purchaser. I want to know what
your goods are like. Well, of course, you must show what they are like.

I don't only want to know what I'm buying, but whom I'm buying from.
That was my father's rule. Come, begin ... come, if not from childhood--come
now, have you been long abroad?

And where have you been up till now? Only don't walk so fast, we're in
no hurry.'

'I came here from Italy, where I spent several months.'
'Ah, you feel, it seems, a special attraction towards everything Italian.
It's strange you didn't find your lady-love there. Are you fond of art?
of pictures? or more of music?'
'I am fond of art.... I like everything beautiful.'
'And music?'
'I like music too.'
'Well, I don't at all. I don't care for anything but Russian songs--and
that in the country and in the spring--with dancing, you know ... red
shirts, wreaths of beads, the young grass in the meadows, the smell of
smoke ... delicious! But we weren't talking of me. Go on, tell me.'
Maria Nikolaevna walked on, and kept looking at Sanin. She was tall--her
face was almost on a level with his face.

He began to talk--at first reluctantly, unskilfully--but afterwards he
talked more freely, chattered away in fact. Maria Nikolaevna was a very
good listener; and moreover she seemed herself so frank, that she led
others unconsciously on to frankness. She possessed that great gift of
'intimateness'--_le terrible don de la familiarité_--to which Cardinal
Retz refers. Sanin talked of his travels, of his life in Petersburg,
of his youth.... Had Maria Nikolaevna been a lady of fashion, with
refined manners, he would never have opened out so; but she herself spoke
of herself as a 'good fellow,' who had no patience with ceremony
of any sort; it was in those words that she characterised herself
to Sanin.

And at the same time this 'good fellow' walked by his side with feline
grace, slightly bending towards him, and peeping into his face;
and this 'good fellow' walked in the form of a young feminine
creature, full of the tormenting, fiery, soft and seductive charm,
of which--for the undoing of us poor weak sinful men--only Slav
natures are possessed, and but few of them, and those never of pure
Slav blood, with no foreign alloy.

Sanin's walk with Maria Nikolaevna, Sanin's talk with Maria Nikolaevna
lasted over an hour. And they did not stop once; they kept walking about
the endless avenues of the park, now mounting a hill and admiring
the view as they went, and now going down into the valley, and getting
hidden in the thick shadows,--and all the while arm-in-arm. At times Sanin
felt positively irritated; he had never walked so long with Gemma, his
darling Gemma ... but this lady had simply taken possession of him,
and there was no escape! 'Aren't you tired?' he said to her more than
once. 'I never get tired,' she answered. Now and then they met other
people walking in the park; almost all of them bowed--some respectfully,
others even cringingly.

To one of them, a very handsome, fashionably dressed dark man, she called
from a distance with the best Parisian accent, '_Comte, vous savez, il
ne faut pas venir me voir--ni aujourd'hui ni demain_.' The man took
off his hat, without speaking, and dropped a low bow.

'Who's that?' asked Sanin with the bad habit of asking questions characteristic
of all Russians.

'Oh, a Frenchman, there are lots of them here ... He's dancing
attendance on me too. It's time for our coffee, though. Let's go home;
you must be hungry by this time, I should say. My better half must
have got his eye-peeps open by now.'
'Better half! Eye-peeps!' Sanin repeated to himself ... 'And speaks French
so well ... what a strange creature!'
* * * * *
Maria Nikolaevna was not mistaken. When she went back into the hotel with
Sanin, her 'better half or 'dumpling' was already seated, the invariable
fez on his head, before a table laid for breakfast.

'I've been waiting for you!' he cried, making a sour face. 'I was on the
point of having coffee without you.'
'Never mind, never mind,' Maria Nikolaevna responded cheerfully. 'Are
you angry?

That's good for you; without that you'd turn into a mummy
altogether. Here I've brought a visitor. Make haste and ring! Let us
have coffee--the best coffee--in Saxony cups on a snow-white cloth!'
She threw off her hat and gloves, and clapped her hands.

Polozov looked at her from under his brows.

'What makes you so skittish to-day, Maria Nikolaevna?'

he said in an undertone.

'That's no business of yours, Ippolit Sidoritch! Ring! Dimitri Pavlovitch,
sit down and have some coffee for the second time.

Ah, how nice it is to give orders! There's no pleasure on earth like
it!'

'When you're obeyed,' grumbled her husband again.

'Just so, when one's obeyed!

That's why I'm so happy! Especially with you. Isn't it so, dumpling? Ah,
here's the coffee.'
On the immense tray, which the waiter brought in, there lay also a playbill.
Maria Nikolaevna snatched it up at once.

'A drama!'

she pronounced with indignation, 'a German drama.
No matter; it's better than a German comedy. Order a box for me--_baignoire_--or
no ... better the _Fremden-Loge_,' she turned to the waiter. 'Do you hear:
the _Fremden-Loge_ it must be!'
'But if the _Fremden-Loge_ has been already taken by his excellency,
the director of the town (_seine Excellenz der Herr Stadt-Director_),'
the waiter ventured to demur.

'Give his excellency ten _thalers_, and let the box be mine! Do you
hear!'
The waiter bent his head humbly and mournfully.

'Dimitri Pavlovitch, you will go with me to the theatre? the German
actors are awful, but you will go ... Yes? Yes? How obliging you are!
Dumpling, are you not coming?

'You settle it,' Polozov observed into the cup he had lifted to his
lips.

'Do you know what, you stay at home. You always go to sleep at the theatre,
and you don't understand much German. I'll tell you what you'd better do,
write an answer to the overseer--you remember, about our mill ... about
the peasants' grinding. Tell him that I won't have it, and I won't and
that's all about it! There's occupation for you for the whole evening.'

'All right,' answered Polozov.

'Well then, that's first-rate. You're a darling. And now, gentlemen, as
we have just been speaking of my overseer, let's talk about our great
business. Come, directly the waiter has cleared the table, you shall
tell me all, Dimitri Pavlovitch, about your estate, what price you
will sell it for, how much you want paid down in advance, everything,
in fact! (At last, thought Sanin, thank God!)

You have told me something about it already, you remember, you described
your garden delightfully, but dumpling wasn't here.... Let him hear,
he may pick a hole somewhere! I'm delighted to think that I can help you
to get married, besides, I promised you that I would go into your business
after lunch, and I always keep my promises, isn't that the truth,
Ippolit Sidoritch?'
Polozov rubbed his face with his open hand. 'The truth's the truth.
You don't deceive any one.'
'Never! and I never will deceive any one.

Well, Dimitri Pavlovitch, expound the case as we express it in the senate.'

XXXVII

Sanin proceeded to expound his case, that is to say, again, a second
time, to describe his property, not touching this time on the
beauties of nature, and now and then appealing to Polozov for
confirmation of his 'facts and figures.'

But Polozov simply gasped and shook his head, whether in approval or
disapproval, it would have puzzled the devil, one might fancy, to decide.
However, Maria Nikolaevna stood in no need of his aid. She exhibited
commercial and administrative abilities that were really astonishing! She
was familiar with all the ins-and-outs of farming; she asked questions
about everything with great exactitude, went into every point; every word
of hers went straight to the root of the matter, and hit the nail
on the head.

Sanin had not expected such a close inquiry, he had not prepared himself
for it. And this inquiry lasted for fully an hour and a half.
Sanin experienced all the sensations of the criminal on his trial,
sitting on a narrow bench confronted by a stern and penetrating
judge.

'Why, it's a cross-examination!' he murmured to himself dejectedly. Maria
Nikolaevna kept laughing all the while, as though it were a joke; but
Sanin felt none the more at ease for that; and when in the course of
the 'cross-examination' it turned out that he had not clearly realised the
exact meaning of the words 'repartition' and 'tilth,' he was in a cold
perspiration all over.

'Well, that's all right!' Maria Nikolaevna decided at last. 'I know your
estate now ... as well as you do. What price do you suggest per soul?'
(At that time, as every one knows, the prices of estates were reckoned
by the souls living as serfs on them.)
'Well ... I imagine ... I could not take less than five hundred roubles
for each,' Sanin articulated with difficulty.

O Pantaleone, Pantaleone, where were you! This was when you ought to
have cried again, 'Barbari!'

Maria Nikolaevna turned her eyes upwards as though she were calculating.

'Well?' she said at last. 'I think there's no harm in that price.
But I reserved for myself two days' grace, and you must wait till to-morrow.
I imagine we shall come to an arrangement, and then you will tell me how
much you want paid down. And now, _basta cosi_!' she cried, noticing
Sanin was about to make some reply. 'We've spent enough time over
filthy lucre ... _à demain les affaires_. Do you know what, I'll let you
go now ... (she glanced at a little enamelled watch, stuck in her belt)
... till three o'clock ...

I must let you rest. Go and play roulette.'
'I never play games of chance,' observed Sanin.

'Really? Why, you're a paragon. Though I don't either. It's stupid
throwing away one's money when one's no chance. But go into the gambling
saloon, and look at the faces. Very comic ones there are there. There's
one old woman with a rustic headband and a moustache, simply delicious!
Our prince there's another, a good one too. A majestic figure with
a nose like an eagle's, and when he puts down a _thaler_, he crosses
himself under his waistcoat. Read the papers, go a walk, do what
you like, in fact. But at three o'clock I expect you ... _de pied ferme_.
We shall have to dine a little earlier. The theatre among these absurd
Germans begins at half-past six. She held out her hand. '_Sans rancune,
n'est-ce pas?_'

'Really, Maria Nikolaevna, what reason have I to be annoyed?'
'Why, because I've been tormenting you. Wait a little, you'll see.
There's worse to come,' she added, fluttering her eyelids, and all her
dimples suddenly came out on her flushing cheeks. 'Till we meet!'
Sanin bowed and went out. A merry laugh rang out after him, and in the
looking-glass which he was passing at that instant, the following
scene was reflected: Maria Nikolaevna had pulled her husband's fez
over his eyes, and he was helplessly struggling with both hands.

XXXVIII

Oh, what a deep sigh of delight Sanin heaved, when he found himself
in his room!

Indeed, Maria Nikolaevna had spoken the truth, he needed rest, rest from
all these new acquaintances, collisions, conversations, from this suffocating
atmosphere which was affecting his head and his heart, from this enigmatical,
uninvited intimacy with a woman, so alien to him! And when was all this
taking place? Almost the day after he had learnt that Gemma loved
him, after he had become betrothed to her.

     Why, it was sacrilege!

     A thousand times he mentally asked forgiveness of his pure
     chaste dove, though he could not really blame himself for anything;
a thousand times over he kissed the cross she had given him.

Had he not the hope of bringing the business, for which he had come
to Wiesbaden, to a speedy and successful conclusion, he would have
rushed off headlong, back again, to sweet Frankfort, to that dear
house, now his own home, to her, to throw himself at her loved
feet....

But there was no help for it!

The cup must be drunk to the dregs, he must dress, go to dinner,
and from there to the theatre....

If only she would let him go to-morrow!

One other thing confounded him, angered him; with love, with tenderness,
with grateful transport he dreamed of Gemma, of their life together, of
the happiness awaiting him in the future, and yet this strange woman,
this Madame Polozov persistently floated--no! not floated, poked herself,
so Sanin with special vindictiveness expressed it--_poked herself_ in and
faced his eyes, and he could not rid himself of her image, could not
help hearing her voice, recalling her words, could not help being aware
even of the special scent, delicate, fresh and penetrating, like the
scent of yellow lilies, that was wafted from her garments. This lady was
obviously fooling him, and trying in every way to get over him ...
what for? what did she want?
Could it be merely the caprice of a spoiled, rich, and most likely
unprincipled woman? And that husband! What a creature he was! What were
his relations with her? And why would these questions keep coming
into his head, when he, Sanin, had really no interest whatever in
either Polozov or his wife? Why could he not drive away that intrusive
image, even when he turned with his whole soul to another image,
clear and bright as God's sunshine? How, through those almost divine
features, dare _those others_ force themselves upon him? And not
only that; those other features smiled insolently at him. Those
grey, rapacious eyes, those dimples, those snake-like tresses, how
was it all that seemed to cleave to him, and to shake it all off,
and fling it away, he was unable, had not the power?
Nonsense! nonsense! to-morrow it would all vanish and leave no
trace.... But would she let him go to-morrow?
Yes.... All these question he put to himself, but the time was
moving on to three o'clock, and he put on a black frockcoat and
after a turn in the park, went in to the Polozovs!

* * * * *
He found in their drawing-room a secretary of the legation, a very
tall light-haired German, with the profile of a horse, and his hair
parted down the back of his head (at that time a new fashion), and
...
oh, wonder! whom besides? Von Dönhof, the very officer with whom
he had fought a few days before! He had not the slightest expectation
of meeting him there and could not help being taken aback. He greeted
him, however.
'Are you acquainted?' asked Maria Nikolaevna who had not failed to
notice Sanin's embarrassment.
'Yes ... I have already had the honour,' said Dönhof, and bending
a little aside, in an undertone he added to Maria Nikolaevna, with
a smile, 'The very man ... your compatriot ... the Russian ...'

'Impossible!' she exclaimed also in an undertone; she shook her
finger at him, and at once began to bid good-bye both to him and
the long secretary, who was, to judge by every symptom, head over
ears in love with her; he positively gaped every time he looked at
her.From time to
time he could pray, but each time he broke off; for what Power in Heaven
or on earth could unseal those closed eyes and stir that heart to beat
again, that tongue to speak--could vouchsafe to him, the outcast, the one
thing for which his soul thirsted and without which he thought he must
die: Pardon, pardon, his father's pardon! Now and then he struck his
forehead and heart like a man demented, with cries of anguish, curses and
lamentations.

About midnight--it was but just twelve hours since that fearful scene,
and to him it seemed like as many days--he threw himself on the couch,
dressed as he was in the dark mourning garments, which he had half torn
off in his rage and despair, and broke out into such loud groans that he
himself was almost frightened in the silence of the night. Full of
self-pity and horror at his own deep grief, he turned his face to the
wall to screen his eyes from the clear, full moon, which only showed him
things he did not want to see, while it hurt him.

His torture was beginning to be quite unbearable; he fancied his soul was
actually wounded, riven, and torn; it had even occurred to him to seize
his sharpest sword and throw himself upon it like Ajax in his fury--and
like Cato--and so put a sudden end to this intolerable and overwhelming
misery.

He started up for--surely it was no illusion, no mistake-the door of his
room was softly opened and a white figure came in with noiseless, ghostly
steps. He was a brave man, but his blood ran cold; however, in a moment
he recognized his nocturnal visitor as little Mary. She came across the
moonlight without speaking, but he exclaimed in a sharp tone:

"What is the meaning of this? What do you want?"

The child started and stood still in alarm, stretching out imploring
hands and whispering timidly:

"I heard you lamenting. Poor, poor Orion! And it was I who brought it all
on you, and so I could not stay in bed any longer--I must--I could not
help. . . ." But she could say no more for sobs. Orion exclaimed:

"Very well, very well: go back to your own room and sleep. I will try not
to groan so loud."

He ended his speech in a less rough tone, for he observed that the child
had come to see him, though she was ill, with bare feet and only in her
night-shift, and was trembling with cold, excitement, and grief. Mary,
however, stood still, shook her head, and replied, still weeping though
less violently:

"No, no. I shall stop here and not go away till you tell me that you--Oh,
God, you never can forgive me, but still I must say it, I must."

With a sudden impulse she ran straight up to him, threw her arms round
his neck, laid her head against his, and then, as he did not immediately
push her away, kissed his cheeks and brow.

At this a strange feeling came over him; he himself did not know what it
was, but it was as though something within him yielded and gave way, and
the moisture which felt warm in his eyes and on his cheeks was not from
the child's tears but his own. This lasted through many minutes of
silence; but at last he took the little one's arms from about his neck,
saying:

"How hot your hands and your cheeks are, poor thing! You are feverish,
and the night air blows in chill--you will catch fresh cold by this mad
behavior."

He had controlled his tears with difficulty, and as he spoke, in broken
accents, he carefully wrapped her in the black robe he had thrown off and
said kindly:

"Now, be calm, and I will try to compose myself. You did not mean any
harm, and I owe you no grudge. Now go; you will not feel the draught in
the anteroom with that wrap on. Go; be quick."

"No, no," she eagerly replied. "You must let me say what I have to say or
I cannot sleep. You see I never thought of hurting you so dreadfully, so
horribly--never, never! I was angry with you, to be sure, because--but
when I spoke I really and truly did not think of you, but only of poor
Paula. You do not know how good she is, and grandfather was so fond of
her before you came home; and he was lying there and going to die so
soon, and I knew that he believed Paula to be a thief and a liar, and it
seemed to me so horrible, so unbearable to see him close his eyes with
such a mistake in his mind, such an injustice!--Not for his sake, oh no!
but for Paula's; so then I--Oh Orion! the Merciful Saviour is my witness,
I could not help it; if I had had to die for it I could not have helped
it! I should have died, if I had not spoken!"

"And perhaps it was well that you spoke," interrupted the young man, with
a deep sigh. "You see, child, your lost father's miserable brother is a
ruined man and it matters little about him; but Paula, who is a thousand
times better than I am, has at least had justice done her; and as I love
her far more dearly than your little heart can conceive of, I will gladly
be friends with you again: nay, I shall be more fond of you than ever.
That is nothing great or noble, for I need love--much love to make life
tolerable. The best love a man may have I have forfeited, fool that I am!
and now dear, good little soul, I could not bear to lose yours! So there
is my hand upon it; now, give me another kiss and then go to bed and
sleep."

But still Mary would not do his bidding, but only thanked him vehemently
and then asked with sparkling eyes:

"Really, truly? Do you love Paula so dearly?" At this point however she
suddenly checked herself. "And little Katharina. . ."

"Never mind about that," he replied with a sigh. "And learn a lesson from
all this. I, you see, in an hour of recklessness did a wrong thing; to
hide it I had to do further wrong, till it grew to a mountain which fell
on me and crushed me. Now, I am the most miserable of men and I might
perhaps have been the happiest. I have spoilt my own life by my own
folly, weakness, and guilt; and I have lost Paula, who is dearer to me
than all the other creatures on earth put together. Yes, Mary, if she had
been mine, your poor uncle would have been the most enviable fellow in
the world, and he might have been a fine fellow, too, a man of great
achievements. But as it is!--Well, what is done cannot be undone! Now go
to bed child; you cannot understand it all till you are older."

"Oh I understand it already and much better perhaps than you suppose,"
cried the ten years' old child. "And if you love Paula so much why should
not she love you? You are so handsome, you can do so many things, every
one likes you, and Paula would have loved you, too, if only. . . . Will
you promise not to be angry with me, and may I say it?"

"Speak out, little simpleton."

"She cannot owe you any grudge when she knows how dreadfully you are
suffering on her account and that you are good at heart, and only that
once ever did--you know what. Before you came home, grandfather said a
hundred times over what a joy you had been to him all your life through,
and now, now. . . . Well, you are my uncle, and I am only a stupid little
girl; still, I know that it will be just the same with you as it was with
the prodigal son in the Bible. You and grandfather parted in anger. . . ."

"He cursed me," Orion put in gloomily.

"No, no! For I heard every word he said. He only spoke of your evil deed
in those dreadful words and bid you go out of his sight."

"And what is the difference--Cursed or outcast?"

"Oh! a very great difference! He had good reason to be angry with you;
but the prodigal son in the Bible became his father's best beloved, and
he had the fatted calf slain for him and forgave him all; and so will
grandfather in heaven forgive, if you are good again, as you used to be
to him and to all of us. Paula will forgive you, too; I know her--you
will see. Pass the butter. Perhaps my wife now would buy it.
You talk to her about it. If you don't ask too much, she's not above
thinking of that.... What asses these Germans are, really! They can't
cook fish. What could be simpler, one wonders? And yet they go on about
"uniting the Fatherland."

Waiter, take away that beastly stuff!'
'Does your wife really manage ... business matters herself?' Sanin
inquired.

'Yes.

Try the cutlets--they're good. I can recommend them. I've told you already,
Dimitri Pavlovitch, I don't interfere in any of my wife's concerns, and
I tell you so again.'
Polozov went on munching.

'H'm.... But how can I have a talk with her, Ippolit Sidorovitch?'
'It's very simple, Dimitri Pavlovitch. Go to Wiesbaden. It's not far from
here. Waiter, haven't you any English mustard? No? Brutes! Only don't
lose any time. We're starting the day after to-morrow. Let me pour you
out a glass of wine; it's wine with a bouquet--no vinegary stuff.'
Polozov's face was flushed and animated; it was never animated but when
he was eating--or drinking.

'Really, I don't know, how that could be managed,' Sanin muttered.

'But what makes you in such a hurry about it all of a sudden?'
'There is a reason for being in a hurry, brother.'
'And do you need a lot of money?'
'Yes, a lot. I ... how can I tell you? I propose ... getting married.'

Polozov set the glass he had been lifting to his lips on the table.

'Getting married!' he articulated in a voice thick with astonishment,
and he folded his podgy hands on his stomach. 'So suddenly?'
'Yes ... soon.'
'Your intended is in Russia, of course?'
'No, not in Russia.'
'Where then?'
'Here in Frankfort.'

'And who is she?'
'A German; that is, no--an Italian. A resident here.'
'With a fortune?'
'No, without a fortune.'

'Then I suppose your love is very ardent?'
'How absurd you are! Yes, very ardent.'
'And it's for that you must have money?'
'Well, yes ... yes, yes.'
Polozov gulped down his wine, rinsed his mouth, and washed his hands,
carefully wiped them on the napkin, took out and lighted a cigar.
Sanin watched him in silence.

'There's one means,' Polozov grunted at last, throwing his head
back, and blowing out the smoke in a thin ring.

'Go to my wife. If she likes, she can take all the bother off your hands.'

'But how can I see your wife? You say you are starting the day after
to-morrow?'
Polozov closed his eyes.

'I'll tell you what,' he said at last, rolling the cigar in his
lips, and sighing.

'Go home, get ready as quick as you can, and come here.

At one o'clock I am going, there's plenty of room in my carriage. I'll
take you with me. That's the best plan. And now I'm going to have a nap.
I must always have a nap, brother, after a meal. Nature demands it,
and I won't go against it And don't you disturb me.'
Sanin thought and thought, and suddenly raised his head; he had made up
his mind.

'Very well, agreed, and thank you. At half-past twelve I'll be here, and
we'll go together to Wiesbaden. I hope your wife won't be angry....'

But Polozov was already snoring. He muttered, 'Don't disturb me!' gave
a kick, and fell asleep, like a baby.

Sanin once more scanned his clumsy figure, his head, his neck, his upturned
chin, round as an apple, and going out of the hotel, set off with
rapid strides to the Rosellis' shop. He had to let Gemma know.

XXXII

He found her in the shop with her mother. Frau Lenore was stooping
down, measuring with a big folding foot-rule the space between the
windows.

On seeing Sanin, she stood up, and greeted him cheerfully, though with
a shade of embarrassment.

'What you said yesterday,' she began, 'has set my head in a whirl with ideas
as to how we could improve our shop. Here, I fancy we might put a couple
of cupboards with shelves of looking-glass. You know, that's the fashion
nowadays.

And then ...'
'Excellent, excellent,' Sanin broke in, 'we must think it all over....

But come here, I want to tell you something.' He took Frau Lenpre and
Gemma by the arm, and led them into the next room.

Frau Lenore was alarmed, and the foot-rule slipped out of her hands. Gemma
too was almost frightened, but she took an intent look at Sanin, and was
reassured. His face, though preoccupied, expressed at the same time keen
self-confidence and determination.

He asked both the women to sit down, while he remained standing before
them, and gesticulating with his hands and ruffling up his hair, he
told them all his story; his meeting with Polozov, his proposed
expedition to Wiesbaden, the chance of selling the estate. 'Imagine my
happiness,' he cried in conclusion:
'things have taken such a turn that I may even, perhaps, not have
to go to Russia!

And we can have our wedding much sooner than I had anticipated!'
'When must you go?' asked Gemma.

'To-day, in an hour's time; my friend has ordered a carriage--he will
take me.'
'You will write to us?'
'At once! directly I have had a talk with this lady, I will write.'
'This lady, you say, is very rich?' queried the practical Frau
Lenore.

'Exceedingly rich! her father was a millionaire, and he left everything
to her.'
'Everything--to her alone? Well, that's so much the better for you.
Only mind, don't let your property go too cheap!

Be sensible and firm. Don't let yourself be carried away! I understand
your wishing to be Gemma's husband as soon as possible ... but prudence
before everything! Don't forget: the better price you get for your estate,
the more there will be for you two, and for your children.'
Gemma turned away, and Sanin gave another wave of his hand. 'You can
rely on my prudence, Frau Lenore!

Indeed, I shan't do any bargaining with her. I shall tell her the fair
price; if she'll give it--good; if not, let her go.'
'Do you know her--this lady?' asked Gemma.

'I have never seen her.'
'And when will you come back?'
'If our negotiations come to nothing--the day after to-morrow; if
they turn out favourably, perhaps I may have to stay a day or two
longer.

In any case I shall not linger a minute beyond what's necessary. I am
leaving my heart here, you know! But I have said what I had to say to
you, and I must run home before setting off too.... Give me your hand
for luck, Frau Lenore--that's what we always do in Russia.'
'The right or the left?'
'The left, it's nearer the heart. I shall reappear the day after to-morrow
with my shield or on it!

Something tells me I shall come back in triumph! Good-bye, my good
dear ones....'
He embraced and kissed Frau Lenore, but he asked Gemma to follow
him into her room--for just a minute--as he must tell her something
of great importance.

He simply wanted to say good-bye to her alone. Frau Lenore saw that,
and felt no curiosity as to the matter of such great importance.

Sanin had never been in Gemma's room before. All the magic of love,
all its fire and rapture and sweet terror, seemed to flame up and burst
into his soul, directly he crossed its sacred threshold.... He
cast a look of tenderness about him, fell at the sweet girl's feet and
pressed his face against her waist....

'You are mine,' she whispered: 'you will be back soon?'
'I am yours. I will come back,' he declared, catching his breath.

'I shall be longing for you back, my dear one!'
A few instants later Sanin was running along the street to his lodging.
He did not even notice that Pantaleone, all dishevelled, had darted out
of the shop-door after him, and was shouting something to him and was
shaking, as though in menace, his lifted hand.

* * * * *
Exactly at a quarter to one Sanin presented himself before Polozov.

The carriage with four horses was already standing at the hotel gates.

On seeing Sanin, Polozov merely commented, 'Oh! you've made up your
mind?' and putting on his hat, cloak, and over-shoes, and stuffing
cotton-wool into his ears, though it was summer-time, went out on to the
steps. The waiters, by his directions, disposed all his numerous purchases
in the inside of the carriage, lined the place where he was to sit with
silk cushions, bags, and bundles, put a hamper of provisions for his
feet to rest on, and tied a trunk on to the box.
Polozov paid with a liberal hand, and supported by the deferential
door-keeper, whose face was still respectful, though he was unseen behind
him, he climbed gasping into the carriage, sat down, disarranged
everything about him thoroughly, took out and lighted a cigar, and
only then extended a finger to Sanin, as though to say, 'Get in, you too!'
Sanin placed himself beside him.

Polozov sent orders by the door-keeper to the postillion to drive carefully--if
he wanted drinks; the carriage steps grated, the doors slammed, and the
carriage rolled off.

XXXIII

It takes less than an hour in these days by rail from Frankfort to
Wiesbaden; at that time the extra post did it in three hours. They changed
horses five times. Part of the time Polozov dozed and part of the time
he simply shook from side to side, holding a cigar in his teeth;
he talked very little; he did not once look out of the window; picturesque
views did not interest them; he even announced that 'nature was the death
of him!' Sanin did not speak either, nor did he admire the scenery; he had
no thought for it. He was all absorbed in reflections and memories. At the
stations Polozov paid with exactness, took the time by his watch, and
tipped the postillions--more or less--according to their zeal. When they
had gone half way, he took two oranges out of the hamper of
edibles, and choosing out the better, offered the other to Sanin.
Sanin looked steadily at his companion, and suddenly burst out
laughing.

'What are you laughing at?' the latter inquired, very carefully peeling
his orange with his short white nails.

'What at?' repeated Sanin. 'Why, at our journey together.'
'What about it?' Polozov inquired again, dropping into his mouth
one of the longitudinal sections into which an orange parts.

'It's so very strange. Yesterday I must confess I thought no more
of you than of the Emperor of China, and to-day I'm driving with you
to sell my estate to your wife, of whom, too, I have not the slightest
idea.'
'Anything may happen,' responded Polozov. 'When you've lived a bit
longer, you won't be surprised at anything. For instance, can you fancy
me riding as an orderly officer? But I did, and the Grand Duke Mihail
Pavlovitch gave the order, 'Trot! let him trot, that fat cornet! Trot
now! Look sharp!'
Sanin scratched behind his ear.

'Tell me, please, Ippolit Sidorovitch, what is your wife like? What
is her character? It's very necessary for me to know that, you see.'

'It was very well for him to shout, "Trot!"' Polozov went on with sudden
vehemence, 'But me! how about me? I thought to myself, "You can
take your honours and epaulettes--and leave me in peace!" But ...
you asked about my wife? What my wife is? A person like any one else.
Don't wear your heart upon your sleeve with her--she doesn't like that.
The great thing is to talk a lot to her ... something for her to laugh
at. Tell her about your love, or something ... but make it more amusing,
you know.'

'How more amusing?'
'Oh, you told me, you know, that you were in love, wanting to get
married. Well, then, describe that.'
Sanin was offended. 'What do you find laughable in that?'
Polozov only rolled his eyes. The juice from the orange was trickling down
his chin.

'Was it your wife sent you to Frankfort to shop for her?' asked Sanin after
a short time.

'Yes, it was she.'
'What are the purchases?'

'Toys, of course.'
'Toys? have you any children?'
Polozov positively moved away from Sanin.

'That's likely! What do I want with children? Feminine fallals ...
finery. For the toilet.'
'Do you mean to say you understand such things?'
'To be sure I do.'
'But didn't you tell me you didn't interfere in any of your wife's affairs?'

'I don't in any other. But this ... is no consequence. To pass the time--one
may do it. And my wife has confidence in my taste. And I'm a first-rate
hand at bargaining.'
Polozov began to speak by jerks; he was exhausted already. 'And is your
wife very rich?'
'Rich; yes, rather! Only she keeps the most of it for herself.'
'But I expect you can't complain either?'
'Well, I'm her husband.

I'm hardly likely not to get some benefit from it! And I'm of use to
her. With me she can do just as she likes! I'm easy-going!'
Polozov wiped his face with a silk handkerchief and puffed painfully,
as though to say, 'Have mercy on me; don't force me to utter another word.
You see how hard it is for me.'
Sanin left him in peace, and again sank into meditation.

* * * * *
The hotel in Wiesbaden, before which the carriage stopped, was exactly
like a palace. Bells were promptly set ringing in its inmost recesses; a
fuss and bustle arose; men of good appearance in black frock-coats skipped
out at the principal entrance; a door-keeper who was a blaze of gold
opened the carriage doors with a flourish.

Like some triumphant general Polozov alighted and began to ascend a staircase
strewn with rugs and smelling of agreeable perfumes. To him flew up another
man, also very well dressed but with a Russian face--his valet. Polozov
observed to him that for the future he should always take him everywhere
with him, for the night before at Frankfort, he, Polozov, had been
left for the night without hot water!

The valet portrayed his horror on his face, and bending down quickly, took
off his master's goloshes.

'Is Maria Nikolaevna at home?' inquired Polozov.

'Yes, sir. Madam is pleased to be dressing. Madam is pleased to be dining
to-night at the Countess Lasunsky's.'
'Ah! there?... Stay! There are things there in the carriage; get them all
yourself and bring them up. And you, Dmitri Pavlovitch,' added Polozov,
'take a room for yourself and come in in three-quarters of an hour.

We will dine together.'
Polozov waddled off, while Sanin asked for an inexpensive room for
himself; and after setting his attire to rights, and resting a
little, he repaired to the immense apartment occupied by his
Serenity (Durchlaucht) Prince von Polozov.

He found this 'prince' enthroned in a luxurious velvet arm-chair in the
middle of a most magnificent drawing-room. Sanin's phlegmatic friend
had already had time to have a bath and to array himself in a most sumptuous
satin dressing-gown; he had put a crimson fez on his head. Sanin approached
him and scrutinised him for some time. Polozov was sitting rigid as an
idol; he did not even turn his face in his direction, did not even move
an eyebrow, did not utter a sound. It was truly a sublime spectacle! After
having admired him for a couple of minutes, Sanin was on the point of
speaking, of breaking this hallowed silence, when suddenly the door
from the next room was thrown open, and in the doorway appeared a young
and beautiful lady in a white silk dress trimmed with black lace, and
with diamonds on her arms and neck--Maria Nikolaevna Polozov. Her thick
fair hair fell on both sides of her head, braided, but not fastened up
into a knot.

XXXIV

'Ah, I beg your pardon!' she said with a smile half-embarrassed, half-ironical,
instantly taking hold of one end of a plait of her hair and fastening
on Sanin her large, grey, clear eyes.

'I did not think you had come yet.'
'Sanin, Dmitri Pavlovitch--known him from a boy,' observed Polozov,
as before not turning towards him and not getting up, but pointing
at him with one finger.
'Yes.... I know.... You told me before. Very glad to make your
acquaintance. But I wanted to ask you, Ippolit Sidorovitch.... My
maid seems to have lost her senses to-day ...'
'To do your hair up?'
'Yes, yes, please. I beg your pardon,' Maria Nikolaevna repeated
with the same smile. She nodded to Sanin, and turning swiftly,
vanished through the doorway, leaving behind her a fleeting but
graceful impression of a charming neck, exquisite shoulders, an
exquisite figure.
Polozov got up, and rolling ponderously, went out by the same
door.
Sanin did not doubt for a single second that his presence in 'Prince
Polozov's' drawing-room was a fact perfectly well known to its
mistress; the whole point of her entry had been the display of her
hair, which was certainly beautiful. Sanin was inwardly delighted
indeed at this freak on the part of Madame Polozov; if, he thought,
she is anxious to impress me, to dazzle me, perhaps, who knows, she
will be accommodating about the price of the estate. His heart was
so full of Gemma that all other women had absolutely no significance
for him; he hardly noticed them; and this time he went no further
than thinking, 'Yes, it was the truth they told me; that lady's
really magnificent to look at!'
But had he not been in such an exceptional state of mind he would
most likely have expressed himself differently; Maria Nikolaevna
Polozov, by birth Kolishkin, was a very striking personality. And
not that she was of a beauty to which no exception could be taken;
traces of her plebeian origin were rather clearly apparent in her.
Her forehead was low, her nose rather fleshy and turned up; she
could boast neither of the delicacy of her skin nor of the elegance
of her hands and feet--but what did all that matter? Any one meeting
her would not, to use Pushkin's words, have stood still before 'the
holy shrine of beauty,' but before the sorcery of a half-Russian,
half-Gipsy woman's body in its full flower and full power ... and
he would have been nothing loath to stand still!
But Gemma's image preserved Sanin like the three-fold armour of
which the poets sing.
Ten minutes later Maria Nikolaevna appeared again, escorted by her
husband. She went up to Sanin ... and her walk was such that some
eccentrics of that--alas!--already, distant day, were simply crazy
over her walk alone. 'That woman, when she comes towards one, seems
as though she is bringing all the happiness of one's life to meet
one,' one of them used to say. She went up to Sanin, and holding
out her hand to him, said in her caressing and, as it were, subdued
voice in Russian, 'You will wait for me, won't you? I'll be back
soon.'
Sanin bowed respectfully, while Maria Nikolaevna vanished behind
the curtain over the outside door; and as she vanished turned her
head back over her shoulder, and smiled again, and again left behind
her the same impression of grace.
When she smiled, not one and not two, but three dimples came out
on each cheek, and her eyes smiled more than her lips--long, crimson,
juicy lips with two tiny moles on the left side of them.
Polozov waddled into the room and again established himself in the
arm-chair. He was speechless as before; but from time to time a
queer smile puffed out his colourless and already wrinkled cheeks.
He looked like an old man, though he was only three years older
than Sanin.
The dinner with which he regaled his guest would of course have
satisfied the most exacting gourmand, but to Sanin it seemed endless,
insupportable! Polozov ate slowly, 'with feeling, with judgment,
with deliberation,' bending attentively over his plate, and sniffing
at almost every morsel. First he rinsed his mouth with wine, then
swallowed it and smacked his lips.... Over the roast meat he suddenly
began to talk--but of what? Of merino sheep, of which he was intending
to order a whole flock, and in such detail, with such tenderness,
using all the while endearing pet names for them. After drinking a
cup of coffee, hot to boiling point (he had several times in a voice
of tearful irritation mentioned to the waiter that he had been
served the evening before with coffee, cold--cold as ice!) and
bitten off the end of a Havannah cigar with his crooked yellow
teeth, he dropped off, as his habit was, into a nap, to the intense
delight of Sanin, who began walking up and down with noiseless steps
on the soft carpet, and dreaming of his life with Gemma and of what
news he would bring back to her. Polozov, however, awoke, as he
remarked himself, earlier than usual--he had slept only an hour and
a half--and after drinking a glass of iced seltzer water, and
swallowing eight spoonfuls of jam, Russian jam, which his valet
brought him in a dark-green genuine 'Kiev' jar, and without which,
in his own words, he could not live, he stared with his swollen
eyes at Sanin and asked him wouldn't he like to play a game of
'fools' with him. Sanin agreed readily; he was afraid that Polozov
would begin talking again about lambs and ewes and fat tails. The
host and the visitor both adjourned to the drawing-room, the waiter
brought in the cards, and the game began, not,--of course, for
money.
At this innocent diversion Maria Nikolaevna found them on her return
from the Countess Lasunsky's."Amen," said the leech; and Paula had been quite satisfied by her
friend's arrangements.

By the next day she felt herself one of the household, though she every
hour found something that could not fail to strike her as strange.


CHAPTER XIX.

When Paula had eaten with Rufinus and his family after the funeral
ceremonies, she went into the garden with Pul and the old man--it had
been impossible to induce Perpetua to sit at the same table with her
mistress. The sun was now low, and its level beams gave added lustre to
the colors of the flowers and to the sheen of the thick, metallic foliage
of the south, which the drought and scorching heat had still spared. A
bright-hued humped ox and an ass were turning the wheel which raised
cooling waters from the Nile and poured them into a large tank from which
they flowed through narrow rivulets to irrigate the beds. This toil was
now very laborious, for the river had fallen to so low a level as to give
cause for anxiety, even at this season of extreme ebb. Numbers of birds
with ruffled feathers, with little splints on their legs, or with sadly
drooping heads, were going to roost in small cages hung from the branches
to protect them from cats and other beasts of prey; to each, as he went
by, Rufinus spoke a kindly word, or chirruped to encourage and cheer it.
Aromatic odors filled the garden, and rural silence; every object shone
in golden glory, even the black back of the negro working at the
water-wheel, and the white and yellow skin of the ox; while the clear
voices of the choir of nuns thrilled through the convent-grove. Pul
listened, turning her face to meet it, and crossing her arms over her
heart. Her father pointed to her as he said to Paula:

"That is where her heart is. May she ever have her God before her eyes!
That cannot but be the best thing for a woman. Still, among such as we
are, we must hold to the rule: Every man for his fellowman on earth, in
the name of the merciful Lord!--Can our wise and reasonable Father in
Heaven desire that brother should neglect brother, or--as in our case--a
child forsake its parents?"

"Certainly not," replied Paula. "For my own part, nothing keeps me from
taking the veil but my hope of finding my long-lost father; I, like your
Pulcheria, have often longed for the peace of the cloister. How piously
rapt your daughter stands there! What a sweet and touching sight!--In my
heart all was dark and desolate; but here, among you all, it is already
beginning to feel lighter, and here, if anywhere, I shall recover what I
lost in my other home.--Happy child! Could you not fancy, as she stands
there in the evening light, that the pure devotion which fills her soul,
radiated from her? If I were not afraid of disturbing her, and if I were
worthy, how gladly would I join my prayers to hers!"

"You have a part in them as it is," replied the old man with a smile. "At
this moment St. Cecilia appears to her under the guise of your features.
We will ask her--you will see."

"No, leave her alone!" entreated Paula with a blush, and she led Rufinus
away to the other end of the garden.

They soon reached a spot where a high hedge of thorny shrubs parted the
old man's plot from that of Susannah. Rufinus here pricked up his ears
and then angrily exclaimed:

"As sure as I long to be quit of this lumber, they are cutting my hedge
again! Only last evening I caught one of the slaves just as he was going
to work on the branches; but how could I get at the black rascal through
the thorns? It was to make a peep-hole for curious eyes, or for spies,
for the Patriarch knows how to make use of a petticoat; but I will be
even with them! Do you go on, pray, as if you had seen and heard nothing;
I will fetch my whip."

The old man hurried away, and Paula was about to obey him; but scarcely
had he disappeared when she heard herself called in a shrill girl's voice
through a gap in the hedge, and looking round, she spied a pretty face
between the boughs which had yesterday been forced asunder by a man's
hands--like a picture wreathed with greenery.

Even in the twilight she recognized it at once, and when Katharina put
her curly head forward, and said in a beseeching tone: "May I get
through, and will you listen to me?" she gladly signified her consent.

The water-wagtail, heedless of Paula's hand held out to help her, slipped
through the gap so nimbly that it was evident that she had not long
ceased surmounting such obstacles in her games with Mary. As swift as the
wind she came down on her feet, holding out her arms to rush at Paula;
but she suddenly let them fall in visible hesitancy, and drew back a
step. Paula, however, saw her embarrassment; she drew the girl to her,
kissed her forehead, and gaily exclaimed:

"Trespassing! And why could you not come in by the gate? Here comes my
host with his hippopotamus thong.--Stop, stop, good Rufinus, for the
breach effected in your flowery wall was intended against me and not
against you. There stands the hostile power, and I should be greatly
surprised if you did not recognize her as a neighbor?"

"Recognize her?" said the old man, whose wrath was quickly appeased. "Do
we know each other, fair damsel--yes or no? It is an open question."

"Of course!" cried Katharina, "I have seen you a hundred times from the
gnat-tower."

"You have had less pleasure than I should have had, if I had been so
happy as to see you.--We came across each other about a year ago. I was
then so happy as to find you in my large peach-tree, which to this day
takes the liberty of growing over your garden-plot."

"I was but a child then," laughed Katharina, who very well remembered how
the old man, whose handsome white head she had always particularly
admired, had spied her out among the boughs of his peach-tree and had
advised her, with a good-natured nod, to enjoy herself there.

"A child!" repeated Rufinus. "And now we are quite grown up and do not
care to climb so high, but creep humbly through our neighbor's hedge."

"Then you really are strangers?" cried Paula in surprise. "And have you
never met Pulcheria, Katharina?"

"Pul?--oh, how glad I should have been to call her!" said Katharina. "I
have been on the point of it a hundred times; for her mere appearance
makes one fall in love with her,--but my mother. . . ."

"Well, and what has your mother got to say against her neighbors?" asked
Rufinus. "I believe we are peaceable folks who do no one any harm."

"No, no, God forbid! But my mother has her own way of viewing things; you
and she are strangers still, and as you are so rarely to be seen in
church. . . ."

"She naturally takes us for the ungodly. Tell her that she is mistaken,
and if you are Paula's friend and you come to see her--but prettily,
through the gate, and not through the hedge, for it will be closely
twined again by to-morrow morning--if you come here, I say, you will find
that we have a great deal to do and a great many creatures to nurse and
care for--poor human creatures some of them, and some with fur or
feathers, just as it comes; and man serves his Maker if he only makes
life easier to the beings that come in his way; for He loves them all.
Tell that to your mother, little wagtail, and come again very often."

"Thank you very much. But let me ask you, if I may, where you heard that
odious nickname? I hate it."

"From the same person who told you the secret that my Pulcheria is called
Pul!" said Rufinus; he laughed and bowed and left the two girls together.

"What a dear old man!" cried Katharina. "Oh, I know quite well how he
spends his Days! And his pretty wife and Pul--I know them all. How often
I have watched them--I will show you the place one day! I can see over
the whole garden, only not what goes on near the convent on the other
side of the house, or beyond those trees. You know my mother; if she once
dislikes any one. . . . But Pul, you understand, would be such a friend
for me!"

"Of course she would," replied Paula. "And a girl of your age must chose
older companions than little Mary."

"Oh, you shall not say a word against her!" cried Katharina eagerly. "She
is only ten years old, but many a grown-up person is not so upright or so
capable as I have found her during these last few miserable days."

"Poor child!" said Paula stroking her hair.

At this a bitter sob broke suddenly and passionately from Katharina; she
tried with all her might to suppress it, but could not succeed. Her fit
of weeping was so violent that she could not utter a word, till Paula had
led her to a bench under a spreading sycamore, had induced her with
gentle force to sit down by her side, clasping her in her arms like a
suffering child, and speaking to her words of comfort and encouragement.

Birds without number were going to rest in the dense branches overhead,
owls and bats had begun their nocturnal raids, the sky put on its
spangled glory of gold and silver stars, from the western end of the town
came the jackals' bark as they left their lurking-places among the ruined
houses and stole out in search of prey, the heavy dew, falling through
the mild air silently covered the leaves, the grass, and the flowers; the
garden was more powerfully fragrant now than during the day-time, and
Paula felt that it was high time to take refuge from the mists that came
up from the shallow stream. But still she lingered while the little
maiden poured out all that weighed upon her, all she repented of,
believing she could never atone for it; and then all she had gone
through, thinking it must break her heart, and all she still had to live
down and drive out of her mind.

She told Paula how Orion had wooed her, how much she loved him, how her
heart had been tortured by jealousy of her, Paula, and how she had
allowed herself to be led away into bearing false witness before the
judges. And then she went on to say it was Mary who had first opened her
eyes to the abyss by which she was standing. In the afternoon after the
death of the Mukaukas she had gone with her mother to the governor's
house to join in her friends' lamentations. She had at once asked after
Mary, but had not been allowed to see her, for she was still in bed and
very feverish. She was then on her way to the cool hall when she heard
her mother's voice--not in grief, but angry and vehement--so, thinking it
would be more becoming to keep out of the way, she wandered off into the
pillared vestibule opening towards the Nile. She would not for worlds
have met Orion, and was terribly afraid she might do so, but as she went
out, for it was still quite light, there she found him--and in what a
state! He was sitting all in a heap, dressed in black, with his head
buried in his hands. He had not observed her presence; but she pitied him
deeply, for though it was very hot he was trembling in every limb, and
his strong frame shuddered repeatedly. She had therefore spoken to him,
begging him to be comforted, at which he had started to his feet in
dismay, and had pushed his unkempt hair back from his face, looking so
pale, so desperate, that she had been quite terrified and could not
manage to bring out the consoling words she had ready. For some time
neither of them had uttered a syllable, but at length he had pulled
himself together as if for some great deed, he came slowly towards her
and laid his hands on her shoulders with a solemn dignity which no one
certainly had ever before seen in him. He stood gazing into her face--his
eyes were red with much weeping--and he sighed from his very heart the
two words: "Unhappy Child!"--She could hear them still sounding in her
ears.

And he was altered: from head to foot quite different, like a stranger.
His voice, even, sounded changed and deeper than usual as he went on:

"Child, child! Perhaps I have given much pain in my life without knowing
it; but you have certainly suffered most through me, for I have made you,
an innocent, trusting creature, my accomplice in crime. The great sin we
both committed has been visited on me alone, but the punishment is a
hundred--a thousand times too heavy!"

"And with this," Katharina went on, "he covered his face with his hands,
threw himself on the couch again, and groaned and sighed. Then he sprang
up once more, crying out so loud and passionately that I felt as if I
must die of grief and pity: 'Forgive me if you can! Forgive me, wholly,
freely. I want it--you must, you must! I was going to run up to him and
throw my arms round him and forgive him everything, his trouble
distressed me so much; but he gravely pushed me away--not roughly or
sternly, and he said that there was an end of all love-making and
betrothal between us--that I was young, and that I should be able to
forget him. He would still be a true friend to me and to my mother, and
the more we required of him the more gladly would he serve us.

"I was about to answer him, but he hastily interrupted me and said firmly
and decisively: 'Lovable as you are, I cannot love you as you deserve;
for it is my duty to tell you, I have another and a greater love in my
heart--my first and my last; and though once in my life I have proved
myself a wretch, still, it was but once; and I would rather endure your
anger, and hurt both you and myself now, than continue this unrighteous
tie and cheat you and others.'--At this I was greatly startled, and
asked: 'Paula?' However, he did not answer, but bent over me and touched
my forehead with his lips, just as my father often kissed me, and then
went quickly out into the garden.

"Just then my mother came up, as red as a poppy and panting for breath:
she took me by the hand without a word, dragged me into the chariot after
her, and then cried out quite beside herself--she could not even shed a
tear for rage: 'What insolence! what unheard-of behavior--How can I find
the heart to tell you, poor sacrificed lamb. . .'"

"And she would have gone on, but that I would not let her finish; I told
her at once that I knew all, and happily I was able to keep quite calm. I
had some bad hours at home; and when Nilus came to us yesterday, after
the opening of the will, and brought me the pretty little gold box with
turquoises and pearls that I have always admired, and told me that the
good Mukaukas had written with his own hand, in his last will, that it
was to be given to me I his bright little 'Katharina,' my mother insisted
on my not taking it and sent it back to Neforis, though I begged and
prayed to keep it. And of course I shall never go to that house again;
indeed my mother talks of quitting Memphis altogether and settling in
Constantinople or some other city under Christian rule. 'Then our nice,
pretty house must be given up, and our dear, lovely garden be sold to the
peasant folk, my mother says. It was just the same a year and a half ago
with Memnon's palace. His garden was turned into a corn-field, and the
splendid ground-floor rooms, with their mosaics and pictures, are now
dirty stables for cows and sheep, and pigs are fed in the rooms that
belonged to Hathor and Dorothea. Good Heavens! And they were my clearest
friends! And I am never to play with Mary any more; and mother has not a
kind word for any living soul, hardly even for me, and my old nurse is as
deaf as a mole! Am I not a really miserable, lonely creature? And if you,
even you, will have nothing to say to me, who is there in all Memphis
whom I can trust in? But you will not be so cruel, will you? And it will
not be for long, for my mother really means to go away. You are older
than I am, of course, and much graver and wiser. . . ."

"I will be kind to you, child; but try to make friends with Pulcheria!"

"Gladly, gladly. But then my mother! I should get on very well by myself
if it were not. . . Well, you yourself heard what Orion said to me, that
time in the avenue. He surely loved me a little! What sweet, tender names
he gave me then. Oh God! no man can speak like that to any one he is not
fond of!--And he is rich himself; it cannot have been only my fortune
that bewitched him. And does he look like a man who would allow himself
to be parted from a girl by his mother, whether he would or no?"

"He was always fond of me I think; but then, afterwards, he remembered
what a high position he had to fill and regarded me as too little and too
childish. Oh, how many tears I have shed over being so absurdly little! A
Water-wagtail--that is what I shall always be. Your old host called me
so; and if a man like Orion feels that he must have a stately wife I can
hardly blame him. That other one whom he thinks he loves better than he
does me is tall and beautiful and majestic--like you; and I have always
told myself that his future wife ought to look like you. It is all over
between him and me, and I will submit humbly; but at the same time I
cannot help thinking that when he came home he thought me pretty and
attractive, and had a real fancy and liking for me. Yes, it was so, it
certainly was so!--But then he saw that other one, and I cannot compare
with her. She is indeed the woman he wants,--and that other, Paula, is
yourself. Yes, indeed, you yourself; an inner voice tells me so. And I
tell you truly, you may quite believe me: it is a pain no doubt, but I
can be glad of it too. I should hate any mere girl to whom he held out
his hand--but, if you are that other--and if you are his wife. . ."

"Nonsense," exclaimed Paula decidedly. "Consider what you are saying.
When Orion tempted you to perjure yourself, did he behave as my friend or
as my foe, my bitterest and most implacable enemy?"

"Before the judges, to be sure . . ." replied the girl looking down
thoughtfully. But she soon looked up again, fixed her eyes on Paula's
face with a sparkling, determined glance, and frankly and unhesitatingly
exclaimed: "And you?--In spite of it all he is so handsome, so clever, so
manly. You can hardly help it--you love him!"

Paula withdrew her arm, which had been round Katharina, and answered
candidly.

"Until to-day, at the funeral, I hated and abominated him; but there, by
his father's tomb, he struck me as a new man, and I found it easy to
forgive him in my heart."

"Then you mean to say that you do not love him?" urged Katharina,
clasping her friend's round arm with her slender fingers.

Paula started to feel how icy cold her hand was. The moon was up, the
stars rose higher and higher, so, simply saying: "Come away," she rose.
"It must be within an hour of midnight," she added. "Your mother will be
anxious about you."

"Only an hour of midnight!" repeated the girl in alarm. "Good Heavens, I
shall have a scolding! She is still playing draughts with the Bishop, no
doubt, as she does every evening. Good-bye then for the present. The
shortest way is through the hedge again."

"No," said Paula firmly, "you are no longer a child; you are grown up,
and must feel it and show it. You are not to creep through the bushes,
but to go home by the gate. Rufinus and I will go with you and explain to
your mother. . ."

"No, no!" cried Katharina in terror. "She is as angry with you as she is
with them. Only yesterday she forbid. . ."

"Forbid you to come to me?" asked Paula. "Does she believe. . ."

"That it was for your sake that Orion. . . . Yes, she is only too glad to
lay all the blame on you. But now that I have talked to you I. . . . Look,
do you see that light? It is in her sitting-room."

And, before Paula could prevent her, she ran to the hedge and slipped
through the gap as nimbly as a weasel.

Paula looked after her with mingled feelings, and then went back to the
house, and to bed. Katharina's story kept her awake for a long time, and
the suspicion--nay almost the conviction--that it was herself, indeed,
who had aroused that "great love" in Orion's heart gave her no rest. If
it were she? There, under her hand was the instrument of revenge on the
miscreant; she could make him taste of all the bitterness he had brewed
for her aching spirit. But which of them would the punishment hurt most
sorely: him or herself? Had not the little girl's confidences revealed a
world of rapture to her and her longing heart? No, no. It would be too
humiliating to allow the same hand that had smitten her so ruthlessly to
uplift her to heaven; it would be treason against herself.

Slumber overtook her in the midst of these conflicting feelings and
thoughts, and towards morning she had a dream which, even by daylight,
haunted her and made her shudder.

She saw Orion coming towards her, as pale as death, robed in mourning,
pacing slowly on a coal-black horse; she had not the strength to fly, and
without speaking to her or looking at her, he lifted her high in the air
like a child, and placed her in front of him on the horse. She put forth
all her strength to get free and dismount, but he clasped her with both
arms like iron clamps and quelled her efforts. Life itself would not have
seemed too great a price for escape from this constraint; but, the more
wildly she fought, the more closely she was held by the silent and
pitiless horseman. At their feet flowed the swirling river, but Orion did
not seem to notice it, and without moving his lips, he coolly guided the
steed towards the water. Beside herself now with horror and dread, she
implored him to turn away; but he did not heed her, and went on unmoved
into the midst of the stream. Her terror increased to an agonizing pitch
as the horse bore her deeper and deeper into the water; of her own free
will she threw her arms round the rider's neck; his paleness vanished,
his cheeks gained a ruddy hue, his lips sought hers in a kiss; and, in
the midst of the very anguish of death, she felt a thrill of rapture that
she had never known before. She could have gone on thus for ever, even to
destruction; and, in fact, they were still sinking--she felt the water
rising breast high, but she cared not. Not a word had either of them
spoken. Suddenly she felt urged to break the silence, and as if she could
not help it she asked: "Am I the other?" At this the waves surged down on
them from all sides; a whirlpool dragged away the horse, spinning him
round, and with him Orion and herself, a shrill blast swept past them,
and then the current and the waves, the roaring of the whirlpool, the
howling of the storm--all at once and together, as with one voice, louder
than all else and filling her ears, shouted: "Thou!"--Only Orion remained
speechless. An eddy caught the horse and sucked him under, a wave carried
her away from him, she was sinking, sinking, and stretched out her arms
with longing.--A cold dew stood on her brow as she slept, and the nurse,
waking her from her uneasy dream, shook her head as she said:

"Why, child? What ails you? You have been calling Orion again and again,
at first in terror and then so tenderly.--Yes, believe me, tenderly."


CHAPTER XX.

In the neat rooms which Rufinus' wife had made ready for her sick guests
perfect peace reigned, and it was noon. A soft twilight fell through the
thick green curtains which mitigated the sunshine, and the nurses had
lately cleared away after the morning meal. Paula was moistening the
bandage on the Masdakite's head, and Pulcheria was busy in the adjoining
room with Mandane, who obeyed the physician's instructions with
intelligent submission and showed no signs of insanity.

Paula was still spellbound by her past dream. She was possessed by such
unrest that, quite against her wont, she could not long remain quiet, and
when Pulcheria came to her to tell her this or that, she listened with so
little attention and sympathy that the humble-minded girl, fearing to
disturb her, withdrew to her patient's bed-side and waited quietly till
her new divinity called her.

In fact, it was not without reason that Paula gave herself up to a
certain anxiety; for, if she was not mistaken, Orion must necessarily
present himself to hand over to her the remainder of her fortune; and
though even yesterday, on her way from the cemetery, she had said to
herself that she must and would refuse to meet him, the excitement
produced by Katharina's story and her subsequent dream had confirmed her
in her determination.

Perpetua awaited Orion's visit on the ground-floor, charged to announce
him to Rufinus and not to her mistress. The old man had willingly
undertaken to receive the money as her representative; for Philippus had
not concealed from her that he had acquainted him with the circumstances
under which Paula had quitted the governor's house, describing Orion as a
man whom she had good reason for desiring to avoid.

By about two hours after noon Paula's restlessness had increased so much
that now and then she wandered out of the sick-room, which looked over
the garden, to watch the Nile-quay from the window of the anteroom; for
he might arrive by either way. She never thought of the security of her
property; but the question arose in her mind as to whether it were not
actually a breach of duty to avoid the agitation it would cost her to
meet her cousin face to face. On this point no one could advise her, not
even Perpetua; her own mother could hardly have understood all her
feelings on such an occasion. She scarcely knew herself indeed; for
hitherto she had never failed, even in the most difficult cases, to know
at once and without long reflection, what to do and to leave undone, what
under special circumstances was right or wrong. But now she felt herself
a yielding reed, a leaf tossed hither and thither; and every time she set
her teeth and clenched her hands, determined to think calmly and to
reason out the "for" and "against," her mind wandered away again, while
the memory of her dream, of Orion as he stood by his father's grave--of
Katharina's tale of "the other," and the fearful punishment which he had
to suffer, nay indeed, certainly had suffered--came and went in her mind
like the flocks of birds over the Nile, whose dipping and soaring had
often passed like a fluttering veil between her eye and some object on
the further shore.

It was three hours past noon, and she had returned to the sick-room, when
she thought that she heard hoofs in the garden and hurried to the window
once more. Her heart had not beat more wildly when the dog had flown at
her and Hiram that fateful night, than it did now as she hearkened to the
approach of a horseman, still hidden from her gaze by the shrubs. It must
be Orion--but why did he not dismount? No, it could not be he; his tall
figure would have overtopped the shrubbery which was of low growth.

She did not know her host's friends; it was one of them very likely. Now
the horse had turned the corner; now it was coming up the path from the
front gate; now Rufinus had gone forth to meet the visitor--and it was
not Orion, but his secretary, a much smaller man, who slipped off a mule
that she at once recognized, threw the reins to a lad, handed something
to the old man, and then dropped on to a bench to yawn and stretch his
legs.

Then she saw Rufinus come towards the house. Had Orion charged this
messenger to bring her her possessions? She thought this somewhat
insulting, and her blood boiled with wrath. But there could be no
question here of a surrender of property; for what her host was holding
in his hand was nothing heavy, but a quite small object; probably, nay,
certainly a roll of papyrus. He was coming up the narrow stairs, so she
ran out to meet him, blushing as though she were doing something wrong.
The old man observed this and said, as he handed her the scroll:

"You need not be frightened, daughter of a hero. The young lord is not
here himself, he prefers, it would seem, to treat with you by letter; and
it is best so for both parties."

Paula nodded agreement; she took the roll, and then, while she tore the
silken tie from the seal, she turned her back on the old man; for she
felt that the blood had faded from her face, and her hands were
trembling.

"The messenger awaits an answer," remarked Rufinus, before she began to
read it. "I shall be below and at your service." He left; Paula returned
to the sick-room, and leaning against the frame of the casement, read as
follows, with eager agitation:

"Orion, the son of George the Mukaukas who sleeps in the Lord, to his
cousin the daughter of the noble Thomas of Damascus, greeting.

"I have destroyed several letters that I had written to you before this
one." Paula shrugged her shoulders incredulously. "I hope I may succeed
better this time in saying what I feel to be indispensable for your
welfare and my own. I have both to crave a favor and offer counsel."

"Counsel! he!" thought the girl with a scornful curl of the lips, as she
went on. "May the memory of the man who loved you as his daughter, and
who on his death-bed wished for nothing so much as to see you--averse as
he was to your creed--and bless you as his daughter indeed, as his son's
wife,--may the remembrance of that just man so far prevail over your
indignant and outraged soul that these words from the most wretched man
on earth, for that am I, Paula, may not be left unread. Grant me the last
favor I have to ask of you--I demand it in my father's name."

"Demand!" repeated the damsel; her cheeks flamed, her eye sparkled
angrily, and her hands clutched the opposite sides of the letter as
though to tear it across. But the next words: "Do not fear," checked her
hasty impulse--she smoothed out the papyrus and read on with growing
excitement:

"Do not fear that I shall address you as a lover--as the man for whom
there is but one woman on earth. And that one can only be she whom I have
so deeply injured, whom I fought with as frantic, relentless, and cruel
weapons as ever I used against a foe of my own sex."

"But one," murmured the girl; she passed her hand across her brow, and a
faint smile of happy pride dwelt on her lips as she went on:

"I shall love you as long as breath animates this crushed and wretched
heart."

Again the letter was in danger of destruction, but again it escaped
unharmed, and Paula's expression became one of calm and tender pleasure
as she read to the end of Orion's clearly written epistle:

"I am fully conscious that I have forfeited your esteem, nay even all
good feeling towards me, by my own fault; and that, unless divine love
works some miracle in your heart, I have sacrificed all joy on earth. You
are revenged; for it was for your sake--understand that--for your sake
alone, that my beloved and dying father withdrew the blessings he had
heaped on my remorseful head, and in wrath that was only too just at the
recreant who had desecrated the judgment-seat of his ancestors, turned
that blessing to a curse."

Paula turned pale as she read. This then was what Katharina had meant.
This was what had so changed his appearance, and perhaps, too, his whole
inward being. And this, this bore the stamp of truth, this could not be a
lie--it was for her sake that a father's curse had blighted his only son!
How had it all happened? Had Philippus failed to observe it, or had he
held his peace out of respect for the secrets of another?--Poor man, poor
young man! She must see him, must speak to him. She could not have a
moment's ease till she knew how it was that her uncle, a tender
father.--But she must go on, quickly to the end:

"I come to you only as what I am: a heart-broken man, too young to give
myself over for lost, and at the same time determined to make use of all
that remains to me of the steadfast will, the talents, and the
self-respect of my forefathers to render me worthy of them, and I implore
you to grant me a brief interview. Not a word, not a look shall betray
the passion within and which threatens to destroy me.

"You must on no account fail to read what follows, since it is of no
small real importance even to you. In the first place restitution must be
made to you of all of your inheritance which the deceased was able to
rescue and to add to by his fatherly stewardship. In these agitated times
it will be a matter of some difficulty to invest this capital safely and
to good advantage. Consider: just as the Arabs drove out the Byzantines,
the Byzantines might drive them out again in their turn. The Persians,
though stricken to the earth, the Avars, or some other people whose very
name is as yet unknown to history, may succeed our present rulers, who,
only ten years since, were regarded as a mere handful of unsettled
camel-drivers, caravan-leaders, and poverty-stricken desert-tribes. The
safety of your fortune would be less difficult to provide for if, as was
formerly the case here, we could entrust it to the merchants of
Alexandria. But one great house after another is being ruined there, and
all security is at an end. As to hiding or burying your possessions, as
most Egyptians do in these hard times, it is impossible, for the same
reason as prevents our depositing it on interest in the state
land-register. You must be able to get it at the shortest notice; since
you might at some time wish to quit Egypt in haste with all your
possessions.

"These are matters with which a woman cannot be familiar. I would
therefore propose that you should leave the arrangement of them to us
men; to Philippus, the physician, Rufinus, your host--who is, I am
assured, an honest man--and to our experienced and trustworthy treasurer
Nilus, whom you know as an incorruptible judge.

"I propose that the business should be settled tomorrow in the house of
Rufinus. You can be present or not, as you please. If we men agree in our
ideas I beg you--I beseech you to grant me an interview apart. It will
last but a few minutes, and the only subject of discussion will be a
matter--an exchange by which you will recover something you value and
have lost, and grant me I hope, if not your esteem, at any rate a word of
forgiveness. I need it sorely, believe me, Paula; it is as indispensable
to me as the breath of life, if I am to succeed in the work I have begun
on myself. If you have prevailed on yourself to read through this letter,
simply answer 'Yes' by my messenger, to relieve me from torturing
uncertainty. If you do not--which God forefend for both our sakes, Nilus
shall this very day carry to you all that belongs to you. But, if you
have read these lines, I will make my appearance to-morrow, at two hours
after noon, with Nilus to explain to the others the arrangement of which
I have spoken. God be with you and infuse some ruth into your proud and
noble soul!"

Paula drew a deep breath as the hand holding this momentous epistle
dropped by her side; she stood for some time by the window, lost in grave
meditation. Then calling Pulcheria, she begged her to tend her patient,
too, for a short time. The girl looked up at her with rapt admiration in
her clear eyes, and asked sympathetically why she was so pale; Paula
kissed her lips and eyes, and saying affectionately: "Good, happy child!"
she retired to her own room on the opposite side of the house. There she
once more read through the letter.

Oh yes; this was Orion as she had known him after his return till the
evening of that never-to-be-forgotten water-party. He was, indeed, a
poet; nature herself had made it so easy to him to seduce unguarded souls
into a belief in him! And yet no! This letter was honestly meant.
Philippus knew men well; Orion really had a heart, a warm heart. Not the
most reckless of criminals could mock at the curse hurled at him by a
beloved father in his last moments. And, as she once more read the
sentence in which he told her that it was his crime as an unjust judge
towards her that had turned the dying man's blessing to a curse, she
shuddered and reflected that their relative attitude was now reversed,
and that he had suffered more and worse through her than she had through
him. His pale face, as she had seen it in the Necropolis, came back
vividly to her mind, and if he could have stood before her at this moment
she would have flown to him, have offered him a compassionate hand, and
have assured him that the woes she had brought upon him filled her with
the deepest and sincerest pity.

That morning she had asked the Masdakite whether he had besought Heaven
to grant him a speedy recovery, and the man replied that Persians never
prayed for any particular blessing, but only for "that which was good;"
for that none but the Omnipotent knew what was good for mortals. How
wise! For in this instance might not the most terrible blow that could
fall on a son--his father's curse--prove a blessing? It was undoubtedly
that curse which had led him to look into his soul and to start on this
new path. She saw him treading it, she longed to believe in his
conversion--and she did believe in it. In this letter he spoke of his
love; he even asked her hand. Only yesterday this would have roused her
wrath; to-day she could forgive him; for she could forgive anything to
this unhappy soul--to the man on whom she had brought such deep anguish.
Her heart could now beat high in the hope of seeing him again; nay, it
even seemed to her that the youth, whose return had been hailed with such
welcome and who had so powerfully attracted her, had only now grown and
ripened to full and perfect manhood through his sin, his penitence, and
his suffering.

And how noble a task it would be to assist him in seeking the right way,
and in becoming what he aspired to be!

The prudent care he had given to her worldly welfare merited her
gratitude. What could he mean by the "exchange" he proposed? The "great
love" of which he had spoken to Katharina was legible in every line of
his letter, and any woman can forgive any man--were he a sinner, and a
scarecrow into the bargain--for his audacity in loving her. Oh! that he
might but set his heart on her--for hers, it was vain to deny it, was
strongly drawn to him. Still she would not call it Love that stirred
within her; it could only be the holy impulse to point out to him the
highest goal of life and smooth the path for him. The pale horseman who
had clutched her in her dream should not drag her away; no, she would
joyfully lift him up to the highest pinnacle attainable by a brave and
noble man.

So her thoughts ran, and her cheeks flushed as, with swift decision, she
opened her trunk, took out papyrus, writing implements and a seal, and
seated herself at a little desk which Rufinus had placed for her in the
window, to write her answer.

At this a sudden fervent longing for Orion came over her. She made a
great effort to shake it off; still, she felt that in writing to him it
was impossible that she should find the right words, and as she replaced
the papyrus in the chest and looked at the seal a strange thing happened
to her; for the device on her father's well-known ring: a star above two
crossed swords--perchance the star of Orion--caught her eye, with the
motto in Greek: "The immortal gods have set sweat before virtue," meaning
that the man who aims at being virtuous must grudge neither sweat nor
toil.

She closed her trunk with a pleased smile, for the motto round the star
was, she felt, of good augury. At the same time she resolved to speak to
Orion, taking these words, which her forefathers had adopted from old
Hesiod, as her text. She hastened down stairs, crossed the garden,
passing by Rufinus, his wife and the physician, awoke the secretary who
had long since dropped asleep, and enjoined him to say: "Yes" to his
master, as he expected. However, before the messenger had mounted his
mule, she begged him to wait yet a few minutes and returned to the two
men; for she had forgotten in her eagerness to speak to them of Orion's
plans. They were both willing to meet him at the hour proposed and, while
Philippus went to tell the messenger that they would expect his master on
the next day, the old man looked at Paula with undisguised satisfaction
and said:

"We were fearing lest the news from the governor's house should have
spoilt your happy mood, but, thank God, you look as if you had just come
from a refreshing bath.--What do you say, Joanna? Twenty years ago such
an inmate here would have made you jealous? Or was there never a place
for such evil passions in your dove-like soul?"

"Nonsense!" laughed the matron. "How can I tell how many fair beings you
have gazed after, wanderer that you are in all the wide world far away?"

"Well, old woman, but as sure as man is the standard of all things,
nowhere that I have carried my staff, have I met with a goddess like
this!"

"I certainly have not either, living here like a snail in its shell,"
said Dame Joanna, fixing her bright eyes on Paula with fervent
admiration.


CHAPTER XXI.

That evening Rufinus was sitting in the garden with his wife and daughter
and their friend Philippus. Paula, too, was there, and from time to time
she stroked Pulcheria's silky golden hair, for the girl had seated
herself at her feet, leaning her head against Paula's knee.

The moon was full, and it was so light out of doors that they could see
each other plainly, so Rufinus' proposition that they should remain to
watch an eclipse which was to take place an hour before midnight found
all the more ready acceptance because the air was pleasant. The men had
been discussing the expected phenomenon, lamenting that the Church should
still lend itself to the superstitions of the populace by regarding it as
of evil omen, and organizing a penitential procession for the occasion to
implore God to avert all ill. Rufinus declared that it was blasphemy
against the Almighty to interpret events happening in the course of
eternal law and calculable beforehand, as a threatening sign from Him; as
though man's deserts had any connection with the courses of the sun and
moon. The Bishop and all the priests of the province were to head the
procession, and thus a simple natural phenomenon was forced in the minds
of the people into a significance it did not possess.

"And if the little comet which my old foster father discovered last week
continues to increase," added the physician, "so that its tail spreads
over a portion of the sky, the panic will reach its highest pitch; I can
see already that they will behave like mad creatures."

"But a comet really does portend war, drought, plague, and famine," said
Pulcheria, with full conviction; and Paula added:

"So I have always believed."

"But very wrongly," replied the leech. "There are a thousand reasons to
the contrary; and it is a crime to confirm the mob in such a
superstition. It fills them with grief and alarms; and, would you believe
it--such anguish of mind, especially when the Nile is so low and there is
more sickness than usual, gives rise to numberless forms of disease? We
shall have our hands full, Rufinus."

"I am yours to command," replied the old man. "But at the same time, if
the tailed wanderer must do some mischief, I would rather it should break
folks' arms and legs than turn their brains."

"What a wish!" exclaimed Paula. "But you often say things--and I see
things about you too--which seem to me extraordinary. Yesterday you
promised. . . ."

"To explain to you why I gather about me so many of God's creatures who
have to struggle under the burden of life as cripples, or with injured
limbs."

"Just so," replied Paula. "Nothing can be more truly merciful than to
render life bearable to such hapless beings. . . ."

"But still, you think," interrupted the eager old man, "that this noble
motive alone would hardly account for the old oddity's riding his hobby
so hard.--Well, you are right. From my earliest youth the structure of
the bones in man and beast has captivated me exceedingly; and just as
collectors of horns, when once they have a complete series of every
variety of stag, roe, and gazelle, set to work with fresh zeal to find
deformed or monstrous growths, so I have found pleasure in studying every
kind of malformation and injury in the bones of men and beasts."

"And to remedy them," added Philippus. "It has been his passion from
childhood.

"And the passion has grown upon me since I broke my own hip bone and know
what it means," the old man went on. "With the help of my fellow-student
there, from a mere dilettante I became a practised surgeon; and, what is
more, I am one of those who serve Esculapius at my own expense. However,
there are accessory reasons for which I have chosen such strange
companions: deformed slaves are cheap and besides that, certain
investigations afford me inestimable and peculiar satisfaction. But this
cannot interest a young girl."

"Indeed it does!" cried Paula. "So far as I have understood Philippus
when he explains some details of natural history. . . ."

"Stay," laughed Rufinus, "our friend will take good care not to explain
this. He regards it as folly, and all he will admit is that no surgeon or
student could wish for better, more willing, or more amusing house-mates
than my cripples."

"They are grateful to you," cried Paula.

"Grateful?" asked the old man. "That is true sometimes, no doubt; still,
gratitude is a tribute on which no wise man ever reckons. Now I have told
you enough; for the sake of Philippus we will let the rest pass."

"No, no," said Paula putting up entreating hands, and Rufinus answered
gaily:

"Who can refuse you anything? I will cut it short, but you must pay good
heed.--Well then Man is the standard of all things. Do you understand
that?"

"Yes, I often hear you say so. Things you mean are only what they seem to
us."

"To us, you say, because we--you and I and the rest of us here--are sound
in body and mind. And we must regard all things--being God's
handiwork--as by nature sound and normal. Thus we are justified in
requiring that man, who gives the standard for them shall, first and
foremost, himself be sound and normal. Can a carpenter measure straight
planks properly with a crooked or sloping rod?"

"Certainly not."

"Then you will understand how I came to ask myself: 'Do sickly, crippled,
and deformed men measure things by a different standard to that of sound
men? And might it not be a useful task to investigate how their estimates
differ from ours?'"

"And have your researches among your cripples led to any results?"

"To many important ones," the old man declared; but Philippus interrupted
him with a loud: "Oho!" adding that his friend was in too great a hurry
to deduce laws from individual cases. Many of his observations were, no
doubt, of considerable interest. . . . Here Rufinus broke in with some
vehemence, and the discussion would have become a dispute if Paula had
not intervened by requesting her zealous host to give her the results, at
any rate, of his studies.

"I find," said Rufinus very confidently, as he stroked down his long
beard, "that they are not merely shrewd because their faculties are early
sharpened to make up by mental qualifications for what they lack in
physical advantages; they are also witty, like AEesop the fabulist and
Besa the Egyptian god, who, as I have been told by our old friend Horus,
from whom we derive all our Egyptian lore, presided among those heathen
over festivity, jesting, and wit, and also over the toilet of women. This
shows the subtle observation of the ancients; for the hunchback whose
body is bent, applies a crooked standard to things in general. His keen
insight often enables him to measure life as the majority of men do, that
is by a straight rule; but in some happy moments when he yields to
natural impulse he makes the straight crooked and the crooked straight;
and this gives rise to wit, which only consists in looking at things
obliquely and--setting them askew as it were. You have only to talk to my
hump-backed gardener Gibbus, or listen to what he says. When he is
sitting with the rest of our people in an evening, they all laugh as soon
as he opens his mouth.--And why? Because his conformation makes him utter
nothing but paradoxes.--You know what they are?"

"Certainly."

"And you, Pul?"

"No, Father."

"You are too straight-nay, and so is your simple soul, to know what the
thing is! Well, listen then: It would be a paradox, for instance, if I
were to say to the Bishop as he marches past in procession: 'You are
godless out of sheer piety;' or if I were to say to Paula, by way of
excuse for all the flattery which I and your mother offered her just now:
'Our incense was nauseous for very sweetness.'--These paradoxes, when
examined, are truths in a crooked form, and so they best suit the
deformed. Do you understand?"

"Certainly," said Paula.

"And you, Pul?"

"I am not quite sure. I should be better pleased to be simply told: 'We
ought not to have made such flattering speeches; they may vex a young
girl.'"

"Very good, my straightforward child," laughed her father. "But look,
there is the man! Here, good Gibbus--come here!--Now, just consider:
supposing you had flattered some one so grossly that you had offended him
instead of pleasing him: How would you explain the state of affairs in
telling me of it?"

The gardener, a short, square man, with a huge hump but a clever face and
good features, reflected a minute and then replied: "I wanted to make an
ass smell at some roses and I put thistles under his nose."

"Capital!" cried Paula; and as Gibbus turned away, laughing to himself,
the physician said:

"One might almost envy the man his hump. But yet, fair Paula, I think we
have some straight-limbed folks who can make use of such crooked phrases,
too, when occasion serves."

But Rufinus spoke before Paula could reply, referring her to his Essay on
the deformed in soul and body; and then he went on vehemently:

"I call you all to witness, does not Baste, the lame woman, restrict her
views to the lower aspect of things, to the surface of the earth indeed?
She has one leg much shorter than the other, and it is only with much
pains that we have contrived that it should carry her. To limp along at
all she is forced always to look down at the ground, and what is the
consequence? She can never tell you what is hanging to a tree, and about
three weeks since I asked her under a clear sky and a waning moon whether
the moon had been shining the evening before and she could not tell me,
though she had been sitting out of doors with the others till quite late,
evening after evening. I have noticed, too, that she scarcely recognizes
men who are rather tall, though she may have seen them three or four
times. Her standard has fallen short-like her leg. Now, am I right or
wrong?"

"In this instance you are right," replied Philippus, "still, I know some
lame people. . ."

And again words ran high between the friends; Pulcheria, however, put an
end to the discussion this time, by exclaiming enthusiastically:

"Baste is the best and most good-natured soul in the whole house!"

"Because she looks into her own heart," replied Rufinus. "She knows
herself; and, because she knows how painful pain is, she treats others
tenderly. Do you remember, Philippus, how we disputed after that
anatomical lecture we heard together at Caesarea?"

"Perfectly well," said the leech, "and later life has but confirmed the
opinion I then held. There is no less true or less just saying than the
Latin motto: 'Mens sana in corpore sano,' as it is generally interpreted
to mean that a healthy soul is only to be found in a healthy body. As the
expression of a wish it may pass, but I have often felt inclined to doubt
even that. It has been my lot to meet with a strength of mind, a
hopefulness, and a thankfulness for the smallest mercies in the sickliest
bodies, and at the same time a delicacy of feeling, a wise reserve, and
an undeviating devotion to lofty things such as I have never seen in a
healthy frame. The body is but the tenement of the soul, and just as we
find righteous men and sinners, wise men and fools, alike in the palace
and the hovel--nay, and often see truer worth in a cottage than in the
splendid mansions of the great--so we may discover noble souls both in
the ugly and the fair, in the healthy and the infirm, and most
frequently, perhaps, in the least vigorous. We should be careful how we
go about repeating such false axioms, for they can only do harm to those
who have a heavy burthen to bear through life as it is. In my opinion a
hunchback's thoughts are as straightforward as an athlete's; or do you
imagine that if a mother were to place her new-born children in a spiral
chamber and let them grow up in it, they could not tend upwards as all
men do by nature?"

"Your comparison limps," cried Rufinus, "and needs setting to rights. If
we are not to find ourselves in open antagonism. . . ."

"You must keep the peace," Joanna put in addressing her husband; and
before Rufinus could retort, Paula had asked him with frank simplicity:

"How old are you, my worthy host?"

"Your arrival at my house blessed the second day of my seventieth year,"
replied Rufinus with a courteous bow. His wife shook her finger at him,
exclaiming:

"I wonder whether you have not a secret hump? Such fine phrases. . ."

"He is catching the style from his cripples," said Paula laughing at him.
"But now it is your turn, friend Philippus. Your exposition was worthy of
an antique sage, and it struck me--for the sake of Rufinus here I will
not say convinced me. I respect you--and yet I should like to know how
old. . . ."

"I shall soon be thirty-one," said Philippus, anticipating her question.

"That is an honest answer," observed Dame Joanna. "At your age many a man
clings to his twenties."

"Why?" asked Pulcheria.

"Well," said her mother, "only because there are some girls who think a
man of thirty too old to be attractive."

"Stupid creatures," answered Pulcheria. "Let them find me a young man who
is more lovable than my father; and if Philippus--yes you,
Philippus--were ten or twenty years over nine and twenty, would that make
you less clever or kind?"

"Not less ugly, at any rate," said the physician. Pulcheria laughed, but
with some annoyance, as though she had herself been the object of the
remark. "You are not a bit ugly!" she exclaimed. "Any one who says so has
no eyes. And you will hear nothing said of you but that you are a tall,
fine man!"

As the warm-hearted girl thus spoke, defending her friend against
himself, Paula stroked her golden hair and added to the physician:

"Pulcheria's father is so far right that she, at any rate, measures men
by a true and straight standard. Note that, Philippus!--But do not take
my questioning ill.--I cannot help wondering how a man of one and thirty
and one of seventy should have been studying in the high schools at the
same time? The moon will not be eclipsed for a long time yet--how bright
and clear it is!--So you, Rufinus, who have wandered so far through the
wide world, if you would do me a great pleasure, will tell us something
of your past life and how you came to settle in Memphis."

"His history?" cried Joanna. "If he were to tell it, in all its details
from beginning to end, the night would wane and breakfast would get cold.
He has had as many adventures as travelled Odysseus. But tell us
something husband; you know there is nothing we should like better."

"I must be off to my duties," said the leech, and when he had taken a
friendly leave of the others and bidden farewell to Paula with less
effusiveness than of late, Rufinus began his story.

"I was born in Alexandria, where, at that time, commerce and industry
still flourished. My father was an armorer; above two hundred slaves and
free laborers were employed in his work-shops. He required the finest
metal, and commonly procured it by way of Massilia from Britain. On one
occasion he himself went to that remote island in a friend's ship, and he
there met my mother. Her ruddy gold hair, which Pul has inherited, seems
to have bewitched him and, as the handsome foreigner pleased her
well--for men like my father are hard to match nowadays--she turned
Christian for his sake and came home with him. They neither of them ever
regretted it; for though she was a quiet woman, and to her dying day
spoke Greek like a foreigner, the old man often said she was his best
counsellor. At the same time she was so soft-hearted, that she could not
bear that any living creature should suffer, and though she looked keenly
after everything at the hearth and loom, she could never see a fowl, a
goose, or a pig slaughtered. And I have inherited her weakness--shall I
say 'alas!' or 'thank God?'

"I had two elder brothers who both had to help my father, and who were to
carry on the business. When I was ten years old my calling was decided
on. My mother would have liked to make a priest of me and at that time I
should have consented joyfully; but my father would not agree, and as we
had an uncle who was making a great deal of money as a Rhetor, my father
accepted a proposal from him that I should devote myself to that career.
So I went from one teacher to another and made good progress in the
schools.

"Till my twentieth year I continued to live with my parents, and during
my many hours of leisure I was free to do or leave undone whatever I had
a fancy for; and this was always something medical, if that is not too
big a word. I was but a lad of twelve when this fancy first took me, and
that through pure accident. Of course I was fond of wandering about the
workshops, and there they kept a magpie, a quaint little bird, which my
mother had fed out of compassion. It could say 'Blockhead,' and call my
name and a few other words, and it seemed to like the noise, for it
always would fly off to where the smiths were hammering and filing their
loudest, and whenever it perched close to one of the anvils there were
sure to be mirthful faces over the shaping and scraping and polishing.
For many years its sociable ways made it a favorite; but one day it got
caught in a vice and its left leg was broken. Poor little creature!"

The old man stooped to wipe his eyes unseen, but he went on without
pausing:

"It fell on its back and looked at me so pathetically that I snatched the
tongs out of the bellows-man's hand--for he was going to put an end to
its sufferings in all kindness--and, picking it up gently, I made up my
mind I would cure it. Then I carried the bird into my own room, and to
keep it quiet that it might not hurt itself, I tied it down to a frame
that I contrived, straightened its little leg, warmed the injured bone by
sucking it, and strapped it to little wooden splints. And behold it
really set: the bird got quite well and fluttered about the workshops
again as sound as before, and whenever it saw me it would perch upon my
shoulder and peck very gently at my hair with its sharp beak.

"From that moment I could have found it in me to break the legs of every
hen in the yard, that I might set them again; but I thought of something
better. I went to the barbers and told them that if any one had a bird, a
dog, or a cat, with a broken limb, he might bring it to me, and that I
was prepared to cure all these injuries gratis; they might tell all their
customers. The very next day I had a patient brought me: a black hound,
with tan spots over his eyes, whose leg had been smashed by a badly-aimed
spear: I can see him now! Others followed; feathered or four-footed
sufferers; and this was the beginning of my surgical career. The invalid
birds on the trees I still owe to my old allies the barbers. I only
occasionally take beasts in hand. The lame children, whom you saw in the
garden, come to me from poor parents who cannot afford a surgeon's aid.
The merry, curly-headed boy who brought you a rose just now is to go home
again in a few days.--But to return to the story of my youth.

"The more serious events which gave my life this particular bias occurred
in my twentieth year, when I had already left even the high school behind
me; nor was I fully carried away by their influence till after my uncle
had procured me several opportunities of proving my proficiency in my
calling. I may say without vanity that my speeches won approval; but I
was revolted by the pompous, flowery bombast, without which I should have
been hissed down, and though my parents rejoiced when I went home from
Niku, Arsmoe, or some other little provincial town, with laurel-wreaths
and gold pieces, to myself I always seemed an impostor. Still, for my
father's sake, I dared not give up my profession, although I hated more
and more the task of praising people to the skies whom I neither loved
nor respected, and of shedding tears of pathos while all the time I was
minded to laugh.

"I had plenty of time to myself, and as I did not lack courage and held
stoutly to our Greek confession, I was always to be found where there was
any stir or contention between the various sects. They generally passed
off with nothing worse than bruises and scratches, but now and then
swords were drawn. On one occasion thousands came forth to meet
thousands, and the Prefect called out the troops--all Greeks--to restore
order by force. A massacre ensued in which thousands were killed. I could
not describe it! Such scenes were not rare, and the fury and greed of the
mob were often directed against the Jews by the machinations of the
creatures of the archbishop and the government. The things I saw there
were so horrible, so shocking, that the tongue refuses to tell them; but
one poor Jewess, whose husband the wretches--our fellow
Christians--killed, and then pillaged the house, I have never forgotten!
A soldier dragged her down by her hair, while a ruffian snatched the
child from her breast and, holding it by its feet, dashed its skull
against the wall before her eyes--as you might slash a wet cloth against
a pillar to dry it--I shall never forget that handsome young mother and
her child; they come before me in my dreams at night even now.

"All these things I saw; and I shuddered to behold God's creatures,
beings endowed with reason, persecuting their fellows, plunging them into
misery, tearing them limb from limb--and why? Merciful Saviour, why? For
sheer hatred--as sure as man is the standard for all things--merely
carried away by a hideous impulse to spite their neighbor for not
thinking as they do--nay, simply for not being themselves--to hurt him,
insult him, work him woe. And these fanatics, these armies who raised the
standard of ruthlessness, of extermination, of bloodthirstiness, were
Christians, were baptized in the name of Him who bids us forgive our
enemies, who enlarged the borders of love from the home and the city and
the state to include all mankind; who raised the adulteress from the
dust, who took children into his arms, and would have more joy over a
sinner who repents than over ninety and nine just persons!--Blood, blood,
was what they craved; and did not the doctrine of Him whose followers
they boastfully called themselves grow out of the blood of Him who shed
it for all men alike,--just as that lotos flower grows out of the clear
water in the marble tank? And it was the highest guardians and keepers of
this teaching of mercy, who goaded on the fury of the mob: Patriarchs,
bishops, priests and deacons--instead of pointing to the picture of the
Shepherd who tenderly carries the lost sheep and brings it home to the
fold.

"My own times seemed to me the worst that had ever been; aye, and--as
surely as man is the standard of all things--so they are! for love is
turned to hatred, mercy to implacable hardheartedness. The thrones not
only of the temporal but of the spiritual rulers, are dripping with the
blood of their fellow-men. Emperors and bishops set the example; subjects
and churchmen follow it. The great, the leading men of the struggle are
copied by the small, by the peaceful candidates for spiritual benefices.
All that I saw as a man, in the open streets, I had already seen as a boy
both in the low and high schools. Every doctrine has its adherents; the
man who casts in his lot with Cneius is hated by Caius, who forthwith
speaks and writes to no other end than to vex and put down Cneius, and
give him pain. Each for his part strives his utmost to find out faults in
his neighbor and to put him in the pillory, particularly if his
antagonist is held the greater man, or is likely to overtop him. Listen
to the girls at the well, to the women at the spindle; no one is sure of
applause who cannot tell some evil of the other men or women. Who cares
to listen to his neighbor's praises? The man who hears that his brother
is happy at once envies him! Hatred, hatred everywhere! Everywhere the
will, the desire, the passion for bringing grief and ruin on others
rather than to help them, raise them and heal them!

"That is the spirit of my time; and everything within me revolted against
it with sacred wrath. I vowed in my heart that I would live and act
differently; that my sole aim should be to succor the unfortunate, to
help the wretched, to open my arms to those who had fallen into unmerited
contumely, to set the crooked straight for my neighbor, to mend what was
broken, to pour in balm, to heal and to save!

"And, thank God! it has been vouchsafed to me in some degree to keep this
vow; and though, later, some whims and a passionate curiosity got mixed
up with my zeal, still, never have I lost sight of the great task of
which I have spoken, since my father's death and since my uncle also left
me his large fortune. Then I had done with the Rhetor's art, and
travelled east and west to seek the land where love unites men's hearts
and where hatred is only a disease; but as sure as man is the standard of
all things, to this day all my endeavors to find it have been in vain.
Meanwhile I have kept my own house on such a footing that it has become a
stronghold of love; in its atmosphere hatred cannot grow, but is nipped
in the germ.

"In spite of this I am no saint. I have committed many a folly, many an
injustice; and much of my goods and gold, which I should perhaps have
done better to save for my family, has slipped through my fingers, though
in the execution, no doubt, of what I deemed the highest duties. Would
you believe it, Paula?--Forgive an old man for such fatherly familiarity
with the daughter of Thomas;--hardly five years after my marriage with
this good wife, not long after we had lost our only son, I left her and
our little daughter, Pul there, for more than two years, to follow the
Emperor Heraclius of my own free will to the war against the Persians who
had done me no harm--not, indeed, as a soldier, but as a surgeon eager
for experience. To confess the truth I was quite as eager to see and
treat fractures and wounds and injuries in great numbers, as I was to
exercise benevolence. I came home with a broken hip-bone, tolerably
patched up, and again, a few years later, I could not keep still in one
place. The bird of passage must need drag wife and child from the peace
of hearth and homestead, and take them to where he could go to the high
school. A husband, a father, and already grey-headed, I was a singular
exception among the youths who sat listening to the lectures and
explanations of their teachers; but as sure as man is the standard of all
things, they none of them outdid me in diligence and zeal, though many a
one was greatly my superior in gifts and intellect, and among them the
foremost was our friend Philippus. Thus it came about, noble Paula, that
the old man and the youth in his prime were fellow-students; but to this
day the senior gladly bows down to his young brother in learning and
feeling. To straighten, to comfort, and to heal: this is the aim of his
life too. And even I, an old man, who started long before Philippus on
the same career, often long to call myself his disciple."

Here Rufinus paused and rose; Paula, too, got up, grasped his hand
warmly, and said:

"If I were a man, I would join you! But Philippus has told me that even a
woman may be allowed to work with the same purpose.--And now let me beg
of you never to call me anything but Paula--you will not refuse me this
favor. I never thought I could be so happy again as I am with you; here
my heart is free and whole. Dame Joanna, do you be my mother! I have lost
the best of fathers, and till I find him again, you, Rufinus, must fill
his place!"

"Gladly, gladly!" cried the old man; he clasped both her hands and went
on vivaciously: "And in return I ask you to be an elder sister to Pul.
Make that timid little thing such a maiden as you are yourself.--But
look, children, look up quickly; it is beginning!--Typhon, in the form of
a boar, is swallowing the eye of Horns: so the heathen of old in this
country used to believe when the moon suffered an eclipse. See how the
shadow is covering the bright disk. When the ancients saw this happening
they used to make a noise, shaking the sistrum with its metal rings,
drumming and trumpeting, shouting and yelling, to scare off the evil one
and drive him away. It may be about four hundred years since that last
took place, but to this day--draw your kerchiefs more closely round your
heads and come with me to the river--to this day Christians degrade
themselves by similar rites. Wherever I have been in Christian lands, I
have always witnessed the same scenes: our holy faith has, to be sure,
demolished the religions of the heathen; but their superstitions have
survived, and have forced their way through rifts and chinks into our
ceremonial. They are marching round now, with the bishop at their head,
and you can hear the loud wailing of the women, and the cries of the men,
drowning the chant of the priests. Only listen! They are as passionate
and agonized in their entreaty as though old Typhon were even now about
to swallow the moon, and the greatest catastrophe was hanging over the
world. Aye, as surely as man is the standard of all things, those
terrified beings are diseased in mind; and how are we to forgive those
who dare to scare Christians; yes, Christian souls, with the traditions
of heathen folly, and to blind their inward vision?"


     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Gratitude is a tribute on which no wise man ever reckons
     Healthy soul is only to be found in a healthy body
     Man is the standard of all things
     Persians never prayed for any particular blessing
     The immortal gods have set sweat before virtue
     Things you mean are only what they seem to us
     Would want some one else to wear herself out for
     Any woman can forgive any man for his audacity in loving her


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 6.


CHAPTER XXII.

Up to within a few days Katharina had still been a dependent and docile
child, who had made it a point of honor to obey instantly, not only her
mother's lightest word, but Dame Neforis, too; and, since her own Greek
instructress had been dismissed, even the acid Eudoxia. She had never
concealed from her mother, or the worthy teacher whom she had truly
loved, the smallest breach of rules, the least naughtiness or wilful act
of which she had been guilty; nay, she had never been able to rest till
she had poured out a confession, before evening prayer, of all that her
little heart told her was not perfectly right, to some one whom she
loved, and obtained full forgiveness. Night after night the
"Water-wagtail" had gone to sleep with a conscience as clear and as white
as the breast of her whitest dove, and the worst sin she had ever
committed during the day was some forbidden scramble, some dainty or,
more frequently, some rude and angry word.

But a change had first come over her after Orion's kiss in the
intoxicating perfume of the flowering trees; and almost every hour since
had roused her to new hopes and new views. It had never before occurred
to her to criticise or judge her mother; now she was constantly doing so.
The way in which Susannah had cut herself off from her neighbors in the
governor's house, to her daughter seemed perverse and in bad taste; and
the bitterly vindictive attacks on her old friends, which were constantly
on Susannah's lips, aggrieved the girl, and finally set her in opposition
to her mother, whose judgment had hitherto seemed to her infallible.
Thus, when the governor's house was closed against her, there was no one
in whom she cared to confide, for a barrier stood between her and Paula,
and she was painfully conscious of its height each time the wish to pass
it recurred to her mind. Paula was certainly "that other" of whom Orion
had spoken; when she had stolen away to see her in the evening after the
funeral, she had been prompted less by a burning wish to pour out her
heart to a sympathizing hearer, than by torturing curiosity mingled with
jealousy. She had crept through the hedge with a strangely-mixed feeling
of tender longing and sullen hatred; when they had met in the garden she
had at first given herself up to the full delight of being free to speak,
and of finding a listener in a woman so much her superior; but Paula's
reserved replies to her bold questioning had revived her feelings of envy
and grudge. Any one who did not hate Orion must, she was convinced, love
him.

Were they not perhaps already pledged to each other! Very likely Paula
had thought of her as merely a credulous child, and so had concealed the
fact!

This "very likely" was torture to her, and she was determined to try, at
any rate, to settle the doubt. She had an ally at her command; this was
her foster-brother, the son of her deaf old nurse; she knew that he would
blindly obey all her wishes--nay, to please her, would throw himself to
the crocodiles in the Nile. Anubis had been her comrade in all her
childish sports, till at the age of fourteen, after learning to read and
write, her mother had obtained an appointment for him in the governor's
household, as an assistant to be further trained by the treasurer Nilus.
Dame Susannah intended to find him employment at a future date on her
estates, or at Memphis, the centre of their administration, as he might
prove himself capable. The lad was still living with his mother under the
rich widow's roof, and only spent his working days at the governor's
house, he was industrious and clever during office hours, though between
whiles he busied himself with things altogether foreign to his future
calling. At Katharina's request he had opened a communication between the
two houses by means of carrier-pigeons, and many missives were thus
despatched with little gossip, invitations, excuses, and the like, from
Katharina to Mary and back again. Anubis took great pleasure in the
pretty creatures, and by the permission of his superiors a dovecote was
erected on the roof of the treasurer's house. Mary was now lying ill, and
their intercourse was at an end; still, the well-trained messengers need
not be idle, and Katharina had begun to use them for a very different
purpose.

Orion's envoy had been detained a long time at Rufinus' door the day
before; and she had since learnt from Anubis, who was acquainted with all
that took place in Nilus' office, that Paula's moneys were to be
delivered over to her very shortly, and in all probability by Orion
himself. They must then have an interview, and perhaps she might succeed
in overhearing it. She knew well how this could be managed; the only
thing was to be on the spot at the right moment.

On the morning after the full-moon, at two hours and a half before noon,
the little boy whose task it was to feed the feathered messengers in
their dove-cote brought her a written scrap, on which Anubis informed her
that Orion was about to set out; but he was not very warmly welcomed, for
the hour did not suit her at all. Early in the morning Bishop Plotinus
had come to inform Susannah that Benjamin, Patriarch of Alexandria, was
visiting Amru on the opposite shore, and would presently honor Memphis
with his presence. He proposed to remain one day; he had begged to have
no formal reception, and had left it to the bishop to find suitable
quarters for himself and his escort, as he did not wish to put up at the
governor's house. The vain widow had at once pressingly urged her
readiness to receive the illustrious guest under her roof: The prelate's
presence must bring a blessing on the house, and she thought, too, that
she might turn it to advantage for several ends she just now happened to
have in view.

A handsome reception must be prepared; there were but a few hours to
spare, and even before the bishop had left her, she had begun to call the
servants together and give them orders. The whole house must be turned
upside down; some of the kitchen staff were hurried off into the town to
make purchases, others bustled round the fire; the gardeners plundered
the beds and bushes to weave wreaths and nosegays for decorations; from
cellar to roof half a hundred of slaves, white, brown and black, were
toiling with all their might, for each believed that, by rendering a
service to the Patriarch, he might count on the special favor of Heaven,
while their unresting mistress never ceased screaming out her orders as
to what she wished done.

Susannah, who as a girl had been the eldest of a numerous and not wealthy
family, and had been obliged to put her own hand to things, quite forgot
now that she was a woman of position and fortune whom it ill-beseemed to
do her own household work; she was here, there, and everywhere, and had
an eye on all--excepting indeed her own daughter; but she was the petted
darling of the house, brought up to Greek refinement, whose help in such
arduous labors was not to be thought of; indeed, she would only have been
in the way.

When the bishop had taken his leave Katharina was merely desired to be
ready in her best attire, with a nosegay in her hand, to receive the
Patriarch under the awning spread outside the entrance. More than this
the widow did not require of her, and as the girl flew up the stairs to
her room she was thinking: "Orion will be coming directly: it still wants
fully two hours of noon, and if he stays there half an hour that will be
more than enough. I shall have time then to change my dress, but I will
put my new sandals on at once as a precaution; nurse and the maid must
wait for me in my room. They must have everything ready for my
return--perhaps he and Paula may have much to say to each other. He will
not get off without a lecture, unless she has already found an
opportunity elsewhere of expressing her indignation."

A few minutes later she had sprung to the top of a mound of earth covered
with turf, which she had some time since ordered to be thrown up close
behind the hedge through which she had yesterday made her way. Her little
feet were shod with handsome gold sandals set with sapphires, and she
seated herself on a low bench with a satisfied smile, as though to assist
at a theatrical performance. Some broad-leaved shrubs, placed behind this
place of ambush, screened her to some extent from the heat of the sun,
and as she sat watching and listening in this lurking place, which she
was not using for the first time, her heart began to beat more quickly;
indeed, in her excitement she quite forgot some sweetmeats which she had
brought to wile away the time and had poured into a large leaf in her
lap.

Happily she had not long to wait; Orion arrived in his mother's
four-wheeled covered chariot. By the side of the driver sat a servant,
and a slave was perched on the step to the door on each side of the
vehicle. It was followed by a few idlers, men and women, and a crowd of
half-naked children. But they got nothing by their curiosity, for the
carruca did not draw up in the road, but was driven into Rufinus' garden,
and the trees and shrubs hid it from the gaze of the expectant mob, which
presently dispersed.

Orion got out at the principal door of the house, followed by the
treasurer; and while the old man welcomed the son of the Mukaukas, Nilus
superintended the transfer of a considerable number of heavy sacks to
their host's private room.

Nothing of all this had seemed noteworthy to Katharina but the quantity
and size of the bags--full, no doubt, of gold--and the man, whom alone
she cared to see. Never had she thought Orion so handsome; the long,
flowing mourning robe, which he had flung over his shoulder in rich
folds, added to the height of his stately form; his abundant hair, not
curled but waving naturally, set off his face which, pale and grave as it
was, both touched and attracted her ir resistibly. The thought that this
splendid creature had once courted her, loved her, kissed her--that he
had once been hers, and that she had lost him to another, was a pang like
physical agony, mounting from her heart to her brain.

After Orion had vanished indoors, she still seemed to see him; and when
she thrust his image from her fancy, forced to remind herself that he was
now standing face to face with that other, and was looking at Paula as, a
few days since, he had looked at her, the anguish of her soul was
doubled. And was Paula only half as happy as she had been in that hour of
supreme bliss? Ah! how her heart ached! She longed to leap over the
hedge--she could have rushed into the house and flung herself between
Paula and Orion.

Still, there she sat; restless but without moving; wholly under the
dominion of evil thoughts, among which a good one rarely and timidly
intruded, with her eyes fixed on Rufinus' dwelling. It stood in the broad
sunshine as silent as death, as if all were sleeping. In the garden, too,
all was motionless but the thin jet of water, which danced up from the
marble tank with a soft and fitful, but monotonous tinkle, while
butterflies, dragonflies, bees, and beetles, whose hum she could not
hear, seemed to circle round the flowers without a sound. The birds must
be asleep, for not one was to be seen or broke the oppressive stillness
by a chirp or a twitter. The chariot at the door might have been
spellbound; the driver had dismounted, and he, with the other slaves, had
stretched himself in the narrow strips of shade cast by the pillars of
the verandah; their chins buried in their breasts, they spoke not a word.
The horses alone were stirring-flicking off the flies with their flowing
tails, or turning to bite the burning stings they inflicted. This now and
then lifted the pole, and as the chariot crunched backwards a few inches,
the charioteer growled out a sleepy "Brrr."

Katharina had laid a large leaf on her head for protection against the
sun; she did not dare use a parasol or a hat for fear of being seen. The
shade cast by the shrubs was but scanty, the noontide heat was torment;
still, though minute followed minute and one-quarter of an hour after
another crept by at a snail's pace, she was far too much excited to be
sleepy. She needed no dial to tell her the time; she knew exactly how
late it was as one shadow stole to this point and another to that, and,
by risking the danger to her eyes of glancing up at the sun, she could
make doubly sure.

And yet ... such insolent conduct! _Diavolo, diavolo_!' repeated Pantaleone,
sighing and shaking his topknot.

The carriage still rolled on and on.

It was an exquisite morning. The streets of Frankfort, which were just
beginning to show signs of life, looked so clean and snug; the windows
of the houses glittered in flashes like tinfoil; and as soon as the
carriage had driven beyond the city walls, from overhead, from a
blue but not yet glaring sky, the larks' loud trills showered down in
floods. Suddenly at a turn in the road, a familiar figure came from
behind a tall poplar, took a few steps forward and stood still. Sanin
looked more closely.... Heavens! it was Emil!

'But does he know anything about it?' he demanded of Pantaleone.

'I tell you I'm a madman,' the poor Italian wailed despairingly, almost
in a shriek. 'The wretched boy gave me no peace all night, and
this morning at last I revealed all to him!'

'So much for your _segredezza_!' thought Sanin. The carriage had got up
to Emil. Sanin told the coachman to stop the horses, and called the
'wretched boy' up to him. Emil approached with hesitating steps, pale
as he had been on the day he fainted. He could scarcely stand.

'What are you doing here?' Sanin asked him sternly. 'Why aren't you at
home?'
'Let ... let me come with you,' faltered Emil in a trembling voice, and
he clasped his hands. His teeth were chattering as in a fever.

'I won't get in your way--only take me.'
'If you feel the very slightest affection or respect for me,' said
Sanin, 'you will go at once home or to Herr Klüber's shop, and you
won't say one word to any one, and will wait for my return!'

'Your return,' moaned Emil--and his voice quivered and broke, 'but if
you're--'
'Emil!' Sanin interrupted--and he pointed to the coachman, 'do control
yourself! Emil, please, go home! Listen to me, my dear! You say you love
me. Well, I beg you!' He held out his hand to him. Emil bent forward,
sobbed, pressed it to his lips, and darting away from the road, ran
back towards Frankfort across country.

'A noble heart too,' muttered Pantaleone; but Sanin glanced severely at
him.... The old man shrank into the corner of the carriage. He was
conscious of his fault; and moreover, he felt more and more bewildered
every instant; could it really be he who was acting as second, who had
got horses, and had made all arrangements, and had left his peaceful
abode at six o'clock?

Besides, his legs were stiff and aching.

Sanin thought it as well to cheer him up, and he chanced on
the very thing, he hit on the right word.

'Where is your old spirit, Signor Cippatola? Where is _il antico valor_?'

Signor Cippatola drew himself up and scowled '_Il antico valor_?' he
boomed in a bass voice. '_Non è ancora spento_ (it's not all lost yet),
_il antico valor!_'

He put himself in a dignified attitude, began talking of his career, of
the opera, of the great tenor Garcia--and arrived at Hanau a hero.

After all, if you think of it, nothing is stronger in the world
...
and weaker--than a word!

XXII
The copse in which the duel was to take place was a quarter of a
mile from Hanau.

Sanin and Pantaleone arrived there first, as the latter had predicted;
they gave orders for the carriage to remain outside the wood, and they
plunged into the shade of the rather thick and close-growing trees. They
had to wait about an hour.
The time of waiting did not seem particularly disagreeable to Sanin;
he walked up and down the path, listened to the birds singing,
watched the dragonflies in their flight, and like the majority of
Russians in similar circumstances, tried not to think. He only once
dropped into reflection; he came across a young lime-tree, broken
down, in all probability by the squall of the previous night. It
was unmistakably dying ... all the leaves on it were dead. 'What
is it? an omen?' was the thought that flashed across his mind; but
he promptly began whistling, leaped over the very tree, and paced
up and down the path."How can Neforis treat her little favorite so?"

"Remember," said Orion, "what my father has been to my poor mother. She
is now completely crushed: and, when she sees the little girl, that last
scene of her unhappy husband's life is brought back to her, with all that
came upon my father and me, beyond a doubt through Mary. She looks on the
poor little thing as the bane of the family?"

"Then she must come away," said Paula much touched. "Send her to us. Kind
and comforting souls dwell under Rufinus' roof."

"I thank you warmly. I will entreat my mother most urgently. . . ."

"Do so," interrupted Paula. "Have you ever seen Pulcheria, the daughter
of my worthy host?"

"Yes.--A singularly lovable creature!"

"She will soon take Mary into her faithful heart--"

"And our poor little girl needs a friend, now that Susannah has forbidden
her daughter to visit at our house."

The conversation now turned on the two girls, of whom they spoke as sweet
children, both much to be pitied; and, when Orion observed that his niece
was old for her tender years, Paula replied with a slight accent of
reproach: "But Katharina, too, has ripened much during the last few days;
the lively child has become a sober girl; her recent experience is a
heavy burden on her light heart."

"But, if I know her at all, it will soon be cast off," replied Orion.
"She is a sweet, happy little creature; and, of all the dreadful things I
did on that day of horrors, the most dreadful perhaps was the woe I
wrought for her. There is no excuse possible, and yet it was solely to
gratify my mother's darling wish that I consented to marry
Katharina.--However, enough of that.--Henceforth I must march through
life with large strides, and she to whom love gives courage to become my
wife, must be able to keep pace with me."

Katharina could only just hear these last words. The speakers now turned
down the path, sparsely shaded from the midday sun by a few trees, which
led to the tank in the centre of the garden, and they went further and
further from her.

She heard no more--still, she knew enough and could supply the rest. The
object of her ambush was gained: she knew now with perfect certainty who
was "the other." And how they had spoken of her! Not as a deserted bride,
whose rights had been trodden in the dust, but as a child who is
dismissed from the room as soon as it begins to be in the way. But she
thought she could see through that couple and knew why they had spoken of
her thus. Paula, of course, must prevent any new tie from being formed
between herself and Orion; and as for Orion, common prudence required
that he should mention her--her, whom he had but lately loaded with
tenderness--as a mere child, to protect himself against the jealousy of
that austere "other" one. That he had loved her, at any rate that evening
under the trees, she obstinately maintained in her own mind; to that
conviction she must cling desperately, or lose her last foothold. Her
whole being was a prey to a frightful turmoil of feeling. Her hands
shook; her mouth was parched as by the midday heat; she knew that there
were withered leaves between her feet and the sandals she wore, that
twigs had got caught in her hair; but she could not care and when the
pair were screened from her by the denser shrubs she flew back to her
raised seat-from which she could again discover them. At this moment she
would have given all she held best and dearest, to be the thing it vexed
her so much to be called: a water-wagtail, or some other bird.

It must be very near noon if not already past; she dusted her sandals and
tidied her curly hair, picking out the dry leaves and not noticing that
at the same time a rose fell out on the ground. Only her hands were busy;
her eyes were elsewhere, and suddenly they brightened again, for the
couple on which she kept them fixed were coming back, straight towards
the hedge, and she would soon be able again to hear what they were
saying.


CHAPTER XXIII.

Orion and Paula had had much to talk about, since the young man had
arrived. The discussion over the safe keeping of the girl's money had
been tedious. Finally, her counsellors had decided to entrust half of it
to Gamaliel the jeweller and his brother, who carried on a large business
in Constantinople. He happened to be in Memphis, and they had both
declared themselves willing each to take half of the sum in question and
use it at interest. They would be equally responsible for its security,
so that each should make good the whole of the property in their hands in
case of the other stopping payment. Nilus undertook to procure legal
sanction and the necessary sixteen witnesses to this transaction.

The other half of her fortune was, by the advice of Philippus, to be
placed in the hands of a brother of Haschim's, the Arab merchant, who had
a large business as money changer in Fostat, the new town on the further
shore, in which the merchant himself was a partner. This investment had
the advantage of being perfectly safe, at any rate so long as the Arabs
ruled the land.

After all this was settled Nilus departed with that half of the money
which Orion was to hand over to the keeping of the Moslem money changer
on the following morning.

Paula, though she had taken no part in the men's discussion, had been
present throughout, and had expressed her grateful consent. The
clearness, gravity, and decision which Orion had displayed had not
escaped her notice; and though the treasurer's shrewd remarks, briefly
and modestly made, had in every case proved final, it was Orion's
reasoning and explanations that had most come home to her, for it seemed
to her that he was always prompted by loftier, wider, and more
statesmanlike considerations than the others.

When this was over she and Orion were left together, and neither she nor
the young man had been able to escape a few moments of anxious
heart-beating.

It was not till the governor's son had summoned up his courage and,
sinking on his knees, was imploring her pardon, that she recovered some
firmness and reminded him of the letter he had sent her. But her heart
drew her to him almost irresistibly, and in order not to yield to its
urgent prompts, she hastily enquired what he had meant by the exchange he
had written about.

At this he went up to her with downcast eyes, drew a small box out of the
breast of his robe, and took out the emerald with the damaged setting. He
held them towards her with a beseeching gesture, exclaiming, with all the
peculiar sweetness of his deep voice:

"It is your property! Take it and give me in return your confidence, your
forgiveness."

She drew back a little, looking first at him and then at the stone and
its setting--surprised, pleased, and deeply moved, with a bright light in
her eyes. The young man found it impossible to utter a single word, only
holding the jewel and the broken setting closer to her, and yet closer,
like some poor man who makes bold to offer the best he has to a wealthy
superior, though conscious that it is all too humble a gift to find
favor.

And Paula was not long undecided; she took the proffered gem and feasted
her glistening eyes with glad thankfulness on her recovered treasure.

Two days ago she had thought of it as defiled and desecrated; it had
gratified her pride to fancy that she had cast the precious jewel at the
feet, as it were, of Neforis and her son, never to see it again. So hard
is it to forego the right of hating those who have basely brought grief
into our lives and anguish to our souls!--and yet Paula, who would not
have yielded this right at any price a short time since, now waived it of
her own free will--nay, thrust it from her like some tormenting incubus
which choked her pulses and kept her from breathing freely. In this gem
she saw once more a cherished memorial of her lost mother, the honorable
gift of a great monarch to her forefathers; and she was happy to possess
it once more. But it was not this that gave life to the warm, sunny glow
of happiness which thrilled through her, or occasioned its quick and
delightful growth; for her eye did not linger on the large and glittering
stone, but rested spellbound on the poor gold frame which had once held
it, and which had cost her such hours of anguish. This broken and
worthless thing, it is true, was powerful to justify her in the opinions
of her judges and her enemies; with this in her hand she would easily
confute her accusers. Still, it was not that which so greatly consoled
her. The physician's remark, that there was no greater joy than the
discovery that we have been deceived in thinking ill of another, recurred
to her mind; and she had once loved the man who now stood before her open
to every good influence, deeply moved in her presence; and her judgment
of him had been a hundred, a thousand times too hard. Only a noble soul
could confidently expect magnanimity from a foe and he, he had put
himself defenceless into the power of her who had been mortally stricken
by the most fateful, and perhaps the only disgraceful act of his life. In
giving up this gold frame Orion also gave himself up; with this talisman
in her possession she stood before him as irresistible Fate. And now, as
she looked up at him and met his large eyes, full of life and intellect
but sparkling through tears of violent agitation, she felt absolutely
certain that this favorite of Fortune, though he had indeed sinned deeply
and disastrously, was capable of the highest and greatest aims if he had
a friend to show him what life required of him and were but ready to
follow such guidance. And such a friend she would be to him!

She, like Orion, could not for some time speak; but he, at last, was
unable to contain himself; he hastened towards her and pressed her hand
to his lips with fervent gratitude, while she--she had to submit; nay,
she would have been incapable of resisting him if, as in her dream, he
had clasped her in his arms, to his heart. His burning lips had rested
fervently on her hand, but it was only for an instant that she abandoned
herself to the violent agitation that mastered her. Then with a great
effort her instinct and determination to do right enabled her to control
it; she pushed him from her decisively but not ungently, and then, with
some emotion and an arch sweetness which he had never before seen in her,
and which charmed him even more than her noble and lofty pride, she said,
threatening him with her finger.

"Take care, Orion! Now I have the stone and the setting; yes, that very
setting. Beware of the consequences, rash man!"

"Not at all. Say rather: Fool, who at last has succeeded in doing
something rational," he replied joyfully. "What I have brought you is not
a gift; it is your own. To you it can be neither more nor less than it
was before; but to me it has gained inestimably in value since it places
my honor, perhaps my life even, in your keeping; I am in your power as
completely as the humblest slave in the palace is in that of the Emperor.
Keep the gem, and use it and this fateful gold trifle till the day shall
come when my weal and woe are one with yours."

"For your dead father's sake," she answered, coloring deeply, "your weal
lies already very near my heart. Am not I, who brought upon you your
father's curse, bound indeed to help you to free yourself from the burden
of it? And it may perhaps be in my power to do so, Orion, if you do not
scorn to listen to the counsels of an ignorant girl?"

"Speak," he cried; but she did not reply immediately. She only begged him
to come into the garden with her; the close atmosphere of the room had
become intolerable to both, and when they got out and Katharina had first
caught sight of them their flushed cheeks had not escaped her watchful
eye.

In the open air, a scarcely perceptible breath from the river moderated
the noontide heat, and then Paula found courage to tell him what
Philippus had called his apprehension in life. It was not new to him;
indeed it fully answered to the principles he had laid down for the
future. He accepted it gratefully: "Life is a function, a ministry, a
duty!" the words were a motto, a precept that should aid him in carrying
out his plans.

"And the device," he exclaimed, "will be doubly precious to me as having
come from your lips.--But I no longer need its warning. The wisest and
most practical axioms of conduct never made any man the better. Who does
not bring a stock of them with him when he quits school for the world at
large? Precepts are of no use unless, in the voyage of life, a manly will
holds the rudder. I have called on mine, and it will steer me to the
goal, for a bright guiding star lights the pilot on his way. You know
that star; it is. . . ."

"It is what you call your love," she interposed, with a deep blush.--Your
love for me, and I will trust it."

"You will!" he cried passionately. "You allow me to hope. . . ."

That having ceased, he pauses and looks carefully around him; but
before he can determine what course to pursue, the cry of the pack
again forces itself upon his attention.

Once more he darts away, and after a while again pauses. His strength
perhaps begins to fail, and he has recourse to stratagem in order to escape.
He practises the doubling and the crossing of the fox or the hare. This
being useless, he attempts to escape by plunging into some lake or river
that happens to lie in his way, and when, at last, every attempt
to escape proves abortive, he boldly faces his pursuers, and attacks
the first dog or man who approaches him." [24] 

SOUTHERN HOUND.

There used to be in the south of Devon a pack or cry of the genuine old
English or southern hounds. There is some reason to believe that this
was the original stock of the island, or of this part of the island,
and that this hound was used by the ancient Britons in the chase of the
larger kinds of game with which the country formerly abounded.

Its distinguishing characters are its size and general heavy
appearance; its great length of body, deep chest, and ears remarkably
large and pendulous.

The tones of its voice were peculiarly deep. It answered the description
of Shakspeare:
"So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung With ears that sweep
away the morning dew; Crook-knee'd, and dew-lapp'd, like Thessalian
bulls; Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells, Each under
each."

It was the slowness of the breed which occasioned its disuse. Several of
them, however, remained not long ago at a village called Aveton Gifford,
in Devonshire, in the neighbourhood of which some of the most opulent of
the farmers used to keep two or three dogs each. When fox-hunting had
assumed somewhat of its modern form, the chase was followed by a
slow heavy hound, whose excellent olfactory organs enabled him to carry
on the scent a considerable time after the fox-hound passed, and also
over grassy fallows, and hard roads, and other places, where the modern
high-bred fox-hound would not be able to recognise it.
When, presently, they began talking again of the past she asked him quite
frankly, but in a low voice and without looking up, what had become of
the emerald he had taken from the Persian hanging. He turned pale at
this, looked at the ground, and hesitatingly replied that he had sent it
to Constantinople--"to have it set--set in an ornament--worthy of her
whom--whom he. . . ."

But here he broke off, stamped angrily with his foot, and looking
straight into the girl's eyes exclaimed:

"A pack of lies, foul and unworthy lies!--I have been truthful by nature
all my life; but does it not seem as though that accursed day forced me
to some base action every time it is even mentioned? Yes, Paula; the gem
is really on its way to Byzantium. But the stolen gift was never meant
for you, but for a fair, gentle creature, in nothing blameworthy, who
gave me her heart. To me she was never anything but a pretty plaything;
still, there were moments when I believed--poor soul!--I first learnt
what love meant through you, how great and how sacred it is!--Now you
know all; this, indeed, is the truth!"

They walked on again, and Katharina, who had not been able to gather the
whole of this explanation, could plainly hear Paula's reply in warm, glad
accents:

"Yes, that is the truth, I feel. And henceforth that horrible day is
blotted out, erased from your life and mine; and whatever you tell me in
the future I shall believe."

And the listener heard the young man answer in a tremulous voice:

"And you shall never be deceived in me. Now I must leave you; and I go,
in spite of my griefs, a happy man, entitled to rejoice anew. O Paula,
what do I not owe to you! And when we next meet you will receive me, will
you not, as you did that evening on the river after my return?"

"Yes, indeed; and with even more glad confidence," replied Paula, holding
out her hand with a lovely graciousness that came from her heart; he
pressed it a moment to his lips, and then sprang on to his horse and rode
off at a round trot, his slave following him.

"Katharina, child, Katharina!" was shouted from Susannah's house in a
woman's high-pitched voice. The water-wagtail started up, hastily
smoothing her hair and casting an evil glance at her rival, "the other,"
the supplanter who had basely betrayed her under the sycamores; she
clenched her little fist as she saw Paula watching Orion's retreating
form with beaming eyes. Paula went back into the house, happy and walking
on air, while the other poor, deeply-wounded child burst into violent
weeping at the first hasty words from her mother, who was not at all
satisfied with the disorder of her dress; and she ended by declaring with
defiant audacity that she would not present the flowers to the patriarch,
and would remain in her own room, for she was dying of headache.--And so
she did.


CHAPTER XXIV.

In the course of the afternoon Orion paid his visit to the Arab governor.
He crossed the bridge of boats on his finest horse.

Only two years since, the land where the new town of Fostat was now
growing up under the old citadel of Babylon had been fields and gardens;
but at Amru's word it had started into being as by a miracle; house after
house already lined the streets, the docks were full of ships and barges,
the market was alive with dealers, and on a spot where, during the siege
of the fortress, a sutler's booth had stood, a long colonnade marked out
the site of a new mosque.

There was little to be seen here now of native Egyptian life; it looked
as though some magician had transported a part of Medina itself to the
shores of the Nile. Men and beasts, dwellings and shops, though they had
adopted much of what they had found in this ancient land of culture,
still bore the stamp of their origin; and wherever Orion's eye fell on
one of his fellow-countrymen, he was a laborer or a scribe in the service
of the conquerors who had so quickly made themselves at home.

Before his departure for Constantinople one of his father's palm-groves
had occupied the spot where Amru's residence now stood opposite the
half-finished mosque. Where, now, thousands of Moslems, some on foot,
some on richly caparisoned steeds, were passing to and fro, turbaned and
robed after the manner of their tribe, with such adornment as they had
stolen or adopted from intercourse with splendor-loving nations, and
where long trains of camels dragged quarried stones to the building, in
former times only an occasional ox-cart with creaking wheels was to be
seen, an Egyptian riding an ass or a bare-backed nag, and now and then a
few insolent Greek soldiers. On all sides he heard the sharper and more
emphatic accent of the sons of the desert instead of the language of his
forefathers and their Greek conquerors. Without the aid of the servant
who rode at his side he could not have made himself understood on the
soil of his native land.

He soon reached Amru's house and was there informed by an Egyptian
secretary that his master was gone out hunting and would receive him, not
in the town, but at the citadel. There, on a pleasant site on the
limestone hills which rose behind the fortress of Babylon and the
newly-founded city, stood some fine buildings, originally planned as a
residence for the Prefect; and thither Amru had transported his wives,
children, and favorite horses, preferring it, with very good reason, to
the palace in the town, where he transacted business, and where the new
mosque intercepted the view of the Nile, while this eminence commanded a
wide prospect.

The sun was near setting when Orion reached the spot, but the general had
not yet come in from the chase, and the gate-keeper requested that he
would wait.

Orion was accustomed to be treated in his own country as the heir of the
greatest man in it; the color mounted to his brow and his Egyptian heart
revolted at having to bend his pride and swallow his wrath before an
Arab. He was one of the subject race, and the thought that one word from
his lips would suffice to secure his reception in the ranks of the rulers
forced itself suddenly on his mind; but he repressed it with all his
might, and silently allowed himself to be conducted to a terrace screened
by a vine-covered trellis from the heat of the sun.

He sat down on one of the marble seats by the parapet of this hanging
garden and looked westward. He knew the scene well, it was the playground
of his childhood and youth; hundreds of times the picture had spread
before him, and yet it affected him to-day as it had never done before.
Was there on earth--he asked himself--a more fertile and luxuriant land?
Had not even the Greek poets sung of the Nile as the most venerable of
rivers? Had not great Caesar himself been so fascinated by the idea of
discovering its source that to that end--so he had declared--he would
have thought the dominion of the world well lost? On the produce of those
wide fields the weal and woe of the mightiest cities of the earth had
been dependent for centuries; nay, imperial Rome and sovereign
Constantinople had quaked with fears of famine, when a bad harvest here
had disappointed the hopes of the husbandman.

And was there anywhere a more industrious nation of laborers, had there
ever been, before them, a thriftier or a more skilful race? When he
looked back on the fate and deeds of nations, on the remotest horizon
where the thread of history was scarcely perceptible, that same gigantic
Sphinx was there--the first and earliest monument of human joy in
creative art--those Pyramids which still proudly stood in undiminished
and inaccessible majesty beyond the Nile, beyond the ruined capital of
his forefathers, at the foot of the Libyan range. He was the son of the
men who had raised these imperishable works, and in his veins perchance
there still might flow a drop of the blood of those Pharaohs who had
sought eternal rest in these vast tombs, and whose greater progeny, had
overrun half the world with their armies, and had exacted tribute and
submission. He, who had often felt flattered at being praised for the
purity of his Greek--pure not merely for his time: an age of bastard
tongues--and for the engaging Hellenism of his person, here and now had
an impulse of pride of his Egyptian origin. He drew a deep breath, as he
gazed at the sinking sun; it seemed to lend intentional significance to
the rich beauty of his home as its magical glory transmuted the fields,
the stream, and the palm-groves, the roofs of the city, and even the
barren desert-range and the Pyramids to burning gold. It was fast going
to rest behind the Libyan chain. The bare, colorless limestone sparkled
like translucent crystal; the glowing sphere looked as though it were
melting into the very heart of the mountains behind which it was
vanishing, while its rays, shooting upwards like millions of gold
threads, bound his native valley to heaven--the dwelling of the Divine
Power who had blessed it above all other lands.

To free this beautiful spot of earth and its children from their
oppressors--to restore to them the might and greatness which had once
been theirs--to snatch down the crescent from the tents and buildings
which lay below him and plant the cross which from his infancy he had
held sacred--to lead enthusiastic troops of Egyptians against the
Moslems--to quell their arrogance and drive them back to the East like
Sesostris, the hero of history and legend--this was a task worthy of the
grandson of Menas, of the son of George the great and just Mukaukas.

Paula would not oppose such an enterprise; his excited imagination
pictured her indeed as a second Zenobia by his side, ready for any great
achievement, fit to aid him and to rule.

Fully possessed by this dream of the future, he had long ceased to gaze
at the glories of the sunset and was sitting with eyes fixed on the
ground. Suddenly his soaring visions were interrupted by men's voices
coming up from the street just below the terrace. He looked over and
perceived at its foot about a score of Egyptian laborers; free men, with
no degrading tokens of slavery, making their way along, evidently against
their will and yet in sullen obedience, with no thought of resistance or
evasion, though only a single Arab held them under control.

The sight fell on his excited mood like rain on a smouldering fire, like
hail on sprouting seed. His eye, which a moment ago had sparkled with
enthusiasm, looked down with contempt and disappointment on the miserable
creatures of whose race he came. A line of bitter scorn curled his lip,
for this troop of voluntary slaves were beneath his anger--all the more
so as he more vividly pictured to himself what his people had once been
and what they were now. He did not think of all this precisely, but as
dusk fell, one scene after another from his own experience rose before
his mind's eye--occasions on which the Egyptians had behaved
ignominiously, and had proved that they were unworthy of freedom and
inured to bow in servitude. Just as one Arab was now able to reduce a
host of his fellow-countrymen to subjection, so formerly three Greeks had
held them in bondage. He had known numberless instances of almost glad
submission on the part of freeborn Egyptians--peasants, village magnates,
and officials, even on his father's estates and farms. In Alexandria and
Memphis the sons of the soil had willingly borne the foreign yoke,
allowing themselves to be thrust into the shade and humbled by Greeks, as
though they were of a baser species and origin, so long only as their
religious tenets and the subtleties of their creed remained untouched.
Then he had seen them rise and shed their blood, yet even then only with
loud outcries and a promising display of enthusiasm. But their first
defeat had been fatal and it had required only a small number of trained
soldiers to rout them.

To make any attempt against a bold and powerful invader as the leader of
such a race would be madness; there was no choice but to rule his people
in the service of the enemy and so exert his best energies to make their
lot more endurable. His father's wiser and more experienced judgment had
decided that the better course was to serve his people as mediator
between them and the Arabs rather than to attempt futile resistance at
the head of Byzantine troops.

"Wretched and degenerate brood!" he muttered wrathfully, and he began to
consider whether he should not quit the spot and show the arrogant Arab
that one Egyptian, at any rate, still had spirit enough to resent his
contempt, or whether he should yet wait for the sake of the good cause,
and swallow down his indignation. No! he, the son of the Mukaukas, could
not--ought not to brook such treatment. Rather would he lose his life as
a rebel, or wander an exile through the world and seek far from home a
wider field for deeds of prowess, than put his free neck under the feet
of the foe.

But his reflections were disturbed by the sound of footsteps, and looking
round he saw the gleam of lanterns moving to and fro on the terrace,
turned directly on him. These must be Amru's servants come to conduct him
to their master, who, as he supposed, would now do him the honor to
receive him--tired out with hunting, no doubt, and stretched on his divan
while he imperiously informed his guest, as if he were some freed slave,
what his wishes were.

But the steps were not those of a messenger. The great general himself
had come to welcome him; the lantern-bearers were not to show the way to
Amru's couch, but to guide Amru to the "son of his dear departed friend."
The haughty Vicar of the Khaliffs was the most cordial host, prompted by
hospitality to make his guest's brief stay beneath his roof as pleasant
as possible, and giving him the right hand of welcome.

He apologized for his prolonged absence in very intelligible Greek,
having learnt it in his youth as a caravan-leader to Alexandria; he
expressed his regret at having left Orion to wait so long, blamed his
servants for not inviting him indoors and for neglecting to offer him
refreshment. As they crossed the garden-terrace he laid his hand on the
youth's shoulder, explained to him that the lion he had been pursuing,
though wounded by one of his arrows, had got away, and added that he
hoped to make good his loss by the conquest of a nobler quarry than the
beast of prey.

There was nothing for it but that the young man should return courtesy
for courtesy; nor did he find it difficult. The Arab's fine pleasant
voice, full of sincere cordiality, and the simple distinction and dignity
of his manner appealed to Orion, flattered him, gave him confidence, and
attracted him to the older man who was, besides, a valiant hero.

In his brightly-lighted room hung with costly Persian tapestry, Amru
invited his guest to share his simple hunter's supper after the Arab
fashion; so Orion placed himself on one side of the divan while the
Governor and his Vekeel--[Deputy]--Obada--a Goliath with a perfectly
black moorish face squatted rather than sat on the other, after the
manner of his people.

Amru informed his guest that the black giant knew no Greek, and he only
now and then threw in a few words which the general interpreted to Orion
when he thought fit; but the negro's remarks were not more pleasing to
the young Egyptian than his manner and appearance.

Obada had in his childhood been a slave and had worked his way up to his
present high position by his own exertions; his whole attention seemed
centred in the food before him, which he swallowed noisily and greedily,
and yet that he was able to follow the conversation very well, in spite
of his ignorance of Greek, his remarks sufficiently proved. Whenever he
looked up from the dishes, which were placed in the midst on low tables,
to put in a word, he rolled his big eyes so that only the whites remained
visible; but when he turned them on Orion, their small, black pupils
transfixed him with a keen and, as the young man thought, exceedingly
sinister glare.

The presence of this man oppressed him; he had heard of his base origin,
which to Orion's lofty ideas rendered him contemptible, of his fierce
valor, and remarkable shrewdness; and though he did not understand what
Obada said, more than once there was something in the man's tone that
brought the blood into his face and made him set his teeth. The more
kindly and delightful the effect of the Arab's speech and manner, the
more irritating and repulsive was his subordinate; and Orion was
conscious that he would have expressed himself more freely, and have
replied more candidly to many questions, if he had been alone with Amru.

At first his host made enquiries as to his residence in Constantinople
and asked much about his father; and he seemed to take great interest in
all he heard till Obada interrupted Orion, in the midst of a sentence,
with an enquiry addressed to his superior. Amru hastily answered him in
Arabic and soon after gave a fresh turn to the conversation.

The Vekeel had asked why Amru allowed that Egyptian boy to chatter so
much before settling the matter about which he had sent for him, and his
master had replied that a man is best entertained when he has most
opportunity given him for hearing himself talk; that moreover the young
man was well-informed, and that all he had to say was interesting and
important.

The Moslems drank nothing; Orion was served with capital wine, but he
took very little, and at length Amru began to speak of his father's
funeral, alluding to the Patriarch's hostility, and adding that he had
talked with him that morning and had been surprised at the marked
antagonism he had confessed towards his deceased fellow-believer, who
seemed formerly to have been his friend. Then Orion spoke out; he
explained fully what the reasons were that had moved the Patriarch to
display such conspicuous and far-reaching animosity towards his father.
A bitch and two of her whelps, nearly half grown--a male and female--had
inhabited the same cage from the time that the young ones were born.
Some cause of quarrel occurred on a certain night, and the two bitches
fell upon the dog and perfectly destroyed him. There was not a limb
left whole.

A stronger instance of the innate ferocity of this breed could scarcely
be given. Even in their native country all attempts perfectly to domesticate
them have failed; for they never lose an opportunity to devour the
poultry or attack the sheep. Every domesticated dog coming within their
reach was immediately destroyed. One that was brought to England broke
his chain--scoured the surrounding country--and, before dawn, had
destroyed several sheep; and another attacked, and would have
destroyed, an ass, if he had not been prevented.

Mr. Oxley, Surveyor-General of New South Wales, however, gives an interesting
account of the mutual attachment between two of the native and wild New
Holland dingos.

"About a week ago we killed a native dog, and threw his body on a small
bush. On returning past the same spot to-day, we found the body removed
three or four yards from the bush, and the female in a dying-state lying
close beside it: she had apparently been there from the day the
dog was killed.

Being now so weakened and emaciated as to be unable to move on our approach,
it was deemed a mercy to despatch her."

When Van Diemen Land began to be colonized by Europeans, the losses
sustained by the settlers by the ravages of the wild dogs were almost
incredible. The districts infested by these animals were principally
those appropriated to sheep, and there was scarcely a flock that did not
suffer. It was in vain to double the number of shepherds, to watch by
night and by day, or to have fires at every quarter of the fold; for these
animals would accomplish their object by stratagem or by force.
One colony lost no fewer than 1200 sheep and lambs in three months; another
colony lost 700.

The ravagers were either the native wild dogs of the island, or those
that had escaped from their owners. They seemed to have apportioned the
country into different districts, each troop having its allotted
range.

At length the evil became so great that a general meeting of the
colonists was convened. The concluding sentences of the speech of
Lieutenant Hill forcibly express the extent of the evil.

"The country is free from bush-rangers: we are no longer surrounded and
threatened by the natives. We have only one enemy left in the field;
but that enemy strikes at the very root of our welfare, and through him
the stream of our prosperity is tainted at its very source."

The colonists were then few, but they cordially united in the
endeavour to extirpate this formidable enemy; and, although the
wild dog is still found in the interior of the island, he is
comparatively seldom seen, and his ravages have nearly ceased.

THE CANIS AUSTRALIS--KARÁRAHÉ, NEW ZEALAND DOG.

A tradition exists in New Zealand of this dog having been given to
the natives two or three centuries ago by a number of divinities
who made their descent on these shores, probably Juan Fernandez and
his companions.

The sagacious animal has, however, dwindled down to the lowest rank of his
family, but ill usage has not altogether destroyed his worth. In New
Zealand he is the safeguard of every village. Should the slightest alarm
exist, he is the first to ascertain the cause of it, and many families
have saved themselves by flight, or have taken arms in self-defence against
the incursions of predatory bands. The New Zealanders are therefore
kind in their treatment of the dog, except that they occasionally destroy
him for his hide.

The name formerly given to the New Zealand dog was 'pero', which in some
measure substantiates the supposition of Juan Fernandez having visited
the country--'perro', in the Spanish language, being the name of a
dog.

We will now turn to the northern parts of America. The races of wild dogs
are there considerably limited, both in number and the districts
which they occupy.

In the elevated sandy country north of the source of the Missouri, inhabited
by the "Stone" and the "Black Foot" Indians, is a doubtful species of
dogs--wolves they used to be called--who hunt in large packs and are
exceedingly swift; whose bark is similar to that of the domestic
dog, but who burrow in the ground, and eagerly run to their holes,
when the gun of the hunter is heard.

[Our author evidently, in the above remarks, confounds the Louisiana
marmot, Arctomys Ludovicianus or Prairie dog, with the Canis Latrans of
Say, as he certainly would not make us believe that such harmless
animals as the marmot should associate themselves in packs to hunt
the deer or other quadrupeds; neither would he tell us that so
different an animal as the Canis Latrans could burrow in the ground
and retreat to their holes when surprised by the hunter.

The Louisiana Marmot, improperly called Prairie dog, is about sixteen
inches long, and lives in extended villages or excavations surmounted
by mounds.

These communities often comprise several thousand inhabitants, whose
sole food consists in the scanty herbage surrounding the settlement, as
they seldom extend their excursions beyond a half-mile from their
burrows for fear of the wolves, and many other enemies.

The Canis Latrans, on the other hand, is quite a large and savage
animal, and frequently unites in bands to run down deer or buffalo
calves, but as for living under ground in burrows, it is quite out
of reason to suppose such a thing possible with this quadruped, who
secretes himself in the depths of the forest, and appears on the
open plain only when in pursuit of game.

--L.] The habit of selecting large, open, sandy plains, and burrowing there,
extends to the greater part of the American wild dogs.

[We have been credibly informed by several gentlemen, familiar with
the country of Mexico, that there is a diminutive species of dog
running wild, and burrowing in the ground as rabbits, in the
neighbourhood of Santa Fe and Chihuahua.

A gentleman who has seen these animals, states that there is no
doubt as to their identity, having met with them in a state of
domestication, when they exhibited all the actions and manners of
a French lap dog, such as come from Cuba or other West India
Islands.

They are of every variety of hue, and resort to their burrows
whenever disturbed in their natural haunts.

What they subsist on it is difficult to say, as they are too harmless and
insignificant to attack any other animal beyond a mouse or a snail.

They are represented as being very difficult to tame, but when domesticated
show no disposition to return to their former mode of life. The lady
of the Mexican Minister, when in this city, had one of these dogs
as a boudoir pet; it was lively and barked quite fiercely. We have not
been able to ascertain whether they bark in their natural state. The
breed of dog cultivated in China for food alone, are fed entirely upon
rice meal and other farinaceous articles, having no relish whatever
for flesh or other strong aliment.--L.]
In some parts of North America whole troops of horses are guarded and
kept together by dogs. If any of the troop attempt to steal away, the dog
will immediately fly after the horse, head him, and bring him back
to his companions.

[To show the necessity of having dogs for this purpose, as well as to
guard the flocks of sheep, we need only mention that it is no uncommon
thing for a Mexican to own several thousand horses, besides an
immense number of cattle.

Mr. Kendall, in his Santa Fé expedition, states that the proprietress
of one hacienda, a widow, and comparatively poor when the wonderful
wealth of her ancestors is considered, now owns fifty thousand
horses and mules, beside herds of cattle and sheep, and that the
pasture ground extended for fifty miles on either side of the road.

One of the former owners of this immense estate, a short time previous
to the revolution, sent as a present to a Spanish colonel, just arrived
with his regiment of dragoons, a thousand white horses, nearly all of
the same age, and every one raised on this prolific hacienda.

--L.]
The wild dogs abound in many parts of South America. In some of the
forests on the banks of the Oronoko they multiply to an annoying
degree.
The Cayotte of Mexico, described by some as a wolf, and bearing no slight
resemblance to that animal, belongs to the South American wild dogs, as
do also the Aguara dogs of every kind. These wanderers of the woods are,
however, diminished in numbers in every part of that continent, and are
replaced by other kinds, many of which have been imported from Europe and
domesticated.

[There is no country in the world more cursed with worthless curs than
that of Mexico and the other southern republics; the cities and
villages actually swarm with these animals, and produce no little
vexation to travellers, who speak of their eternal yelping and
barking in the most indignant terms.

Mr. Kendall, on entering San Antonio, says,
"From every house some half dozen Mexican curs would jump forth and
greet us with a chorus of yelps and barks, and before we had fairly
entered the town the canine hue and cry was general.

Those who have for the first time entered a Mexican town or city must
have been struck with the unusual number of dogs, and annoyed by their
incessant barking; but the stranger soon learns that they spend all their
courage in barks--they seldom bite."--L.]
Many of the Indian tribes have succeeded in reclaiming the dog of
the woods, and have made him a useful although not a perfectly
attached servant.

The dogs of the Falkland Islands, and the Indian North American dogs
generally, are brown or gray-coloured varieties of the wild dog;
but as they are nearly exterminated, will occupy little space.

It has already been stated that in Egypt and in Nubia we have the first
records of the dog.

Many superstitious notions were connected with him, and divine honours were
paid to him. Those times are passed away, and he is regarded with
aversion by the Moslem of the present day. He is an outcast. He obtains
a scanty living by the offal which he gathers in the towns, or he
is become a perfect wild dog, and scours the country for his prey.

His modern name is the 'deab'. He is of considerable size, with a
round muzzle, large head, small erect ears, and long and hairy tail,
spotted with black, white, and yellow, and having a fierce wolfish
aspect. These dogs are not, however, numerous; but the mischief which
they do is often great, whether in pairs they burrow in the earth,
or associate with others and hunt in troops. [7]
In Nubia is a smaller dog of the same kind, which never burrows. It lives
on small animals and birds, and rarely enters any of the towns.

A similar dog, according to Colonel Hamilton Smith, inhabits the neighbourhood
of the Cape, and particularly the Karroo or Wilderness.

It is smaller than either of the others, and lives among bushes or under
prominent rocks. Others, although not identified with the jackal, yet
associating with him, inhabit the Uplands of Gambia and Senegal.

On the Gold Coast, the dog is used and prized as an article of food.

He is fattened and driven to market as the European drives his sheep and
hogs. The dog is even more valued than the sheep for human subsistence,
and is deemed the greatest luxury that can be placed even on the royal
table.

In Loango, or Lower Guinea, is a town from which the African wild dogs
derive their name--the 'dingo'. They hunt in large packs. They fearlessly
attack even the elephant, and generally destroy him.

In the neighbourhood of the Cape, the country is nearly cleared of wild
beasts; but in Cape Town there are a great number of lean and
miserable dogs, who howl about the streets at night, quitting their
dens and lurking-places, in quest of offal.

No great while ago, the wolves and hyaenas used to descend and
dispute the spoil with the dogs, while the town resounded with their
hideous howlings all the night long.

This will be a proper place to refer to the numerous accounts that are
given both in ancient and modern times of the immolation of dogs, and
of their being used for food. They were sacrificed at certain periods
by the Greeks and Romans to almost all their deities, and particularly
to Mars, Pluto, and Pan, to Minerva, Proserpine, and Lucina, and
also to the moon, because the dog by his barking disturbed all
charms and spells, and frightened away all spectres and apparitions.

The Greeks immolated many dogs in honour of Hecate, because by their
baying the phantoms of the lower world were disturbed. A great
number of dogs were also destroyed in Samothrace in honour of the same
goddess. Dogs were periodically sacrificed in February, and also in
April and in May; also to the goddess Rubigo, who presided over the corn,
and the Bona Dea, whose mysterious rites were performed on Mount Aventine.
The dog Cerberus was supposed to be watching at the feet of Pluto, and
a dog and a youth were periodically sacrificed to that deity.

The night when the Capitol had nearly been destroyed was annually celebrated
by the cruel scourging of a dog in the principal public places, even to
the death of the animal.

[As on a certain occasion, the dogs who had the Capitol in custody,
did not bark and give warning when the Gauls attempted to scale the
wails, there is a custom annually observed at Rome, to transfix
certain dogs to forks, and thus crucified, hang them on an elder
tree as examples of justice.

(Book 29, chap. IV. Pliny.)-L.]
Many of the Greek and Roman epicures were strangely fond of the flesh of
the dog, and those who ought to have known much better encouraged the use
of this food. Galen speaks of it in the strongest terms of
praise.
Hippocrates says that the meat of old dogs is of a warm and dry
quality, giving strength to the eater.

Ananias, the poet, speaks of dog's flesh served up with that of the
hare and fox. Virgil recommends that the fatted dog should be served up
with whey or butter; and Dioscorides, the physician, says that
they should be fed on the whey that remains after the making of
cheese.

[Independent of the many useful and interesting qualities that necessarily
endeared this animal to the ancients, he had yet stronger claims
upon them, in the prophylactic properties of different portions of
his body.

Pliny, Hippocrates, Aristotle and others, speak of various preparations
made of his flesh, for the cure of many distempers.

The first-mentioned writer observes, that the ashes of burnt dogs, made
into a liniment, with oil, will make an excellent application to
the eye-brows, to turn them black.

We doubt not that an analogous compound, if proved to be really efficacious,
might he introduced to the notice of the belles of our own time,
or meet with extensive sale for dyeing the pagoties and mustachios
of the modern dandy.

This quaint philosopher also recommends the same substance as a
healing salve, for malignant wounds, and the internal use of the same
article as a preventive or cure of hydrophobia and other distempers.
(Book 28, chap, XI. and X.)--L.]
Before Christianity was established among the Danes, on every ninth year
at the winter solstice, a monstrous sacrifice of 99 dogs was effected.
In Sweden the sacrifice was still worse. On each of 9 successive days, 99
dogs were destroyed.

This sacrifice of the dog, however, gave way to one as numerous and as
horrible. On every 9th year, 99 human victims were immolated,
and the sons of the reigning tyrant among the rest, in order that
the life of the monarch might be prolonged. [8]
On the other hand, the dog was frequently the executioner; and,
from an early period, whether in the course of war or the mock
administration of justice, thousands of poor wretches were torn to
pieces by animals trained to that horrible purpose.

Many of the Indians of North America, and almost of the present day,
are fond of the flesh of the dog.

Captain Carver, in his Travels in North America in 1766, 1767, and 1768,
describes the admission of an Indian into one of the horrible societies
of that country.

"The dishes being brought near to me," says he, "I perceived
that they consisted of dog's flesh, and I was informed that at all
their grand feasts they never made use of any other food.

The new candidate provides fat dogs for the festival, if they can
be procured at any price.

They ate the flesh; but the head and the tongue were left sticking on a
pole with the front towards the east. When any noxious disease appeared
among them, a dog was killed, the intestines were wound between
two poles, and every man was compelled to pass between them."

The Nandowepia Indians also eat dog's flesh as an article of luxury, and
not from any want or scarcity of other animal food; for they have the
bear, buffalo, elk, deer, beaver, and racoon.

Professor Keating, in his interesting work on the expedition to Peter's
River, states that he and a party of American officers were regaled
in a large pavilion on buffalo meat, and 'tepsia', a vegetable
boiled in buffalo grease, and the flesh of three dogs kept for the
occasion, and without any salt.

They partook of the flesh of the dogs with a mixture of curiosity
and reluctance, and found it to be remarkably fat, sweet, and
palatable, divested of any strong taste, and resembling the finest
Welsh mutton, but of a darker colour.

So strongly rooted, however, are the prejudices of education, that few of
them could be induced to eat much of it.

The feast being over, great care was taken to replace the bones in their
proper places in the dish, after which they were carefully washed and
buried, as a token of respect to the animals generally, and because
there was the belief among them that at some future time they would
return again to life.

Well-fattened puppies are frequently sold; and an invitation to a
feast of dog's meat is the greatest distinction that can be offered
to a stranger by any of the Indian nations east of the Rocky
Mountains.

[Notwithstanding the Indians occasionally eat their dogs either through
necessity or when they wish to pay a marked tribute of respect to their
gods, or prepare a feast of friendship with strangers, they value them
very highly, and do not by any means consider their flesh superior to
that of the buffaloes or other animals of the chase. Mr. Catlin remarks,
that "the dog, amongst all Indian tribes, is more esteemed and
more valued than amongst any part of the civilized world: the Indian, who
has more time to devote to his company, and whose untutored mind more
nearly assimilates to that of his faithful domestic, keeps him closer
company and draws him nearer his heart: they hunt together and are
equal sharers in the chase--their bed is one; and on the rocks and on their
coats of arms they carve his image as the symbol of fidelity." (Vol. I.,
p. 230.)

On visiting the Sioux, they prepared for this gentleman as a token of
regard a dog feast, previous to partaking of which they addressed him
in a manner that plainly exhibits the veneration in which they held
these faithful animals, at the same time forcibly demonstrating the
peculiar circumstances under which they alone are willing to destroy
them:

"My father, I hope you will have pity upon us; we are very poor. We offer
you to-day not the best we have got; for we have a plenty of good buffalo
hump and marrow; but we give you our hearts in this feast, we have killed
our faithful dogs to feed you, and the Great Spirit will seal our
friendship. I have no more to say." (Vol. I., p. 229.)--L.]
As a counterpart to much of this, the ancient Hyrcanians may be mentioned,
who lived near the Caspian Sea, and who deemed it one of the strongest
expressions of respect to leave the corpse of their deceased friends
to be torn and devoured by dogs.

Every man was provided with a certain number of these animals, as a
living tomb for himself at some future period, and these dogs were remarkable
for their fierceness.

[Not only the Hyrcanians but most of the people dwelling on or near the
Caspian sea, preserved this race or a similarly formidable one,
more particularly to devour their dead; it being considered more
propitiatory to the Gods, and more flattering to the spirits of the deceased,
to make this disposition of the corpse, than consigning it to the gloomy
grave or funeral pile.

This custom is noticed by Theodoret as being pursued by the inhabitants
of those parts, and was not abolished till after their adherence to
Christianity.--L.]

DOMESTICATED DOGS OF THE FIRST DIVISION
Some of the readers of this work may possibly recollect three
beautiful dogs of this species in the gardens of the Zoological
Society of London, which afforded a perfect illustration of the
elongated head of the dogs belonging to Cuvier's first section.

Mr. Bennett, the Secretary of the Society, gave an interesting account of
them in 1835, derived from the observation of Sir John Franklin and Dr.
Richardson.

The elongation and sharpness of the muzzle, and the small capacity of
the skull, first attract attention. The dog was doubtless fitted for its
situation, where its duty is to hunt by sight after the moose or
rein-deer, but would have been comparatively worthless if he was
to be guided by the scent.

Its erect ears, widened at the base and pointed at the top, gave it an
appearance of vivacity and spirit. Its depth of chest, and tucked-up flank,
and muscular quarters, marked it as a dog of speed, while its light
frame, and the length of the toes, and wideness of web between them,
seem to depict the kind of surface over which it was to bound. It is not
designed to seize and to hold any animal of considerable bulk; it
bounds over the snow without sinking, if the slightest crust is
formed upon it, and eagerly overtakes and keeps at bay the moose
or the rein-deer until the hunters arrive.

This animal furnishes a beautiful illustration of adaptation for a
particular purpose.

The hair of these dogs is white, with patches of grayish-black and
brown. They are known only in the neighbourhood of the Mackenzie
River and of the Great Bear Lake in North America They appear to be
good-tempered and easily manageable, and soon become familiar even with
strangers. They are most valuable to the Indians, who live almost
entirely on the produce of the chase.
Katharina was trying to overhear
a dialogue between the Patriarch Benjamin--whose bearded and apostolic
head Orion could clearly recognize--and the priest John, an insignificant
looking little man, of whom, however, the deceased Mukaukas had testified
that he was far superior to old Plotinus the Bishop in intellect and
energy.

The young man could easily have watched Katharina's every movement, but
he did not think it worth while. Nevertheless, as he rode on, the
water-wagtail's little figure dwelt in his mind; not alone, however, for
that of Paula immediately rose by her side; and the smaller Katharina's
seemed, the more ample and noble did the other appear. Every word he had
heard that day from Paula's lips rushed to his remembrance, and the vivid
and lovely memory drove out all care. That woman, who only a few hours
since, had declared herself ready, with him, to hope all things, to
believe all things, and to accept his protection--that lordly maiden whom
he had been glad to bid fix her eye, with him, on the goal of his future
efforts, whose pure gaze could restrain his passion and impetuosity as by
a charm, and who yet granted him the right to strive to possess her--that
proud daughter of heroes, whom even his father would have clasped to his
heart as a daughter--was it possible that she should betray him like some
pleasure-seeking city beauty? Could she forget her dignity as a
woman?--No! and a thousand times no. To doubt her was to insult her--was
to wrong her and himself.

The physician loved her; but it certainly was not any warmer feeling than
friendship on her part that made her receive him at this late hour. The
shame would be his own, if he ever again allowed such base suspicion to
find place in his soul!

He breathed a deep sigh of relief. And when his servant, who had lingered
to pay the toll at the bridge, came up with him, Orion dismounted and
desired him to lead his horse home, for he himself wished to return on
foot, alone with his thoughts. He walked meditatively and slowly under
the sycamores, but he had not gone far when, on the other side of the
deserted road, he heard some one overtaking him with long, quick strides.
He recognized the leech Philippus at a glance and was glad, for this
proved to him how senseless and unjust his doubts had been, and how
little ground he had for regarding the physician as a rival; for indeed
this man did not look like a happy lover. He hurried on with his head
bent, as though under a heavy burthen, and clasped his hand to his
forehead with a gesture of despair. No, this nocturnal wanderer had left
no hour of bliss behind him; and if his demeanor was calculated to rouse
any feeling it was not envy, but pity.

Philippus did not heed Orion; absorbed in himself, he strode on, moaning
dully, as if in pain. For a few minutes he disappeared into a house
whence came loud cries of suffering, and when he came out again, he
walked on, shaking his head now and then, as a man who sees many things
happen which his understanding fails to account for.

The end of his walk was a large, palatial building. The stucco had fallen
off in places, and in the upper story the windows had been broken away
till their open ings were a world too wide. In former times this house
had accommodated the State officers of Finance for the province, and the
ground-floor rooms had been suitably and comfortably fitted up for the
Ideologos--the supreme controller of this department, who usually resided
at Alexandria, but who often spent some weeks at Memphis when on a tour
of inspection. But the Arabians had transferred the management of the
finances of the whole country to the new capital of Fostat on the other
shore of the river, and that of the monetary affairs of the decaying city
had been incorporated with the treasurer's department of the Mukaukas'
household. The senate of the city had found the expense of this huge
building too heavy, and had been well content to let the lower rooms to
Philippus and his Egyptian friend, Horapollo.

The two men occupied different rooms, but the same slaves attended to
their common housekeeping and also waited on the physician's assistant, a
modest and well-informed Alexandrian.

When Philippus entered his old friend's lofty and spacious study he found
him still up, sitting before a great number of rolls of manuscript, and
so absorbed in his work that he did not notice his late-coming comrade
till the leech bid him good-evening. His only reply was an unintelligible
murmur, for some minutes longer the old man was lost in study; at last,
however, he looked up at Philippus, impatiently tossing an ivory
ruler-which he had been using to open and smooth the papyrus on to the
table; and at the same moment a dark bundle under it began to move--this
was the old man's slave who had long been sleeping there.

Three lamps on the writing-table threw a bright light on the old man and
his surroundings, while the physician, who had thrown himself on a couch
in a corner of the large room, remained in the dark.

What startled the midnight student was his housemate's unwonted silence;
it disturbed him as the cessation of the clatter of the wheel disturbs a
man who lives in a mill. He looked at his friend with surprised enquiry,
but Philippus was dumb, and the old man turned once more to his rolls of
manuscript. But he had lost the necessary concentration; his brown hand,
in which the blue veins stood out like cords, fidgeted with the scrolls
and the ivory rule, and his sunken lips, which had before been firmly
closed, were now twitching restlessly.

The man's whole aspect was singular and not altogether pleasing: his lean
brown figure was bent with age, his thoroughly Egyptian face, with broad
cheekbones and outstanding ears, was seamed and wrinkled like oak-bark;
his scalp was bare of its last hair, and his face clean-shaved, but for a
few tufts of grey hair by way of beard, sprouting from the deep furrows
on his cheeks and chin, like reeds from the narrow bed of a brook; the
razor could not reach them there, and they gave him an untidy and
uncared-for appearance. His dress answered to his face--if indeed that
could be called dress which consisted of a linen apron and a white
kerchief thrown over his shoulders after sundown. Still, no one meeting
him in the road could have taken him for a beggar; for his linen was fine
and as white as snow, and his keen, far-seeing eyes, above which, exactly
in the middle, his bristly eyebrows grew strangely long and thick, shone
and sparkled with clear intelligence, firm self-reliance, and a repellent
severity which would no more have become an intending mendicant than the
resolute and often scornful expression which played about his lips. There
was nothing amiable, nothing prepossessing, nothing soft in this man's
face; and those who knew what his life had been could not wonder that the
years had failed to sweeten his abrupt and contradictory acerbity or to
transmute them into that kindly forbearance which old men, remembering
how often they have stumbled and how many they have seen fall, sometimes
find pleasure in practising.

He had been born, eighty years before, in the lovely island of Philae,
beyond the cataract in the district of the temple of Isis, and under the
shadow of the only Egyptian sanctuary in which the heathen cultus was
kept up, and that publicly, as late as in his youth. Since Theodosius the
Great, one emperor and one Praefectus Augustalis after another had sent
foot-soldiers and cavalry above the falls to put an end to idolatry in
the beautiful isle; but they had always been routed or destroyed by the
brave Blemmyes who haunted the desert between the Nile and the Red Sea.
These restless nomad tribes acknowledged the Isis of Philae as their
tutelary goddess, and, by a very ancient agreement, the image of their
patroness was carried every year by her priests in a solemn procession to
the Blemmyes, and then remained for a few weeks in their keeping.
Horapollo's father was the last of the horoscope readers, and his
grandfather had been the last high-priest of the Isis of Philae. His
childhood had been passed on the island but then a Byzantine legion had
succeeded in beating the Blemmyes, in investing the island, and in
plundering and closing the temple. The priests of Isis escaped the
imperial raid and Horapollo had spent all his early years with his
father, his grandfather, and two younger sisters, in constant peril and
flight. His youthful spirit was unremittingly fed with hatred of the
persecutors, the cruel contemners and exterminators of the faith of his
forefathers; and this hatred rose to irreconcilable bitterness after the
massacre at Antioch where the imperial soldiery fell upon all his family,
and his grandfather and two innocent sisters were murdered. These horrors
were committed at the instigation of the Bishop, who denounced the
Egyptian strangers as idolaters, and to whom the Roman prefect, a proud
and haughty patrician, had readily lent the support of an armed force. It
was owing to the narrowest chance--or, as the old man would have it, to
the interposition of great Isis, that his father had been so happy as to
get away with him and the treasures he had brought from the temple at
Philae. Thus they had means to enable them to travel farther under an
assumed name, and they finally settled in Alexandria. Here the persecuted
youth changed his name, Horus, to its Greek equivalent, and henceforth he
was known at home and in the schools as Apollo. He was highly gifted by
nature, and availed himself with the utmost zeal of the means of learning
that abounded in Alexandria; he labored indefatigably and dug deep into
every field of Greek science, gaining, under his father's guidance, all
the knowledge of Egyptian horoscopy, which was not wholly lost even at
this late period.

In the midst of the contentious Christian sects of the capital, both
father and son remained heathen and worshippers of Isis; and when the old
priest died at an advanced age, Horapollo moved to Memphis where he led
the quiet and secluded life of a student, mingling only now and then with
the astronomers, astrologers, and calendar-makers at the observatory, or
visiting the alchemists' laboratories, where, even in Christian Egypt,
they still devoted themselves to attempts to transmute the baser into the
noble metals. Alchemists and star-readers alike soon detected the old
man's superior knowledge, and in spite of his acrid and often
offensively-repellent demeanor, took counsel of him on difficult
questions. His fame had even reached the Arabs, and, when it was
necessary to find the exact direction towards Mecca for the prayer niche
in Amru's new mosque, he was appealed to, and his decision was final.

Philippus had, some years since, been called to the old man's bedside in
sickness, and being then a beginner and in no great request, he had given
the best of his time and powers to the case. Horapollo had been much
attracted by the young physician's wide culture and earnest studiousness;
he had conceived a warm liking for him, the warmest perhaps that he had
ever felt for any fellow-human since the death of his own family. At last
the elder took the younger man into his heart with such overflowing
affection, that it seemed as though his spirit longed to make up now for
the stint of love it had hitherto shown. No father could have clung to
his son with more fervent devotion, and when a relapse once more brought
him to death's door he took Philippus wholly into his confidence,
unrolled before his eyes the scroll of his inner and outer life from its
beginnings, and made him his heir on condition that he should abide by
him to the end.

Philippus, who, from the first, had felt a sympathetic attraction to this
venerable and talented man, agreed to the bargain; and when he
subsequently became associated with the old man in his studies, assisting
him from time to time, Horapollo desired that he would help him to
complete a work he hoped to finish before he died. It was a treatise on
hieroglyphic writing, and was to interpret the various signs so far as
was still possible, and make them intelligible to posterity.

The old man disliked writing anything but Egyptian, using Greek
unwillingly and clumsily, so he entrusted to his young friend the task of
rendering his explanations into that language. Thus the two men--so
different in age and character, but so closely allied in intellectual
aims--led a joint existence which was both pleasant and helpful to both,
in spite of the various eccentricities, the harshness and severity of the
elder.

Horapollo lived after the manner of the early Egyptian priests,
subjecting himself to much ablution and shaving; eating little but bread,
vegetables, and poultry, and abstaining from pulse and the flesh of all
beasts--not merely of the prohibited animal, swine; wearing nothing but
pure linen clothing, and setting apart certain hours for the recitation
of those heathen forms of prayer whose magic power was to compel the gods
to grant the desires of those who thus appealed to them.

And if the old man had given his full confidence to Philippus, the leech,
on his part, had no secrets from him; or, if he withheld anything,
Horapollo, with wonderful acumen, was at once aware of it. Philippus had
often spoken of Paula to his parental friend, describing her charms with
all the fervor of a lover, but the old man was already prejudiced against
her, if only as the daughter of a patrician and a prefect. All who bore
these titles were to him objects of hatred, for a patrician and a prefect
had been guilty of the blood of those he had held most dear. The Governor
of Antioch, to be sure, had acted only under the orders of the bishop;
but old Horapollo, and his father before him, from the first had chosen
to throw all the blame on the prefect, for it afforded some satisfaction
to the descendant of an ancestral race of priests to be able to vent all
his wrathful spite on any one rather than on the minister of a god--be
that god who or what he might.

So when Philippus praised Paula's dignified grandeur, her superior
elegance, the height of her stature or the loftiness of her mind, the old
man would bound up exclaiming: "Of course--of course!--Beware boy,
beware! You are disguising haughtiness, conceit, and arrogance under
noble names. The word 'patrician' includes everything we can conceive of
as most insolent and inhuman; and those apes in purple who disgrace the
Imperial throne pick out the worst of them, the most cold-hearted and
covetous, to make prefects of them. And as they are, so are their
children! Everything which they in their vainglory regard as 'beneath
them' they tread into the dust--and we--you and I, all who labor with
their hands in the service of the state--we, in their dull eyes, are
beneath them. Mark me, boy! To-day the governor's daughter, the patrician
maiden, can smile at you because she needs you; tomorrow she will cast
you aside as I push away the old panther-skin which keeps my feet warm in
winter, as soon as the March days come!"

Nor was his aversion less for the son of the Mukaukas, whom, however, he
had never seen; when the leech had confessed to him how deep a grudge
against Orion dwelt in the heart of Paula, old Horapollo had chuckled
scornfully, and he exclaimed, as though he could read hearts and look
into the future--: "They snap at each other now, and in a day or two they
will kiss again! Hatred and love are the opposite ends of the same rod;
and how easily it is reversed!--Those two!--Like in blood is like in
kind;--such people attract each other as the lodestone tends towards the
iron and the iron towards the lodestone!"

But these and similar admonitions had produced little effect on the
physician's sentiments; even Paula's repulse of his ardent appeal after
she had moved to the house of Rufinus had failed to extinguish his hope
of winning her at last. This very morning, in the course of the
discussion as to the stewardship of her fortune, Paula had been ready and
glad to accept him as her Kyrios--her legal protector and representative;
but he now thought that he could perceive by various signs that his
venerable friend was right: that the rod had been reversed, and that
aversion had been transformed to love in the girl's heart. The anguish of
this discovery was hard to bear. And yet Paula had never shown him such
hearty warmth of manner, never had she spoken to him in a voice so soft
and so full of feeling, as this evening in the garden. More cheerful and
talkative than usual, she had constantly turned to address him, while he
had felt his pain and torment of mind gradually eased, till in him too,
sentiment had blossomed anew, and his intellectual power had expanded.
Never--so he believed--had he expressed his thoughts better or more
brilliantly than in that hour. Nor had she withheld her approval; she had
heartily agreed with his views; and when, half an hour before midnight,
he had gone with her to visit his patients, rapturous hopes had sprung
once more in his breast. Ecstatically happy, like a man intoxicated, he
had, by her own desire, accompanied her into her sitting-room, and
then--and there. . . .

Poor, disappointed man, sitting on the divan in a dark corner of the
spacious room! In his soul hitherto the intellect had alone made itself
heard, the voice of the heart had never been listened to.

How he had found his way home he never knew. All he remembered was that,
in the course of duty, he had gone into the house of a man whose
wife--the mother of several children--he had left at noon in a dying
state; that he had seen her a corpse, surrounded by loud but sincere
mourners; that he had gone on his way, weighed down by their grief and
his own, and that he had entered his friend's rooms rather than his own,
to feel safe from himself. Life had no charm, no value for him now;
still, he felt ashamed to think that a woman could thus divert him from
the fairest aims of life, that he could allow her to destroy the peace of
mind he needed to enable him to carry out his calling in the spirit of
his friend Rufinus. He knew his house-mate well and felt that he would
only pour vitriol into his wounds, but it was best so. The old man had
already often tried to bring down Paula's image from its high pedestal in
his soul, but always in vain; and even now he should not succeed. He
would mar nothing, scatter nothing to the winds, tread nothing in the
dust but the burning passion, the fevered longing for her, which had
fired his blood ever since that night when he had vanquished the raving
Masdakite. That old sage by the table, on whose stern, cold features the
light fell so brightly, was the very man to accomplish such a work of
destruction, and Philippus awaited his first words as a wounded man
watches the surgeon heating the iron with which to cauterize the sore.

Poor disappointed wretch, sorely in need of a healing hand!

He lay back on the divan, and saw how his friend leaned over his scroll
as if listening, and fidgeted up and down in his arm-chair.

It was clear that Horapollo was uneasy at Philippus' long silence, and
his pointed eyebrows, raised high on his brow, plainly showed that he was
drawing his own conclusions from it--no doubt the right ones. The peace
must soon be broken, and Philippus awaited the attack. He was prepared
for the worst; but how could he bring himself to make his torturer's task
easy for him. Thus many minutes slipped away; while the leech was waiting
for the old man to speak, Horapollo waited for Philippus. However, the
impatience and curiosity of the elder were stronger than the young man's
craving for comfort; he suddenly laid down the roll of manuscript,
impatiently snatched up the ivory stick which he had thrown aside, set
his heavy seat at an angle with a shove of amazing vigor for his age,
turned full on Philippus, and asked him, in a loud voice, pointing his
ruler at him as if threatening him with it:

"So the play is out. A tragedy, of course!"

"Hardly, since I am still alive," replied the other.

"But there is inward bleeding, and the wound is painful," retorted the
old man. Then, after a short pause, he went on: "Those who will not
listen must feel! The fox was warned of the trap, but the bait was too
tempting! Yesterday there would still have been time to pull his foot out
of the spring, if only he had sincerely desired it; he knew the hunter's
guile. Now the foe is down on the victim; he has not spared his weapons,
and there lies the prey dumb with pain and ignominy, cursing his own
folly.--You seem inclined for silence this evening. Shall I tell you just
how it all came about?"

"I know only too well," said Philippus.

"While I, to be sure, can only imagine it!" growled the old man. "So long
as that patrician hussy needed the poor beast of burthen she could pet it
and throw barley and dates to it. Now she is rolling in gold and living
under a sheltering roof, and hey presto, the discarded protector is sent
to the right about in no time. This mistress of the hearts of our weak
and bondage-loving sex raises this rich Adonis to fill the place of the
hapless, overgrown leech, just as the sky lets the sun rise when the pale
moon sinks behind the hills. If that is not the fact give me the lie!"

"I only wish I could," sighed Philippus. "You have seen rightly,
wonderfully rightly--and yet, as wrongly as possible."

"Dark indeed!" said the old man quietly. "But I can see even in the dark.
The facts are certain, though you are still so blinded as not to see
their first cause. However, I am satisfied to know that your delusion has
come to so abrupt, and in my opinion so happy, an end. To its cause--a
woman, as usual--I am perfectly indifferent. Why should I needlessly
ascribe to her any worse sin than she had committed? If only for your
sake I will avoid doing so, for an honorable soul clings to those whom it
sees maligned. Still, it seems to me that it is for you to speak, not for
me. I should know you for a philosopher, without such persistent silence;
and as for myself, I am not altogether bereft of curiosity, in spite of
my eighty years."

At this Philippus hastily rose and pacing the room while he spoke, or
pausing occasionally in front of the old man, he poured out with glowing
cheeks and eager gestures, the history of his hopes and sufferings--how
Paula had filled him with fresh confidence, and had invited him to her
rooms--only to show him her whole heart; she had been strongly moved,
surprised at herself, but unable and unwilling to conceal from him the
happiness that had come into her life. She had spoken to him, her best
friend, as a burthened soul pours itself out to a priest: had confessed
all that she had felt since the funeral of the deceased Mukaukas, and
said that she felt convinced now that Orion had come to a right mind
again after his great sin.

"And that there, was so much joy over him in heaven," interrupted
Horapollo, "that she really could not delay doing her cast-off lover the
honor of inviting his sympathy!"

"On the contrary. It was with the utmost effort that she uttered all her
heart prompted her to tell; she had nothing to look for from me but
mockery, warning, and reproach, and yet she opened her heart to me."

"But why? To what end?" shrieked the old man. "Shall I tell you. Because
a man who is a friend must still be half a lover, and a woman cannot bear
to give up even a quarter of one."

"Not so!" exclaimed Philippus, indignantly interrupting him. "It was
because she esteems and values me,--because she regards me as a brother,
and--I am not a vain man--and could not bear--those were her very
words--to cheat me of my affection for even an hour! It was noble, it was
generous, worthy of her! And though every fibre of my nature rebelled I
found myself compelled to admire her sincerity, her true friendship, her
disregard of her own feelings, and her womanly tenderness!--Nay, do not
interrupt me again, do not laugh at me. It is no small matter for a proud
girl, conscious of her own dignity, to lay bare her heart's weakness to a
man who, as she knows, loves her, as she did just now to me. She called
me her benefactor and said she would be a sister to me; and whatever
motive you--who hate her out of a habit of prejudice without really
knowing her--may choose to ascribe her conduct to, I--I believe in her,
and understand her.

"Could I refuse to grasp the hand she held out to me as she entreated me
with tears in her eyes to be still her friend, her protector, and her
Kyrios! And yet, and yet!--Where shall I find resolution enough to ask of
her who excites me to the height of passion no more than a kind glance, a
clasp of the hand, an intelligent interest in what I say? How am I to
preserve self-control, calmness, patience, when I see her in the arms of
that handsome young demi-god whom I scorned only yesterday as a worthless
scoundrel? What ice may cool the fire of this burning heart? What spear
can transfix the dragon of passion which rages here? I have lived almost
half my life without ever feeling or yearning for the love of which the
poets sing. I have never known anything of such feelings but through the
pangs of some friend whose weakness had roused my pity; and now, when
love has come upon me so late with all its irresistible force--has
subjugated me, cast me into bondage--how shall I, how can I get free?

"My faithful friend, you who call me your son, whom I am glad to hear
speak to me as 'boy,' and 'child,' who have taken the place of the father
I lost so young--there is but one issue: I must leave you and this
city--flee from her neighborhood--seek a new home far from her with whom
I could have been as happy as the Saints in bliss, and who has made me
more wretched than the damned in everlasting fire. Away, away! I will
go--I must go unless you, who can do so much, can teach me to kill this
passion or to transmute it into calm, brotherly regard."

He stood still, close in front of the old man and hid his face in his
hands. At his favorite's concluding words, Horapollo had started to his
feet with all the vigor of youth; he now snatched his hand down from his
face, and exclaimed in a voice hoarse with indignation and the deepest
concern:

"And you can say that in earnest? Can a sensible man like you have sunk
so deep in folly? Is it not enough that your own peace of mind should
have been sacrificed, flung at the feet of this--what can I call her?--Do
you understand at last why I warned you against the Patrician brood?--The
faith, gratitude, and love of a good man!--What does she care for them?
Unhook the whiting; away with him in the dust! Here comes a fine large
fish who perhaps may swallow the bait!--Do you want to ruin, for her
sake, and the sake of that rascally son of the governor, the comfort and
happiness of an old man's last years when he has become accustomed to
love you, who so well deserve it, as his own son? Will you--an energetic
student, you--a man of powerful intellect, zealous in your duty, and in
favor with the gods--will you pine like a deserted maiden or spring from
the Leucadian rock like love-sick Sappho in the play while the spectators
shake with laughter? You must stay, Boy, you must stay; and I will show
you how a man must deal with a passion that dishonors him."

"Show me," replied Philippus in a dull voice. "I ask no more. Do you
suppose that I am not myself ashamed of my own weakness? It ill beseems
me of all men, formed by fate for anything rather than to be a sighing
and rapturous lover. I will struggle with it, wrestle with it with all
the strength that is in me; but here, in Memphis, close to her and as her
Kyrios, I should be forced every day to see her, and day after day be
exposed to fresh and humiliating defeat! Here, constantly near her and
with her, the struggle must wear me out--I should perish, body and soul.
The same place, the same city, cannot hold her and me."

"Then she must make way for you," croaked Horus. Philippus raised his
bowed head and asked, in some surprise and with stern reproof:

"What do you mean by that?"

"Nothing," replied the other airily. He shrugged his shoulders and went
on more gently: "Memphis has greater need of you than of the patrician
hussy." Then he shook himself as if he were cold, struck his breast and
added: "All is turmoil here within; I can neither help nor advise you.
Day must soon be dawning in the east; we will try to sleep. A knot can
often be untied by daylight which by lamplight seems inextricable, and
perhaps on my sleepless couch the goddess may reveal to me the way I have
promised to show you. A little more lightness of heart would do neither
of us any harm.--Try to forget your own griefs in those of others; you
see enough of them every day. To wish you a good night would probably be
waste of words, but I may wish you a soothing one, You may count on my
aid; but you will not let me, a poor old man, hear another word about
flight and departure and the like, will you? No, no. I know you better,
Philippus--you will never treat your lonely old friend so!"

These were the tenderest words that the leech had ever heard from the old
man's lips, and it comforted him when Horapollo pressed him to his heart
in a hasty embrace. He thought no more of the hint that it was Paula's
part to make room for him. But the old man had spoken in all seriousness,
for, no sooner was he alone than he petulantly flung down the ivory ruler
on the table, and murmured, at first angrily and then scornfully, his
eyes sparkling the while:

"For this true heart, and to preserve myself and the world from losing
such a man, I would send a dozen such born hussies to Amentis--[The
Nether world of the ancient Egyptians.]--Hey, hey! My beauty! So this
noble leech is not good enough for the like of us; he may be tossed away
like a date-stone that we spit out? Well, every one to his taste; but how
would it be if old Horapollo taught us his value? Wait a bit, wait!--With
a definite aim before my eyes I have never yet failed to find my way--in
the realm of science, of course; but what is life--the life of the sage
but applied knowledge? And why should not old Horapollo, for once before
he dies, try what his brains can contrive to achieve in the busy world of
outside human existence? Pleasant as you may think it to be in Memphis
with your lover, fair heart-breaker, you will have to make way for the
plaything you have so lightly tossed aside! Aye, you certainly will,
depend upon that my beauty, depend upon that!--Here, Anubis!"

He gave the slave, who had fallen asleep again under the table, a kick
with his bare foot, and while Anubis lighted his master to his
sleeping-room, and helped him in his long and elaborate ablutions,
Horapollo never ceased muttering broken sentences and curses, or laughing
maliciously to himself.


     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A knot can often be untied by daylight
     Hatred and love are the opposite ends of the same rod
     Life is a function, a ministry, a duty
     So hard is it to forego the right of hating
     Those who will not listen must feel
     Use their physical helplessness as a defence


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 7.


CHAPTER I.

If Philippus found no sleep that night, neither did Orion. He no longer
doubted Paula, but his heart was full of longing to hear her say once
more that she loved him and him alone, and the yearning kept him awake.
He sprang from his bed at the first glimmer of dawn, glad that the night
was past, and started to cross the Nile in order to place half of Paula's
fortune in the hands of Salech, the brother of Haschim the merchant.

In Memphis all was still silent, and all he saw in the old town struck
him as strangely worn-out, torpid, and decayed; it seemed only fit to be
left to ruin, while on the other side of the river, in the new town of
Fostat, on all hands busy, eager, new-born vitality met his eyes.

He involuntarily compared the old capital of the Pharaohs to a time-eaten
mummy, and Amru's new city to a vigorous youth. Here every one was astir
and in brisk activity. The money-changer, who had risen, like all
Moslems, to perform his morning prayer, "as soon as a white thread could
be distinguished from a black one," was already busy with his rolls of
gold and silver coin; and how quick, clear, and decisive the Arab was in
concluding his bargain with Orion and with Nilus, who had accompanied
him!

Whichever way the young man turned, bright and flashing eyes met his
gaze, energetic, resolute, and enterprising faces; no bowed heads, no
dull, brooding looks, no gloomy resignation like those in his native town
on the other shore. Here, in Fostat, his blood flowed more swiftly;
there, existence was an oppressive burden. Everything attracted him to
the Arabs!

The changer's shop, like all those in the Sook or Bazaar of Fostat,
consisted of a wooden stall in which he sat with his assistants. On the
side open to the street he transacted business with his customers, who,
when the affair promised to be lengthy, were invited by the Arab to seat
themselves with him on his little platform.

Orion and Nilus had accepted such an invitation, and it happened that,
while they sat in treaty with Salech, visible to the passers-by, the
Vekeel Obada, who had so deeply stirred the wrath of the governor's son
on the previous evening, came by, close to him. To Orion's amazement he
greeted him with great amiability, and he, remembering Amru's warning,
responded, though not without an effort, to his hated foe's civility.
When Obada passed the stall a second and a third time, Orion felt that he
was watching him; however, it was quite possible that the Vekeel might
also have business with the money-changer and be waiting only for the
conclusion of his.

At any rate Orion ere long forgot the incident, for matters of more
pressing importance claimed his attention at home.

As often happens, the death of one man had changed everything in his
house so utterly as to make it unlike the same; though his removal had
made it neither richer nor poorer, and though his secluded presence of
late had scarcely had an appreciable influence. The rooms formerly so
full of life now seemed dead. Petitioners and suppliants no longer
crowded the anteroom, and all visits of condolence had, according to the
ancient custom, been received on the day after the funeral. The Lady
Neforis had ceased fussing and bustling, the clatter of her keys and her
scolding were no longer to be heard; she sat apart, either in her
sleeping-room or the cool hall with the fountain which had been her
husband's favorite room, excepting when she was at church whither she
went twice every day. She returned from thence with the same weary,
abstracted expression that she took there, and any one seeing her lying
on the divan which her husband had formerly occupied, idly absorbed in
gloomy thought, would hardly have recognized her as the same woman who
had but lately been so active and managing. She did not exactly mourn or
bewail her loss; indeed, she had no tears for her grief, as though she
had shed them all, once for all, during the night after his death and
burial. But she could not attain to that state of sadness made sacred by
memories with which consoling angels so often mingle some drops of
sweetness, after the first anguish is overpast. She felt--she knew--that
with her husband a portion of her own being had been riven from her, but
she could not yet perceive that this last portion was nothing less than
the very foundations of her whole moral and social being.

Her father and her husband's father had been the two leading men in
Memphis, nay, in all Egypt. She had given her hand and a heart full of
love to the son of Menas, a proud and happy woman. It was as one with
her, and not by himself alone, that he had risen to the highest dignity
attainable by a native Egyptian, and she had done everything that lay in
her power to uphold him in a position which many envied him, and in
filling it with dignity and effect. After many years of rare happiness
their grief at the loss of their murdered sons only bound the attached
couple more closely, and when her husband had fallen into bad health she
had gladly shared his seclusion, had devoted herself entirely to caring
for him, and divided all the doubts and anxieties which came upon him
from his political action. The consciousness of being not merely much but
everything to him, was her pride and her joy. Her dislike of Paula had
its rise, in the first instance, in the discovery that she, his wife, was
no longer indispensable to the sufferer when he had his fair young
niece's company. And now?

At night, after long lying awake, when she woke from a snatch of uneasy
sleep, she involuntarily listened for the faint panting breath, but no
heart now throbbed by her side; and when she quitted her lonely couch at
dawn the coming day lay before her as a desert and treeless solitude. By
night, as by day, she constantly tried to call up the image of the dead,
but whenever her small imaginative power had succeeded in doing so--not
unfrequently at first--she had seen him as in the last moments of his
life, a curse on his only son on his trembling lips. This horrible
impression deprived her of the last consolation of the mourner: a
beautiful memory, while it destroyed her proud and glad satisfaction in
her only child. The youth, who had till now been her soul's idol, was
stigmatized and branded in her eyes. She might not ignore the burden laid
on Orion by that most just man; instead of taking him to her heart with
double tenderness and softening or healing the fearful punishment
inflicted by his father, she could only pity him. When Orion came to see
her she would stroke his waving hair and, as she desired not to wound him
and make him even more unhappy than he must be already, she neither
blamed nor admonished him, and never reminded him of his father's curse.
And how beggared was that frugal heart, accustomed to spend all its store
of love on so few objects--nay, chiefly on one alone who was now no more!

The happy voices of the children had always given her pleasure, so long
as they did not disturb her suffering husband; now, they too were silent.
She had withdrawn the sunshine of her narrow affection from her only
grandchild, who had hitherto held a place in it, for little Mary had had
a share in the horrors that had come upon her and Orion in her husband's
last moments. Indeed, the bereaved woman's excited fancy had firmly
conceived the mad notion that the child was the evil genius of the house
and the tool of Satan.

Neforis had, however, enjoyed some hours of greater ease during the last
two days. In the misery of wakefulness which was beginning to torture her
like an acute pain, she had suddenly recollected what relief from
sleeplessness her husband had been wont to find in the opium pillules,
and a box of the medicine, only just opened, was at hand. And was not
she, too, suffering unutterable wretchedness? Why should she neglect the
remedy which had so greatly mitigated her husband's distress? It was said
to have a bad effect after long and frequent use, and she had often
checked the Mukaukas in taking it too freely; but could her sufferings be
greater? Would she not, indeed, be thankful to the drug if it should
shorten her miserable existence?

So she took the familiar remedy, at first hesitatingly and then more
freely; and on the second day again, with real pleasure and happy
expectancy, for it had not merely procured her a good night but had
brought her joy in the morning: The dead had appeared to her, and for the
first time not in the act of cursing, but as a young and happy man.

No one in the house knew what comfort the widow had had recourse to; the
physician and her son had been glad yesterday to find her more composed.

When Orion returned home, after concluding his business with the
money-changer at Fostat, he had to make his way through a crowd of
people, and found the court-yard full of men, and the guards and servants
in the greatest excitement. No less a personage than the Patriarch had
arrived on a visit, and was now in conference with Neforis. Sebek, the
steward, informed Orion that he had asked for him, and that his mother
wished that he should immediately join them and pay his respects to the
very reverend Father.

"She wished it?" asked the young man, as he tossed his riding-hat to a
slave, and he stood hesitating.

He was too much a son of his time, and the Church and her ministers had
exercised too marked influence on his education, for the great prelate's
visit to be regarded otherwise than as a high honor. At the same time he
could not forget the insult done to his father's vanes, nor the Arab
general's warning to be on his guard against Benjamin's enmity; and
perhaps, he said to himself, it might be better to avoid a meeting with
the powerful priest than to expose himself to the danger of losing his
self-control and finding fresh food for his wrath.

However, he had in fact no choice, for the patriarch just now came out of
the fountain-hall into the viridarium. The old man's tall figure was not
bent, his snowy hair flowed in abundance round his proud head, and a
white beard fell in soft waves far down his breast. His fine eyes rested
on the young man with a keen glance, and though he had last seen Orion as
a boy he recognized him at once as the master of the house. While Orion
bowed low before him, the patriarch, in his deep, rich voice, addressed
him with cheerful dignity.

"All hail, son of my never-to-be-forgotten friend! The child I remember,
has, I see, grown to a fine man. I have devoted a short time to the
mother, and now I must say what is needful to the son."

"In my father's study," Orion said to the steward; and he led the way
with the ceremonious politeness of a chamberlain of the imperial court.

The patriarch, as he followed him, signed to his escort to remain behind,
and as soon as the door was closed upon them, he went up to Orion and
exclaimed: "Again I greet you! This, then, is the descendant of the great
Menas, the son of Mukaukas George, the adored ruler of my flock at
Memphis, who held the first place among the gilded youth of
Constantinople in their gay whirl! A strange achievement for an Egyptian
and a Christian! But first of all, child, first give me your hand!" He
held out his right hand and Orion accepted it, but not without reserve,
for he had suspected a scornful ring in the patriarch's address, and he
could not help asking himself whether this man honestly meant so well by
him, that he could address him thus paternally as "child" in all
sincerity of heart? To refuse his hand was, however, impossible; still,
he found courage to reply:

"I can but obey your desire, holy Father; but, at the same time, I do not
know whether it becomes the son to grasp the hand of the foe who was not
to be appeased even by Death, the reconciler--who grossly insulted the
father, the noblest of men, and, in him, the son too, at the grave
itself."

The patriarch shook his head with a supercilious smile, and a hot thrill
shot through Orion as Benjamin laid his hand on his shoulder and said
with grave kindness:

"A Christian does not find it hard to forgive a sinner, an antagonist, an
enemy; and it is a joy to me to pardon the son who feels himself injured
through his lost father, blind and foolish as his indignation may be.
Your wrath can no more affect me, Child, than the Almighty in Heaven, and
it would not even be blameworthy, but that--and of this we must speak
presently--but that--well, I will be frank with you at once--but that
your manner clearly and unmistakably betrays what you lack to make you a
true Christian, and such a man as he must be who fills so conspicuous a
position in this land governed by infidels. You know what I mean?"

The prelate let his hand slip from the young man's shoulder, looking
enquiringly in his face; and when Orion, finding no reply ready, drew
back a step or two, the old man went on with growing excitement:

"It is humility, pious and submissive faith, that I find you lack, my
friend. Who, indeed, am I? But as the Vicar, the representative of Him
before whom we all are as worms in the dust, I must insist that every man
who calls himself a Christian, a Jacobite, shall submit to my will and
orders, without hesitation or doubt, as obediently and unresistingly as
though salvation or woe had fallen on him from above. What would become
of us, if individuals were to take upon themselves to defy me and walk in
their own way? In one miserable generation, and with the death of the
elders who had grown up as true Christians, the doctrine of the Saviour
would be extinct on the shores of the Nile, the crescent would rise in
the place of the Cross, and our cry would go up to Heaven for so many
lost souls. Learn, haughty youth, to bow humbly and submissively to the
will of the Most High and of His vicar on earth, and let me show you,
from your demeanor to myself especially, how far your own judgment is to
be relied on. You regard me as your father's enemy?"

"Yes," said Orion firmly.

"And I loved him as a brother!" replied the patriarch in a softer voice.
"How gladly would I have heaped his bier with palm branches of peace,
such as the Church alone can grow, wet with my own tears!"

"And yet," cried Orion, "you denied to him, whom you call your friend,
what the Church does not refuse to thieves and murderers, if only they
desire forgiveness and have received absolution from a priest; and that.
. . ."

"And that your father did!" interrupted the old man. "Peace be to him! He
is now, no doubt, gazing on the glory of the Lord. And nevertheless I
could forbid the priesthood here showing him honor at the grave.--Why?
For what urgent reason was such a prohibition spoken by a friend against
a friend?"

"Because you wished to brand him, in the eyes of the world, as the man
who lent his support to the unbelievers and helped them to victory," said
Orion gloomily.

"How well the boy can read the thoughts of men!" exclaimed the prelate,
looking at the young man with approbation in which, however, there was
some irony and annoyance. "Very good. We will assume that my object was
to show the Christians of Memphis what fate awaits the man, who
surrenders his country to the enemy and walks hand-in-hand with
unbelievers? And may I not possibly have been right?"

"Do you suppose my father invited the Arabs?" interrupted the young man.

"No, Child," replied the patriarch, "the enemy came of his own free
will."

"And you," Orion went on, "after the Greeks had driven you into exile,
prophesied from the desert that they would come and overthrow the
Melchites, the Greek enemies of our faith, drive them out of the
country."

"It was revealed to me by the Lord!" replied the old man, bowing his head
reverently. "And yet other things were shown to me while I dwelt a devout
ascetic, mortifying my flesh under the scorching sun of the desert.
Beware my son, beware! Heed my warning, lest it should be fulfilled and
the house of Menas vanish like clouds swept before the wind.--Your
father, I know, regarded my prophecy as advice given by me to receive the
infidels as the instrument of the Almighty and to support them in driving
the Melchite oppressors out of the land."

"Your prophecy," replied Orion, "had, no doubt, a marked effect on my
father; and when the cause of the emperor and the Greeks was lost, your
opinion that the Melchites were unbelievers as much as the sons of Islam,
was of infinite comfort to him. For he, if any one--as you know--had good
reason to hate the sectarians who killed his two sons in their prime.
What followed, he did to rescue his and your unfortunate brethren and
dependants from destruction. Here, here in this desk, lies his answer to
the emperor's accusations, as given to the Greek deputation who had
speech of him in this very room. He wrote it down as soon as they had
left him. Will you hear it?"

"I can guess its purport."

"No, no!" cried the excited youth; he hastily opened his father's desk,
laid his hand at once on the wax tablet, and exclaimed: "This was his
reply!" And he proceeded to read:

"These Arabs, few as they are, are stronger and more powerful than we
with all our numbers. One man of them is equal to a hundred of us, for
they rush on death and love it better than life. Each of them presses to
the front in battle, and they have no longing to return home and to their
families. For every Christian they kill they look for a great reward in
Heaven, and they say that the gates of Paradise open at once for those
who fall in the fight. They have not a wish in this world beyond the
satisfaction of their barest need of food and clothing. We, on the
contrary, love life and dread death;--how can we stand against them? I
tell you that I will not break the peace I have concluded with the Arabs.
. . ."

"And what is the upshot of all this reply?" interrupted the patriarch
shrugging his shoulders.

"That my father found himself compelled to conclude a peace, and
that--but read on.--That as a wise man he was forced to ally himself with
the foe."

"The foe to whom he yielded more readily and paid much greater honor than
became him as a Christian!--Does not this discourse convey the idea that
the joys of Paradise solely and exclusively await our damned and
blood-thirsty oppressors?--And the Moslem Paradise! What is it but a gulf
of iniquity, in which they are to wallow in sensual delight? The false
prophet invented it to tempt his followers to force his lying creed, by
might of arms and in mad contempt of death, on nation after nation. Our
Lord, the Word made flesh, came down on earth to win hearts and souls by
the persuasive power of the living truth, one and eternal, which emanates
from Him as light proceeds from the sun; this Mohammed, on the contrary,
is a sword made flesh! For me, then, there is no choice but to submit to
superior strength; but I can still hate and loathe their accursed and
soul-destroying superstition.--And so I do, and so I shall, to the last
throb of this old heart, which only longs for rest, the sooner the
better. . . .

"But you? And your father? Verily, verily, the man who, even for an
instant, ceases to hate unbelief or false doctrine has sinned for his
whole life on this side of the grave and beyond it; sinned against the
only true and saving faith and its divine Founder. Blasphemous and
flattering praise of the piety and moderation of our foes, the very
antichrist incarnate, who kill both body and soul.--With these your
father fouled his heart and tongue. . ."

"Fouled?" cried Orion and the blood tingled in his cheeks. "He kept his
heart and tongue alike pure and honorable; never did a false word pass
his lips. Justice, justice to all, even to his enemies, was the ruling
principle, the guiding clue of his blameless life; and the noblest of the
heathen Greeks admired the man who could so far triumph over himself as
to recognize what was fine and good in a foe."

"And they were right," replied the patriarch, "for they were not yet
acquainted with truth. In a worldly sense, even now, each of us may aim
at such magnanimity; but the man who forgives those who tamper with the
sacred truth, which is the bread, meat, and wine of the Christian's soul,
sins against that truth; and, if he is a leader of men, he draws on those
who look up to him, and who are only too ready to follow his example,
into everlasting fire. Where your father ought to have been a
recalcitrant though conquered enemy, he became an ally; nay, so far as
the leader of the infidels was concerned, a friend--how many tears it
cost me! And our hapless people were forced to see this attitude of their
chief, and imitated it.--Forgive their seducer, Merciful God!--forming
their conduct on his. Thousands fell away from our saving faith and went
over to those, who in their eyes could not be reprobate, could not be
damned, since they saw them dwelling and working hand-in-hand with their
wise and righteous leader; and it was simply and solely to warn his
misguided people that I did not hesitate to wound my own heart, to raise
the voice of reproof at the grave of a dear friend, and to refuse the
honor and blessing of which his just and virtuous life rendered him more
worthy than thousands of others. I have spoken, and now your foolish
anger must be appeased; now you will grasp the hand held out to you by
the shepherd of the souls entrusted to him with an easy and willing
heart."

And again he offered his hand to Orion, who, however, again took it
doubtfully, and instead of looking the prelate in the face, cast down his
eyes in gloomy bewilderment. The patriarch appeared not to observe the
young man's repulsion and clasped his hand warmly. Then he changed the
subject, speaking of the grieving widow, of the decadence of Memphis, of
Orion's plans for the future, and finally of the gems dedicated to the
Church by the deceased Mukaukas. The dialogue had taken a calm,
conversational tone; the patriarch was sitting in the dead man's
arm-chair, and there was nothing forced or unnatural in his asking, in
the course of discussing the jewels, what had become of the great
emerald.

Orion replied, in the same tone, that this stone was not, strictly
speaking, any part of his father's gift; but Benjamin expressed an
opposite opinion.

All the tortures Orion had endured since that luckless deed in the
tablinum revived in his soul during this discussion; however, it was some
small relief to him to perceive, that neither his mother nor Dame
Susannah seemed to have told the patriarch the guilt he had incurred by
reason of that gem. Susannah, of course, had said nothing of the incident
in order to avoid speaking of her daughter's false evidence; still, this
miserable business might easily have come to the ears of the stern old
man, and to the guilty youth no sacrifice seemed too great to smother any
enquiry for the ill-fated jewel. He unhesitatingly explained that the
emerald had disappeared, but that he was quite ready to make good its
value. Benjamin might fix his own estimate, and name any sum he wished
for some benevolent purpose, and he, Orion, was ready to pay it to him on
the spot.

The prelate, however, calmly persisted in his demand, enjoined Orion to
have a diligent search made for the gem, and declared that he regarded it
as the property of the Church. He added that, when his patience was at an
end, he should positively insist on its surrender and bring every means
at his disposal into play to procure it.

Orion had no choice but to say that he would prosecute his search for the
lost stone; but his acquiescence was sullen, as that of a man who accedes
to an unreasonable demand.

At first the patriarch took this coolly; but presently, when he rose to
take leave, his demeanor changed; he said, with stern solemnity:

"I know you now, Son of Mukaukas George, and I end as I began: The
humility of the Christian is far from you, you are ignorant of the power
and dignity of our Faith, you do not even know the vast love that
animates it, and the fervent longing to lead the straying sinner back to
the path of salvation.--Your admirable mother has told me, with tears in
her eyes, of the abyss over which you are standing. It is your desire to
bind yourself for life to a heretic, a Melchite--and there is another
thing which fills her pious mother's heart with fears, which tortures it
as she thinks of you and your eternal welfare. She promised to confide
this to my ear in church, and I shall find leisure to consider of it on
my return home; but at any rate, and be it what it may, it cannot more
greatly imperil your soul than marriage with a Melchite.

"On what have you set your heart? On the mere joys of earth! You sue for
the hand of an unbeliever, the daughter of an unbelieving heretic; you go
over to Fostat--nay, hear me out--and place your brain and your strong
arm at the service of the infidels--it is but yesterday; but I, I, the
shepherd of my flock, will not suffer that he who is the highest in rank,
the richest in possessions, the most powerful by the mere dignity of his
name, shall pervert thousands of the Jacobite brethren. I have the will
and the power too, to close the sluice gates against such a disaster.
Obey me, or you shall rue it with tears of blood."

The prelate paused, expecting to see Orion fall on his knees before him;
but the young man did nothing of the kind. He stood looking at him,
open-eyed and agitated, but undecided, and Benjamin went on with added
vehemence:

"I came to you to lift up my voice in protest, and I desire, I require, I
command you: sever all ties with the enemies of your nation and of your
faith, cast out your love for the Melchite Siren, who will seduce your
immortal part to inevitable perdition. . . ."

Till this Orion had listened with bowed head and in silence to the
diatribe which the patriarch had hurled at him like a curse; but at this
point his whole being rose in revolt, all self-control forsook him, and
he interrupted the speaker in loud tones:

"Never, never, never will I do such a thing! Insult me as you will. What
I am, I will still be: a faithful son of the Church to which my fathers
belonged, and for which my brothers died. In all humility I acknowledge
Jesus Christ as my Lord. I believe in him, believe in the God-made-man
who died to save us, and who brought love into the world, and I will
remain unpersuaded and faithful to my own love. Never will I forsake her
who has been to me like a messenger from God, like a good angel to teach
me how to lay hold on what is earnest and noble in life-her whom my
father, too, held dear. Power, indeed, is yours. Demand of me anything
reasonable, and within my attainment, and I will try to force myself to
obedience; but I never can and never will be faithless to her, to prove
my faith to you; and as to the Arabs. . . ."

"Enough!" exclaimed the prelate. "I am on my way to Upper Egypt. Make
your choice by my return. I give you till then to come to a right mind,
to think the matter over; and it is quite deliberately that I bid you to
forget the Melchite. That you, of all men, should marry a heretic would
be an abomination not to be borne. With regard to your alliance with the
Arabs, and whether it becomes you--being what you are--to take service
with them, we will discuss it at a future day. If, by the time I return,
you have thought better of the matter as regards your marriage--and you
are free to choose any Jacobite maiden--then I will speak to you in a
different tone. I will then offer you my friendship and support; instead
of the Church's curse I will pronounce her blessing on you--the pardon
and grace of the Almighty, a smooth path to eternity and peace, and the
prospect of giving new joy to the aching heart of your sorrowing mother.
My last word is that you must and shall give up the woman from whom you
can look for nothing but perdition."

"I cannot, and shall not, and I never will!" replied Orion firmly.

"Then I can, and shall, and will make you feel how heavily the curse
falls which, in the last resort, I shall not hesitate to pronounce upon
you!"

"It is in your power," said Orion. "But if you proceed to extremities
with me, you will drive me to seek the blessing for which my soul thirsts
more ardently than you, my lord, can imagine, and the salvation I crave,
with her whom you hold reprobate, and on the further side of the Nile."

"I dare you!" cried the patriarch, quitting the room with a resolute step
and flaming cheeks.


CHAPTER II.

Orion was alone in the spacious room, feeling as though the whole world
were sinking into nothingness after the rack of storm and tempest. At
first he was merely conscious of having gone through a fearful
experience, which threatened to fling him far outside the sphere of
everything he was wont to reverence and hold sacred. For love and honor
of his guardian angel he had declared war to the patriarch, and that
man's power was as great as his stature. Still, the image of Paula rose
high and supreme above that of the terrible old man, in Orion's fancy,
and his father, as it seemed to him, was like an ally in the battle he
was destined to wage in his own strength.

The young man's vivid imagination and excellent memory recapitulated
every word the prelate had uttered. The domineering old man, overflowing
with bigoted zeal, had played with him as a cat with a mouse. He had
tried to search his soul and sift him to the bottom before he attacked
the subject with which he ought to have begun, and concerning which he
was fully informed when he offered him his hand that first time--as
cheerfully, too, as though he had no serious grievance seething in his
soul. Orion resolved that he would cling fast to his faith without
Benjamin's interposition, and not allow his hold on the two other
Christian graces, Hope and Love, to be weakened by his influence.

By some miracle his mother had not yet told the prelate of his father's
curse, in spite of the anguish of her aching heart; and what a weapon
would not that have been in Benjamin's hand. It was with the deepest pity
that he thought of that poor, grief-stricken woman, and the idea flashed
through his mind that the patriarch might have gone back to his mother to
accuse him and to urge her to further revelations.

Many minutes had passed since the patriarch had left him; Orion had
allowed his illustrious guest to depart unescorted, and this could not
fail to excite surprise. Such a breach of good manners, of the uncodified
laws of society, struck Orion, the son of a noble and ancient house, who
had drunk in his regard for them as it were with his mother's milk, as an
indignity to himself; and to repair it he started up, hastily smoothing
down his tumbled hair, and hurried into the viridarium. His fears were
confirmed, for the patriarch's following were standing in the
fountain-hall close to the exit; his mother, too, was there and Benjamin
was in the act of departure.

The old man accepted his offered escort with dignified affability, as if
nothing but what was pleasant had passed between him and Orion. As they
crossed the viridarium he asked his young host what was the name of some
rare flower, and counselled him to take care that shade-giving trees were
planted in abundance on his various estates. In the outer hall, on either
side of the door, was a statue: Truth and justice, two fine works by
Aristeas of Alexandria, who flourished in the time of the Emperor
Hadrian. Justice held the scales and sword, Truth was gazing into her
mirror. As the patriarch approached them, he said to the priest who
walked by his side: "Still here!" Then, standing still, he said, partly
to Orion and partly to his companion:

"Your father, I see, neglected my suggestion that these heathen images
had no place in any Christian house, and least of all in one attached, as
this is, to a public function. We, no doubt, know the meaning of the
symbols they bear; but how easily might the ordinary man, waiting here,
mistake the figure with the mirror for Vanity and that with the scales
Venality: 'Pay us what we ask,' she might be saying, 'or else your life
is a forfeit,'--so the sword would imply."

He smiled and walked on, but added airily to Orion:

"When I come again--you know--I shall be pleased if my eye is no longer
offended by these mementos of an extinct idolatry."

"Truth and justice!" replied Orion in a constrained voice. "They have
dwelt on this spot and ruled in this house for nearly five hundred
years."

"It would look better, and be more suitable," retorted the patriarch, "if
you could say that of Him to whom alone the place of honor is due in a
Christian house; in His presence every virtue flourishes of itself. The
Christian should proscribe every image from his dwelling; at the door of
his heart only should he raise an image on the one hand of Faith and on
the other of Humility."

By this time they had reached the court-yard, where Susannah's chariot
was waiting. Orion helped the prelate into it, and when Benjamin offered
him his hand to kiss, in the presence of several hundred slaves and
servants, all on their knees, the young man lightly touched it with his
lips. He stood bowed low in reverence so long as the holy father remained
visible, in the attitude of blessing the crowd from the open side of the
chariot; then he hurried away to join his mother.

He expected to find her exhausted by the excitement of the patriarch's
visit; but, in fact, she was more composed than he had seen her yet since
his father's death. Her eyes indeed, commonly so sober in their
expression, were bright with a kind of rapture which puzzled Orion. Had
she been thinking of his father? Could the patriarch have succeeded in
inspiring her pious fervor to such a pitch, that it had carried her, so
to speak, out of herself?

She was dressed to go to church, and after expressing her delight at the
honor done to herself and her whole household by the prelate's visit, she
invited Orion to accompany her. Though he had proposed devoting the next
few hours to a different purpose, the dutiful son at once acceded to this
wish; he helped her into her chariot, bid the driver go slowly, and
seated himself by her side.

As they drove along he asked her what she had told the patriarch, and her
replies might have reassured him but that she filled him with grave
anxiety on fresh grounds. Her mind seemed to have suffered under the
stress of grief. It was usually so clear, so judicious, so reasonable;
and now all she said was incoherent and not more than half intelligible.
Still, one thing he distinctly understood: that she had not confided to
the patriarch the fact of his father's curse. The prelate must certainly
have censured the conduct of the deceased to her also and that had sealed
her lips. She complained to her son that Benjamin had never understood
her lost husband, and that she had felt compelled to repress her desire
to disclose everything to him. Nowhere but in church, in the very
presence of the Redeemer, could she bring herself to allow him to read
her heart as it were an open book. A voice had warned her that in the
house of God alone, could she find salvation for herself and her son;
that voice she heard day and night, and much as it pained her to grieve
him he must hear it now--: That voice never ceased to enjoin her to tear
asunder his connection with the Melchite maiden. Last evening it had
seemed to her that it was her eldest son, who had died for the Jacobite
faith, that was speaking to her. The voice had sounded like his, and it
had warned her that the ancient house of Menas must perish, if a Melchite
should taint the pure blood of their race. And Benjamin had confirmed her
fears; he had come back to her on purpose to beseech her to oppose
Orion's sinful affection for Thomas' daughter with the utmost maternal
authority, and, as the patriarch expressed the same desire as the voice,
it must be from God and she must obey it.

Her old grudge against Paula had revived, and her very tones betrayed
that it grew stronger with every word she spoke which had any reference
to the girl.

At this Orion begged her to be calm, reminding her of the promise she had
made him by his father's deathbed; and just as his mother was about to
reply in a tone of pitiful recrimination, the chariot stopped at the door
of the church. He did everything in his power to soothe her; his gentle
and tender tones comforted her, and she nodded to him more happily,
following him into the sanctuary.

Beyond the narthex--the vestibule of the church, where three penitents
were flaying their backs with scourges by the side of a small marble
fountain, and in full view of the crowd--they were forced to part, as the
women were divided from the men by a screen of finely-carved woodwork.

As Neforis went to her place, she shook her bowed head: she was
meditating on the choice offered her by Orion, of yielding to the
patriarch's commands or to her son's wishes. How gladly would she have
seen her son in bright spirits again. But Benjamin had threatened her
with the loss of all the joys of Heaven, if she should agree to Orion's
alliance with the heretic--and the joys of Heaven to her meant a meeting,
a recognition, for which she would willingly have sacrificed her son and
everything else that was dear to her heart.

Orion assisted at the service in the place reserved for the men of his
family, close to the hekel, or holy of holies, where the altar stood and
the priests performed their functions. A partition, covered with
ill-wrought images and a few gilt ornaments, divided it from the main
body of the church, and the whole edifice produced an impression that was
neither splendid nor particularly edifying. The basilica, which had once
been richly decorated, had been plundered by the Melchites in a fight
between them and the Jacobites, and the impoverished city had not been in
a position to restore the venerable church to anything approaching its
original splendor. Orion looked round him; but could see nothing
calculated to raise his devotion.

The congregation were required to stand all through the service; and as
it often was a very long business, not the women only, behind the screen,
but many of the men supported themselves like cripples on crutches. How
unpleasing, too, were the tones of the Egyptian chant, accompanied by the
frequent clang of a metal cymbal and mingled with the babble of
chattering men and women, checked only when the talk became a quarrel, by
a priest who loudly and vehemently shouted for silence from the hekel.

Generally the chanted liturgy constituted the whole function, unless the
Lord's Supper was administered; but in these anxious times, for above a
week past, a priest or a monk preached a daily sermon. This began a short
while after the young man had taken his place, and it was with painful
feelings that he recognized, in the hollow-eyed and ragged monk who
mounted the pulpit, a priest whom he had seen more than once drunk to
imbecility, in Nesptah's tavern, And the revolting creature, who thus
flaunted his dirty, dishevelled person even in the pulpit, thundered down
on the trembling congregation declarations that the delay in the rising
of the Nile was the consequence of their sins, and God's punishment for
their evil deeds. Instead of comforting the terrified souls, or
encouraging their faith and bidding them hope for better times, he set
before them in burning words the punishment that awaited their wicked
despondency.

God Almighty was plaguing them and the land with great heat; but this was
like the cool north wind at Advent-tide, as compared with the fierceness
of the furnace of hell which Satan was making hot for them. The scorching
sun on earth at any rate gave them daylight, but the flames of hell shed
no light, that the terrors might never cease of those whom the devil's
myrmidons drove over the narrow bridge leading to his horrible realm,
goading them with spears and pitchforks, with heavy cudgelling or gnawing
of their flesh. In the anguish of death, and the crush by the way,
mothers trod down their infants and fathers their daughters; and when the
damned reached the spiked threshold of hell itself, a hideous and
poisoned vapor rose up to meet them, choking them, and yet giving them
renewed strength to feel fresh torments with increased keenness of every
sense. Then the devil's shrieks of anguish, which shake the vault of
hell, came thundering on their ears; with hideous yells he snatched at
them from the grate on which he lay, crushed and squeezed them in his
iron jaws like a bunch of grapes, and swallowed them into his fiery maw;
or else they were hung up by their tongues by attendant friends in
Satan's fiery furnace, or dragged alternately through ice and flames, and
finally beaten to pieces on the anvil of hell, or throttled and wrung
with ropes and cloths.--As compared with the torments they would suffer
there, every present anxiety was as the kiss of a lover. Mothers would
hear the brain seething in their infants' skulls. . . .

At this point of the monk's grewsome discourse, Orion turned away with a
shudder. The curse with which the patriarch had threatened him recurred
to his mind; he could have fancied that the hot, stuffy, incense-laden
air of the church was full of flapping daws and hideous bats. Deadly
horror crept over him; but then, suddenly, the rebound came of youthful
vigor, longing for freedom and joy in living; a voice within cried out:
"Away with coercion and chains! Winged spirit, use your pinions! Down
with the god of terrors! He is not that Heavenly Father whose love
embraces mankind. Forward, leap up and be free! Trusting in your own
strength, guided by your own will, go boldly forth into the open sunshine
of life! Be free, be free!--Still, be not like a slave who is no sooner
cut adrift and left to himself than he falls a slave again to his own
senses. No; but striving unceasingly and of your own free will, in the
sweat of your brow, to reach the high goal, to work out to its fulfilment
and fruition everything that is best in your soul and mind. Yes--life is
a ministry. . . . I, like the disciples of the Stoa, will strive after all
that is known as virtue, with no other end in view than to practise it
for its own sake, because it is fair and gives unmixed joys. I will rely
on myself to seek the truth--and do what I feel to be right and good;
this, henceforth, shall be the lofty aim of my existence. To the two
chief desires of my heart--: atonement to my father and union with Paula,
I here add a third: the attainment of the loftiest goal that I may reach,
by valiant striving to get as near to it as my strength will allow. The
road thither is by Work; the guiding star I must keep before me that I
may not go astray is my Love!"

His cheeks were burning, and with a deep breath he looked about him as
though to find an adversary with whom he might measure his strength. The
horrible sermon was ended and the words of the chanting crowd fell on his
ear. "Lord, reward me not according to mine iniquities!" The load of his
own sin fell on his heart again, and his dying father's curse; his proud
head drooped on his breast, and he said to himself that his burthen was
too heavy for him to venture on the bold flight for which he had but now
spread his wings. The ban was not yet lifted; he was not yet redeemed
from its crushing weight. But the mere word "redeemed" brought to his
mind the image of Him who took on Himself the sins of the world; and the
more deeply he contemplated the nature of the Saviour whom he had loved
from his childhood, the more surely he felt that it would be doing no
violence to the freedom of his own will, but rather be the fulfilment of
a long-felt desire, if he were to tell Jesus simply all that oppressed
him; that his love for Him, his faith in Him, had a saving power even for
his soul. He lifted up his eyes and heart to Him, and to Him, as to a
trusted friend, confided all that troubled and hindered him and besought
His aid.

In loving Him, he and Paula were one, he knew, though they had not the
same idea of His nature.

Orion, as he meditated, thought out the points on which her views
deviated from his own: she believed that the divine and the human natures
were distinct in the person of Christ. And as he reflected on this creed,
till now so horrible in his eyes, he felt that the unique individuality
of the Saviour, shedding forth love and truth, came home to him more
closely when he pictured Him perfect and spotless, yet feeling as a man;
walking among men with all their joy in life in His heart, alive to every
pang and sorrow which can torture mortals, rejoicing with them, and
taking upon Himself unspeakable humiliation, suffering, and death, with a
stricken, bleeding, and yet self-devoting heart, for pure love of the
wretched race to which He could stoop from His glory. Yes, this Christ
could be his Redeemer too. The Almighty Lord had become his perfect and
most loving friend, his glorious, but lenient and tender brother, to whom
he could gladly give his whole heart, who understood everything, who was
ready to forgive everything--even all that was seething in his aching
heart which longed for purification--and all because He once had suffered
as a man suffers.

For the first time he, the Jacobite, dared to confess so much to himself;
and not solely for Paula's sake. A violent clanging on a cracked metal
plate roused him from his meditations by its harsh clamor; the sacrament
of the Last Supper was about to be administered: the invariable
conclusion of the Jacobite service. The bishop came forth from behind the
screen of the inner sanctuary, poured some wine into a silver cup and
crumbled into it two little cakes stamped with the Coptic cross. Of this
mixture he first partook, and then gave it in a spoon to each member of
the congregation who came up to receive it. Orion approached after two
elders of the Church. Finally the priest rinsed out the cup, and drained
the very washings, that no drop of the saving liquid should be lost.

How high had Orion's heart throbbed when, as a youth, he had been
admitted for the first time to this most sacred of all Christian
privileges! He was instructed in its deep and glorious symbolism, and had
often felt the purifying, saving, and refreshing effect of the sacrament,
strengthening him in all goodness, when he had partaken of it with his
parents and brothers. Hand-in-hand, they had gone home feeling as if
newly robed in body and soul and more closely bound together than before.
And to-day, insensible as he was to the repulsiveness of the forms of
worship of his confession he felt as though the bread and wine--the Flesh
and Blood of the Saviour--had sealed the bond he had silently entered
into with himself; as though the Lord had put forth an invisible hand to
remove the guilt and the curse that crushed him so sorely. Deep devotion
fell on his soul: his future life, he thought, should bring him nearer to
God than ever before, and be spent in loving, and in the more earnest,
full, and laborious exercise of the gifts Heaven had bestowed on him.


CHAPTER III.

Orion had dreaded the drive home with his mother, but after complaining
to him of Susannah's conduct in having made a startling display of her
vexation in the women's place behind the screen, she had leaned on him
and fallen fast asleep. It was an ugly black night, with a strong wind
blowing, but there was not much sea. I was on deck, alone. Toward
ten I started below. A figure issued from the gamblers' den, and
disappeared in the darkness. I experienced a shock, for I was sure it was
Backus. I flew down the companion-way, looked about for him, could not
find him, then returned to the deck just in time to catch a glimpse
of him as he re-entered that confounded nest of rascality.

Had he yielded at last? I feared it. What had he gone below for?--His bag
of coin? Possibly. I drew near the door, full of bodings. It was a-crack,
and I glanced in and saw a sight that made me bitterly wish I had
given my attention to saving my poor cattle-friend, instead of
reading and dreaming my foolish time away. He was gambling.
Worse still, he was being plied with champagne, and was already showing
some effect from it. He praised the 'cider,' as he called it, and
said now that he had got a taste of it he almost believed he would
drink it if it was spirits, it was so good and so ahead of anything
he had ever run across before.

Surreptitious smiles, at this, passed from one rascal to another, and
they filled all the glasses, and whilst Backus honestly drained his to
the bottom they pretended to do the same, but threw the wine over their
shoulders.

I could not bear the scene, so I wandered forward and tried to interest
myself in the sea and the voices of the wind. But no, my uneasy spirit
kept dragging me back at quarter-hour intervals; and always I saw Backus
drinking his wine--fairly and squarely, and the others throwing
theirs away. It was the painfullest night I ever spent.

The only hope I had was that we might reach our anchorage with
speed-- that would break up the game.Besides this, however, she had devoted herself with the most admirable
unselfishness to her pupil, since the child had been ill and her
grandmother had turned against her, noticing, too, that Orion took a
tender and quite fatherly interest in his little niece. This morning the
young man had not had time to enquire for Mary, and Eudoxia's report that
she seemed even more excited than on the day before disturbed him so
greatly, that he rose from table, in spite of Eudoxia's protest, without
waiting till the end of the meal, to visit the little invalid.

It was with genuine anxiety that he mounted the stairs. His heart was
heavy over many things, and as he went towards the child's room he said
to himself with a melancholy smile, that he, who had contemned many a
distinguished man and many a courted fair one at Constantinople because
they had fallen short of his lofty standard, had here no one but this
child who would be sure to understand him. Some minutes elapsed before
his knock was answered with the request to 'come in,' and he heard a
hasty bustle within. He found Mary lying, as the physician had ordered,
on a couch by the window, which was wide open and well-shaded; her couch
was surrounded by flowering plants and, on a little table in front of
her, were two large nosegays, one fading, the other quite fresh and
particularly beautiful.

How sadly the child had changed in these few days. The soft round cheeks
had disappeared, and the pretty little face had sunk into nothingness by
comparison with the wonderful, large eyes, which had gained in size and
brilliancy. Yesterday she had been free from fever and very pale, but
to-day her cheeks were crimson, and a twitching of her lips and of her
right shoulder, which had come on since the scene at the grandfather's
deathbed, was so incessant that Orion sat down by her side in some alarm.

"Has your grandmother been to see you?" was his first question, but the
answer was a mournful shake of her head.

The blossoming plants were his own gift and so was the fading nosegay;
the other, fresher one had not come from him, so he enquired who was the
giver, and was not a little astonished to see his favorite's confusion
and agitation at the question. There must be something special connected
with the posey, that was very evident, and the young man, who did not
wish to excite her sensitive nerves unnecessarily, but could not recall
his words, was wishing he had never spoken them, when the discovery of a
feather fan cut the knot of his difficulty; he took it up, exclaiming:
"Hey--what have we here?"

A deeper flush dyed Mary's cheek, and raising her large eyes imploringly
to his face, she laid a finger on her lips. He nodded, as understanding
her, and said in a low voice:

"Katharina has been here? Susannah's gardener ties up flowers like that.
The fan--when I knocked--she is here still perhaps?"

He had guessed rightly; Mary pointed dumbly to the door of the adjoining
room.

"But, in Heaven's name, child," Orion went on, in an undertone, "what
does she want here?"

"She came by stealth, in the boat," whispered the child. "She sent Anubis
from the treasurer's office to ask me if she might not come, she could
not do without me any longer, and she never did me any harm and so I said
yes--and then, when I knew it was your knock, whisk--off she went into
the bedroom."

"And if your grandmother were to come across her?"

"Then--well, then I do not know what would become of me! But oh! Orion,
if you only knew how--how. . . ." Two big tears rolled down her cheeks and
Orion understood her; he stroked her hair lovingly and said in a whisper,
glancing now and again at the door of the next room.

"But I came up on purpose to tell you something more about Paula. She
sends you her love, and she invites you to go to her and stay with her,
always. But you must keep it quite a secret and tell no one, not even
Eudoxia and Katharina; for I do not know myself how we can contrive to
get your grandmother's consent. At any rate we must set to work very
prudently and cautiously, do you understand? I have only taken you into
our confidence that you may look forward to it and have something to be
glad of at night, when you are such a silly little thing as to keep your
eyes open like the hares, instead of sleeping like a good child. If
things go well, you may be with Paula to-morrow perhaps--think of that! I
had quite given up all hope of managing it at all; but now, just now--is
it not odd--just within these two minutes I suddenly said to myself: 'It
will come all right!'--So it must be done somehow."

A flood of tears streamed down Mary's burning cheeks but, freely as they
flowed, she did not sob and her bosom did not heave. Nor did she speak,
but such pure and fervent gratitude and joy shone from her glistening
eyes that Orion felt his own grow moist. He was glad to find some way of
concealing his emotion when Mary seized his hand and, pressing a long
kiss on it, wetted it with her tears.

"See!" he exclaimed. "All wet! as if I had just taken it out of the
fountain."

But he said no more, for the bedroom door was suddenly thrown open and
Eudoxia's high, thin voice was heard saying:

"But why make any fuss? Mary will be enchanted! Here, Child, here is your
long-lost friend! Such a surprise!" And the water-wagtail, pushed forward
by no gentle hand, appeared within the doorway. Eudoxia was as radiant as
though she had achieved some heroic deed; but she drew back a little when
she found that Orion was still in the room. The divided couple stood face
to face. What was done could not be undone; but, though he greeted her
with only a calm bow, and she fluttered her fan with abrupt little jerks
to conceal her embarrassment, nothing took place which could surprise the
bystander; indeed, Katharina's pretty features assumed a defiant
expression when he enquired how the little white dog was, and she coldly
replied that she had had him chained up in the poultry-yard, for that the
patriarch, who was their guest, could not endure dogs.

"He honors a good many men with the same sentiments," replied Orion, but
Katharina retorted, readily enough.

"When they deserve it."

The dialogue went on in this key for some few minutes; but the young man
was not in the humor either to take the young girl's pert stings or to
repay her in the same coin; he rose to go but, before he could take
leave, Katharina, observing from the window how low the sun was, cried:
"Mercy on me! how late it is--I must be off; I must not be absent at
supper time. My boat is lying close to yours in the fishing-cove. I only
hope the gate of the treasurer's house is still open."

Orion, too, looked at the sun and then remarked: "To-day is Sanutius."

"I know," said Katharina. "That is why Anubis was free at noon."

"And for the same reason," added Orion, "there is not a soul at work now
in the office."

This was awkward. Not for worlds would she have been seen in the house;
and knowing, as she did from her games with Mary, every nook and corner
of it, she began to consider her position. Her delicate features assumed
a sinister expression quite new to Orion, which both displeased him and
roused his anxiety--not for himself but for Mary, who could certainly get
no good from such a companion as this. These visits must not be repeated
very often; he would not allude to the subject in the child's presence,
but Katharina should at once have a hint. She could not get out of the
place without his assistance; so he intruded on her meditations to inform
her that he had the key of the office about him. Then he went to see if
the hall were empty, and led her at once to the treasurer's office
through the various passages which connected it with the main buildings.
The office at this hour was as lonely as the grave, and when Orion found
himself standing with her, close to the door which opened on the road to
the harbor, and had already raised the key to unlock it, he paused and
for the first time broke the silence they had both preserved during their
unpleasant walk, saying:

"What brought you to see Mary, Katharina? Tell me honestly." Her heart,
which had been beating high since she had found herself alone with him in
the silent and deserted house, began to throb wildly; a great terror, she
knew not of what, came over her.

"She had come to the house for several reasons, but one had outweighed
all the rest: Mary must be told that her young uncle and Paula were
betrothed; for she knew by experience that the child could keep nothing
of importance from her grandmother, and that Neforis had no love for
Paula was an open secret. As yet she certainly could know nothing of her
son's formal suit, but if once she were informed of it she would do
everything in her power--of this Katharina had not a doubt--to keep Orion
and Paula apart. So the girl had told Mary that it was already reported
that they were a betrothed and happy pair, and that she herself had
watched them making love in her neighbor's garden. To her great
annoyance, however, Mary took this all very coolly and without any
special excitement.

"So, when Orion enquired of his companion what had brought her to the
governor's house, she could only reply that she longed so desperately to
see little Mary.

"Of course," said Orion. "But I must beg of you not to yield again to
your affectionate impulse. Your mother makes a public display of her
grudge against mine, and her ill-feeling will only be increased if she is
told that we are encouraging you to disregard her wishes. Perhaps you
may, ere long, have opportunities of seeing Mary more frequently; but, if
that should be the case, I must especially request you not to talk of
things that may agitate her. You have seen for yourself how excitable she
is and how fragile she looks. Her little heart, her too precocious brain
and feelings must have rest, must not be stirred and goaded by fresh
incitements such as you are in a position to apply. The patriarch is my
enemy, the enemy of our house, and you--I do not say it to offend
you--you overheard what he was saying last night, and probably gathered
much important information, some of which may concern me and my family."

Katharina stood looking at her companion, as pale as death. He knew that
she had played the listener, and when, and where! The shock it gave her,
and the almost unendurable pang of feeling herself lowered in his eyes,
quite dazed her. She felt bewildered, offended, menaced; however, she
retained enough presence of mind to reply in a moment to her antagonist:

"Do not be alarmed! I will come no more. I should not have come at all,
if I could have foreseen. . ."

"That you would meet me?"

"Perhaps.--But do not flatter yourself too much on that account!--As to
my listening. . . . Well, yes; I was standing at the window. Inside the
room I could only half hear, and who does not want to hear what great men
have to say to each other? And, excepting your father, I have met none
such in Memphis since Memnon left the city. We women have inherited some
curiosity from our mother Eve; but we rarely indulge it so far as to hunt
for a necklace in our neighbor's trunk! I have no luck as a criminal, my
dear Orion. Twice have I deserved the name. Thanks to the generous and
liberal use you made of my inexperience I sinned--sinned so deeply that
it has ruined my whole life; and now, again, in a more venial way; but I
was caught out, you see, in both cases."

"Your taunts are merited," said Orion sadly. "And yet, Child, we may both
thank Providence, which did not leave us to wander long on the wrong
road. Once already I have besought your forgiveness, and I do so now
again. That does not satisfy you I see--and I can hardly blame you.
Perhaps you will be better pleased, when I assure you once more that no
sin was ever more bitterly or cruelly punished than mine has been."

"Indeed!" said Katharina with a drawl; then, with a flutter of her fan,
she went on airily: "And yet you look anything rather than crushed; and
have even succeeded in winning 'the other'--Paula, if I am not mistaken."

"That will do!" said Orion decisively, and he raised the key to the lock.
Katharina, however, placed herself in his way, raised a threatening
finger, and exclaimed:

"So I should think!--Now I am certain. However, you are right with your
insolent 'That will do!' I do not care a rush for your love affairs;
still, there is one thing I should like to know, which concerns myself
alone; how could you see over our garden hedge? Anubis is scarcely a head
shorter than you are. . . ."

"And you made him try?" interrupted Orion, who could not forbear smiling,
perceiving that his honestly meant gravity was thrown away on Katharina.
"Notwithstanding such a praiseworthy experiment, I may beg you to note
for future cases that what is true of him is not true of every one, and
that, besides foot-passengers, a tall man sometimes mounts a tall horse?"

"It was you, then, who rode by last night?"

"And who could not resist glancing up at your window."

At these words she drew back in surprise, and her eyes lighted up, but
only for an instant; then, clenching the feathers of her fan in both
hands, she sharply asked:

"Is that in mockery?"

"Certainly not," said Orion coolly; "for though you have reason enough to
be angry with me. . . ."

"I, at any rate, have, so far given you none," she petulantly broke in.
"No, I have not. It is I, and I alone, who have been insulted and
ill-used; you must confess that you owe me some amends, and that I have a
right to ask them."

"Do so," replied he. "I am yours to command." She looked him straight in
the face.

"First of all," she began, "have you told any one else that I was. . ."

"That you were listening? No--not a living soul."

"And will you promise never to betray me?"

"Willingly. Now, what is the 'secondly' to this 'first of all?'"

But there was no immediate answer; the water-wagtail evidently found it
difficult. However, she presently said, with downcast eyes:

"I want. . . . You will think me a greater fool than I am . . .
nevertheless, yes, I will ask you, though it will involve me in fresh
humiliation.--I want to know the truth; and if there is anything you hold
sacred, before I ask, you must swear by what is holiest to answer me, not
as if I were a silly girl, but as if I were the Supreme judge at the last
day.--Do you hear?"

"This is very solemn," said Orion. "And you must allow me to observe that
there are some questions which do not concern us alone, and if yours is
such. . . ."

"No, no," replied Katharina, "what I mean concerns you and me alone."

"Then I see no reason for refusing," he said. "Still, I may ask you a
favor in return. It seems to me no less important than it did to you, to
know what a great man like the patriarch finds to talk about, and since I
place myself at your commands. . . ."

"I thought," said the girl with a smile, "that your first object would be
to discharge some small portion of your debt to me; however, I expect no
excessive magnanimity, and the little I heard is soon told. It cannot
matter much to you either--so I will agree to your wishes, and you, in
return, must promise. . . ."

"To speak the whole truth."

"As truly as you hope for forgiveness of your sins?"

"As truly as that."

"That is well."

"And what is it that you want to know?"

At this she shook her head, exclaiming uneasily:

"Nay, nay, not yet. It cannot be done so lightly. First let me speak; and
then open the door, and if I want to fly let me go without saying or
asking me another word.--Give me that chair; I must sit down." And in
fact she seemed to need it; for some minutes she had looked very pale and
exhausted, and her hands trembled as she drew her handkerchief across her
face.

When she was seated she began her story; and while her words flowed on
quickly but without expression, as though she spoke mechanically, Orion
listened with eager interest, for what she had to tell struck him as
highly significant and important.

He had been watched by the patriarch's orders. By midnight Benjamin had
already been informed of Orion's visit to Fostat, and to the Arab
general. Nothing, however, had been said about it beyond a fear lest he
had gone thither with a view to abjuring the faith of his fathers and
going over to the Infidels. Far more important were the facts Orion
gathered as to the prelate's negotiations with the Khaliff's
representative. Amru had urged a reduction of the number of convents and
of the monks and nuns who lived on the bequests and gifts of the pious,
busied in all kinds of handiwork according to the rule of Pachomius, and
enabled, by the fact of their living at free quarters, to produce almost
all the necessaries of life, from the mats on the floors to the shoes
worn by the citizens, at a much lower price than the independent
artisans, whether in town or country. The great majority of these poor
creatures were already ruined by such competition, and Amru, seeing the
Arab leather-workers, weavers, ropemakers, and the rest, threatened with
the same fate, had determined to set himself firmly to restrict all this
monastic work. The patriarch had resisted stoutly and held out long, but
at last he had been forced to sacrifice almost half the convents for
monks and nuns.

But nothing had been conceded without an equivalent; for Benjamin was
well aware of the immense difficulties which he, as chief of the Church,
could put in the way of the new government of the country. So it was left
to him to designate which convents should be suppressed, and he had, of
course, begun by laying hands on the few remaining Melchite retreats,
among them the Convent of St. Cecilia, next to the house of Rufinus. This
establishment was now to be closed within three days and to become the
property of the Jacobite Church; but it was to be done quite quietly, for
there was no small fear that now, when the delayed rising of the river
was causing a fever of anxiety in all minds, the impoverished populace of
the town might rise in defence of the wealthy sisterhood to whom they
were beholden for much benevolence and kind care.

Opposition from the town-senate was also to be looked for, since the
deceased Mukaukas had pronounced this measure unjust and detrimental to
the common welfare. The evicted orthodox nuns were to be taken into
various Jacobite convents as lay sisters similar cases had already been
known; but the abbess, whose superior intellect, high rank, and
far-reaching influence might, if she were left free to act, easily rouse
the prelates of the East to oppose Benjamin, was to be conveyed to a
remote convent in Ethiopia, whence no flight or return was possible.

Katharina's report took but few minutes, and she gave it with apparent
indifference; what could the suppression of an orthodox cloister, and the
dispersion of its heretic sisterhood, matter to her, or to Orion, whose
brothers had fallen victims to Melchite fanaticism? Orion did not betray
his deep interest in all he heard, and when at length Katharina rose and
pointed feebly to the door, all she said, as though she were vexed at
having wasted so much time, was: "That, on the whole, is all."

"All?" asked Orion unlocking the door.

"Certainly, all," she repeated uneasily. "What I meant to ask--whether I
ever know it or not--it does not matter.--It would be better perhaps-yes,
that is all.--Let me go."

But he did not obey her.

"Ask," he said kindly. "I will answer you gladly."

"Gladly?" she retorted, with an incredulous shrug. "In point of fact you
ought to feel uncomfortable whenever you see me; but things do not always
turn out as they ought, in Memphis or in the world; for what do you men
care what becomes of a poor girl like me? Do not imagine that I mean to
reproach you; God forbid! I do not even owe you a grudge. If anyone can
live such a thing down I can. Do not you think so? Everything is
admirably arranged for me; I cannot fail to do well. I am very rich, and
not ugly, and I shall have a hundred suitors yet. Oh, I am a most
enviable creature! I have had one lover already, and the next will be
more faithful, at any rate, and not throw me over so ruthlessly as the
first.--Do not you think so?"

"I hope so," said Oriole gravely. "Bitter as the cup is that you offer me
to drink. . ."

"Well?"

"I can only repeat that I must even drink it, since the fault was mine.
Nothing would so truly gladden me as to be able to atone in some degree
for my sin against you."

"Oh dear no!" she scornfully threw in. "Our hopes shall not be fixed so
high as that! All is at an end between us, and if you ever were anything
to me, you are nothing to me now--absolutely nothing. One hour in the
past we had in common; it was short indeed, but to me--would you believe
it?--a very great matter. It aged the young creature, whom you, but
yesterday, still regarded as a mere child--that much I know--with amazing
rapidity; aye, and made a worse woman of her than you can fancy."

"That indeed would grieve me to the bottom of my soul," replied Orion.
"There is, I know, no excuse for my conduct. Still, as you yourself know,
our mothers' wish in the first instance. . ."

"Destined us for each other, you would say. Quite true!--And it was all
to please Dame Neforis that you put your arms round me, under the
acacias, and called me your own, your all, your darling, your rose-bud?
Was that--and this is exactly what I want to ask you, what I insist on
knowing--was that all a lie--or did you, at any rate, in that brief
moment, under the trees, love me with all your heart--love me as now you
love--I cannot name her--that other?--The truth, Orion, the whole truth,
on your oath!"

She had raised her voice and her eyes glowed with the excitement of
passion; and now, when she ceased speaking, their sparkling, glistening
enquiry plainly and unreservedly confessed that her heart still was his,
that she counted on his high-mindedness and expected him to say "yes."
Her round arm lay closely pressed to her bosom, as though to keep its
wild heaving within bounds. Her delicate face had lost its pallor and
seemed bathed in a glow, now tender and now crimson. Her little mouth,
which but now had uttered such bitter words, was parted in a smile as if
ready to bestow a sweet reward for the consoling, saving answer, for
which her whole being yearned, and her eager eyes, shining through tears,
did not cease to entreat him so pathetically, so passionately! How
bewitching an image of helpless, love-sick, beseeching youth and grace.

"As you love that other,--on your oath."--The words still rang in the
young man's ear. All that was soft in his soul urged him to make good the
evil he had brought upon this fair, hapless young creature; but those
very words gave him strength to remain steadfast; and though he felt
himself appealed to for comfort and compassion, he could only stretch out
imploring hands, as though praying for help, and say:

"Ah Katharina, and you are as lovely, as charming now, as you were then;
but--much as you attracted me, the great love that fills a life can come
but once. . . . Forget what happened afterwards. . . . Put your question
in another form, alter it a little, and ask me again--or let me assure
you."

But he had no time to say more; for, before he could atop her, she had
slipped past him and flown away like some swift wild thing into the road
and down to the fishing cove.


CHAPTER IV.

Orion stood alone gazing sadly after her. Was this his father's
curse--that all who loved him must reap pain and grief in return?

He shivered; still, his youthful energy and powers of resistance were
strong enough to give him speedy mastery over these torturing
reflections. What opportunities lay before him of proving his prowess!
Even while Katharina was telling her story, the brave and strenuous youth
had set himself the problem of rescuing the cloistered sisters. The
greater the danger its solution might involve him in, the more impossible
it seemed at first sight, the more gladly, in his present mood, would he
undertake it. He stepped out into the road and closed the door behind him
with a feeling of combative energy.

It was growing dusk. Philippus must now be with Mary and, with the
leech's aid, he was resolved to get the child away from his mother's
house. Not till he felt that she was safe with Paula in Rufinus' house,
could he be free to attempt the enterprise which floated before his eyes.
On the stairs he shouted to a slave:

"My chariot with the Persian trotting horse!" and a few minutes after he
entered the little girl's room at the same time with a slave girl who
carried in a lamp. Neither Mary nor the physician observed him at first,
and he heard her say to Philippus, who sat holding her wrist between his
fingers.

"What is the matter with you this evening? Good heavens, how pale and
melancholy you look!" The lamplight fell full on his face. "Look here, I
have just made such a smart little man out of wax. . ."

She hoped to amuse the friend who was always so kind to her with this
comical work of art; but, as she leaned forward to reach it, she caught
sight of her uncle and exclaimed: "Philippus comes here to cure me, but
he looks as if he wanted a draught himself. Take care, or you will have
to drink that bitter brown stuff you sent yesterday; then you will know
for once how nasty it can be." Though the child's exclamation was
well-meant, neither of the men took any notice of it. They stood face to
face in utter silence and with only a formal greeting; for Orion, without
Mary's remark, had been struck by the change that had come over the
physician since yesterday. Ignoring Orion's presence, he asked the child
a few brief questions, begged Eudoxia to persevere in the same course of
treatment, and then hastily bid a general farewell to all present; Orion,
however, did not respond, but said, with an affectionate glance at the
little patient: "One word with you presently."

This made Philippus turn to look at Mary and, as the eyes of the rivals
met, they knew that on one subject at any rate they thought and felt
alike. The leech already knew how tenderly the young man had taken to
Mary, and he followed him into the room which Orion now occupied, and
which, as Philippus was aware, had formerly been Paula's.

"In the cause of duty," he said to himself again and again, to keep
himself calm and enable him to gather at least the general sense of what
the handsome young fellow opposite to him was saying in his rich,
pleasant voice, and urging as a request with more warmth than the leech
had given him credit for. Philippus, of course, had heard of the
grandmother's lamentable revulsion of feeling against her grandchild, and
he thought Orion's wish to remove the little girl fully justified. But,
on learning that she was to be placed under Paula's care, he seemed
startled, and gazed at the floor in such sullen gloom that the other
easily guessed what was going on in his mind. In fact, the physician
suspected that the child was to serve merely as an excuse for the more
frequent meetings of the lovers. Unable to bury this apprehension in his
own breast he started to his feet, and was about to put it into words,
when Orion took the words out of his mouth, saying modestly but frankly,
with downcast eyes:

"I speak only for the child's--for Mary's sake. By my father's
soul. . . ."

But Philippus shook his head dismally, went up to his rival, and murmured
dully:

"For the sake of that child I am capable of doing or enduring a great
deal. She could not be better cared for than with Rufinus and Paula; but
if I could suppose," and he raised his voice, while his eyes took a
sinister and threatening expression, "if I could suppose that her sacred
and suffering innocence were merely an excuse. . . ."

"No, no," said Orion urgently. "Again, on my sacred word, I assure you
that I have no aim in view but the child's safety; and, as we have said
so much, I will not stick at a word more or less! Rufinus' house is open
to you day and night, and I, if all turns out as I expect, shall ere long
be far from hence--from Memphis--from Paula. There is mischief brewing--I
dare say no more--an act of treachery; and I will try to prevent it at
the risk of my life. You, every one, shall no longer have a right to
think me capable of things which are as repulsive to my nature as to
yours. You and I, if I mistake not, strive for the same prize, and so far
are rivals; but why should the child therefor suffer? Forget it in her
presence, and that forgetting will, as you well know, enhance your merit
in her--her eyes."

"My merit?" retorted the other scornfully. "Merit is not in the balance;
nothing but the gifts of blind Fortune--a nose, a chin, an eye, anything
in short--a crime as much as a deed of heroism--that happens to make a
deep impression on the wax of a girl's soft heart. But curse me," and he
shouted the words at Orion as if he were beside himself, "if I know how
we came to talk of such things! Has my folly gone running through the
streets, bare-bosomed, to display itself to the world at large? How do
you know what my feelings are? She, perhaps, has laughed with you at her
ridiculous lover?--Well, no matter. You know already, or will know by
to-morrow, which of us has won the cock-fight. You have only to look at
me! What woman ever broke her heart for such a Thersites-face. Good-luck
to the winner, and the other one--well, since it must be so, farewell
till to-morrow."

He hastily made his way towards the door; Orion, however, detained him,
imploring him to set aside his ill-feeling--at any rate for the present;
assured him that Paula had not betrayed what his feelings were; that, on
the contrary, he himself, seeing him with her so late on the previous
night, had been consumed by jealousy, and entreated him to vent his wrath
on him in abusive words, if that could ease his heart, only, by all that
was good, not to withdraw his succor from that poor, innocent child.

The physician's humane heart was not proof against his prayer; and when
at length he prepared to depart, in the joyful and yet painful conviction
that his happier rival had become more worthy of the prize, he had agreed
that he would impress on Neforis, whose mind he suspected to be slightly
affected, that the air of the governor's residence did not suit Mary, and
that she should place her in the care of a physician outside the town.

As soon as Philippus had quitted the house, Orion went to see Rufinus,
who, on his briefly assuring him that he had come on grave and important
business, begged him to accompany him to his private room. The young man,
however, detained him till he had made all clear with the women as to the
reception of little Mary.

"By degrees all the inhabitants of the residence will be transplanted
into our garden!" exclaimed Rufinus. "Well, I have no objection; and you,
old woman, what do you say to it?"

"I have none certainly," replied his wife. "Besides, neither you nor I
have to decide in this case: the child is to be Paula's guest."

"I only wish she were here already," said Paula, "for who can say whether
your mother, Orion--the air here is perilously Melchite."

"Leave Philippus and me to settle that.--You should have seen how pleased
Mary was."

Then, drawing Paula aside, he hastily added:

"Have I not hoped too much? Is your heart mine? Come what may, can I
count on you--on your lov-?"

"Yes, Yes!" The words rushed up from the very bottom of her heart, and
Orion, with a sigh of relief, followed the old man, glad and comforted.

The study was lighted up, and there, without mentioning Katharina, he
told Rufinus of the patriarch's scheme for dispersing the nuns of St.
Cecilia. What could he care for these Melchite sisters? But, since that
consoling hour in the church, he felt as though it were his duty to stand
forth for all that was right, and to do battle against everything that
was base. Besides, he knew how warmly and steadfastly his father had
taken the part of this very convent against the patriarch. Finally, he
had heard how strongly his beloved was attached to this retreat and its
superior, so he prepared himself gleefully to come forth a new man of
deeds, and show his prowess.

The old man listened with growing surprise and horror, and when Orion had
finished his story he rose, helplessly wringing his hands. Orion spoke to
him encouragingly, and told him that he had come, not merely to give the
terrible news, but to hold council with him as to how the innocent
victims might be rescued. At this the grey-headed philanthropist and
wanderer pricked up his ears; and as an old war horse, though harnessed
to the plough, when he hears the trumpet sound lifts his head and arches
his neck as proudly and nobly as of yore under his glittering trappings,
so Rufinus drew himself up, his old eyes sparkled, and he exclaimed with
all the enthusiasm and eagerness of youth:

"Very good, very good; I am with you; not merely as an adviser; no, no.
Head, and hand, and foot, from crown to heel! And as for you, young
man--as for you! I always saw the stuff that was in you in spite--in
spite.--But, as surely as man is the standard of all things, those who
reach the stronghold of virtue by a winding road are often better
citizens than those who are born in it.--It is growing late, but evensong
will not yet have begun and I shall still be able to see the abbess. Have
you any plan to propose?"

"Yes; the day after to-morrow at this hour. . . ."

"And why not to-morrow?" interrupted the ardent old man.

"Because I have preparations to make which cannot be done in twelve hours
of daylight."

"Good! Good!"

"The day after to-morrow at dusk, a large barge--not one of ours--will be
lying by the bank at the foot of the convent garden. I will escort the
sisters as far as Doomiat on the Lake. I will send on a mounted messenger
to-night, and I will charter a ship for the fugitives by the help of my
cousin Columella, the greatest ship-owner of that town. That will take
them over seas wherever the abbess may command."

"Capital, splendid!" cried Rufinus enthusiastically. He took up his hat
and stick, and the radiant expression of his face changed to a very grave
one. He went up to the young man with solemn dignity, looked at him with
fatherly kindliness, and said:

"I know what woes befell your house through those of our confession, the
fellow-believers of these whom you propose to protect with so much
prudence and courage; and that, young man, is noble, nay, is truly great.
I find in you--you who were described to me as a man of the world and not
over-precise--for the first time that which I have sought in vain for
many years and in many lands, among the pious and virtuous: the spirit of
willing self-sacrifice to save an enemy of a different creed from
pressing peril.--But you are young, Orion, and I am old. You triumph in
the action only, I foresee the consequences. Do you know what lies before
you, if it should be discovered that you have covered the escape of the
prey whom the patriarch already sees in his net? Have you considered that
Benjamin, the most implacable and most powerful hater among the
Jacobites, will pursue you as his mortal foe with all the fearful means
at his command?"

"I have considered it," replied Orion.

Rufinus laid his left hand on the young man's shoulder, and his right
hand on his head, saying, "Then take with you, to begin with, an old
man's--a father's blessing."

"Yes, a father's," repeated Orion softly. A happy thrill ran through his
body and soul, and he fell on the old man's neck deeply moved.

For a minute they stood clasped in each other's arms; then Rufinus freed
himself, and set out to seek the abbess. Orion returned to the women,
whose curiosity had been roused to a high pitch by seeing Rufinus
disappear through the gate leading to the convent-garden. Dame Joanna
could not sit still for excitement, and Pulcheria answered at random when
Orion and Paula, who had an infinity of things to say or whisper to each
other, now and then tried to draw her into the conversation. Once she
sighed deeply, and when her friend asked her: "What ails you, Child?" she
answered anxiously:

"Something serious must be going forward, I feel it. If only Philippus
were here!"

"But we are all safe and well, thank God!" observed Orion, and she
quickly replied:

"Yes indeed, the Lord be praised!" But she thought to herself:

"You think he is of no use but to heal the sick; but it is only when he
is here that everything goes right and happens for the best!"

Still, all felt that there was something unusual and ominous in the air,
and when the old man presently returned his face confirmed their
suspicions. He laid aside his hat and staff in speechless gravity; then
he put his arm affectionately round his wife and said:

"You will need all your courage and self-command once more, as you have
often done before, good wife; I have taken upon myself a serious duty."

Joanna had turned very pale, and while she clung to her husband and
begged him to speak and not to torture her with suspense, her frail
figure was trembling, and bitter tears ran down her cheeks. She could
guess that her husband was once more going away from her and their child,
in the service and for the benefit of others, and she knew full well that
she could not prevent it. If she could, she never would have had the
heart to interfere: for she always understood him, and felt with him that
something to take him out of the narrow circle of home-life was
indispensable to his happiness.

He read her thoughts, and they gave him pain; but he was not to be
diverted from his purpose. The man who would try to heal every suffering
brute was accustomed to see those whom he loved best grieve on his
account. Marriage, he would say, ought not to hinder a man in following
his soul's vocation; and he was fond of using this high-sounding name to
justify himself in his own and his wife's eyes, in doing things to which
he was prompted only by restlessness and unsatisfied energy. Without this
he would, no doubt, have done his best for the imperilled sisterhood, but
it added to his enjoyment of the grand and dangerous rescue.

The wretched fate of the hapless nuns, and the thought of losing them as
near neighbors, grieved the women deeply, and the men saw many tears
flow; at the same time they had the satisfaction of finding them all
three firmly and equally determined to venture all, and to bid these whom
they loved venture all, to hinder the success of a deed which filled them
with horror and disgust.

Joanna spoke not a word of demur when Rufinus said that he intended to
accompany the fugitives; and when, with beaming looks, he went on to
praise Orion's foresight and keen decisiveness, Paula flew to him proudly
and gladly, holding out both her hands. As for the young man, he felt as
though wings were growing from his shoulders, and this fateful evening
was one of the happiest of his life.

The superior had agreed to his scheme, and in some details had improved
upon it. Two lay sisters and one nun should remain behind. The two former
were to attend to the sick in the infirmary, to ring the bell and chant
the services as usual, that the escape of the rest might not be
suspected; and Joanna, Paula, and Pulcheria, were to assist them.

When, at a late hour, Orion was about to leave, Rufinus asked whether,
under these circumstances, it would be well to bring Mary to his house;
he himself doubted it. Joanna was of his opinion; Paula, on the contrary,
said that she believed it would be better to let the child run the risk
of a remote danger--hardly to be called danger, than to leave her to pine
away body and soul in her old home. Pulcheria supported her, but the two
girls were forced to yield to the decision of the elders.


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 8.


CHAPTER V.

After that interview with Orion, Philippus hurried off through the town,
paying so little heed to the people he met and to the processions
besieging Heaven with loud psalms to let the Nile at last begin to rise,
that he ran up against more than one passer-by, and had many a word of
abuse shouted after him. He went into two or three houses, and neither
his patients nor their attendants could recognize, in this abrupt and
hasty visitor, the physician and friend who was usually so sympathetic to
the sufferer: who would speak with a cordiality that brought new life to
his heart, who would toss the children in the air, kiss one and nod
merrily to another. To-day their elders even felt shy and anxious in his
presence. For the first time he found the duty he loved a wearisome
burthen; the sick man was a tormenting spirit in league with the world
against his peace of mind. What possessed him, that he should feel such
love of his fellow-men as to deprive himself of all comfort in life and
of his night's rest for their sake? Rufinus was right. In these times
each man lived solely to spite his neighbor, and he who could be most
brazenly selfish, looking neither to the right hand nor to the left, was
the most certain to get on in life. Fool that he was to let other folks'
woes destroy his peace and hinder him in his scientific advancement!

Tormented by such bitter thoughts as these, he went into a neat little
house by the harbor where a worthy pilot lay dying, surrounded by his
wife and children; and there, at once, he was himself again, putting
forth all his knowledge and heartfelt kindliness, quitting the scene with
a bleeding heart and an empty purse; but no sooner was he out of doors
than his former mood closed in upon him with double gloom. The case was
plain: Even with the fixed determination not to sacrifice himself for
others he could not help doing it; the impulse was too strong for him. He
could no more help suffering with the sufferer, and giving the best he
had to give with no hope of a return, than the drunkard can help
drinking. He was made to be plundered; it was his fate!

With a drooping head he returned to his old friend's work-room. Horapollo
was sitting, just as he had sat the night before, at his writing-table
with his scrolls and his three lamps, a slave below, snoring while he
awaited his master's pleasure.

The leech's pretty Greek greeting "Rejoice!" sounded rather like "May
you choke!" as he flung aside his upper garment; and to the old man's
answer and anxious exclamation: "How badly you look, Philip!" he answered
crossly: "Like a man who deserves a kick rather than a welcome; a booby
who has submitted to have his nose pulled; a cur who has licked the hand
of the lout who has thrashed him!"

He threw himself on the divan and told Horapollo all that had passed
between him and Orion. "And the maddest part of it all," he ended, "is
that I almost like the man; that he really seems to me to be on the high
road to become a capital fellow; and that I no longer feel inclined to
pitch him into a lime-kiln at the mere thought of his putting out a hand
to Paula. At the same time," and he started to his feet, "even if I help
him to bring the poor little girl away from that demented old hag, I
cannot and will not continue to be her physician. There are plenty of
quacks about in this corpse of a town, and they may find one of them.

"You will continue to treat the child," interrupted the old man quietly.

"To have my heart daily flogged with nettles!" exclaimed the leech, going
towards Horapollo with wild gesticulations. "And do you believe that I
have any desire to meet that young fellow's sweetheart day after day,
often twice a day, that the barb may be twisted round and round in my
bleeding wound?"

"I expect a quite different result from your frequent meeting," said the
other. "You will get accustomed to see her under the aspect which alone
she can hence forth bear to you: that of a handsome girl--there are
thousands such in Egypt,--and the betrothed of another."

"Certainly, if my heart were like a hunting-dog that lies down the moment
it is bid," said Philippus with a scornful laugh. "The end of it is that
I must go away, away from Memphis--away from this miserable world for all
I care! I?--Recover my peace of mind within reach of her? Alas, for my
blissful, lost peace!"

"And why not? To every man a thing is only as he conceives of it. Only
listen to me: I had finished a treatise on the old and new Calendars, and
my master desired me to deliver a lecture on it in the Museum--if the
school of pedants in Alexandria now deserves the name; but I did not wish
to do so because I knew that the presence of such a large and learned
audience would embarrass me. But my master advised me to imagine that my
hearers were not men, but mere cabbages. This gave me new light; I took
his advice, got over my shyness, and my speech flowed like oil."

"A very good story," said Philippus, "but I do not see. . . ."

"The moral of it for you," interrupted the old man, "is that you must
regard the supremely adorable lady of your love as one among a dozen
others--I will not say as a cabbage--as one with whom your heart has no
more concern. Put a little strength of will into it, and you will
succeed."

"If a heart were a cipher, and if passion were calendar-making! . . ."
retorted Philippus. "You are a very wise man, and your manuscripts and
tables have stood like walls between you and passion."

"Who can tell?" said Horapollo. "But at any rate, it never should have
had such power over me as to make me embitter the few remaining days
under the sun yet granted to my father and friend for the sake of a woman
who scorned my devotion. Will you promise me to talk no more nonsense
about flying from Memphis, or anything of the kind?"

"Teach me first to measure my strength of will."

"Will you try, at any rate?"

"Yes, for your sake."

"Will you promise to continue your treatment of that poor little girl,
whom I love dearly in spite of her forbears?"

"As long as I can endure the daily meeting with her--you know. . ."

"That, then, is a bargain.--Now, come and let us translate a few more
chapters."

The friends sat at work together till a late hour, and when the old man
was alone again he reflected: "So long as he can be of use to the child
he will not go away, and by that time I shall have dug a pit for that
damned siren."

          .........................

Orion had his hands full of work for the next morning. Before it was
light he sent off two trustworthy messengers to Doomiat, giving each of
them a letter with instructions that a sailing vessel should be held in
readiness for the fugitives. One was to start three hours after the
other, so that the business in hand should not fail if either of them
should come to grief.

He then went out; first to the harbor, where he succeeded in hiring a
large, good Nile-boat from Doomiat, whose captain, a trustworthy and
experienced man, promised to keep their agreement a secret and to be
prepared to start by noon next day. Next, after taking council with
himself, he went to the treasurer's office, and there, with the
assistance of Nilus, made his will, to be ratified and signed next
morning in the presence of a notary and witnesses. His mother, little
Mary, and Paula were to inherit the bulk of his property. He also
bequeathed a considerable sum as a legacy to the hospitals and orphan
asylums, as well as to the Church, to the end that they might pray for
his soul; and a legacy to Nilus "as the most just judge of his
household." Eudoxia, Mary's Greek governess, was not forgotten; and
finally he commanded that all his house-slaves should be liberated, and
to the end that they might not suffer from want he bequeathed to them one
of his largest estates in Upper Egypt, where they might settle and labor
for their common good. He increased the handsome sums already devised by
his father to the freedmen of his family.

This business occupied several hours. Nilus, who wrote while Orion
dictated, giving the document a legal form, was deeply touched by the
young man's fore thought and kindness; for in truth, since his
desecration of the judgment-seat, he had given him up for a lost soul.

By Orion's orders this will was to be opened after four weeks, in case he
should not have returned from a journey on which he proposed starting on
the morrow, and this injunction revealed to the faithful steward, who had
grown grey in the service, that the last scion of the house expected to
run considerable risk; however, he was too modest to ask any questions,
and his master did not take him into his confidence.

When, after all this, the two men went back into the anteroom, Anubis,
the young clerk and Katharina's ally, was standing there. Nilus took no
notice of him, and while he, with tearful eyes, stooped to kiss the hand
Orion held out to him as he bid him come to take leave of him once more
next evening, Anubis, who had withdrawn respectfully to a little
distance, keeping his ears open, however, officiously opened the heavy
iron-plated door.

Orion was exhausted and hungry; he enquired for his mother, and hearing
that she had gone to lie down, he went into the dining-room to get some
food. Although breakfast had but just been served, Eudoxia was awaiting
him with evident impatience. Her heart was bursting with a great piece of
news, and as Orion entered, greeting her, she cried out:

"Have you heard? Do you know?" Then she began, encouraged by his curt
negative, to pour out to him how that Neforis, by the desire of the
physician who had lately been to see her, had decided on sending her,
Eudoxia, away with her granddaughter to enjoy better air under the roof
of a friend of the leech's; they were to go this very day, or to-morrow
at latest.

Orion was disagreeably startled by this intelligence. He had not expected
that Philippus would come so early, and he himself had been the first to
promote a scheme which now no longer seemed advisable.

"How very provoking!" he muttered between his teeth, as a slave offered
him a roast fowl and asparagus.

"Is it not? And perhaps we shall have to go quite far into the country,"
said the Greek, with a languishing look, as she drew one of the long
stems between her teeth.

The words and the glance made Orion feel as if he grudged the old fool
the good food she was eating, and his voice was not particularly
ingratiating as he replied that town and country were all the same, the
only point was which would be best for the child. When he went on to say
that he was quitting home next evening, Eudoxia cried out, let a stick of
asparagus drop in her lap, and said despairingly: "Oh, then everything is
at an end!"

He, however, interposed reproachfully: "On the contrary, then your duty
begins; you must devote yourself wholly and exclusively to the child. You
know that her own grandmother is averse to her. Give her your best
affection, as you have already begun to do, be a mother to her; and if
you really are my well-wisher, show it in that way. For my part you will
find me grateful, and not in words alone. Go tomorrow to the treasurer's
office; Nilus will give you the only thing by which I can at present
prove my gratitude. Do your best to cherish the child; I have taken care
to provide for your old age."

He rose, cutting short the Greek's profuse expressions of thanks, and
betook himself to his mother. She was still in her room; however, he now
sent word that he had come to see her, and she was ready to admit him,
having expected that he would come even sooner.

She was reclining, half-sitting, on a divan in her cool and shady
bedroom, and she at once told her son of her determination to follow the
physician's advice and entrust the little girl to his friend. She spoke
in a tone of sleepy indifference; but as soon as Orion opposed her and
begged her to keep Mary at home, she grew more lively, and looking him
wrathfully in the face exclaimed: "Can you wish that? How can you ask
me?" and she went on in repining lamentation:

"Everything is changed nowadays. Old age no longer forgets; it is youth
that has a short memory. Your head has long been full of other things,
but I--I still remember who it was that made my lost dear one's last
hours on earth a hell, even in view of the gates of Heaven!" Her breast
heaved with feeble, tearless sobs--a short, convulsive gasping, and Orion
did not dare contravene her wishes. He sought to soothe her with loving
words and, when she recovered herself, he told her that he proposed to
leave her for a short time to look after his estates, as the law
required, and this information gladdened her greatly. To be
alone--solitary and unobserved now seemed delightful. Those white pills
did more for her, raised her spirits better, than any human society. They
brought her dreams, sleeping or waking; dreams a thousand times more
delightful than her real, desolate existence. To give herself up to
memory, to pray, to dream, to picture herself in the other world among
her beloved dead--and besides that to eat and drink, which she was always
ready to do very freely--this was all she asked henceforth of life on
earth.

When, to her further questions, Orion replied that he was going first to
the Delta, she expressed her regret, since, if he had gone to Upper
Egypt, he might have visited his sister-in-law, Mary's mother, in her
convent. She sat up as she spoke, passed her hand across her forehead,
and pointed to a little table near the head of the couch, on which, by
the side of a cup with fruit syrup, phials, boxes, and other objects, lay
a writing-tablet and a letter-scroll. This she took up and handed to
Orion, saying:

"A letter from your sister-in-law. It came last evening and I began to
read it; but the first words are a complaint of your father, and
that--you know, just before going to sleep--I could not read any more; I
could not bear it! And to-day; first there was church, and then the
physician came with his request about the child; I have not yet found
courage to read the rest of it.--What can any letter bring to me but
evil! Do you know at all whence anything pleasant could come to me? But
now: read me the letter. Not that part again about your father; that I
will keep till presently for myself alone."

Orion undid the roll, and with quivering lips glanced over the nun's
accusations against his father. The wildest fanaticism breathed in every
line of this epistle from the martyr's widow. She had found in the
cloister all she sought: she lived now, she said, in God alone and in the
Divine Saviour. She thought of her child, even, only as an alien, one of
God's young creatures for whom it was a joy to pray. At the same time it
was her duty to care for the little one's soul, and if it were not too
hard for her grandmother to part from her, she longed to see Mary once
more. She had lately been chosen abbess of her convent--and no one could
prevent her taking possession of the child; but she feared lest an
overwhelming natural affection might drag her back to the carnal world,
which she had for ever renounced, so she would have Mary brought up in a
neighboring nunnery, and led to Heavenly joys, not to earthly misery--to
be the wife of no sinful husband, but a pure bride of Christ.

Orion shuddered as he read and, when he laid the letter down, his mother
exclaimed:

"Perhaps she is right, perhaps it is already ordained that the child
should be sent to the convent, and not to the leech's friend, and started
on the only path that leads to Heaven without danger or hindrance!"

But Orion said to himself that he would make it his duty to guard the
happy-hearted child from this fate, and he begged his mother to consider
that the first important point was to restore the little girl to health.
He now saw that she had been right. His father had always obeyed the
prescriptions of Philippus, and for that reason, if for no other, it
would be her duty to act by his advice.

Gemma was coming up behind him along the path. She was wearing a grey
cape and a small dark hat. She glanced at Sanin, turned her head away,
and catching him up, passed rapidly by him.

'Gemma,' he articulated, hardly audibly.

She gave him a little nod, and continued to walk on in front. He followed
her.

He breathed in broken gasps. His legs shook under him.

Gemma passed by the arbour, turned to the right, passed by a small
flat fountain, in which the sparrows were splashing busily, and,
going behind a clump of high lilacs, sank down on a bench.

The place was snug and hidden. Sanin sat down beside her.

A minute passed, and neither he nor she uttered a word. She did not
even look at him; and he gazed not at her face, but at her clasped
hands, in which she held a small parasol. What was there to tell, what
was there to say, which could compare, in importance, with the simple
fact of their presence there, together, alone, so early, so close to each
other.

'You ... are not angry with me?' Sanin articulated at last.

It would have been difficult for Sanin to have said anything more
foolish than these words ... he was conscious of it himself....

But, at any rate, the silence was broken.

'Angry?' she answered. 'What for? No.'
'And you believe me?' he went on.

'In what you wrote?'
'Yes.'
Gemma's head sank, and she said nothing. The parasol slipped out of her
hands. She hastily caught it before it dropped on the path.

'Ah, believe me! believe what I wrote to you!' cried Sanin; all his
timidity suddenly vanished, he spoke with heat; 'if there is truth on
earth--sacred, absolute truth--it's that I love, love you passionately,
Gemma.'

She flung him a sideway, momentary glance, and again almost dropped
the parasol.

'Believe me! believe me!' he repeated. He besought her, held out his hands
to her, and did not dare to touch her. 'What do you want me to do ...
to convince you?'
She glanced at him again.

'Tell me, Monsieur Dimitri,' she began; 'the day before yesterday,
when you came to talk to me, you did not, I imagine, know then
... did not feel ...'
'I felt it,' Sanin broke in; 'but I did not know it. I have loved you from
the very instant I saw you; but I did not realise at once what you had
become to me! And besides, I heard that you were solemnly betrothed....
As far as your mother's request is concerned--in the first place, how could
I refuse?--and secondly, I think I carried out her request in such
a way that you could guess....'

They heard a heavy tread, and a rather stout gentleman with a knapsack
over his shoulder, apparently a foreigner, emerged from behind the clump,
and staring, with the unceremoniousness of a tourist, at the couple
sitting on the garden-seat, gave a loud cough and went on.

'Your mother,' Sanin began, as soon as the sound of the heavy footsteps
had ceased, 'told me your breaking off your engagement would cause
a scandal'--Gemma frowned a little--that I was myself in part responsible
for unpleasant gossip, and that ... consequently ... I was, to some
extent, under an obligation to advise you not to break with your
betrothed, Herr Klüber....'

'Monsieur Dimitri,' said Gemma, and she passed her hand over her hair on
the side turned towards Sanin, 'don't, please, call Herr Klüber my betrothed.
I shall never be his wife. I have broken with him.'
'You have broken with him? when?'

'Yesterday.'
'You saw him?'
'Yes. At our house. He came to see us.'
'Gemma? Then you love me?'
She turned to him.

'Should ... I have come here, if not?' she whispered, and both her hands
fell on the seat.

Sanin snatched those powerless, upturned palms, and pressed them to his
eyes, to his lips.... Now the veil was lifted of which he had dreamed
the night before! Here was happiness, here was its radiant form!

He raised his head, and looked at Gemma, boldly and directly. She, too,
looked at him, a little downwards. Her half-shut eyes faintly glistened,
dim with light, blissful tears.

Her face was not smiling ... no! it laughed, with a blissful, noiseless
laugh.

He tried to draw her to him, but she drew back, and never ceasing
to laugh the same noiseless laugh, shook her head.

'Wait a little,' her happy eyes seemed to say.

'O Gemma!' cried Sanin: 'I never dreamed that you would love me!'
'I did not expect this myself,' Gemma said softly.

'How could I ever have dreamed,' Sanin went on, 'when I came
to Frankfort, where I only expected to remain a few hours, that I
should find here the happiness of all my life!'
'All your life? Really?' queried Gemma.

'All my life, for ever and ever!' cried Sanin with fresh ardour.

The gardener's spade suddenly scraped two paces from where they were
sitting.

'Let's go home,' whispered Gemma: 'we'll go together--will you?'
If she had said to him at that instant 'Throw yourself in the sea, will
you?' he would have been flying headlong into the ocean before she had
uttered the last word.

They went together out of the garden and turned homewards, not by the
streets of the town, but through the outskirts.

XXVIII

Sanin walked along, at one time by Gemma's side, at another time a
little behind her.

He never took his eyes off her and never ceased smiling. She seemed to
hasten ... seemed to linger. As a matter of fact, they both--he all
pale, and she all flushed with emotion--were moving along as in a dream.
What they had done together a few instants before--that surrender of
each soul to another soul--was so intense, so new, and so moving; so
suddenly everything in their lives had been changed and displaced that
they could not recover themselves, and were only aware of a whirlwind
carrying them along, like the whirlwind on that night, which had
almost flung them into each other's arms.
Sanin walked along, and felt that he even looked at Gemma with other
eyes; he instantly noted some peculiarities in her walk, in her movements,--and
heavens! how infinitely sweet and precious they were to him! And
she felt that that was how he was looking at her.

Sanin and she were in love for the first time; all the miracles of first
love were working in them. First love is like a revolution; the uniformly
regular routine of ordered life is broken down and shattered in one
instant; youth mounts the barricade, waves high its bright flag, and
whatever awaits it in the future--death or a new life--all alike it
goes to meet with ecstatic welcome.

'What's this? Isn't that our old friend?' said Sanin, pointing to a
muffled-up figure, which hurriedly slipped a little aside as though trying
to remain unobserved. In the midst of his abundant happiness he felt a
need to talk to Gemma, not of love--that was a settled thing and holy--but
of something else.

'Yes, it's Pantaleone,' Gemma answered gaily and happily. 'Most likely he
has been following me ever since I left home; all day yesterday he
kept watching every movement I made ... He guesses!'

'He guesses!' Sanin repeated in ecstasy. What could Gemma have said at
which he would not have been in ecstasy?

Then he asked her to tell him in detail all that had passed the day
before.

And she began at once telling him, with haste, and confusion, and
smiles, and brief sighs, and brief bright looks exchanged with Sanin.

She said that after their conversation the day before yesterday,
mamma had kept trying to get out of her something positive; but that she
had put off Frau Lenore with a promise to tell her her decision within
twenty-four hours; how she had demanded this limit of time for herself,
and how difficult it had been to get it; how utterly unexpectedly
Herr Klüber had made his appearance more starched and affected
than ever; how he had given vent to his indignation at the childish,
unpardonable action of the Russian stranger--'he meant your duel,
Dimitri,'--which he described as deeply insulting to him, Klüber, and
how he had demanded that 'you should be at once refused admittance to
the house, Dimitri.' 'For,' he had added--and here Gemma slightly
mimicked his voice and manner--'"it casts a slur on my honour; as
though I were not able to defend my betrothed, had I thought it necessary
or advisable!

All Frankfort will know by to-morrow that an outsider has fought a duel
with an officer on account of my betrothed--did any one ever hear of
such a thing! It tarnishes my honour!" Mamma agreed with him--fancy!--but
then I suddenly told him that he was troubling himself unnecessarily
about his honour and his character, and was unnecessarily annoyed at
the gossip about his betrothed, for I was no longer betrothed to him and
would never be his wife! I must own, I had meant to talk to you first
... before breaking with him finally; but he came ... and I could not
restrain myself. Mamma positively screamed with horror, but I went into
the next room and got his ring--you didn't notice, I took it off two days
ago--and gave it to him. He was fearfully offended, but as he is
fearfully self-conscious and conceited, he did not say much, and went
away. Of course I had to go through a great deal with mamma, and it
made me very wretched to see how distressed she was, and I thought I
had been a little hasty; but you see I had your note, and even apart
from it I knew ...'
'That I love you,' put in Sanin.

'Yes ... that you were in love with me.'
So Gemma talked, hesitating and smiling and dropping her voice or stopping
altogether every time any one met them or passed by. And Sanin listened
ecstatically, enjoying the very sound of her voice, as the day
before he had gloated over her handwriting.

'Mamma is very much distressed,' Gemma began again, and her words flew very
rapidly one after another; 'she refuses to take into consideration that I
dislike Herr Klüber, that I never was betrothed to him from love, but
only because of her urgent entreaties....
She suspects--you, Dimitri; that's to say, to speak plainly, she's
convinced I'm in love with you, and she is more unhappy about it
because only the day before yesterday nothing of the sort had
occurred to her, and she even begged you to advise me....

It was a strange request, wasn't it? Now she calls you ... Dimitri, a
hypocrite and a cunning fellow, says that you have betrayed her confidence,
and predicts that you will deceive me....'

'But, Gemma,' cried Sanin, 'do you mean to say you didn't tell her?...'

'I told her nothing! What right had I without consulting you?'
Sanin threw up his arms. 'Gemma, I hope that now, at least, you will
tell all to her and take me to her.... I want to convince your mother
that I am not a base deceiver!'
Sanin's bosom fairly heaved with the flood of generous and ardent
emotions.

Gemma looked him full in the face. 'You really want to go with me now to
mamma? to mamma, who maintains that ... all this between us is impossible--and
can never come to pass?' There was one word Gemma could not bring herself
to utter.... It burnt her lips; but all the more eagerly Sanin
pronounced it.

'Marry you, Gemma, be your husband--I can imagine no bliss greater!'

To his love, his magnanimity, his determination--he was aware of
no limits now.

When she heard those words, Gemma, who had stopped still for an instant,
went on faster than ever.... She seemed trying to run away from this too
great and unexpected happiness! But suddenly her steps faltered. Round
the corner of a turning, a few paces from her, in a new hat and coat,
straight as an arrow and curled like a poodle--emerged Herr Klüber.
He caught sight of Gemma, caught sight of Sanin, and with a sort
of inward snort and a backward bend of his supple figure, he advanced
with a dashing swing to meet them.

Sanin felt a pang; but glancing at Klüber's face, to which its owner
endeavoured, as far as in him lay, to give an expression of scornful
amazement, and even commiseration, glancing at that red-cheeked, vulgar
face, he felt a sudden rush of anger, and took a step forward.

Gemma seized his arm, and with quiet decision, giving him hers, she
looked her former betrothed full in the face....

The latter screwed up his face, shrugged his shoulders, shuffled
to one side, and muttering between his teeth, 'The usual end to the song!'
(Das alte Ende vom Liede!)--walked away with the same dashing, slightly
skipping gait.

'What did he say, the wretched creature?' asked Sanin, and would have
rushed after Klüber; but Gemma held him back and walked on with him,
not taking away the arm she had slipped into his.

The Rosellis' shop came into sight.

Gemma stopped once more.

'Dimitri, Monsieur Dimitri,' she said, 'we are not there yet, we have not
seen mamma yet....

If you would rather think a little, if ... you are still free, Dimitri!'

In reply Sanin pressed her hand tightly to his bosom, and drew her
on.

'Mamma,' said Gemma, going with Sanin to the room where Frau Lenore
was sitting, 'I have brought the real one!'

XXIX

If Gemma had announced that she had brought with her cholera or
death itself, one can hardly imagine that Frau Lenore could have
received the news with greater despair.

She immediately sat down in a corner, with her face to the wall, and
burst into floods of tears, positively wailed, for all the world like a
Russian peasant woman on the grave of her husband or her son. For the first
minute Gemma was so taken aback that she did not even go up to her
mother, but stood still like a statue in the middle of the room;
while Sanin was utterly stupefied, to the point of almost bursting into
tears himself! For a whole hour that inconsolable wail went on--a
whole hour! Pantaleone thought it better to shut the outer door of
the shop, so that no stranger should come; luckily, it was still early.
The old man himself did not know what to think, and in any case, did not
approve of the haste with which Gemma and Sanin had acted; he could
not bring himself to blame them, and was prepared to give them his
support in case of need:
he greatly disliked Klüber!

Emil regarded himself as the medium of communication between his friend
and his sister, and almost prided himself on its all having turned out
so splendidly! He was positively unable to conceive why Frau Lenore
was so upset, and in his heart he decided on the spot that women,
even the best of them, suffer from a lack of reasoning power! Sanin fared
worst of all.

Frau Lenore rose to a howl and waved him off with her hands, directly
he approached her; and it was in vain that he attempted once or twice to
shout aloud, standing at a distance, 'I ask you for your daughter's hand!'
Frau Lenore was particularly angry with herself. 'How could she have
been so blind--have seen nothing? Had my Giovann' Battista been alive,'
she persisted through her tears, 'nothing of this sort would have
happened!' 'Heavens, what's it all about?' thought Sanin; 'why, it's
positively senseless!' He did not dare to look at Gemma, nor could she
pluck up courage to lift her eyes to him. She restricted herself to
waiting patiently on her mother, who at first repelled even her....

At last, by degrees, the storm abated. Frau Lenore gave over weeping,
permitted Gemma to bring her out of the corner, where she sat huddled
up, to put her into an arm-chair near the window, and to give
her some orange-flower water to drink. She permitted Sanin--not to approach
... oh, no!

--but, at any rate, to remain in the room--she had kept clamouring for
him to go away--and did not interrupt him when he spoke. Sanin immediately
availed himself of the calm as it set in, and displayed an astounding
eloquence. He could hardly have explained his intentions and emotions
with more fire and persuasive force even to Gemma herself. Those emotions
were of the sincerest, those intentions were of the purest, like
Almaviva's in the _Barber of Seville_.

He did not conceal from Frau Lenore nor from himself the disadvantageous
side of those intentions; but the disadvantages were only apparent!
It is true he was a foreigner; they had not known him long, they knew
nothing positive about himself or his means; but he was prepared to bring
forward all the necessary evidence that he was a respectable person and
not poor; he would refer them to the most unimpeachable testimony of his
fellow-countrymen! He hoped Gemma would be happy with him, and
that he would be able to make up to her for the separation from her own
people!... The allusion to 'separation'--the mere word 'separation'--almost
spoiled the whole business.... Frau Lenore began to tremble all over
and move about uneasily.... Sanin hastened to observe that the separation
would only be temporary, and that, in fact, possibly it would not take
place at all!
Sanin's eloquence was not thrown away. Frau Lenore began to glance
at him, though still with bitterness and reproach, no longer with
the same aversion and fury; then she suffered him to come near her,
and even to sit down beside her (Gemma was sitting on the other
side); then she fell to reproaching him,--not in looks only, but
in words, which already indicated a certain softening of heart; she
fell to complaining, and her complaints became quieter and gentler;
they were interspersed with questions addressed at one time to her
daughter, and at another to Sanin; then she suffered him to take
her hand and did not at once pull it away ... then she wept again,
but her tears were now quite of another kind.... Then she smiled
mournfully, and lamented the absence of Giovanni Battista, but quite
on different grounds from before.... An instant more and the two
criminals, Sanin and Gemma, were on their knees at her feet, and
she was laying her hands on their heads in turn; another instant
and they were embracing and kissing her, and Emil, his face beaming
rapturously, ran into the room and added himself to the group so
warmly united.
Pantaleone peeped into the room, smiled and frowned at the same
time, and going into the shop, opened the front door.

XXX
The transition from despair to sadness, and from that to 'gentle
resignation,' was accomplished fairly quickly in Frau Lenore; but
that gentle resignation, too, was not slow in changing into a secret
satisfaction, which was, however, concealed in every way and
suppressed for the sake of appearances. Sanin had won Frau Lenore's
heart from the first day of their acquaintance; as she got used to
the idea of his being her son-in-law, she found nothing particularly
distasteful in it, though she thought it her duty to preserve a
somewhat hurt, or rather careworn, expression on her face.
Besides, everything that had happened the last few days had been
so extraordinary.... One thing upon the top of another. As a practical
woman and a mother, Frau Lenore considered it her duty also to put
Sanin through various questions; and Sanin, who, on setting out
that morning to meet Gemma, had not a notion that he should marry
her--it is true he did not think of anything at all at that time,
but simply gave himself up to the current of his passion--Sanin
entered, with perfect readiness, one might even say with zeal, into
his part--the part of the betrothed lover, and answered all her
inquiries circumstantially, exactly, with alacrity. When she had
satisfied herself that he was a real nobleman by birth, and had
even expressed some surprise that he was not a prince, Frau Lenore
assumed a serious air and 'warned him betimes' that she should be
quite unceremoniously frank with him, as she was forced to be so
by her sacred duty as a mother! To which Sanin replied that he
expected nothing else from her, and that he earnestly begged her
not to spare him!
Then Frau Lenore observed that Herr Klüber--as she uttered the name,
she sighed faintly, tightened her lips, and hesitated--Herr Klüber,
Gemma's former betrothed, already possessed an income of eight
thousand guldens, and that with every year this sum would rapidly
be increased; and what was his, Herr Sanin's income? 'Eight thousand
guldens,' Sanin repeated deliberately.... 'That's in our money
...
about fifteen thousand roubles.... My income is much smaller. I
have a small estate in the province of Tula.... With good management,
it might yield--and, in fact, it could not fail to yield--five or
six thousand ... and if I go into the government service, I can
easily get a salary of two thousand a year.'
'Into the service in Russia?'When Paula had at last ended her confession, the superior
had remained silent for some time; then drawing the girl to her, she had
affectionately asked her:

"And now? Now, tell me truly, does not the passion that has such
wonderful power over you prompt and urge your inmost soul to yield--to
fly to the embrace of the man you love--to give all up for him and say:
'Here I am--I am yours! Call a priest to bless our union!--Is it not
so--am I not right?'"

Paula, deeply blushing, bowed assent; but the old woman drew her head on
to her motherly bosom, and went on thoughtfully:

"I saw him drive past in his quadriga, and was reminded of many a noble
statue of the heathen Greeks. Beauty, rank, wealth, aye--and talents and
intellect--all that could ruin the heart of a Paula are his, and she--I
see it plainly--will give it to him gladly."

And again the maiden bowed her head. The abbess sighed, and went on as
though she had with difficulty succeeded in submitting to the inevitable
"Then all warning would be in vain.--Still, he is not of our confession,
he. . . ."

"But how highly he esteems it!" cried Paula. "That he proves by risking
his freedom and life for you and your household."

"Say rather for you whom he loves," replied the other. "But putting that
out of the question, it pains me deeply to think of Thomas' daughter as
the wife of a Jacobite. You will not, I know, give him up; and the Father
of Love often leads true love to good ends by wonderful ways, even though
they are ways of error, passing through pitfalls and abysses."

Paula fell on her neck to kiss her gratefully: but the abbess could only
allow the girl a few minutes to enjoy her happiness. She desired her to
sit down by her side, and holding Paula's hand in both her own, she spoke
to her in a tone of calm deliberation. She and her sisterhood, she began
by saying, were deeply indebted to Orion. She had no dearer wish than
that Paula should find the greatest earthly happiness in her marriage;
still, it was her part to tender advice, and she dared not blind herself
to the dangers which threatened this happiness. She herself had a long
life behind her of varied experience, in which she had seen hundreds of
young men who had been given up as lost sinners by father and
mother--lost to the Church and to all goodness--and among these many a
one, like Saul, had had his journey to Damascus. A turning point had come
to them, and the outcast sons had become excellent and pious men.

Paula, as she listened, had drawn closer to the speaker, and her eyes
beamed with joy; but the elder woman shook her head, and her gaze grew
more devout and rapt, as she went on with deep solemnity:

"But then, my child, in all of these Grace had done its perfect work; the
miracle was accomplished which we term regeneration. They were still the
same men in the flesh and in the elements of their sensible nature, but
their relation to the world and to life was altogether new. All that they
had formerly thought desirable they could now hate; what they had deemed
important was now worthless, and the worthless precious in their eyes;
whereas they once referred everything to their own desires, they now
referred all to God and His will. Their impulses were the same as of old,
but they kept them within bounds by a never-sleeping consciousness that
they led, not to joys, but to everlasting punishment. These regenerate
souls learned to contemn the world, and instead of gazing down at the
dust their eyes were fixed upwards on Heaven. If either of them tottered,
his whole 'new man' prompted him to recover his balance before he fell to
the ground.--But Orion! Your lover? His guilt seems to have passed over
him; he hopes for reunion with God from a more meritorious life in the
world. Not only is his nature unaltered, but his attitude with regard to
life and to the joys it offers to the children of this world. Earthly
love is spurring him on to strive for what is noble and great and he
earnestly seeks to attain it; but he will fall over every stone that the
devil casts in his path, and find it hard to pick himself up again, for
misfortune has not led him to the new birth or the new life in God. Just
such men have I seen, numbers of times, relapsing into the sins they had
escaped from. Before we can entirely trust a man who has once--though but
once-wandered so far from God's ways, while Grace has not yet worked
effectually in him, we shall do well to watch his dealings and course for
more than a few short days. If you still feel that you must follow the
dictates of your heart, at any rate do not fly into your lover's open
arms, do not abandon to him the pure sanctuary of your body and soul, do
not be wholly his till he has been fully put to the proof."

"But I believe in him entirely!" cried Paula, with a flood of tears.

"You believe because you love him," replied the abbess.

"And because he deserves it."

"And how long has he deserved it?"

"Was he not a splendid man before his fall?"

"And so was many a murderer. Most criminals become outcasts from society
in a single moment."

"But society still accepts Orion."

"Because he is the son of the Mukaukas."

"And because he wins all hearts!"

"Even that of the Almighty?"

"Oh! Mother, Mother! why do you measure him by the standard of your own
sanctified soul? How few are the elect who find a share of the grace of
which you speak!"

"But those who have sinned like him must strive for it."

"And he does so, Mother, in his way."

"It is the wrong way; wrong for those who have sinned as he has. All he
strives for is worldly happiness."

"No, no. He is firm in his faith in God and the Saviour. He is not a
liar."

"And yet he thinks he may escape the penalty?"

"And does not the Lord pardon true repentance?--He has repented; and how
bitterly, how fearfully he has suffered!"

"Say rather that he has felt the stripes that his own sin brought upon
him.--There are more to come; and how will he take them? Temptation lurks
in every path, and how will he avoid it? As your mother, indeed it is my
duty to warn you: Keep your passion and yourself still under control;
continue to watch him, and grant him nothing--not the smallest favor, as
you are a maiden, before he. . ."

"Till when; how long am I to be so basely on my guard?" sobbed Paula. "Is
that love which trusts not and is not ready to share the lot even of the
backslider?"

"Yes, child, yes," interrupted the old woman. "To suffer all things, to
endure all things, is the duty of true love, and therefore of yours; but
you must not allow the most indissoluble of all bonds to unite you to him
till the back-slider has learnt to walk firmly. Follow him step by step,
hold him up with faithful care, never despair of him if he seems other
than what you had hoped. Make it your duty, pious soul, to render him
worthy of grace--but do not be in a hurry to speak the final yes--do not
say it yet."

Paula yielded, though unwillingly, to this last word of counsel; but, in
fact, Orion's fault had filled the abbess with deep distrust. So great a
sinner, under the blight, too, of a father's curse, ought, in her
opinion, to have retired from the world and besieged Heaven for grace and
a new birth, instead of seeking joys, such as she thought none but the
most blameless--and, those of her own confession--could deserve, in union
with so exceptional a creature as her beloved Paula. Indeed, having
herself found peace for her soul only in the cloister, after a stormy and
worldly youth, she would gladly have received the noble daughter of her
old friend as the Bride of Christ within those walls, to be, perhaps, her
successor as Mother Superior. She longed that her darling should be
spared the sufferings she had known through the ruthlessness of faithless
men; so she would not abate a jot of the tenor of her advice, or cease to
impress on Paula, firmly though lovingly, the necessity of following it.
At last Paula took leave of her, bound by a promise not to pledge herself
irrevocably to Orion till his return from Doomiat, and till the abbess
had informed her by letter what opinion she had formed of him in the
course of their flight.

The high-spirited girl had not shed so many tears, as in the course of
this interview, since the fatal affair at Abyla where she had lost her
father and brother; it was with a tear-stained face and aching head that
she had made her way back, under the scorching mid-day sun, to Rufinus'
house, where she sought her old nurse. Betta had earnestly entreated her
to lie down, and when Paula refused to hear of it she persuaded her at
any rate to bathe her head with water as cold as was procurable in this
terrific heat, and to have her hair carefully rearranged by her skilful
hand; for this had been her mother's favorite remedy against headache.
When, at length, Paula and her lover stood face to face, in a shady spot
in the garden, they both looked embarrassed and estranged. He was pale,
and gazed at her with some annoyance; and her red eyes and knit brows,
for her brain was throbbing with piercing pain, did not tend to improve
his mood. It was her part to explain and excuse herself; and as he did
not at once address her after they had exchanged greetings, she said in a
low tone of urgent entreaty:

"Forgive me for coming so late. How long you must have been waiting! But
parting from my best friend, my second mother, agitated me so
painfully--it was so unspeakably sad.--I did not know how to hold up my
head, it ached so when I came home, and now--oh, I had hoped that we
might meet to-day so differently!"

"But even yesterday you had no time to spare for me," he retorted
sullenly, "and this morning--you were present when Rufinus invited
me--this morning!--I am not exacting, and to you, good God! How could I
be?--But have we not to part, to bid each other farewell--perhaps for
ever? Why should you have given up so much time and strength to your
friend, that so scanty a remnant is left for the lover? That is an unfair
division."

"How could I deny it?" she said with melancholy entreaty. "You are indeed
very right; but I could not leave the child last evening, as soon as she
came, and while she was weeping out all her sorrows; and if you only knew
how surprised and grieved I was--how my heart ached when, instead of
finding you, your note. . . ."

"I was obliged to go to Amru," interrupted Orion. "This undertaking
compels me to leave much behind, and I am no longer the freest of the
free, as I used to be. During this dreadful breakfast I have been sitting
on thorns. But let all that pass. I came hither with a heart high with
hope--and now?--You see, Paula, this enterprise tears me in two in more
ways than you can imagine, puts me into a more critical position, and
weighs more on my mind than you can think or know--I will explain it all
to you at another time--and to bear it all, to keep up the spirit and
happy energy that I need, I must be secure of the one thing for which I
could take far greater toil and danger as mere child's play; I must
know. . . ."

"You must know," she interposed, "whether my heart is fully and wholly
open to your love. . . ."

"And whether," he added, with growing ardor, "in spite of the bitter
suffering that weighs on my wretched soul, I may hope to be happier than
the saints in bliss. O Paula, adored and only woman, may I. . . ."

"You may," she said clearly and fervently. "I love you, Orion, and shall
never, never cease to love you with my whole soul."

He flew to her side, clasped both her hands as if beside himself,
snatched them to his lips regardless of the nearness of the house, whence
ten pairs of eyes might have seen him, and covered them with burning
kisses, till she drew them from him with the entreaty: "No, no; forbear,
I entreat you. No--not now."

"Yes, now, at this very moment--or, if not, when?" he asked vehemently.
"But here, in this garden--you are right, this is no place for two human
beings so happy as we are. Come with me; come into the house and lead the
way to a spot where we may be unseen and unheard, alone with each other
and our happiness."

"No, no, no!" she hastily put in, pressing her hand to her aching brow.
"Come with me to the bench under the sycamore; it is shady there, and you
can tell me everything, and hear once more how entirely love has taken
possession of me."

He looked in her face, surprised and disappointed; but she turned towards
the sycamore and sat down beneath it. He slowly followed her. She signed
to him to take a seat by her side, but he stood up in front of her,
saying sadly and despondently.

"Always the same--always calm and cold. Is this fair, Paula? Is this the
overwhelming love of which you spoke? Is this your response to the
yearning cry of a passionately ardent heart? Is this all that love can
grant to love--that a betrothed owes to her lover on the very eve of
parting?"

At this she looked up at him, deeply distressed, and said in pathetically
urgent entreaty: "O Orion, Orion! Have I not told you, can you not see
and feel how much I love you? You must know and feel it; and if you do,
be content, I entreat. You, whom alone I love, be satisfied to know that
this heart is yours, that your Paula--your own Paula, for that indeed I
am--will think of nothing, care for nothing, pray and entreat Heaven for
nothing but you, yes you, my own, my all."

"Then come, come with me," he insisted, "and grant your betrothed the
rights that are his due.

"Nay, not my betrothed--not yet," she besought him, with all the fervor
of her tortured soul. "In my veins too the blood flows warm with
yearning. Gladly would I fly to your arms and lay my head against yours,
but not to-day can I become your betrothed, not yet; I cannot, I dare
not!"

"And why not? Tell me, at any rate, why not," he cried indignantly,
clenching his fist to his breast. "Why will you not be my bride, if
indeed it is true that you love me? Why have you invented this new and
intolerable torment?"

"Because prudence tells me," she replied in a low, hurried voice, while
her bosom heaved painfully, as though she were afraid to hear her own
words; "because I see that the time is not yet come. Ah, Orion! you have
not yet learnt to bridle the desires and cravings that burn within you;
you have forgotten all too quickly what is past--what a mountain we had
to cross before we succeeded in finding each other, before I--for I must
say it, my dear one--before I could look you in the face without anger
and aversion. A strange and mysterious ordering has brought it about; and
you, too, have honestly done your best that everything should be changed,
that what was white should now be black, that the chill north wind should
turn to a hot southerly one. Thus poison turns to healing, and a curse to
a blessing. In this foolish heart of mine passionate hatred has given way
to no less fervent love. Still, I cannot yet be your bride, your wife.
Call it cowardice, call it selfish caution, what you will. I call it
prudence, and applaud it; though it cost my poor eyes a thousand bitter
tears before my heart and brain could consent to be guided by the warning
voice. Of one thing you may be fully assured: my heart will never be
another's, come what may--it is yours with my whole soul!--But I will not
be your bride till I can say to you with glad confidence, as well as with
passionate love: 'You have conquered--take me, I am yours!' Then you
shall feel and confess that Paula's love is not less vehement, less
ardent. . . . O God! Orion, learn to know and understand me. You must--for
my sake and your own, you must!--My head, merciful Heaven, my head!"

She bowed her face and clasped her hands to her burning brow; Orion, pale
and shivering, laid his hand on her shoulder, and said in a harsh, forced
voice that had lost all its music: "The Esoterics impose severe trials on
their disciples before they admit them into the mysteries. And we are in
Egypt--but the difference is a wide one when the rule is applied to love.
How ever, all this is not from yourself. What you call prudence is the
voice of that nun!"

"It is the voice of reason," replied Paula softly. "The yearning of my
heart had overpowered it, and I owe to my friend. . . ."

"What do you owe her?" cried the young man furiously indignant. "You
should curse her, rather, for doing you so ill a turn, as I do at this
moment. What does she know of me? Has she ever heard a word from my lips?
If that despotic and casuistic recluse could have known what my heart and
soul are like, she would have advised you differently. Even as a childs'
confidence and love alone could influence me. Whatever my faults might
be, I never was false to kindness and trust.--And, so far as you are
concerned--you who are prudence and reason in person--blest in your love,
I should have cared only for your approbation. If I could have overcome
the last of your scruples, I should indeed have been proud and happy!--I
would have brought the sun and stars down from the sky for you, and have
laughed temptation to scorn!--But as it is--instead of being raised I am
lowered, a laughing-stock even in my own eyes. One with you, I could have
led the way on wings to the realms of light where Perfection holds
sway!--But as it is? What a task lies before me!--To heat your frigid
love to flaming point by good deeds, as though they were olive-logs. A
pretty task for a man--to put himself to the proof before the woman he
loves! It is a hideous and insulting torture which I will not submit to,
against which my whole inner man revolts, and which you will and must
forego--if indeed it is true that you love me!"

"I love you, oh! I love you," she cried, beside herself, and seizing his
hands. "Perhaps you are right. I--my God what shall I do? Only do not ask
me yet, to speak the final yes or no. I cannot control myself to the
feeblest thought. You see, you see, how I am suffering!"

"Yes, I see it," he replied, looking compassionately at her pale face and
drawn brow. "And if it must be so, I say: till this evening then. Try to
rest now, and take care of yourself.--But then. . . ."

"Then, during the voyage, the flight, repeat to the abbess all you have
just said to me. She is a noble woman, and she, too, will learn to
understand and to love you, I am sure. She will retract the word I know.
. . ."

"What word?"

"My word, given to her, that I would not be yours. . . ."

"Till I had gone through the Esoteric tests?" exclaimed Orion with an
angry shrug. "Now go,--go and lie down. This hour, which should have been
the sweetest of our lives, a stranger has embittered and darkened. You
are not sure of yourself--nor I of myself. Anything more that we could
say now and here would lead to no good issue for either you or me. Go and
rest; sleep off your pain, and I--I will try to forget.--If you could but
see the turmoil in my soul!--But farewell till our next, more friendly--I
hardly dare trust myself to say our happier meeting."

He hastily turned away, but she called after him in sad lament: "Orion do
not forget--Orion, you know that I love you."

But he did not hear; he buried on with his head bowed over his breast,
down to the road, without reentering Rufinus' house.


CHAPTER VII.

When Orion reached home, wounded to the quick, he flung himself on a
divan. Paula had said that her heart was his indeed, but what a cool and
grudging love was this that would give nothing till it had insured its
future. And how could Paula have allowed a third person to come between
them, and rule her feelings and actions? She must have revealed to that
third person all that had previously passed between them--and it was for
this Melchite nun, his personal foe, that he was about to--it was enough
to drive him mad!--But he could not withdraw; he had pledged himself to
the brave old man to carry out this crazy enterprise. And in the place of
the lofty, noble mistress of his whole being, his fancy pictured Paula as
a tearful, vacillating, and cold-hearted woman.

There lay the maps and plans which he had desired Nilus to send in from
his room for his study of the task set him by Amru; as his eye fell upon
them, he struck his fist against the wall, started up, and ran like a
madman up and down the room which had been sacred to her peaceful life.

There stood her lute; he had freshly strung and tuned it. To calm himself
he drew it to him, took up the plectrum, and began to play. But it was a
poor instrument; she had been content with this wretched thing! He flung
it on the couch and took up his own, the gift of Heliodora. How sweetly,
how delightfully she had been wont to play it! Even now its strings gave
forth a glorious tone; by degrees he began to rejoice in his own playing,
and music soothed his excitement, as it had often done before. It was
grand and touching, though he several times struck the strings so
violently that their loud clanging and sighing and throbbing answered
each other like the wild wailing of a soul in torment.

Under this vehement usage the bridge of the lute suddenly snapped off
with a dull report; and at the same instant his secretary, who had been
with him at Constantinople, threw open the door in glad excitement, and
began, even before he had crossed the threshold:

"Only think, my lord! Here is a messenger come from the inn kept by
Sostratus with this tablet for you.--It is open, so I read it. Only
think! it is hardly credible! The Senator Justinus is here with his wife,
the noble Martina--here in Memphis, and they beg you to visit them at
once to speak of matters of importance. They came last night, the
messenger tells me, and now--what joy! Think of all the hospitality you
enjoyed in their house. Can we leave them in an inn? So long as
hospitality endures, it would be a crime!"

"Impossible, quite impossible!" cried Orion, who had cast aside the lute,
and was now reading the letter himself. "It is true indeed! his own
handwriting. And that immovable pair are in Egypt--in Memphis! By
Zeus!"--for this was still the favorite oath of the golden youth of
Alexandria and Constantinople, even in these Christian times.--"By Zeus,
I ought to receive them here like princes!--Wait!--of course you must
tell the messenger that I am coming at once--have the four new Pannonians
harnessed to the silver-plated chariot. I must go to my mother; but there
is time enough for that. Desire Sebek to have the guest-chambers prepared
for distinguished guests--those sick people are out of them, thank God!
Take my present room for them too; I will go back to the old one. Of
course they have a numerous suite. Set twenty or thirty slaves to work.
Everything must be ready in two hours at furthest. The two sitting-rooms
are particularly handsome, but where anything is lacking, place
everything in the house at Sebek's command.--Justinus in Egypt!--But make
haste, man! Nay, stay! One thing more. Carry these maps and scrolls--no;
they are too heavy for you. Desire a slave to fetch them, and take them
to Rufinus; he must keep them till I come. Tell him I meant to use them
on the way--he knows."

The secretary rushed off; Orion performed a rapid toilet and had his
mourning dress rearranged in fresh folds; then he went to his mother. She
had often heard of the cordial reception that her son, and her husband,
too, in former days, had met with in the senator's house, and she took it
quite as a matter of course that the strangers' rooms, and among them
that which had been Paula's, should be prepared for the travellers; all
she asked was that it should be explained that she was suffering, so that
she might not have to trouble herself to entertain them.

She advised Orion to put off his journey and to devote himself to his
friends; but he explained that even their arrival must not delay him. He
had entire confidence in Sebek and the upper housekeeper, and the emperor
himself would remit the duties of hostess to a sick woman. Once, at any
rate, she would surely allow the illustrious guests to pay their respects
to her,--but even this Neforis refused It would be quite enough if her
visitors received messages and greetings daily in her name, with
offerings of choice fruit and flowers, and on the last day some costly
gift. Orion thought this proposal quite worthy of them both, and
presently drove off behind his Pannonians to the hostelry.

By the harbor he met the captain of the boat he had hired; to him he held
up two fingers, and the boatman signified by repeated nodding that he had
understood the meaning of this signal: "Be ready at two hours before
midnight."

The sight of this weather-beaten pilot, and the prospect of making some
return to his noble friends for all their kindness, cheered Orion
greatly; and though he regretted being obliged to leave these guests of
all others, the perils that lay before him reasserted their charm. He
could surely win over the abbess in the course of the voyage, and Paula
might be brought to reason, perhaps, this very evening. Justinus and his
wife were Melchites, and he knew that both these friends--for whom he had
a particular regard--would be enchanted with his scheme if he took them
into his confidence.

The inn kept by Sostratus, a large, square building surrounding a
spacious court-yard, was the best and most frequented in the town. The
eastern side faced the road and the river, and contained the best rooms,
in which, on the previous night, the senator had established himself with
his wife and servants. The clatter of the quadriga drew Justinus to the
window; as soon as he recognized Orion he waved a table-napkin to him,
shouting a hearty "Welcome!" and then retired into the room again.

"Here he is!" he cried to his wife, who was lying on a couch in the
lightest permissible attire, and sipping fruit-syrup from time to time to
moisten her dry lips, while a boy fanned her for coolness.

"That is well indeed!" she exclaimed, and desired her maid to be quick,
very quick, and fetch her a wrap, but to be sure it was a thin one. Then,
turning to a very lovely young woman who had started to her feet at
Justinus' first exclamation, she asked:

"Would you rather that he should find you here, my darling, or shall we
see him first, and tell him that we have brought you with us?"

"That will be best," answered the other in a sweet voice, and she sighed
softly before she added: "What will he not think of me? We may grow
older, but folly--folly. . ."

"Grows with years?" laughed the matron. "Or do you think it
decreases?--But here he is."

The younger woman hurried away by a side door, behind which she
disappeared. Martina looked after her, and pointing that way to direct
her husband's glance, she observed: "She has left herself a chink. Good
God! Fancy being in love in such heat as this; what a hideous thought!"

At this moment the door was opened, and the heartiest greetings ensued.
It was evident that the meeting was as great a pleasure to the elderly
pair as to the young man. Justinus embraced him warmly, while the matron
cried out: "And a kiss for me too!" And when the youth immediately and
heartily gave it, she exclaimed with a groan:

"O man, and child of man, great Sesostris! How did your famous ancestor
ever achieve heroic deeds under such a sun as this? For my part I am fast
disappearing, melting away like butter; but what will a man not do for
love's sake?--Syra, Syra; for God's sake bring me something, however
small, that looks like a garment! How rational is the fashion of the
people of Africa whom we met with on our journey. If they have three
fingers' breadth of cloth about them, they consider themselves elegantly
dressed.--But come, sit down--there, at my feet. A seat, Argos, and some
wine, and water in a damp clay pitcher, and cool like the last. Husband,
the boy seems to me handsomer than ever. But dear God! he is in mourning,
and how becoming it is! Poor boy, poor boy! Yes, we heard in Alexandria."

She wiped first her eyes and then her damp brow, and her husband added
his expressions of sympathy at the death of the Mukaukas.

They were a genial and comfortable couple, Justinus and his wife Martina.
Two beings who felt perfectly secure in their vast inherited wealth, and
who, both being of noble birth, never need make any display of dignity,
because they were sure of it in the eyes of high and low alike. They had
asserted their right to remain natural and human under the formalities of
the most elaborately ceremonious society; those who did not like the easy
tone adopted by them in their house might stay away. He, devoid of
ambition, a senator in virtue of his possessions and his name, never
caring to make any use of his adventitious dignity but that of procuring
good appointments for his favorite clients, or good places for his family
on any festive occasion, was a hospitable soul; the good friend of all
his friends, whose motto was "live and let live." Martina, with a heart
as good as gold, had never made any pretensions to beauty, but had
nevertheless been much courted. This worthy couple had for many years
thought that nothing could be more delightful than a residence in the
capital, or at their beautiful villa on the Bosphorus, scorning to follow
the example of other rich and fashionable folks, and go to take baths or
make journeys. It was enough for them to be able to make others happy
under their roof; and there was never any lack of visitors, just because
those who were weary of bending their backs at the Byzantine Court, found
this unceremonious circle particularly restful.

Martina was especially fond of having young people about her, and
Heliodora, the widow of her nephew, had found comfort with her in her
trouble; it was in her house that Orion and Heliodora had met. The young
widow was a great favorite with the old couple, but higher in their
esteem even than she, had been the younger brother of her deceased
husband. He was to have been their heir; but they had mourned his death
now two years; for news had reached them that Narses, who had served in
the Imperial army as tribune of cavalry, had fallen in battle against the
infidels. No one, however, had ever brought a more exact report of his
death; and at last their indefatigable enquiries had resulted in their
learning that he had been taken prisoner by the Saracens and carried into
slavery in Arabia. This report received confirmation through the efforts
of Orion and his deceased father. Within a few hours of the young
Egyptian's departure, they received a letter from the youth they had
given up for lost, written in trembling characters, in which he implored
them to effect his deliverance through Amru, the Arab governor of Egypt.
The old people had set forth at once on their pilgrimage, and Heliodora
had done her part in urging them to this step. Her passion for Orion, to
whom, for more than a year, her gentle heart had been wholly devoted, had
increased every hour since his departure. She had not concealed it from
Martina, who thought it no less than her duty to stand by the poor
lovesick child; for Heliodora had nursed her husband, the senator's
nephew, to the end, with touching fidelity and care; and besides, Martina
had given the young Egyptian--with whom she was "quite in love
herself"--every opportunity of paying his addresses to the young widow.

They were a pair that seemed made for each other, and Martina delighted
in match-making. But in this case, though hearts had met, hands had not,
and finally it had been a real grief to Martina to hear Orion and
Heliodora called--and with good reason--a pair of lovers.

Once she had appealed in her genial way to the young man's conscience,
and he had replied that his father, who was a Jacobite, would never
consent to his union with a woman of any other confession. At that time
she had found little to answer; but she had often thought if only she
could make the Mukaukas acquainted with Heliodora, he, whom she had known
in the capital as a young and handsome admirer of every charming woman,
would certainly capitulate.

Her favorite niece had indeed every grace that a father's heart could
desire to attract the son. She was of good family, the widow of a man of
rank, rich, but just two and twenty, and beautiful enough to bewitch old
or young. A sweeter and gentler soul Martina had never known. Those large
dewy eyes-imploring eyes, she called them--might soften a stone, and her
fair waving hair was as soft as her nature. Add to this her full, supple
figure--and how perfectly she dressed, how exquisitely she sang and
struck the lute! It was not for nothing that she was courted by every
youth of rank in Constantinople--and if the old Mukaukas could but hear
her laugh! There was not a sound on earth more clear, more glad than
Heliodora's laugh. She was not indeed remarkable for intellect, but no
one could call her a simpleton, and your very clever women were not to
every man's taste.

So, when they were to travel to Egypt, Martina took it for granted that
Heliodora must go with them, and that the flirtation which had made her
favorite the talk of the town must, in Memphis, become courtship in
earnest. Then, when she heard at Alexandria that the Mukaukas was lately
dead, she regarded the game as won. Now they were in Memphis, Orion was
sitting before her, and the young man had invited her and her following
of above twenty persons to stay in his house. It was a foregone
conclusion that the travellers were to accept this bidding as prescribed
by the laws of hospitality, and preparations for the move were
immediately set on foot.

Justinus meanwhile explained what had brought them to Egypt, and begged
Orion's assistance. The young man had known the senator's nephew well as
one of the most brilliant and amiable youths of the capital, and he was
sincerely distressed to be forced to inform his friends that Amru, who
could easily have procured the release of Narses, was to start within two
days for Medina, while he himself was compelled to set out on a journey
that very evening, at an hour he could not name.

He saw how greatly this firmly-expressed determination agitated and
disturbed the old couple, and the senator's urgency led him to tell them,
under the pledge of strict secrecy, what business it was that took him
away and what a perilous enterprise he had before him.

He began his story confident of his orthodox guests' sympathy; but to his
amazement they both disapproved of the undertaking, and not, as they
declared, on his account only or for the sake of the help they had
counted on.

The senator reminded him that he was the natural chief of the Egyptian
population in Memphis, and that, by such a scheme, he was undermining his
influence with those whose leader he was by right and duty as his
father's son. His ambition ought to make him aim at this leadership; and
instead of offering such a rebuff to the patriarch, it was his part to
work with him--whose power he greatly underrated--so as to make life
tolerable to their fellow-Christians in a land ruled by Moslems.

Paula's name was not once mentioned; but Orion thought of her and
remained firm, though not without an inward struggle.

At the same time, to prove to his friends how sincerely he desired to
please them, he proposed that he and Justinus should immediately cross
the Nile to lay his application before the Khaliff's vicar. A glance at
the sky showed him that it wanted still an hour and a half of sunset. His
swift horses would not need more than that time for the journey, and
during their absence the rest of the party could move from the inn. Carts
for the baggage were already in waiting below, and chariots had been
ordered to follow and convey his beloved guests to their new quarters.

The senator agreed to this proposal, and as the two men went off Martina
called after Orion.

"My senator must talk to you on the road, and if you can be brought to
reason you will find your reward waiting for you! Do not be saving of
your talents of gold, old man, till the general has promised to procure
the lad's release.--And listen to me, Orion; give up your mad scheme."

The sun had not wholly disappeared behind the Libyan range when the
snorting Pannonians, all flecked with foam, drove back into the
court-yard of the governor's residence. The two men had unfortunately
gained nothing; for Amru was absent, reviewing the troops between
Heliopolis and Onix, and was not expected home till night or even next
morning. The party had removed from the inn and the senator's white
slaves were already mixing with the black and brown ones of the
establishment.

Martina was delighted with her new quarters, and with the beautiful
flowers--most of them new to her--with which the invalid mistress of the
house had had the two great reception-rooms garnished in token of
welcome; but the failure of Justinus' visit to Fostat fell like
hoar-frost on her happy mood.

Orion, she asserted, ought to regard this stroke of ill-luck as a
judgment from God. It was the will of Heaven that he should give up his
enterprise and be content to make due preparations for a noble work which
could be carried through without him, in order to accomplish another, out
of friendship, which urgently needed his help. However, he again
expressed his regret that in spite of everything he must adhere to his
purpose; and when Martina asked him: "What, even if my reward is one that
would especially delight you?" he nodded regretfully. "Yes, even then."

So she merely added, "Well, we shall see," and went on impressively:
"Every one has some peculiarity which stamps his individuality and
becomes him well: in you it is amiability, my son. Such obstinacy does
not suit you; it is quite foreign to you, and is the very opposite to
what I call amiability. Be yourself, even in this instance."

"That is to say weak and yielding, especially when a kind woman. . . ."

"When old friends ask it," she hastily put in; but almost before she had
finished she turned to her husband, exclaiming: "Good Heavens! come to
the window. Did you ever see such a glorious mingling of purple and gold
in the sky? It is as though the old pyramids and the whole land of Egypt
were in flames. But now, great Sesostris,"--the name she gave to Orion
when she was in a good humor with him, "it is time that you should see
what I have brought you. In the first place this trinket," and she gave
him a costly bracelet of old Greek workmanship set with precious stones,
"and then--nay, no Thanks--and then--Well the object is rather large, and
besides--come with me."

As she spoke she went from the reception-room into the anteroom, led the
way to the door of the room which had once been Paula's, and then his
own, opened it a little way, peeped in, and then pushed Orion forward,
saying hastily: "There--do you see--there it is!"

By the window stood Heliodora. The bright radiance of the sinking sun
bathed her slender but round and graceful form, her "imploring" eyes
looked up at him with rapturous delight, and her white arms folded across
her bosom gave her the aspect of a saint, waiting with humble longing for
some miracle, in expectation of unutterable joys.

Martina's eyes, too, were fixed on Orion; she saw how pale he turned at
seeing the young widow, she saw him start as though suddenly overcome by
some emotion--what, she could not guess--and shrink back from the sunlit
vision in the window. These were effects which the worthy matron had not
anticipated.

Never off the stage, thought she, had she seen a man so stricken by love;
for she could not suspect that to him it was as though a gulf had
suddenly yawned at his feet.

With a swiftness which no one could have looked for from her heavy and
bulky figure, Martina hastily returned to her husband, and even at the
door exclaimed: "It is all right, all has gone well! At the sight of her
he seemed thunderstruck! Mark my words: we shall have a wedding here by
the Nile."

"My blessing on it," replied Justinus. "But, wedding or no wedding, all I
care is that she should persuade that fine young fellow to give up his
crazy scheme. I saw how even the brown rascals in the Arab's service
bowed down before him; and he will persuade the general, if any one can,
to do all in his power for Narses. He must not and shall not go! You
impressed it strongly on Heliodora. . . ."

"That she should keep him?" laughed the matron. "I tell you, she will
nail him down if need be."

"So much the better," replied her husband. "But, wife, folks might say
that it was not quite seemly in you to force them together. Properly
speaking, you are as it were her female mentor, the motherly patroness."

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Martina. "At home they invited no witnesses to
look on at their meetings. The poor love-lorn souls must at any rate have
a chance of speaking to each other and rejoicing that they have met once
more. I will step in presently, and be the anxious, motherly friend.
Tine, Tine! And if it does not end in a wedding, I will make a pilgrimage
to St. Agatha, barefoot."

"And I with only one shoe!" the senator declared, "for, everything in
reason--but the talk about Dora was at last beyond all bounds. It was no
longer possible to have them both together under the same roof. And you
yourself--no, seriously; go in to them."

"Directly, directly.--But first look out of this window once more. Oh,
what a sun!--there, now it is too late. Only two minutes ago the whole
heaven was of the hue of my red Syrian cloak; and now it is all
dark!--The house and garden are beautiful, and everything is old and
handsome; just what I should have expected in the home of the rich
Mukaukas."

"And I too," replied Justinus. "But now, go. If they have come to an
understanding, Dora may certainly congratulate herself."

"I should think so! But she need not be ashamed even of her villa, and
they must spend every summer there, I will manage that. If that poor,
dear fellow Narses does not escape with his life--for two years of
slavery are a serious matter--then I should be able. . . ."

"To alter your will? Not a bad idea; but there is no hurry for that; and
now, you really must go."

"Yes, yes, in a minute. Surely I may have time to speak.--I, for my part,
know of no one whom I would sooner put in the place of Narses. . . ."

"Than Orion and Heliodora? Certainly, I have no objection; but now. . . ."

"Well, perhaps it is wicked to think of a man who may still be alive as
numbered with the dead.--At any rate the poor boy cannot go back to his
legion. . . ."

"On no consideration. But, Martina. . . ."

"To-morrow morning Orion must urge our case on the Arab . . . ."

"If he does not go away."

"Will you bet that she fails to keep him."

"I should be a fool for my pains," laughed Justinus. "Do you ever pay me
when I win?--But now, joking apart, you must go and see what they are
about."

And this time she obeyed. She would have won her bet; for Orion, who had
remained unmoved by his sister-in-law's letter, by the warning voice of
the faith of his childhood, by the faithful council of his honest servant
Nilus, or by the senator's convincing arguments--had yielded to
Heliodora's sweet blandishments.

How ardently had her loving heart flamed up, when she saw him so deeply
agitated at the sight of her! With what touching devotion had she sunk
into his arms; how humbly-half faint with sweet sorrow and sweeter
ecstasy--had she fallen at his feet, and clasped his knees, and entreated
him, with eyes full of tears of adoring rapture, not to leave to-day, to
wait only till tomorrow, and then, if he would, to tread her in the dust.
Now--now when she had just found him again after being worn out with
pining and longing-to part now, to see him rush on an uncertain fate--it
would kill her, it would certainly be her death! And when he still had
tried to resist she had rushed into his arms, had stopped his lips with
burning kisses, and whispered in his ear all the flattering words of love
he once had held so dear.

Why had he never seriously tried to win her, why had he so soon forgotten
her? Because she, who could assert her dignity firmly enough with others,
had abandoned herself to him unresistingly after a few meetings, as if
befooled by some magician's spell. The precious spoil so easily won had
soon lost its value in his eyes. But to-day the fire which had died out
blazed up again. Yes, this was the love he craved, he must have! To be
loved with entire and utter devotion, with a heart that thought only of
him and not of itself, that asked only for love in return for love, that
did not fence itself round with caution and invoke the aid of others for
protection against him. This lovely creature, all passion, who had taken
upon herself to endure the contumely of society, and pain and grief for
his sake, knowing too that he had abandoned her, and would never make her
his wife before God and men--she indeed knew what it was to love; and he
who was so often inclined to despair of himself felt his heart uplifted
at the thought that he was so precious in her eyes, nay--he would own
it--so idolized.

And how sweet, how purely womanly she was! Those imploring eyes--which he
had grown quite sick of in Constantinople, for they were as full of
pathetic entreaty when she merely begged him to hold her cloak for her as
when she appealed to his heart of hearts not to leave her--that
entrancing play of glances which had first bewitched him, came to him
to-day as something new and worked the old spell.

In this moment of tender reunion he had promised her at any rate to
consider whether he could not release himself from the pledge by which he
was bound; but hardly had he spoken the words when the memory of Paula
revived in his mind, and an inward voice cried out to him that she was a
being of nobler mould than this yielding, weak woman, abject before
him--that she symbolized his upward struggle, Heliodora his perdition.

At length he was able to tear himself from her embrace; and at the first
step out of this intoxication into real life again he looked about like
one roused from sleep, feeling as though it were by some mocking sport of
the devil himself that Paula's room should have been the scene of this
meeting and of his weakness.

An enquiry from Heliodora, as to the fate of the little white dog that
she had given him as a remembrance, recalled to his mind that luckless
emerald which was to have been his return offering or antidoron. He
evasively replied that, remembering her love of rare gems, he had sent
her a remarkably fine stone about which he had a good deal to say; and
she gave such childlike and charming expression to her delight and
gratitude, and took such skilful advantage of his pleasure in her
clinging tenderness, to convince him of the necessity for remaining at
home, that he himself began to believe in it, and gave way. The more this
conclusion suited his own wishes the easier it became to find reasons for
it: old Rufinus really did not need him; and if he--Orion--had cause to
be ashamed of his vacillation, on the other hand he could comfort himself
by reflecting that it would be unkind and ungrateful to his good friends
to leave them in the lurch just when he could be of use to them. One pair
of protecting arms more or less could not matter to the nuns, while the
captive Narses might very probably perish before he could be rescued
without his interest with the Arab general.

It was high time to decide one way or the other.--Well, no; he ought not
to go away to-day!

That was settled!

Rufinus must at once be informed of his change of purpose. To sit down
and write at such a moment he felt was impossible: Nilus should go and
speak in his name; and he knew how gladly and zealously he would perform
such an errand.

Heliodora clapped her hands, and just as Martina knocked at the door the
pair came out into the anteroom: She, radiant with happiness, and so
graceful in her fashionable, costly, and well-chosen garb, so
royal-looking in spite of her no more than middle height, that even in
the capital she would have excited the admiration of the men and the envy
of the women: He, content, but with a thoughtful smile on his lips.

He had not yet closed the door when in the anteroom he perceived two
female figures, who had come in while Martina was knocking at her niece's
door. These were Katharina and her waiting-maid.

Anubis had been brought to these rooms after his fall from the roof, and
notwithstanding the preparations that had been made for illustrious
guests Philippus could not be persuaded to allow his patient, for whom
perfect quiet was indispensable, to be moved to the lower floor.

The listener who had been so severely punished had with him his mother,
Katharina's old nurse; the water-wagtail, with her maid, had accompanied
her to see the lad, for she was very anxious to assure herself whether
her foster-brother, before his tumble, had succeeded in hearing anything;
but the poor fellow was so weak and his pain so severe that she had not
the heart to torment him with questions. However, her Samaritan's visit
brought her some reward, for to meet Orion coming out of Paula's room
with so beautiful and elegant a woman was a thing worth opening her eyes.
to see. She would have walked from home hither twice over only to see the
clothes and jewels of this heaven sent stranger. Such a being rarely
strayed to Memphis,--and might not this radiant and beautiful creature be
"the other" after all, and not Paula? Might not Orion have been trifling
with her rival as he had already trifled with her? They must have had a
rapturous meeting in that room; every feature of the fair beauty's
saint-like face betrayed the fact. Oh, that Orion! She would have liked
to throttle him; and yet she was glad to think that there was another
besides herself--and she so elegant and lovely--whom he had betrayed.

"He will stay!" Heliodora exclaimed as she came out of the room; and
Martina held out her hand to the young man, with a fervent: "God bless
you for that!"

She was delighted to see how happy her niece looked but the lively old
woman's eyes were everywhere at once, and when she caught sight of
Katharina who had stood still with curiosity, she turned to her with a
friendly nod and said to Orion:

"Your sister? Or the little niece of whom you used to speak?"

Orion called Katharina and introduced her to his guests, and the girl
explained what had brought her hither; in such a sweet and pathetic
manner--for she was sincerely fond of her foster-brother and
play-fellow--that she quite charmed Martina and Heliodora, and the
younger woman expressed a hope that they might see her often. Indeed,
when she was gone, Martina exclaimed: "A charming little thing! As fresh
and bright as a newly-fledged bird, so brisk and pretty too--and how
nicely she prattles!"

"And the richest heiress in Memphis into the bargain," added Orion. But,
noticing that on this Heliodora cast down her eyes with a troubled
expression, he went on with a laugh: "Our mothers destined us to marry
each other, but we are too ill-matched in size, and not exactly made for
a pair in other ways."

Then, taking leave of them, he went to Nilus and informed him of his
decision. His request that the treasurer would make his excuses to
Rufinus, carry his greetings to Thomas' daughter, and make the most of
his reasons for remaining behind, sent the good man almost beside himself
for joy; and he so far forgot his modest reserve as to embrace Orion as a
son.

The young host sat with his visitors till nearly midnight: and when, on
the following morning, Martina first greeted her niece--who looked
peacefully happy though somewhat tired--she was able to tell her that the
two men had already gone across the Nile, and, she hoped, settled
everything with the Arab governor. Great was her disappointment when
presently Justinus and Orion came back to say that Amru, instead of
returning to Fostat from the review at Heliopolis, had gone straight to
Alexandria. He had engagements there for a few days, and would then start
for Medina.

The senator saw nothing for it but to follow him up, and Orion
volunteered to accompany him.

A faint attempt on Heliodora's part to detain him met with a decisive,
nay, stern refusal. This journey was indeed sheer flight from his own
weakness and from the beautiful creature who could never be anything to
him.

Early in the day he had found time to write to Paula; but he had cast
aside more than one unfinished letter before he could find the right
words. He told her that he loved her and her alone; and as his stylus
marked the wax he felt, with horror of himself, that in fact his heart
was Paula's, and his determination ripened to put an end once for all to
his connection with Heliodora, and not allow himself to see Paula again
till he had forever cut the tie that bound him to the young widow.

The two women went out to see the travellers start, and as they returned
to the house, hanging their heads like defeated warriors, in the
vestibule they met Katharina and her maid. Martina wanted to detain the
little girl, and to persuade her to go up to their rooms with them; but
Katharina refused, and appeared to be in a great hurry. She had just come
from seeing Anubis, who was in less pain to-day, and who had done his
best to tell her what he had overheard. That the flight was to be
northwards he was certain; but he had either misunderstood or forgotten
the name of the place whither the sisters were bound.

His mother and the nurse were dismissed from the room, and then the
water-wagtail in her gratitude had bent over him, had raised his pretty
face a little, and had given him two such sweet kisses that the poor boy
had been quite uneasy. But, when he was alone with his mother once more,
he had felt happier and happier, and the remembrance of the transient
rapture he had known had alleviated the pain he was suffering on
Katharina's account.

Katharina, meanwhile, did not go home at once to her mother; on the
contrary, she went straight off to the Bishop of Memphis, to whom she
divulged all she had learnt with regard to the inhabitants of the convent
and the intended rescue. The gentle Plotinus even had been roused to
great wrath, and no sooner had she left him than he set out for Fostat to
invoke the help of Amru, and--finding him absent--of his Vekeel to enable
him to pursue the fugitive Melchite sisters.

When the water-wagtail was at home again and alone in her room, she said
to herself, with calm satisfaction, that she had now contrived something
which would spoil several days for Orion and for Paula, and that might
prove even fatal, so far as she was concerned.


CHAPTER VIII.

Nilus had performed his errand well, and Rufinus was forced to admit that
Orion had done his part and had planned the enterprise with so much care
and unselfishness that his personal assistance could be dispensed with.
Under these circumstances he scarcely owed the young man a grudge for
placing himself at the service of his Byzantine friends; still, his not
coming to the house disturbed and vexed him, less on his own account, or
that of the good cause, than for Paula's sake, for her feelings towards
Orion had remained no secret to him or his wife.

Dame Joanna, indeed, felt the young man's conduct more keenly than
Rufinus; she would have been glad to withhold her husband from the
enterprise, whose dangers now appeared to her frightened soul tenfold
greater than they were. But she knew that the Nile would flow backwards
before she could dissuade him from keeping his promise to the abbess, so
she forced herself to preserve at any rate outward composure.

Before Paula, Rufinus declared that Orion was fully justified and he
loudly praised the young man's liberality in providing the Nile-boat and
the vessel for the sea-voyage, and such admirable substitutes for
himself. Pulcheria was delighted with her father's undertaking; she only
longed to go with him and help him to save her dear nuns. The
ship-builder had brought with him, besides his sons, three other Greeks
of the orthodox confession, shipwrights like himself, who were out of
work in consequence of the low ebb of the Nile, which had greatly
restricted the navigation. Hence they were glad to put a hand to such a
good work, especially as it would be profitable, too, for Orion had
provided the old man with ample funds.

As the evening grew cooler after sundown Paula had got better. She did
not, indeed, know what to think of Orion's refusal to start. First she
was grieved, then she rejoiced; for it certainly preserved him from great
perils. In the early days after his return from Constantinople she had
heard his praise of the senator's kindness and hospitality, in which the
Mukaukas, who had pleasant memories of the capital, heartily joined. He
must, of course, be glad to be able to assist those friends, of all
others; and Nilus, who was respectfully devoted to her, had greeted her
from Orion with peculiar warmth. He would come to-morrow, no doubt; and
the oftener she repeated to herself his assertion that he had never
betrayed affectionate trust, the more earnestly she felt prompted, in
spite of the abbess' counsel, to abandon all hesitancy, to follow the
impulse of her heart, and to be his at once in full and happy confidence.

The waning moon had not yet risen, and the night was very dark when the
nuns set forth. The boat was too large to come close to the shore in the
present low state of the river, and the sisters, disguised as
peasant-women, had to be carried on board one by one from the convent
garden. Last of all the abbess was to be lifted over the shallow water,
and the old ship-builder held himself in readiness to perform this
service. Joanna, Pulcheria, Perpetua, and Eudoxia, who was also zealously
orthodox, were standing round as she gave Paula a parting kiss and
whispered: "God bless thee, child!--All now depends on you, and you must
be doubly careful to abide by your promise."

"I owe him, in the first place, friendly trust," was Paula's whispered
reply, and the abbess answered: "But you owe yourself firmness and
caution." Rufinus was the last; his wife and daughter clung around him
still.

"Take example from that poor girl," cried the old man, clasping his wife
in his arms. "As sure as man is the standard of all things, all must go
well with me this time if everlasting Love is not napping. Till we meet
again, best of good women!--And, if ill befalls your stupid old husband,
always remember that he brought it upon himself in trying to save a
quarter of a hundred innocent women from the worst misfortunes. At any
rate I shall fall on the road I myself have chosen.--But why has
Philippus not come to take leave of me?"

Dame Joanna burst into tears: "That-that is so hard too! What has come
over him that he has deserted us, and just now of all times? Ah, husband!
If you love me, take Gibbus with you on the voyage."

"Yes, master, take me," the hunchbacked gardener interposed. "The Nile
will be rising again by the time we come back, and till then the flowers
can die without my help. I dreamt last night that you picked a rose from
the middle of my Bump. It stuck up there like the knob on the lid of a
pot. There is some meaning in it and, if you leave me at home, what is
the good of the rose--that is to say what good will you get out of me?"

"Well then, carry your strange flower-bed on board," said the old man
laughing. "Now, are you satisfied Joanna?"

Once more he embraced her and Pulcheria and, as a tear from his wife's
eyes dropped on his hand, he whispered in her ear: "You have been the
rose of my life; and without you Eden--Paradise itself can have no joys."

The boat pushed out into the middle of the stream and was soon hidden by
the darkness from the eyes of the women on the bank.

The convent bells were soon heard tolling after the fugitives: Paula and
Pulcheria were pulling them. There was not a breath of air; not enough
even to fill the small sail of the seaward-bound boat; but the rowers
pulled with all their might and the vessel glided northward. The captain
stood at the prow with his pole; sounding the current: his brother, no
less skilled, took the helm.--The shallowness of the water made
navigation very difficult, and those who knew the river best might easily
run aground on unexpected shoals or newly-formed mud-drifts. The moon had
scarcely risen when the boat was stranded at a short distance below
Fostat, and the men had to go overboard to push it off to an
accompaniment of loud singing which, as it were, welded their individual
wills and efforts into one. Thus it was floated off again; but such
delays were not unfrequent till they reached Letopolis, where the Nile
forks, and where they hoped to steal past the toll-takers unobserved.
Almost against their expectation, the large boat slipped through under
the heavy mist which rises from the waters before sunrise, and the
captain and crew, steering down the Phatmetic branch of the river with
renewed spirit, ascribed their success to the intercession of the pious
sisters.

By daylight it was easier to avoid the sand-banks; but how narrow was the
water-way-at this season usually overflowing! The beds of papyrus on the
banks now grew partly on dry land, and their rank green had faded to
straw-color. The shifting ooze of the shore had hardened to stone, and
the light west wind, which now rose and allowed of their hoisting the
sail, swept clouds of white dust before it. In many cases the soil was
deeply fissured and wide cracks ran across the black surface, yawning to
heaven for water like thirsty throats. The water-wheels stood idle, far
away from the stream, and the fields they were wont to irrigate looked
like the threshing floors on which the crops they bore should be threshed
out. The villages and palm-groves were shrouded in shimmering mist,
quivering heat, and dazzling yellow light; and the passer-by on the
raised dykes of the shore bent his head as he dragged his weary feet
through the deep dust.

The sun blazed pitilessly in the cloudless sky, down on land and river,
and on the fugitive nuns who had spread their white head-cloths above
them for an awning and sat in dull lethargy, awaiting what might he
before them.

The water-jar passed from hand to band; but the more they drank the more
acute was their discomfort, and their longing for some other refreshment.
At meal time the dishes were returned to the tiny cabin almost untouched.
The abbess and Rufinus tried to speak comfort to them; but in the
afternoon the superior herself was overpowered by the heat, and the air
in the little cabin, to which she retired, was even less tolerable stuffy
than on deck.

Thus passed a long day of torment, the hottest that even the men could
remember; and they on the whole suffered least from it, though they
toiled at the oar without ceasing and with wonderful endurance.

At length evening fell after those fearful midday hours; and as a cool
breeze rose shortly before sunset to fan their moist brows, the hapless
victims awoke to new energies. Their immediate torment had so crushed
them that, incapable of anticipating the future, they had ceased either
to fear or to hope; but now they could rejoice in thinking of the start
they had gained over their pursuers. They were hungry and enjoyed their
evening meal; the abbess made friends with the worthy ship-wright, and
began an eager conversation with Rufinus as to Paula and Orion: Her wish
that the young man should spend a time of probation did not at all please
Rufinus; with such a wife as Paula, he could not fail to be at all times
the noble fellow which his old friend held him to be in spite of his
having remained at home.

The hump-backed gardener made the younger nuns merry with his jests, and
after supper they all united in prayer.

Even the oarsmen had found new vigor and new life; and it was well that
few of the Greek sisters understood Egyptian, for the more jovial of them
started a song in praise of the charms of the maids they loved, which was
not composed for women's ears.

The nuns chatted of those they had left behind, and many a one spoke of a
happy meeting at home once more; but an elderly nun put a stop to this,
saying that it was a sin to anticipate the ways of God's mercy, or, when
His help was still so sorely needed, to speak as though He had already
bestowed it. They could only tremble and pray, for they knew from
experience that a threatening disaster never turned to a good end unless
it had been expected with real dread.

Another one then began to speculate as to whether their pursuers could
overtake them on foot or on horseback, and as it seemed only too probable
that they could, their hearts sank again with anxiety. Ere long, however,
the moon rose; the objects that loomed on the banks and were mirrored in
the stream, were again clearly visible and lost their terrors.

The lower down they sailed, the denser were the thickets of papyrus on
the shore. Thousands of birds were roosting there, but they were all
asleep; a "dark ness that might be felt" brooded over the silent land
scape. The image of the moon floated on the dark water, like a gigantic
lotos-flower below the smaller, fragrant lotos-blossoms that it out-did
in sheeny whiteness; the boat left a bright wake in its track, and every
stroke of the oar broke the blackness of the water, which reflected the
light in every drop. The moonlight played on the delicate tufts that
crowned the slender papyrus-stems, filmy mist, like diaphanous brocade of
violet and silver, veiled the trees; and owls that shun the day, flew
from one branch to another on noiseless, rhythmic wings.

The magic of the night fell on the souls of the nuns; they ceased
prattling; but when Sister Martha, the nightingale of the sisterhood,
began to sing a hymn the others followed her example. The sailors' songs
were hushed, and the psalms of the virgin sisters, imploring the
protection of the Almighty, seemed to float round the gliding boat as
softly as the light of the circling moon. For hours--and with increased
zeal as the comet rose in the sky--they gave themselves up to the
soothing and encouraging pleasure of singing; but one by one the voices
died away and their peaceful hymn was borne down the river to the sea, by
degrees more low, more weary, more dreamlike.

They sat looking in their laps, gazing in rapture up to heaven, or at the
dazzling ripples and the lotos flowers on the surface. No one thought of
the shore, not even the men, who had been lulled to sleep or daydreams by
the nuns' singing. The pilot's eyes were riveted on the channel--and yet,
as morning drew near, from time to time there was a twinkle, a flash
behind the reed-beds on the eastern bank, and now and then there was a
rustling and clatter there. Was it a jackal that had plunged into the
dense growth to surprise a brood of water-fowl; was it a hyena trampling
through the thicket?

The flashing, the rustling, the dull footfall on parched earth followed
the barge all through the night like a sinister, lurid, and muttering
shadow.

Suddenly the captain started and gazed eastwards.--What was that?

There was a herd of cattle feeding in a field beyond the reeds-two bulls
perhaps were sharpening their horns. The river was so low, and the banks
rose so high, that it was impossible to see over them. But at this moment
a shrill voice spoke his name, and then the hunchback whispered in his
ear:

"There--over there--it is glittering again.--I will bite off my own nose
if that is not--there, again. Merciful God! I am not mistaken.
Harness--and there, that is the neighing of a horse; I know the sound.
The east is growing grey. By all the saints, we are pursued!"

The captain looked eastwards with every sense alert, and after a few
minutes silence he said decidedly "Yes."

"Like a flight of quail for whom the fowler spreads his net," sighed the
gardener; but the boatman impatiently signed to him to be quiet, and
gazed cautiously on every side. Then he desired Gibbus to wake Rufinus
and the shipwrights, and to hide all the nuns in the cabin.

"They will be packed as close as the dates sent to Rome in boxes,"
muttered the gardener, as he went to call Rufinus. "Poor souls, their
saints may save them from suffocation; and as for me, on my faith, if it
were not that Dame Joanna was the very best creature on two legs, and if
I had not promised her to stick to the master, I would jump into the
water and try the hospitality of the flamingoes and storks in the reeds!
We must learn to condescend!"

While he was fulfilling his errand, the captain was exchanging a few
words with his brother at the helm. There was no bridge near, and that
was well. If the horsemen were indeed in pursuit of them, they must ride
through the water to reach them; and scarcely three stadia lower down,
the river grew wider and ran through a marshy tract of country; the only
channel was near the western bank, and horsemen attempting to get to it
ran the risk of foundering in the mud. If the boat could but get as far
as that reach, much would be gained.

The captain urged the men to put forth all their strength, and very soon
the boat was flying along under the western shore, and divided by an oozy
flat from the eastern bank. Day was breaking, and the sky was tinged red
as with blood--a sinister omen that this morning was destined to witness
bitter strife and gaping wounds.

The seed sown by Katharina was beginning to grow. At the bishop's request
the Vekeel had despatched a troop of horse in pursuit of the nuns, with
orders to bring the fugitives back to Memphis and take their escort
prisoners. As the boat had slipped by the toll watch unperceived, the
Arabs had been obliged to divide, so as to follow down each arm of the
Nile. Twelve horsemen had been told off to pursue the Phasmetic branch;
for by every calculation these must suffice for the capture of a score or
so of nuns, and a handful of sailors would scarcely dare to attempt to
defend themselves. The Vekeel had heard nothing of the addition to the
party of the ship-master and his sons.

The pursuers had set out at noon of the previous day, and had overtaken
the vessel about two hours before daylight. But their leader thought it
well to postpone the attack till after sunrise, lest any of the fugitives
should escape. He and his men were all Arabs, and though well acquainted
with the course of that branch of the river which they were to follow,
they were not familiar with its peculiarities.

As soon as the morning star was invisible, the Moslems performed their
devotions, and then rushed out of the papyrus-beds. Their leader, making
a speaking trumpet of his hand, shouted to the boat his orders to stop.
He was commissioned by the governor to bring it back to Fostat. And the
fugitives seemed disposed to obey, for the boat lay to. The captain had
recognized the speaker as the captain of the watch from Fostat, an
inexorable man; and now, for the first time, he clearly understood the
deadly peril of the enterprise. He was accustomed, no doubt, to evade the
commands of his superiors, but would no more have defied them than have
confronted Fate; and he at once declared that resistance was madness, and
that there was no alternative but to yield. Rufinus, however, vehemently
denied this; he pointed out to him that the same punishment awaited him,
whether he laid down his arms or defended himself, and the old
ship-wright eagerly exclaimed:

"We built this boat, and I know you of old, Setnau; You will not turn
Judas--and, if you do, you know that Christian blood will be shed on this
deck before we can show our teeth to those Infidels."

The captain, with all the extravagant excitability of his southern blood,
beat his forehead and his breast, bemoaned himself as a betrayed and
ruined man, and bewailed his wife and children. Rufinus, however, put an
end to his ravings. He had consulted with the abbess, and he put it
strongly to the unhappy man that he could, in any case, hope for no mercy
from the unbelievers; while, on Christian ground, he would easily find a
safe and comfortable refuge for himself and his family. The abbess would
undertake to give them all a passage on board the ship that was awaiting
her, and to set them on shore wherever he might choose.

Setnau thought of a brother living in Cyprus; still, for him it meant
sacrificing his house and garden at Doomiat, where, at this very hour,
fifty date-palms were ripening their fruit; it meant leaving the fine new
Nile-boat by which he and his family got their living; and as he
represented this to the old man, bitter tears rolled down his brown
cheeks. Rufinus explained to him that, if he should succeed in saving the
sisters, he might certainly claim some indemnification. It is true,
that some actors can return there again and again; as Power, who is
most deservedly a favourite with them, and Ellen Tree, who is equally so.
Celeste has realised a large fortune.

Mrs Wood, and the Keeleys, were also very great favourites; but there are
not many actors who can venture there a second time; at least, not until
a certain interval has elapsed for the Americans to forget them. When there
are no longer any stars, the theatres will not be so well attended;
as, indeed, is the case every where. To prove how fond the Americans are
of anything that excites them, I will mention a representation which
I one day went to see--that of the "Infernal Regions." There
were two or three of these shewn in the different cities in the States.
I saw the remnants of another, myself; but, as the museum-keeper
very appropriately observed to me, "It was a fine thing once, but
now it had all gone to hell."

You entered a dark room; where, railed off with iron railings, you beheld
a long perspective of caverns in the interior of the earth, and a molten
lake in the distance.
In the foreground were the most horrible monsters that could be
invented--bears with men's heads, growling--snakes darting in and out,
hissing--here a man lying murdered, with a knife in his heart;
there--a suicide, hanging by the neck--skeletons lying about in all
directions, and some walking up and down in muslin shrouds.

The machinery was very perfect. At one side was the figure of a man
sitting down, with a horrible face; boar's tusks protruding from his
mouth, his eyes rolling, and horns on his head; I thought it was
mechanism as well as the rest; and was not a little surprised when
it addressed me in a hollow voice:
"We've been waiting some time for you, captain." As I found he had a
tongue, I entered into conversation with him. The representation wound
up with showers of fire, rattling of bones, thunder, screams, and
a regular cascade of the d---d, pouring into the molten lake.

When it was first shewn, they had an electric battery communicating
with the iron railing; and whoever put his hand on it, or went too
near, received a smart electric shock. But the alarm created by this
addition was found to be attended with serious consequences, and it had
been discontinued.

The love of excitement must of course produce a love of gambling, which
may be considered as one of the American amusements: it is, however,
carried on very quietly in the cities. In the South, and on the Mississippi,
it is as open as the noon day; and the gamblers may be said to have
there become a professional people. I have already mentioned them,
and the attempts which have been made to get rid of them. Indeed, they
are not only gamesters who practice on the unwary, but they combine with
gambling the professions of forgery, and uttering of base money.
If they lose, they only lose forged notes. There is no part of the world
where forgery is carried on to such an extent as it is in the United States;
chiefly in the Western country. The American banks are particularly careful
to guard against this evil, but the ingenuity of these miscreants is
surprising, and they will imitate so closely as almost to escape
detection at the banks themselves.

Bank-note engraving is certainly carried to the highest state of perfection
in the United States, but almost in vain. I have myself read a notice,
posted up at Boston, which may appear strange to us. "Bank notes made
here to any pattern." But the Eastern banks are seldom forged upon.
Counterfeit money is also very plentiful. When I was in the West, I had
occasion to pay a few dollars to a friend: when I saw him a day or two
afterwards, he said to me, "Do you know that three dollars you gave
me were counterfeits?" I apologised, and offered to replace them, "Oh!
no," replied he; "it's of no consequence. I gave them in payment to
my people, who told me that they _were_ counterfeit; but they said it
was of no consequence, as they could easily pass them."

In some of the States lotteries have been abolished, in others they are
still permitted. They are upon the French principle, and are very
popular.

There is one very remarkable point in the American character, which is,
that they constantly change their professions. I know not whether
it proceeds simply from their love of change, or from their embracing
professions at so early a period, that they have not discovered
the line in which from natural talents they are best calculated to
succeed.

I have heard it said, that it is seldom that an American succeeds in
the profession which he had first taken up at the commencement
of his career. An American will set up as a lawyer; quit, and go to sea
for a year or two; come back, set up in another profession; get tired
again, go as clerk or steward in a steam-boat, merely because he wishes
to travel; then apply himself to something else, and begin to amass
money.
It is of very little consequence what he does, the American is really a
jack of all trades, and master of any to which he feels at last
inclined to apply himself.

In Mrs Butler's clever journal there is one remark which really surprised
me. She says, "The absolute absence of imagination is of course the
absolute absence of humour. An American can no more understand a
fanciful jest than a poetical idea; and in society and conversation the
_strictest matter of fact_ prevails," etcetera.

If there was nothing but "_matter of fact_" in society and conversation
in America or elsewhere, I imagine that there would not be many
words used: but I refer to the passage, because she says that the
Americans are not imaginative; whereas, I think that there is not a more
imaginative people existing.

It is true that they prefer broad humour, and delight in the hyperbole, but
this is to be expected in a young nation; especially as their education
is, generally speaking, not of a kind to make them sensible to very refined
wit, which, I acknowledge, is thrown away upon the majority. What is
termed the under current of humour, as delicate raillery, for instance,
is certainly not understood.
When they read Sam Slick, they did not perceive that the author was
laughing at them; and the letters of Major Jack Downing are much more
appreciated in this country than they are in America. But as for saying
that they are not imaginative, is a great error, and I have no doubt
that Mrs B has discovered it by this time.

Miss Martineau says, and very truly, "The Americans appear to me
an eminently imaginative people."

Indeed, it is only necessary to read the newspapers to be convinced
it is the case. The hyperbole is their principal forte, but what is lying
but imagination? and why do you find that a child of promising talent
is so prone to lying? because it is the first effort of a strong
imagination. Wit requires refinement, which the Americans have not; but
they have excessive humour, although it is generally speaking coarse.

An American, talking of an ugly woman with a very large mouth, said to
me, "Why, sir, when she yawns, you can see right down to her garters;" and
another, speaking of his being very sea-sick, declared, "That he threw
every thing up, down to his knee-pans."

If there required any proof of the dishonest feeling so prevalent in
the United States arising from the desire of gain, it would be in the
fact, that almost every good story which you hear of an American is an
instance of great ingenuity, and very little principle. So many have
been told already, that I hesitate to illustrate my observation, from
fear of being accused of uttering stale jokes. Nevertheless I will
venture upon one or two.

"An American (Down East, of course), when his father died, found his
patrimony to consist of several hundred dozen of boxes of ointment for
the cure of a certain complaint, said (by us) to be more common in
the North than in England. He made up his pack, and took a round of nearly
a hundred miles, going from town to town and from village to village,
offering his remedy for sale. But unfortunately for him no one was afflicted
with the complaint, and they would not purchase on the chance of
any future occasion for it.

He returned back to his inn, and having reflected a little, he went
out, inquired where he could find the disease, and having succeeded,
inoculated himself with it. When he was convinced that he had it with
sufficient virulence, he again set forth making the same round; and
taking advantage of the American custom which is so prevalent, he shook
hands with everybody whom he had spoken to on his former visit, declaring
he was `'tarnal glad to see them again.'

Thus he went on till his circuit was completed, when he repaired
to the first town again, and found that his ointment, as he expected,
was now in great request; and he continued his route as before,
selling every box that he possessed."

There is a story of a Yankee clock-maker's ingenuity, that I have not
seen in print. He also "made a circuit, having a hundred clocks when he
started; they were all very bad, which he well knew; but by `soft sawder
and human natur,' as Sam Slick says, he contrived to sell ninety-nine
of them, and reserve the last for his intended `_ruse_.'

He went to the house where he had sold the first clock, and said, `Well,
now, how does your clock go? very well, I guess.' The answer was as he
anticipated, `No, very bad.' `Indeed! Well, now, I've found it out at last.
You see, I had one clock which was I know a bad one, and I said
to my boy, "you'll put that clock aside, for it won't do to sell
such an article."

Well, the boy didn't mind, and left the clock with the others; and I
found out afterwards that it had been sold somewhere. Mighty mad I was,
I can tell you, for I'm not a little particular about my credit; so I
have asked here and there, everywhere almost, how my clocks went,
and they all said that "they actually regulated the sun."

But I was determined to find out who had the bad clock, and I am most
particular glad that I have done it at last. Now, you see I have but
one clock left, a very superior article, worth a matter of ten
dollars more than the others, and I must give it you in change,
and I'll only charge you five dollars difference, as you have been
annoyed with the bad article.'

The man who had the bad clock thought it better to pay five dollars
more to have a good one; so the exchange was made, and then the Yankee,
proceeding with the clock, returned to the next house. `Well, now, how
does your clock go? very well, I guess.' The same answer--the same story
repeated--and another five dollars received in exchange. And thus
did he go round, exchanging clock for clock, until he had received an
extra five dollars for every one which he had sold."
Logic.

--"A Yankee went into the bar of an inn in a country town: `Pray what's
the price of a pint of shrub?' `Half a dollar,' was the reply of the man
at the bar. `Well, then, give it me.'

The shrub was poured out, when the bell rang for dinner. `Is that your
dinner-bell?' `Yes.' `What may you charge for dinner?' `Half a dollar.'
`Well, then, I think I had better not take the shrub, but have
some dinner instead.'

This was consented to. The Yankee went in, sat down to his dinner, and
when it was over, was going out of the door without paying. `Massa,'
said the negro waiter, `you not paid for your dinner.' `I know that; I
took the dinner instead of the shrub.' `But, massa, you not pay for the
shrub.' `Well, I did not have the shrub, did I, you nigger?' said the
Yankee, walking away. The negro scratched his head; he knew that something
was wrong, as he had got no money; but he could not make it out till
the Yankee was out of sight."
I do not think that _democracy_ is marked upon the features of the
lower classes in the United States; there is no arrogant bearing in them,
as might be supposed from the despotism of the majority; on the contrary,
I should say that their lower classes are much more civil than our own.
I had a _slap_ of equality on my first landing at New York. I had hired
a truck-man to take up my luggage from the wharf; I went a-head, and missed
him when I came to the corner of the street where I had engaged apartments,
and was looking round for him in one direction, when I was saluted with
a slap on the shoulder, which was certainly given with good-will.

I turned, and beheld my carman, who had taken the liberty to draw
my attention in this forcible manner.

He was a man of few words; he pointed to his truck where it stood with
the baggage, and then went on.

This civil bearing is peculiar, as when they are excited by politics,
or other causes, they are most insolent and overbearing.

In his usual demeanour, the citizen born is quiet and obliging. The
insolence you meet with is chiefly from the emigrant classes. I have before
observed, that the Americans are a good-tempered people; and to this
good temper I ascribe their civil bearing. But why are they good-tempered?
It appears to me to be one of the few virtues springing from
democracy.
When the grades of society are distinct, as they are in the older
institutions, when difference of rank is acknowledged and submitted
to without murmur, it is evident that if people are obliged to
control their tempers in presence of their superiors or equals,
they can also yield to them with their inferiors; and it is this
yielding to our tempers which enables them to master us.

But under institutions where all are equal, where no one admits the
superiority of another, even if he really be so, where the man
with the spade in his hand will beard the millionaire, and where
you are compelled to submit to the caprice and insolence of a
domestic, or lose his services, it is evident that every man must
from boyhood have learnt to control his temper, as no ebullition
will be submitted to, or unfollowed by its consequences.

I consider that it is this habitual control, forced upon the Americans
by the nature of their institutions, which occasions them to be so
good-tempered, when not in a state of excitement. The Americans are in one
point, as a mob, very much like the English; make them laugh, and
they forget all their animosity immediately.

One of the most singular points about the lower classes in America
is, that they will call themselves ladies and gentlemen, and yet
refuse their titles to their superiors.

Miss Martineau mentions one circumstance, of which I very often met with
similar instances. "I once was with a gentleman who was building a large
house; he went to see how the men were getting on; but they had all
disappeared but one. `Where are the people?' inquired he. `The _gentlemen_
be all gone to _liquor_,' was the reply."

I bought one of the small newspapers just as I was setting off in a
steam-boat from New York to Albany. The boy had no change, and went
to fetch it. He did not come back himself, but another party made his
appearance.

"Are you the _man_ who bought the newspaper?" "Yes," replied I. "The _young
gentleman_ who sold it to you has sent me to pay you four cents."
A gentleman was travelling with his wife, they had stopped at an
inn, and during the gentleman's momentary absence the lady was taken
ill.

The lady wishing for her husband, a man very good-naturedly went to find
him, and when he had succeeded he addressed him, "I say, Mister,
your _woman_ wants you; but I telled the _young lady of the house_ to fetch
her a glass of water."
There was no insolence intended in this; it is a peculiarity to be
accounted for by their love of title and distinction.

It is singular to observe human nature peeping out in the Americans, and
how tacitly they acknowledge by their conduct how uncomfortable a
feeling there is in perfect equality. The respect they pay to a title
is much greater than that which is paid to it in England; and naturally
so; we set a higher value upon that which we cannot obtain.

     I have been often amused at the variance on this point between their
words and their feelings, which is shewn in their eagerness for
rank of some sort among themselves.

     Every man who has served in
     the militia carries his title until the day of his death.

There is no end to generals, and colonels, and judges; they keep
taverns and grog shops, especially in the Western State; indeed,
there are very few who have not brevet rank of some kind; and I
being only a captain, was looked upon as a very small personage,
as far as rank went.

An Englishman, who was living in the State of New York, had sent
to have the chimney of his house raised.

The morning afterwards he saw a labourer mixing mortar before the
door.

"Well," said the Englishman, "when is the chimney to be finished?"

"I'm sure I don't know, you had better ask the colonel." "The colonel?
What colonel?" "Why, I reckon that's the colonel upon the top of the
house, working away at the chimney."
After all, this fondness for rank, even in a democracy, is very
natural, and the Americans have a precedent for it. His Satanic Majesty
was the first democrat in heaven, but as soon as he was dismissed
to his abode below, if Milton be correct, he assumed his title.

VOLUME TWO, CHAPTER SIX.

ARISTOCRACY.

If the Americans should imagine that I have any pleasure in writing
the contents of this chapter they will be mistaken; I have considered
well the duty of and pondered over it.

I would not libel an individual, much less a whole nation; but I must
speak the truth, and upon due examination, and calling to my mind all
that I have collected from observation and otherwise, I consider
that at this present time the standard of morality is lower in America
than in any other portion of the civilised globe. I say at this present
time, for it was not so even twenty years ago, and possibly may not be
so twenty years hence. There is a change constantly going on in
every thing below, and I believe, for many reasons, that a change for
the better will soon take place in America. There are even now many
thousands of virtuous, honourable, and enlightened people in the United
States, but at present virtue is passive, while vice is active.

The Americans possess courage, presence of mind, perseverance, and
energy, but these may be considered rather as endowments than as
virtues.

They are propelling powers which will advance them as a people, and, were
they regulated and tempered by religious and moral feeling, would make
them great and good, but without these adjuncts they can only become
great and vicious.

I have observed in my preface that the virtues and vices of a nation are
to be traced to the form of government, the climate, and circumstances,
and it will be easy to shew that to the above may be ascribed much of the
merit as well as the demerits of the people of the United States.

In the first place, I consider the example set by the government as most
injurious: as I shall hereafter prove, it is insatiable in its ambition,
regardless of its faith, and corrupt to the highest degree. This example
I consider as the first cause of the demoralisation of the Americans.
The errors incident to the voluntary system of religion are the
second: the power of the clergy is destroyed, and the tyranny of
the laity has produced the effect of the outward form having been
substituted for the real feeling, and hypocrisy has been but too
often substituted for religion.

To the evil of bad example from the government is superadded the natural
tendency of a democratic form of government, to excite ambition without
having the power to gratify it morally or virtuously; and the debasing
influence of the pursuit of gain is everywhere apparent. It shews itself
in the fact that money is in America everything, and everything else
nothing; it is the only sure possession, for character can at any time
be taken from you, and therefore becomes less valuable than in other
countries, except so far as mercantile transactions are concerned.
Mr Cooper says--not once, but many times--that in America all the local
affections, indeed everything, is sacrificed to the spirit of gain.

Dr Charming constantly laments it, and he very truly asserts, "A people
that deems the possession of riches its highest source of distinction,
admits one of the most degrading of all influences to preside over its
opinions. At no time should money be ever ranked as more than a means,
and he who lives as if the acquisition of property were the sole end of
his existence, betrays the dominion of the most sordid, base, and grovelling
motive that life offers;" and ascribing it to the institutions, he
says, "In one respect our institutions have _disappointed us all_:
they have not wrought out for us that elevation of character which
is the most precious, and, in truth, the only substantial blessing
of liberty."

I have before observed, that whatever society permits, men will do
and not consider to be wrong, and if the government considers a
breach of trust towards it as not of any importance, and defaulters are
permitted to escape, it will of course become no crime in the eyes of the
majority. Mr Cooper observes, "An evident _dishonesty_ of sentiment
pervades the _public_ itself, which is beginning to regard acts of
private delinquency with a dangerous indifference; acts too that
are inseparably connected with the character, security, and right
administration of the state."

And Paula! If only he could have seen her happy--But she was pale; and
that which robbed the young girl--healthy as she was in mind and body--of
her proud, frank, independent bearing was not the heat, which tormented
all creation, but a secret, devouring sorrow; and this sorrow was the
work of one alone--of him on whom she had set her heart, and who made,
ah! what a return, for the royal gift of her love.

Philippus had frequent business at the governor's residence, and a
fortnight since he had plainly perceived what it was that had brought
Neforis into this strange state. She was taking the opium that her
husband had had, taking it in excessive quantities; and she could easily
procure more through some other physician. However, her piteous prayer
that Philippus would not abandon her to her fate had prevailed to induce
him to continue to see her, in the hope of possibly restricting her use
of the drug.

The senator's wife, Martina, also required his visits to the palace. She
was not actually ill, but she suffered cruelly from the heat, and she had
always been wont to see her worthy old house-physician every day, to hear
all the latest gossip, and complain of her little ailments when anything
went wrong with her usually sound health. Philippus was indeed too much
overburdened to chatter, but his professional advice was good and helped
her to endure the fires of this pitiless sky. She liked this incisive,
shrewd, plain-spoken man--often indeed sharp and abrupt in his
freedom--and he appreciated her bright, natural ways. Now and then
Martina even succeeded in winning a smile from "Hermes Trismegistus," who
was "generally as solemn as though there was no such thing on earth as a
jest," and in spurring him to a rejoinder which showed that this dolorous
being had a particularly keen and ready wit.

Heliodora attracted him but little. There was, to be sure, an
unmistakable likeness in her "imploring eyes" to those of Pulcheria; but
the girl's spoke fervent yearning for the grace and love of God, while
the widow's expressed an eager desire for the admiration of the men she
preferred. She was a graceful creature beyond all question, but such
softness, which never even attempted to assert a purpose or an opinion,
did not commend itself to his determined nature; it annoyed him, when he
had contradicted her, to hear her repeat his last statement and take his
side, as if she were ashamed of her own silliness. Her society, indeed,
did not seem to satisfy the clever older woman, who at home, was
accustomed to a succession of visitors, and to whom the word "evening"
was synonymous with lively conversation and a large gathering. She spoke
of the leech's visits as the oasis in the Egyptian desert, and little
Katharina even she regarded as a Godsend.

The water-wagtail was her daily visitant, and the girl's gay and often
spiteful gossip helped to beguile her during this terrific heat.
Katharina's mother made no difficulties; for Heliodora had gone to see
her in all her magnificence, and had offered her and her daughter
hospitality, some day, at Constantinople. They were very likely going
thither; at any rate they would not remain in Memphis, and then it would
be a piece of good fortune to be introduced to the society of the capital
by such people as their new acquaintances.

Martina thus heard a great deal about Paula; and though it was all
adverse and colored to her prejudice she would have liked to see the
daughter of the great and famous Thomas whom she had known; besides,
after all she had heard, she could fear nothing from Paula for her niece:
uncommonly handsome, but haughty, repellent, unamiable, and--like
Heliodora herself--of the orthodox sect.--What could tempt "great
Sesostris" to give her the preference?

Katharina herself proposed to Martina to make them acquainted; but
nothing would have induced Dame Martina to go out of her rooms, protected
to the utmost from the torrid sunshine, so she left it to Heliodora to
pay the visit and give her a report of the hero's daughter. Heliodora had
devoted herself heart and soul to the little heiress, and humored her on
many points.

This was carried out. Katharina actually had the audacity to bring the
rivals together, even after she had reported to each all she knew of
Orion's position with regard to the other. It was exquisite sport; still,
in one respect it did not fulfil her intentions, for Paula gave no sign
of suffering the agonies of jealousy which Katharina had hoped to excite
in her. Heliodora, on the other hand, came home depressed and uneasy;
Paula had received her coldly and with polite formality, and the young
widow had remained fully aware that so remarkable a woman might well cast
her own image in Orion's heart into the shade, or supplant it altogether.

Like a wounded man who, in spite of the anguish, cannot resist touching
the wound to assure himself of its state, Heliodora went constantly to
see Katharina in order to watch her rival from the garden or to be taken
to call on her, though she was always very coldly received.

At first Katharina had pitied the young woman whose superior in
intelligence she knew herself to be; but a certain incident had
extinguished this feeling; she now simply hated her, and pricked her with
needle-thrusts whenever she had a chance. Paula seemed invulnerable; but
there was not a pang which Katharina would not gladly have given her to
whom she owed the deepest humiliation her young life had ever known. How
was it that Paula failed to regard Heliodora as a rival? She had
reflected that, if Orion had really returned the widow's passion, he
could not have borne so long a separation. It was on purpose to avoid
Heliodora, and to remain faithful to what he was and must always be to
Paula, that he had gone with the senator, far from Memphis.
Heliodora--her instinct assured her--was the poor, forsaken woman with
whom he had trifled at Byzantium, and for whom he had committed that
fatal theft of the emerald. If Fate would but bring him home to her, and
if she then yielded all he asked--all her own soul urged her to grant,
then she would be the sole mistress and queen of his heart--she must be,
she was sure of it! And though, even as she thought of it, she bowed her
head in care, it was not from fear of losing him; it was only her anxiety
about her father, her good old friend, Rufinus, and his family, whom she
had made so entirely her own.

This was the state of affairs this morning, when to his old friend's
vexation, Philippus had so hastily and silently drunk off his
after-breakfast draught; just as he set down the cup, the black
door-keeper announced that a hump-backed man wished to see his master at
once on important business.

"Important business!" repeated the leech. "Give me four more legs in
addition to my own two, or a machine to make time longer than it is, and
then I will take new patients-otherwise no! Tell the fellow. . . ."

"No, not sick. . . ." interrupted the negro. "Come long way. Gardener to
Greek man Rufinus."

Philippus started: he could guess what this messenger had to say, and his
heart sank with dread as he desired that he might be shown in.

A glance at Gibbus told him what he had rightly feared. The poor fellow
was hardly recognizable. He was coated with dust from head to foot, and
this made him look like a grey-haired old man; his sandals hung to his
feet in strips; the sweat, pouring down his cheeks, had made gutters as
it were in the dust on his face, and his tears, as the physician held out
his hand to him, washed out other channels.

In reply to the leech's anxious, long drawn "Dead?" he nodded silently;
and when Philippus, clasping his hands to his temples, cried out: "Dead!
My poor old Rufinus dead! But how, in Heaven's name, did it happen?
Speak, man, speak!"--Gibbus pointed to the old philosopher and said:
"Come out then, with me, Master. No third person. . . ."

Philippus, however, gave him to understand that Horapollo was his second
self; and the hunch-back went on to tell him what he had seen, and how
his beloved master had met his end. Horapollo sat listening in
astonishment, shaking his head disapprovingly, while the physician
muttered curses. But the bearer of evil tidings was not interrupted, and
it was not till he had ended that Philippus, with bowed head and tearful
eyes, said:

"Poor, faithful old man; to think that he should die thus--he who leaves
behind him all that is best in life, while I--I. . . ." And he groaned
aloud. The old man glanced at him with reproachful displeasure.

While the leech broke the seals of the tablets, which the abbess had
carefully closed, and began to read the contents, Horapollo asked the
gardener: "And the nuns? Did they all escape?"

"Yes, Master! on the morning after we reached Doomiat, a trireme took
them all out to sea."

And the old man grumbled to himself: "The working bees killed and the
Drones saved!"

Gibbus, however, contradicted him, praising the laborious and useful life
of the sisters, in whose care he himself had once been.

Meanwhile Philippus had read his friend's last letter. Greatly disturbed
by it he turned hither and thither, paced the room with long steps, and
finally paused in front of the gardener, exclaiming: "And what next? Who
is to tell them the news?"

"You," replied Gibbus, raising his hands in entreaty.

"I-oh, of course, I!" growled the physician. "Whatever is difficult,
painful, intolerable, falls on my shoulders as a matter of course! But I
cannot--ought not--I will not do it. Had I any part or lot in devising
this mad expedition? You observe, Father?--What he, the simpleton,
brewed, I--I again am to drink. Fate has settled that!"

"It is hard, it is hard, child!" replied the old man. "Still, it is your
duty. Only consider--if that man, as he stands before us now, were to
appear before the women. . . ."

But Philippus broke in: "No, no, that would not do! And you, Gibbus--this
very day there has been an Arab again to see Joanna; and if they were to
suspect that you had been with your master--for you look strangely.--No,
man; your devotion merits a better reward. They shall not catch you. I
release you from your service to the widow, and we--what do you say,
Father?--we will keep him here."

"Right, very right," said Horapollo. "The Nile must some day rise again.
Stay with us; I have long had a fancy to eat vegetables of my own
growing."

But Gibbus firmly declined the offer, saying he wished to return to his
old mistress. When the physician again pointed out to him how great a
danger he was running into, and the old man desired to know his reasons,
the hunch-back exclaimed:

"I promised my master to stay with the women; and now, while in all the
household I am the only free man, shall I leave them unprotected to
secure my own miserable life? Sooner would I see a scimitar at my throat.
When my head is off the rascals are welcome to all that is left."

The words came hollow and broken from his parched tongue, and as he spoke
the faithful fellow's face changed. Even under the dust he turned pale,
and Philippus had to support him, for his feet refused their office. His
long tramp through the torrid heat had exhausted his strength; but a
draught of wine soon brought him to himself again and Horapollo ordered
the slave to lead him to the kitchen and desire the cook to take the best
care of him.

As soon as the friends were alone, the elder observed:

"That worthy, foolhardy, old child who is now dead, seems to have left
you some strange request. I could see that as you were reading."

"There--take it!" replied Philippus; and again he walked up and down the
room, while Horapollo took the letter. Both faces of the tablets were
covered with irregular, up-and-down lines of writing to the following
effect:

   "Rufinus, in view of death, to his beloved Philippus:

   "One shivering fit after another comes over me; I shall certainly
   die to-day. I must make haste. Writing is difficult. If only I
   can say what is most pressing.--First: Joanna and the poor child.
   Be everything you can be to them. Protect them as their guardian,
   Kyrios, and friend. They have enough to live on and something still
   to spare for others. My brother Leonax manages the property, and he
   is honest. Joanna knows all about it.--Tell her and the poor child
   that I send them ten thousand blessings--and to Joanna endless
   thanks for all her goodness.--And to you, my friend: heed the old
   man's words. Rid your heart of Paula. She is not for you: you
   know, young Orion. But as to yourself: Those who were born in high
   places rarely suit us, who have dragged ourselves up from below to a
   better position. Be her friend; that she deserves--but let that be
   all. Do not live alone, a wife brings all that is best into a man's
   life; it is she who weaves sweet dreams into his dull sleep. You
   know nothing of all this as yet; and your worthy old friend--to whom
   my greetings--has held aloof from it all his life. . . .

   "For your private eye: it is a dying man who speaks thus. You must
   know that my poor child, our Pul, regards you as the most perfect of
   men and esteems you above all others. You know her and Joanna.
   Bear witness to your friend that no evil word ever passed the lips
   of either of them. Far be it from me to advise you, who bear the
   image of another woman in your heart,--to say: marry the child, she
   is the wife for you. But this much to you both--Father and son--I
   do advise you to live with the mother and daughter as true and
   friendly house-mates. You will none of you repent doing so. This
   is a dying man's word. I can write no more. You are the women's
   guardian, Philip, a faithful one I know. A common aim makes men
   grow alike. You and I, for many a year.--Take good care of them for
   me; I entreat you--good care."

The last words were separated and written all astray; the old man could
hardly make them out. He now sat looking, as Phillipus had done before,
sorely puzzled and undecided over this strange document.

"Well?" asked the leech at last.

"Aye-well?" repeated the other with a shrug. Then both again were silent;
till Horapollo rose, and taking his staff, also paced the room while he
murmured, half to himself and half to his younger friend "They are two
quiet, reasonable women. There are not many of that sort, I fancy. How
the little one helped me up from the low seat in the garden!" It was a
reminiscence that made him chuckle to himself; he stopped Philippus, who
was pacing at his side, by lightly patting his arm, exclaiming with
unwonted vivacity: "A man should be ready to try everything--the care of
women even, before he steps into the grave. And is it a fact that neither
of them is a scold or a chatter-box?"

"It is indeed."

"And what 'if' or 'but' remains behind?" asked the old man. "Let us be
reckless for once, brother! If the whole business were not so
diabolically serious, it would be quite laughable. The young one for me
and the old one for you in our leisure hours, my son; better washed
linen; clothes without holes in them; no dust on our books; a pleasant
'Rejoice' every morning, or at meal-times;--only look at the fruit on
that dish! No better than the oats they strew before horses. At the old
man's everything was as nice as it used to be in my own home at Philae:
Supper a little work of art, a feast for the eye as well as the appetite!
Pulcheria seems to understand all that as well as my poor dead sister
did. And then, when I want to rise, such a kind, pretty little hand to
help one up! I have long hated this dwelling. Lime and dust fall from the
ceiling in my bedroom, and here there are wide gaps in the flooring-I
stumbled over one yesterday--and our niggardly landlords, the officials,
say that if we want anything repaired we may do it ourselves, that they
have no money left for such things. Now, under that worthy old man's roof
everything was in the best order." The philosopher chuckled aloud and
rubbed his hands as he went on: "Supposing we kick over the traces for
once, Philip. Supposing we were to carry out our friend's dying wish?
Merciful Isis! It would certainly be a good action, and I have not many
to boast of. But cautiously--what do you say? We can always throw it up
at a month's notice."

Then he grew grave again, shook his head, and said meditatively: "No, no;
such plans only disturb one's peace of mind. A pleasant vision! But
scarcely feasible."

"Not for the present, at any rate," replied the leech.

"So long as Paula's fate remains undecided, I beg you to let the matter
rest."

The old man muttered a curse on her; then he said with a vicious, sharp
flash in his eyes: "That patrician viper! Every where in everything--she
spoils it all! But wait a while! I fancy she will soon be removed from
our path, and then. . . . No, even now, at the present time, I will not
allow that we should be deprived of what would embellish life, of doing a
thing which may turn the scale in my favor in the day of judgment. The
wishes of a dying man are sacred: So our fathers held it; and they were
right. The old man's will must be done! Yes, yes, yes. It is settled. As
soon as that hindrance is removed, we will keep house with the two women.
I have said; and I mean it."

At this point the gardener came in again, and the old man called out to
him:

"Listen, man. We shall live together after all; you shall hear more of
this later. Stay with my people till sundown, but you must keep your own
counsel, for they are all listeners and blabs. The physician here will
now take the melancholy tidings to the unfortunate widow, and then you
can talk it all over with her at night. Nothing startling must take place
at the house there; and with regard to your master, even his death must
remain a secret from every one but us and his family."

The gardener knew full well how much depended on his silence; Philippus
tacitly agreed to the old man's arrangement, but for the present he
avoided discussing the matter with the women. When, at length he set off
on his painful errand to the widow, Horapollo dismissed him saying:

"Courage, courage, my Son.--And as you pass by, just glance at our little
garden;--we grieved to see the fine old palm-tree perish; but now a young
and vigorous shoot is growing from the root."

"It has been drooping since yesterday and will die away," replied
Philippus shrugging his shoulders.

But the old man exclaimed: "Water it, Gibbus! the palm-tree must be
watered at once."

"Aye, you have water at hand for that!" retorted the leech, but he added
bitterly as he reached the stairs, "If it were so in all cases!"

"Patience and good purpose will always win," murmured the old man; and
when he was alone he growled on angrily: "Only be rid of that dry old
palm-tree--his past life in all its relations to that patrician hussy
Away with it, into the fire!--But how am I to get her? How can I manage
it?"

He threw himself back in his arm-chair, rubbing his forehead with the
tips of his fingers. He had come to no result when the negro requested an
audience for some visitors. These were the heads of the senate of
Memphis, who had come as a deputation to ask counsel of the old sage. He,
if any one, would find some means of averting or, at any rate, mitigating
the fearful calamity impending over the town and country, and against
which prayer, sacrifice, processions, and pilgrimages had proved
abortive. They were quite resolved to leave no means untried, not even if
heathen magic should be the last resource.


CHAPTER X.

All Katharina's sympathy with Heliodora had died finally in the course of
the past, moonless night. She had secretly accompanied her, with her maid
and an old deaf and dumb stable-slave, to a soothsayer--for there still
were many in Memphis, as well as magicians and alchemists; and this woman
had told the young widow that her line of life led to the greatest
happiness, and that even the wildest wishes of her heart would find
fulfilment. What those wishes were Katharina knew only too well; the
probability of their accomplishment had roused her fierce jealousy and
made her hate Heliodora.

Heliodora had gone to consult the sorceress in a simple but rich dress.
Her peplos was fastened on the shoulder, not by an ordinary gold pin, but
by a button which betrayed her taste for fine jewels, as it consisted of
a sapphire of remarkable size; this had at once caught the eye of the
witch, showing her that she had to deal with a woman of rank and wealth.
She had taken Katharina, who had come very plainly dressed, for her
companion or poor friend, so she had promised her no more than the
removal of certain hindrances, and a happy life at last, with a husband
no longer young and a large family of children.

The woman's business was evidently a paying one; the interior of her
house was conspicuously superior to the wretched hovels which surrounded
it, in the poorest and most squalid part of the town. Outside, indeed, it
differed little from its neighbors; in fact; it was intentionally
neglected, to mislead the authorities, for witchcraft and the practice of
magic arts were under the penalty of death. But the fittings of the
roofless centre-chamber in which she was wont to perform her incantations
and divinations argued no small outlay. On the walls were hangings with
occult figures; the pillars were painted with weird and grewsome
pictures; crucibles and cauldrons of various sizes were simmering over
braziers on little altars; on the shelves and tables stood cups, phials,
and vases, a wheel on which a wryneck hopped up and down, wax images of
men and women--some with needles through their hearts, a cage full of
bats, and glass jars containing spiders, frogs, leeches, beetles,
scorpions, centipedes and other foul creatures; and lengthways down the
room was stretched a short rope walk, used in a Thracian form of magic.
Perfumes and pungent vapors filled the air, and from behind a curtain
which hid the performers came a monotonous music of children's voices,
bells, and dull drumming.

Medea, so the wise woman was called, though scarcely past five and forty,
harmonized in appearance with this strange habitation, full as it was of
objects calculated to rouse repulsion, dread, and amazement. Her face was
pale, and her extraordinary height was increased by a mass of coal-black
hair, curled high over a comb at the very top of her head.

At the end of the first visit paid her by the two young women, who had
taken her by surprise, so that several things were lacking which on the
second occasion proved to be very effective in the exercise of her art,
she had made Heliodora promise to return in three days' time. The young
widow had kept her word, and had made her appearance punctually with
Katharina.

To be in Egypt, the land of sorcery and the magic arts, without putting
them to the test, was impossible. Even Martina allowed this, though she
did not care for such things for herself. She was content with her lot;
and if any change for the worse were in prospect she would rather not be
tormented beforehand by a wise prophet; nor was it better to be deluded
by a foolish one. Happiness as of Heaven itself she no longer craved; it
would only have disturbed her peace. But she was the last person to think
ill of the young, whose life still lay before them, if they longed to
look into futurity.

The fair widow and her companion crossed the sorceress' threshold in some
trepidation, and Katharina was the more agitated of the two; for this
afternoon she had seen Philippus leave the house of Rufinus, and not long
after some Arab officials had called there. Paula had come into the
garden shortly before sundown, her eyes red with weeping; and when, soon
after, Pulcheria and her mother had joined her there, Paula had thrown
herself on Joanna's neck, sobbing so bitterly that the mother and
daughter--"whose tears were near her eyes"--had both followed her
example. Something serious had occurred; but when she had gone to the
house to pick up further information, old Betta, who was particularly
snappish with her, had refused her admission quite rudely.

Then, on their way hither, she and Heliodora had had a painful adventure;
the chariot, lent by Neforis to convey them as far as the edge of the
necropolis, was stopped on the way by a troop of Arab horse, and they
were subjected to a catechism by the leader.

So they entered the house of "Medea of the curls," as the common people
called the witch, with uneasy and throbbing hearts; they were received,
however, with such servile politeness that they soon recovered
themselves, and even the timid Heliodora began to breathe freely again.
The sorceress knew this time who Katharina was, and paid more respectful
attention to the daughter of the wealthy widow.

The young crescent moon had risen, a circumstance which Medea declared
enabled her to see more clearly into the future than she could do at the
time of the Luna-negers as she called the moonless night. Her inward
vision had been held in typhornian darkness at the time of their first
visit, by the influence of some hostile power. She had felt this as soon
as they had quitted her, but to-day she saw clearer. Her mind's eye was
as clear as a silver mirror, she had purified it by three days' fasting
and not a mote could escape her sight.--"Help, ye children of Horapollo!
Help, Hapi and Ye three holy ones!"

"Oh, my beauties, my beauties!" she went on enthusiastically. "Hundreds
of great dames have proved my art, but such splendid fortunes I never
before saw crowding round any two heads as round yours. Do you hear how
the cauldrons of fortune are seething? The very lids lift! Amazing,
amazing."

She stretched out her hand towards the vessels as though conjuring them
and said solemnly: "Abundance of happiness; brimming over, brimming over!
Bursting storehouses! Zefa-oo Metramao. Return, return, to the right
levels, the right heights, the right depth, the right measure! Your Elle
Mei-Measurer, Leveller, require them, Techuti, require them, double
Ibis!"

She made them both sit down on elegant seats in front of the boiling
pots, tied the "thread of Anubis" round the ring-finger of each, asked in
a low whisper between muttered words of incantation for a hair of each,
and after placing the hairs both in one cauldron she cried out with wild
vehemence, as though the weal or woe of her two visitors were involved in
the smallest omission:

"Press the finger with the thread of Anubis on your heart; fix your eyes
on the cauldron and the steam which rises to the spirits above, the
spirits of light, the great One on high!"

The two women obeyed the sorceress' directions with beating hearts, while
she began spinning round on her toes with dizzy rapidity; her curls flew
out, and the magic wand in her extended hand described a large and
beautiful curve. Suddenly, and as if stricken by terror, she stopped her
whirl, and at the same instant the lamps went out and the only light was
from the stars and the twinkling coals under the cauldrons. The low music
died away, and a fresh strong perfume welled out from behind the curtain.

Medea fell on her knees, lifted up her hands to Heaven, threw her head so
far back that her whole face was turned up to the sky and her eyes gazed
straight up at the stars-an attitude only possible to so supple a spine.
In this torturing attitude she sang one invocation after another, to the
zenith of the blue vault over their heads, in a clear voice of fervent
appeal. Her body was thrown forward, her mass of hair no longer stood up
but was turned towards the two young women, who every moment expected
that the supplicant would be suffocated by the blood mounting to her
head, and fall backwards; but she sang and sang, while her white teeth
glittered in the starlight that fell straight upon her face. Presently,
in the midst of the torrent of demoniacal names and magic formulas that
she sang and warbled out, a piteous and terrifying sound came from behind
the curtain as of two persons gasping, sighing, and moaning: one voice
seemed to be that of a man oppressed by great anguish; the other was the
half-suffocated wailing of a suffering child. This soon became louder,
and at length a voice said in Egyptian: "Water, a drink of water."

The woman started to her feet, exclaiming: "It is the cry of the poor and
oppressed who have been robbed to enrich those who have too much already;
the lament of those whom Fate has plundered to heap you with wealth
enough for hundreds." As she spoke these words, in Greek and with much
unction, she turned to the curtain and added solemnly, but in Egyptian:
"Give drink to the thirsty; the happy ones will spare him a drop from
their overflow. Give the white drink to the wailing child-spirit, that he
may be soothed and quenched.--Play, music, and drown the lamentations of
the spirits in sorrow."

Then, turning to Heliodora's kettle she said sternly, as if in obedience
to some higher power:

"Seven gold pieces to complete the work,"--and while the young widow drew
out her purse the sorceress lighted the lamps, singing as she did so and
as she dropped the coin into the boiling fluid: "Pure, bright gold!
Sunlight buried in a mine! Holy Seven. Shashef, Shashef! Holy Seven,
marry and mingle--melt together!"

When this was done she poured out of the cauldron a steaming fluid as
black as ink, into a shallow saucer, called Heliodora to her side, and
told her what she could see in the mirror of its surface.

It was all fair, and gave none but delightful replies to the widow's
questioning. And all the sorceress said tended to confirm the young
woman's confidence in her magic art; she described Orion as exactly as
though she saw him indeed in the surface of the ink, and said he was
travelling with an older man. And lo! he was returning already; in the
bright mirror she could see Heliodora clasped in her lover's arms; and
now--it was like a picture: A stranger--not the bishop of Memphis--laid
her hand in his and blessed their union before the altar in a vast and
magnificent cathedral.

Katharina, who had been chilled with apprehensions and a thrill of awe,
as she listened to Medea's song, listened to every word with anxious
attention; what Medea said--how she described Orion--that was more
wonderful than anything else, beyond all she had believed possible. And
the cathedral in which the lovers were to be united was the church of St.
Sophia at Constantinople, of which she had heard so much.

A tight grip seemed to clutch her heart; still, eagerly as she listened
to Medea's words, her sharp ears heard the doleful gasping and whimpering
behind the hanging; and this distressed and dismayed her; her breath came
short, and a deep, torturing sense of misfortune possessed her wholly.
The wailing child-spirit within, a portion of whose joys Medea said had
been allotted to her--nay, she had not robbed him, certainly not--for who
could be more wretched than she? It was only that beautiful, languishing
young creature who was so lavishly endowed by Fortune with gifts enough
and to spare for others without number. Oh! if she could but have
snatched them from her one after another, from the splendid ruby she was
wearing to-day, to Orion's love!

She was pale and tremulous as she rose at the call of the sorceress,
after she also had offered seven gold pieces. She would gladly have
purchased annihilating curses to destroy her happier rival.

The black liquid in the saucer began to stir, and a sharply smelling
vapor rose from it; the witch blew this aside, and as soon as the murky
fluid was a little cool, and the surface was smooth and mirror-like, she
asked Katharina what she most desired to know. But the answer was checked
on her lips; a fearful thundering and roaring suddenly made the house
shake; Medea dropped the saucer with a piercing shriek, the contents
splashed up, and warm, sticky drops fell on the girl's arms and dress.
She was quite overcome with the startling horror, and Heliodora, who
could herself scarcely stand, had to support her, for she tottered and
would have fallen.

The sorceress had vanished; a half-grown lad, a young man, and a very
tall Egyptian girl in scanty attire were rushing about the room. They
flew hither and thither, throwing all the vessels they could lay hands on
into an opening in the floor from which they had lifted a trap-door;
pouring water on the braziers and extinguishing the lights, while they
drove the two strangers into a corner of the hall, rating and abusing
them. Then the lads clambered like cats up to the opening in the roof,
and sprang off and away.

A shrill whistle rang through the house, and in moment Medea burst into
the room again, clutched the two trembling women by the shoulders, and
exclaimed: "For Christ's sake, be merciful! My life is at stake Sorcery
is punishable by death. I have done my best for you. You came here--that
is what you must say--out of charity to nurse the sick." She pushed them
both behind the hanging whence they still heard feeble groans, into a
low, stuffy room, and the over-grown girl slipped in behind them.

Here, on miserable couches, lay an old man shivering, and showing dark
spots on his bare breast and face: and a child of five, whose crimson
cheeks were burning with fever.

Heliodora felt as if she must suffocate in the plague stricken, heavy
atmosphere, and Katharina clung to her helplessly; but the soothsayer
pulled her away, saying: "Each to one bed: you to the child, and you--the
old man."

Involuntarily they obeyed the woman who was panting with fright. The
water-wagtail, who never in her life thought of a sick person, turned
very sick and looked away from the sufferer; but the your widow, who had
spent many and many a night by the death-bed of a man she had loved, and
who, tender-hearted, had often tended her sick slaves with her own hand,
looked compassionately into the pretty, pain-stricken face of the child,
and wiped the dews from his clammy brow.

Katharina shuddered; but her attention was presently attracted to
something fresh; from the other side of the house came a clatter of
weapons, the door was pushed open, and the physician Philippus walked
into the room. He desired the night-watch, who were with him, to wait
outside. He had come by the command of the police authorities, to whose
ears information had been brought that there were persons sick of the
plague in the house of Medea, and that she, nevertheless, continued to
receive visitors. It had long been decided that she must be taken in the
act of sorcery, and warning had that day been given that she expected
illustrious company in the evening. The watch were to find her
red-handed, so to speak; the leech was to prove whether her house was
indeed plague-stricken; and in either case the senate wished to have the
sorceress safe in prison and at their mercy, though even Philippus had
not been taken into their confidence.

The visitors he had come upon were the last he had expected to find here.
He looked at them with a disapproving shake of the head, interrupted the
woman's voluble asseverations that these noble ladies had come, out of
Christian charity, to comfort and help the sick, with a rough
exclamation: "A pack of lies!" and at once led the coerced sick nurses
out of the house. He then represented to them the fearful risk to which
their folly had exposed them, and insisted very positively on their
returning home and, notwithstanding the lateness of the hour, taking a
bath and putting on fresh garments.

With trembling knees they found their way back to the chariot; but even
before it could start Heliodora had broken down in tears, while
Katharina, throwing herself back on the cushions, thought, as she glanced
at her weeping companion: "This is the beginning of the wonderful
happiness she was promised! It is to be hoped it may continue!"

It seemed indeed as though Katharina's guardian spirit had overheard this
amiable wish; for, as the chariot drove past the guard-house into the
court-yard of the governor's house, it was stopped by armed men with
brown, warlike faces, and they had to wait some minutes till an Arab
officer appeared to enquire who they were, and what they wanted. This
they explained in fear and trembling, and they then learnt that the Arab
government had that very evening taken possession of the residence. Orion
was accused of serious crimes, and his guests were to depart on the
following day.

Katharina, who was known to the interpreter, was allowed to go with
Heliodora to the senator's wife; she might also use the chariot to return
home in, and if she pleased, take the Byzantines with her, for the palace
would be in the hands of the soldiery for the next few days.

The two young women held council. Katharina pressed her friend to come at
once to her mother's house, for she felt certain that they were
plague-stricken, and how could they procure a bath in a house full of
soldiers? Heliodora could not and must not remain with Martina in this
condition, and the senator's wife could follow her next day. Her mother,
she added, would be delighted to welcome so dear a guest.

The widow was passive, and when Martina had gladly consented to accept
the invitation of her "delivering angel," the chariot carried them to
Susannah's house. The widow had long been in bed, firmly convinced that
her daughter was asleep and dreaming in her own pretty room.

Katharina would not have her disturbed, and the bath-room was so far from
Susannah's apartment that she slept on quietly while Katharina and her
guest purified themselves.


CHAPTER XI.

The inhabitants of the governor's residence passed a fearful night.
Martina asked herself what sin she had committed that she, of all people,
should be picked out to witness such a disaster.

And where were her schemes of marriage now? Any movement in such heat was
indeed scarcely endurable; but she would have moved from one part of the
house to another a dozen times, and allowed herself to be tossed hither
and thither like a ball, if it could have enabled her to save her dear
"great Sesostris" from such hideous peril. And at the bottom of all this
was, no doubt, this wild, senseless business of the nuns.

And these Arabs! They simply helped themselves to whatever they fancied,
and were, of course, in a position to strip the son of the great Mukaukas
of all he possessed and reduce him to beggary. A pretty business this!

Heliodora, to be sure, had enough for both, and she and her husband would
not forget them in their will; but there was more than this in the
balance now: it was a matter of life and death.

A cold shudder ran through her at the thought; and her fears were only
too well founded: the black Arab who had come to parley with her, and had
finally allowed her to remain under this roof till next day, had told her
as much through the interpreter. A fearful, horrible, nameless
catastrophe! And that she should be in the midst of it and have to see it
all!

Then her husband, her poor Justinus! How hard this would fall on him! She
could not cease weeping; and before she fell asleep she prayed fervently
indeed, to the saints and the dear Mother of God, that they would bring
all to a happy issue. She closed her eyes on the thought: "What a
misfortune!" and she woke to it again early in the morning.

She, however, had known nothing of the worst horrors of that fatal night.

A troop of Arab soldiers had crossed the Nile at nightfall, some on foot
or on horseback and some in boats, led by Obada the Vekeel, and had
invested the governor's residence. When they had fully assured themselves
that Orion was indeed absent they took Nilus prisoner. It was then
Obada's business to inform the Mukaukas' widow of what had happened, and
to tell her that she must quit the house next day. This must be done,
because he had views of his own as to what was to become of the venerable
house of the oldest family in the country.

Neforis was still up, and when the interpreter was announced as Obada's
forerunner, she was in the fountain-room. He found her a good deal
excited; for, although she was incapable of any consecutive train of
thought and, when her mind was required to exert itself, her ideas only
came like lightning-flashes through her brain, she had observed that
something unusual was going on. Sebek and her maid had evaded her
enquiries, and would say no more than that Amru's representative had come
to speak with the young master. It seemed to be something important,
perhaps some false accusation.

The interpreter now explained that Orion himself was accused of having
planned and aided an enterprise which had cost the lives of twelve Arab
soldiers; and, as she knew, any injury inflicted even on a single Moslem
by an Egyptian was punished by death and the confiscation of his goods.
Besides this, her son was accused of a robbery.

At the close of this communication, to which Neforis listened with a
vacant stare, horrified and at last almost crushed, the interpreter
begged that she would grant the Vekeel an audience.

"Not just yet--give me a few minutes," said the widow, bringing out the
words with difficulty: first she must have recourse to her secret
specific. When she had done so, she expressed her readiness to see Obada.
Her son's swarthy foe was anxious to appear a mild and magnanimous man in
her eyes, so it was with flattering servility and many smirking grins
that he communicated to her the necessity for her quitting the house in
which she had passed the longest and happiest half of her life, and no
later than next day.

To his announcement that her private fortune would remain untouched, and
that she would be at liberty to reside in Memphis or to go to her own
house in Alexandria, she indifferently replied that "she should see."

She then enquired whether the Arabs had yet succeeded in capturing her
son.

"Not actually," replied the Vekeel. "But we know where he is hiding, and
by to-morrow or the next day we shall lay hands on the unhappy young
man."

But, as he spoke, the widow detected a malicious gleam in his eyes to
which, so far, he had tried to give a sympathetic expression, and she
went on with a slight shake of the bead: "Then it is a case of life and
death?"

"Compose yourself, noble lady," was the reply. "Of death alone."

Neforis looked up to heaven and for some minutes did not speak; then she
asked:

"And who has accused him of robbery?" "The head of his own Church. . . ."

"Benjamin?" she murmured with a peculiar smile. Only yesterday she had
made her will in favor of the patriarch and the Church. "If Benjamin
could see that," said she to herself, "he would change his views of you
and your people, and have prayers constantly said for us."

As she spoke no more the Vekeel sat looking at her inquisitively and
somewhat at a loss, till at length she rose, and with no little dignity
dismissed him, remarking that now their business was at an end and she
had nothing further to say to him.

This closed the interview; and as the Vekeel quitted the fountain-room he
muttered to himself: "What a woman! Either she is possessed and her brain
is crazed, or she is of a rarely heroic pattern."

Neforis was supported to her own room; when she was in bed she desired
her maid to bring a small box out of her chest and place it on the little
table containing medicines by the bead of the couch.

As soon as she was alone she took out two letters which George had
written to her before their marriage, and a poem which Orion had once
addressed to her; she tried to read them, but the words danced before her
eyes, and she was forced to lay them aside. She took up a little packet
containing hair cut from the heads of her sons after death, and a lock of
her husband's. She gazed on these dear memorials with rapt tenderness,
and now the poppy juice began to take effect: the images of those
departed ones rose clear in her mind, and she was as near to them as
though they were standing in living actuality by her side.

Still holding the curls in her hand, she looked up into vacancy, trying
to apprehend clearly what had occurred within the last few hours and what
lay before her: She must leave this room, this ample couch, this
house--all, in short, that was bound up with the dearest memories of
those she had loved. She was to be forced to this--but did it beseem her
to submit to this Negro, this stranger in the house where she was
mistress? She shook her head with a scornful smile; then opening a glass
phial, which was still half-full of opium pillules, she placed a few on
her tongue and again gazed sky-wards.--Another face now looked down on
her; she saw the husband from whom not even death could divide her, and
at his feet their two murdered sons. Presently Orion seemed to rise out
of the clouds, as a diver comes up from the water, and make for the shore
of the island on which George and the other two seemed to be standing.
His father opened his arms to receive him and clasped him to his heart,
while she herself--or was it only her wraith--went to the others, who
hurried forward to greet her tenderly; and then her husband, too, met
her, and she found rest on his bosom.

For hours, and long before the incursion of the Arabs, she had been
feeling half stunned and her mind clouded; but now a delicious,
slumberous lethargy came over her, to which her whole being urged her to
yield. But every time her eyes closed, the thought of the morrow shot
through her brain, and finally, with a great effort, she sat up, took
some water--which was always close at hand--shook into it the remaining
pillules in the bottle, and drank it off to the very last drop.

Her hand was steady; the happy smile on her lips, and the eager
expression of her eyes, might have led a spectator to believe that she
was thirsty and had mixed herself a refreshing draught. She had no look
of a desperate creature laying violent hands on her own life; she felt no
hesitancy, no fear of death, no burthen of the guilt she was
incurring--nothing but ecstatic weariness and hope; blissful hope of a
life without end, united to those she loved.

Hardly had she swallowed the deadly draught when she shivered with a
sudden chill. Raising herself a little she called her maid, who was
sitting up in the adjoining room; and as the woman looked alarmed at her
mistress's fixed stare, she stammered out: "A priest--quick--I am dying."

The woman flew off to the viridarium to call Sebek, who was standing in
front of the tablinum with the Vekeel; she told him what had happened,
and the Negro gave him leave to obey his dying mistress, escorting him as
far as the gate. Just outside, the steward met a deacon who had been
giving the blessing of the Church to a poor creature dying of the
pestilence, and in a few minutes they were standing by the widow's bed.

The locks of her sons' hair lay by her side; her hands were folded over a
crucifix; but her eyes, which had been fixed on the features of the
Saviour, had wandered from it and again gazed up to Heaven.

The priest spoke her name, but she mistook him for her son and murmured
in loving accents:

"Orion, poor, poor child! And you, Mary, my darling, my sweet little pet!
Your father--yes, dear boy, only come with me.--Your father is kind again
and forgives you. All those I loved are together now, and no one--Who can
part us? Husband--George, listen. . ."

The priest performed his office, but she paid no heed, still staring
upwards; her smiling lips continued to move, but no articulate sound came
from them. At last they were still, her eyelids fell, her hands dropped
the crucifix, a slight shiver ran through her limbs, which then relaxed,
and she opened her mouth as though to draw a deeper breath. But it closed
no more, and when the faithful steward pressed her lips together her face
was rigid and her heart had ceased to beat.

The honest man sobbed aloud; when he carried the melancholy news to the
Vekeel, Obada growled out a curse, and said to a subaltern officer who
was super-intending the loading of his camels with the treasures from the
tablinum:

"I meant to have treated that cursed old woman with conspicuous
generosity, and now she has played me this trick; and in Medina they will
lay her death at my door, unless. . ."

But here he broke off; and as he once more watched the loading of the
camels, he only thought to himself: "In playing for such high stake's, a
few gold pieces more or less do not count. A few more heads must fall
yet--the handsome Egyptian first and foremost.--If the conspirators at
Medina only play their part! The fall of Omar means that of Amru, and
that will set everything right."


CHAPTER XII.

Katharina slept little and rose very early, as was her habit, while
Heliodora was glad to sleep away the morning hours. In this scorching
season they were, to be sure, the pleasantest of the twenty-four, and the
water-wagtail usually found them so; but to-day, though a splendid Indian
flower had bloomed for the first time, and the head gardener pointed it
out to her with just pride, she could not enjoy it and be glad. It might
perish for aught she cared, and the whole world with it!

There was no one stirring yet in the next garden, but the tall leech
Philippus might be seen coming along the road to pay a visit to the
women.

A few swift steps carried her to the gate, whence she called him. She
must entreat him to say nothing of her last night's expedition; but
before she had time to prefer her request he had paused to tell her that
the widow of the Mukaukas, overcome by alarm and horror, had followed her
husband to the next world.

There had been a time when Katharina had been devoted to Neforis,
regarding her as a second mother; when the governor's residence had
seemed to her the epitome of all that was great, venerable, and
illustrious; and when she had been proud and happy to be allowed to run
in and out, and to be loved like a child of the family. The tears that
started to her eyes were sincere, and it was a relief to her, too, to lay
aside the gay and defiantly happy mien which she wore as a mask, while
all in her soul was dark, wild, and desperate.

The physician understood her grief; he readily promised not to betray her
to any one, and did not blame her, though he again pointed out the danger
she had incurred and earnestly insisted that every article of clothing,
which she or Heliodora had worn, must be destroyed. The subtle germ of
the malady, he said, clung to everything; every fragment of stuff which
had been touched by the plague-stricken was especially fitted to carry
the infection and disseminate the disease. She listened to him in deep
alarm, but she could satisfy him on this point; everything she or her
companion had worn had been burnt in the bath-room furnace.

The physician went on; and she, heedless of the growing heat, wandered
restlessly about the grounds. Her heart beat with short, quick, painful
jerks; an invisible burthen weighed upon her and prevented her breathing
freely. A host of torturing thoughts haunted her unbidden; they were not
to be exorcised, and added to her misery: Neforis dead; the residence in
the hands of the Arabs; Orion bereft of his possessions and held guilty
of a capital crime.

And the peaceful house beyond the hedge--what trouble was hanging over
its white-haired master and his guileless wife and daughter? A storm was
gathering, she could see it approaching--and beyond it, like another
murky, death-dealing thunder-cloud, was the pestilence, the fearful
pestilence.

And it was she, a fragile, feeble girl--a volatile water-wagtail--who had
brought all these terrors down on them, who had opened the sluice-gates
through which ruin was now beginning to pour in on all around her. She
could see the flood surging, swelling--saw it lapping round her own
house, her own feet; drops of sweat bedewed her forehead and hands from
terror at the mere thought. And yet, and yet!--If she had really had the
power to bind calamity in the clouds, to turn the tide back into its
channel, she would not have done so! The uttermost that she longed for,
as the fruit of the seed she had sown and which she longed to see ripen,
had not yet come to pass--and to see that she would endure anything, even
death and parting from this deceitful, burning, unlovely world.

Death awaited Orion; and before it overtook him he should know who had
sharpened the sword. Perhaps he might escape with his life; but the Arab
would not disgorge what he once had seized, and if that young and
splendid Croesus should come out of prison alive, but a beggar,
then--then. . . . And as for Paula! As for Heliodora! For once her little
hand had wrenched the thunderbolts from Zeus' eagle, and she would find
one for them!

The sense of her terrible power, to which more than one victim had
already fallen, intoxicated her. She would drive Orion--Orion who had
betrayed her--into utter ruin and misery; she would see him a beggar at
her feet!--And this it was that gave her courage to do her worst; this,
and this alone. What she would do then, she herself knew not; that lay as
yet in the womb of the Future. She might take a fancy to do something
kind, compassionate, and tender.

By the time she went into the house again her fears and depression had
vanished; revived energy possessed her soul, and the little eavesdropper
and tale-bearer had become in this short hour a purposeful and terrible
woman, ready for any crime.

"Poor little lamb!" thought Philippus, as he went into Rufinus' garden.
"That miserable man may have brought pangs enough to her little heart!"

His old friend's garden-plot was deserted. Under the sycamore, however,
he perceived the figures of a very tall young man and a pretty woman,
delicate, fair-haired, and rather pale. The big young fellow was holding
a skein of wool on his huge, outstretched hands; the girl was winding it
on to a ball. These were Rustem the Masdakite and Mandane, both now
recovered from their injuries; the girl, indeed, had been restored to the
new life of a calm and understanding mind. Philippus had watched over
this wonderful resuscitation with intense interest and care. He ascribed
it, in the first instance, to the great loss of blood from the wound in
her head; and secondly, to the fresh air and perfect nursing she had had.
All that was now needful was to protect her against agitation and violent
emotions. In the Masdakite she had found a friend and a submissive
adorer; and Philippus could rejoice as he looked at the couple, for his
skill had indeed brought him nothing but credit.

His greeting to them was cheery and hearty, and in answer to his enquiry:
"How are you getting on?" Rustem replied, "As lively as a fish in water,"
adding, as he pointed to Mandane, "and I can say the same for my
fellow-countrywoman."

"You are agreed then?" said the leech, and she nodded eager assent.

At this Philippus shook his finger at the man, exclaiming: "Do not get
too tightly entangled here, my friend. Who knows how soon Haschim may
call you away."

Then, turning his back on the convalescents, he murmured to himself:
"Here again is something to cheer us in the midst of all this
trouble-these two, and little Mary."

Rufinus, before starting on his journey, had sent back all the crippled
children he had had in his care to their various parents; thus the
anteroom was empty.

The women apparently were at breakfast in the dining-room. No, he was
mistaken; it was yet too early, and Pulcheria was still busy laying the
table. She did not notice him as he went in, for she was busy arranging
grapes, figs, pomegranates and sycamore-figs, a fruit resembling
mulberries in flavor which grow in clusters from the trunk of the
tree-between leaves, which the drought and heat of the past weeks had
turned almost yellow. The tempting heap was fast rising in an elegant
many-hued hemisphere; but her thoughts were not in her occupation, for
tears were coursing each other down her cheeks.

"Those tears are for her father," thought the leech as he watched her
from the threshold. "Poor child!"--How often he had heard his old friend
call her so!

And till now he had never thought of her but as a child; but to-day he
must look at her with different eyes--her own father had enjoined it. And
in fact he gazed at her as though he beheld a miracle.

What had come over little Pulcheria?--How was it that he had never
noticed it before?--It was a well-grown maiden that he saw, moving round,
snowwhite arms; and he could have sworn that she had only thin, childish
arms, for she had thrown them round his neck many a time when she had
ridden up and down the garden on his back, calling him her fine horse.

How long ago was that? Ten years! She was now seventeen!

And how slender, and delicate, and white her hands were--those hands for
which her mother had often scolded her when, after building castles of
sand, she had sat down to table unwashed.

Now she was laying the grapes round the pomegranates, and he remembered
how Horapollo, only yesterday, had praised her dainty skill.

The windows were well screened, but a few sunbeams forced their way into
the room and fell on her red-gold hair. Even the fair Boeotians, whom he
had admired in his student-days at Athens, had no such glorious crown of
hair. That she had a sweet and pretty face he had always known; but now,
as she raised her eyes and first observed him, meeting his gaze with
maidenly embarrassment and sweet surprise, and yet with perfect welcome,
he felt himself color and he had to pause a moment to collect himself
before he could respond with something more than an ordinary greeting to
hers. The dialogue that flashed through his mind in that instant began
with sentences full of meaning. But all he said was:

"Yes, here I am," which really did not deserve the hearty reply:

"Thank God for that!" nor the bewitching embarrassment of the explanation
that ensued: "on my mother's account."

Again he blushed; he, the man who had long since forgotten his youthful
shyness. He asked after Dame Joanna, and how she was bearing her trouble,
and then he said gravely: "I was the bearer of bad news yesterday, and
to-day again I have come like a bird of ill-omen."

"You?" she said with a smile, and the simple word conveyed so sweet a
doubt of his capacity for bringing evil that he could not help saying to
himself that his friend, in leaving this child, this girl, to his care,
had bequeathed to him the best gift that one mortal can devise to
another: a dear, trustful, innocent daughter--or no, a younger sister--as
pure, as engaging, and as lovable as only the child of such parents could
be.

While he stood telling her of what had happened at the governor's house,
he noted how deeply, for Paula's and Mary's sake, she took to heart the
widow's death, though Neforis had been nothing to her; and he decided
that he would at once make Pulcheria's mother acquainted with her dead
husband's wishes.

All this did not supplant his old passion for Paula; far from it--that
tortured him still as deeply and hotly as ever. But at the same time he
was conscious of its evil influence; he knew that by cherishing it he was
doing himself harm--nay a real injury since it was not returned. He knew
that within reach of Paula, and condemned to live with her, he could
never recover his peace, but must suffer constant pangs. It was only away
from her, and yet under the same roof with Joanna and her daughter, that
he could ever hope to be a contented and happy man; but he dared not put
this thought into words.

Pulcheria detected that he had something in reserve, and feared lest he
should know of some new impending woe; however, on this head he could
reassure her, telling her that, on the contrary, he had something in his
mind which, so far at least as he was concerned, was a source of
pleasure. Her grieved and anxious spirit could indeed hardly believe him;
and he begged her not to lose all hope in better days, asking her if she
had true and entire trust in him.

She warmly replied that he must surely feel that she did; and now, as the
others came into the room, she nodded to her mother, whom she had already
seen quite early, and offering him her hand shook his heartily. This had
been a restful interval; but the sight of Paula, and the news he had to
give her, threw him back into his old depressed and miserable mood.

Little Mary, whose cheeks had recovered their roses and who looked quite
well again, threw her arms round Paula's neck as she heard the evil
tidings; but Paula herself was calmer than he had expected. She turned
very pale at the first shock, but soon she could listen to him with
composure, and presently quite recovered her usual demeanor. Philippus,
as he watched her, had to control himself sternly, and as soon as
possible he took his leave.

It was as though he had been fated once more to see with agonizing
clearness what he had lost in her; she walked through life as though
borne up by lofty feeling, and a thoughtful radiance lent her noble
features a bewitching charm which grieved while it enchanted him.

Orion a prisoner, and all his possessions confiscated! The thought had
horrified her for a little while; but then it had come to her that this
was just as it should be--that what had at first looked like a dreadful
disaster had been sent to enable her love to cast off its husks, to
appear in all its loftiness and purity, and to give it, by the help of
the All-merciful, its true consecration.

She did not fear for his life, for he had told her and written to her
that Amru had been paternal in his kindness; and all that had occurred
was, she was sure, the work of the Vekeel, of whose odious and cruel
character he had given her a horrible picture that day when Rufinus had
gone to warn the abbess.

When Philippus had left his friends, he sighed deeply. How different he
had found these women from what he had expected. Yes, his old friend knew
men well!

From trifling details he had succeeded in forming a more accurate idea of
Pulcheria than the leech himself had gained in years of intimacy.
Horapollo had foreseen, too, that the danger which threatened the
Mukaukas' son would fan Paula's passions like a fresh breeze; and Joanna,
frail, ailing Joanna! she had behaved heroically under the loss of the
companion with whom she had lived for so many years in faithful love. He
could not help comparing her with the wretched Neforis; what was it that
enabled one to bear the equal loss with so much more dignity than the
other? Nothing but the presence of the tender-hearted Pulcheria, who
shared her sorrow with such beautiful resignation, such ready and
complete sympathy. This the governor's widow had wholly lacked; and how
happy were they who could call such a heart their own! He walked through
the garden with his head bent, and looking neither to the right hand nor
the left.

The Masdakite, who was still sitting with Mandane under the sycamore, as
indifferent to the torrid heat as she was, looked after him, and said
with a sigh as he pointed to him:

"There he goes. This is the first time he ever said a rude word to you or
to me: or did you not understand?"

"Oh yes," said she in a low voice, looking down at her needlework.

They talked in Persian, for she had not forgotten the language which her
mother had spoken till her dying day.

Life is sometimes as strange as a fairy-tale; and the accident was indeed
wonderful which had brought these two beings, of all others, at the same
time to the sick room. His distant home was also hers, and he even knew
her uncle--her father's brother--and her father's sad history.

When the Greek army had taken possession of the province where they had
lived, the men had fled into the woods with their flocks and herds, while
the women and children took refuge in the fortress which defended the
main road. This had not long held out against the Byzantines, and the
women, among them Mandane with her mother, had been handed over to the
soldiers as precious booty. Her father had then joined the troops to
rescue the women, but he and his comrades had only lost their lives in
the attempt. To this day the valiant man's end was a tale told in his
native place, and his property and valuable rose gardens now belonged to
his younger brother. So the two convalescents had plenty to talk about.

It was curious to note how clearly the memories of her childhood were
stamped on Mandane's mind.

She had laid her wounded head on the pillow of sickness with a darkened
brain, and the new pain had lifted the veil from her mind as a storm
clears the oppressive atmosphere of a sultry summer's day. She loved to
linger now among the scenes of her childhood--the time when she had a
mother.--Or she would talk of the present; all between was like a
night-sky black, and only lighted up by an awful comet and shining stars.
That comet was Orion. All she had enjoyed with him and suffered through
him she consigned to the period of her craziness; she had taught herself
to regard it all as part of the madness to which she had been a victim.
Her nature was not capable of cherishing hatred and she could feel no
animosity towards the Mukaukas' son. She thought of him as of one who,
without evil intent, had done her great wrong; one whom she might not
even remember without running into peril.

"Then you mean to say," the Masdakite began once more, "that you would
really miss me if Haschim sent for me?"

"Yes indeed, Rustem; I should be very sorry."

"Oh!" said the other, passing his hand over his big head, on which the
dense mane of hair which had been shaved off was beginning to grow again.
"Well then, Mandane, in that case--I wanted to say it yesterday, but I
could not get it out.--Tell me: why would you be sorry if I were to leave
you?"

"Because--well, no one can have all their reasons ready; because you have
always been kind to me; and because you came from my country, and talk
Persian with me as my mother used."

"Is that all?" said the man slowly, and he rubbed his forehead.

"No, no. Because--if once you go away, you will not be here."

"Aye that is it; that is just the thing. And if you would be sorry for
that, then you must have liked being here--with me."

"And why not? It has been very nice," said the girl blushing and trying
not to meet his eyes.

"That it has--and that it is!" cried Rustem, striking his palm with the
other huge fist. "And that is why I must have it out; that is why, if we
have any sense, we two need never part."

"But your master is sure to want you," said she with growing confusion,
"and we cannot always remain a burthen on the kind folks here. I shall
not work at the loom again; but as I am now free, and have the scroll
that proves it, I must soon look about for some employment. And a strong,
healthy fellow like you cannot always be nursing yourself."

"Nursing myself!" and he laughed gaily. "I will earn money, and enough
for three!"

"By your camels always, up and down the country?"

"I have done with that," said he with a grin. "We will go back to our own
country; there I will buy a good piece of pasture land, for my eldest
brother has our little estate, and you may ask Haschim whether I
understand camel-breeding."

"But Rustem, consider."

"Consider! Think this, and think that! Where there's a will there's a
way. That is the upshot of it all. And if you mean to say that before you
buy you must have money, and that the best may come to grief, all I can
tell you is. . . . Can you read? No? nor I; but here in my pocket I have
my accounts in the master's own hand. Eleven thousand, three hundred and
sixty drachmae were due to me for wages the last time we reckoned: all
the profit the master had set down to my credit since I led his caravan.
He has kept almost all of it for me; for food was allowed, and there was
almost always a bit of stuff for a garment to be found among the bales,
and I never was a sot. Eleven thousand, three hundred and sixty drachmae!
Hey, little one, that is the figure. And now what do you say? Can we buy
something with that? Yes or no?"

He looked at her triumphantly, and she eagerly replied: "Yes, yes indeed;
and in our country I think something worth having."

"And we--you and I--we will begin a quite new life. I was seventeen when
I first set out with my master, and I was twenty-six last midsummer. How
many years wandering does that make?"

They both thought this over for some time; then Mandane said doubtfully

"If I am not mistaken it is eight."

"I believe it is nine," he exclaimed. "Let us see. Here, give me your
little paw! There, I begin with seventeen, that is where I started. First
your little-finger--what a mite of a thing, and then the rest." He took
her right hand and counted off her fingers till he ended with the last
finger of the left. The result puzzled him; he shook his head, saying:
"There are ten fingers on both hands, sure enough, and yet it cannot be
ten years; it is nine at most I know."

He began the counting, which he liked uncommonly, all over again; but
with the same result. Mandane said it was but nine, she had counted it up
herself; and he agreed, and declared that her little fingers must be
bewitched. And this game would have gone on still longer but that she
remembered that the seventeen must not be included at all, and that he
ought to begin with eighteen. Rustem could not immediately take this in,
and even when he admitted it he did not release her hand, but went on
with gay resolution:

"And you see, my girl, I mean to keep this little hand--you may pull it
away if you choose--but it is mine, and the pretty little maid, and all
that belongs to it. And I will take you and both your hands, bewitched
fingers and all, home with me. There they may weave and stitch as much as
you like; but as man and wife no one shall part us, and we will lead a
life such a life! The joys of Paradise shall be no better than a rap on
the skull with an olive-wood log in comparison!"

He tried to take her hand again, but she drew it away, saying in deep
confusion and without looking up: "No, Rustem. I was afraid yesterday
that it would come to this; but it can never, never be. I am
grateful--oh! so grateful; but no, it cannot be, and that must be the end
of it. I can never be your wife. Rustem."

"No?" he asked with a scowl, and the veins swelled in his low forehead.
"Then you have been making a fool of me!--as to the gratitude you talk
of. . . ."

He stood up in hot excitement; she laid her hand on his arm, drew him
down on to the seat again, and ventured to steal an imploring look into
his eyes, which never could long flash with anger. Then she said:

"How you break out! I shall really and truly be very grieved to part from
you; cannot you see that I am fond of you? But indeed, indeed it will
never do, I--oh! if only I might go back, home, and with you. Yes, with
you, as your wife. What a proud and happy thought! And how gladly would I
work for us both--for I am very handy and hard-working, but . . ."

"But?" he repeated, and he put his big, sun-burnt face close to hers,
looking as if he could break her in pieces.

"But it cannot be, for your sake; it must not be, positively, certainly.
I will not make you so bad a return for all your kindness. What! have you
forgotten what I was, what I am? You, as a freeman, will soon have a nice
little estate at home, and may command respect and reverence from all;
but how different it would be if you had a wife like me at your heels--if
only from the fact that I was once a slave."

"That is the history of it all!" he interrupted, and his brow cleared.
"That is what is troubling your dear little soul! But do you not know who
and what I am? Have I not told you what a Masdakite is?

   [Eutychius, Bishop of Alexandria thus describes the communistic
   doctrine of Masdak: "God has given to men on earth that which is of
   the earth to the end that it may be divided equally among them, and
   that no more falls to the lot of one than another. And if one hath
   more than is seemly of money or wives or slaves or movable goods, we
   will take it from him to the end that he and the rest may be equal."]

We Masdakites believe, nay, we know, that all men are born equal, and
that this mad-cap world would be a better place if there were neither
masters nor servants; however, as things are, so they must remain. The
great Lord of Heaven will suffer it yet for a season; but sooner or
later, perhaps very soon, everything will be quite different, and it is
our business to make ready for the day of equality. Then Paradise will
return on earth; there will be none greater or less than another, but we
shall all walk hand-in-hand and stand by each other on an equal footing.
Then shall war and misery cease; for all that is fair and good on earth
belongs to all men in common; and then all men shall be as willing to
give and to help others, as they now are to seize and to oppress.--We
have no marriage bond like other people; but when a man loves a woman he
says, 'Will you be mine?' and if her heart consents she follows him home;
and one may quit the other if love grows cold. Still, no married couple,
whether Christian or Parsee, ever clung together more faithfully than my
parents or my grandparents; and we will do the same to the end, for our
love will bind us firmly together with strong cords that will last longer
than our lives.--So now you know the doctrine of our master Masdak; my
father and grandfather both followed it, and I was taught it by my mother
when I was a little child. All in our village were Masdakites; and there
was not a slave in the place; the land belonged to all in common and was
tilled by all, and the harvest was equally shared. However, they no
longer receive strangers, and I must seek for fellow-believers elsewhere.
Still, a Masdakite I shall always remain; and, if I were to take a slave
for my wife, I should only be acting on the precepts of the master and
helping them on. But as for you, the case does not apply to you, for you
are the child of a brave freeman, respected in all the land; our people
will regard you as a prisoner of war, not as a slave. They will look up
to me as your deliverer. And if I had found you, just as you are, the
meanest of slaves and keeping pigs, I would have put my hand in my wallet
at once and have bought your freedom and have carried you off home as my
wife--and no Masdakite who saw you would ever blame me. Now you know all
about it, and there, I hope, is an end of your coyness and mincing."

Mandane, however, still would not yield; she looked at him with eyes that
entreated his pity, and pointed to her cropped ears.

Rustem shrugged his shoulders with a laugh. "Of course, that too, into
the bargain; You will not let me off any part of it! If it had been your
eyes now, you would not have been able to see, and no countryman can do
with a blind wife, so I should leave you where you are. But you, little
one, have hearing as sharp as a bird's? And what bird--pretty little
things--did you ever see with ears, unless it were a bat or a nasty
owl?--That is all nonsense. Besides, who can see what you have lost now
that Pulcheria has brought your hair down so prettily? And do not you
remember the head-dress our women wear? You might have ears as long as a
hare's, and what good would it do you?--no one could see them. Just as
you are, a lily grown like a cypress, you are ten times sweeter to look
at than the prettiest girl there, if she had three or even four ears. A
girl with three ears! Only think, Mandane, where could the third ear
grow?"

How heartily he laughed, and how glad he was to have hit on this jest and
have turned off a subject which might so well be painful to her! But his
mirth failed of its effect, and only brought a silent smile to her lips.
Even this died quickly away, and in its place there came such a sad,
pathetic expression, as she hung her pretty head, that he could neither
carry on the joke nor reproach her sharply. He said compassionately, with
a little shake of the head:

"But you must not look like that, my pigeon: I cannot bear it. What is it
that is weighing on your little soul? Courage, courage, sweetheart, and
make a clean breast of it!--But no! Do not speak. I can spare you that! I
know, poor little darling--it is that old story of the governor's son."

She nodded, and her eyes filled with tears; and he, with a loud sigh,
exclaimed: "I thought as much, I was right, poor child!"

He took her hand, and went on bravely:

"Yes, that has given me some bad hours, too, and a great deal to think
about; in fact, I came very near to leaving you alone and spoiling my own
happiness and yours too. But I came to my senses before it was too late.
Not on account of what Dame Joanna said the day before yesterday--though
what she says must be true, and she told me that all--you know what--was
at an end. No; my own sense told me this time; for I said to myself: Such
a motherless, helpless little thing, a slave, too, and as pretty as the
angels, her master's son took a fancy to her, how could she defend
herself? And how cruelly the poor little soul was punished!--Yes, little
one, you may well weep! Why, my own eyes are full of tears. Well, so it
had to be and so it was. You and I and the Lord Almighty and the Hosts of
Heaven--who can do anything against us?--So you see that even a poor fool
like me can understand how it all came about; and I do not accuse you,
nor have I anything to forgive. It was just a dreadful misfortune. But it
has come to a good end, thank God I and I can forget it entirely and for
ever, if only you can say: 'It is all over and done with and buried like
the dead!'"

Before he could hinder her, she snatched his hand, to her lips with
passionate affection and sobbed out:

"You are so good! Oh! Rustem, there is not another man on earth so good
as you are, and my mother will bless you for it. Do what you will with
me! And I declare to you, once for all that all that is past and gone,
and only to think of it gives me horror. And it was exactly as you say:
my mother dead, no one to warn me or protect me,--I was hardly sixteen, a
simple, ignorant creature, and he called me, and it all came over me like
a dream in my sleep; and when I awoke. . . ."

"There we are," he interrupted and he tried to laugh as he wiped his
eyes. "Both laid up with holes in our heads.--And when I am in my own
country I always think the prettiest time is just when the hard
winter-frost is over, and the snow melted, and all the flowers in the
valleys rush into bloom--and so I feel now, my little girl. Everything
will be well now, we shall be so wonderfully happy. The day before
yesterday, do you know, I still was not quite clear about it all. Your
trouble gave me no peace, and it went against the grain-well, you can
understand. But then, later, when I was lying in my room and the moon
shone down on my bed . . . " and a rapt expression came into his face that
strangely beautified his harsh features, "I could not help asking myself:
'Although the moon went down into the sea this morning, does that prevent
its shining as brightly as ever to-night, and bringing a cooler breeze?'
And if a human soul has gone under in the same way, may it not rise up
again, bright and shining, when it has bathed and rested? And such a
heart--of course every man would like to have its love all to himself,
but it may have enough to give more than once. For, as I remembered, my
mother, though she loved me dearly, when another child came and yet
another gave them the best she had to give; and I was none the worse when
she had my youngest sister at the breast, nor was she when I was petted
and kissed. And it must be just the same with you. Thought I to myself:
though she once loved another man, she may still have a good share left
for me!"

"Yes, indeed, Rustem!" she exclaimed, looking tearfully but gratefully
into his eyes. "All that is in me of love and tenderness is for you--for
you only."

At this he joyfully exclaimed:

"All, that is indeed good hearing! That will do for me; that is what I
call a good morning's work! I sat down under this tree a vagabond and a
wanderer, and I get up a future land-holder, with the sweetest little
wife in the world to keep house for me."

They sat a long time under the shady foliage; he craved no more than to
gaze at her and, when he put the old questions asked by all lovers, to be
answered with lips and eyes, or merely a speechless nod. Her hands no
longer plied the needle, and the pair would have smiled in pity on any
one who should have complained of the intolerable heat of this scorching,
parching forenoon. A pair of turtle doves over their heads were less
indifferent to the sun's rays than they, for the birds had closed their
eyes, and the head of the mother bird was resting languidly against the
dark collar round her mate's neck.


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 10.


CHAPTER XIII.

The Vekeel, like the Persian lovers, did not allow the heat of the day to
interfere with his plans. He regarded the governor's house as his own;
all he found there aroused, not merely his avarice, but his interest. His
first object was to find some document which might justify his
proceedings against Orion and the sequestration of his estates, in the
eyes of the authorities at Medina.

Great schemes were brewing there; if the conspiracy against the Khaliff
Omar should succeed, he had little to fear; and the greater the sum he
could ere long forward to the new sovereign, the more surely he could
count on his patronage--a sum exceeding, if possible, the largest which
his predecessor had ever cast into the Khaliff's treasury.

He went from room to room with the curiosity and avidity of a child,
touching everything, testing the softness of the pillows, peeping into
scrolls which he did not understand, tossing them aside, smelling at the
perfumes in the dead woman's rooms, and the medicines she had used. He
showed his teeth with delight when he found in her trunks some costly
jewels and gold coins, stuck the finest of her diamond rings on his
finger, already covered with gems, and then eagerly searched every corner
of the rooms which Orion had occupied.

His interpreter, who could read Greek, had to translate every document he
found that did not contain verses. While he listened, he clawed and
strummed on the young man's lyre and poured out the scented oil which
Orion had been wont to use to smear it over his beard. In front of the
bright silver mirror he could not cease from making faces.

To his great disgust he could find nothing among the hundred objects and
trifles that lay about to justify suspicion, till, just as he was leaving
the room, he noticed in a basket near the writing-table some discarded
tablets. He at once pointed them out to the interpreter and, though there
was but little to read on the Diptychon,--[Double writing-tablets, which
folded together]--it seemed important to the negro for it ran as follows:

"Orion, the son of George, to Paula the daughter of Thomas!

"You have heard already that it is now impossible for me to assist in the
rescue of the nuns. But do not misunderstand me. Your noble, and only too
well-founded desire to lend succor to your fellow-believers would have
sufficed. . ."

From this point the words written on the wax were carefully effaced, and
hardly a letter was decipherable; indeed, there were so few lines that it
seemed as though the letter had never been ended-which was the fact.

Though it gave the Vekeel no inculpating evidence against Orion it
pointed to his connection with the guilty parties: Paula, doubtless, had
been concerned in the scheme which had cost the lives of so many brave
Moslems. The negro had learnt, through the money-changer at Fostat, that
she was on terms of close intimacy with the Mukaukas' son and had
entrusted her property to his stewardship. They must both be accused as
accomplices in the deed, and the document proved Orion's knowledge of it,
at any rate.

Plotinus, the bishop, at whose instigation the fugitives had been chased,
could fill up what the damsel might choose to conceal.

He had started to follow the patriarch immediately after the pursuers had
set out, and had only returned from Upper Egypt early on the previous
day. On his arrival he had forwarded to the Vekeel two indictments
brought against Orion by the prelate: the first relating to the evasion
of the nuns; the other to the embezzlement of a costly emerald; the
rightful property of the church. These accusations were what had
encouraged the Negro to confiscate the young man's estate, particularly
as the bitter tone of the patriarch's document sufficiently proved that
in him he had found an ally.

Paula must next be placed in safe custody, and he had no doubt whatever
that her statement would incriminate Orion in some degree. He would
gladly have cross-examined her at once, but he had other matters in hand
to-day.

The longest part of his task was ransacking the treasurer's office; Nilus
himself had to conduct the search. Everything which he pointed out as a
legal document, title-deed, contract for purchase or sale, revenue
account or the like, was at once placed in oxcarts or on camels, with the
large sums of gold and silver coin, and carried across the river under a
strong escort. All the more antique deeds and the family archives, the
Vekeel left untouched. He was indeed an indefatigable man, for although
these details kept him busy the whole day, he allowed himself no rest nor
did he once ask for the refreshment of food or a cooling draught. As the
day went on he enquired again and again for the bishop, with increasing
impatience and irritation. It would have been his part to wait on the
patriarch, but who was Plotinus? Thin-skinned, like all up-starts in
authority, he took the bishop's delay as an act of personal contumely.
But the shepherd of the flock at Memphis was not a haughty prelate, but a
very humble and pious minister. His superior, the patriarch, had
entrusted him with an important mission to Amru or his lieutenant, and
yet he could let the Vekeel wait in vain, and not even send him a message
of explanation; in the afternoon, however, his old housekeeper dispatched
the acolyte who was attached to his person to seek Philippus. Her master,
a hale and vigorous man, had gone to bed by broad day-light a few hours
after his return home, and had not again left it. He was hot and thirsty,
and did not seem fully conscious of where he was or of what was
happening.

Plotinus had always maintained that prayer was the Christian's best
medicine; still, as his poor body had become alarmingly heated the old
woman ventured to send for the physician; but the messenger came back
saying that Philippus was absent on a journey. This was in fact the case:
He had quitted Memphis in obedience to a letter from Haschim. The
merchant's unfortunate son was not getting better. There seemed to be an
injury to some internal organ, which threatened his life. The anxious
father besought the leech, in whom he had the greatest confidence, to
hasten to Djidda, there to examine the sufferer and undertake the case.
At the same time he desired that Rustem should join him as soon as his
health would permit.

This letter--which ended with greetings to Paula, for whose father he was
making diligent search--agitated Philippus greatly. How could he leave
Memphis at a time of such famine and sickness?--And Dame Joanna and her
daughter!

On the other hand he was much drawn to get away on Paula's account--away,
far away; and then how gladly would he do his best to save that fine old
man's son. In spite of all this he would have remained, but that his old
friend, quite unexpectedly, took Haschim's side of the question and
implored him to make the journey. He would make it his business and his
pleasure to take charge of the women in Rufinus' house; Philip's
assistant could fill his place at the bedside of many of the sick, and
the rest could die without him. Had not he himself said that there was no
remedy for the disease? Again, Philip had said not long since that there
could be no peace for him within reach of Paula: here was a favorable
opportunity for escape without attracting remark, and at the same time
for doing a work of the truest charity.

So Philippus had yielded, and had started on his journey with very mixed
feelings.

Horapollo did not devote any particular attention to his personal
comfort; but in one respect he took especial care of himself. He had
great difficulty in walking and, as he loved to breathe the fresh air at
sundown, and sometimes to study the stars at a late hour, he kept an ass
of the best and finest breed. He did not hesitate to pay a high price for
such a beast if it really answered his requirements; that is to say if it
were strong, surefooted, gentle, and light-colored. His father and
grandfather, priests of Isis, had always ridden white asses, and so he
would do the same.

During the last few sultry weeks he had rarely gone out of doors, and
to-day he waited till the hour before sunset before starting to keep his
promise.

Robed in snowy-white linen, with new sandals on his feet, freshly shaven,
and protected from the sun's rays by a crisply curled, flowing wig, after
the manner of his fathers, as well as by an umbrella, he mounted his
beautiful white ass in the conviction that he had done his best for his
outer man, and set forth, followed by his black slave trotting on foot.

It was not yet dark when he stopped at the house of Rufinus. His heart
had not beat so high for many a day.

"I feel as if I had come courting," said he, laughing at himself. "Well,
and I really am come to propose an alliance for the rest of my life!
Still, curiosity, one would think, might be shed with the hair and the
teeth!" However, it still clung to him, and he could not deny to himself
that he was very curious as to the person whom he hated, though he had
never seen her, simply because she was the daughter of a patrician and a
prefect, and had made his Philippus miserable. As he was dismounting, a
graceful young girl and an older woman, in very costly though simple
dresses, came through the garden. These must be the water-wagtail, and
Orion's Byzantine guest.--How annoying! So many women at once!

The art of reviewing may be compared to French cookery; it has no
medium--it must either be first-rate or it is worth nothing: nay, the
comparison goes much further, as the attempt at either not only
spoils the meat, but half poisons the guests.

The fact is, good reviewing is of the highest order of literature, for
a good reviewer ought to be superior to the party whose writings he reviews.
Such men as Southey, Croker, and Lockhart on the one side, Brougham,
Fontblanque, and Rintoul on the other, will always command respect in
their vocations, however much they may be influenced by political feelings,
or however little you may coincide with them in opinion. But, passing
over these, and three or four more _cordons bleus_, what are
reviewers in general?

men of a degree of talent below that of the author whose works they presume
to decide upon; the major portion of whom, having failed as authors, are
possessed with but one feeling in their disappointment, which is to drag
others down to their own debased level. To effect this, you have malevolence
substituted for wit, and high-sounding words for sense; every
paltry advantage is taken that can be derived from an intentional
misrepresentation of your meaning, and (what is the great secret
of all) from unfair quotations of one or two lines, carefully
omitting the context--an act of unpardonable dishonesty towards the
author, and but too often successful in misleading the reader of
the Review.

By acting upon this last-mentioned system, there is no book, whatever
its merits may be, which cannot be misrepresented to the public:
a work espousing atheism may be made to appear wholly moral; or,
the Holy Scriptures themselves condemned as licentious and indecent.

If such reviewing is fair, a jury may, upon a similar principle, decide
upon a case by the evidence in favour of the prosecution; and beauty or
deformity in architecture be pronounced upon by the examination of a few
bricks taken out from different portions of a building.

That, latterly, the public have been more inclined to judge for
themselves, than to pin their faith upon reviews, is certain;
nevertheless, when what is termed a "_slashing article_" upon a popular
work makes its appearance, the public are too apt to receive it without
scrutiny. Satisfied with the general effect, as with that produced in a
theatrical representation, they do not bear in mind that that which
has the appearance of gold, would prove upon examination to be
nothing more than tinsel.

Were all reviewers to be reviewed by authors as well as all authors
by reviewers, the authors would have the best of it in the _melee_.
Again, were reviewers obliged to put their names to their several
articles, there would be a great difference in their style; but, secure
in their _incognito_ from the disgrace of exposure, they make no scruple
to assert what they well know to be false, and, coward-like, to assail
those who have seldom an opportunity, whatever may be their power, to
defend themselves. Never, perhaps, was there a better proof of the truth
of the foregoing observations than is afforded by the article in the
Edinburgh Review upon the first portion of my work on America; and as I
have some pages to spare, I shall now take the unusual liberty of
reviewing the Reviewer.

First, let me introduce to the public the writer of the article--Miss
Harriet Martineau.

My readers may inquire how I can so positively make this assertion? I
reply that it is owing to my "craft." A person who has long dealt in
pictures will, without hesitation, tell you the name of the painter
of any given work: a shepherd with a flock of three or four hundred
sheep under his charge, will know every one of them individually,
although to people in general, one sheep is but the counterpart of
the others.

Thus, there are little varieties of style, manner, and handling of the
pen, which become evident to practised writers, although they are not
always so to readers. But even if these peculiarities were not sufficient,
the manner in which the article is managed (the remarks of Miss Martineau
upon the merits of Miss Martineau) in my mind establishes to conviction,
that the major portion of the article, if not the whole, has proceeded
from her pen.

This is a matter of no consequence, and I only mention it that my readers
may understand why Miss Martineau, who forms so prominent a feature
in the Edinburgh article, will also occasionally appear in mine. My
reply, however, is not addressed to her, but to the Edinburgh Reviewer.

I have no doubt the Reviewer will most positively deny that Miss Martineau
had any thing to do with the Review of my work: that of course. With
his permission, I will relate a little anecdote. "When the Royal George
went down at Spithead, an old gentleman, who had a son on board,
was bewailing his loss.

His friends came to console him.

`I thought,' observed one of them, `that you had received a letter?'--`Yes,'
replied the old gentleman, `but it was from _Jack himself_.'--`Well,
what more would you have?'--`Ah,' replied the old gentleman, `had it been
from the captain, or from one of his messmates, or, indeed, from
anybody else, it would have consoled me; but Jack,--he is such _an
incorrigible liar_, that his _very assertion_ that he is safe, convinces
me that he has gone to the bottom.'"
Now my opinion of the veracity of the Edinburgh Review may be estimated
by the above anecdote; the very circumstance of its denial would, with
me, be sufficient to establish the fact. But to proceed.

The Review has pronounced the first portion of my work to be light and
trifling, and full of errors; it asserts that I have been hoaxed
by the Americans; that I am incapable of sound reasoning; cannot
estimate human nature; and, finally, requests as a favour that I
will write no more.

Such are the general heads of the Review.

Now here we have a strange inconsistency, for why should the Edinburgh
Review, if the work be really what he asserts it to be, "light and
trifling," etcetera, waste so much powder and shot upon a tomtit?

Why has he dedicated twenty-seven pages of ponderous verbosity to so light
and trifling a work? How seldom is it that the pages of the Quarterly
or Edinburgh condescend to notice even the very best of light
literature! Do they not, in their majesty, consider it _infra dig_. to
review such works, and have not two or three pages bestowed upon them
been considered as an immense favour on their part, and a high compliment
to the authors? Notwithstanding which, we have here _twenty-seven pages
of virulent attack_ upon my light and trifling work.
Does not the Edinburgh reviewer at once shew that the work is not light
and trifling? does he not contradict his own assertions, by the labour
and space bestowed upon it? nay, more, is it not strange that
he should think it necessary to take the unfair advantage of reviewing
a work before it is half finished, and pounce upon the first portion, with
the hopes of neutralising the effects which he evidently dreads from the
second.

I will answer the question for him. He indulges in his precipitate and
unmeasured attacks, because he feels that the work is written in a style
that will induce every one to read it; because he feels assured
that the occasional, and apparently careless hits at democracy, are
only preparatory to others more severe, and that these will come
out in the second part, which will be read with as much avidity as
the first.

He perceives the drift of the work; he feels that it has been purposely
made amusing, and that it will be more injurious to the cause which the
Edinburgh Review upholds than a more laboured treatise; that those who
would not look at a more serious work will read this, and that the
opinions it contains will be widely disseminated, and impressed
without the readers being aware of it; moreover, that it will descend
to a class of readers who have hitherto been uninformed upon the
subject: in short, he apprehends the greater danger to his cause
from the work having, as I have said, been made amusing, and from
its being in appearance, although not in reality, "light and
trifling."

I candidly acknowledge that the Reviewer is right in his supposition: my
great object has been to do serious injury to the cause of democracy.

To effect this, it was necessary that I should write a book which
should be universally read--not merely by the highly educated portion
of the community, for they are able to judge for themselves; but
_read by every tradesman and mechanic_; pored over even by milliners'
girls, and boys behind the counter, and thumbed to pieces in every
petty circulating library.

I wrote the work with this object, and I wrote accordingly.
Light and trifling as it may appear to be, every page of it (as I
have stated) has been the subject of examination and deliberation:
it has given me more trouble than any work I ever wrote; and, my
labour having been so far crowned with success, I trust that I shall
have "done the State some service."

[See Note 1.] The review in the Edinburgh will neither defeat nor obstruct
my purpose, as that publication circulates chiefly among those classes
who have already formed their opinions; and I have this advantage over it,
that, as for one that reads the Edinburgh Review, fifty will read my
work, so will fifty read my reply who will never trouble themselves
about the article in the Edinburgh Review.

And now let us enter a little into detail.

The Reviewer finds great fault with my introduction, as being
wholly irrevelant to the Diary which follows it. I admit, that if it
were an introduction to the Diary alone, there then would be some
justice in his remark. But such is not the case: an introduction is, I
believe, generally understood to refer to the _whole_ of the
work, not a portion of it; and now that the work is complete, I
leave it to the public to decide whether the introduction is suitable
or not, as bearing upon the whole.

I believe, also, it is the general custom to place an introduction at the
commencement of a work; I never heard of one being introduced into the
middle or at the end of it. The fault, therefore, of its imputed irrelevancy
is not mine: it is the Reviewer's, who has thought proper to review
the work before it was complete. He quotes me, as saying, "_Captain
Marryat's object was to examine and ascertain what were the effects
of a democratic form of government upon a people which, with all its foreign
admixture, may still be considered as English_;" and then, without waiting
till I have completed my task, he says, that the present work "has
nothing, or next to nothing, to do with such an avowal." Whether
such an assertion has any thing to do with the work now that it is completed,
I leave the public to decide. The Reviewer has no excuse for this
illiberal conduct, for I have said, in my Introduction, "In the
arrangement of this work, I have considered it advisable to present
to the reader first, those portions of my Diary which may be
interesting, and in which are recorded _traits_ and _incidents_
which will _bear strongly upon the commentaries I shall subsequently
make_;" notwithstanding which the reviewer has the mendacity to
assert that, "not until the last paragraph of the last volume, does
he learn for the first time that the work is not complete."

I will be content with quoting his own words against him--"_An habitual
story teller_ prefers _invention_ to description."
The next instance of the Reviewer's dishonesty is, his quoting a
portion of a paragraph and rejecting the context. He quotes, "I had
not been three weeks in the country before I decided upon accepting
no more invitations, charily as they were made," and upon this
quotation he founds an argument that, as I did not enter into
society, I could of course have no means of gaining any knowledge
of American character or the American institutions.

Now, if the reviewer had had the common honesty to finish the paragraph,
the reason why I refused the invitations would have been apparent;
"because I found that, although invited, my presence was a restraint upon
the company, and every one _was afraid to speak_."

Perhaps the sagacity of the Reviewer will explain what information I
was likely to gain from people who would not open their mouths. Had he
any knowledge of the Americans, he would admit that they never will venture
to give their opinions _in the presence of each other_; it was not
that they were afraid of _me_, but of each other, as Monsieur de Tocqueville
has very truly pointed out in his work. Moreover, I have now, for the
first time, to learn that the best way of arriving at the truth is to
meet people who are on their guard, and whose object is to deceive.

There is a malevolent feeling in the assertion, that I have treated
_all_ other previous writers on America with contempt; and here again
he intentionally quotes falsely.

My words are "the _majority_ of those who have preceded me." As nearly
as I can reckon, there have been about fifty works published on America,
out of which there are not _ten_ which deserve attention; and the ample
quotations I have made from Monsieur de Tocqueville, Captain Hamilton,
and others, in corroboration of my own opinions, fully evince the respect
I have for their writings. In fact, the whole article is a tissue of
falsehood and misrepresentation, and so weak that hardly one of its
positions is tenable. Can any thing be more absurd, or more shallow,
than to quote the Mississippi scheme and Mr Law as a proof that the French
are, as well as the English and Americans, a _speculative nation_: one
solitary instance of a portion of the French having, about sixty or
seventy years ago, been induced to embark their capital, is brought
forward, while the abject supineness of the French population of
Lower Canada, in juxta-position with the energy and enterprise of
the Americans, has for half a century stared us in the face.

The Reviewer has the kindness repeatedly to inform me that I have been
hoaxed by the Americans, and, most unfortunately for himself, he
has brought forward the "Original Draft of the Declaration of
Independence" as a proof of it.

That he would be very glad to prove it to be a hoax, I believe; as it
is a sad discovery, and one which the American democrats should
have kept secret.

That the Americans did hoax Miss Martineau, and that they would have
hoaxed me if they could, I admit, but even the Reviewer must
acknowledge that they would not _hoax_ themselves.

Now it so happens, that this document, which has not long been
discovered, is in the splendid public library of Philadelphia: it has
been carefully preserved in a double plate-glass frame, so as to be read
on both sides without handling; it is expensively mounted, and shewn
to every visitor as a great curiosity, as it certainly is, the
authenticity of it being undeniable, and acknowledged by the
Americans.

The paragraph which was expunged is verbatim as I gave it--a paragraph
which affords more proof, if further proof were necessary, that Jefferson
was one of the most unprincipled men who ever existed. The Reviewer
recommends my perusal of the works of this "_great and good man_,"
as Miss Martineau calls him.

I suspect that I have read more of Mr Jefferson and other American authors
than ever the Reviewer has; and I consider the writings of this Father
of Democracy, opposed to his private life, to be a remarkable
_type_ of democracy in _theory_ and in _practice_.

To borrow a term from the Reviewer, those writings are "_brave words_" to
proceed from an infidel, who proved his ardent love of liberty by allowing
his own children to be put up to auction at his death, and wear away
their existence in misery and bondage. I cannot help here observing a
_trifling inconsistency_ on the part of the Reviewer. After lauding the
Father of Democracy, and recommending me to read his works; after sneering
at our aristocracy by observing, "that no _kind_ of virtue that we
have heard of can suffer much from the loss of a _court_ and of an
_hereditary nobility_;" after, in short, defending and upholding democracy
in every page, all of a sudden the Reviewer turns round and says, "_We are
no general admirers of democracy_." Indeed! if not general, you
certainly appear to be _particular_ admirers; and if neither general nor
particular, may I inquire what the Edinburgh Review has been frothing,
fizzing, hissing, and bubbling about, like a tea-kettle in a passion, for
these last twenty years?

Never was there a more convincing proof of the boldness and arrogance
which Reviewers (trusting to the irresponsibility arising from their
concealment) assume, than is afforded by the following passage in
the Edinburgh article:--
"_An ardent pursuit of wealth and deep religious feelings go very
well together_."

It is not for me to reply to the Reviewer in this instance; I must hand
him over to higher authority. I must oppose the everlasting doctrines
of inspiration to the cold, heartless, and arrogant philosophy of an
Edinburgh reviewer.

In vain are we again and again forewarned in the Scriptures against
the love of money; in vain has our Saviour denounced it; in vain have
the apostles followed in his steps.

Let the Reviewer, if he ever has looked into the Bible, refer to the
epistles to the Colossians and to the Ephesians.

St Paul declares that covetousness is _idolatry_. Hear also what he sayeth
to Timothy:--
"But they that _wish to be rich_ fall into temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition." "For the _love of money is the root of all evil_."

His wife and daughter had
always been kind neighbors to her; and she would not have willingly
brought sorrow on them. If she were called up to give evidence it might
go hard with them, and she wished no harm to any one but those who had
cheated her out of Orion's love. This idea of standing before a court of
justice was the worst of all; this must be warded off at any cost.

Where could Bishop Plotinus be? He had returned to Memphis the day
before, and yet he had not been to see her mother, to whom he usually
paid a daily visit. This absence seemed to her ominous. Everything
depended on her reminding the old man of his promise as soon as possible;
for if at the trial next morning--which of course, he must attend--he
should happen to mention her name, the guards, the interpreter, and the
scribe would invade her home too and then-horror! She had given evidence
once already, and could never again go through all that had ensued.

But how was she to get at the bishop in the course of the night or early
to-morrow at latest?

The chariot had not yet returned, and if--it still wanted two hours of
midnight; yes--it must be done.

She began talking to her mother of the prelate's absence; Susannah, too,
was uneasy about it, particularly since she had heard that the old man
had come home ill and that his servant had been out and about in search
of a physician. Katharina promptly proposed to go and see him: the horses
were still in harness, her nurse could accompany her. She really must go
and learn how her venerable friend was going on.

Susannah thought this very sweet; still, she said it was very late for
such a visit; however, her spoilt child had said that she "must" and the
answer was a foregone conclusion. Dame Susannah gave way; the nurse was
sent for, and as soon as the chariot came round Katharina flung her arms
round her mother's neck, promising her not to stay long, and in a few
minutes the chariot stopped at the door of the bishop's palace. She bid
the nurse wait for her and went alone into the vast, rambling house.

The spacious hall, lighted feebly by a single lamp, was silent and
deserted, even the door-keeper had left his post; however, she was
familiar with every step and turning, and went on through the impluvium
into the library where, at this hour, the bishop was wont to be found.
But it was dark, and her gentle call met with no reply. In the next room,
to which she timidly felt her way, a slave lay snoring; beside him were a
wine jar and a hand-lamp. The sight somewhat reassured her. Beyond was
the bishop's bedroom, which she had never been into. A dim light gleamed
through the open door and she heard a low moaning and gasping. She called
the house-keeper by name once, twice; no answer. The sleeping slave did
not stir; but a familiar voice addressed her from the bedroom, groaning
rather than saying:

"Who is there? Is he come? Have you found him at last?"

The whole household had fled in fear of the pestilence; even the acolyte,
who had indeed a wife and children. The housekeeper had been forced to
leave the master to seek the physician, who had already been there once,
and the last remaining slave, a faithful, goodhearted, heedless sot, had
been left in charge; but he had brought a jar of wine up from the
unguarded cellar, had soon emptied it, and then, overcome by drink and
the heat of the night, he had fallen asleep.

Katharina at once spoke her name and the old man answered her, saying
kindly, but with difficulty: "Ah, it is you, you, my child!"

She took up the lamp and went close to the sick man. He put out his lean
arm to welcome her; but, as her approach brought the light near to him he
covered his eyes, crying out distressfully: "No, no; that hurts. Take
away the lamp."

Katharina set it down on a low chest behind the head of the bed; then she
went up to the sufferer, gave him her mother's message, and asked him how
he was and why he was left alone. He could only give incoherent answers
which he gasped out with great difficulty, bidding her go close to him
for he could not hear her distinctly. He was very ill, he told
her--dying. It was good of her to have come for she had always been his
pet, his dear, good little girl.

"And it was a happy impulse that brought you," he added, "to receive an
old man's blessing. I give it you with my whole heart."

As he spoke he put forth his hand and she, following an instinctive
prompting, fell on her knees by the side of the couch.

He laid his burning right hand on her head and murmured some words of
blessing; she, however, scarcely heeded them, for his hand felt like lead
and its heat oppressed and distressed her dreadfully. It was a sincere
grief to her to see this true old friend of her childhood suffering
thus--perhaps indeed dying; at the same time she did not forget what had
brought her here--still, she dared not disturb him in this act of love.
He gave her his blessing--that was kind; but his mutterings did not come
to an end, the weight of the hot hand on her head grew heavier and
heavier, and at last became intolerable. She felt quite dazed, but with
an effort she collected her senses and then perceived that the old man
had wandered off from the usual formulas of blessing and was murmuring
disconnected and inarticulate words.

At this she raised the terrible, fevered hand, laid it on the bed, and
was about to ask him whether he had betrayed her to Benjamin, and if he
had mentioned her name, when--Merciful God! there on his cheeks were the
same livid spots that she had noticed on those of the plague stricken man
in Medea's house. With a cry of horror she sprang up, snatched at the
lamp, held it over the sufferer, heedless of his cries of anguish, looked
into his face, and pulled away the weary hands with which he tried to
screen his eyes from the light. Then, having convinced herself that she
was not mistaken, she fled from room to room out into the hall.

Here she was met by the housekeeper, who took the lamp out of her hand
and was about to question her; but Katharina only screamed:

"The plague is in the house! Lock the doors!" and then rushed away, past
the leech who was coming in. With one bound she was in the chariot, and
as the horses started she wailed out to the nurse:

"The plague--they have the plague. Plotinus has taken the plague!"

The terrified woman tried to soothe her, assuring her that she must be
mistaken for such hellish fiends did not dare come near so holy a man.
But the girl vouchsafed no reply, merely desiring her to have a bath made
ready for her as soon as they should reach home.

She felt utterly shattered; on the spot where the old man's
plague-stricken hand had rested she was conscious of a heavy, hateful
pressure, and when the chariot at length drove into their own garden
something warm and heavy-something she could not shake off, still seemed
to weigh on her brain.

The windows were all dark excepting one on the ground-floor, where a
light was still visible in the room inhabited by Heliodora. A diabolical
thought flashed through her over-excited and restless mind; without
looking to the right hand or the left she obeyed the impulse and went
forward, just as she was, into her friend's sitting-room and then,
lifting a curtain, on into the bedroom. Heliodora was lying on her couch,
still suffering from a headache which had prevented her going to visit
their neighbors; at first she did not notice the late visitor who stood
by her side and bid her good evening.

A single lamp shed a dim light in the spacious room, and the young girl
had never thought their guest so lovely as she looked in that twilight. A
night wrapper of the thinnest material only half hid her beautiful limbs.
Round her flowing, fair hair, floated the subtle, hardly perceptible
perfume which always pervaded this favorite of fortune. Two heavy plaits
lay like sheeny snakes over her bosom and the white sheet. Her face was
turned upwards and was exquisitely calm and sweet; and as she lay
motionless and smiled up at Katharina, she looked like an angel wearied
in well-doing.

No man could resist the charms of this woman, and Orion had succumbed. By
her side was a lute, from which she brought the softest and most soothing
tones, and thus added to the witchery of her appearance.

Katharina's whole being was in wild revolt; she did not know how she was
able to return Heliodora's greeting, and to ask her how she could
possibly play the lute with a headache.

"Just gliding my fingers over the strings calms and refreshes my blood,"
she replied pleasantly. "But you, child, look as if you were suffering
far worse than I.--Did you come home in the chariot that drove up just
now?"

"Yes," replied Katharina. "I have been to see our dear old bishop. He is
very ill, dying; he will soon be taken from us. Oh, what a fearful day!
First Orion's mother, then Paula, and now this to crown all! Oh,
Heliodora, Heliodora!"

She fell on her knees by the bed and pressed her face against her pitying
friend's bosom. Heliodora saw the tears which had risen with unaffected
feeling to the girl's eyes; her tender soul was full of sympathy with the
sorrow of such a gladsome young creature, who had already had so much to
suffer, and she leaned over the child, kissing her affectionately on the
brow, and murmuring words of consolation. Katharina clung to her closely,
and pointing to the top of her head where that burning hand had pressed
it, she said: "There, kiss there: there is where the pain is worst!--Ah,
that is nice, that does me good."

And, as the tender-hearted Heliodora's fresh lips rested on the
plague-tainted hair, Katharina closed her eyes and felt as a gladiator
might who hitherto has only tried his weapons on the practising ground,
and now for the first time uses them in the arena to pierce his
opponent's heart. She had a vision of herself as some one else, taller
and stronger than she was; aye, as Death itself, the destroyer, breathing
herself into her victim's breast.

These feelings entirely possessed her as she knelt on the soft carpet,
and she did not notice that another woman was crossing it noiselessly to
her comforter's bed-side, with a glance of intelligence at Heliodora.
Just as she exclaimed: "Another kiss there-it burns so dreadfully," she
felt two hands on her temples and two lips, not Heliodora's, were pressed
on her head.

She looked up in astonishment and saw the smiling face of her mother, who
had come after her to ask how the bishop was, and who wished to take her
share in soothing the pain of her darling.

How well her little surprise had succeeded!

But what came over the child? She started to her feet as if lightning had
struck her, as if an asp had stung her, looked horror-stricken into her
mother's eyes, and then, as Susannah was on the point of clasping the
little head to her bosom once more to kiss the aching, the cursed spot,
Katharina pushed her away, flew, distracted, through the sitting-room
into the vestibule, and down the narrow steps leading to the bathroom.

Her mother looked after her, shaking her head in bewilderment. Then she
turned to Heliodora with a shrug, and said, as the tears filled her eyes:

"Poor, poor little thing! Too many troubles have come upon her at once.
Her life till lately was like a long, sunny day, and now the hail is
pelting her from all sides at once. She has bad news of the bishop, I
fear."

"He is dying, she said," replied the young widow with feeling.

"Our best and truest friend," sobbed Susannah. "It is, it really is too
much. I often think that I must myself succumb, and as for her--hardly
more than a child!--And with what resignation she bears the heaviest
sorrows!--You, Heliodora, are far from knowing what she has gone through;
but you have no doubt seen how her only thought is to seem bright, so as
to cheer my heart. Not a sigh, not a complaint has passed her lips. She
submits like a saint to everything, without a murmur. But, now that her
clear old friend is stricken, she has lost her self-control for the first
time. She knows all that Plotinus has been to me." And she broke down
into fresh sobbing. When she was a little calmer, she apologised for her
weakness and bid her fair guest good night.

Katharina, meanwhile, was taking a bath.

A bathroom was an indispensable adjunct to every wealthy Graeco-Egyptian
house, and her father had taken particular pains with its construction.
It consisted of two chambers, one for men and one for women; both fitted
with equal splendor.

White marble, yellow alabaster, purple porphyry on all sides; while the
pavement was of fine Byzantine mosaic on a gold ground. There were no
statues, as in the baths of the heathen; the walls were decorated with
bible texts in gold letters, and above the divan, which was covered with
a giraffe skin, there was a crucifix. On the middle panel of the coffered
ceiling was inscribed defiantly, in the Coptic language the first axiom
of the Jacobite creed: "We believe in the single, indivisible nature of
Christ Jesus." And below this hung silver lamps.

The large bath had been filled immediately for Katharina, as the furnace
was heated every evening for the ladies of the house. As she was
undressing, her maid showed her a diseased date. The head gardener, had
brought it to her, for he had that afternoon, discovered that his palms,
too, had been attacked. But the woman soon regretted her loquacity, for
when she went on to say that Anchhor, the worthy shoemaker who, only the
day before yesterday, had brought home her pretty new sandals, had died
of the plague, Katharina scolded her sharply and bid her be silent. But
as the maid knelt before her to unfasten her sandals, Katharina herself
took up the story again, asking her whether the shoemaker's pretty young
wife had also been attacked. The girl said that she was still alive, but
that the old mother-in-law and all the children had been shut into the
house, and even the shutters barred as soon as the corpse had been
brought out. The authorities had ordered that this should be done in
every case, so that the pestilence might not pervade the streets or be
disseminated among the healthy. Food and drink were handed to the
captives through a wicket in the door. Such regulations, she added,
seemed particularly well-considered and wise. But she would have done
better to keep her opinions to herself, for before she had done speaking
Katharina gave her an angry push with her foot. Then she desired her not
to be sparing with the 'smegma',--[A material like soap, but used in a
soft state.]--and to wash her hair as thoroughly as possible.

This was done; and Katharina herself rubbed her hands and arms with
passionate diligence. Then she had water poured over her head again and
again, till, when she desired the maid to desist, she had to lean
breathless and almost exhausted against the marble.

But in spite of smegma and water she still felt the pressure of the
burning hand on top of her head, and her heart seemed oppressed by some
invisible load of lead.

Her mother! oh, her mother! She had kissed her there, where the plague
had actually touched her, and in fancy she could hear her gasping and
begging for a drink of water like the dying wretches to whom her fate had
led her. And then--then came the servants of the senate and shut her into
the pestilential house with the sick; she saw the pest in mortal form, a
cruel and malignant witch; behind her, tall and threatening, stood her
inexorable companion Death, reaching out a bony hand and clutching her
mother, and then all who were in the house with her, and last of all,
herself.

Her arms dropped by her side: powerful and terrible as she had felt
herself this morning, she was now crushed by a sense of miserable and
impotent weakness. Her defiance had been addressed to a mortal, a frail,
tender woman; and God and Fate had put her in the front of the battle
instead of Heliodora. She shuddered at the thought.

As she went up from the bath-room, her mother met her in the hall and
said:

"What, still here, Child? How you startled me! And is it true? Is
Plotinus really ill of a complaint akin to the plague?"

"Worse than that, mother," she replied sadly. "He has the plague; and I
remembered that a bath is the right thing when one has been in a
plague-stricken house; you, too, have kissed and touched me. Pray have
the fire lighted again, late as it is, and take a bath too."

"But, Child," Susannah began with a laugh; but Katharina gave her no
peace till she yielded, and promised to bathe in the men's room, which
had not been used at all since the appearance of the epidemic. When Dame
Susannah found herself alone she smiled to herself in silent
thankfulness, and in the bath again she lifted up her heart and hands in
prayer for her only child, the loving daughter who cared for her so
tenderly.

Katharina went to her own room, after ascertaining that the clothes she
had worn this evening had been sacrificed in the bath-furnace.

It was past midnight, but still she bid the maid sit up, and she did not
go to bed. She could not have found rest there. She was tempted to go out
on the balcony, and she sat down there on a rocking chair. The night was
sultry and still. Every house, every tree, every wall seemed to radiate
the heat it had absorbed during the day. Along the quay came a long
procession of pilgrims; this was followed by a funeral train and soon
after came another--both so shrouded in clouds of dust that the torches
of the followers looked like coals glimmering under ashes. Several who
had died of the pestilence, and whom it had been impossible to bury by
day, were being borne to the grave together. One of these funerals, so
she vaguely fancied, was Heliodora's; the other her own perhaps--or her
mother's--and she shivered at the thought. The long train wandered on
under its shroud of dust, and stood still when it reached the Necropolis;
then the sledge with the bier came back empty on red hot runners--but she
was not one of the mourners--she was imprisoned in the pestiferous house.
Then, when she was freed again--she saw it all quite clearly--two heads
had been cut off in the courtyard of the Hall of justice: Orion's and
Paula's--and she was left alone, quite alone and forlorn. Her mother was
lying by her father's side under the sand in the cemetery, and who was
there to care for her, to be troubled about her, to protect her? She was
alone in the world like a tree without roots, like a leaf blown out to
sea, like an unfledged bird that has fallen out of the nest.

Then, for the first time since that evening when she had borne false
witness, her memory reverted to all she had been taught at school and in
the church of the torments of hell, and she pictured the abode of the
damned, and the scorching, seething Lake of fire in which murderers,
heretics, false witnesses. . . .

What was that?

Had hell indeed yawned, and were the flames soaring up to the sky through
the riven shell of the earth? Had the firmament opened to pour living
fire and black fumes on the northern part of the city?

She started up in dismay, her eyes fixed on the terrible sight. The whole
sky seemed to be in flames; a fiery furnace, with dense smoke and myriads
of shooting sparks, filled the whole space between earth and heaven. A
devouring conflagration was apparently about to annihilate the town, the
river, the starry vault itself; the metal heralds which usually called
the faithful to church lifted up their voices; the quiet road at her feet
suddenly swarmed with thousands of people; shrieks, yells and frantic
commands came up from below, and in the confusion of tongues she could
distinguish the words "Governor's Palace"--"Arabs"--"Mukaukas"--"Orion"
--"fire"--"Put it out"--"Save it."

At this moment the old head-gardener called up to her from the
lotos-tank: "The palace is in flames! And in this drought--God
All-merciful save the town!"

Her knees gave way; she put out her hands with a faint cry to feel for
some support, and two arms were thrown about her-the arms which she so
lately had pushed away: her mother's: that mother who had bent over her
only child and inhaled death in a kiss on her plague-tainted hair.


CHAPTER XV.

The governor's palace, the pride and glory of Memphis, the magnificent
home of the oldest and noblest family of the land--the last house that
had given birth to a race of native Egyptians held worthy, even by the
Greeks, to represent the emperor and uphold the highest dignity in the
world--the very citadel of native life, lay in ashes; and just as a giant
of the woods crushes and destroys in its fall many plants of humbler
growth, so the burning of the great house destroyed hundreds of smaller
dwellings.

This night's work had torn the mast and rudder, and many a plank besides,
from that foundering vessel, the town of Memphis. It seemed indeed a
miracle that had saved the whole from being reduced to cinders; and for
this, next to God's providence, they might thank the black incendiary
himself and his Arabs. The crime was committed with cool and shrewd
foresight, and carried through to the end. During his visitation
throughout the rambling buildings Obada had looked out for spots that
might suit his purpose, and two hours after sunset he had lighted fire
after fire with his own hand, in secret and undetected. The troops he
intended to employ later were waiting under arms at Fostat, and when the
fire broke out, first in the treasury and afterwards in three other
places in the palace, they were immediately marched across and very
judiciously employed.

All that was precious in this ancient home of a wealthy race, was
conveyed to a place of safety, even the numerous fine horses in the
stables; and the title-deeds of the estate, slaves, and so forth were
already secured at Fostat; still, the flames consumed vast quantities of
treasures that could never be replaced. Beautiful works of art,
manuscripts and books such as were only preserved here, old and splendid
plants from every zone, vessels and woven stuffs that had been the
delight of connoisseurs--all perished in heaps. But the incendiary
regretted none of them, for all possibility of proving how much that was
precious had fallen into his hands was buried under their ashes.

The worst that could happen to him now was to be deposed from office for
his too audacious proceedings. Of all the towns he had seen in the course
of the triumphant incursions of Islam none had attracted him so greatly
as Damascus, and he now had the means of spending the latter half of his
life there in luxurious enjoyment.

At the same time it was desirable to rescue as much as possible from the
flames; for it would have given his enemies a fatal hold upon him, if the
famous old city of Memphis should perish by his neglect. And he was a man
to give battle to the awful element.

Not another building fell a prey to it on the Nile quay; but a light
southerly breeze carried burning fragments to the northwest, and several
houses in the poorer quarter on the edge of the desert caught fire.
Thither the larger portion of those who could combat the flames and
rescue the inhabitants were at once directed; and here, as at the palace,
he acted on the principle of sacrificing whatever could not be saved
entire. Thus a whole quarter of the town was destroyed, hundreds of
beggared families lost all they possessed; and yet he, whose ruthless
avarice had cast so many into misery, was admired and lauded; for he was
everywhere at once: now by the river and now by the desert, always where
the danger was greatest, and where the presence of the leader was most
needed. Here he was seen in the very midst of the fire, there he swung
the axe with his own hand; now, mounted on horseback, he rode down the
line where the dry grass was to be torn up by the roots and soaked with
water; now, on foot, he directed the scanty jet from the pipes or, with
Herculean strength, flung back into the flames a beam which had fallen
beyond the limits he had set. His shrill voice sounded, as his huge
height towered, above all others; every eye was fixed on his black face
and flashing eyes and teeth, while his example carried away all his
followers to imitate it. His shouts of command made the scene of the fire
like a battle-field; the Moslems, so ably led, regardless of life as they
were and ready to strain and exert their strength to the utmost, wrought
wonders in the name of their God and His Prophet.

The Egyptians, too, did their best; but they felt themselves impotent by
comparison with what these Arabs did, and they hardly felt anything but
the disgrace of being over-mastered by them.

The light shone far across the country; even he whose splendid
inheritance was feeding the flames perceived, between midnight and dawn,
a glow on the distant western horizon which he was unable to account for.

He had been riding towards it for about half an hour when the caravan
halted at the last station but one, on the high road between Kolzum and
Babylon.

   [Suez, and the Greek citadel near which Amru founded Fostat and
   Cairo subsequently grew up.]

A considerable troop of horse soldiers dismounted at the same time, but
Orion had not summoned these to protect him; on the contrary, he was in
their charge and they were taking him, a prisoner, to Fostat. He had
quitted the chariot in which he had set out and had been made to mount a
dromedary; two horsemen armed to the teeth rode constantly at his side.
His fellow-travellers were allowed to remain in their chariot.

At the inn which they had now reached Justinus got out and desired his
companion, a pale-faced man who sat sunk into a heap, to do the same; but
with a weary shake of the head he declined to move.

"Are you in pain, Narses?" asked Justinus affectionately, and Narses
briefly replied in a husky voice: "All over," and settled himself against
the cushion at the back of the chariot. He even refused the refreshments
brought out to him by the Senator's servant and interpreter. He seemed
sunk in apathy and to crave nothing but peace.

This was the senator's nephew.

With Orion's help, and armed with letters of protection and
recommendation from Amru, the senator had gained his purpose. He had
ransomed Narses, but not before the wretched man had toiled for some time
as a prisoner, first at the canal on the line of the old one constructed
by the Pharaohs, which was being restored under the Khaliff Omar, to
secure the speediest way of transporting grain from Egypt to Arabia and
afterwards in the rock-bound harbor of Aila. On the burning shores of the
Red Sea, under the fearful sun of those latitudes, Narses was condemned
to drag blocks of stone; many days had elapsed before his uncle could
trace him--and in what a state did Justinus find him at last!

A week before he could reach him, the ex-officer of cavalry had laid
himself down in the wretched sheds for the sick provided for the
laborers; his back still bore the scars of the blows by which the
overseer had spurred the waning strength of his exhausted and suffering
victim. The fine young soldier was a wreck, broken alike in heart and
body and sunk in melancholy. Justinus had hoped to take him home jubilant
to Martina, and he had only this ruin to show her, doomed to the grave.

The senator was glad, nevertheless, to have saved this much at any rate.
The sight of the sufferer touched him deeply, and the less Narses would
take or give, the more thankful was Justinus when he gave the faintest
sign of reviving interest.

In the course of this journey by land and water--and latterly as sharing
the senator's care of his nephew--Orion had become very dear to his old
friend; and at the risk of incurring his displeasure he had even
confessed the reasons that had prompted him to leave Memphis.

He never could cease to feel that everything good or lofty in himself was
Paula's alone; that her love ennobled and strengthened him; that to
desert her was to abandon himself. His trifling with Heliodora could but
divert him from the high aim he had set before himself. This aim he kept
constantly in view; his spirit hungered for peaceful days in which he
might act on the resolution he had formed in church and fulfil the task
set before him by the Arab governor.

The knowledge that he had inherited an enormous fortune now afforded him
no joy, for he was forced to confess to himself that but for this
superabundant wealth he might have been a very different man; and more
than once a vehement wish came over him to fling away all his possessions
and wrestle for peace of mind and the esteem of the best men by his own
unaided powers.

The senator had taken his confession as it was meant: if Thomas' daughter
was indeed what Orion described her there could be but small hope for his
beautiful favorite. He and Martina must e'en make their way home again
with two adopted dear ones, and it must be the care of the old folks to
comfort the young ones instead of the young succoring the old as was
natural. And in spite of everything Orion had won on his affections, for
every day, every hour he was struck by some new quality, some greater
trait than he had looked for in the young man.

Torches were flaring in the inn-yard where, under a palm-thatched roof
supported on poles and covering a square space in the middle, benches
stood for the guests to rest. Here Justinus and Orion again met for a few
minutes' conversation.

His warders were also seated near them; they did not let Orion out of
their sight even while they ate their meal of mutton, bread, onions, and
dates. The senator's servants brought some food from the chariot, and
just as Justinus and Orion had begun their attack on it, a tall man came
into the yard and made his way to the benches. This was Philippus,
pausing on his road to Djidda. He had learnt, even before coming in, whom
he would find here, a prisoner; and the Arabs, to whom the leech was
known, allowed him to join the pair, though at the same time they came a
little nearer, and their leader understood Greek.

Philippus was anything rather than cordially disposed towards Orion;
still, he knew what peril hung over the youth, and how sad a loss he had
suffered. His conscience bid him do all he could to prove helpful in the
trial that awaited him in the matter of the expedition in which Rufinus
had perished. He was the bearer, too, of sad news which the Arabs must
necessarily hear. Orion was indeed furious when he heard of the seizure
and occupation of the governor's residence; still, he believed that Amru
would insist on restitution; but on hearing of his mother's death he
broke down completely. Even the Arabs, seeing the strong man shaken with
sobs and learning the cause of his grief, respectfully withdrew; for the
anguish of a son at the loss of his mother was sacred in their eyes. They
regard the man who mourns for one he loves as stricken by the hand of the
Almighty and hallowed by his touch and treat him with the reverence of
pious awe.

Orion had not observed their absence, but Philippus at once took
advantage of it to tell him, as briefly as possible, all that related to
the escape of the nuns. He himself knew not yet of the burning of the
palace, or of Paula's imprisonment; but he could tell the senator where
he would find his wife and niece. So by the time he was bidden to mount
and start once more Orion was informed of all that had happened.

It was with a drooping head, and sunk in melancholy thought that he rode
on his way.

As for the residence!--whether the Arabs gave it back to him or not, what
did he care?--but his mother, his mother! All she had been to him from
his earliest years rose before his mind; in the deep woe of this parting
he forgot the imminent danger and the dungeon that awaited him, and the
intolerable insult to his rights; nay, even the image of the woman he
loved paled by the side of that of the beloved dead. Perhaps he might not
even gain permission to bury her!

The way lay through a parched tract of rocky desert, and the further they
went the more intense was that wonderful flush in the west, till day
broke behind the travellers and the glory of the sunrise quenched the
vividness of its glow.

Another scorching day! The rocks by the wayside still threw long shadows
on the sandy desert-road, when a party of Arab horsemen came from Fostat
to meet the travellers, shouting the latest news to the prisoner's
escort. It was evidently important; but Orion did not understand a word
of what they said. Evil tidings fly fast, however; while the men were
talking together, the dragoman rode up to him and told him that his home
was burnt to the ground and half Memphis still in flames. Then came other
newsbearers, on horseback and on dromedaries; and they met chariots and
files of camels loaded with corn and Egyptian merchandise; and each and
all shouted to the Arab escort reports of what was going on in Memphis,
hoping to be the first to tell the homeward bound party.

How many times did Orion hear the story--and each time that a traveller
began with: "Have you heard?" pointing westward, the wounds the first
news had inflicted bled anew.

What lay beneath that mass of ashes? How much had the flames consumed
that never could be replaced! Much that he had silently wished were
possible had in fact been fulfilled--and so soon! Where now was the
burthen of great wealth which had hung about his heels and hindered his
running freely? And yet he did not, even now, feel free; the way was not
yet open before him; he secretly mourned over the ruined house of his
fathers and the wrecked home; a miserable sense of insecurity weighed him
down. No father--no mother-no parental roof! For years he had been, in
fact, perfectly independent, and yet he felt now like a pilot whose boat
had lost its rudder.

Before him lay a prison, and the closing act of the great tragedy of
which he himself had been the hero. Fate had fallen on his house, had
marked it for destruction as erewhile that of Tantalus. It lay in ashes,
and the victims were already many: two brothers, father, mother--and, far
away from home, Rufinus too.

But whose was the guilt?

It was not his ancestors who had sinned; it could only be his own that
had called down this ruin. But was there then such a power as the Destiny
of the ancients--inexorable, iron Fate? Had he not repented and suffered,
been reconciled to his Redeemer, and prepared himself to fight the hard
fight? Perhaps he was indeed to be the hero of a tragedy; then he would
show that it was not the blind Inevitable, but what a man can make of
himself, and what he can do by the aid of the God of might, which
determines his fate. If he must still succumb, it should only be after a
valiant struggle and defense. He would battle fearlessly against every
foe, would press onward in the path he had laid down for himself. His
heart beat high once more; he felt as though he could see his father's
example as a guiding star in the sky, so that he must be true to that
whether to live or to die. And when he turned his eye earthwards again,
still, even there, he had that which made it seem worth the cost of
enduring the pangs of living and the brunt of the hardest battle: Paula
and her love.

The nearer he approached Fostat, the more ardently his heart swelled with
longing. Heaven must grant him to see her once more, once more to clasp
her in his arms, before--the end!

It seemed to him that what he had gone through in these few hours must
have removed and set aside everything that could part them. Now, he felt,
he had strength to remain worthy of her; if Heliodora were to come in his
way again he would now certainly, positively, regard and treat her only
as a sister.

He was conducted at once to the house of the Kadi; but this official was
at the Divan--the council, which his arch-foe, that black monster Obada,
had called together.

After the labors of the past night the Negro had allowed himself only a
few hours rest, and then had met the council, where he had not been slow
to discover that he had as many enemies as there were members present.

His most determined opponents were the Kadi Othman, the head of the
Courts of justice and administration, and Khalid the governor of the
exchequer. Neither of them hesitated to express his opinion; and indeed,
no one present at this meeting would have suspected for a moment that
most of the members had, in their peaceful youth, guarded flocks as
shepherds on the mountains, led caravans across the desert, or managed
some small trade. In the contests of tribe against tribe they had found
opportunities for practice in the use of weapons, and for steeling their
courage; but where had they learnt to choose their words with so much
care, and emphasize them with gestures of such natural grace that any
Greek orator would have admired them? It was only when the indignant
orator "thundered and lightened" and was carried away by the heat of
passion that he forgot his dignified moderation, and then how grandly
voice, eye, and action helped each other! And never, even under the
highest excitement, was purity of language overlooked. These men, of whom
very few could read and write, had at their command all the most
effective verses of their poets having thousands of lines stored in their
minds.

The discussion to-day dealt with the social aspects of an ancient
civilization, unknown but a few years since to the warlike children of
the desert, and yet how ably had the four overseers of public buildings
the comptrollers of the markets, of the irrigation works, and of the
mills, achieved their ends. These bright and untarnished spirits were
equal to the hardest task and capable of carrying it through with energy,
acumen, and success.

And the sons of these men who had passed through no school were already
well-fitted and invited to give new splendor to cities in their decline,
and new life to the learning of the countries they had subdued.
Everything in this council revealed talent, vitality, and ardor; and
Obada, who had been a slave, found it by no means easy to uphold his
pre-eminence among these assertive scions of free and respectable
families.

The Kadi spoke frankly and fearlessly against his recent proceedings,
declaring in the name of every member of the Divan, that they disclaimed
all responsibility for what had been done, and that it rested on the
Vekeel alone. Obada was very ready to accept it; and he announced with
such fiery eloquence his determination to give shelter at Fostat to the
natives whom the conflagration had left roofless, he was so fair-spoken,
and he had shown his great qualities in so clear a light during the past
night, that they agreed to postpone their attainder and await the reply
from Medina to the complaints they had forwarded. Discipline, indeed,
required that they should submit; and many a man who would have flown to
meet death on the field as a bride, quailed before the terrible
adventurer who would not shrink from the most hideous deeds.

Obada had won by hard fighting. No one could prove a theft against him of
so much as a single drachma; but he nevertheless had to take many a rough
word, and with one consent the assembly refused him the deference justly
due to the governor's representative.

Bitterly indignant, he remained till the very last in the
council-chamber, no one staying with him, not even his own subalterns, to
speak a soothing word in praise of the power and eloquence of his
address, while the same cursed wretches would, under similar
circumstances, have buzzed round Amru like swarming bees, and have
escorted him home like curs wagging their tails. He ascribed the
contumely and opposition he met with to their prejudice, as haughty,
free-born men against his birth, and not to any fault of his own, and yet
he looked down on them all, feeling himself the superior of each by
himself; if the blow in Medina were successful, he would pick out his
victims, and then. . . .

His dreams of vengeance were abruptly broken by a messenger, covered with
dust from head to foot; he brought good news: Orion was taken and safely
bestowed in the Kadi's house.

"And why not in mine?" asked Obada in peremptory tones. "Who is the
governor's representative here. Othman or I? Take the prisoner to my
house."

And he forthwith went home. But instead of the prisoner there presently
appeared before him an official of the Kadi's household, who informed
him, from his master, that as the Khaliff had constituted Othman supreme
judge in Egypt this matter was in his hands; if Obada wished to see the
prisoner he might go to the Kadi's residence, or visit him later in the
town prison of Memphis, whither Orion would presently be transferred.

He rushed off, raging, to his enemy's house, but his stormy fury was met
by the placidity of a calm and judicial mind. Othman was a man between
forty and fifty years old, but his soft, black beard was already turning
grey; his noble dark face bore the stamp of a lofty, high-bred soul, and
a keen but temperate spirit shone in his eyes. There was something serene
and clear in his whole person; he was a man to bear the burthen of life's
vicissitudes with dignity, while he had set himself the task of saving
others from them so far as in him lay.

The patriarch's complaints had come also to the Kadi's knowledge, and he,
too, was minded to exact retribution for the massacre of the Moslem
soldiers; but the punishment should fall on none but the guilty. He would
have been sorry to believe that Orion was one of them, for he had
esteemed his father as a brave man and a just judge, and had taken many a
word of good advice from the experienced Egyptian.

The scene between him and the infuriated Vekeel was a painful one even
for the attendants who stood round; and Orion, who heard Obada's raging
from the adjoining room, could gather from it some idea of the relentless
hatred with which his negro enemy would persecute him.

However, as after the wildest storm the sea ebbs in ripples so even this
tempest came to a more peaceful conclusion. The Kadi represented to the
Vekeel what an unheard-of thing it would be, and in what a disgraceful
light it would set Moslem justice if one of the noblest families in the
country--to whose head, too, the cause of Islam owed so much--were robbed
of its possessions on mere suspicion. To this the Vekeel replied that
there were definite accusations brought by the head of the native Church,
and that nothing had been robbed, but merely confiscated and placed in
security. "Well, now, suppose we step down together; you may _cheapen_
it a bit for me, may be." These facts are known to the respectable and
gentleman-like Americans, who, after the samples which have come over,
and have obtained admission into society and gone to Court, will not
shew themselves, but prefer to stay at home.

All this is wrong, and a remedy must soon be found, as the evil increases
every day. The Americans cannot take the English Court by storm,
or force us to acknowledge their equality in this country. There are but
certain classes in this country who have any pretension to be received
at Court; and unless the Americans can prove that they are by their
situation, or descent, of a sufficient rank to qualify them to be
admitted, they must be content to be excluded, as the major portion
of our countrymen are.

Even an American being a member of Congress does not qualify him, although
being a member of the Senate certainly _should_. The members of the
American Congress are not in the mass equal by any means in respectability
to the members of the English House of Commons; and there have been many
members of the English House of Commons, since the passing of the
Reform Bill, who could not, and cannot, gain admittance into society.

If the harmony and good feeling between the two countries is to continue
uninterrupted, and our intercourse to be extended, as there is every
probability that it will be, it appears to me that there is more
importance to be attached to this question than at the first view
of it might be supposed.

The Americans are more ambitious of birth and aristocracy than any other
nation, which is very natural, if it were only from the simple fact that
we always most desire what is out of our reach. Since the Americans
have come over in such numbers to this country, our Herald's Office has
actually been _besieged_ by them, in their anxiety to take out the
arms and achievements of their presumed forefathers; this is also very
natural and very proper, although it may be at variance with
their institutions.

The determination to have an aristocracy in America gains head every
day: a conflict must ensue, when the increase of wealth in the
country adds sufficiently to the strength of the party.

But some line must be drawn in this country, as to the admission of
Americans to the English Court, or, if not drawn, it will end in a
total, and therefore unjust exclusion.

As but few of the Americans can claim any right to aristocracy in their
own country from acknowledged descent, I should not be surprised if in a
few years, now that the two countries are becoming so intimately
connected, a reception at the English Court of this country be
considered as an establishment of their claim.

If so, it will be a curious anomaly in the history of a republic, that,
fifty years after it was established, the republicans should apply
to the mother country whose institutions they had abjured, to obtain
from her a patent of superiority, so as to raise themselves above
that hated equality which, by their own institutions, they
profess.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1.

English Capital Invested.--It is but _fair_ to give the English who have
invested their money in American securities, some idea of what their
chance of receiving their principal or receiving their interest may
be. As _long_ as it depends upon the faith of those who have
contracted the debt, their money is safe, but as soon as the
power is taken out of their hands, and vested in the majority,
they may consider their money as gone.

I will explain this--at present the English have vested their capital
in canals, railroads, and other public improvements. The returns of
these undertakings are at present honourably employed in paying interest
to the lenders of the capital, and if the returns are not sufficient,
more money is borrowed to meet the demands of the creditor; but
there is a certain point at which credit fails, and at which no more money
can be borrowed; if then no more money can be borrowed, and the
returns of their railroads, canals, and other securities fail off,
where is the deficiency to be made good?
In this country it would be made good by a tax being imposed upon the
population to meet the deficiency, and support the credit of the nation.

Here is the question:--will the majority in America consent to be taxed?
I say, No--if they do, I shall be surprised, and be most happy to recant,
but it is my opinion that they will not, and if so the English capital
will be lost; and if the reader will call to mind what I have pointed out
as to the probable effect of the power of America working to the westward,
and the direct importation which in a few years must take place,
he will see that there is every prospect of a rapid decrease in the
value of all their securities, and that the only ultimate chance
of their recovering the money is by this country compelling payment
of it by the Federal Government.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 2.

"At the time of the first settlement of the English in Virginia, when land
was to be had for little or nothing, some provident persons having
obtained large grants of it, and being desirous of maintaining the
splendour of their families, entailed their property upon their
descendants. The transmission of these estates from generation to generation,
to men who bore the same name, had the effect of raising up a distinct
class of families, who, possessing by law the privilege of perpetuating
their wealth, formed by these means a sort of patrician order,
distinguished by the grandeur and luxury of their establishments.
From this order it was that the king usually chose his councillors
of state.

"In the United States, the principal clauses of the English law respecting
descent have been universally rejected. The first rule that we follow,
says Mr Kent, touching inheritance, is the following:--If a man dies
intestate, his property goes to his heirs in a direct line. If he has
but one heir or heiress, he or she succeeds to the whole. If there are
several heirs of the same degree, they divide the inheritance equally
amongst them, without distinction of sex.

"This rule was prescribed for the first time in the State of New York by a
statute of the 23rd of February, 1786. (_See Revised Statutes_, volume
III, _Appendix_, page 48.)

It has since then been adopted in the revised statutes of the same State.
At the present day this law holds good throughout the whole of the
United States, with the exception of the State of Vermont, where
the male heir inherits a double portion:
Kent's Commentaries, volume IV, page 370.

Mr Kent, in the same work, volume IV, pages 1-22, gives an historical
account of American legislation on the subject of entail; by this we
learn that previous to the revolution the colonies followed the English
law of entail. Estates tail were abolished in Virginia in 1776, on a
motion of Mr Jefferson.
They were suppressed in New York in 1786; and have since been abolished in
North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, Georgia, and Missouri.

In Vermont, Indiana, Illinois, South Carolina, and Louisiana, entail was
never introduced. Those States which thought proper to preserve the
English law of entail, modified it in such a way as to deprive it of
its most aristocratic tendencies. `Our general principles on the subject
of government,' says Mr Kent, `tend to favour the free circulation of
property.'
"It cannot fail to strike the French reader who studies the law of
inheritance, that on these questions the French legislation is infinitely
more democratic even than the American.

"The American law makes an equal division of the father's property, but
only in the case of his will not being known; `for every man,' says the
law, `in the State of New York, (_Revised Statutes_, volume III,
_Appendix_, page 51), has entire liberty, power, and authority,
to dispose of his property by will, to leave it entire, or divided
in favour of any persons he choses as his heirs, provided he do not
leave it to a political body or any corporation.'

The French law obliges the testator to divide his property equally, or
nearly so, among his heirs.

"Most of the American republics still admit of entails, under certain
restrictions; but the French law prohibits entail in all cases.

"If the social condition of the Americans is more democratic than
that of the French, the laws of the latter are the most democratic
of the two.

This may be explained more easily than at first appears to be the case.
In France, democracy is still occupied in the work of destruction; in
America, it reigns quietly over the ruins it has made."

--_Democracy in America, by A De Tocqueville_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 3. In New England the estates are exceedingly small, but they
are rarely subjected to further division.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 4. It may also be here observed, that the Americans have little
opportunity of judging favourably of the English by the usual
_importations_ to their country. They all call themselves English
_Gentlemen_, and are too often supposed to be, and are received as such.

I have often been told that I should meet with an English gentleman
or an English merchant, and the parties mostly proved to be nothing
but travellers, bagsmen, or even worse.

If the sterling Americans stay at home, and send the bad ones to us, and
we do the same, neither party will be likely to form a very favourable
opinion of the other for some time to come.

VOLUME TWO, CHAPTER SEVEN.

GOVERNMENT.

It is not my intention to enter into a lengthened examination of the American
form of government. I have said that, as a government, "with all its
imperfections, it is the best suited to _the present condition
of America_, in _so far as_ it is the one under which the country has
made, and will continue to make, the most rapid strides;" but I have
not said that it was a better form of government than others. Its very
weakness is favourable to the advance of the country; it may be compared
to a vessel which, from her masts not being wedged, and her timbers
being loose, sails faster than one more securely fastened.

Considered merely as governments for the preservation of order and the
equalisation of pressure upon the people, I believe that few
governments are bad, as there are always some correcting influences,
moral or otherwise, which strengthen those portions which are the
weakest.

A despot, for instance, although his power is acknowledged and
submitted to, will not exercise tyranny too far, from the fear of
assassination.

I have inserted in an Appendix the Form of the American Constitution,
and if my readers wish to examine more closely into it, I must refer them
to M. Tocqueville's excellent work. The first point which must
strike the reader who examines into it is, that it is extremely
complicated. It is, and it is not. It is so far complicated that a variety
of wheels are at work; but it is not complicated, from the circumstance
that the _same principle_ prevails throughout, from the Township to
the Federal Head, and that it is put in motion by one great and
universal propelling power.

It may be compared to a cotton-thread manufactory, in which thousands and
thousands of reels and spindles are all at work, the labour of so many
smaller reels turned over to larger, which in their turn yield up their
produce, until the whole is collected into one mass.

The principle of the American Government is good; the power that puts it
in motion is enormous, and therefore, like the complicated machinery I
have compared it to, it requires constant attention, and proper regulation
of the propelling power, that it may not become out of order. The
propelling power is the sovereignty of the people, otherwise the
will of the majority.

The motion of all propelling powers must be regulated by a fly-wheel, or
corrective check, if not, the motion will gradually accelerate, until
the machinery is destroyed by the increase of friction. But
there are other causes by which the machinery may be deranged; as, although
the smaller portions of the machine, if defective, may at any time be
taken out and repaired without its being necessary for the machine to
stop; yet if the larger wheels are by any chance thrown out of their
equilibrium, the machinery may be destroyed just as it would be
by a too rapid motion, occasioned by the excess of propelling power.

Further, there are external causes which may endanger it: any machine
may be thrown out of its level by a convulsion, or shock, which
will cause it to cease working, if even it does not break it into
fragments.

Now, the dangers which _threaten_ the United States are, the Federal
Government being still weaker than it is at present, or its becoming, as
it may from circumstances, too powerful.

The _present_ situation of the American Government is that the fly-wheel,
or regulator of the propelling power (that is to say the aristocracy,
or power of the senate,) has been nearly destroyed, and the
consequences are that the motion is at this moment too much
accelerated, and threatens in a few years to increase its rapidity,
at the risk of the destruction of the whole machinery.

But, although it will be necessary to point out the weakness of the Federal
Government, when opposed to the States or the majority, inasmuch as
the morality of the people is seriously affected by this weakness, my
object is not to enter into the merits of the government of the
United States as a _working_ government, but to inquire how far the
Americans are correct in their boast of its being a model for other
countries.

Let us consider what is the best form of government. Certainly that which
most contributes to security of life and property, and renders those
happy and moral who are submitted to it. This I believe will be generally
acknowledged, and it is upon these grounds that the government of the
United States must be tested. They abjured our monarchy, and left their
country for a distant land, to obtain _freedom_. They railed at the
vices and imperfections of continental rule, and proposed to themselves
a government which should be perfect, under which every man should
have his due weight in the representation, and prove to the world
that a people could govern themselves.

Disgusted with the immorality of the age and the disregard to religion,
they anticipated an amendment in the state of society. This new, and
supposed perfect, machinery has been working for upwards of sixty years,
and let us now examine how far the theory has been supported and
borne out by the practical result.

I must first remind the reader that I have already shewn the weakness of
the Federal Government upon one most important point, which is, that
there is not sufficient security for person and property. When such is the
case, there cannot be that adequate punishment for vice so necessary
to uphold the morals of a people. I will now proceed to prove the weakness
of the Federal Government whenever it has to combat with the several
States, or with the will of the majority.

It will be perceived, by an examination into the Constitution of the United
States, that the States have reserved for themselves all the real
power, and that the Federal Union exists but upon their sufferance.

Each State still insists upon its right to withdraw itself from the Union
whenever it pleases, and the consequence of this right is, that in
every conflict with a State, the Federal Government has invariably to
succumb. M. Tocqueville observes, "If the sovereignty of the Union
were to engage in a struggle with that of the States, at the present
day, its defeat may be confidently predicted; and it is not probable
that such a struggle would be seriously undertaken.

As often as a steady resistance is offered to the Federal Government, it
will be found to yield. Experience has hitherto shewn that whenever a
State has demanded any thing with perseverance and resolution, it has
invariably succeeded; and that if a separate government has distinctly
refused to act, it was left to do as it thought fit.

See Note 1.

"But even if the government of the Union had any strength inherent in
itself, the physical situation of the country would render the excise
of that strength very difficult. [See Note 2.]

The United States cover an immense territory; they were separated from
each other by great distances; and the population is disseminated over
the surface of a country which is still half a wilderness. If the Union
were to undertake to enforce the allegiance of the confederate States
by military means, it would be in a position very analagous to that of
England at the time of the War of Independence."
The Federal Government never displayed more weakness than in the question
of the tariff put upon English goods to support the manufacturers of the
Northern States. The Southern States, as producers and exporters, complained
of this as prejudicial to their interests.

South Carolina, one of the smallest States, led the van, and the storm
rose.

This State passed an act by convention, _annulling_ the Federal Act of
the tariff, armed her militia, and prepared for war. The
consequence was that the Federal Government abandoned the principle
of the tariff, but at the same time, to save the disgrace of its
defeat, it passed an act warranting the President to _put down
resistance by force_, or, in other words, making the Union _compulsory_.

South Carolina _annulled_ this law of the Federal Government, but
as the State gained its point by the Federal Government having
abandoned the principle of the tariff, the matter ended.

Another instance in which the Federal Government showed its weakness
when opposed to a State, was in its conflict with Georgia.

The Federal Government had entered into a solemn, and what ought
to have been an inviolable treaty, with the Cherokee Indians,
securing to them the remnant of their lands in the State of Georgia.

The seventh Article of that treaty says, "The United States _solemnly_
guarantee to the Cherokee nation all their lands not hitherto ceded."
The State of Georgia, when its population increased, did not like the
Indians to remain, and insisted upon their removal. What was the
result?--that the Federal Government, in violation of a solemn treaty
and the national honour, submitted to the dictation of Georgia, and
the Indians were removed to the other side of the Mississippi.

These instances are sufficient to prove the weakness of the Federal
Government when opposed to the States; it is still weaker when opposed
to the will of the majority. I have already quoted many instances of the
exercise of this uncontrolled will.
"What is it?"

"Speak--do not keep us on the rack!" was shouted on all sides; but he
remained inexorable, promising only to call the council together when the
right time should come and desiring that the president would proclaim
from the balcony that Horapollo knew of a sacrifice which would cause the
Nile at last to rise. As soon as the right victim could be found, the
people should be invited to give their consent. In the time of their
forefathers it had never failed of its effect, so men, women, and
children might go home in all confidence, and await the future with new
and well-founded hopes.

And this announcement, with which the president mingled his praises of
the venerable Horapollo, had a powerful effect. The crowd hallooed with
glee, as though they had found new life. "Hail, hail!" was shouted again
and again, and it was addressed, not merely to the old man who had
promised them deliverance, but also to the Fathers of the city, who felt
as if a fearful load had fallen from their souls.

The old man's scheme was, to be sure, not pious nor rightly Christian;
but had the power of the Church been in any way effectual? And this
having failed they must of their own accord have had recourse to means
held reprobate by the priesthood. Magic and the black arts were genuinely
Egyptian; and when faith had no power, these asserted themselves and
superstition claimed its own. Though Medea had been taken by surprise and
imprisoned, this had not been done to satisfy the law, but with a view to
secretly utilizing her occult science for the benefit of the community.
In such dire need no means were too base; and though the old man himself
was horrified at those he proposed he was sure of public approbation if
only they had the desired result. If only they could avert the calamity
the sin could be expiated, and the Almighty was so merciful!

The bishop had a seat and voice in the council, but Fate itself had saved
them from the dilemma of having to meet his remonstrances.

When Horapollo went out into the market-place he was received with
acclamations, and as much gratitude as though he had already achieved the
deliverance of the people and country.

What had he done?--Whether the work he had set going were to fail or to
succeed he could not remain in Memphis, for in either case he would never
have peace again. But that did not daunt him; it would certainly be very
good for the two women to be removed from the perilous neighborhood of
the Arab capital, and he was firmly determined to take them away with
him. For his dear Philip, too, nothing could be better than a
transplantation into other soil.

At the house of Rufinus he now learnt the fate that had fallen on Paula.

She was out the way, at any rate for the present; still, if she should be
released to-morrow or the day after, or even a month hence, she would be
as great a hindrance as ever. His plots against her must therefore be
carried out. His own isolation provoked him, and what a satisfaction it
would be if only he should succeed in stirring up the Egyptian Christians
to the heathen deed to which he was endeavoring to prompt them.

If Paula should be condemned to death by the Arabs, the execution of the
scheme would be greatly promoted; and now the first point was to ensure
the favor of the black Vekeel, for everything depended on his consent.

Joanna and Pulcheria thought him more good-humored and amiable than they
had ever known him; his proposal that he and Philippus should join their
household was hailed with delight even by little Mary, and the women
conducted him all over the house, supporting his steps with affectionate
care. All he saw there pleased him beyond measure. Such neatness and
comfort could only exist where there was a woman's eye to direct and
watch over everything. The rooms on the ground floor, which had been the
master's, should be his, and the corresponding wing on the other side
could be made ready for Philippus. The dining-room, the large
ante-chamber, and the viridarium would be common ground, and the upper
story was large enough for the women and any guests. He would move in as
soon as he had settled some business he had in hand.

It must be something of a pleasant nature, for as the old man spoke of it
his sunken lips mumbled with satisfaction, while his sparkling eyes
seemed to say to Pulcheria: "And I have something good in store for you,
too, dear child."


     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Thin-skinned, like all up-starts in authority


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 11.


CHAPTER XVII.

Paula passed a fearful night in the small, frightfully hot prison-cell in
which she and Betta were shut up. She could not sleep, and when once she
succeeded in closing her eyes she was roused by the yells and clanking
chains of the captives in the common prison and the heavy step of another
sufferer who paced the room overhead, even more restless than herself.

Poor fellow-victim! Was it a tortured conscience that drove him hither
and thither, or was he as innocent as she was, and was it longing, love,
and anxiety that bereft him of sleep?

He was no vulgar criminal. There was no room for those in this part of
the building; and at midnight, when the noise in the large hall was
suddenly silenced, soft sounds of the lute came down to her from his
cell, and only a master could strike the strings with such skill.

She cared nothing for the stranger; but she was grateful for his gift of
music, for it diverted her thoughts from herself, and she listened with
growing interest. Glad of an excuse for rising from her hard, hot bed,
she sprang up and placed herself close to the one window, an opening
barred with iron. But then the music ceased and a conversation began
between the warder and her fellow-prisoner.

What voice was that? Did she deceive herself, or hear rightly?

Her heart stood still while she listened; and now every doubt was
silenced: It was Orion, and none other, whom she heard speaking in the
room above. Then the warder spoke his name; they were talking of her
deceased uncle; and now, as if in obedience to some sign, they lowered
their voices. She heard whispering but could not distinguish what was
said. At length parting words were uttered in louder tones, the door of
the cell was locked and the prisoner approached his window.

At this she pressed her face close to the heated iron bars, looked
upwards, listened a moment and, as nothing was stirring, she said, first
softly, and then rather louder: "Orion, Orion!"

And, from above, her name was spoken in reply. She greeted him and asked
how and when he had come hither; but he interrupted her at the first
words with a decisive: "Silence!" adding in a moment, "Look out!"

She listened in expectancy; the minutes crept on at a snail's pace to a
full half hour before he at last said: "Now!" And, in a few moments, she
held in her hand a written scroll that he let down to her by a lutestring
weighted with a scrap of wood.

She had neither light nor fire, and the night was moonless. So she called
up "Dark!" and immediately added, as he had done: "Look out."

She then tied to the string the two best roses of those Pulcheria had
brought her, and at her glad "Now!" they floated up.

He expressed his thanks in a few low chords overflowing with yearning and
passion; then all was still, for the warder had forbidden him to sing or
play at night and he dared not risk losing the man's favor.

Paula laid down again with Orion's letter in her hand, and when she felt
slumber stealing upon her, she pushed it under her pillow and ere long
was sleeping on it. When they both woke, soon after sunrise, they had
been dreaming of each other and gladly hailed the return of day.

How furious Orion had felt when the prison door closed upon him! He
longed to wrench the iron bars from the window and kick down or force the
door; and there is no more humiliating and enraging feeling for a man
than that of finding himself shut up like a wild beast, cut off from the
world to which he belongs and which he needs, both to give him all that
makes life worth having, and to receive such good as he can do and give.

Yesterday their dungeon had seemed a foretaste of hell, they had each
been on the verge of despair; to-day what different feelings animated
them! Orion had been the victim of blow on blow from Fate--Paula had
looked forward to his return with an anxious and aching heart; to-day how
calm were their souls, though both stood in peril of death.

The legend tells us that St. Cecilia, who was led away to the rack from
her marriage feast, even in the midst of the torments of martyrdom,
listened in ecstasy to heavenly music and sweet echoes of the organ; and
how many have had the same experience! In the extremity of anguish and
danger they find greater joys than in the midst of splendor, ease and the
intoxicating pleasures of life; for what we call happiness is the
constant guest of those who have within reach that for which their souls
most ardently long, irrespective of place and outward circumstances.

So these two in their prison were what they had not been for a long time:
full of heartfelt bliss; Paula with his letter, which he had begun at the
Kadi's house, and in which he poured out his whole soul to her; Orion in
the possession of her roses, on which he feasted his eyes and heart, and
which lay before him while he wrote the following lines, which the
kindhearted warder willingly transmitted to her:

   Lo! As night in its gloom and horror fell on my prison,
   Methought the sun sank black, dark forever in death.

   I drew thy roses up, and behold! from their crimson petals
   Beamed a glory of light, a glow as of sunshine and day!

   Love! Love is the star that rose with those fragrant flowers;
   Rose, as Phoebus' car comes up from the tossing waves.

   Is not the ardent flame of a heart that burns with passion
   Like the sparkling glow-worm hid in the heart of the rose?

   While it yet was day, and we breathed in freedom and gladness,
   While the sun still shone, that light seemed small and dim;

   But now, when night has fallen, sinister, dark, portentous,
   Its kindly ray beams forth to raise our drooping souls.

   As seeds in the womb of earth break from the brooding darkness,
   Or as the soul soars free, heaven-seeking from the grave,

   So the hopeless soil of a dungeon blossoms to rapture,
   Blooms with roses of Love, more sweet than the wildling rose!

And when had Paula ever felt happier than at the moment when this
offering from her lover, this humble prison-flower, first reached her.

Old Betta could not hear the verses too often, and cried with joy, not at
the poem, but at the wonderful change it had produced in her darling.
Paula was now the radiant being that she had been at home on the Lebanon;
and when she appeared before the assembled judges in the hall of justice
they gazed at her in amazement, for never had a woman on her trial for
life or death stood in their presence with eyes so full of happiness. And
yet she was in evil straits. The just and clement Kadi, himself the
loving father of daughters, felt a pang at his heart as he noted the
delusive confidence which so evidently filled the soul of this noble
maiden.

Yes, she was in evil straits: a crushing piece of evidence was in their
hands, and the constitution of the court--which was in strict conformity
with the law must in itself be unfavorable to her. Her case was to be
tried by an equal number of Egyptians and of Arabs. The Moslems were
included because by her co-operation, Arabs had been slain; while Paula,
as a Christian and a resident in Memphis, came under the jurisdiction of
the Egyptians.

The Kadi presided, and experience had taught him that the Jacobite
members of the bench of judges kept the sentence of death in their
sleeves when the accused was of the Melchite confession. What had
especially prejudiced them against this beautiful creature he knew not;
but he easily discovered that they were hostile to the accused, and if
they should utter the verdict "guilty", and only two Arabs should echo
it, the girl's fate was sealed.

And what was the declaration which that whiterobed old man among the
witnesses desired to make--the venerable and learned Horapollo? The
glances he cast at Paula augured her no good.

It was so oppressively, so insufferably hot in the hall! Each one felt
the crushing influence, and in spite of the importance of the occasion,
the proceedings every now and then came to a stand-still and then were
hurried on again with unseemly haste.

The prisoner herself seemed happily to be quite fresh and not affected by
the sultriness of the day. It had cost her small effort to adhere to her
statement that she had had no share in the escape of the sisters, when
catechised by the ruffianly negro; but she found it hard to defy Othman's
benevolent questioning. However, there was no choice, and she succeeded
in proving that she had never quitted Memphis nor the house of Rufinus at
the time when the Arab warriors met their death between Athribis and
Doomiat. The Kadi endeavored to turn this to account for her advantage
and Obada, who had found much to whisper over with his grey-headed
neighbor on the bench reserved for witnesses, let him talk; but no sooner
had he ended than the Vekeel rose and laid before the judges the note he
had found in Orion's room.

It was undoubtedly in the young man's handwriting and addressed to Paula,
and the final words: "But do not misunderstand me. Your noble, and only
too well-founded desire to lend succor to your fellow-believers would
have sufficed. . . ." could not fail to make a deep impression. When the
Kadi questioned Paula, however, she replied with perfect truth that this
document was absolutely unknown to her; at the same time she did not deny
that the sisters of St. Cecilia, who were of her own confession, had
always had her warmest wishes, and that she had hoped they might succeed
in asserting their rights in opposition to the patriarch.

The deceased Mukaukas, and the Jacobite members of the town-council even,
had shared these feelings and the Arabs had never interfered with the
pious sicknurses.

The calm conciseness with which she made these statements had a favorable
effect, on her Moslem judges especially, and the Kadi began to have some
hopes for her; he desired that Orion should be called as being best able
to account for the meaning of the letter he had written but never sent.

On this the young man appeared, and though he and Paula did their utmost
to preserve a suitable demeanor, every one could see the violent
agitation they felt at meeting each other in such a situation. Horapollo
never took his eyes off Orion, whom he now saw for the first time, and
his features put on a darkening and menacing expression.

The young man acknowledged that he had written the letter in question,
but he and Paula alike referred it to the danger with which the
sisterhood had long been threatened from the patriarch's hostility. The
assistance which, in that document, he had refused he would have afforded
readily and zealously at a later and fit season, and he could have
counted on the aid of the Arab governor Amru, who, as he would himself
confirm, shared the views of the Mukaukas George as to the nuns' rights.

At this the old sage murmured loud enough to be heard: "Clever, very
clever!" and the Vekeel laughed aloud, exclaiming:

"I call that a cunning way of lengthening your days! Be on your guard, my
lords. These two are partners in the game and are intimately allied. I
have proof of that in my own hands. That youngster takes as good care of
the damsel's fortune as though it were his own already, and what is
more. . . . "

Here Paula broke in. She did not know what the malicious man was going to
say, but it was something insulting beyond a doubt. And there stood
Orion, just as she had pictured him in moments of tender remembrance; she
felt his eye resting on her in ecstasy. To go up to him, to tell him all
she was feeling in this critical struggle for life or death, seemed
impossible; but as the Vekeel began to disclose to their judges matters
which concerned only herself and her lover, every impulse prompted her to
interpose and, in this fateful hour, to do her friend such service as she
once, like a coward, had shrank from. So with eager emotion, her eyes
flashing, she interrupted the negro "Stop!" she cried, "you are wasting
words and trouble. What you are trying to prove by subtlety I am proud
and glad to declare. Hear it, all of you. The son of the Mukaukas is my
betrothed!"

At the same time her eye sought to meet Orion's. And thus, in the very
extremity of danger, they enjoyed a solemn moment of the purest, deepest
happiness. Paula's eyes were moist with grateful tenderness, when Orion
exclaimed:

"You have heard from her own lips what makes the greatest bliss of my
life. The noble daughter of Thomas is my promised bride!"

There was a murmur among the Jacobite judges. 'Till this moment several
of them, oppressed by the heat, had sat dreaming with their heads sunk on
their breasts, but now they were suddenly as wide-awake and alert as
though a jet of cold water had been turned on to them, and one cried out:
"And your father, young man? You have forgotten him in a hurry! What
would he have said to such a disgrace to his blood as your marriage to a
Melchite, the daughter of those who caused your two brothers to be
murdered? Oh! if the dead could. . . ."

"He blessed our union on his death-bed," Orion put in.

"Did he, indeed?" asked another Jacobite with sarcastic scorn. "Then the
patriarch was in the right when he refused to let the priests follow his
corpse. That I should live to be witness to such crimes!"

But such words fell on the ears of the enraptured pair like the chirping
of crickets. They felt, they cared for nothing but what this blissful
moment had brought them, and never suspected that Paula's glad avowal had
sealed her death-warrant.

The wrath of the Jacobite faction now hastened the end. The prosecutor,
an Arab, now represented how many Moslems had lost their lives in the
affair of the nuns, and once more read Orion's letter. His Christian
colleagues tried to prove that this document could only refer to the
flight, so ingeniously plotted, of the sisters; and now something quite
new and unlooked-for occurred, which gave a fresh turn to the
proceedings: the old man interrupted the Kadi to make a statement. At
this Paula's confidence rose again for the last speaker had somewhat
shaken it. She felt sure that the tried friend and adoptive father of her
faithful Philippus would take her part.

But what was this?

The old man seemed to measure her height in a glance which struck to her
heart with its fierce enmity, and then he said deliberately:

"On the morning of the nuns' flight the accused, Paula, went to the
convent and there tolled the bell. Contradict me if you can, proud
prefect's daughter; but I warn you beforehand, that in that case, I shall
be compelled to bring forward fresh charges."

At this the horror-stricken girl pictured to herself the widow and
daughter of Rufinus at her side on the condemned bench before the judges,
and felt that denial would drag her friends to destruction with her; with
quivering lips she confirmed the old man's statement.

"And why did you toll the bell?" asked the Kadi.

"To help them," replied Paula. "They are my fellow-believers, and I love
them."

"She was the originator of the treasonable and bloody scheme," cried the
Vekeel, "and did it for no other purpose than to cheat us, the rulers of
this country."

The Kadi however signed to him to be silent and bid the Jacobite counsel
for the accused speak next. He had seen her early in the day, and came
forward in the Egyptian manner with a written defence in his hand; but it
was a dull formal performance and produced no effect; though the Kadi did
his utmost to give prominence to every point that might help to justify
her, she was pronounced guilty.

Still, could her crime be held worthy of death? It was amply proved that
she had had a hand in the rescue of the nuns; but it was no less clear
that she had been far enough away from the sisters and their defenders
when the struggle with the Arabs took place. And she was a woman, and how
pardonable it seemed in a pious maiden that she should help the
fellow-believers whom she loved to evade persecution.

All this Othman pointed out in eloquent words, repeatedly and sternly
silencing the Vekeel when he sought to argue in favor of the sentence of
death; and the humane persuasiveness of the lenient judge won the hearts
of most of the Moslems.

Paula's appearance had a powerful effect, too, and not less the
circumstance that their noblest and bravest foe had been the father of
the accused.

When at length it was put to the vote the extraordinary result was that
all her fellow Christians--the Jacobites--without exception demanded her
death, while of the infidels on the judges' bench only one supported this
severe meed of punishment.

Sentence was pronounced, and as the Vekeel Obada passed close to
Orion--who was led back to his cell pale and hardly master of himself--he
said, mocking him in broken Greek: "It will be your turn to-morrow, Son
of the Mukaukas!"

Orion's lips framed the retort: "And yours, too, some day, Son of a
Slave!"--but Paula was standing opposite, and to avoid infuriating her
foe he was able to do what he never could have done else: to let the
Vekeel and Horapollo pass on without a word in reply.

As soon as the door was closed on this couple, Othman nodded approvingly
at Orion and said:

"Rightly and wisely done, my friend! The eagle should never forget that
he must not use his pinions in a cage as he does between the desert and
the sky."

He signed to the guards to lead him away, and stood apart while the young
man looked and waived an adieu to his betrothed.

Finally the Kadi went up to Paula, whose heroic composure as she heard
the sentence of death had filled him with admiration.

"The court has decided against you, noble maiden," he said. "But its
verdict can he overruled by the clemency of our Sovereign Lord the
Khaliff and the mercy of God the compassionate. Do you pray to Him--I and
a few friends will appeal to the Khaliff."

He disclaimed her gratitude, and when she, too, had been led away he
added, in the figurative language of his nation, to the friends who were
waiting for him:

"My heart aches! To have to pronounce such a verdict oppressed me like a
load; but to have an Obada for a fellow Moslem and be bound to obey
him--there is no heavier lot on earth!"


CHAPTER XVIII.

The mysterious old sage had no sooner left the judgment-hall with the
Vekeel than he begged for a private interview. Obada did not hesitate to
turn the keeper of the prison, with his wife and infant, out of his room,
and there he listened while Horapollo informed him of the fate to which
he destined the condemned girl. The old man's scheme certainly found
favor with the Negro; still, it seemed to him in many respects so daring
that, but for an equivalent service which Horapollo was in a position to
offer Obada, he would scarcely have succeeded in obtaining his consent.

All the Vekeel aimed at was to make it very certain that Orion had had a
hand in the flight of the nuns, and chance had placed a document in the
old man's hands which seemed to set this beyond a doubt.

He had effected his removal to the widow's dwelling in the cool hours of
early morning. He had taken with him, in the first instance, only the
most valuable and important of his manuscripts, and as he was placing
these in a small desk--the very same which Rufinus had left for Paula's
use--Horapollo found in it the note which the youth had hastily written
when, after waiting in vain for Paula as she sat with little Mary, he had
at last been obliged to depart and take leave of Amru. This wax-tablet,
on which the writing was much defaced and partly illegible, could not
fail to convince the judges of Orion's guilt, and the production of this
piece of evidence enabled the old man to extort Obada's consent to his
proposal as to the mode of Paula's death. When they finally left the
warder's room, the Negro once more turned to the keeper of the prison and
told him with a snort, as he pointed to his pretty wife and the child at
her breast, that they should all three die if he allowed Orion to quit
his cell for so much as an instant.

He then swung himself on to his horse, while Horapollo rode off to the
Curia to desire the president of the council to call a meeting for that
evening; then he betook himself to his new quarters.

There he found his room carefully shaded, and as cool as was possible in
such heat. The floor had been sprinkled with water, flowers stood
wherever there was room for them, and all his properties in scrolls and
other matters had found places in chests or on shelves. There was not a
speck of dust to be seen, and a sweet pervading perfume greeted his
sensitive nostrils.

What a good exchange he had made! He rubbed his withered hands with
satisfaction as he seated himself in his accustomed chair, and when Mary
came to call him to dinner, it was a pleasure to him to jest with her.

Pulcheria must lead him through the viridarium into the dining-room; he
enjoyed his meal, and his cross, wrinkled old face lighted up amazingly
as he glanced round at his feminine associates; only Eudoxia was absent,
confined to her room by some slight ailment. He had something pleasant to
say to each; he frankly compared his former circumstances with his
present position, without disguising his heartfelt thankfulness; then,
with a merry glance at Pulcheria, he described how delightful it would be
when Philippus should come home to make the party complete--a true and
perfect star: for every Egyptian star must have five rays. The ancients
had never painted one otherwise nor graven it in stone; nay, they had
used it as the symbol for the number five.

At this Mary exclaimed: "But then I hope--I hope we shall make a
six-rayed star; for by that time poor Paula may be with us again!"

"God grant it!" sighed Dame Joanna. Pulcheria, however, asked the old man
what was wrong with him, for his face had suddenly clouded. His
cheerfulness had vanished, his tufted eyebrows were raised, and his
pinched lips seemed unwilling to part, when at length he reluctantly
said:

"Nothing--nothing is wrong. . . . At the same time; once for all--I loathe
that name."

"Paula?" cried the child in astonishment. "Oh! but if you knew. . ."

"I know more than enough," interrupted the old man. "I love you all--all;
my old heart expands as I sit in your midst; I am comfortable here, I
feel kindly towards you, I am grateful to you; every little attention you
show me does me good; for it comes from your hearts: if I could repay you
soon and abundantly--I should grow young again with joy. You may believe
me, as I can see indeed that you do. And yet," and again his brows went
up, "and yet, when I hear that name, and when you try to win me over to
that woman, or if you should even go so far as to assail my ears with her
praises--then, much as it would grieve me, I would go back again to the
place where I came from."

"Why, Horapollo, what are you saying?" cried Joanna, much distressed.

"I say," the old man went on, "I say that in her everything is
concentrated which I most hate and contemn in her class. I say that she
bears in her bosom a cold and treacherous heart; that she blights my days
and my nights; in short, that I would rather be condemned to live under
the same roof with clammy reptiles and cold-blooded snakes than . . ."

"Than with her, with Paula?" Mary broke in. The eager little thing sprang
to her feet, her eyes flashed lightnings and her voice quivered with
rage, as she exclaimed: "And you not only say it but mean it? Is it
possible?"

"Not only possible, but positive, sweetheart," replied the old man,
putting out his hand to take hers, but she shrank back, exclaiming
vehemently:

"I will not be your sweetheart, if you speak so of her! A man as old as
you are ought to be just. You do not know her at all, and what you say
about her heart. . ."

"Gently, gently, child," the widow put in; and Horapollo answered with
peculiar emphasis.

"That heart, my little whirlwind!--it would be well for us all if we
could forget it, forget it for good or for evil. She has been tried
to-day, and that heart is sentenced to cease beating."

"Sentenced! Merciful Heaven!" shrieked Pulcheria, and as she started up
her mother cried out:

"For God's sake do not jest about such things, it is a sin.--Is it
true?--Is it possible? Those wretches, those . . . I see in your face it
is true; they have condemned Paula."

"As you say," replied Horapollo calmly. "The girl is to be executed."

"And you only tell us now?" wept Pulcheria, while Mary broke out:

"And yet you have been able to jest and laugh, and you--I hate you! And
if you were not such a helpless, old, old man. . ." But here Joanna again
silenced the child, and she asked between her sobs:

"Executed?--Will they cut off her head? And is there no mercy for her who
was as far away from that luckless fight as we were--for her, a girl, and
the daughter of Thomas?"

To which the old man replied:

"Wait a while, only wait! Heaven has perhaps chosen her for great ends.
She may be destined to save a whole country and nation from destruction
by her death. It is even possible. . ."

"Speak out plainly; you make me shudder with your oracular hints," cried
the widow; but he only shrugged his shoulders and said coolly:

"What we foresee is not yet known. Heaven alone can decide in such a
case. It will be well for us all--for me, for her, for Pulcheria, and
even our absent Philip, if the divinity selects her as its instrument.
But who can see into darkness? If it is any comfort to you, Joanna, I can
inform you that the soft-hearted Kadi and his Arab colleagues, out of
sheer hatred of the Vekeel, who is immeasurably their superior in talent
and strength of will, will do everything in their power. . . ." "To save
her?" exclaimed the widow.

"To-morrow they will hold council and decide whether to send a messenger
to Medina to implore pardon for her," Horapollo went on with a horrible
smile. "The day after they will discuss who the messenger is to be, and
before he can reach Arabia fate will have overtaken the prisoner. The
Vekeel Obada moves faster than they do, and the power lies in his hands
so long as Amru is absent from Egypt. He, they say, perfectly dotes on
the Mukaukas' son, and for his sake--who knows? Paula as his betrothed."

"His betrothed?"

"He called her by that name before the judges, and congratulated himself
on his promised bride."

"Paula and Orion!" cried Pulcheria, jubilant in the midst of her tears,
and clapping her hands for joy.

"A pair indeed!" said the old man. "You may well rejoice, my girl! Feeble
hearts as you all are, respect the experience of the aged, and bless Fate
if it should lame the horse of the Kadi's messenger!--However, you will
not listen to anything oracular, so it will be better to talk of
something else."

"No, no," cried Joanna. "What can we think of but her and her fate? Oh,
Horapollo, I do not know you in this mood. What has that poor soul done
to you, persecuted as she is by the hardest fate--that noble creature who
is so dear to us all? And do you forget that the judges who have
sentenced her will now proceed to enquire what Rufinus, and we all
of us . . ."

"What you had to do with that mad scheme of rescue?" interrupted
Horapollo. "I will make it my business to prevent that. So long as this
old brain is able to think, and this mouth to speak, not a hair of your
heads shall be hurt."

"We are grateful to you," said Joanna. "But, if you have such power, set
to work--you know how dear Paula is to us all, how highly your friend
Philip esteems her--use your power to save her."

"I have no power, and refuse to have any," retorted the old man harshly.

"But Horapollo, Horapollo!--Come here, children!--We were to find in you
a second father--so you promised. Then prove that those were no empty
words, and be entreated by us."

The old man drew a deep breath; he rose to his feet with such vigor as he
could command, a bright, sharply-defined patch of color tinged each pale
cheek, and he exclaimed in husky tones:

"Not another word! No attempt to move me, not a cry of lamentation!
Enough, and a thousand times too much, of that already. You have heard
me, and I now say again--me or Paula, Paula or me. Come what may in the
future, if you cannot so far control yourselves as never to mention her
in my presence, I--no, I do not swear, but when I have said a thing I
keep to it--I will go back to my old den and drag out life the richer by
a disappointment--or die, as my ruling goddess shall please."

With this he left the room, and little Mary raised her clenched right
fist and shook it after him, exclaiming: "Then let him go, hard-hearted,
unjust, old scarecrow! Oh, if only I were a man!" And she burst out
crying aloud. Heedless of the widow's reproof, she went on quite beside
herself: "Oh, there is no one more wicked than he is, Dame Joanna! He
wants to see her die, he wishes her to be dead; I know it, he even wishes
it! Did you hear him, Pul, he would be glad if the messenger's horse went
lame before he could save her? And now she is my Orion's betrothed--I
always meant them for each other--and they want to kill him, too, but
they shall not, if there is still a God of justice in heaven! Oh if I--if
I. . ." Her voice failed her, choked with sobs. When she had somewhat
recovered she implored Pulcheria and her mother to take her to see Paula,
and as they shared her wish they prepared to start for the prison before
it should grow dark.

The nearer they went to the market-place, which they must cross, the more
crowded were the streets. Every one was going the same way; the throng
almost carried the women with it; yet, from the market came, as it were,
a contrary torrent of shouts and shrieks from a myriad of human throats.
Dame Joanna was terrified in the press by the uproarious doings in the
market, and she would gladly have turned back with the girls, or have
made her way through by-streets, but the tide bore her on, and it would
have been easier to swim against a swollen mountain stream than to return
home. Thus they soon reached the square, but there they were brought to a
standstill in the crush.

The widow's terrors now increased. It was dreadful to be kept fast with
the young people in such a mob. Pulcheria clung closely to her, and when
she bid Mary take her hand the child, who thoroughly enjoyed the
adventure, exclaimed: "Only look, Mother Joanna, there is our Rustem. He
is taller than any one."

"If only he were by our side!" sighed the widow. At this the little girl
snatched away her hand, made her way with the nimbleness of a squirrel
through the mass of men, and soon had reached the Masdakite. Rustem had
not yet quitted Memphis, for the first caravan, which he and his little
wife were to join, was not to start for a few days. The worthy Persian
and Mary were very good friends; as soon as he heard that his
benefactress was alarmed he pushed his way to her, with the child, and
the widow breathed more freely when he offered to remain near her and
protect her.

Meanwhile the yelling and shouting were louder than ever. Every face,
every eye was turned to the Curia, in the evident expectation of
something great and strange taking place there.

"What is it?" asked Mary, pulling at Rustem's coat. The giant said
nothing, but he stooped, and to her delight, a moment later she had her
feet on his arms, which he folded across his chest, and was settling
herself on his broad shoulder whence she could survey men and things as
from a tower. Joanna laid her hand in some tremor on the child's little
feet, but Mary called down to her: "Mother--Pulcheria--I am quite sure
our old Horapollo's white ass is standing in front of the Curia, and they
are putting a garland round the beast's neck--a garland of olive."

At this moment the blare of a tuba rang out from the Senate-house across
the square, through the suffocatingly hot, quivering air; a sudden
silence fell and spread till, when a man opened his mouth to shout or to
speak, a neighbor gave him a shove and bid him hold his tongue. At this
the widow held Mary's ankles more tightly, asking, while she wiped the
drops from her brow:

"What is going on?" and the child answered quickly, never taking her eyes
off the scene:

"Look, look up at the balcony of the Curia; there stands the chief of the
Senate--Alexander the dyer of purple--he often used to come to see my
grandfather, and grandmother could not bear his wife. And by his side--do
you not see who the man is close by him?

"It is old Horapollo. He is taking the laurel-crown off his
wig!--Alexander is going to speak."

She was interrupted by another trumpet call, and immediately after a
loud, manly voice was heard from the Curia, while the silence was so
profound that even the widow and her daughter lost very little of the
speech which followed:

"Fellow-citizens, Memphites, and comrades in misfortune," the president
began in slow, ringing tones, "you know what the sufferings are which we
all share. There is not a woe that has not befallen us, and even worse
loom before us."

The crowd expressed their agreement by a fearful outcry, but they were
reduced to silence by the sound of the tuba, and the speaker went on:

"We, the Senate, the fathers of the city, whom you have entrusted with
the care of your persons and your welfare. . ."

At this point he was interrupted by wild yells, and cries could be
distinguished of: "Then take care of us--do your duty!"

"Money bags!"

"Keep your pledge!"

"Save us from destruction!"

The trumpet call, however, again silenced them, and the speaker went on,
almost beside himself with vehement excitement.

"Hearken! Do not interrupt me! The dearth and misery fall on our heads as
much as on yours. My own wife and son died of the plague last night!"

At this only a low murmur ran through the crowd, and it died away of its
own accord as the dignified old man on the balcony wiped his eyes and
went on:

"If there is a single man among you who can prove us guilty of neglect--a
man, woman, or child--let him accuse us before God, before our new ruler
the Khaliff, and yourselves, the citizens of Memphis; but not now, my
fellow-sufferers, not now! At this time cease your cries and
lamentations; now when rescue is in sight. Listen to me, and let us know
what you feel with regard to the last and uttermost means of deliverance
which I now come to propose to you."

"Silence! Hear him! Down with the noisy ones!" was heard on all sides,
and the orator went on:

"We, as Christians, in the first instance addressed ourselves to our
Father in Heaven, to our one and only divine Redeemer, and to His Holy
Church to aid us; and I ask you: Has there been any lack of prayers,
processions, pilgrimages, and pious gifts? No, no, my beloved
fellow-citizens! Each one be my witness--certainly not! But Heaven has
remained blind and deaf and dumb in sight of our need, yea as though
paralyzed. And yet no; not indeed paralyzed, for it has been powerful and
swift to move only to heap new woes upon us. Not a thing that human
foresight and prudence could devise or execute has remained untried.

"The time-honored arts of the magicians, sorcerers, and diviners, which
aforetime have often availed to break the powers of evil spirits, have
proved no less delusive and ineffectual. So then we remembered our
glorious forefathers and ancestors, and we recollected that a man lives
in our midst who knew many things which we others have lost sight of in
the lapse of years. He has made the wisdom of our forefathers his own in
the course of a long life of laborious days and nights. He has the key to
the writing and the secrets of the ancients, and he has communicated to
us the means of deliverance to which they resorted, when they suffered
from such afflictions as have befallen us in these dreadful days; and
this venerable man at my side, the wise and truthful Horapollo, will
acquaint us with it. You see the antique scrolls in his hand: They teach
us the wonders it wrought in times past."

Here the speaker was interrupted by a cry of: "Hail Horapollo, the
Deliverer!" and thousands took it up and expressed their satisfaction and
gratitude by loud shouting.

The old man bowed modestly, pointed to his narrow chest and toothless
mouth and then to the head of the Council as the man who had undertaken
to transmit his opinion to the populace; so Alexander went on:

"Great favors, my friends and fellow-citizens, must be purchased by great
gifts. The ancients knew this, and when the river--on which, as we know
only too well, the weal or woe of this land solely depends--refused to
rise, and its low ebb brought evils of many kinds upon its banks, they
offered in sacrifice the thing they deemed most noble of all the earth
has to show a pure and beautiful maiden.

"It is just as we expected: you are horrified! I hear your murmur, I see
your horror-stricken faces; how can a Christian fail to be shocked at the
thought of such a victim? But is it indeed so extraordinary? Have we ever
wholly given up everything of the kind? Which of us does not entreat
Saint Orion, either at home or under the guidance of the priests in
church, whenever he craves a gift from our splendid river; and this very
year as usual, on the Night of Dropping, did we not cast into the waters
a little box containing a human finger.

   [So late as in the XIV. century after Christ the Egyptian Christians
   still threw a small casket containing a human finger into the Nile
   to induce it to rise. This is confirmed by the trustworthy
   Makrizi.]

"This lesser offering takes the place of the greater and more precious
sacrifice of the heathen; it has been offered, and its necessity has
never at any time been questioned; even the severest and holiest
luminaries of the Church--Antonius and Athanasius, Theophilus and
Cyrillus had nothing to say against it, and year after year it has been
thrown into the waters under their very eyes.

"A finger in a box! What a miserable exchange for the fairest and purest
that God has allowed to move on earth among men. Can we wonder if the
Almighty has at last disdained and rejected the wretched substitute, and
claims once more for His Nile that which was formerly given? But where is
the mother, where is the father, you will ask, who, in our selfish days,
is so penetrated with love for his country, his province, his native
town, that he will dedicate his virgin daughter to perish in the waters
for the common good? What daughter of our nation is ready of her own free
will to die for the salvation of others?

"But be not afraid. Have no fears for the growing maiden, the very apple
of your eye, in your women's rooms. Fear not for your granddaughters,
sisters, playfellows and betrothed: From the earliest ages a stringent
law forbade the sacrifice of Egyptian blood; strangers were to perish, or
those who worshipped other gods than those in Egypt.

"The same law, citizens and fellow-believers, is incumbent on us. And
mark me well, all of you! Would it not seem as though Fate desired to
help us to bring to our blessed Nile the offering which for so many
centuries has been withheld? The river claims it; and, as if by a
miracle, it has been brought to our hand. For a crime which does not
taint her purity our judges have to-day condemned to death a beautiful
and spotless maiden--a stranger, and at the same time a Greek and a
heretic Melchite.

"This stirs you, this fills your souls with joyful thankfulness; I see
it! Then make ready for thy bridal, noble stream, Benefactor of our land
and nation! The virgin, the bride that thou hast longed for, we deck for
thee, we lead to thine embrace--she shall be Thine!

"And you, Memphites, citizens and fellow-sufferers," and the orator
leaned far over the parapet towards the crowd, "when I ask you for your
suffrages, when I appeal to you in the name of the senate, and of this
venerable sage. . . ."

But here he was interrupted by the triumphant shout of the assembled
multitude; a thousand voices went up in a mighty, heaven-rending cry:

"To the Nile with her--the maiden to the Nile!"

"Marry the Melchite to the river! Bring wreaths for the bride of the
Nile, bring flowers for her marriage."

"Let us abide by the teaching of our fathers!"

"Hail to the councillor! Hail to the sage, Horapollo! Hail to our chief
Senator!"

These were the glad and enthusiastic shouts that rose in loud confusion;
and it was only on the north side, where the money-changers' tables now
stood deserted-for gold and silver had long since been placed in
safety--that a sinister murmur of dissent was heard. The little girl in
the Persian's arms had long since been breathing hard and deep. She
thought she knew whom that fiend up there had his eye upon for his cursed
heathen sacrifice; and as Mary bent down to Dame Joanna to see whether
she shared her hideous suspicion, she perceived that her eyes and
Pulcheria's were full of tears.--That was enough; she asked no questions,
for a new act in the drama claimed her attention.

Close to the money-changer's stalls a hand was lifted on high, holding a
crucifix, and the child could see it steadily progressing through the
crowd towards the Curia. Every one made way for the sacred symbol and the
bearer of it; and to Mary's fancy the throng parted on each side of the
advancing image of the Redeemer, as the waters of the Red Sea had parted
at the approach of the people of God. The murmurs in that part of the
square grew louder; the acclamations of the populace waxed fainter; every
voice seemed to fail, and presently a frail figure in bishop's robes,
small but rigidly dignified, was seen to mount the steps and finally
disappear within the portals of the Curia.

The turmoil sank like an ebbing wave to a low, enquiring mutter, and even
this died away when the diminutive personage, who looked the taller,
however, for the crucifix which he still held, came out on the balcony,
approached the parapet, and stretched forth the arm that held the image
above the heads of the foremost rows of the people.

At this Horapollo stepped up to Alexander, his eyes flashing with rage,
and demanded that the intruder should be forbidden to speak; but the
commanding eye of the new-comer rested on the dyer, who bowed his head
and allowed him to proceed. Nor did one of the senators dare to hinder
him, for every one recognized him as the zealous, learned, and determined
priest who had, since yesterday, filled the place of the deceased bishop.

Their new pastor began, addressing his flock in as loud a voice as he
could command:

"Look on this Cross and hearken to its minister! You languish for the
blessing of Christ, and you follow after heathen abominations. The
superstitious triumph, through which I have struggled to reach you, will
be turned to howls of anguish if you stop your ears and are deaf to the
words of salvation.

"Yea, you may murmur! You will not reduce me to silence, for Truth speaks
in me and can never be dumb. I say to each of you that knows it not: The
staff of the departed Plotinus has been placed in my hands. I would fain
bear it with gentleness and mercy; but, if I must, I will wield it as a
sword and a scourge till your wounds bleed and your bruises ache.

"Behold in my right hand the image of your Redeemer! I hold it up as a
wall between you and the heathen abomination which you hail with joy in
your blindness.

"Ye are accursed and apostate. Lift up your hearts, and look at Him who
died on the cross to save you. Verily He will not let him perish who
believeth in Him; but you! where is your faith? Because it is night ye
lament and cry: The Light is dead!' Because ye are sick ye say: 'The
physician cannot heal!'

"What are these blasphemies that I hear: 'The Lord and His Church are
powerless! Magic, enchantments, and heathen abominations may save
us.'--But, inasmuch as ye trust not in the true Saviour and Redeemer, but
in heathen wickedness, magic, and enchantments, punishment shall be
heaped on punishment; and so it will be,--I see it coming--till ye are
choked in the mud and seek with groans the only Hand that is able to
save.

"That whereby the blinded sons of men hope to escape from the evil, that,
and that only, is the source of their sufferings and I stand here to stay
that spring and dig a channel for its overflow.

"Children of Moloch ye try to be and I hope to make you Christians again.
But the maiden whom your fury would cast into the abyss of the river is
under the merciful protection of the supreme Church, for the death of her
body will bring death to your souls. Saint Orion turns from you with
horror! Away from the hapless victim! Away, I say, with your accursed
desires and sacrilegious hands!"

"And sit with them in our laps and wring them in prayer till they ache,
while want and the plague snatch away those that are left!" interrupted
the old man's voice, thin and feeble, but audible at a considerable
distance, and from the market-place thousands proclaimed their approval
by loud shouts.

The president of the senate had listened with a penitent mien and bowed
head, but now he recovered his presence of mind and exclaimed
indignantly:

"The people die, the town and country are going to ruin, plague and
horrors rise up from the river. Show us some other way of escape, or let
us trust to our forefathers and try this last means."

But the little man drew himself up more stiffly, pointed with his left
hand to the crucifix, and cried with unmoved composure:

"Believe, hope, and pray!"

"Perhaps you think that no evil is come upon us!" cried Alexander. "You,
to be sure, have seen no wife with glazing eyes, no child struggling for
breath. . . ." And a fresh tumult came up from below, wilder and louder
than ever. Each one whose home or beasts had been blighted by death,
whose gardens and fields had perished of drought, whose dates had dropped
one by one from the trees, lifted up his voice and shrieked:

"The victim, the victim!"

"To the river with the maiden!"

"All hail to our deliverer, the wise Horapollo!" But others shouted
against them:

"Let us remain Christians! Hail to Bishop John!"

"Think of our souls!"

The prelate made an effort once more to rivet the attention of the
populace, and failing in this he turned to the senators and the
trumpeters, whom at length he succeeded in persuading to blow again and
again, and more loudly through their brazen tuba. But the call produced
no effect, for in the market square groups had formed on opposite sides,
and blows and wrestling threatened to end in a sanguinary street-riot.

The women succeeded in getting away from the scene of action under the
protection of the Masdakite, before the Arab cavalry rode across to
separate the combatants; but in the Curia Bishop John explained to the
Fathers that he would make every effort to prevent this inhuman and
unchristian sacrifice of a young girl, even though she was a Melchite and
under sentence of death. This very day a carrier pigeon should be
dispatched to the patriarch in Upper Egypt, and bring back his decision.

When, on this, Horapollo replied that the Khaliff's representative here
had signified his consent to the proceedings, and that even against the
will of the clergy the misery of the people must be put an end to, the
Bishop broke out vehemently and threatened all who had first suggested
this hideous scheme with the anathema of the Church. But Horapollo
retorted again with flaming eloquence, the desperate Senators took his
part, and the Bishop left the Curia in the highest wrath.


CHAPTER XIX.

Few things could be more intolerable to the gentle and retiring widow
than such a riot of the people. The unchained passion, the tumult, and
all the vulgar accessories that surrounded her there grieved her tender
nature; all through the old man's speech she had felt nothing but the
desire to escape, but as soon as she had acquired the certainty that
Paula was the hapless being whom her terrible house-mate was preparing to
hand over to the superstition of the mob, she thought no more of getting
home, but waited in the crush till at length she and the two children
could be conducted by Rustem to the prison, though the way thither was
through the most crowded streets.

Had the nameless horrors that hung over Paula already found their way to
her ears through the prisonwalls, or might it yet be her privilege to be
able to prepare the girl for the worst, and to comfort the victim who
must already have been driven to the verge of desperation by the sentence
of death?

On the previous day the chief warder had acceded without demur to her
wish to see Paula, for the Kadi had enjoined him to show her and Orion
all possible courtesy, but the Vekeel's threats made him now refuse to
admit Dame Joanna. However, while he was talking with her, his infant son
stretched out his arms to Pulcheria, who had played with him the day
before in her sweet way, and she now took him up and kissed him, thus
bringing a kindly feeling to three hearts at once; and most of all to
that of the child's mother who immediately interested herself for them,
and persuaded her husband to oblige them once more.

Pretty Emau had always waited on the mirthful Orion, under the palms by
her father's inn, more gladly than on most other guests; and her husband
who, after the manner of the Egyptians, was docile to his better half
though till now he had not been quite free from jealousy, was even more
ready to serve his benefactor's son since hearing that he was betrothed
to the fair Paula.

There was a great uproar in the large common prison to-day, as usual when
the judges had passed sentence of death on any criminal, and the women
shuddered as the miserable wretches hallooed and bellowed. Many a shriek
came up, of which it was hard to say whether it was the expression of
wild defiance or of bitter jesting, and no more suitable accompaniment
could be conceived to this terrific riot than the clank of chains.

When the women reached Paula's cell their hearts throbbed painfully, for
within the door which the warder unlocked anguish and despair must dwell.

The prisoner was standing at the window, pressing her brow against the
iron bars and listening to the lute played by her lover, which sounded,
amid the turmoil of the other prisoners, like a bell above the roar of
thunder and the storm. By the bed sat Betta on a low stool, asleep with
the distaff in her lap; and neither she nor her mistress heeded the
entrance of the visitors. A miserable lamp lighted the squalid room.

Mary would have flown to her friend, but Joanna held her back and called
Paula tenderly by name in a low voice. But Paula did not hear; her soul
was no doubt absorbed in anguish and the terror of death. The widow now
raised her voice, and the ill-fated girl turned round; then, with a
little cry of joy, she hastened to meet the faithful creatures who could
find her even in prison, and clasped first the widow, then Pulcheria,
then the child in a tender embrace. Joanna put her hands fondly round her
face to kiss it, and to see how far fear and affliction had altered her
lovely features, and a faint cry of astonishment escaped her, for she was
looking, not at a grief and terror-stricken face, but a glad and calm
one, and a pair of large eyes looked brightly and gratefully into hers.

Had she not been told then what was hanging over her? Nay--for she at
once asked whether they had heard that she was condemned to die. And she
went on to tell them how things had gone with her at her trial, and how
her good Philip's friend and foster-father had suddenly and inexplicably
become her bitterest foe.

At this the others could not check their tears; it was Paula who had to
comfort and soothe them, by telling them that she had found a paternal
friend in the Kadi who had promised to intercede for her with the
Khaliff.

Dame Joanna could scarcely take it all in. This girl and her heroic
demeanor, in the face of such disaster, seemed to her miraculous. Her
trust was beautiful; but how easily might it be deceived! how insecure
was the ground in which she had cast the anchor of hope.

Even little Mary seemed more troubled than her friend, and threw herself
sobbing on her bosom. And Paula returned her fondness, and tried to
mollify Pulcheria as to the disgraceful conduct of their old housemate,
and smiled kindly at the widow when she asked where she had found such
composure in the face of so much misfortune, saying that it was from her
example that she had learnt resignation to the worst that could befall
her. Even in this dark hour she found more to be thankful for than to
lament over; indeed, it had brought her a glorious joy. And this for the
first time reminded Joanna and the girls that she was now betrothed, and
again she was clasped in their loving arms.

Just then the warder rapped; Paula rose thoughtfully, and exclaimed in a
low voice: "I have something to send to Orion that I dare not entrust to
a stranger: but now, now I have you, my Mary, and you shall take it to
him."

As she spoke she took out the emerald, gave it to the little girl, and
charged her to deliver it to her uncle as soon as they should be alone
together. In the little note which she had wrapped around it she implored
her lover to regard it as his own property, and to use it to satisfy the
claims of the Church.

The man was easily induced to take Mary to her uncle; and how happily she
ran on before him up to Orion's cell, how great was his joy at seeing her
again, how gratefully he pressed the emerald to his lips! But when she
exclaimed that her prophecy had been fulfilled, and that Paula, was now
his, his brow was knit as he replied, with gloomy regret, that though he
had won the woman he loved, it was only to lose her again.

"But the Kadi is your friend and will gain pardon from the Khaliff!"
cried the child.

"But then another enemy suddenly starts up: Horapollo!"

"Oh, our old man!" and the child ground her teeth. "If you did but know,
Orion!--And to think that I must live under the same roof with him!"

"You!" asked the young man.

"Yes, I. And Pulcheria, and Mother Joanna," and Mary went on to tell him
how the old man had come to live with them and Orion could guess from
various indications that she was concealing some important fact; so he
pressed her to keep nothing from him, till the child could not at last
evade telling him all she had seen and heard.

At this he lost all caution and self-control. Quite beside himself he
called aloud the name of his beloved, invoking in passionate tones the
return of the Governor Amru, the only man who could help them in this
crisis. His sole hope was in him. He had shown himself a real father to
him, and had set him a difficult but a noble task.

"Into which you have plunged over head and ears!" cried the child.

"I thought it all out while on my journey," replied Orion. "I tried
yesterday to write out a first sketch of it, but I lacked what I most
wanted: maps and lists. Nilus had put them all up together; I was to have
taken them with me on the voyage with the nuns, and I ordered that they
should be carried to the house of Rufinus. . . ."

"That they should come to us?" interrupted the child with sparkling eyes.
"Oh, they are all there! I saw the documents myself, when the chest was
cleared out for old Horapollo, and to-morrow, quite early to-morrow, you
shall have them." Orion kissed her brow with glad haste; then, striking
the wall of his cell with his fist, he waited till something had been
withdrawn with a grating sound on the other side, and exclaimed:

"Good news, Nilus! The plans and lists are found: I shall have them
to-morrow!"

"That is well!" replied the treasurer's thin voice from the adjoining
room. "We shall need something to comfort us! A prisoner has just been
brought in for having attacked an Arab horseman in a riot in the market
square. He tells me some dreadful news."

"Concerning my betrothed?"

"Alas! yes, my lord."

"Then I know it already," replied the young man; and after exchanging a
few words with his master with reference to the old man's atrocious
proposal, Nilus went on:

"My prison-mate tells me, too, that while he was in custody in the
guard-house the Arabs were speaking of a messenger from the governor
announcing his arrival at Medina, and also that he intended making only a
short stay there. So we may expect his return before long."

"Then he will have started long before the Kadi's messenger can have
arrived and laid the petition for pardon before the Khaliff!--We have no
hope but in Amru; if only we could send information to him on his
way. . . ."

"He would certainly not tarry in Upper Egypt, but hasten his journey, or
send on a plenipotentiary," said the voice on the other side of the wall.
"If we had but a trusty man to despatch! Our people are scattered to the
four winds, and to hunt them up now. . . ."

At this Mary's childish tones broke in with: "I can find a messenger."

"You? What are you thinking of, child?" said Orion. She did not heed his
remonstrance, but went on eagerly, quite sure of her own meaning:

"He shall be told everything, everything! Ought he to know what I heard
about your share in the flight of the sisters?"

"No, no; on no account!" cried Nilus and his master both at once; and
Mary understood that her proposition was accepted. She clapped her hands,
and exclaimed full of enterprise and with glowing cheeks:

"The messenger shall start to-morrow; rely on me. I can do it as well as
the greatest. And now tell me exactly the road he is to take. To make
sure, write the names of the stages on my little tablet.--But wait, I
must rub it smooth."

"What is this on the wax?" asked Orion. "A large heart with squares all
over it.--And that means?"

"Oh! mere nonsense," said the child somewhat abashed. "It was only to
show how my heart was divided among the persons I love. A whole half of
it belongs to Paula, this quarter is yours; but there, there, there," and
at each word she prodded the wax with the stylus, "that is where I had
kept a little corner for old Horapollo. He had better not come in my way
again!"

Her nimble fingers smoothed the wax, and over the effaced heart--a
child's whim--Orion wrote things on which the lives of two human beings
depended. He did so with sincere confidence in his little ally's
adroitness and fidelity. Early next morning she was to receive a letter
to be conveyed to Amru by the messengers.

"But a rapid journey costs money, and Amru always chooses the road by the
mountains and Berenice," observed the treasurer. "If we put together our
last gold pieces they will hardly suffice."

"Keep them, you will want them here," said the little girl. "And
yet--there are my pearls, to be sure, and my mother's jewels--at the same
time. . . ."

"You ought never to part from such things, you heart of gold!" cried
Orion.

"Oh yes, yes! What do I want with them? But Dame Joanna has my mother's
things in her keeping."

"And you are afraid to ask her for them?" asked the young man. He
appealed to Nilus, and when the treasurer had calculated the cost, Orion
took off a costly sapphire ring, which he gave to Mary, charging her to
hand it to Joanna. Gamaliel, the Jew, would lend her as much as she would
require on this gem. Mary joyfully took possession of the ring; but
presently, when the warder appeared to fetch her, her satisfaction
suddenly turned to no less vehement grief, and she took leave of Orion as
if they were parting for ever.

In the passage leading to Paula's cell the man suddenly stood still: some
one was approaching up the stairs.--If it should be the black Vekeel, and
he should find visitors in the prison at so late an hour!

But no. Two lamps were borne in front of the new-comers, and by their
light the warder recognized John, the new Bishop of Memphis, who had
often been here before now to console prisoners.

He had come to-night prompted by his desire to see the condemned
Melchite. Mary's dress and demeanor betrayed at once that she could not
belong to any official employed here; and, as soon as he had learnt who
she was, he whispered to his companion, an aged deacon who always
accompanied him when he visited a female prisoner: "We find her here!"
And when he had ascertained with whom the child had come hither at so
late an hour, he turned again to his colleague and added in a low voice:

"The wife and daughter of Rufinus! Just so: I have long had my eye on
these Greeks. In church once or twice every year!--Melchites in disguise!
Allied with this Melchite! And this is the school in which the Mukaukas'
granddaughter is growing up! An abominable trick! Benjamin judged
rightly, as he always did!" Then, in a subdued voice, he asked:

"Shall we take her away with us at once?" But, as the deacon made
objections, he hastily replied: "You are right; for the present it is
enough that we know where she is to be found."

The warder meanwhile had opened Paula's cell; before the bishop went in
he spoke a few kind words to the child, asking her whether she did not
long to see her mother; and when Mary replied: "Very often!" he stroked
her hair with his bony hand and said:

"So I thought.--You have a pretty name, child, and you, like your mother,
will perhaps ere long dedicate your life to the Blessed among women,
whose name you bear." And, holding the little girl by the hand, he
entered the cell. While Paula looked in amazement at the prelate who came
so late a visitor, Joanna and Pulcheria recognized him as the brave
ecclesiastic who had so valiantly opposed the old sage and the misled
populace, and they bowed with deep reverence. This the bishop observed,
and came to the conclusion that these Greeks perhaps after all belonged
to his Church. At any rate, the child might safely be left in their care
a few days longer.

After he had exchanged a few cordial words with them the widow prepared
to withdraw, and was about to take leave when he went up to her and
announced that he would pay her a visit the next day or the day after;
that he wished to speak with her of matters involving the happiness of
one who was dear to them both, and Dame Joanna, believing that he
referred to Paula, whispered:

"She has no idea as yet of the terrible fate the people have in store for
her. If possible, spare her the fearful truth before she sleeps this
night."

"If possible," repeated the prelate. Then, as Mary kissed his hand before
leaving, he drew her to him and said: "Like the Infant Christ, every
Christian child is the Mother's. You, Mary, are chosen before thousands!
The Lord took your father to himself as a martyr; your mother has
dedicated herself to Heaven. Your road is marked out for you, child,
reflect on this. To-morrow-no, the day after, I will see you and guide
you in the new path."

At these words Joanna turned pale. She now understood what the bishop's
purpose was in calling on her. At the bottom of the stairs, she threw her
arms round the child and asked her in--a low voice: "Do you pine for the
cloister--do you wish to go away from us like your mother, to think of
nothing but saving your soul, to live a nun in the holy seclusion which
Pulcheria has described to you so often?"

But this the child positively denied; and as Joanna's head drooped
anxiously and sadly, Mary looked up brightly and exclaimed: "Never fear,
Mother dear! Things will have altered greatly by the day after tomorrow.
Let the bishop come! I shall be a match for him!--Oh! you do not know me
yet. I have been like a lamb among you through all this misfortune and
serious trouble; but there is something more in me than that. You will be
quite astonished!"

"Nay, nay. Remain what you are," the widow said.

"Always and ever full of love for you and Pul. But I am a grand and
trusted person now! I have something very important to do for Orion
to-morrow. Something--Rustem will go with me.--Important, very important,
Mother Joanna. But what it is I must not tell--not even you!"

Here she was interrupted, for the heavy prison door opened for their
exit.

It was many hours before it was again unlocked to let out the bishop, so
long was he detained talking to Paula in her cell.

To his enquiry as to whether she was an orthodox Greek, or as the common
people called it, a Melchite, she replied that she was the latter; adding
that, if he had come with a view to perverting her from the confession of
her forefathers, his visit was thrown away; at the same time she
reverenced him as a Christian and a priest; as a learned man, and the
friend whom her deceased uncle had esteemed above every other minister of
his confession; she was gladly ready to disclose to him all that lay on
her soul in the face of death. He looked into the pure, calm face; and
though, at her first declaration, he had felt prompted to threaten her
with the hideous end which he had but just done his utmost to avert, he
now remembered the Greek widow's request and bound himself to keep
silence.

He allowed her to talk till midnight, giving him the whole history of all
she had known of joy and sorrow in the course of her young life; his keen
insight searched her soul, his pious heart rose to meet the strength and
courage of hers; and when he quitted her, as he walked home with the
deacon, the first words with which he broke a long silence were:

"While you were asleep, God vouchsafed me an edifying hour through that
heretic child of earth."


CHAPTER XX.

When the door in the tall prison-wall was closed behind the women, Joanna
made her way through streets still sultry under the silence of the night,
Rustem following with the child.

The giant's good heart was devoted to Mary, and he often passed his huge
hand over his eyes while she told him all that the scene they had
witnessed meant, and the fearful end that threatened Paula. They rush
flying onwards and he flies with them....

He took a sheet of paper, and without blotting out a word, almost with
one sweep of the pen, wrote as follows:--

'DEAR GEMMA,--You know what advice I undertook to give you, what your
mother desired, and what she asked of me; but what you don't know and
what I must tell you now is, that I love you, love you with all
the ardour of a heart that loves for the first time!

This passion has flamed up in me suddenly, but with such force that
I can find no words for it!

When your mother came to me and asked me, it was still only smouldering
in me, or else I should certainly, as an honest man, have refused
to carry out her request....

The confession I make you now is the confession of an honest man. You ought
to know whom you have to do with--between us there should exist
no misunderstandings.

You see that I cannot give you any advice.... I love you, love you, love
you--and I have nothing else--either in my head or in my heart!!

'DM. SANIN.'
When he had folded and sealed this note, Sanin was on the point of
ringing for the waiter and sending it by him....

'No!' he thought, 'it would be awkward.... By Emil? But to go to the shop,
and seek him out there among the other employés, would be awkward too.
Besides, it's dark by now, and he has probably left the shop.' Reflecting
after this fashion, Sanin put on his hat, however, and went into
the street; he turned a corner, another, and to his unspeakable
delight, saw Emil before him.

With a satchel under his arm, and a roll of papers in his hand, the
young enthusiast was hurrying home.

'They may well say every lover has a lucky star,' thought Sanin, and
he called to Emil.

The latter turned and at once rushed to him.

Sanin cut short his transports, handed him the note, and explained
to whom and how he was to deliver it....

Emil listened attentively.

'So that no one sees?' he inquired, assuming an important and mysterious
air, that said, 'We understand the inner meaning of it all!'
'Yes, my friend,' said Sanin and he was a little disconcerted; however, he
patted Emil on the cheek.... 'And if there should be an answer....
You will bring me the answer, won't you? I will stay at home.'
'Don't worry yourself about that!' Emil whispered gaily; he ran off, and
as he ran nodded once more to him.

Sanin went back home, and without lighting a candle, flung himself on
the sofa, put his hands behind his head, and abandoned himself to those
sensations of newly conscious love, which it is no good even to
describe.

One who has felt them knows their languor and sweetness; to one who
has felt them not, one could never make them known.

The door opened--Emil's head appeared.

'I have brought it,' he said in a whisper: 'here it is--the answer!'
He showed and waved above his head a folded sheet of paper.

Sanin leaped up from the sofa and snatched it out of Emil's hand.
Passion was working too powerfully within him: he had no thought of reserve
now, nor of the observance of a suitable demeanour--even before
this boy, her brother.

He would have been scrupulous, he would have controlled himself--if
he could!

He went to the window, and by the light of a street lamp which stood
just opposite the house, he read the following lines:--
I beg you, I beseech you--_don't come to see us, don't show yourself
all day to-morrow_.

It's necessary, absolutely necessary for me, and then everything
shall be settled. I know you will not say no, because ...

'GEMMA.'
Sanin read this note twice through.

Oh, how touchingly sweet and beautiful her handwriting seemed to him!
He thought a little, and turning to Emil, who, wishing to give him to
understand what a discreet young person he was, was standing with his
face to the wall, and scratching on it with his finger-nails, he
called him aloud by name.

Emil ran at once to Sanin. 'What do you want me to do?'
'Listen, my young friend...'

'Monsieur Dimitri,' Emil interrupted in a plaintive voice, 'why do you
address me so formally?'

Sanin laughed. 'Oh, very well. Listen, my dearest boy--(Emil gave a little
skip of delight)--listen; _there_ you understand, there, you will
say, that everything shall be done exactly as is wished--(Emil
compressed his lips and nodded solemnly)--and as for me ... what
are you doing to-morrow, my dear boy?'

'I? what am I doing? What would you like me to do?'
'If you can, come to me early in the morning--and we will walk about the
country round Frankfort till evening.... Would you like to?'
Emil gave another little skip. 'I say, what in the world could be jollier?
Go a walk with you--why, it's simply glorious! I'll be sure to come!'
'And if they won't let you?'
'They will let me!'

'Listen ... Don't say _there_ that I asked you to come for the whole day.'

'Why should I?

But I'll get away all the same! What does it matter?'
Emil warmly kissed Sanin, and ran away.

Sanin walked up and down the room a long while, and went late to bed.
"A girl, a little lady like you--a messenger, and
all alone with a clumsy fellow like me. No, no, no!"

"And again no, and a hundred times over no!" cried the child merrily.
"The little lady will stop at home and you will take a boy with you--a
boy called Marius, not Mary."

"A boy! But I thought.--It is enough to puzzle one. . . ."

"A boy who is a girl and a boy in one," laughed Mary. "But if you must
have it in plain words: I shall dress up as a boy to go with you;
to-morrow when we set out you will see, you will take me for my own
brother."

"Your own brother! With a little face like yours! Then the most
impossible things will become possible," cried Rustem laughing, and he
looked down good humoredly at the little girl. But suddenly the
preposterousness of her scheme rose again before his mind, and he
exclaimed half-frantically: "But then my master!--It will not do--It will
never do!"

"It is for his sake that you will do us this service," said Mary
confidently. "He is Paula's friend and protector; and when he hears what
you have done for her he will praise you, while if you leave us in the
lurch I am quite sure . . . "

"Well?"

"That he will say: 'I thought Rustem was a shrewder man and had a better
heart.'"

"You really think he will say that?"

"As surely as our house stands before us!--Well, we have no time for any
more discussion, so it is settled: we start together. Let me find you in
the garden early to-morrow morning. You must tell your Mandane that you
are called away by important business."

"And Dame Joanna?" asked the Persian, and his voice was grave and anxious
as he went on: "The thing I like least, child, is that you should not ask
her, and take her into your confidence."

"But she will hear all about it, only not immediately," replied Mary.
"And the day after to-morrow, when she knows what I have gone off for and
that you are with me, she will praise us and bless us; yes, she will, as
surely as I hope that the Almighty will succor us in our journey!"

At these words, which evidently came from the very depths of her heart,
the Masdakite's resistance altogether gave way--just in time, for their
walk was at an end, and they both felt as though the long distance had
been covered by quite a few steps. They had passed close to several
groups of noisy and quarrelsome citizens, and many a funeral train had
borne the plague-stricken dead to the grave by torchlight under their
very eyes, but they had heeded none of these things.

It was not till they reached the garden-gate that they observed what was
going on around them. There they found the gardener and all the
household, anxiously watching for the return of their belated mistress.
Eudoxia too was waiting for them with some alarm. In the house they were
met by Horapollo, but Joanna and Pulcheria returned his greeting with a
cold bow, while Mary purposely turned her back on him. The old man
shrugged his shoulders with regretful annoyance, and in the solitude of
his own room he muttered to himself:

"Oh, that woman! She will be the ruin even of the peaceful days I hoped
to enjoy during the short remainder of my life!"

The widow and her daughter for some time sat talking of Mary. She had bid
them good-night as devotedly and tenderly as though they were parting for
life. Poor child! She had forebodings of the terrible fate to which the
bishop, and perhaps her own mother had predestined her.

But Mary did not look as if she were going to meet misfortune; Eudoxia,
who slept by her side, was rejoiced on the contrary at seeing her so gay;
only she was surprised to see the child, who usually fell asleep as soon
as her little head was on the pillow, lying awake so long this evening.
The elderly Greek, who suffered from a variety of little ailments and
always went to sleep late, could not help watching the little girl's
movements.

What was that? Between midnight and dawn Mary sprang from her bed, threw
on her clothes, and stole into the next room with the night-lamp in her
hand. Presently a brighter light shone through the door-way. She must
have lighted a lamp,-and presently, hearing the door of the sitting-room
opened, Eudoxia rose and noiselessly watched her. Mary immediately
returned, carrying a boy's clothes--a suit, in point of fact, which
Pulcheria and Eudoxia had lately been making as a Sunday garb--for the
lame gardener's boy. The child smilingly tried on the little blue tunic;
then, after tossing the clothes into a chest, she sat down at the table
to write. But she seemed to have set herself some hard task; for now she
looked down at the papyrus and rubbed her forehead, and now she gazed
thoughtfully into vacancy. She had written a few sentences when she
started up, called Eudoxia by name, and went towards the sleeping-room.

Eudoxia went forward to meet her; Mary threw herself into her arms, and
before her governess could ask any questions she told her that she had
been chosen to accomplish a great and important action. She had been
intending to wake her, to make her her confidant and to ask her advice.

How sweet and genuine it all sounded, and how charmingly confused she
seemed in spite of the ardent zeal that inspired her!

Eudoxia's heart went forth to her; the words of reproof died on her lips,
and for the first time she felt as though the orphaned child were her
own; as though their joy and grief were one; as though she, who all her
life long had thought only of herself and her own advantage, and who had
regarded her care of Mary as a mere return in kind for a salary and home,
were ready and willing to sacrifice herself and her last coin for this
child. So, when the little girl now threw her arms round Eudoxia's neck,
imploring her not to betray her, but, on the contrary, to help her in the
good work which aimed at nothing less than the rescue of Paula and
Orion-the imperilled victims of Fate, her dry eyes sparkled through
tears; she kissed Mary's burning cheeks once more and called her her own
dear, dear little daughter. This gave the child courage; with tragical
dignity, which brought a smile to the governess' lips, she took Eudoxia's
bible from the desk, and said, fixing her beseeching gaze on the Greek's
face:

"Swear!--nay, you must be quite grave, for nothing can be more
solemn--swear not to tell a soul, not even Mother Joanna, what I want to
confess to you."

Eudoxia promised, but she would take no oath. "Yea, yea, and nay, nay,"
was the oath of the Christian by the law of the Lord; but Mary clung to
her, stroked her thin cheeks, and at last declared she could not say a
word unless Eudoxia yielded. In such an hour the Greek could not resist
this tender coaxing; she allowed Mary to take possession of her hand and
lay it on the Bible; and when once this was done Eudoxia gave way, and
with much head shaking repeated the oath that her pupil dictated, though
much against her will.

After this the governess threw herself on the divan, as if exhausted and
shocked at her own weakness; and the little girl took advantage of her
victory, seating herself at her feet, and telling her all she knew about
Paula and the perils that threatened her and Orion; and she was artful
enough to give special prominence to Orion's danger, having long since
observed how high he stood in Eudoxia's good graces. So far Eudoxia had
not ceased stroking her hair, while she assented to everything that was
said; but when she heard that Mary proposed to undertake the embassy to
Amru herself, she started to her feet in horror, and declared most
positively that she would never, never consent to such rashness, to such
fatal folly.

Mary now brought to bear her utmost resources of persuasion and flattery.
There was no other fit messenger to be found, and the lives of Orion and
Paula were at stake. Was a ride across the mountains such a tremendous
matter after all? How well she knew how to manage a beast, and how little
she suffered from the heat! Had she not ridden more than once from
Memphis to their estates by the seaboard? And faithful Rustem would be
always with her, and the road over the mountains was the safest in all
the country, with frequent stations for the accommodation of travellers.
Then, if they found Amru, she could give a more complete report than any
other living soul.

But Eudoxia was not to be shaken; though she admitted that Mary's project
was not so entirely crazy as it had at first appeared.

At this the little girl began again; after reminding Eudoxia once more of
her oath, she went on to tell her of the doom she herself hoped to escape
by setting out on her errand. She told Eudoxia of her meeting with the
bishop, and that even Joanna was uneasy as to her future fate. Ah! that
life within walls under lock and key seemed to her so frightful--and she
pictured her terrors, her love of freedom and of a busy, useful, active
life among men and her friends, and her hope that the great general,
Amru, would defend her against every one if once she could place herself
under his protection--painting it all so vividly, so passionately, and so
pathetically, that the governess was softened.

She clasped her hands over her eyes, which were streaming with tears, and
exclaimed: "It is horrible, unheard-of--still, perhaps it is the best
thing to do. Well, go to meet the governor,--ride off, ride off!"

And when the sweet, warm-hearted, joyous creature clang round her neck
she was glad of her own weakness: this fair, fresh, and blooming bud of
humanity should not pine in confinement and seclusion; she should find
and give happiness, to her own joy and that of all good souls, and unfold
to a full and perfect flower. And Eudoxia knew the widow well; she knew
that Joanna would by-and-bye understand why she helped the child to
escape the greatest peril that can hang over a human soul: that of living
in perpetual conflict with itself in the effort to become something
totally different from what, by natural gifts and inclinations, it is
intended to be.

With a sigh of anguish Eudoxia reflected what she herself, forced by
cruel fate and lacking freedom and pleasurable ease, had become, from an
ardent and generous young creature; and she, the narrow-hearted teacher,
could make allowances for the strange, adventurous yearning of a child,
where a larger souled woman might have derided, and blamed and repressed
it.

When it was daylight Eudoxia fulfilled the offices she commonly left to
the maid: she arranged Mary's hair, talking to her and listening the
while, as though in this night the child had developed into a woman. Then
she went into the garden with her, and hardly let her out of her sight.

At breakfast Joanna and Pulcheria wondered at her singular behavior, but
it did not displease them, and Marv was radiant with contentment.

The widow made no objection to allowing the child to go into the city to
execute her uncle's mysterious commission. Rustem was with her; and
whatever it was that made the child so happy must certainly be right and
unobjectionable. Orion's maps and lists were sent to the prison early in
the day, and before the child set out with her stalwart escort Gibbus had
returned with the prisoner's letter to the Arab governor.

On their way it was agreed that Mary should join Rustem at dusk at the
riverside inn of Nesptah. In these clays of famine and death beasts of
burthen of every description were easily procurable, as well as
attendants and guides; and the Masdakite, who was experienced in such
matters, thought it best to purchase none but swift dromedaries and to
carry only a light tent for the "little mistress!"

At the door of Gamaliel's shop Mary bid him wait; the jovial goldsmith
welcomed her with genuine pleasure. . . .

What had befallen the house of the Mukaukas! Fire had destroyed the
dwelling-place of justice, like the Egyptian cities to whom the prophet
had announced a similar fate a thousand years since.

Gamaliel knew in what peril Orion stood, and the fate that hung over the
noble maiden who had once given him the costliest of gems, and afterwards
entrusted to him a portion of her fortune.

To see any member of his patron's family alive and well rejoiced his
heart. He asked Mary one sympathizing question after another, and his
wife wanted to give her some of her good apricot tarts; but the little
girl begged Gamaliel to grant her at once a private interview, so the
jeweller led her into his little work-shop, bidding her trust him
entirely, for whatever a grandchild of Mukaukas George might ask of him
it was granted beforehand.

Blushing with confusion she took Orion's ring out of its wrapper, offered
it to the Jew, and desired him to give her whatever was right.

She looked enquiringly into his face with her bright eyes, in full
confidence that the kind-hearted man would at once pay her down gold
coins and to spare; but he did not even take the ring out of her hand. He
merely glanced at it, and said gravely:

"Nay, my little maid, we do not do business with children."

"But I want the money, Gamaliel," she urged. "I must have it."

"Must?" he repeated with a smile. "Well, must is a nail that drives
through wood, no doubt; but if it hits iron it is apt to bend. Not that I
am so hard as that; but money, money, money! And whose money do you mean,
little maid? If you want money of mine to spend in bread, or in cakes,
which is more likely, I will shut my eyes and put my hand boldly into my
wallet; but, if I am not mistaken, you are well provided for by Rufinus
the Greek, in whose house there is no lack of anything; and I have a nice
round sum in my own keeping which your grandfather placed in my hands at
interest two years since, with a remark that it was a legacy to you from
your godmother, and the papers stand in your name; so your necessity
looks very like what other folks would call ease."

"Necessity! I am in no necessity," Mary broke in. "But I want the money
all the same; and if I have some of my own, and you perhaps have it there
in your box, give me as much of it as I want."

"As much as you want?" laughed the jeweller. "Not so fast, little maid.
Before such matters can be settled here in Egypt we must have plenty of
time, and papyrus and ink, a grand law court, sixteen witnesses, a
Kyrios. . ."

"Well then, buy the ring! You are such a good, kind man Gamaliel. Just to
please me. Why, you yourself do not really think that I want to buy
cakes!"

"No. But in these hard times, when so many are starving, a soft heart may
be moved to other follies."

"No indeed! Do buy the ring; and if you will do me this favor. . ."

"Old Gamaliel will be both a rogue and a simpleton!--Have you forgotten
the emerald? I bought that, and a pretty piece of business that was! I
can have nothing to say to the ring, my little maid." Mary withdrew her
hand, and the grief and disappointment expressed by her large, tearful
eyes were so bitter and touching, that the Jew paused, and then went on
seriously and heartily:

"I would sooner give my own old head to be an anvil than distress you,
sweet child; and Adonai! I do not mean to say--why should I--that you
should ever leave old Gamaliel without money. He has plenty, and though
he is always ready to take, he is ready to give, too, when it is meet and
fitting. I cannot buy the ring, to be sure, but do not be down-hearted
and look me well in the face, little maid. It is much to ask, and I have
handsomer things in my stores, but if you see anything in it that gives
you confidence, speak out and whisper to the man of whom even your
grandfather had some good opinion: 'I want so much, and what is more--how
did you put it?--what is more, I must have it.'"

Mary did see something in the Jew's merry round face that inspired her
with trust, and in her childlike belief in the sanctity of an oath she
made a third person--a believer too, in a third form of religion--swear
not to betray her secret, only marvelling that the administering of the
oath, in which she had now had some practice, should be so easy. Even
grown-up people will sometimes buy another's dearest secret for a light
asseveration. And when she had thus ensured the Israelite's silence, she
confided to him that she was charged by Orion to send out a messenger to
meet Amru, that he and Paula might be reprieved in time. The goldsmith
listened attentively, and even before she had ended he was busying
himself with an iron chest built into the wall, and interrupted her to
ask! "How much?"

She named the sum that Nilus had suggested, and hardly had she finished
her story when the Jew, who kept the trick by which he opened the chest a
secret even from his wife, exclaimed:

"Now, go and look out of the window, you wonder among envoys and
money-borrowers, and if you see nothing in the courtyard, then fancy to
yourself that a man is standing there who looks like old Gamaliel, and
who puts his hand on your head and gives you a good kiss. And you may
fancy him, too, as saying to himself: 'God in Heaven! if only my little
daughter, my Ruth may be such another as little Mary, grandchild of the
just Mukaukas!'"

And as he spoke, the vivacious but stout man, who had dropped on his
knees, rose panting, left the lid of his strong box open, hurried up to
the child, who had been standing at the window all the while, and bending
over her from behind pressed a kiss on her curly head, saying with a
laugh: "There, little pickpocket, that is my interest. But look out
still, till I call you again." He nimbly trotted back on his short little
legs, wiping his eyes; took from the strong box a little bag of gold,
which contained rather more than the desired sum, locked the chest again,
looking at Mary with a mixture of suspicion and hearty approbation; then
at last he called her to him. He emptied the money-bag before her,
counted out the sum she needed, put the remainder of the coins into his
girdle, and handed the bag to the little girl requesting her to count his
"advance", back into it, while he, with a cunning smile, quitted the
room.

He presently returned and she had finished her task, but she timidly
observed: "One gold piece is wanting." At this he clasped his hands over
his breast and raised his eyes to Heaven exclaiming: "My God! what a
child. There is the solidus, child; and you may take my word for it as a
man of experience: whatever you undertake will prosper. You know what you
are about; and when you are grown up and a suitor comes he will go to a
good market. And now sign your name here. You are not of age, to be sure,
and the receipt is worth no more than any other note scribbled with
ink--however, it is according to rule."

Mary took the pen, but she first hastily glanced through what Gamaliel
had written; the Jew broke out in fresh enthusiasm:

"A girl--a mere child! And she reads, and considers, and makes all sure
before she will sign! God bless thee, Child!--And here come the tarts,
and you can taste them before. . . . Just Heaven! a mere child, and such
important business!"


THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 12.


CHAPTER XXI.

While Rustem, to whom Mary had entrusted the jeweller's gold, was making
his preparations for their journey with all the care of a practised
guide, and while Mary was comforting her governess and Mandane, to whom
she explained that Rustem's journey was to save Paula's life, a fresh
trial was going forward in the Court of Justice.

This time Orion was the accused. He had scarcely begun to study the maps
and lists he required for his undertaking when he was bidden to appear
before his judges.

The members composing the Court were the same as yesterday. Among the
witnesses were Paula and the new bishop, as well as Gamaliel, who had
been sent for soon after Mary had left him.

The prosecutor accused the son of the Mukaukas of having made away, in
defiance of the patriarch's injunction, with a costly emerald bequeathed
to the Church by his father.

Orion had determined to conduct his own defence; he recapitulated
everything that he had told the prelate in self-justification in his
father's private room, and then added, that to put a speedy end to this
odious affair he was now prepared to restore the stone, and he placed it
at the disposal of his judges. He handed Paula's emerald to the Kadi who
presented it to the bishop. John, however, did not seem satisfied; he
referred to the written testimony of the widow Susannah, who had been
present when the deceased Mukaukas had designated all the jewels in the
Persian hanging as included in his gift to the Church. This was in
Orion's presence so he was still under suspicion of a fraud; and it was
difficult to determine whether the fine gem now lying on the table before
them were indeed the same to which the Church laid claim.

All this was urged with excessive vehemence and bore the stamp of a
hostile purpose.

Obedience and conviction alike prompted the zealous prelate to this
demeanor, for the same carrier-pigeon which had brought from the
patriarch his appointment to the bishopric required him to insist on
Orion's punishment, for he was a thorn in the flesh of the Jacobite
church, a tainted sheep who might infect the rest of the flock. If the
young man should offer an emerald it was therefore to be closely
examined, to see whether it were the original stone or a substitute.

On these grounds the bishop had expressed his doubts, and though they
gave rise to an indignant murmur among the judges, the Kadi so far
admitted the prelate's suspicions as to explain that last evening a
letter had reached him from his uncle at Djidda, Haschim the merchant, in
which mention was made of the emerald. His son happened to have weighed
that stone, without his knowledge, before he started for Egypt, and
Othman had here a note of its exact weight. The Jew Gamaliel had been
desired to attend with his balances, and could at once use them to
satisfy the bishop.

The jeweller immediately proceeded to do so, and old Horapollo, who was
an expert in such matters, went close up to him, and watched him
narrowly.

It was in feverish anxiety, and more eagerly than any other bystander,
that Paula and Orion kept their eyes fixed on the Jew's hands and lips;
after weighing it once, he did so a second time. Old Horapollo himself
weighed it a third time, with a keen eye though his hands trembled a
little; all three experiments gave the same result: this gem was heavier
by a few grains of doura than that which the merchant's son had weighed,
and yet the Jew declared that there was no purer, clearer, or finer
emerald in the world than this.

Orion breathed more freely, and the question arose among the judges as to
whether the young Arab might have failed in precision, or an exchange had
in fact been effected. This was difficult to imagine, since in that case
the accused would have given himself the loss, and the Church the
advantage.

The bishop, an honest man, now said that the patriarch's suspicions had
certainly led him too far in this instance, and after this he spoke no
more.

All through this enquiry the Vekeel had kept silence, but the defiant
gaze, assured of triumph, which he fixed on Paula and Orion alternately,
augured the worst.

When the prosecutor next accused the young man of complicity in the much
discussed escape of the nuns Orion again asserted his innocence, pointing
out that during the fatal contest between the Arabs and the champions of
the sisters, he had been with the Arab governor, as Amru himself could
testify. By an act of unparalleled despotism, he had been deprived of his
estates and his freedom on mere false suspicion, and he put his trust in
the first instance in a just sentence from his judges and, failing that,
he threw himself on the protection and satisfaction of his sovereign lord
the Khaliff.

As he spoke his eyes flashed flames at the Vekeel; but the negro still
preserved his self-control, and this doubled the alarm of those who
wished the youth well.

It was clear from all this that Obada felt sure that he had the noose
well around his victim's neck, and why he thought so, soon became
evident; for Orion had hardly finished his defence when he rose, and with
a malicious grin, handed to the Kadi the little tablet given him
yesterday by old Horapollo, describing it as a document addressed to
Paula and desiring the Kadi to examine it. The heat had effaced much of
what had been written on the wax, but most of the words could still be
deciphered. The venerable Horapollo had already made them out, and was
quite ready to read to the judges all that the accused--who by his own
account, was a spotless dove--had written in his innocence and
truthfulness for his fair one. He signed to the old man and helped him as
he rose with difficulty, but the Kadi begged him to wait, made himself
acquainted with the contents of the letter by the help of the
interpreter, and when the man had, with much pains, fulfilled his task,
he turned, not to Horapollo, but to Obada, and asked whence this document
had come.

"From Paula's desk," replied the Vekeel. "My old friend found it there."
He pointed to Horapollo, who confirmed his statement by a nod of assent.

The Kadi rose, went up to the girl, whose cheeks were pale with
indignation, and asked whether she recognized the tablets as her
property; Paula, after convincing herself, replied with a flaming glance
of scorn and aversion at Horapollo: "Yes, my lord. It is mine. That base
old man has taken it with atrocious meanness from among my things." For
an instant her voice failed her; then, turning to the judges, she
exclaimed:

"If there is one among you to whom helplessness and innocence are sacred
and malice and cunning odious, I beg him to go to Rufinus' wife, over
whose threshold this man has crept like a ferret into a dovecote, for no
other end but to tread hospitable kindness in the dust, to rifle her home
and make use of whatever might serve his vile purpose--to go, I say, and
warn the lonely woman against this treacherous spy and thief."

At this the old man, gasping and inarticulate, raised his withered arm;
the Christian judges whispered together, but at cross-purposes, while the
Jew fidgeted his round little person on the bench, drumming incessantly
with his fingers on his breast, and trying to meet Orion's or Paula's eye
and to make her understand that he was the man who would warn Joanna. But
a thump from the Vekeel's fist, that came down on his shoulder unawares,
reduced him to sitting still; and while he sat rubbing the place with
subdued sounds of pain, not daring to reproach the all-powerful negro for
his violence, the Kadi gave the tablets to Horapollo and bid him read the
letter.

But the terrible accusation cast at him by the hated Patrician maiden,
ascribing his removal to Rufinus house to a motive which, in truth, had
been far from his, had so enraged and agitated him that his old lungs, at
all times feeble, refused their office. This woman had done him a fresh
wrong, for he had gone to live with the widow from the kindest impulse;
only an accident had thrown this document in his way. And yet it would
not fail to be reported to Joanna in the course of the day that he had
gone to her house as a spy, and there would be an end to the pleasant
life of which he had dreamed--nay, even Philippus might perhaps quarrel
with him.

And all, all through this woman.

He could not utter a word but, as he sank back on the seat, a glance so
full of hatred, so dark with malignant fury, fell on Paula that she
shuddered, and told herself that this man was ready to die himself if
only he could drag her down too.

The interpreter now began to read Orion's letter and to translate it for
the Arabs; and while he blundered through it, declaring that not a letter
could be plainly made out, she recovered her self-control and, before the
interpreter had done his task, a gleam as of sunshine lighted up her pure
features. Some great, lofty, and rapturous thought must have flashed
through her brain, and it was evident that she had seized it and was
feeding on it.

Orion, sitting opposite to her, noticed this; still, he did not
understand what her beseeching gaze had to say to him, what it asked of
him as she pressed her hand on her breast, and looked into his eyes with
such urgent entreaty that it went to his very heart.

The interpreter ceased; but what he had read had had a great effect on
the judges. The Kadi's benevolent face expressed extreme apprehension,
and the contents of the letter were indeed such as to cause it. It ran as
follows:

"After waiting for you a long time in vain, I must at last make up my
mind to go; and how much I still had to say to you. A written farewell."

Here a few lines were effaced, and then came the--fatal and quite legible
conclusion:

"How far otherwise I had dreamed of ending this day, which has been for
the most part spent in preparations for the flight of the Sisters; and I
have found a pleasure in doing all that lay in my power for those kind
and innocent, unjustly persecuted nuns. We must hope for the best for
them; and for ourselves we must look to-morrow for an undisturbed
interview and a parting which may leave us memories on which we can live
for a long time. The noble governor Amru is, among the Arabs, such
another as he whom we mourn was among the Egyptians . . ." Here the
letter ended; not quite three lines were wanting to conclude it.

The Kadi held the tablets for a few minutes in his hand; then looking up
again at the assembly, who were waiting in great suspense, he began:
"Even if the accused was not one of those who raised their hands in
mutiny against our armed troops, it is nevertheless indisputable, after
what has just been read, that he not only knew of the escape of the nuns,
but aided them to the utmost.--When did you receive this communication,
noble maiden?"

At this Paula clasped her hands tightly and replied with a slightly bent
head and her eyes fixed on the ground.

"When did I receive it?--Never; for I wrote it myself. The writing is
mine."

"Yours?" said the Kadi in amazement. "It is from me to Orion," replied
Paula.

"From you to him? How then comes it in your desk?"

"In a very simple way," she explained, still looking down. "After writing
the letter to my betrothed I threw it in with the other tablets as soon
as I had no need for it; for he himself came, and there was no necessity
for his reading what could be better said by word of mouth."

As she spoke a peculiar smile passed over her lips and a loud murmur ran
through the room. Orion looked first at the girl and then at the Kadi in
growing bewilderment; but the Negro started up, struck his fist on the
table, making it shake, and roared out:

"An atrocious fabrication! Which of you can allow yourself to be taken in
by a woman's guile?" Horapollo, who had recovered himself by this time,
laughed hoarsely and maliciously; the judges looked at each other much
puzzled; but when the Vekeel went on raging the Kadi interrupted him, and
desired that Orion might speak, for he had twice tried to make himself
heard. Now, with scarlet cheeks and a choking utterance, he said:

"No, Othman--no, no indeed, my lords. Do not believe her. Not she, but
I--I wrote the letter that. . . ."

But Paula broke in:

"He? Do you not feel that all he wants is to save me, and so he takes my
guilt on himself? It is his generosity, his love for me! Do not, do not
believe him! Do not allow yourselves to be deceived by him."

"I? No, it is she, it is she," Orion again asserted; but, before he could
say more, Paula declared with a flashing glance that it was a poor sort
of love which sacrificed itself out of false generosity. And as, at the
same time, she again pressed her hand to her bosom with pathetic
entreaty, he was suddenly silent, and casting his eyes up to heaven, he
sank back on the prisoners' bench, deeply affected.

Paula joyfully went on:

"He has thought better of it, and given up his crazy attempt to take my
guilt on himself. You see, Othman, you all see, worthy men.--Let me atone
for what I did to help the poor nuns."

"Have your way!" shrieked the old man; but the Negro cried out:

"A hellish tissue of lies, an unheard-of deception! But in spite of the
shield a woman holds before you, I have my foot on your neck, treacherous
wretch! Is it credible--I ask you, judges--that a finished letter should
be found, after weeks had elapsed, in the hands of the writer and not
those of the person to whom it was addressed?"

The Kadi shrugged his shoulders and replied with calm dignity:

"Consider, Obada, that we are condemning this damsel on the evidence of a
letter which was found in possession, not of the person to whom it was
addressed, but of the writer. This document gave rise to no doubts in
your mind. The judge should mete out equal measure to all, Obada."

The aptness of these words, spoken in a dogmatic tone, aroused the
approval of the Arabs, and the Jew could not restrain himself from
exclaiming: "Capital!" but no sooner had it escaped him than he shrank as
quick as lightning out of the Vekeel's reach; and Obada hardly heard him,
for he did not allow himself to be interrupted by the Kadi but went on to
explain in wrathful words what a disgrace it was to them, as men and
judges, to have dust cast in their eyes by a woman, and allow themselves
to be molified by the arts of a pair of love-stricken fools; and how
desirable it must be in the eyes of every Moslem to guard the security of
life and bring the severest punishment on the instigator of a sanguinary
revolt against the champions of the Khaliff's power.

His eloquent and stormy address was not without effect; still, the
Christians, who ascribed every form of evil to the Melchite girl, would
have been satisfied with her death and have been ready to forgive the son
of the Mukaukas this crime--supposing him to have committed it. And it
was after the judges had agreed that it was impossible to decide by whom
the letter on the tablet had been written, and there had been a great
deal of argument on both sides, that the real discussion began.

It was long before the assembly could agree, and all the while Orion sat
now looking as though he had already been condemned to a cruel death, and
now exchanging glances with Paula, while he pressed his hand to his heart
as though to keep it from bursting. He perfectly understood her, and her
magnanimity upheld him. He had indeed persuaded himself to accept her
self-sacrifice, but he was fully determined that if she must die he would
follow her to the grave. "Non dolet,"--[It does not hurt]--Arria cried to
her lover Paetus, as she thrust the knife into her heart that she might
die before him; and the words rang in his ear; but he said to himself
that Paula would very likely be pardoned, and that then he would be free
and have a whole lifetime in which to thank her.

At last--at last. The Kadi announced the verdict: It was impossible to
find Orion worthy of death, and equally so to give up all belief in his
guilt; the court therefore declared itself inadequate to pronounce a
sentence, and left it to be decided by the Khaliff or by his
representative in Egypt, Amru. The court only went so far as to rule that
the prisoner was to be kept in close confinement, so that he might be
within reach of the hand of justice, if the supreme decision should be
"guilty!"

When the Kadi said that the matter was to be referred to the Khaliff or
his representative, the Vekeel cried out:

"I--I am Omar's vicar!" but a disapproving murmur from the judges, as
with one voice, rejected his pretensions, and at a proposal of the Kadi
it was resolved that the young man should be protected against any
arbitrary attack on the part of the Vekeel by a double guard; for many
grave accusations against Obada were already on their way to Medina. The
negro quitted the court, mad with rage, and concocting fresh indictments
against Paula with the old man.

When Paula returned to her cell old Betta thought that she must have been
pardoned; for how glad, how proud, how full of spirit she entered it! The
worst peril was diverted from her lover, and she and her love had saved
him!

She gave herself up for lost; but whatever fate might have in store for
her, life lay open before him; he would have time to prove his splendid
powers, and that he would do so, as she would have him do it, she felt
certain.

She had not ended telling her nurse of the judges' decision, when the
warder announced the Kadi. In a minute or two he made his appearance; she
expressed her thanks, and he warmly assured her that he regarded the
disgrace of being perhaps a beguiled judge as a favor of Fortune; then he
turned the conversation on the real object of his visit.

In the letter, he began, which he had received the evening before from
his uncle Haschim, there was a great deal about her. She had quite won
the old merchant's heart, and the enquiries for her father which he had
set on foot. . . .

Here she interrupted him saying: "Oh, my lord; is the wish, the prayer of
my life to be granted?"

"Your father, the noble Thomas, before whom even the Moslem bows, has
been . . . " and then Othman went on to tell her that the hero of
Damascus had in fact retired to Sinai and had been living there as a
hermit. But she must not indulge in premature rejoicing, for the
messengers had found him ill, consumed by disease arising from his
wounded lungs, and almost at death's door. His days were numbered. . . .

"And I, I am a prisoner," groaned the girl. "Held fast, helpless, robbed
of all means of flying to his arms!"

He again bid her be calm, and went on to tell her: in his soft, composed
manner, that two days since a Nabathaean had come to him and had asked
him, as the chief administrator of justice in Egypt, whether an old foe
of the Moslems, a general who had fought in the service of the emperor
and the cross against the Khaliff and the crescent, and who was now sick,
weary, and broken, might venture on Egyptian soil without fear of being
seized by the Arab authorities; and when he, Othman, had learnt that this
man was no other than Thomas, the hero of Damascus, he had promised him
his life and freedom, promised them gladly, as he felt assured his
sovereign the Khaliff would desire.

So this very day her father had reached Fostat, and the Kadi had received
him as a guest into his house. Thomas, indeed, stood on the brink of the
grave; but he was inspirited and sustained by the hope of seeing his
daughter. It had been falsely reported to him that she had perished in
the massacre at Abyla and he had already mourned her fate.

It was now his duty to fulfil the wish of a dying man, and he had ordered
the prison servants to prepare the room adjoining Paula's cell with
furniture which was on the way from his house. The door between the two
would be opened for her.

"And I shall see him again, have him again to live with--to close his
eyes, perhaps to die with him!" cried Paula; and, seizing the good man's
hand, she kissed it gratefully.

The Moslem's eyes filled with tears as he bid her not to thank him, but
God the All-merciful; and before the sun went down the head of the doomed
daughter was resting on the breast of the weary hero who was so near his
end, though his unimpaired mind and tender heart rejoiced in their
reunion as fully and deeply as did his beloved and only child. A new and
unutterable joy came to Paula in the gloom of her prison; and that same
day the warder carried a letter from her to Orion, conveying her father's
greetings; and, as he read the fervent blessing, he felt as though an
invisible hand had released him for ever from the curse his own father
had laid upon him. A wonderful glad sense of peace came over him with
power and pleasure in work, and he gave his brains and pen no rest till
morning was growing grey.


CHAPTER XXII.

Horapollo made his way home to his new quarters from the court of justice
with knit and gloomy brows. As he passed Susannah's garden hedge he saw a
knot of people gathered together and pointing out furtively to the
handsome residence beyond.

They, like a hundred other groups he had passed, hailed him with words of
welcome, thanks, and encouragement and, as he bowed to them slightly, his
eyes followed the direction of their terrified gaze and he started; above
the great garden gates hung the black tablet; a warning that looked like
a mark of disgrace, crying out to the passer-by: "Avoid this threshold!
Here rages the destroying pestilence!"

The old man had a horror of everything that might remind him of death,
and a cold shiver ran through him. To live so near to a focus of the
disease was most alarming and dangerous! How had it invaded this, the
healthiest part of the town, which the last raging epidemic had spared?

An officer of the town-council, whom he called to him, told him that two
slaves, father and son, whose duty it was to take charge of the baths in
the widow's house, had been first attacked, but they had been carried
quietly away in the night to the new tents for the sick; to-day, however,
the widow herself had fallen ill. To prevent the spread of the infection,
the plot of ground was now guarded on all sides.

"Be strict, be sharp; not a rat must creep out!" cried the old man as he
rode on.

He was later than he had been yesterday; supper must be ready. After a
short rest he was preparing to join the family at their meal, washing and
dressing with the help of his servant, when a lame slave-girl came into
his room and placed a tray covered with steaming dishes on the low table
by the divan.

What was the meaning of this? Before he could ask, he was informed that
for the future the women wished to eat by themselves; he would be served
in his own room.

At this a bright patch of red colored his cheeks; after brief reflection
he cried to his servant. "My ass!" and added to the girl: "Where is your
mistress?"

"In the viridarium with Gamaliel the goldsmith; but they are going to
supper immediately."

"And without their guest? I understand!" muttered the old man, taking up
his hat and marching past the maid out of the room. In the hall he met
Gamaliel, to whom a slave-girl was handing his stick. Horapollo could
guess that the Jew had come only to warn the women against him and,
without vouchsafing him a glance, he went into the dining-room. There he
found Pulchena and Mary kneeling in tears by the side of Joanna, who was
weeping too.

He guessed for whom were these lamentations, and prompted by the wish to
prove the falsity of the accusation that charged him with having entered
the house as a spy, he spoke to the widow. She shuddered as he entered,
and she now pointed to the door with an outstretched finger; when he
nevertheless stood still and was about to make his defence, she
interrupted him loudly and urgently: "No, no, my lord! This house is
henceforth closed against you! You yourself have broken every tie that
bound us! Do not any longer disturb our peace! Go back to the place you
came from."

At this the old man made one more attempt to speak; but the widow rose,
and saying: "Come, my children," she hastily withdrew with the girls into
the adjoining room, and closed the door.

Horapollo was left alone on the threshold.

Old as he was, in all his life he had never suffered such an insult; but
he did not lay it to the score of those who had shown him the door, but
to the already long one of the Syrian girl; as he rode back to his own
home on his white ass, he stopped several times to speak to the
passers-by.

During the following day or two he heeded not the heat of the weather,
nor his own need of rest for his body, and quiet occupation for his mind;
morning, noon and night he was riding about the streets stirring up the
people, and setting forth in insinuating speeches that they must perish
miserably if they rejected the only means of deliverance which he had
pointed out to them. He was present at every meeting of the Senate, and
his inflammatory eloquence kept the town council on his side, and
nullified the efforts of the bishop, while he pressed them to fix the day
of the marriage of the Nile with his bride.

He knew the Egyptians and their passion for the intoxicating joys of a
splendid ceremonial. This festival: the wedding of the Bride of the Nile
to her mighty and unresting spouse, on whom the weal or woe of the land
depended, was to be as a flowery oasis in the waste of dearth and
desolation. He recalled every detail of the reminiscences of his
childhood as to the processions in Honor of Isis, and the festivals
dedicated to her and her triad; every record of his own experience and
that of former generations; all he had read in books of the great
pilgrimages and dramas of heathen Egypt--and he described it all in his
speeches, painted it in glowing colors to the Senate and the mob, and
counselled the authorities to reproduce it all with unparalleled splendor
on the occasion of this marriage.

Every man in whose veins flowed Egyptian blood listened to him
attentively, took pleasure in his projects, and was quite ready to do his
utmost to enhance the glories of this ceremonial, in which every one was
to take part either active or passive. Thousands were ruined, but there
was yet enough and to spare for this marriage feast, and the Senate did
not hesitate to raise a fresh loan.

"Destruction or Deliverance!" was the watch-word Horapollo had given the
Memphites. If everything came to ruin their hoarded talents would be lost
too; if, on the other hand, the sacrifice produced its result, if the
Nile should bless its children with renewed prosperity, what need the
town or country care for a few thousand drachmae more or less?

So the day was fixed!

Not quite two weeks after Paula's trial, on the day of Saint Serapis the
miraculous, saving, auspicious ceremonial was to take place. And how
glowing was the picture given of the Bride's beauty by the old man, and
by the judges and officials who had seen her! How brightly old
Horapollo's eyes would flash with hate as he described it! The eyes of
love could not be more radiant.

All that this patrician hussy had done to aggrieve him--she should
expiate it all, and his triumph meant woe, not only to that one woman,
but to the Christian faith which he hated!

Bishop John, however, had not been idle meanwhile. Immediately after his
interference with the popular vote he had despatched a letter by a
carrier-pigeon to the patriarch in Upper Egypt, and Benjamin's reply
would no doubt give him powers for still more vigorous measures. In
church, before the Senate, and even in the highways, he and his clergy
did their utmost to combat the atrocious project of the authorities and
the populace, but the zeal which was stirred up by old Horapollo soon
broke into brighter flames than the conservatism, orthodoxy and breadth
of view which the ecclesiastics did their utmost to fan. The wind blew
with equal force from both quarters, but on one side it blew on
smoldering fuel, and on the other on overflowing and flaming stores.
Famine and despair had undermined faith, and weakened discipline; even
the mightiest weapons of the Church--Cursing and blessing--were
powerless. A floating beam was held out to sinking men, and they would no
longer wait for the life-boat that was approaching to rescue them, with
strong hands at the oars and a trusty pilot at the helm.

Horapollo went no more to the widow's home. A few hours after she had
shown him the door, his slaves came and fetched away the various things
he had carried there with him. His body servant at the same time brought
a large sealed phial and a letter to Dame Joanna, as follows:

"It is wrong to judge a man without hearing his defence. This you have
done; but I owe you no grudge. Philippus, on his return, will perhaps
pick up the ends of the tie and join again what you have this day cut. I
send you a portion of the remedy he left with me at parting to use
against the plague in case of need. Its good effects have been tested
within the last few days. May the sickness which has fallen on your
neighbors, spare you and yours."

Joanna was much pleased with this letter but, when she had read it aloud,
little Mary exclaimed:

"If any one should fall ill he shall not take a drop of that mixture! I
tell you he only wants to poison us!"

Joanna, however, maintained that the old man was not bad hearted in spite
of his unaccountable hatred of Paula; and Pulcheria declared that it must
be so, if only because Philip esteemed him so highly. If only he were
here, everything would have been different and have turned out well.

Mary remained with the mother and daughter till it grew dark; her chatter
always led them back to Paula; and when, in the afternoon, the Nabathaean
messenger came to them, and told them from their captive friend that he
had brought her father home to her, the women once more began to hope,
and Mary could allow herself to give free expression to her fond love
before she quitted them, without exciting their suspicions.

At length she said she must go to her lessons with Eudoxia; she had a
hard task before her and they must think of her and wish her good
success. She threw her arms first round the widow's neck and then round
Pulcheria's; and, as the tears would start to her eyes, she asked them if
she were not indeed a silly childish thing--but they were to think of her
all the same and never to forget her.

She met the governess in her own room; Eudoxia cut off the fine, soft
curls, shedding her first tears over them; and those tears flowed faster
as she placed round Mary's neck a little reliquary containing a lock from
the sheep-skin of St. John the Baptist, which had belonged to her own
mother. It was very dear and sacred to her, and she had never before
parted from it, but now it was to protect the child and bring her
happiness--great happiness.

Had it brought her such happiness?--Not much, in truth; and yet she
believed in the saving and beneficent influence of the relic.

At last Mary stood before her with short hair and in a boy's dress; and
what a sweet and lovely little fellow it was; Eudoxia could not weary of
looking at him. But Mary was too pretty, too frail for a boy; and Eudoxia
advised her to pull her broad travelling hat low over her eyes as soon as
she came in sight of men, or else to darken her color.

Gamaliel, who had in fact come to warn Dame Joanna against Horapollo, had
kept them informed of the progress of this day's sitting, and Paula's
conduct to save her lover had increased Mary's admiration for her. When
she should confront Amru she could answer him on every head, so she felt
equipped at all points as she stole through the garden with Eudoxia, and
down to the quay.

When she had passed the gateway she once more kissed her hand to the
house she loved and its inmates; then, pointing with a sigh to the
neighboring garden, she said:

"Poor Katharina! she is a prisoner now.--Do you know, Eudoxia, I am still
very fond of her, and when I think that she may take the plague, and die
but no!--Tell Mother Joanna and Pulcheria to be kind to her. To-morrow,
after breakfast, give them my letter; and this evening, if they get
anxious, you can only quiet them by saying you know all and that it is of
no use to fret about me. You will set it all right and not allow them to
grieve."

As they passed a Jacobite chapel that stood open, she begged Eudoxia to
wait for her and fell on her knees before the crucifix. In a few minutes
she came out again, bright and invigorated and, as they passed the last
houses in the town, she exclaimed:

"Is it not wicked, Eudoxia? I am leaving those I love dearly, very
dearly, and yet I feel as glad as a bird escaping from its cage. Good
Heaven! Only to think of the ride by night through the desert and over
the hills, a swift beast under me, and over my head no ceiling but the
blue sky and countless stars! Onward and still onward to a glorious end,
left entirely to myself and entrusted with an important task like a
grownup person! Is it not splendid? And by God's help--and if I find the
governor and succeed in touching his heart. . . . Now, confess, Eudoxia,
can there be a happier girl in the whole wide world?"

They found the Masdakite at Nesptah's inn with some capital dromedaries
and the necessary drivers and attendants. The Greek governess gave her
pupil much good advice, and added her "maternal" blessing with her whole
heart. Rustem lifted the child on to the dromedary, carefully settling
her in the saddle, and the little caravan set out. Mary waved repeated
adieux to her old governess and newly-found friend, and Eudoxia was still
gazing after her long after she had vanished in the darkness.

Then she made her way home, at first weeping silently with bowed head,
but afterwards tearless, upright, and with a confident step. She was in
unusually good spirits, her heart beat higher than it had done for years;
she felt uplifted by the sense of relief from a burthensome duty, and of
freedom to act independently on the dictates of her own intelligence. She
would assert herself, she would show the others that she had acted
rightly; and when at supper-time Mary was missing, and had not returned
even at bed-time, there was much to do to soothe and comfort them, and
much misconstruction to endure; but she took it all patiently, and it was
a consolation to her to bear such annoyance for her little favorite.

Next morning, when she had delivered Mary's letter to Dame Joanna, her
love and endurance were put to still severer proof; indeed, the
meek-tempered widow allowed herself to be carried away to such an
outbreak as hitherto would undoubtedly have led Eudoxia to request her
dismissal, with sharp recrimination; but she took it all calmly.

It was not till noon-day--when the bishop made his appearance to carry
the child off to the convent, and was highly wrathful at Mary's
disappearance, threatening the widow, and declaring that he would search
the whole country through for the little girl and find her at last, that
Eudoxia felt that the moment of her triumph had come. She quietly allowed
the bishop to depart, and then only did she send her last and best shaft
at Joanna by informing her that she had in fact encouraged the child in
her exploit on purpose to save her from the cloister. Her newly-found
motherly feeling made her eloquent, and with a result that she had almost
ceased to hope for: the warm-hearted little woman, who had hurt her with
such cruel words, threw her arms round Eudoxia's tall, meagre figure, put
up her face to kiss her, called her a brave, clever girl, and begged her
forgiveness for all she had said and done the day before.

So, when the Greek went to bed, she felt as if her life had turned
backwards and she had grown more like the happy young creature she had
once been with her sisters in her parents' house.


CHAPTER XXIII.

Paula now understood what hung over her. It is Bishop John who had told
her, as gently as he could, and with every assurance that he still clung
to the hope that he could stop the hideous heathen abomination; but even
without this she would certainly have known what was impending, for large
crowds of people gathered every day under the prisonwalls, and loud cries
reached her, demanding to see the "Bride of the Nile."

Now and again shouts of "Hail!" came up to her; but when the demented
creatures had shrieked themselves hoarse, and in vain, they would abuse
her vilely. The cry for the "Bride" never ceased from morning till night,
and the head warder of the prison was glad that the bishop had relieved
him of the task of explaining to Paula the meaning of the fateful word,
whose significance she had repeatedly asked him.

At first this fresh and terrible peril had startled and shaken her; but
she did her utmost to cling to the hope held out by the bishop so as to
appear calm, and as far as possible cheerful, in her sick father's
presence. And in this she succeeded so long as it was day; but at night
she was a prey to agonizing terrors. Then, in fancy she saw herself
surrounded by a raging mob, dragged to the river and cast into a watery
grave before a thousand eyes. Then, prayer was of no avail, nor any
resolve or effort; not the tender messages that constantly reached her
from Orion, nor the songs he would sing for her in the brief moments of
leisure he allowed himself; not the bishop's words of comfort, nor the
visits of those she loved. The warder would admit her friends as often as
he was able; and among those who found their way to her cell were the
Senator Justinus and his wife.

By great good fortune Martina had quitted Susannah's house as soon as the
two slaves had fallen ill and she had heard that the physician pronounced
them to be sickening of the plague. She had returned to her rooms in the
inn kept by Sostratus, but her nephew Narses had remained with Katharina
and her mother. He was indeed intending to follow her with Heliodora;
but, by the time they were ready to set out, Susannah, too, had fallen a
victim to the pestilence and the authorities had forbidden all egress
from her house.

Heliodora might have succeeded in leaving in time, alone; but she would
not abandon her unfortunate brother-in-law; for he never felt easy but in
her presence, would allow no one else to wait on him, and would take
neither food nor drink unless they were offered him by her. Besides this,
the cavalry officer, once so stalwart, had in his weakness become
pathetically like her lost husband, and she knew that Narses had been the
first to love her, and that it was only for his brother's sake that he
had concealed his passion. Her motherly instincts found an outlet in the
care of the half-crushed, but not hopelessly lost man; and the desire to
drag him back to life kept her busy day and night, and made her regard
everything else as trivial and of secondary importance. Her life had once
more found a purpose; her efforts were for an attainable end, and she
devoted herself to him body and soul.

Her uncle had told her that Orion was bound to Paula by a supreme
passion.--This had been a painful blow, but the Syrian girl had impressed
her; she looked up to her, and it soothed her wounded self-esteem to
reflect that she had lost her lover to no inferior woman. Though her
longing for him still surged up in many a silent hour, she felt it an
injustice, a stint of love to her invalid charge.

So far as Katharina was concerned, next to her mother, Heliodora was the
object of her deepest anxiety. The least word of complaint from either
terrified her; and if Susannah sank on the divan exhausted by the heat,
or Heliodora had a headache after watching through the night by the sick
man, the girl would turn pale, her heart would beat painfully, she would
paint them in fancy stricken by the plague, with burning brows and the
horrible, fatal spots on their foreheads and cheeks; and whenever these
alarms pressed on the young criminal she felt the ominous weight on the
top of her head where the dead bishop's hand had rested.

The senator's wife had so completely changed in her demeanor to the
water-wagtail, since Paula's imprisonment, that to Katharina she was as a
living reproach, so she had no regret at seeing the worthy pair depart.
But scarcely had they left when misfortune took their place as an
unbidden guest.

The slave whose duty it was to heat the baths had reserved a portion of
the infected garments that had been given to him to burn; his son had
helped him, and Katharina's nurse, the mother of her foster-brother
Anubis, had come into direct contact with her immediately after her
return from the soothsayer's and from the bishop's. All three had caught
the disease. They had all three been removed to the hospital tents--the
slave and the nurse as corpses.

But had the fearful infection been taken away with them? If not, it would
be the turn next of those whom she herself had pushed into the arms of
the fell monster: First Heliodora, and then her mother! And she,
rightfully, ought to have fallen before them; and if the pestilence
should seize her and death should drag her down into the grave it would
be showing her mercy. She was still so young, and yet she hated life. It
had nothing in store for her but humiliation and disappointment, arrows
which, sent from the prison, pierced her to the heart, and a torturing
fear which never gave her any peace, day or night.

When the physician came to transport the sick to the hospital in the
desert, he mentioned incidentally that the judges had condemned Paula to
death, and that the populace and senate, in spite of the new bishop's
prohibition, had determined to cast her into the river in accordance with
an ancient custom. Orion's fate was not to be decided till the following
day; but it would hardly be to his advantage in the eyes of his Jacobite
judges, that his betrothed was this Syrian Melchite.

At this Katharina was forced to support herself against her mother's
arm-chair to save herself from sinking on her knees; with tingling cheeks
she questioned the leech till he lost all patience and turned away much
annoyed at such excessive feminine curiosity.

Yes! "The other" was his betrothed before all the world; but only to die!
The blood rushed through her veins in a hot tide at the thought; she
could have laughed aloud and fallen on the neck of every one she met.
What she felt was hideous; malignant spite possessed her; but it gave her
rapture--delicious rapture--a flower of hell, but with splendid petals
and intoxicating perfume. But its splendor dazzled her and its fragrance
presently sickened her. Sheer horror of herself came over her, and yet
she could have shouted with joy each time that the thought flashed
through her brain: "The other must die!"

Her mother feared that her daughter, too, was about to fall ill, her eyes
glowed so strangely and she was so restless and nervously excitable.

Since Heliodora had taken the overwhelming news of Orion's betrothal to
Paula with astonishing though sorrowful calmness, to the hot-blooded girl
she was nothing, nobody, utterly unworthy of her notice.

To spite her she had committed a crime as like murder as one snake is
like another, and imperilled her own mother's life! It was enough to
drive her to despair, to make her scourge herself with rods!

When Susannah kissed her at parting for the night she complained of a
slight sore throat and of her lips, which she fancied must be swollen.
Katharina detained her, questioned her with a trembling voice, put the
lamp close to her, and held her breath while she examined her face, her
neck, and her arms for the dreadful spots. But none were to be seen and
her mother laughed at her terrors, called her a dutiful, anxious child,
and warned her not to be too full of fears, as they were supposed to
invite the disease.

"It ain't rubbish, ma'am," ses Joe Barlcomb; "three o' my children
is down with the measles, my wife's broke 'er leg, 'er mother is laid up
in my little place with the yellow jaundice, and the pig's dead."
"Wot, another one?" ses Mrs. Prince.

"No; the same one," ses Joe.

"Well, 'ow am I to help you?" ses Mrs. Prince. "Do you want me to come
and nurse 'em?"
"No, no," ses Joe, starting and turning pale; "unless you'd like
to come and nurse my wife's mother," he ses, arter thinking a bit.

"I was hoping that you'd know who'd been overlooking me and that
you'd make 'em take the spell off."

Mrs. Prince got up from 'er chair and looked round for the broom she'd
been sweeping with, but, not finding it, she set down agin and
stared in a curious sort o' way at Joe Barlcomb.

"Oh, I see," she ses, nodding. "Fancy you guessing I was a witch."
"You can't deceive me," ses Joe; "I've 'ad too much experience; I
knew it the fust time I saw you by the mole on your nose."
Mrs.

Prince got up and went into her back-place, trying her 'ardest to remember
wot she'd done with that broom. She couldn't find it anywhere, and at
last she came back and sat staring at Joe for so long that 'e was 'arf
frightened out of his life. And by-and-by she gave a 'orrible smile and
sat rubbing the side of 'er nose with 'er finger.

"If I help you," she ses at last, "will you promise to keep it a dead
secret and do exactly as I tell you? If you don't, dead
pigs'll be nothing to the misfortunes that you will 'ave."

"I will," ses Joe Barlcomb, very pale.

"The spell," ses Mrs. Prince, holding up her 'ands and shutting 'er eyes,
"was put upon you by a man. It is one out of six men as is jealous of
you because you're so clever, but which one it is I can't tell without
your assistance. Have you got any money?"
"A little," ses Joe, anxious-like-- "a very little.

Wot with the yellow jaundice and other things, I----"
"Fust thing to do," ses Mrs. Prince, still with her eyes shut, "you
go up to the Cauliflower to-night; the six men'll all be there, and
you must buy six ha'pennies off of them; one each."

"Buy six ha'pennies?" ses Joe, staring at her.

"Don't repeat wot I say," ses Mrs. Prince; "it's unlucky. You buy six
ha'pennies for a shilling each, without saying wot it's for. You'll be
able to buy 'em all right if you're civil."
"It seems to me it don't need much civility for that," ses Joe, pulling
a long face.

"When you've got the ha'pennies," ses Mrs.

Prince, "bring 'em to me and I'll tell you wot to do with 'em. Don't
lose no time, because I can see that something worse is going to 'appen
if it ain't prevented."
"Is it anything to do with my wife's mother getting worse?" ses Joe Barlcomb,
who was a careful man and didn't want to waste six shillings.

"No, something to you," ses Mrs. Prince.

Joe Barlcomb went cold all over, and then he put down a couple of eggs
he'd brought round for 'er and went off 'ome agin, and Mrs. Prince
stood in the doorway with a cat on each shoulder and watched
'im till 'e was out of sight.

That night Joe Barlcomb came up to this 'ere Cauliflower public-house,
same as he'd been told, and by-and-by, arter he 'ad 'ad a pint, he looked
round, and taking a shilling out of 'is pocket put it on the table,
and he ses, "Who'll give me a ha'penny for that?" he ses.

None of 'em seemed to be in a hurry. Bill Jones took it up and bit it, and
rang it on the table and squinted at it, and then he bit it agin, and
turned round and asked Joe Barlcomb wot was wrong with it.

"Wrong?" ses Joe; "nothing."

Bill Jones put it down agin. "You're wide awake, Joe," he ses, "but so am
I."
"Won't nobody give me a ha'penny for it?" ses Joe, looking round.

Then Peter Lamb came up, and he looked at it and rang it, and at last he
gave Joe a ha'penny for it and took it round, and everybody 'ad a look
at it.

[Illustration: "He took it round, and everybody 'ad a look at it."]

"It stands to reason it's a bad 'un," ses Bill Jones, "but it's so well
done I wish as I'd bought it."
"H-s-h!" ses Peter Lamb; "don't let the landlord 'ear you."
The landlord 'ad just that moment come in, and Peter walked up and
ordered a pint, and took his ten-pence change as bold as brass. Arter
that Joe Barbcomb bought five more ha'pennies afore you could wink
a'most, and every man wot sold one went up to the bar and 'ad a
pint and got tenpence change, and drank Joe Barlcomb's health.

"There seems to be a lot o' money knocking about to-night," ses the landlord,
as Sam Martin, the last of 'em, was drinking 'is pint.

Sam Martin choked and put 'is pot down on the counter with a bang,
and him and the other five was out o' that door and sailing up the road
with their tenpences afore the landlord could get his breath. He stood
to the bar scratching his 'ead and staring, but he couldn't understand
it a bit till a man wot was too late to sell his ha'penny up and told 'im
all about it. The fuss 'e made was terrible. The shillings was in a
little heap on a shelf at the back o' the bar, and he did all
sorts o' things to 'em to prove that they was bad, and threatened Joe
Barlcomb with the police. At last, however, 'e saw wot a fool he was
making of himself, and arter nearly breaking his teeth 'e dropped them
into a drawer and stirred 'em up with the others.

Joe Barlcomb went round the next night to see Mrs.

Prince, and she asked 'im a lot o' questions about the men as 'ad sold 'im
the ha'pennies.

"The fust part 'as been done very well," she ses, nodding her 'ead at
'im; "if you do the second part as well, you'll soon know who your enemy
is."
"Nothing'll bring the pig back," ses Joe.

"There's worse misfortunes than that, as I've told you," ses Mrs. Prince,
sharply. "Now, listen to wot I'm going to say to you. When the clock
strikes twelve to-night----"
"Our clock don't strike," ses Joe.

"Then you must borrow one that does," ses Mrs. Prince, "and when it strikes
twelve you must go round to each o' them six men and sell them a ha'penny
for a shilling."
Joe Barlcomb looked at 'er. "'Ow?" he ses, short-like.

"Same way as you sold 'em a shilling for a ha'-penny," ses Mrs. Prince;
"it don't matter whether they buy the ha'pennies or not.

All you've got to do is to go and ask 'em, and the man as makes the
most fuss is the man that 'as put the trouble on you."
"It seems a roundabout way o' going to work," ses Joe.

"_Wot!_" screams Mrs. Prince, jumping up and waving her arms about.
"_Wot!_ Go your own way; I'll have nothing more to do with you. And don't
blame me for anything that happens. It's a very bad thing to come to a
witch for advice and then not to do as she tells you.

You ought to know that."

"I'll do it, ma'am," ses Joe Barlcomb, trembling.

"You'd better," ses Mrs. Prince; "and mind--not a word to anybody."
Joe promised her agin, and 'e went off and borrered a clock from Albert
Price, and at twelve o'clock that night he jumped up out of bed and began
to dress 'imself and pretend not to 'ear his wife when she asked
'im where he was going.

It was a dark, nasty sort o' night, blowing and raining, and, o' course,
everybody 'ad gone to bed long since. The fust cottage Joe came to was
Bill Jones's, and, knowing Bill's temper, he stood for some time afore
he could make up 'is mind to knock; but at last he up with 'is stick
and banged away at the door.

A minute arterward he 'eard the bedroom winder pushed open, and then Bill
Jones popped his 'cad out and called to know wot was the matter and who
it was.

"It's me--Joe Barlcomb," ses Joe, "and I want to speak to you very
partikler."
"Well, speak away," ses Bill. "You go into the back room," he ses, turning
to his wife.

"Whaffor?" ses Mrs. Jones.

"'Cos I don't know wot Joe is going to say," ses Bill. "You go in
now, afore I make you."
His wife went off grumbling, and then Bill told Joe Barlcomb to hurry up
wot he'd got to say as 'e 'adn't got much on and the weather wasn't as
warm as it might be.

"I sold you a shilling for a ha'penny last night, Bill," ses Joe.

"Do you want to sell any more?" ses Bill Jones, putting his 'and down to
where 'is trouser pocket ought to be.

"Not exactly that," ses Joe Barlcomb. "This time I want you to sell me a
shilling for a ha'penny."
Bill leaned out of the winder and stared down at Joe Barlcomb, and then he
ses, in a choking voice, "Is that wot you've come disturbing my sleep
for at this time o' night?" he ses.

"I must 'ave it, Bill," ses Joe.

"Well, if you'll wait a moment," ses Bill, trying to speak perlitely,
"I'll come down and give it to you."

Joe didn't like 'is tone of voice, but he waited, and all of a sudden
Bill Jones came out o' that door like a gun going off and threw 'imself
on Joe Barlcomb. Both of 'em was strong men, and by the time they'd
finished they was so tired they could 'ardly stand. Then Bill Jones went
back to bed, and Joe Barlcomb, arter sitting down on the doorstep to rest
'imself, went off and knocked up Peter Lamb.

Peter Lamb was a little man and no good as a fighter, but the
things he said to Joe Barlcomb as he leaned out o' the winder and
shook 'is fist at him was 'arder to bear than blows. He screamed away at
the top of 'is voice for ten minutes, and then 'e pulled the winder to
with a bang and went back to bed.

Joe Barlcomb was very tired, but he walked on to Jasper Potts's 'ouse,
trying 'ard as he walked to decide which o' the fust two 'ad made
the most fuss.

Arter he 'ad left Jasper Potts 'e got more puzzled than ever, Jasper being
just as bad as the other two, and Joe leaving 'im at last in the middle
of loading 'is gun.

By the time he'd made 'is last call--at Sam Martin's--it was past three
o'clock, and he could no more tell Mrs. Prince which 'ad made the most
fuss than 'e could fly.

There didn't seem to be a pin to choose between 'em, and, 'arf
worried out of 'is life, he went straight on to Mrs.

Prince and knocked 'er up to tell 'er. She thought the 'ouse was afire at
fust, and came screaming out o' the front door in 'er bedgown, and when
she found out who it was she was worse to deal with than the men 'ad
been.

She 'ad quieted down by the time Joe went round to see 'er the next
evening, and asked 'im to describe exactly wot the six men 'ad done
and said.

She sat listening quite quiet at fust, but arter a time she scared Joe by
making a odd, croupy sort o' noise in 'er throat, and at last she got
up and walked into the back-place. She was there a long time making
funny noises, and at last Joe walked toward the door on tip-toe and
peeped through the crack and saw 'er in a sort o' fit, sitting in a chair
with 'er arms folded acrost her bodice and rocking 'erself up and down
and moaning. Joe stood as if 'e'd been frozen a'most, and then 'e crept
back to 'is seat and waited, and when she came into the room agin
she said as the trouble 'ad all been caused by Bill Jones.

She sat still for nearly 'arf an hour, thinking 'ard, and then she turned
to Joe and ses:

[Illustration: "She sat listening quite quiet at fust."]

"Can you read?" she ses.

"No," ses Joe, wondering wot was coming next.

"That's all right, then," she ses, "because if you could I couldn't do
wot I'm going to do."
"That shows the 'arm of eddication," ses Joe. "I never did believe
in it."

Mrs.

Prince nodded, and then she went and got a bottle with something
in it which looked to Joe like gin, and arter getting out 'er pen
and ink and printing some words on a piece o' paper she stuck it
on the bottle, and sat looking at Joe and thinking.

"Take this up to the Cauliflower," she ses, "make friends with Bill Jones,
and give him as much beer as he'll drink, and give 'im a little
o' this gin in each mug. If he drinks it the spell will be broken, and
you'll be luckier than you 'ave ever been in your life afore. When 'e's
drunk some, and not before, leave the bottle standing on the table."

Joe Barlcomb thanked 'er, and with the bottle in 'is pocket went off to
the Cauliflower, whistling. Bill Jones was there, and Peter Lamb, and two
or three more of 'em, and at fust they said some pretty 'ard things
to him about being woke up in the night.

"Don't bear malice, Bill," ses Joe Barlcomb; "'ave a pint with
me."
He ordered two pints, and then sat down along-side o' Bill, and in five
minutes they was like brothers.
"'Ave a drop o' gin in it, Bill," he ses, taking the bottle out of
'is pocket.
Bill thanked 'im and had a drop, and then, thoughtful-like, he
wanted Joe to 'ave some in his too, but Joe said no, he'd got a
touch o' toothache, and it was bad for it.
"I don't mind 'aving a drop in my beer, Joe," ses Peter Lamb.
"Not to-night, mate," ses Joe; "it's all for Bill. I bought it on
purpose for 'im."
Bill shook 'ands with him, and when Joe called for another pint and
put some more gin in it he said that 'e was the noblest-'arted man
that ever lived.
"You wasn't saying so 'arf an hour ago," ses Peter Lamb.
"'Cos I didn't know 'im so well then," ses Bill Jones.
"You soon change your mind, don't you?" ses Peter.
Bill didn't answer 'im. He was leaning back on the bench and staring
at the bottle as if 'e couldn't believe his eyesight. His face was
all white and shining, and 'is hair as wet as if it 'ad just been
dipped in a bucket o' water.
"See a ghost, Bill?" ses Peter, looking at 'im.
Bill made a 'orrible noise in his throat, and kept on staring at
the bottle till they thought 'e'd gone crazy. Then Jasper Potts
bent his 'ead down and began to read out loud wot was on the bottle.
"P-o-i-- POISON FOR BILL JONES," he ses, in a voice as if 'e couldn't
believe it.
You might 'ave heard a pin drop. Everybody turned and looked at
Bill Jones, as he sat there trembling all over. Then those that
could read took up the bottle and read it out loud all over
agin.
"Pore Bill," ses Peter Lamb. "I 'ad a feeling come over me that
something was wrong."
"You're a murderer," ses Sam Martin, catching 'old of Joe
Barlcomb.
"You'll be 'ung for this. Look at pore Bill, cut off in 'is prime."
"Run for the doctor," ses someone.
Two of 'em ran off as 'ard as they could go, and then the landlord
came round the bar and asked Bill to go and die outside, because
'e didn't want to be brought into it. Jasper Potts told 'im to clear
off, and then he bent down and asked Bill where the pain was.
"I don't think he'll 'ave much pain," ses Peter Lamb, who always
pretended to know a lot more than other people. "It'll soon be over,
Bill."
"We've all got to go some day," ses Sam Martin. "Better to die young
than live to be a trouble to yourself," ses Bob Harris.
To 'ear them talk everybody seemed to think that Bill Jones was in
luck; everybody but Bill Jones 'imself, that is.
"I ain't fit to die," he ses, shivering. "You don't know 'ow bad
I've been."
"Wot 'ave you done, Bill?" ses Peter Lamb, in a soft voice. "If
it'll ease your feelings afore you go to make a clean breast of it,
we're all friends here." 
Bill groaned.
"And it's too late for you to be punished for anything," ses Peter,
arter a moment.
Bill Jones groaned agin, and then, shaking 'is 'ead, began to w'isper
'is wrong-doings. When the doctor came in 'arf an hour arterward
all the men was as quiet as mice, and pore Bill was still w'ispering
as 'ard as he could w'isper.
The doctor pushed 'em out of the way in a moment, and then 'e bent
over Bill and felt 'is pulse and looked at 'is tongue. Then he
listened to his 'art, and in a puzzled way smelt at the bottle,
which Jasper Potts was a-minding of, and wetted 'is finger and
tasted it.
[Illustration: "The doctor felt 'is pulse and looked at 'is tongue."]

"Somebody's been making a fool of you and me too," he ses, in a
angry voice. "It's only gin, and very good gin at that.It was very hot, and yet a cold shiver ran through her slender frame. Was
she now attacked by the pestilence? No; it would be too merciful of Fate
to take such pity on her woes.

The mother was dead, dragged to the grave by her own daughter. The
disease had first shown itself on her lips; and how many times had the
physician expressed his surprise at the plague having broken out in this
healthy quarter of the town, and in a house kept so scrupulously clean.
She knew at whose bidding the avenging angel had entered there, and whose
criminal guile had trifled with him. The words "murdered your mother"
haunted her, and she remembered the law of the ancients which refused to
prescribe a punishment for the killing of parents, because they
considered such a monstrous deed impossible.

A scornful smile curled her lip. Laws! Principles! Was there one that she
had not defied? She had contemned God, meddled with magic, borne false
witness, committed murder--and as to the one law with promise, which, if
Philippus was right, was exactly the same in the code of her forefathers
as on the tables of Moses, how had she kept that? Her own mother was no
more, and by her act!

All through this frightful retrospect she had never ceased to shiver and,
as this was becoming unendurable, she took to walking up and down and
seeking excuses for her sinful doings: It was not her mother, but
Heliodora whom she had wished to kill; why had malicious Fate. . . ?

Here she was interrupted, for the young widow, who had heard the sad
news, sought her out to comfort her and offer her services. She spoke to
the girl with real affection; but her sweet, low tones reminded Katharina
of that evening after the old bishop's death; and when Heliodora put out
her arm to draw her to her, she shrank from her, begging her in a dry,
hoarse voice, not to touch her for her clothes were infected. She wanted
no comfort; all she asked was to be left alone--quite alone--nothing
more. The words were hard and unkind, and as the door closed on the young
woman Katharina's eyes glared after her.

Why had this doom passed over Heliodora's head and demanded the sacrifice
of one whose loss she could never cease to mourn?

This brought her mother vividly to her mind. She flew back to her
death-bed and fell on her knees--but even there she could not bear to
stay long, so she wandered into the garden and visited every spot where
she and her mother had been together. But there were such strange
crackings in the shrubs, and the trees and bushes cast such uncanny
shadows that she hailed daybreak as a deliverance.

She was on her way back to the house when her foster-brother Anubis came
limping to meet her. Poor fellow! She had made a cripple of him, too, and
his mother had died through her fault.

The lad spoke to her, giving expression to his sympathy, and she accepted
it; but she said such strange things, and answered him so utterly at
random, that he began to fear that grief had turned her brain. She went
on to ask him point-blank how much money she now had, and as he happened
to know approximately, he could tell her; she clasped her hands, for how
could any one human being who was not a king possess such enormous
wealth! Finally she enquired whether he knew how a will should be drawn
up, and that, too, he answered affirmatively.

She made him describe it all, and then he added that the signature must
be made valid by those of two witnesses; but she, he added, was too young
to be thinking of making her will.

"Why?" said she. "Is Paula much older than I am?"

"And the day after to-morrow," the boy went on, "she is to be cast into
the Nile. All the people call her the Bride of the Nile."

At this that hideous, malignant smile again curled her lips, but she
hastily suppressed it and walked straight on into the house. At the door
he timidly asked her whether he might once more look on his mistress; but
she was obliged to forbid it for fear of infection. However, he proudly
replied: "What you do not fear, has no terrors for me," and he followed
her to the side of the bed where the corpse now lay washed and in fine
array; and when he saw Katharina kiss the dead woman's hand he, too, as
soon as she looked away, pressed his lips on the place hers had touched.
Then he sat down by the bed and remained there till she sent him away.

Before noon the bishop arrived to perform the last rites. He found the
body surrounded by beautiful flowers. Katharina had been out in the
garden again and had cut all the rarest and finest; and though she had
allowed the gardener to carry the basket for her, she would not have him
help her in gathering them. The feeling that she was doing something for
her mother had been a comfort to her; still, by day everything about her
seemed even more intolerable than by night. Everything looked so large,
so coarse, so insistent, so menacing, and reminded her at every step of
some injustice or some deed of which she was ashamed. Every eye, she
fancied, must see through her; and now and then it seemed as though the
pillars of the great banqueting-hall, where her mother still lay, were
tottering, and the ceiling about to fall in and crush her.

She answered the bishop's questions absently and often quite at random,
and the old man supposed that she was stunned by her great sorrow; so to
give her thoughts a new direction he began telling her about Paula, and
believing that Katharina was fond of her, he confided to her that he had
taken Paula, the day before, to Orion's cell, and consecrated their
betrothal.

At this her face was convulsed in a manner that alarmed the bishop; a
fearful tumult raged in her soul, her bosom rose and fell spasmodically,
and all she could utter was the question: "But they will sacrifice her
all the same?"

The bishop thought he understood. She was horror stricken by the idea of
the sudden, cruel end that hung over the young bride, and he replied
sadly; "I shall not be able to restrain the wretches; still, no means
shall remain untried. The patriarch's rescript, condemning this mad
crime, shall be made public to-day, and I will read and expound it at the
Curia, and try to give it keener emphasis.--Would you like to read it?"

As she eagerly assented, the prelate signed to the acolyte who had waited
on him with the holy vessels, and he produced from a packet a written
sheet which he handed to Katharina. As soon as she was alone she read the
patriarch's epistle; at first superficially, then more carefully, and at
last in deep attention and growing interest, stirred by it to strange
thoughts, till at length her eyes flashed and her breath came fast, as
though this paper referred to herself, and could seal her fate for life.

When the bearers came in to fetch away the body she was still sitting
there, gazing as if spell-bound at the papyrus; but she sprang up, shook
herself, and then bid farewell to the cold rigid form of the mother on
whose warm heart she had so often rested, and to whom she had been the
dearest thing on earth--and even then the solace of tears was denied her.

She no longer suffered the deep remorse that had tormented her; for she
felt now that her intercourse with her last mother had not been put an
end to by death; that after a short parting they would meet again--soon
perhaps, perhaps even to-morrow--meet for a fulness of speech, an
outpouring of the heart, a revelation of all the past more open and
unreserved than could ever be between mortal beings, even between mother
and daughter. And when she who was sleeping there, blind, deaf, and
senseless, should awake again, up there, with eyes clearer than those of
men below, and the ears and senses of a spiritual being to see and hear
and judge all she had known and done, all she had felt and made others
feel--then, she told herself, her mother might perhaps blame her and
punish her more than she had ever done on earth, but she would also clasp
her more closely to her heart and comfort her more earnestly.

She whispered gently in her ear as if she were still alive: "Wait awhile,
only wait: I shall come soon and tell you everything!"

And then she kissed her so passionately and recklessly that the nuns were
shocked and dragged her away, ordering the bearers to close the coffin.
They obeyed, and when the wooden lid fell over the sleeping form,
shutting it in with a slam, and hiding it from the girl's sight, the
barrier gave way which had hitherto restrained her tears and she began to
weep bitterly; now, too, the feeling that she had indeed lost her mother
took complete possession of her--the sense of being an orphan and alone,
quite alone in the wide world.

She saw and heard no more of what took place round the beloved dead; for
when she took her hands from her face streaming with tears, the house of
the rich widow no longer sheltered its mistress; her remains had been
borne away to the nearest mortuary. The law forbade its being any longer
kept within doors, but did not allow of its being buried till night fell.
The child might not follow her own mother to the cemetery.

With a drooping head Katharina withdrew to her room and there stood
looking out into the garden. It all was hers now; she was mistress of it
all and of much besides, as free and unfettered to command as hitherto
she had been over the birds, her little dog, or the jewels that lay on
her toilet-table. She could make hundreds happy with a word, a wave of
the hand--but not herself. She had never felt so grown-up, independent,
womanly, nay powerful, and at the same time so unutterably wretched and
helpless as she felt in this hour.

What did she care for all these vanities? They could not suffice to check
one sigh of disappointed yearning.

She had parted from her mother with a promise; the fervent longing that
filled her soul was never still; and now the patriarch's letter had given
her a hint as to how she might fulfil the one and silence the other. She
hastily took the document up again, and read it through once more.

Its instructions were precise to stop the proceedings of the misguided
Memphites with stern promptitude. It explained that the death of the
Christ Jesus, who shed His blood to redeem the world, had satisfied the
need for a human victim. Throughout the wide realms which the Cross
overshadowed with blessing human sacrifice must therefore be accounted a
useless and accursed abomination. It went on to point out how the heathen
had devised their gods in the image of weak, sinful, earthly beings, and
chosen victims in accordance with this idea. "But our God," it said, "is
as high above men as the Spirit is above the flesh, and the sacrifice He
demands is not of the flesh, but of the spirit. Will He not turn away in
wrath and sorrow from the blinded Christians of Memphis who, in their
straits, feel and are about to act like the cruel and foolish heathen?
They take for their victim a heretic and a stranger, deeming that that
will diminish the abomination in the eyes of the Lord; but it moves Him
to loathing all the same, for no human blood may stain the pure and
sacred altars of our mild faith, which gives life and not death.

"Ask your blind and misguided flock, my brother: Can the Father of Love
feel joy at the sight of one of His children, even an erring one,
suffocated in the waters to the honor of the Most High, while struggling,
and cursing her executioners?

"If, indeed, there were a pure maiden, possessed with the blessed
intoxication of the love of God, who was ready to follow the example of
Him who redeemed man by His death, to fling herself into the waters while
she cried to Heaven with her dying breath: 'Take me and my innocence as
an offering, O Lord! Release my people from their extremity!'--that would
be a victim indeed; and perchance, the Lord might say: 'I will accept it;
but the will alone is enough. No child of mine may cast away the life
that I have lent her as the most sacred and precious of gifts.'"

The letter ended with pious exhortations to the community.

Then a maiden who should voluntarily sacrifice herself in the river to
save the people in their need would be a victim pleasing in the sight of
the Lord--so said the Man of God, through whose mouth the Most High
spoke. And this opinion, this hint, was to Katharina like a distaff from
which she spun a lengthening thread to warp to the loom and weave from it
a tangible tissue.

She would be the maiden whom the patriarch had imagined--the real, true
Bride of the Nile, inspired to cast off her young life to save her people
in their need. In this there was expiation such as Heaven might accept;
this would release her from the burthen of life that weighed upon her,
and would reunite her to her mother; in this way she could show her lover
and the bishop and all the world the immensity of her self-sacrifice,
which was in nothing behind that of "the other"--the much-vaunted
daughter of Thomas! She would do the great deed before Paula's eyes, in
sight of all the people. But Orion must know whose image she bore in her
heart and for whose sake she made that leap from blooming life into a
watery grave.

Oh! it was wonderful, splendid! Would she not thus compel him inevitably
to remember her whenever he should think of Paula? Yes, she would force
him to allow her image to dwell in his soul, inseparable from that
"other;" and would not such an unparalleled act add such height to her
figure, that it would be equal to that of her Syrian rival in the
estimation of all men--even in his?

She now began to long for the supreme moment. Her vain little heart
laughed in anticipation of the delight of being seen, praised and admired
by all. Tomorrow she, her little self, would tower above all the world;
and the more she felt the oppressive heat of the scorching day, the more
delicious it seemed to look forward to finding rest from the torments of
life in the cool element.

She saw no difficulties in the way of her achievement; she was mistress
now, and her slaves and servants must obey her orders. He observed towards
sacred institutions a cold, but still an habitual respect. And, strange
as the fact may seem, he was laborious in his avocations, even to severe
drudgery, and equally a stranger to avarice, and a passion for a vain
ostentation. Whether these relieving traits of his character were the
effects of habit, produced by the influence of former piety; or whether
they were the result of constitutional temperament, or of education,
is not for me to decide. But such was L. C., until the autumn of 1824;
when not only a reform but an absolute reversal, of every perverse disposition
and habit in the revolting catalogue of his character took place. A more
obliging and affectionate husband I am convinced is not to be found
on the Cape, few in the world!

And there is no appearance of constraint, or affection in this display
of tenderness.

It is uniform, untiring, cordial, and increasing, as far as it is
permitted to any one, except the Searcher of hearts, to judge. In
all his intercourse with his family, and neighbors, he carries with him,
an inimitable air of sweet and profound humility. You would pronounce
it to be the meekness of the heart springing from some deep-felt sentiment
of the interior of the mind. But so far from abasing the
possessor, in the estimation of others, this very trait commands their
respect, and their love. It gives to him a value, which he never
appeared to possess before. Ten months have I now had daily opportunities
to observe this altered man in a great variety of circumstances, and some
of them, it must be confessed, sufficiently trying. In one instance, I
have had to regret, and censure the appearance of that perversity
which made an important part of his character.

But happily this fit of turbulence was of short duration; and some
months have passed since, without witnessing a repetition of the
infirmity.

Were I this evening asked to name a man in the Colony, who would most
carefully guard against offending, or causing even a momentary pain
to any of his fellow-men, I should not hesitate to say that in my judgment,
the man is L. C.

On this point I insist, because it was precisely in his revolting and
unfeeling churlishness, that his greatest and most incurable
infirmity seemed to consist. I hardly need add, were silence not
liable to misconstruction, that the duties and ordinances of religion
are matters of his most devout and diligent observance. How often have I
been awaked at dawn of Sabbath, by his devout strains of prayer and praise,
sent up from the midst of a little company of praying people, who
at that hour assemble for religious exercises in a vacant building near
my residence.

How sure am I to find him reverently seated in his place, among the earliest
who assemble in the house of God. What an active promoter of every
commendable and pious design, is sure to be found in him.

Every laudable habit, which had survived the general extinction of all
practical virtue, seems to have acquired additional confirmation:
and from the operation of higher principles, seems to follow of
course, and derive the best guaranty of its continuance.

I might go on to particularize; but it would only be to fill up the outline
already sketched, and which, whether relating to his former or his
present character, however, imperfect, is strictly true.

Ask of him the cause of so obvious and surprising a change, and he humbly,
but unhesitatingly ascribes it wholly to the power of the Divine Spirit,
operating, he cannot tell how, but evidently by means of the word and
ordinances of God, upon his whole mind.
The crowd was increasing every minute, and in spite of the
intense heat, not a Memphite could bear to stop within doors, Men, women
and children were flocking to the scene of the festival; they came in
thousands from the neighboring towns, hamlets and villages, to witness
the unprecedented sacrifice which was to put an end to the misery of the
land. Who had ever heard of such a marriage? What a privilege, what a
happiness, to be so fortunate as to see it!

The senate had not been idle and had done all in their power to surround
it with magnificence and to enable as many as possible to enjoy the
pageant, which had been planned with a lavish hand and liberal
munificence.

Round the cove by Nesptah's inn a semi-circular wooden stand had been
constructed, on which thousands found seats or standing-room. Stalls
furnished with hangings were erected in the middle of the tribune for the
authorities and their families as well as for the leading Arab officials,
and arm-chairs were placed in them for the Vekeel, for the Kadi, for the
head of the senate, for old Horapollo and also for the Christian
priesthood, though it was well known that they would not be present at
the ceremony.

The lower classes, who could not afford to pay for admission to these
seats, had established themselves on the banks of the river; wandering
dealers had followed them, and wherever the crowd was densest they had
displayed their wares--light refreshments or solid food--on two-wheeled
trucks, or on little carpets spread on the ground. In the tribune itself
the cries of the water-sellers were incessant as they offered filtered
Nile water and fruit syrups for sale.

The parched tops of the palms, where turtle doves, lapwings and
sparrow-hawks were wont to perch, were crowded with the vagabond boys of
the town, who whiled away the time by pulling the withered and diseased
dates from the great clumps and flinging them down on the bystanders
below, till the guard took aim at them with their arrows and stopped the
game.

The centre of attraction to all eyes was a wooden platform or pontoon,
built far out into the stream; from thence the bride was to be flung into
the watery embrace of the expectant bridegroom. Here the masters of the
ceremonies had put forth their best efforts, and it was magnificently
decorated with hangings and handkerchiefs, palm-leaves and flags; with
heavy garlands of tamarisk and willow, mingled with bright blossoms of
the lotos and mallow, lilies and roses; with devices emblematic of the
province, and other gilt ornaments. Only the furthest end of it was
unadorned and without even a railing, that there might be nothing to
intercept the view of the "marriage."

Three hours before noon none were absent but those whose places were
secured, and ere long curiosity brought them also to the spot. The
town-watch found it required all their efforts to keep the front ranks of
the people from being pushed into the river by those behind; indeed, this
accident could not be everywhere guarded against; but, thanks to the
shallow state of the water, no one was the worse. But the cries of those
who were in danger nevertheless drowned the music of the bands performing
on raised platforms and the shouts of applause which rose on all sides to
hail Horapollo--who was here, there, everywhere on his white ass as brisk
as a lad--or to greet some leading official.

And now and again loud cries of anguish were heard, or the closely-packed
throng parted with exclamations of horror. A citizen had had a sunstroke,
or had been seized by the plague. Then the fugitives dragged others away
with them; screaming mothers trying to save their little ones from the
crush on one hand and the contagion on the other, oversetting one
dealer's truck, smashing the eggs and cakes of another. A whole party
were pushed into a deep but half-dried up water-course; the guardians of
the peace flourished their staves, yelling and making their victims yell
in their efforts to restore order--but all this hardly affected the vast
body of spectators, and suddenly peace reigned, the confusion subsided,
the shrieks were silenced. Those who were doomed might fall or die, be
crushed or plague-stricken. Trumpet calls and singing were heard
approaching from the town: the procession, the Bridal procession was
coming! Not a man but would have perished rather than be deprived of
seeing a single act of this stupendous drama.

Those Arabs--what fools they were! Besides the Vekeel only three of their
magnates were present, and those men whom no one knew. Even the Kadi was
nowhere to be seen; and he must have forbidden the Moslem women to come,
for not a single veiled beauty of the harem was visible. Not one Egyptian
woman would have failed to appear if the plague had not kept so many
imprisoned in their houses. Such a thing would never be seen again; this
day's doings would be a tale to tell to future great-grandchildren!

The music and singing came nearer and nearer; and it did not indeed sound
as if it were escorting a hapless creature to a fearful end. Blast after
blast rang out from the trumpets, filling the air with festive defiance;
cheerful bridal songs came nearer and nearer to the listeners, the shrill
chorus of boys and maidens sounding above the deeper and stronger chant
of youths and men of all ages; flutes piped a gay invitation to gladness;
the dull roar of drums muttered like the distant waves in time to a
march, broken by the clang of cymbals and the tinkle of bells hung around
tambourines held high by girlish hands which struck, rattled and waved
them above their flowing curls; lute players discoursed sweet music on
the strings; and as this vast tide of mingled tones came closer, behind
it there was still more music and more song.

To the ear the procession seemed endless, and the eye soon confirmed the
impression.

All were listening, gazing, watching to see the Bride and her escort.
Every eye seemed compelled to turn in the same direction; and presently
there came: first the trumpeters on spirited horses, and these ranged
themselves on each side of the road by the shore leading to the scene of
the "marriage." In front of them the choir of women took their stand to
the left and, on the right, the men who had marched after them. All alike
were arrayed in light sea-green garments, and loaded with lotos-flowers.
The women's hair, twined with white blossoms, flowed over their
shoulders; the men carried bunches of papyrus and reeds;--they
represented river gods that had risen from the stream.

Then came boys and bearded men, in white robes, with panther-skins on
their shoulders, as the heathen priests had been wont to wear them. They
were headed by two old men with long white beards, one holding a silver
cup and the other a golden one, ready to fling them into the waves as a
first offering, according to the practise of their forefathers, as
Horapollo had described and ordered it. These went on to the pontoon, to
its farthest end, and took their place on one side of the platform whence
the Bride was to be cast into the river. Behind them came a large troop
of flute-players and drummers, followed by fifty maidens holding
tambourines, and fifty men all dressed and carrying emblems as followers
of Dionysus, or Osiris-Bacchus, who had been worshipped here in the time
of the Romans; with these came the drunken Silenus, goathoofed Satyrs and
Pan, with his reed-pipes, all riding grey asses strangely bedaubed with
yellow.

Then followed giraffes, elephants, ostriches, antelopes, gazelles; even
some tamed lions and panthers were led past the wondering crowd; for this
had been done in the famous procession in honor of the second Ptolemy,
described by Callixenus of Rhodes.

Next came a large car drawn by twelve black horses, and on it a
symbolical group of Famine and Pestilence overthrown; they were
surrounded by shrieking black children, with pointed wings on their
shoulders and horns on their foreheads, bound to stakes to represent the
hosts of hell--a performance which they tried to make at once ghastly and
droll.

On another car the Goddess of the Inundation was to be seen. She sat amid
sheaves, fruits, and garlands of vine; while round her were groups of
children with apples and corn, pomegranates and bunches of dates,
wine-jars and cups in their hands.

Presently there appeared in a large shell, as though lounging in a bath,
the goddess of health; she was drawn by eight snow-white horses, and held
in one hand a golden goblet and in the other a caduceus. After her came
the river-god Nile, the bridegroom of the marriage, studied from the
famous statue carried away from Alexandria by the Romans: a splendid and
mighty bearded man, resting against an urn. Sixteen naked children--the
sixteen ells that the river must rise for its overflow to bless the
land--played round his herculean form, and a bridal wreath of
lotos-flowers crowned his flowing locks. This car, which was decorated
with crocodiles, sheaves, dates, grapes, and shells, was hailed with
shouts of enthusiasm; it was escorted by old men in the costume of the
heathen priesthood.

Behind this came more music and singers, with a troop of young men and
maidens led by lute-players singing. These too were dressed as the genie,
and nymphs of the river and were the groomsmen and bridesmaids in
attendance on the betrothed.

The longer the procession lasted and the nearer the looked-for victim
approached, the more eagerly attent were the gazing multitude.

When this group of youths and maidens had gone by, there was hardly a
sound to be heard in the tribune and among the crowd. No one felt the
fierce heat of the sun, no one heeded the thirst that parched every
tongue; all eyes were bent in one direction; only the black Vekeel, whose
colossal form towered up where he stood, occasionally sent a sinister and
anxious glance towards the town. He expected to see smoke rising from the
quarter near the prison, and suddenly his lips parted and he displayed
his dazzlingly white teeth in a scornful laugh. That which he looked for
had come to pass; the little grey cloud which he discerned grew blacker,
and then, in the heart of it, rose a crimson glow which did not take its
color from the sun. But of all those thousands he was the only one who
looked behind him and observed it.

The bride's attendants had by this time taken their station on the
pontoon; here came another band of youths with panther skins on their
shoulders; and now--at last, at last--a car came swaying along, drawn by
eight coal-black oxen dressed with green ostrich-feathers and
water-plants.

The car was shaded by a tall canopy, supported by four poles, against
which leaned four men in the robes of the heathen priesthood; this awning
was lavishly decorated with wreaths of lotos and reeds, and fenced about
with papyrus, bulrushes, tall grasses and blossoming river-weeds. Beneath
it sat the queen of the festival--the Bride of the Nile.

Robed in white and closely veiled, she was quite motionless. Her long,
thick brown hair fell over her shoulders; at her feet lay a wreath, and
rare rose-colored lotos-flowers were strewn on the car.

The bishop had been sitting at her side, the first Christian priest,
certainly, of all the swarms of monks and ecclesiastics in Memphis, who
had ever appeared at such a scene of heathen abomination. He was now
standing, looking down at the crowd with a deeply knit brow and menacing
gaze. What good had come of the penitential sermons in all the churches,
of his and his vicar's warnings and threats? In spite of all remonstrance
he had mounted the car with the condemned victim, after administering the
last consolations to her soul. It might cost him his life, but he would
keep his promise.

In her hand Paula held two roses: one was Orion's last greeting delivered
by Martina; the other Pulcheria had brought her early in the morning.
Yesterday, in a lucid moment, her dying father had given her his fondest
blessing, little knowing what hung over her; to-day he had not come to
himself, and had neither noticed nor returned her parting kiss. Quite
unconscious, he had been moved from the prison out of doors and to the
house of Rufinus. Dame Joanna would not forego the privilege of giving
him a resting-place and taking care of him till the end.

Orion's last note was placed in Paula's hands just before she set out; it
informed her that his task was now successfully ended. He had been told
that it was to-morrow, and not to-day, that the hideous act would be
accomplished; and it was a consolation to her to know that he was spared
the agony of following her in fancy in her fearful progress.

She had allowed the women who came to clothe her in bridal array to
perform their task; among them was Emau, the chief warder's wife, and her
overflowing compassion had done Paula good. But even in the prison-yard
she had felt it unendurable to exhibit herself decked in her bridal
wreaths to the gaping multitude; she had torn them from her and thrown
them on the ground.

How long--how interminably long--had the road to the river appeared; but
she had never raised her eyes to look at the curious crowd, never ceased
lifting up her heart in prayer; and when her proud blood boiled, or
despair had almost taken possession of her, she had grasped the bishop's
hand and he had never wearied of encouraging her and exhorting her to
cling to love and faith, and not even yet abandon all hope.

Thus they at last reached the pontoon at whose further end life would
begin for her in another world. The shouts of the crowd were as loud, as
triumphant, as expectant as ever; music and singing mingled with the roar
of thousands of spectators; she allowed herself to be lifted from the car
as though she were stunned, and followed the young men and maidens who
formed the bridal train, and in alternate choruses sang the finest
nuptial song of Sappho the fair Lesbian.

The bishop now made an attempt to address the people, but he was soon
reduced to silence. So he once more joined Paula, and hand in hand they
went on to the pier.

All she had in her of strength, pride, and heroic courage she summoned to
her aid to enable her to walk these last few paces with her head erect,
and without tottering; she had gone half way along the wooden structure,
with a mien as lofty and majestic as though she were marching to command
the obedience of the mob, when hoofs came thundering after her on the
boards.

Old Horapollo, on his white ass, had overtaken her and stopped her on her
road. Breathless, bathed in perspiration, scornful and triumphant, he
desired her to remove her veil, and ordered the bishop to leave her and
give up his place to the man who represented Father Nile--a gigantic
farrier who followed him, somewhat embarrassed in his costume, but very
ready to perform his part to the end.

The priest and Paula, however, refused to obey. At this the old man tore
the veil from her face and signed to the Nile-God; he stepped forward and
assumed his rights, after bowing respectfully to the prelate--who was
forced to make way--and then led the Bride to the end of the platform.
Here the two elders who had headed the procession in honor of Bacchus,
cast the gold cups as offerings into the river, and then a lawyer, in the
costume of a heathen priest, proceeded to expound, in a well-set speech,
the meaning of this betrothal and sacrifice. He took Paula's hand to
place in that of the farrier, who made ready to cast her into the river
for which he stood proxy.

But an obstacle intervened before he could do so. A large and splendid
barge had drawn up close to the platform, and shouts were heard from the
tribune and from the mob which had till now looked on in breathless
suspense and profound silence:

"Susannah's barge!"

"Look at the Nile, look at the river!"

"It is the water-wagtail--Philammon's rich heiress!"

"A pretty sight!"

"Another Bride--a second Bride!"

And the gaze of the multitude was now, as one eye, fixed on Katharina.

Susannah's handsome barge had been passing up and down near the platform
for the last hour, and the guards on duty had several times desired that
it was to be kept at a distance from the scene of the "marriage;" but in
vain; and they in their little boats were not strong enough to take
active measures against the larger vessel manned by fifty rowers. It had
now steered quite close to the pontoon, and the splendid gilding and
carving, the tall deck-house supported on silver pillars, and the crimson
embroidered sails would have been a gorgeous feast for the eye, but that
the black flag floating from the mast gave it a melancholy and gloomy
aspect.

Within the cabin Katharina had made her waiting-women dress her in white
and deck her with white flowers-myrtle, roses and lotos; but she
vouchsafed no reply to their anxious enquiries.

The maid who fastened the flowers on her bosom could feel her mistress's
heart beating under her hand, and the lotos-blossoms which drooped from
her shoulder rose and fell as though they were already rocking on the
waves of the Nile. Her lips, too, never ceased moving, and her cheeks
were as pale as death.

"What is she going to do?" her attendants asked each other.

Her mother dead only yesterday, and now she chose to be present at this
ceremonial, desiring the steersman to run close to the platform and keep
near to it, where all the world could see her. But she evidently wished
to display herself to the people in all her finery and be admired, for
she presently went up on the roof of the deck-house. And she looked
lovely, as lovely as a guileless angel, as she mounted the steps with
childlike diffidence-timidly, but with wide open eyes, as though
something grand was awaiting her there--something she had long yearned
for with her whole heart.

Anubis had to help her up the last steps, for her knees gave way; but
once at the top she sent him down again to remain below with the others,
as she wished to be alone. The lad was accustomed to obey; and Katharina
now stepped on a seat close to the side of the boat, turned to Paula,
whom she was now rapidly approaching, and held out to her and the bishop
two tall lily-stems covered with splendid blossoms. At the very moment
when the farrier was measuring by eye the distance between the platform
and the barge, and had judged it impossible to cast the Bride into the
stream till the vessel had moved on, Katharina cried out:

"Reverend Father John--and all of you! Take me, me and not the daughter
of Thomas! It is I, not she--I am the true Bride of the Nile. Of my own
free will--hear me, John!--of my own free will I am ready to give my life
for my hapless land and the misery of the people, and the patriarch said
that such a sacrifice as mine would be acceptable to Heaven. Farewell!
Pray for me!--Lord have mercy upon me! Mother, dear Mother, I am coming
to you!"

Then she called to the steersman: "Put out from the platform!" and as
soon as a few strokes of the oars had carried the barge into the deeper
channel she stepped nimbly on to the edge of the bulwark, dropped the
lilies into the river, and then with a smile, her head gracefully bent on
one side and her skirt modestly held round her, she slipped into the
water.

The waves closed over her; but she was a good swimmer and could not help
coming once to the surface. Her expression was that of a bather enjoying
the cool fresh water that laved and gurgled round her. Perhaps the wild
storm of applause, the mingled cries of horror, compassion and
thanksgiving that went up from the assembled thousands once more reached
her ear--but she dived head foremost to rise no more.

The "River-God," a good-hearted man, who in his daily life could never
have let a fellow-creature drown under his very eyes, forgot his part,
released Paula, and sprang after Katharina, as did Anubis and a few
boatmen; but they could not reach her, and the boy, who found swimming
difficult with his crippled leg followed the girl to whom his young heart
was wholly devoted to a watery death.

Her speech had reached no ears but those to whom it was addressed; but
before she was lost in the waters Bishop John turned to the people, took
Paula's hand--and she felt free once more when her terrible bridegroom
had deserted her--and holding up the Crucifix which hung at his girdle he
shouted loudly:

"Behold the desires of our holy Father Benjamin, by whom God himself
speaks to you, have met with fulfilment. A pure and noble Jacobite
maiden, of her own free and beautiful impulse, has sacrificed herself
after the example of the Saviour, for the sufferings of her nation,
before your eyes. This one," and he drew Paula to him, "this one is free;
the Nile has had his victim!"

But almost before he had done speaking--before the people could proclaim
their vote--Horapollo had rushed at him and interrupted him. He had
dismounted from his ass during the earlier part of the proceedings, and,
not to let his prey escape, he now came between Paula and the bishop,
grasped her dress and cried to the chorus of youths:

"Come on--at once! One of you take the part of the Nile-God--into the
river with the Bride!" The bishop however forced himself between the
speaker and the girl to protect her. But Horapollo flew into a fury and
rushed at the prelate to snatch away the image of the Saviour, while John
exclaimed in a voice of ominous thunder: "Anathema!"

This word of fear roused the Christian blood in the Egyptians; the
sacrilegious attempt stirred the zeal which they had proved in many a
struggle, and which had only been kept under by an effort during these
times of trouble: the leader of the choir dragged the old man away and
took part with the bishop. Others followed his example, while several, on
the contrary, sided with old Horapollo who clung tightly to Paula,
preferring to die himself rather than allow her to escape his hatred and
vengeance.

At this moment the clang of bells was heard from the town with a terrific
and unaccountable uproar, and a young man was seen forcing his way
through the throng, a naked sword in his hand, and in spite of his torn
garments, his wild hair, and his blackened face, he was at once
recognized as Orion. "Land of the South! Oh, lovely land of song!
And is my dwelling by thy classic streams; And is the fate so fondly wished
and long, Mine in the fullest measure of my dreams,-- By thy green
hills and sunny glades to roam, To live among thy happy shepherd swains
Where now the peaceful virtues have their home; A blissful lot! nor
aught of grief remains Save for that friend, beloved, bewailed, revered,
To whom my heart for thrice ten years was bound By truest love and
gratitude endeared:
The glory of his land, in whom were found Genius unmatched, and mastery
of the soul, Beyond all human wight, save Shakspeare's own controul."
F.S.A. L. & E.

* * * * *
NOTES ON CUNNINGHAM'S HANDBOOK FOR LONDON.

_Soho Square._--Your correspondent "NASO" (p. 244.) has anticipated
me in noticing Mr. Cunningham's mistake about Mrs. Cornellys' house
in this square; but he has left unnoticed some particulars which deserve
to be recorded. Mrs.

Cornellys', or _Carlisle House_ as it was called, was pulled down at the
beginning of the present century (1803 or 1804), and _two_ houses built
upon its site, now _Jeffery's Music Warehouse_ and _Weston's Printing
Office_.

Some curious old paintings representing banqueting scenes, formerly
in _Carlisle House_ were carefully preserved until the last few years,
in the drawing-room of the corner house, when they were removed to make
room for some needed "elegancies" of the modern print shops.

The Catholic Chapel in Sutton Street was the banquetting-room of Carlisle
House; and the connecting passage between it and the house in Soho
Square was originally the "Chinese bridge."
"Teresa Cornelys, Carlisle House, St. Ann, Soho, dealer" appears in the
bankrupt list of _The London Gazette_ of November, 1772; and in December
of the same year, this temple of festivity, and all its gorgeous contents,
were thus advertised to be sold by public auction:--
"_Carlisle House, Soho.

_--At twelve o'clock on Monday the 14th instant, by Order of the Assignees,
Mr. Marshall will sell by Auction on the Premises, in one Lot, All
that extensive, commodious, and magnificent House in Soho Square, lately
occupied by Mrs. Cornelys, and used for the Public Assemblies of the
Nobility and Gentry. Together with all the rich and elegant Furniture,
Decorations, China, &c., thereunto belonging, too well-known and
universally admired for their aptness and taste to require here any
public and extraordinary description thereof. Catalogues to
be had at the House, and at Mr.

Marshall's, in St. Martin's Lane. The curiosity of many to see the house,
to prevent improper crowds, and the great damage that might happen
therefrom (and the badness of this season) by admitting indifferent and
disinterested people, must be an excuse to the public for the Assignees
ordering the Catalogues to be sold at 5s. each, which will admit
two to see the house, &c., from Monday the 7th instant to the time
of sale, Sundays excepted, from ten in the morning to three in the
afternoon, and they hope no person or persons will take amiss being
refused admittance without Catalogues."

In December 1774, the nobility and gentry were informed (by advertisement),
"That the Assemblies at Carlisle House will commence soon, under
the conduct and direction of a _New_ Manager;" but notwithstanding the
efforts of this person, we find that Mrs. Cornellys resumed her revels
here with great spirit in 1776. In 1778, Carlisle House was again publicly
advertised to be sold by private contract, or "to be hired as usual;" and
subsequently, after having been used as a common exhibition room of
"Monstrosities," a "School of Eloquence," and "An Infant School of Genius,"
it closed its public career through the interference of the magistracy
in 1797.

A full and particular account of the rise and fall of "Mrs. Cornelys'
Entertainments at Carlisle House, Soho," was privately printed two or
three years ago, by Thomas Mackinlay, Esq., of the firm of Dalmaine
and Co., Soho Square.

_Carlisle Street, Soho Square._--The large house at the end of this street,
looking into the square, was formerly called _Carlisle House_.
In 1770 it was purchased of Lord Delaval by the elder Angelo; who resided
in it many years, and built a large riding-school at the back.

Bach and Abel, of "Concert" notoriety, resided in the adjoining
house.
Carlisle Street was then called _King's Square Court_. {451}

_Catherine Street, Strand._--In 1714, a tract was published with
the following title:--_The Maypole's New Year's Gift or Thanks
returned to his Benefactors, humbly inscribed to the Two Corners
of_ Catherine Street, Strand; _written by a Parishioner of St.Thus the young man had been able to reach the scene of the ceremonial at
the head of his fellow-captives. The fire, however, had gained the upper
hand in the deserted town. It had spread from house to house along the
sun-scorched streets, and next day nothing remained of the city of the
Pyramids but the road along the shore, and a few wretched alleys. The
ancient Capital of the Pharaohs was reduced to a village, and the
houseless residents moved across to the eastern bank, to people as
Moslems the newly-founded town of Fostat, or sought a home on Christian
territory.

Among the houses that had escaped was that of Rufinus, and thither the
Kadi escorted Orion and Paula. It was to serve as their prison till the
return of Amru, and there they spent delightful days in the society of
their friends, and there Thomas was so happy as to clasp his children to
his heart once more, and bless them before he died.

A few minutes before the Kadi had reached the scene of the festival two
carrier pigeons had arrived, each bearing the Arab governor's commands
that the sacrifice of Paula was at any rate to be stopped, and her life
spared till his return. He also reserved the right of deciding Orion's
fate.

Mary and Rustem had met Amru at Berenice, on the Egyptian coast of the
Red Sea. This decaying sea-port was connected with Medina by a
pigeon-post, and in reply to his viceroy's enquiry with reference to the
victim about to be offered by the despairing Egyptians to the Nile, Omar
had sent a reply which had been immediately forwarded to the Kadi.

The burning of their town had brought new and fearful suffering on the
stricken Memphites, and notwithstanding Katharina's death the Nile still
did not rise. The Kadi therefore once more summoned a meeting of all the
inhabitants from both sides of the river, three days after the
interrupted marriage-festival. It was held under the palms by Nesptah's
inn, and there he proclaimed to the multitude, Moslem and Christian, by
means of the Arab herald and Egyptian interpreter, what the Khaliff
commanded him to declare, namely: that God, the One, the All-merciful,
scorned human sacrifice. In this firm conviction he, Omar, would beseech
Allah the Compassionate, and he sent a letter which was to be cast into
the river in his name.

And this letter was addressed:

"To the River of Egypt." And its contents were as follows:

"If thou, O River, flowest of thyself, then swell not; but if it be God,
the One, the Compassionate, that maketh thee to flow, then we entreat the
All-merciful that he will bid thee rise!"

"That which is not of God," wrote Amru in the letter which enclosed
Omar's, "what shall it profit men? But all things created are by Him, and
so is your noble river. The Most High will hearken to Omar's prayers and
ours, and I therefore command that all of you--Moslems, Christians, and
Jews, shall gather together in the Mosque on the other side of the Nile
which I have built to the glory of the All-merciful, and that you there
lift up your souls in one great common prayer, to the end that God may
hear you and take pity on your sufferings!"

And the Kadi bid all the people to go across the Nile and they obeyed his
bidding. Bishop John called on his clergy and marched at their head,
leading the Christians; the priests and elders of the Jews led their
people next to the Jacobites; and side by side with these the Moslems
gathered in the magnificent pillared sanctuary of Amru, where the three
congregations of different creeds lifted up, their hearts and eyes and
voices to the pitying Father in Heaven.

And this very Mosque of Amru has more than once been the scene of the
same sublime spectacle; even within the lifetime and before the eyes of
the narrator of this tale have Moslems, Christians, and Jews united there
in one pious prayer, which must have been acceptable indeed in the ears
of the Lord.

Not long after the letter from the Khaliff Omar had been cast into the
Nile, and the prayer of the united assembly had gone up to Heaven from
the Mosque of Armu, a pigeon came in announcing a sudden rise in the
waters at the cataracts; and after some still anxious but hopeful days of
patience, the Nile swelled higher and yet higher, overflowed its banks,
and gave the laborer a right to look forward to a rich harvest; and then,
when a heavy storm of rain had laid the choking dust, the plague, too,
disappeared.

Just when the river was beginning to rise perceptibly Amru returned;
bringing in his train little Mary and Rustem, Philippus the leech and
Haschim, who had joined the governor's caravan at Djidda.

In the course of their journey they received news of all that had been
happening at Memphis, and when the travellers were approaching their last
night-quarters, and the Pyramids were already in sight, the governor said
to little Mary:

"What do you say little one? Do we not owe the Memphites the treat of a
splendid marriage festival?"

"No, my lord, two," replied the child.

"How is that?" laughed Amru, "You are too young and do not count yet, and
I know no other maiden in Memphis whose wedding I should care to provide
for."

"But there is a man towards whom you feel most kindly, and who lives as
lonely as a recluse. I should like to see him married, and at the same
time as Orion and Paula. I mean our good friend Philippus."

"The physician? And is he still unwed?" asked Amru in surprise; for no
Moslem of the leech's age and position could remain unmarried without
exposing himself to the contempt of his fellow-believers. "He is a
widower then!"

"No," replied Mary. "He has never yet found a wife to suit him; but I
know one created on purpose for him by God himself!"

"You little Khatbe!"--[A professional go-between]--cried the governor.
"Well, settle the matter, and it shall be no fault of mine if the second
wedding lacks magnificence."

"And we will have a third!" interrupted the child, clapping her hands and
laughing. "My worthy escort Rustem. . . .

"The colossus! Why, child, to you all things are possible! Have you found
a wife for him too?"

"No, he found Mandane for himself without my help."

"It is the same thing!" cried the governor jovially. "I will provide for
her. But that must satisfy you, or else all those unbelievers whom we are
settling here will drive us Moslem Arabs out of the land."

The great man had often held such discourse as this with the child since
she had entered his tent at Berenice, there to lay before him the case of
the couple she loved, and for whom she had taken on herself great risk
and hardship; she had pleaded so eloquently, so kindly, and with such
fervent and pathetic words, that Amru had at once made up his mind to
grant her everything that lay in his power. Mary had done him a service,
too, by bringing him the information she could give him, for it enabled
him to avert perils which threatened the interests of the Crescent, and
also to save the children of two men he honored--the son of the Mukaukas,
and the daughter of Thomas--from imminent danger.

He found, on his return home, that the Vekeel's crimes far exceeded his
worst fears. Obada's proceedings had begun to undermine that respect for
Arab rule and Moslem justice which Amru had done his utmost to secure. It
was only by a miracle that Orion had escaped his plots, for he had three
times sent assassins to the prison, and it was entirely owing to the
watchful care of pretty Emau's husband that the youth had been able to
save himself in the fire. Obada had done all this to clear out of his
path the hated man whose statements and impeachments might ruin him. The
wretch had met a less ignominious death than his judges would have
granted him. The wealth found hoarded in his dwelling was sent to Medina;
and even Orion was forced to see the vast sums of which the Negro had
plundered his treasury, appropriated by the Arabs. The Arab governor
thought it only right to inflict this penalty for the share he had taken
in the rescue of the nuns; and the young man submitted willingly to a
punishment which restored him and his bride to freedom, and enabled Amru
to apply a larger proportion of the revenues of his native land for its
own benefit.

The Khaliff Omar, however, never received these moneys, which constituted
far more than half of Orion's patrimony. The Prophet's truest friend, the
wise and powerful ruler, fell by the assassin's hand, and the world now
learnt that the Vekeel had been one of the chief conspirators and had
been spurred on to the rashest extremes by his confidence of success.

Amru received the son of the Mukaukas as a father might; after examining
the result of his labors he found it far superior to his own efforts in
the same direction, and he charged Orion to carry out the new division of
the country, which he confirmed excepting in a few details.

"Perform your duty and do your utmost in the future to go on as you have
begun!" cried Amru; and the young man replied:

"In this bitter and yet happy interval I have become clear on many
points."

"And may I ask on what?" asked the governor. "I would gladly hear."

"I have discovered, my lord," replied Orion, "that there is no such thing
as happiness or unhappiness in the sense men give to the words. Life
appears to each of us as we ourselves paint it. Hard times which come
into our lives from outside are often no more than a brief night from
which a brighter day presently dawns--or the stab of a surgeon's knife,
which makes us sounder than before. What men call grief is, times without
number, a path to greater ease; whereas the ordinary happiness of mankind
flows, swiftly as running waters, down from that delightful sense of
ease. Like a ship, which, when her rudder is lost, is more likely to ride
out the storm on the high seas than near the sheltering coast, so a man
who has lost himself may easily recover himself and his true happiness in
the wildest turmoil of life, but rarely and with difficulty if his
existence runs calmly on. All other blessings are comparatively worthless
if we are not upheld by the consciousness of fulfilling the task of life
in faithful earnest, and of cheerfully dealing with the problems it sets
before us. The lost one was found as soon as he placed his whole being
and faculties at the service of a higher duty, with God in his heart and
before his eyes. I have learnt from my own experience, and from Paula's
good friends, to strive untiringly after what is right, and to find my
own weal in that of others.

"The sense of lost liberty is hard to bear; but leave me love, and give
me room and opportunity to prove my best powers in the service of the
community, even in a prison--and though I cannot be perfectly happy, for
that is impossible without freedom--I will be far happier than such an
idle and useless spendthrift of time and abilities as I used to be among
the dissipations of the capital."

"Then enjoy the consciousness of duty well performed, with liberty and
love," replied the governor. "And believe me, my friend, your father in
Paradise will no more grudge you all that is loveliest and best than I
do. You are on the road where every curse is turned to blessing."

The three marriages which Amru had promised to provide for, were
celebrated with due splendor.

THE MISSISSIPPI.

I have headed this chapter with the name of the river which flows between
the principal States in which the society I am about to depict is to
be found; but, at the same time, there are other southern States, such as
Alabama and Georgia, which must be included. I shall attempt
to draw the line as clearly as I can, for although the territory comprehended
is enormous, the population is not one-third of that of the United
States, and it would be a great injustice if the description of the
society I am about to enter into should be supposed to refer to
that of the States in general.

It is indeed most peculiar, and arising frow circumstances which will
induce me to refer back, that the causes may be explained to the reader.
Never, perhaps, in the records of nations was there an instance of a
century of such unvarying and unmitigated crime as is to be collected
from the history of the turbulent and blood-stained Mississippi. The
stream itself appears as if appropriate for the deeds which have
been committed.

It is not like most rivers, beautiful to the sight, bestowing fertility
in its course; not one that the eye loves to dwell upon as it sweeps
along, nor can you wander on its bank, or trust yourself without danger
to its stream. It is a furious, rapid, desolating torrent, loaded
with alluvial soil; and few of those who are received into its waters
ever rise again, or can support themselves long on its surface
without assistance from some friendly log.

It contains the coarsest and most uneatable of fish, such as the cat-fish
and such genus, and, as you descend, its banks are occupied with the
fetid alligator, while the panther basks at its edge in the
cane-brakes, almost impervious to man.

Pouring its impetuous waters through wild tracks, covered with trees
of little value except for firewood, it sweeps down whole forests in
its course, which disappear in tumultuous confusion, whirled away by the
stream now loaded with the masses of soil which nourished their roots,
often blocking up and changing for a time the channel of the river, which,
as if in anger at its being opposed, inundates and devastates the
whole country round; and as soon as it forces its way through its
former channel, plants in every direction the uprooted monarchs of
the forest (upon whose branches the bird will never again perch,
or the racoon, the opossum or the squirrel, climb) as traps to the
adventurous navigators of its waters by steam, who, borne down upon
these concealed dangers which pierce through the planks, very often
have not time to steer for and gain the shore before they sink to
the bottom.

He had
no long wooing to do; for when, on his return, the girl of whom he had
thought constantly during his long journeying, met him for the first time
in her mother's house and held out both her hands with trustful warmth of
welcome, he clasped her to him and would not release her till Joanna had
given them her maternal blessing. The widow lived in the leech's house
with her children and grandchildren, and often visited her husband's
grave. At length she was laid to rest by him and his soft-hearted mother,
in the cemetery of Alexandria.

Rustem, made a rich man by Orion, became a famous breeder of horses and
camels in his own country, while Mandane ruled mildly but prudently over
his possessions--which he never shared with others, though he remained a
Masdakite till he died. The first daughter his wife bore him was named
Mary, and the first boy Haschim; but she would not agree to Rustem's
proposal that the second should be called Orion; she preferred to give
him the name of Rufinus, and his successors were Rustem and Philippus.

The senator and his wife were only too glad to quit Egypt. Martina,
however, had the satisfaction of assisting at the marriage of her dear
Heliodora on the shores of the Nile; not, indeed, to her "Great
Sesostris," but to her nephew Narses, who by the young widow's devoted
care was restored, if not to perfect vigor, at any rate to very endurable
good health.

Paula's wedding gift to her was the great emerald, which had meanwhile
been brought back again to Memphis. Justinus and Martina always remained
on terms of cordial friendship with the young Mukaukas and his wife:
Nilus lived long after to perform his duties with industry and judgment;
and whenever Haschim came to Alexandria there was a contest between Orion
and Philippus, for neither would yield him to the other. But Philip could
no longer envy his former rival the wife he had won. He had not, indeed,
ceased to admire her; but at the same time he would say: "My comfortable
little Pulcheria has not her match; our rooms would be too small for
Paula, but they suit my golden-haired girl best."

He remained unselfishly devoted to his work till the end, and, when he
saw Orion wearing himself out in energetic toil, he would often say: "He
knows now what life demands, and acts accordingly; and that is why he
grows no older, and his laugh is as winning and gay as ever. It is an
honor to be called friend by a woman who like the Bride of the Nile.
saved herself from certain death, and a man who, like the young Mukaukas,
has freed himself from the heaviest of all curses."

To this day the Bride of the Nile is not forgotten. Before the river
begins to rise on the Night of Dropping the inhabitants of the town of
Cairo, which grew up after the ruin of Memphis, on the eastern shore by
the side of Fostat, erect a figure of clay, representing a maiden form,
which they call Aroosa or the Bride.



     From Charles City County to Richmond, from slave to freedman, from
profligate to prophet, from sinner to saint, is a record that might
have gone unnoticed; but from America to Africa, from governed to
governor, from missionary to martyr is Lott Cary.

     For over a score of years the little village of Carytown was the
only memento of the man.

     But in 1850, the Rev.

     Eli Ball, an agent of the Southern Baptist
     Convention, while visiting all the Liberian Baptist Mission
     stations, found with difficulty the final
     resting place of Lott Cary. The next year a marble monument
     was sent out and placed over his grave.[199]
     MILES MARK FISHER
     
     FOOTNOTES:
     
     [1] This spelling seems
     more correct than either the short form,
     _Lot Cary_, used by the Rev. D. Stratton, D.D. of St.
     Albans, West Virginia, in his "Life and Work
     of Lot Cary, Missionary in Africa," or the longer form, _Lott
     Carey_, used by the Rev. James B. Taylor in "The Biography
     of Elder Lott Carey" and by many other writers for
     the following consideration: There is no trace of Cary
     spelling his name Lot Cary. In the American
     Baptist Magazine and Gammell's "A History of American Baptist
     Missions" there are letters from or
     references to Cary marked Lott Carey, which
     are no doubt presumptions on the part of the printer
     or writer that the name is spelled like that
     of the Rev.
     William Carey. If, on the other hand, Lott
     Cary spelled his name either _Carey_ or
     _Cary_, that would only argue that his name would be better spelled
Lott Cary as a means of distinction from the Rev.Women are indeed the rock ahead in this young fellow's life
     You have a habit of only looking backwards