When I was outside the church, I looked at my watch in the bright
moonlight, and found I had one minute to wait.  So I stood in the shadow
of the doorway and looked out at the scene before me.  Not a sign of life
was visible around me, either on land or sea.  On the broad plateau on
which the church stands there was no movement of any kind.  The wind,
which had been pleasant in the noontide, had fallen completely, and not a
leaf was stirring.  I could see across the creek and note the hard line
where the battlements of the Castle cut the sky, and where the keep
towered above the line of black rock, which in the shadow of the land
made an ebon frame for the picture.  When I had seen the same view on
former occasions, the line where the rock rose from the sea was a fringe
of white foam.  But then, in the daylight, the sea was sapphire blue; now
it was an expanse of dark blue--so dark as to seem almost black.  It had
not even the relief of waves or ripples--simply a dark, cold, lifeless
expanse, with no gleam of light anywhere, of lighthouse or ship; neither
was there any special sound to be heard that one could
distinguish--nothing but the distant hum of the myriad voices of the dark
mingling in one ceaseless inarticulate sound.  It was well I had not time
to dwell on it, or I might have reached some spiritually-disturbing
melancholy.

Let me say here that ever since I had received my Lady's message
concerning this visit to St. Sava's I had been all on fire--not, perhaps,
at every moment consciously or actually so, but always, as it were,
prepared to break out into flame.  Did I want a simile, I might compare
myself to a well-banked furnace, whose present function it is to contain
heat rather than to create it; whose crust can at any moment be broken by
a force external to itself, and burst into raging, all-compelling heat.
No thought of fear really entered my mind.  Every other emotion there
was, coming and going as occasion excited or lulled, but not fear.  Well
I knew in the depths of my heart the purpose which that secret quest was
to serve.  I knew not only from my Lady's words, but from the teachings
of my own senses and experiences, that some dreadful ordeal must take
place before happiness of any kind could be won.  And that ordeal, though
method or detail was unknown to me, I was prepared to undertake.  This
was one of those occasions when a man must undertake, blindfold, ways
that may lead to torture or death, or unknown terrors beyond.  But, then,
a man--if, indeed, he have the heart of a man--can always undertake; he
can at least make the first step, though it may turn out that through the
weakness of mortality he may be unable to fulfil his own intent, or
justify his belief in his own powers.  Such, I take it, was the
intellectual attitude of the brave souls who of old faced the tortures of
the Inquisition.

But though there was no immediate fear, there was a certain doubt.  For
doubt is one of those mental conditions whose calling we cannot control.
The end of the doubting may not be a reality to us, or be accepted as a
possibility.  These things cannot forego the existence of the doubt.
"For even if a man," says Victor Cousin, "doubt everything else, at least
he cannot doubt that he doubts."  The doubt had at times been on me that
my Lady of the Shroud was a Vampire.  Much that had happened seemed to
point that way, and here, on the very threshold of the Unknown, when,
through the door which I was pushing open, my eyes met only an expanse of
absolute blackness, all doubts which had ever been seemed to surround me
in a legion.  I have heard that, when a man is drowning, there comes a
time when his whole life passes in review during the space of time which
cannot be computed as even a part of a second.  So it was to me in the
moment of my body passing into the church.  In that moment came to my
mind all that had been, which bore on the knowledge of my Lady; and the
general tendency was to prove or convince that she was indeed a Vampire.
Much that had happened, or become known to me, seemed to justify the
resolving of doubt into belief.  Even my own reading of the books in Aunt
Janet's little library, and the dear lady's comments on them, mingled
with her own uncanny beliefs, left little opening for doubt.  My having
to help my Lady over the threshold of my house on her first entry was in
accord with Vampire tradition; so, too, her flying at cock-crow from the
warmth in which she revelled on that strange first night of our meeting;
so, too, her swift departure at midnight on the second.  Into the same
category came the facts of her constant wearing of her Shroud, even her
pledging herself, and me also, on the fragment torn from it, which she
had given to me as a souvenir; her lying still in the glass-covered tomb;
her coming alone to the most secret places in a fortified Castle where
every aperture was secured by unopened locks and bolts; her very
movements, though all of grace, as she flitted noiselessly through the
gloom of night.

All these things, and a thousand others of lesser import, seemed, for the
moment, to have consolidated an initial belief.  But then came the
supreme recollections of how she had lain in my arms; of her kisses on my
lips; of the beating of her heart against my own; of her sweet words of
belief and faith breathed in my ear in intoxicating whispers; of . . . I
paused.  No!  I could not accept belief as to her being other than a
living woman of soul and sense, of flesh and blood, of all the sweet and
passionate instincts of true and perfect womanhood.

And so, in spite of all--in spite of all beliefs, fixed or transitory,
with a mind whirling amid contesting forces and compelling beliefs--I
stepped into the church overwhelmed with that most receptive of
atmospheres--doubt.

In one thing only was I fixed: here at least was no doubt or misgiving
whatever.  I intended to go through what I had undertaken.  Moreover, I
felt that I was strong enough to carry out my intention, whatever might
be of the Unknown--however horrible, however terrible.

When I had entered the church and closed the heavy door behind me, the
sense of darkness and loneliness in all their horror enfolded me round.
The great church seemed a living mystery, and served as an almost
terrible background to thoughts and remembrances of unutterable gloom.
My adventurous life has had its own schooling to endurance and upholding
one's courage in trying times; but it has its contra in fulness of
memory.

I felt my way forward with both hands and feet.  Every second seemed as
if it had brought me at last to a darkness which was actually tangible.
All at once, and with no heed of sequence or order, I was conscious of
all around me, the knowledge or perception of which--or even speculation
on the subject--had never entered my mind.  They furnished the darkness
with which I was encompassed with all the crowded phases of a dream.  I
knew that all around me were memorials of the dead--that in the Crypt
deep-wrought in the rock below my feet lay the dead themselves.  Some of
them, perhaps--one of them I knew--had even passed the grim portals of
time Unknown, and had, by some mysterious power or agency, come back
again to material earth.  There was no resting-place for thought when I
knew that the very air which I breathed might be full of denizens of the
spirit-world.  In that impenetrable blackness was a world of imagining
whose possibilities of horror were endless.

I almost fancied that I could see with mortal eyes down through that
rocky floor to where, in the lonely Crypt, lay, in her tomb of massive
stone and under that bewildering coverlet of glass, the woman whom I
love.  I could see her beautiful face, her long black lashes, her sweet
mouth--which I had kissed--relaxed in the sleep of death.  I could note
the voluminous shroud--a piece of which as a precious souvenir lay even
then so close to my heart--the snowy woollen coverlet wrought over in
gold with sprigs of pine, the soft dent in the cushion on which her head
must for so long have lain.  I could see myself--within my eyes the
memory of that first visit--coming once again with glad step to renew
that dear sight--dear, though it scorched my eyes and harrowed my
heart--and finding the greater sorrow, the greater desolation of the
empty tomb!

There!  I felt that I must think no more of that lest the thought should
unnerve me when I should most want all my courage.  That way madness lay!
The darkness had already sufficient terrors of its own without bringing
to it such grim remembrances and imaginings . . . And I had yet to go
through some ordeal which, even to her who had passed and repassed the
portals of death, was full of fear.

It was a merciful relief to me when, in groping my way forwards through
the darkness, I struck against some portion of the furnishing of the
church.  Fortunately I was all strung up to tension, else I should never
have been able to control instinctively, as I did, the shriek which was
rising to my lips.

I would have given anything to have been able to light even a match.  A
single second of light would, I felt, have made me my own man again.  But
I knew that this would be against the implied condition of my being there
at all, and might have had disastrous consequences to her whom I had come
to save.  It might even frustrate my scheme, and altogether destroy my
opportunity.  At that moment it was borne upon me more strongly than ever
that this was not a mere fight for myself or my own selfish purposes--not
merely an adventure or a struggle for only life and death against unknown
difficulties and dangers.  It was a fight on behalf of her I loved, not
merely for her life, but perhaps even for her soul.

And yet this very thinking--understanding--created a new form of terror.
For in that grim, shrouding darkness came memories of other moments of
terrible stress.

Of wild, mystic rites held in the deep gloom of African forests, when,
amid scenes of revolting horror, Obi and the devils of his kind seemed to
reveal themselves to reckless worshippers, surfeited with horror, whose
lives counted for naught; when even human sacrifice was an episode, and
the reek of old deviltries and recent carnage tainted the air, till even
I, who was, at the risk of my life, a privileged spectator who had come
through dangers without end to behold the scene, rose and fled in horror.

Of scenes of mystery enacted in rock-cut temples beyond the Himalayas,
whose fanatic priests, cold as death and as remorseless, in the reaction
of their phrenzy of passion, foamed at the mouth and then sank into
marble quiet, as with inner eyes they beheld the visions of the hellish
powers which they had invoked.

Of wild, fantastic dances of the Devil-worshippers of Madagascar, where
even the very semblance of humanity disappeared in the fantastic excesses
of their orgies.

Of strange doings of gloom and mystery in the rock-perched monasteries of
Thibet.

Of awful sacrifices, all to mystic ends, in the innermost recesses of
Cathay.

Of weird movements with masses of poisonous snakes by the medicine-men of
the Zuni and Mochi Indians in the far south-west of the Rockies, beyond
the great plains.

Of secret gatherings in vast temples of old Mexico, and by dim altars of
forgotten cities in the heart of great forests in South America.

Of rites of inconceivable horror in the fastnesses of Patagonia.

Of . . . Here I once more pulled myself up.  Such thoughts were no kind
of proper preparation for what I might have to endure.  My work that
night was to be based on love, on hope, on self-sacrifice for the woman
who in all the world was the closest to my heart, whose future I was to
share, whether that sharing might lead me to Hell or Heaven.  The hand
which undertook such a task must have no trembling.

Still, those horrible memories had, I am bound to say, a useful part in
my preparation for the ordeal.  They were of fact which I had seen, of
which I had myself been in part a sharer, and which I had survived.  With
such experiences behind me, could there be aught before me more dreadful?
. . .

Moreover, if the coming ordeal was of supernatural or superhuman order,
could it transcend in living horror the vilest and most desperate acts of
the basest men? . . .

With renewed courage I felt my way before me, till my sense of touch told
me that I was at the screen behind which lay the stair to the Crypt.

There I waited, silent, still.

My own part was done, so far as I knew how to do it.  Beyond this, what
was to come was, so far as I knew, beyond my own control.  I had done
what I could; the rest must come from others.  I had exactly obeyed my
instructions, fulfilled my warranty to the utmost in my knowledge and
power.  There was, therefore, left for me in the present nothing but to
wait.

It is a peculiarity of absolute darkness that it creates its own
reaction.  The eye, wearied of the blackness, begins to imagine forms of
light.  How far this is effected by imagination pure and simple I know
not.  It may be that nerves have their own senses that bring thought to
the depository common to all the human functions, but, whatever may be
the mechanism or the objective, the darkness seems to people itself with
luminous entities.

So was it with me as I stood lonely in the dark, silent church.  Here and
there seemed to flash tiny points of light.

In the same way the silence began to be broken now and again by strange
muffled sounds--the suggestion of sounds rather than actual vibrations.
These were all at first of the minor importance of movement--rustlings,
creakings, faint stirrings, fainter breathings.  Presently, when I had
somewhat recovered from the sort of hypnotic trance to which the darkness
and stillness had during the time of waiting reduced me, I looked around
in wonder.

The phantoms of light and sound seemed to have become real.  There were
most certainly actual little points of light in places--not enough to see
details by, but quite sufficient to relieve the utter gloom.  I
thought--though it may have been a mingling of recollection and
imagination--that I could distinguish the outlines of the church;
certainly the great altar-screen was dimly visible.  Instinctively I
looked up--and thrilled.  There, hung high above me, was, surely enough,
a great Greek Cross, outlined by tiny points of light.

I lost myself in wonder, and stood still, in a purely receptive mood,
unantagonistic to aught, willing for whatever might come, ready for all
things, in rather a negative than a positive mood--a mood which has an
aspect of spiritual meekness.  This is the true spirit of the neophyte,
and, though I did not think of it at the time, the proper attitude for
what is called by the Church in whose temple I stood a "neo-nymph."

As the light grew a little in power, though never increasing enough for
distinctness, I saw dimly before me a table on which rested a great open
book, whereon were laid two rings--one of sliver, the other of gold--and
two crowns wrought of flowers, bound at the joining of their stems with
tissue--one of gold, the other of silver.  I do not know much of the
ritual of the old Greek Church, which is the religion of the Blue
Mountains, but the things which I saw before me could be none other than
enlightening symbols.  Instinctively I knew that I had been brought
hither, though in this grim way, to be married.  The very idea of it
thrilled me to the heart's core.  I thought the best thing I could do
would be to stay quite still, and not show surprise at anything that
might happen; but be sure I was all eyes and ears.

I peered anxiously around me in every direction, but I could see no sign
of her whom I had come to meet.

Incidentally, however, I noticed that in the lighting, such as it was,
there was no flame, no "living" light.  Whatever light there was came
muffled, as though through some green translucent stone.  The whole
effect was terribly weird and disconcerting.

Presently I started, as, seemingly out of the darkness beside me, a man's
hand stretched out and took mine.  Turning, I found close to me a tall
man with shining black eyes and long black hair and beard.  He was clad
in some kind of gorgeous robe of cloth of gold, rich with variety of
adornment.  His head was covered with a high, over-hanging hat draped
closely with a black scarf, the ends of which formed a long, hanging veil
on either side.  These veils, falling over the magnificent robes of cloth
of gold, had an extraordinarily solemn effect.

I yielded myself to the guiding hand, and shortly found myself, so far as
I could see, at one side of the sanctuary.

In the floor close to my feet was a yawning chasm, into which, from so
high over my head that in the uncertain light I could not distinguish its
origin, hung a chain.  At the sight a strange wave of memory swept over
me.  I could not but remember the chain which hung over the glass-covered
tomb in the Crypt, and I had an instinctive feeling that the grim chasm
in the floor of the sanctuary was but the other side of the opening in
the roof of the crypt from which the chain over the sarcophagus depended.

There was a creaking sound--the groaning of a windlass and the clanking
of a chain.  There was heavy breathing close to me somewhere.  I was so
intent on what was going on that I did not see that one by one, seeming
to grow out of the surrounding darkness, several black figures in monkish
garb appeared with the silence of ghosts.  Their faces were shrouded in
black cowls, wherein were holes through which I could see dark gleaming
eyes.  My guide held me tightly by the hand.  This gave me a feeling of
security in the touch which helped to retain within my breast some
semblance of calm.

The strain of the creaking windlass and the clanking chain continued for
so long that the suspense became almost unendurable.  At last there came
into sight an iron ring, from which as a centre depended four lesser
chains spreading wide.  In a few seconds more I could see that these were
fixed to the corners of the great stone tomb with the covering of glass,
which was being dragged upward.  As it arose it filled closely the whole
aperture.  When its bottom had reached the level of the floor it stopped,
and remained rigid.  There was no room for oscillation.  It was at once
surrounded by a number of black figures, who raised the glass covering
and bore it away into the darkness.  Then there stepped forward a very
tall man, black-bearded, and with head-gear like my guide, but made in
triple tiers, he also was gorgeously arrayed in flowing robes of cloth of
gold richly embroidered.  He raised his hand, and forthwith eight other
black-clad figures stepped forward, and bending over the stone coffin,
raised from it the rigid form of my Lady, still clad in her Shroud, and
laid it gently on the floor of the sanctuary.

I felt it a grace that at that instant the dim lights seemed to grow
less, and finally to disappear--all save the tiny points that marked the
outline of the great Cross high overhead.  These only gave light enough
to accentuate the gloom.  The hand that held mine now released it, and
with a sigh I realized that I was alone.  After a few moments more of the
groaning of the winch and clanking of the chain there was a sharp sound
of stone meeting stone; then there was silence.  I listened acutely, but
could not hear near me the slightest sound.  Even the cautious,
restrained breathing around me, of which up to then I had been conscious,
had ceased.  Not knowing, in the helplessness of my ignorance, what I
should do, I remained as I was, still and silent, for a time that seemed
endless.  At last, overcome by some emotion which I could not at the
moment understand, I slowly sank to my knees and bowed my head.  Covering
my face with my hands, I tried to recall the prayers of my youth.  It was
not, I am certain, that fear in any form had come upon me, or that I
hesitated or faltered in my intention.  That much I know now; I knew it
even then.  It was, I believe, that the prolonged impressive gloom and
mystery had at last touched me to the quick.  The bending of the knees
was but symbolical of the bowing of the spirit to a higher Power.  When I
had realized that much, I felt more content than I had done since I had
entered the church, and with the renewed consciousness of courage, took
my hands from my face, and lifted again my bowed head.

Impulsively I sprang to my feet and stood erect--waiting.  All seemed to
have changed since I had dropped on my knees.  The points of light about
time church, which had been eclipsed, had come again, and were growing in
power to a partial revealing of the dim expanse.  Before me was the table
with the open book, on which were laid the gold and silver rings and the
two crowns of flowers.  There were also two tall candles, with tiniest
flames of blue--the only living light to be seen.

Out of the darkness stepped the same tall figure in the gorgeous robes
and the triple hat.  He led by the hand my Lady, still clad in her
Shroud; but over it, descending from the crown of her head, was a veil of
very old and magnificent lace of astonishing fineness.  Even in that dim
light I could note the exquisite beauty of the fabric.  The veil was
fastened with a bunch of tiny sprays of orange-blossom mingled with
cypress and laurel--a strange combination.  In her hand she carried a
great bouquet of the same.  Its sweet intoxicating odour floated up to my
nostrils.  It and the sentiment which its very presence evoked made me
quiver.

Yielding to the guiding of the hand which held hers, she stood at my left
side before the table.  Her guide then took his place behind her.  At
either end of the table, to right and left of us, stood a long-bearded
priest in splendid robes, and wearing the hat with depending veil of
black.  One of them, who seemed to be the more important of the two, and
took the initiative, signed to us to put our right hands on the open
book.  My Lady, of course, understood the ritual, and knew the words
which the priest was speaking, and of her own accord put out her hand.
My guide at the same moment directed my hand to the same end.  It
thrilled me to touch my Lady's hand, even under such mysterious
conditions.

After the priest had signed us each thrice on the forehead with the sign
of the Cross, he gave to each of us a tiny lighted taper brought to him
for the purpose.  The lights were welcome, not so much for the solace of
the added light, great as that was, but because it allowed us to see a
little more of each other's faces.  It was rapture to me to see the face
of my Bride; and from the expression of her face I was assured that she
felt as I did.  It gave me an inexpressible pleasure when, as her eyes
rested on me, there grew a faint blush over the grey pallor of her
cheeks.

The priest then put in solemn voice to each of us in turn, beginning with
me, the questions of consent which are common to all such rituals.  I
answered as well as I could, following the murmured words of my guide.
My Lady answered out proudly in a voice which, though given softly,
seemed to ring.  It was a concern--even a grief--to me that I could not,
in the priest's questioning, catch her name, of which, strangely
enough,--I was ignorant.  But, as I did not know the language, and as the
phrases were not in accord literally with our own ritual, I could not
make out which word was the name.

After some prayers and blessings, rhythmically spoken or sung by an
invisible choir, the priest took the rings from the open book, and, after
signing my forehead thrice with the gold one as he repeated the blessing
in each case, placed it on my right hand; then he gave my Lady the silver
one, with the same ritual thrice repeated.  I suppose it was the blessing
which is the effective point in making two into one.

After this, those who stood behind us exchanged our rings thrice, taking
them from one finger and placing them on the other, so that at the end my
wife wore the gold ring and I the silver one.

Then came a chant, during which the priest swung the censer himself, and
my wife and I held our tapers.  After that he blessed us, the responses
coming from the voices of the unseen singers in the darkness.

After a long ritual of prayer and blessing, sung in triplicate, the
priest took the crowns of flowers, and put one on the head of each,
crowning me first, and with the crown tied with gold.  Then he signed and
blessed us each thrice.  The guides, who stood behind us, exchanged our
crowns thrice, as they had exchanged the rings; so that at the last, as I
was glad to see, my wife wore the crown of gold, and I that of silver.

Then there came, if it is possible to describe such a thing, a hush over
even that stillness, as though some form of added solemnity were to be
gone through.  I was not surprised, therefore, when the priest took in
his hands the great golden chalice.  Kneeling, my wife and I partook
together thrice.

When we had risen from our knees and stood for a little while, the priest
took my left hand in his right, and I, by direction of my guide, gave my
right hand to my wife.  And so in a line, the priest leading, we circled
round the table in rhythmic measure.  Those who supported us moved behind
us, holding the crowns over our heads, and replacing them when we
stopped.

After a hymn, sung through the darkness, the priest took off our crowns.
This was evidently the conclusion of the ritual, for the priest placed us
in each other's arms to embrace each other.  Then he blessed us, who were
now man and wife!

The lights went out at once, some as if extinguished, others slowly
fading down to blackness.

Left in the dark, my wife and I sought each other's arms again, and stood
together for a few moments heart to heart, tightly clasping each other,
and kissed each other fervently.

Instinctively we turned to the door of the church, which was slightly
open, so that we could see the moonlight stealing in through the
aperture.  With even steps, she holding me tightly by the left arm--which
is the wife's arm, we passed through the old church and out into the free
air.

Despite all that the gloom had brought me, it was sweet to be in the open
air and together--this quite apart from our new relations to each other.
The moon rode high, and the full light, coming after the dimness or
darkness in the church, seemed as bright as day.  I could now, for the
first time, see my wife's face properly.  The glamour of the moonlight
may have served to enhance its ethereal beauty, but neither moonlight nor
sunlight could do justice to that beauty in its living human splendour.
As I gloried in her starry eyes I could think of nothing else; but when
for a moment my eyes, roving round for the purpose of protection, caught
sight of her whole figure, there was a pang to my heart.  The brilliant
moonlight showed every detail in terrible effect, and I could see that
she wore only her Shroud.  In the moment of darkness, after the last
benediction, before she returned to my arms, she must have removed her
bridal veil.  This may, of course, have been in accordance with the
established ritual of her church; but, all the same, my heart was sore.
The glamour of calling her my very own was somewhat obscured by the
bridal adornment being shorn.  But it made no difference in her sweetness
to me.  Together we went along the path through the wood, she keeping
equal step with me in wifely way.

When we had come through the trees near enough to see the roof of the
Castle, now gilded with the moonlight, she stopped, and looking at me
with eyes full of love, said:

"Here I must leave you!"

"What?"  I was all aghast, and I felt that my chagrin was expressed in
the tone of horrified surprise in my voice.  She went on quickly:

"Alas!  It is impossible that I should go farther--at present!"

"But what is to prevent you?" I queried.  "You are now my wife.  This is
our wedding-night; and surely your place is with me!"  The wail in her
voice as she answered touched me to the quick:

"Oh, I know, I know!  There is no dearer wish in my heart--there can be
none--than to share my husband's home.  Oh, my dear, my dear, if you only
knew what it would be to me to be with you always!  But indeed I may
not--not yet!  I am not free!  If you but knew how much that which has
happened to-night has cost me--or how much cost to others as well as to
myself may be yet to come--you would understand.  Rupert"--it was the
first time she had ever addressed me by name, and naturally it thrilled
me through and through--"Rupert, my husband, only that I trust you with
all the faith which is in perfect love--mutual love, I dare not have done
what I have done this night.  But, dear, I know that you will bear me
out; that your wife's honour is your honour, even as your honour is mine.
My honour is given to this; and you can help me--the only help I can have
at present--by trusting me.  Be patient, my beloved, be patient!  Oh, be
patient for a little longer!  It shall not be for long.  So soon as ever
my soul is freed I shall come to you, my husband; and we shall never part
again.  Be content for a while!  Believe me that I love you with my very
soul; and to keep away from your dear side is more bitter for me than
even it can be for you!  Think, my dear one, I am not as other women are,
as some day you shall clearly understand.  I am at the present, and shall
be for a little longer, constrained by duties and obligations put upon me
by others, and for others, and to which I am pledged by the most sacred
promises--given not only by myself, but by others--and which I must not
forgo.  These forbid me to do as I wish.  Oh, trust me, my beloved--my
husband!"

She held out her hands appealingly.  The moonlight, falling through the
thinning forest, showed her white cerements.  Then the recollection of
all she must have suffered--the awful loneliness in that grim tomb in the
Crypt, the despairing agony of one who is helpless against the
unknown--swept over me in a wave of pity.  What could I do but save her
from further pain?  And this could only be by showing her my faith and
trust.  If she was to go back to that dreadful charnel-house, she would
at least take with her the remembrance that one who loved her and whom
she loved--to whom she had been lately bound in the mystery of
marriage--trusted her to the full.  I loved her more than myself--more
than my own soul; and I was moved by pity so great that all possible
selfishness was merged in its depths.  I bowed my head before her--my
Lady and my Wife--as I said:

"So be it, my beloved.  I trust you to the full, even as you trust me.
And that has been proven this night, even to my own doubting heart.  I
shall wait; and as I know you wish it, I shall wait as patiently as I
can.  But till you come to me for good and all, let me see you or hear
from you when you can.  The time, dear wife, must go heavily with me as I
think of you suffering and lonely.  So be good to me, and let not too
long a time elapse between my glimpses of hope.  And, sweetheart, when
you _do_ come to me, it shall be for ever!"  There was something in the
intonation of the last sentence--I felt its sincerity myself--some
implied yearning for a promise, that made her beautiful eyes swim.  The
glorious stars in them were blurred as she answered with a fervour which
seemed to me as more than earthly:

"For ever!  I swear it!"

With one long kiss, and a straining in each others arms, which left me
tingling for long after we had lost sight of each other, we parted.  I
stood and watched her as her white figure, gliding through the deepening
gloom, faded as the forest thickened.  It surely was no optical delusion
or a phantom of the mind that her shrouded arm was raised as though in
blessing or farewell before the darkness swallowed her up.


BOOK VI: THE PURSUIT IN THE FOREST


RUPERT'S JOURNAL--_Continued_.


                                                           _July_ 3, 1907.

There is no anodyne but work to pain of the heart; and my pain is all of
the heart.  I sometimes feel that it is rather hard that with so much to
make me happy I cannot know happiness.  How can I be happy when my wife,
whom I fondly love, and who I know loves me, is suffering in horror and
loneliness of a kind which is almost beyond human belief?  However, what
is my loss is my country's gain, for the Land of the Blue Mountains is my
country now, despite the fact that I am still a loyal subject of good
King Edward.  Uncle Roger took care of that when he said I should have
the consent of the Privy Council before I might be naturalized anywhere
else.

When I got home yesterday morning I naturally could not sleep.  The
events of the night and the bitter disappointment that followed my
exciting joy made such a thing impossible.  When I drew the curtain over
the window, the reflection of the sunrise was just beginning to tinge the
high-sailing clouds in front of me.  I laid down and tried to rest, but
without avail.  However, I schooled myself to lie still, and at last, if
I did not sleep, was at least quiescent.

Disturbed by a gentle tap at the door, I sprang up at once and threw on a
dressing gown.  Outside, when I opened the door, was Aunt Janet.  She was
holding a lighted candle in her hand, for though it was getting light in
the open, the passages were still dark.  When she saw me she seemed to
breathe more freely, and asked if she might come in.

Whilst she sat on the edge of my bed, in her old-time way, she said in a
hushed voice:

"Oh, laddie, laddie, I trust yer burden is no too heavy to bear."

"My burden!  What on earth do you mean, Aunt Janet?" I said in reply.  I
did not wish to commit myself by a definite answer, for it was evident
that she had been dreaming or Second Sighting again.  She replied with
the grim seriousness usual to her when she touched on occult matters:

"I saw your hairt bleeding, laddie.  I kent it was yours, though how I
kent it I don't know.  It lay on a stone floor in the dark, save for a
dim blue light such as corpse-lights are.  On it was placed a great book,
and close around were scattered many strange things, amongst them two
crowns o' flowers--the one bound wi' silver, the other wi' gold.  There
was also a golden cup, like a chalice, o'erturned.  The red wine trickled
from it an' mingled wi' yer hairt's bluid; for on the great book was some
vast dim weight wrapped up in black, and on it stepped in turn many men
all swathed in black.  An' as the weight of each came on it the bluid
gushed out afresh.  And oh, yer puir hairt, my laddie, was quick and
leaping, so that at every beat it raised the black-clad weight!  An' yet
that was not all, for hard by stood a tall imperial shape o' a woman, all
arrayed in white, wi' a great veil o' finest lace worn o'er a shrood.
An' she was whiter than the snow, an' fairer than the morn for beauty;
though a dark woman she was, wi' hair like the raven, an' eyes black as
the sea at nicht, an' there was stars in them.  An' at each beat o' yer
puir bleeding hairt she wrung her white hands, an' the manin' o' her
sweet voice rent my hairt in twain.  Oh, laddie, laddie! what does it
mean?"

I managed to murmur: "I'm sure I don't know, Aunt Janet.  I suppose it
was all a dream!"

"A dream it was, my dear.  A dream or a veesion, whilka matters nane, for
a' such are warnin's sent frae God . . . "  Suddenly she said in a
different voice:

"Laddie, hae ye been fause to any lassie?  I'm no blamin' ye.  For ye men
are different frae us women, an' yer regard on recht and wrang differs
from oors.  But oh, laddie, a woman's tears fa' heavy when her hairt is
for sair wi' the yieldin' to fause words.  'Tis a heavy burden for ony
man to carry wi' him as he goes, an' may well cause pain to ithers that
he fain would spare."  She stopped, and in dead silence waited for me to
speak.  I thought it would be best to set her poor loving heart at rest,
and as I could not divulge my special secret, spoke in general terms:

"Aunt Janet, I am a man, and have led a man's life, such as it is.  But I
can tell you, who have always loved me and taught me to be true, that in
all the world there is no woman who must weep for any falsity of mine.
If close there be any who, sleeping or waking, in dreams or visions or in
reality, weeps because of me, it is surely not for my doing, but because
of something outside me.  It may be that her heart is sore because I must
suffer, as all men must in some degree; but she does not weep for or
through any act of mine."

She sighed happily at my assurance, and looked up through her tears, for
she was much moved; and after tenderly kissing my forehead and blessing
me, stole away.  She was more sweet and tender than I have words to say,
and the only regret that I have in all that is gone is that I have not
been able to bring my wife to her, and let her share in the love she has
for me.  But that, too, will come, please God!

In the morning I sent a message to Rooke at Otranto, instructing him by
code to bring the yacht to Vissarion in the coming night.

All day I spent in going about amongst the mountaineers, drilling them
and looking after their arms.  I _could_ not stay still.  My only chance
of peace was to work, my only chance of sleep to tire myself out.
Unhappily, I am very strong, so even when I came home at dark I was quite
fresh.  However, I found a cable message from Rooke that the yacht would
arrive at midnight.

There was no need to summon the mountaineers, as the men in the Castle
would be sufficient to make preparations for the yacht's coming.

                                                                  _Later_.

The yacht has come.  At half-past eleven the lookout signalled that a
steamer without lights was creeping in towards the Creek.  I ran out to
the Flagstaff, and saw her steal in like a ghost.  She is painted a
steely blue-grey, and it is almost impossible to see her at any distance.
She certainly goes wonderfully.  Although there was not enough throb from
the engines to mar the absolute stillness, she came on at a fine speed,
and within a few minutes was close to the boom.  I had only time to run
down to give orders to draw back the boom when she glided in and stopped
dead at the harbour wall.  Rooke steered her himself, and he says he
never was on a boat that so well or so quickly answered her helm.  She is
certainly a beauty, and so far as I can see at night perfect in every
detail.  I promise myself a few pleasant hours over her in the daylight.
The men seem a splendid lot.

But I do not feel sleepy; I despair of sleep to-night.  But work demands
that I be fit for whatever may come, and so I shall try to sleep--to
rest, at any rate.


RUPERT'S JOURNAL.--_Continued_.


                                                           _July_ 4, 1907.

I was up with the first ray of sunrise, so by the time I had my bath and
was dressed there was ample light.  I went down to the dock at once, and
spent the morning looking over the vessel, which fully justifies Rooke's
enthusiasm about her.  She is built on lovely lines, and I can quite
understand that she is enormously fast.  Her armour I can only take on
the specifications, but her armament is really wonderful.  And there are
not only all the very newest devices of aggressive warfare--indeed, she
has the newest up-to-date torpedoes and torpedo-guns--but also the
old-fashioned rocket-tubes, which in certain occasions are so useful.
She has electric guns and the latest Massillon water-guns, and Reinhardt
electro-pneumatic "deliverers" for pyroxiline shells.  She is even
equipped with war-balloons easy of expansion, and with compressible
Kitson aeroplanes.  I don't suppose that there is anything quite like her
in the world.

The crew are worthy of her.  I can't imagine where Rooke picked up such a
splendid lot of men.  They are nearly all man-of-warsmen; of various
nationalities, but mostly British.  All young men--the oldest of them
hasn't got into the forties--and, so far as I can learn, all experts of
one kind or another in some special subject of warfare.  It will go hard
with me, but I shall keep them together.

How I got through the rest of the day I know not.  I tried hard not to
create any domestic trouble by my manner, lest Aunt Janet should, after
her lurid dream or vision of last night, attach some new importance to
it.  I think I succeeded, for she did not, so far as I could tell, take
any special notice of me.  We parted as usual at half-past ten, and I
came here and made this entry in my journal.  I am more restless than
ever to-night, and no wonder.  I would give anything to be able to pay a
visit to St. Sava's, and see my wife again--if it were only sleeping in
her tomb.  But I dare not do even that, lest she should come to see me
here, and I should miss her.  So I have done what I can.  The glass door
to the Terrace is open, so that she can enter at once if she comes.  The
fire is lit, and the room is warm.  There is food ready in case she
should care for it.  I have plenty of light in the room, so that through
the aperture where I have not fully drawn the curtain there may be light
to guide her.

Oh, how the time drags!  The clock has struck midnight.  One, two!  Thank
goodness, it will shortly be dawn, and the activity of the day may begin!
Work may again prove, in a way, to be an anodyne.  In the meantime I must
write on, lest despair overwhelm me.

Once during the night I thought I heard a footstep outside.  I rushed to
the window and looked out, but there was nothing to see, no sound to
hear.  That was a little after one o'clock.  I feared to go outside, lest
that should alarm her; so I came back to my table.  I could not write,
but I sat as if writing for a while.  But I could not stand it, so rose
and walked about the room.  As I walked I felt that my Lady--it gives me
a pang every time I remember that I do not know even her name--was not
quite so far away from me.  It made my heart beat to think that it might
mean that she was coming to me.  Could not I as well as Aunt Janet have a
little Second Sight!  I went towards the window, and, standing behind the
curtain, listened.  Far away I thought I heard a cry, and ran out on the
Terrace; but there was no sound to be heard, and no sign of any living
thing anywhere; so I took it for granted that it was the cry of some
night bird, and came back to my room, and wrote at my journal till I was
calm.  I think my nerves must be getting out of order, when every sound
of the night seems to have a special meaning for me.


RUPERT'S JOURNAL--_Continued_.


                                                            _July_ 7, 1907

When the grey of the morning came, I gave up hope of my wife appearing,
and made up my mind that, so soon as I could get away without exciting
Aunt Janet's attention, I would go to St. Sava's.  I always eat a good
breakfast, and did I forgo it altogether, it would be sure to excite her
curiosity--a thing I do not wish at present.  As there was still time to
wait, I lay down on my bed as I was, and--such is the way of
Fate--shortly fell asleep.

I was awakened by a terrific clattering at my door.  When I opened it I
found a little group of servants, very apologetic at awaking me without
instructions.  The chief of them explained that a young priest had come
from the Vladika with a message so urgent that he insisted on seeing me
immediately at all hazards.  I came out at once, and found him in the
hall of the Castle, standing before the great fire, which was always lit
in the early morning.  He had a letter in his hand, but before giving it
to me he said:

"I am sent by the Vladika, who pressed on me that I was not to lose a
single instant in seeing you; that time is of golden price--nay, beyond
price.  This letter, amongst other things, vouches for me.  A terrible
misfortune has occurred.  The daughter of our leader has disappeared
during last night--the same, he commanded me to remind you, that he spoke
of at the meeting when he would not let the mountaineers fire their guns.
No sign of her can be found, and it is believed that she has been carried
off by the emissaries of the Sultan of Turkey, who once before brought
our nations to the verge of war by demanding her as a wife.  I was also
to say that the Vladika Plamenac would have come himself, but that it was
necessary that he should at once consult with the Archbishop, Stevan
Palealogue, as to what step is best to take in this dire calamity.  He
has sent out a search-party under the Archimandrite of Spazac, Petrof
Vlastimir, who is to come on here with any news he can get, as you have
command of the signalling, and can best spread the news.  He knows that
you, Gospodar, are in your great heart one of our compatriots, and that
you have already proved your friendship by many efforts to strengthen our
hands for war.  And as a great compatriot, he calls on you to aid us in
our need."  He then handed me the letter, and stood by respectfully
whilst I broke the seal and read it.  It was written in great haste, and
signed by the Vladika.

"Come with us now in our nation's peril.  Help us to rescue what we most
adore, and henceforth we shall hold you in our hearts.  You shall learn
how the men of the Blue Mountains can love faith and valour.  Come!"

This was a task indeed--a duty worthy of any man.  It thrilled me to the
core to know that the men of the Blue Mountains had called on me in their
dire need.  It woke all the fighting instinct of my Viking forbears, and
I vowed in my heart that they should be satisfied with my work.  I called
to me the corps of signallers who were in the house, and led them to the
Castle roof, taking with me the young messenger-priest.

"Come with me," I said to him, "and see how I answer the Vladika's
command."

The National flag was run up--the established signal that the nation was
in need.  Instantly on every summit near and far was seen the flutter of
an answering flag.  Quickly followed the signal that commanded the call
to arms.

One by one I gave the signallers orders in quick succession, for the plan
of search unfolded itself to me as I went on.  The arms of the semaphore
whirled in a way that made the young priest stare.  One by one, as they
took their orders, the signallers seemed to catch fire.  Instinctively
they understood the plan, and worked like demigods.  They knew that so
widespread a movement had its best chance in rapidity and in unity of
action.

From the forest which lay in sight of the Castle came a wild cheering,
which seemed to interpret the former stillness of the hills.  It was good
to feel that those who saw the signals--types of many--were ready.  I saw
the look of expectation on the face of the messenger-priest, and rejoiced
at the glow that came as I turned to him to speak.  Of course, he wanted
to know something of what was going on.  I saw the flashing of my own
eyes reflected in his as I spoke:

"Tell the Vladika that within a minute of his message being read the Land
of the Blue Mountains was awake.  The mountaineers are already marching,
and before the sun is high there will be a line of guards within hail of
each other round the whole frontier--from Angusa to Ilsin; from Ilsin to
Bajana; from Bajana to Ispazar; from Ispazar to Volok; from Volok to
Tatra; from Tatra to Domitan; from Domitan to Gravaja; and from Gravaja
back to Angusa.  The line is double.  The old men keep guard on the line,
and the young men advance.  These will close in at the advancing line, so
that nothing can escape them.  They will cover mountain-top and forest
depth, and will close in finally on the Castle here, which they can
behold from afar.  My own yacht is here, and will sweep the coast from
end to end.  It is the fastest boat afloat, and armed against a squadron.
Here will all signals come.  In an hour where we stand will be a signal
bureau, where trained eyes will watch night and day till the lost one has
been found and the outrage has been avenged.  The robbers are even now
within a ring of steel, and cannot escape."

The young priest, all on fire, sprang on the battlements and shouted to
the crowd, which was massing round the Castle in the gardens far below.
The forest was giving up its units till they seemed like the nucleus of
an army.  The men cheered lustily, till the sound swung high up to us
like the roaring of a winter sea.  With bared heads they were crying:

"God and the Blue Mountains!  God and the Blue Mountains!"

I ran down to them as quickly as I could, and began to issue their
instructions.  Within a time to be computed by minutes the whole number,
organized by sections, had started to scour the neighbouring mountains.
At first they had only understood the call to arms for general safety.
But when they learned that the daughter of a chief had been captured,
they simply went mad.  From something which the messenger first said, but
which I could not catch or did not understand, the blow seemed to have
for them some sort of personal significance which wrought them to a
frenzy.

When the bulk of the men had disappeared, I took with me a few of my own
men and several of the mountaineers whom I had asked to remain, and
together we went to the hidden ravine which I knew.  We found the place
empty; but there were unmistakable signs that a party of men had been
encamped there for several days.  Some of our men, who were skilled in
woodcraft and in signs generally, agreed that there must have been some
twenty of them.  As they could not find any trail either coming to or
going from the place, they came to the conclusion that they must have
come separately from different directions and gathered there, and that
they must have departed in something of the same mysterious way.

However, this was, at any rate, some sort of a beginning, and the men
separated, having agreed amongst themselves to make a wide cast round the
place in the search for tracks.  Whoever should find a trail was to
follow with at least one comrade, and when there was any definite news,
it was to be signalled to the Castle.

I myself returned at once, and set the signallers to work to spread
amongst our own people such news as we had.

When presently such discoveries as had been made were signalled with
flags to the Castle, it was found that the marauders had, in their
flight, followed a strangely zigzag course.  It was evident that, in
trying to baffle pursuit, they had tried to avoid places which they
thought might be dangerous to them.  This may have been simply a method
to disconcert pursuit.  If so, it was, in a measure, excellent, for none
of those immediately following could possibly tell in what direction they
were heading.  It was only when we worked the course on the great map in
the signaller's room (which was the old guard room of the Castle) that we
could get an inkling of the general direction of their flight.  This gave
added trouble to the pursuit; for the men who followed, being ignorant of
their general intent, could not ever take chance to head them off, but
had to be ready to follow in any or every direction.  In this manner the
pursuit was altogether a stern chase, and therefore bound to be a long
one.

As at present we could not do anything till the intended route was more
marked, I left the signalling corps to the task of receiving and giving
information to the moving bands, so that, if occasion served, they might
head off the marauders.  I myself took Rooke, as captain of the yacht,
and swept out of the creek.  We ran up north to Dalairi, then down south
to Olesso, and came back to Vissarion.  We saw nothing suspicious except,
far off to the extreme southward, one warship which flew no flag.  Rooke,
however, who seemed to know ships by instinct, said she was a Turk; so on
our return we signalled along the whole shore to watch her.  Rooke held
The Lady--which was the name I had given the armoured yacht--in readiness
to dart out in case anything suspicious was reported.  He was not to
stand on any ceremony, but if necessary to attack.  We did not intend to
lose a point in this desperate struggle which we had undertaken.  We had
placed in different likely spots a couple of our own men to look after
the signalling.

When I got back I found that the route of the fugitives, who had now
joined into one party, had been definitely ascertained.  They had gone
south, but manifestly taking alarm from the advancing line of guards, had
headed up again to the north-east, where the country was broader and the
mountains wilder and less inhabited.

Forthwith, leaving the signalling altogether in the hands of the fighting
priests, I took a small chosen band of the mountaineers of our own
district, and made, with all the speed we could, to cut across the track
of the fugitives a little ahead of them.  The Archimandrite (Abbot) of
Spazac, who had just arrived, came with us.  He is a splendid man--a real
fighter as well as a holy cleric, as good with his handjar as with his
Bible, and a runner to beat the band.  The marauders were going at a
fearful pace, considering that they were all afoot; so we had to go fast
also!  Amongst these mountains there is no other means of progressing.
Our own men were so aflame with ardour that I could not but notice that
they, more than any of the others whom I had seen, had some special cause
for concern.

When I mentioned it to the Archimandrite, who moved by my side, he
answered:

"All natural enough; they are not only fighting for their country, but
for their own!"  I did not quite understand his answer, and so began to
ask him some questions, to the effect that I soon began to understand a
good deal more than he did.

_Letter from Archbishop Stevan Palealogue_, _Head of the Eastern Church
of the Blue Mountains_, _to the Lady Janet MacKelpie_, _Vissarion_.

                                                   _Written July_ 9, 1907.

    HONOURED LADY,

    As you wish for an understanding regarding the late lamentable
    occurrence in which so much danger was incurred to this our Land of
    the Blue Mountains, and one dear to us, I send these words by request
    of the Gospodar Rupert, beloved of our mountaineers.

    When the Voivode Peter Vissarion made his journey to the great nation
    to whom we looked in our hour of need, it was necessary that he
    should go in secret.  The Turk was at our gates, and full of the
    malice of baffled greed.  Already he had tried to arrange a marriage
    with the Voivodin, so that in time to come he, as her husband, might
    have established a claim to the inheritance of the land.  Well he
    knew, as do all men, that the Blue Mountaineers owe allegiance to
    none that they themselves do not appoint to rulership.  This has been
    the history in the past.  But now and again an individual has arisen
    or come to the front adapted personally for such government as this
    land requires.  And so the Lady Teuta, Voivodin of the Blue
    Mountains, was put for her proper guarding in the charge of myself as
    Head of the Eastern Church in the Land of the Blue Mountains, steps
    being taken in such wise that no capture of her could be effected by
    unscrupulous enemies of this our Land.  This task and guardianship
    was gladly held as an honour by all concerned.  For the Voivodin
    Teuta of Vissarion must be taken as representing in her own person
    the glory of the old Serb race, inasmuch as being the only child of
    the Voivode Vissarion, last male of his princely race--the race which
    ever, during the ten centuries of our history, unflinchingly gave
    life and all they held for the protection, safety, and well-being of
    the Land of the Blue Mountains.  Never during those centuries had any
    one of the race been known to fail in patriotism, or to draw back
    from any loss or hardship enjoined by high duty or stress of need.
    Moreover, this was the race of that first Voivode Vissarion, of whom,
    in legend, it was prophesied that he--once known as "The Sword of
    Freedom," a giant amongst men--would some day, when the nation had
    need of him, come forth from his water-tomb in the lost Lake of Reo,
    and lead once more the men of the Blue Mountains to lasting victory.
    This noble race, then, had come to be known as the last hope of the
    Land.  So that when the Voivode was away on his country's service,
    his daughter should be closely guarded.  Soon after the Voivode had
    gone, it was reported that he might be long delayed in his
    diplomacies, and also in studying the system of Constitutional
    Monarchy, for which it had been hoped to exchange our imperfect
    political system.  I may say _inter alia_ that he was mentioned as to
    be the first king when the new constitution should have been
    arranged.

    Then a great misfortune came on us; a terrible grief overshadowed the
    land.  After a short illness, the Voivodin Teuta Vissarion died
    mysteriously of a mysterious ailment.  The grief of the mountaineers
    was so great that it became necessary for the governing Council to
    warn them not to allow their sorrow to be seen.  It was imperatively
    necessary that the fact of her death should be kept secret.  For
    there were dangers and difficulties of several kinds.  In the first
    place it was advisable that even her father should be kept in
    ignorance of his terrible loss.  It was well known that he held her
    as the very core of his heart and that if he should hear of her
    death, he would be too much prostrated to be able to do the intricate
    and delicate work which he had undertaken.  Nay, more: he would never
    remain afar off, under the sad circumstances, but would straightway
    return, so as to be in the land where she lay.  Then suspicions would
    crop up, and the truth must shortly be known afield, with the
    inevitable result that the Land would become the very centre of a war
    of many nations.

    In the second place, if the Turks were to know that the race of
    Vissarion was becoming extinct, this would encourage them to further
    aggression, which would become immediate should they find out that
    the Voivode was himself away.  It was well known that they were
    already only suspending hostilities until a fitting opportunity
    should arise.  Their desire for aggression had become acute after the
    refusal of the nation, and of the girl herself, that she should
    become a wife of the Sultan.

    The dead girl had been buried in the Crypt of the church of St. Sava,
    and day after day and night after night, singly and in parties, the
    sorrowing mountaineers had come to pay devotion and reverence at her
    tomb.  So many had wished to have a last glimpse of her face that the
    Vladika had, with my own consent as Archbishop, arranged for a glass
    cover to be put over the stone coffin wherein her body lay.

    After a little time, however, there came a belief to all concerned in
    the guarding of the body--these, of course, being the priests of
    various degrees of dignity appointed to the task--that the Voivodin
    was not really dead, but only in a strangely-prolonged trance.
    Thereupon a new complication arose.  Our mountaineers are, as perhaps
    you know, by nature deeply suspicious--a characteristic of all brave
    and self-sacrificing people who are jealous of their noble heritage.
    Having, as they believed, seen the girl dead, they might not be
    willing to accept the fact of her being alive.  They might even
    imagine that there was on foot some deep, dark plot which was, or
    might be, a menace, now or hereafter, to their independence.  In any
    case, there would be certain to be two parties on the subject, a
    dangerous and deplorable thing in the present condition of affairs.

    As the trance, or catalepsy, whatever it was, continued for many
    days, there had been ample time for the leaders of the Council, the
    Vladika, the priesthood represented by the Archimandrite of Spazac,
    myself as Archbishop and guardian of the Voivodin in her father's
    absence, to consult as to a policy to be observed in case of the girl
    awaking.  For in such case the difficulty of the situation would be
    multiplied indefinitely.  In the secret chambers of St. Sava's we had
    many secret meetings, and were finally converging on agreement when
    the end of the trance came.

    The girl awoke!

    She was, of course, terribly frightened when she found herself in a
    tomb in the Crypt.  It was truly fortunate that the great candles
    around her tomb had been kept lighted, for their light mitigated the
    horror of the place.  Had she waked in darkness, her reason might
    have become unseated.

    She was, however, a very noble girl; brave, with extraordinary will,
    and resolution, and self-command, and power of endurance.  When she
    had been taken into one of the secret chambers of the church, where
    she was warmed and cared for, a hurried meeting was held by the
    Vladika, myself, and the chiefs of the National Council.  Word had
    been at once sent to me of the joyful news of her recovery; and with
    the utmost haste I came, arriving in time to take a part in the
    Council.

    At the meeting the Voivodin was herself present, and full confidence
    of the situation was made to her.  She herself proposed that the
    belief in her death should be allowed to prevail until the return of
    her father, when all could be effectively made clear.  To this end
    she undertook to submit to the terrific strain which such a
    proceeding would involve.  At first we men could not believe that any
    woman could go through with such a task, and some of us did not
    hesitate to voice our doubts--our disbelief.  But she stood to her
    guns, and actually down-faced us.  At the last we, remembering things
    that had been done, though long ages ago, by others of her race, came
    to believe not merely in her self-belief and intention, but even in
    the feasibility of her plan.  She took the most solemn oaths not to
    betray the secret under any possible stress.

    The priesthood undertook through the Vladika and myself to further a
    ghostly belief amongst the mountaineers which would tend to prevent a
    too close or too persistent observation.  The Vampire legend was
    spread as a protection against partial discovery by any mischance,
    and other weird beliefs were set afoot and fostered.  Arrangements
    were made that only on certain days were the mountaineers to be
    admitted to the Crypt, she agreeing that for these occasions she was
    to take opiates or carry out any other aid to the preservation of the
    secret.  She was willing, she impressed upon us, to make any personal
    sacrifice which might be deemed necessary for the carrying out her
    father's task for the good of the nation.

    Of course, she had at first terrible frights lying alone in the
    horror of the Crypt.  But after a time the terrors of the situation,
    if they did not cease, were mitigated.  There are secret caverns off
    the Crypt, wherein in troublous times the priests and others of high
    place have found safe retreat.  One of these was prepared for the
    Voivodin, and there she remained, except for such times as she was on
    show--and certain other times of which I shall tell you.  Provision
    was made for the possibility of any accidental visit to the church.
    At such times, warned by an automatic signal from the opening door,
    she was to take her place in the tomb.  The mechanism was so arranged
    that the means to replace the glass cover, and to take the opiate,
    were there ready to her hand.  There was to be always a watch of
    priests at night in the church, to guard her from ghostly fears as
    well as from more physical dangers; and if she was actually in her
    tomb, it was to be visited at certain intervals.  Even the draperies
    which covered her in the sarcophagus were rested on a bridge placed
    from side to side just above her, so as to hide the rising and
    falling of her bosom as she slept under the narcotic.

    After a while the prolonged strain began to tell so much on her that
    it was decided that she should take now and again exercise out of
    doors.  This was not difficult, for when the Vampire story which we
    had spread began to be widely known, her being seen would be accepted
    as a proof of its truth.  Still, as there was a certain danger in her
    being seen at all, we thought it necessary to exact from her a solemn
    oath that so long as her sad task lasted she should under no
    circumstances ever wear any dress but her shroud--this being the only
    way to insure secrecy and to prevail against accident.

    There is a secret way from the Crypt to a sea cavern, whose entrance
    is at high-tide under the water-line at the base of the cliff on
    which the church is built.  A boat, shaped like a coffin, was
    provided for her; and in this she was accustomed to pass across the
    creek whenever she wished to make excursion.  It was an excellent
    device, and most efficacious in disseminating the Vampire belief.

    This state of things had now lasted from before the time when the
    Gospodar Rupert came to Vissarion up to the day of the arrival of the
    armoured yacht.

    That night the priest on duty, on going his round of the Crypt just
    before dawn, found the tomb empty.  He called the others, and they
    made full search.  The boat was gone from the cavern, but on making
    search they found it on the farther side of the creek, close to the
    garden stairs.  Beyond this they could discover nothing.  She seemed
    to have disappeared without leaving a trace.

    Straightway they went to the Vladika, and signalled to me by the
    fire-signal at the monastery at Astrag, where I then was.  I took a
    band of mountaineers with me, and set out to scour the country.  But
    before going I sent an urgent message to the Gospodar Rupert, asking
    him, who showed so much interest and love to our Land, to help us in
    our trouble.  He, of course, knew nothing then of all have now told
    you.  Nevertheless, he devoted himself whole-heartedly to our
    needs--as doubtless you know.

    But the time had now come close when the Voivode Vissarion was about
    to return from his mission; and we of the council of his daughter's
    guardianship were beginning to arrange matters so that at his return
    the good news of her being still alive could be made public.  With
    her father present to vouch for her, no question as to truth could
    arise.

    But by some means the Turkish "Bureau of Spies" must have got
    knowledge of the fact already.  To steal a dead body for the purpose
    of later establishing a fictitious claim would have been an
    enterprise even more desperate than that already undertaken.  We
    inferred from many signs, made known to us in an investigation, that
    a daring party of the Sultan's emissaries had made a secret incursion
    with the object of kidnapping the Voivodin.  They must have been bold
    of heart and strong of resource to enter the Land of the Blue
    Mountains on any errand, let alone such a desperate one as this.  For
    centuries we have been teaching the Turk through bitter lessons that
    it is neither a safe task nor an easy one to make incursion here.

    How they did it we know not--at present; but enter they did, and,
    after waiting in some secret hiding-place for a favourable
    opportunity, secured their prey.  We know not even now whether they
    had found entrance to the Crypt and stole, as they thought, the dead
    body, or whether, by some dire mischance, they found her
    abroad--under her disguise as a ghost.  At any rate, they had
    captured her, and through devious ways amongst the mountains were
    bearing her back to Turkey.  It was manifest that when she was on
    Turkish soil the Sultan would force a marriage on her so as
    eventually to secure for himself or his successors as against all
    other nations a claim for the suzerainty or guardianship of the Blue
    Mountains.

    Such was the state of affairs when the Gospodar Rupert threw himself
    into the pursuit with fiery zeal and the Berserk passion which he
    inherited from Viking ancestors, whence of old came "The Sword of
    Freedom" himself.

    But at that very time was another possibility which the Gospodar was
    himself the first to realize.  Failing the getting the Voivodin safe
    to Turkish soil, the ravishers might kill her!  This would be
    entirely in accord with the base traditions and history of the
    Moslems.  So, too, it would accord with Turkish customs and the
    Sultan's present desires.  It would, in its way, benefit the ultimate
    strategetic ends of Turkey.  For were once the Vissarion race at an
    end, the subjection of the Land of the Blue Mountains might, in their
    view, be an easier task than it had yet been found to be.

    Such, illustrious lady, were the conditions of affairs when the
    Gospodar Rupert first drew his handjar for the Blue Mountains and
    what it held most dear.

                                                               PALEALOGUE,
              _Archbishop of the Eastern Church_, _in the Land of the Blue
                                                               Mountains_.


RUPERT'S JOURNAL--_Continued_.


                                                           _July_ 8, 1907.

I wonder if ever in the long, strange history of the world had there come
to any other such glad tidings as came to me--and even then rather
inferentially than directly--from the Archimandrite's answers to my
questioning.  Happily I was able to restrain myself, or I should have
created some strange confusion which might have evoked distrust, and
would certainly have hampered us in our pursuit.  For a little I could
hardly accept the truth which wove itself through my brain as the true
inwardness of each fact came home to me and took its place in the whole
fabric.  But even the most welcome truth has to be accepted some time by
even a doubting heart.  My heart, whatever it may have been, was not then
a doubting heart, but a very, very grateful one.  It was only the
splendid magnitude of the truth which forbade its immediate acceptance.
I could have shouted for joy, and only stilled myself by keeping my
thoughts fixed on the danger which my wife was in.  My wife!  My wife!
Not a Vampire; not a poor harassed creature doomed to terrible woe, but a
splendid woman, brave beyond belief, patriotic in a way which has but few
peers even in the wide history of bravery!  I began to understand the
true meaning of the strange occurrences that have come into my life.
Even the origin and purpose of that first strange visit to my room became
clear.  No wonder that the girl could move about the Castle in so
mysterious a manner.  She had lived there all her life, and was familiar
with the secret ways of entrance and exit.  I had always believed that
the place must have been honeycombed with secret passages.  No wonder
that she could find a way to the battlements, mysterious to everybody
else.  No wonder that she could meet me at the Flagstaff when she so
desired.

To say that I was in a tumult would be to but faintly express my
condition.  I was rapt into a heaven of delight which had no measure in
all my adventurous life--the lifting of the veil which showed that my
wife--mine--won in all sincerity in the very teeth of appalling
difficulties and dangers--was no Vampire, no corpse, no ghost or phantom,
but a real woman of flesh and blood, of affection, and love, and passion.
Respectful without servility Satire without bitterness Says all that he
means, and resolutely means all that he can say She awaits your replies
without interruption Situations in life where we are condemned to see
evil done Talent without artifice That Which Often It is Best to
Ignore The King replied that "too much was too much" The monarch
suddenly enough rejuvenated his attire The pulpit is in want of
comedians; they work wonders there Then comes discouragement; after
that, habit There is an exaggeration in your sorrow These liars in
surplice, in black cassock, or in purple Time, the irresistible
healer Trust not in kings Violent passion had changed to mere
friendship Weeping just as if princes had not got to die like anybody
else Went so far as to shed tears, his most difficult feat of all
What they need is abstinence, prohibitions, thwartings When women
rule their reign is always stormy and troublous When one has seen
him, everything is excusable When one has been pretty, one imagines
that one is still so Wife: property or of furniture, useful to his
house Wish you had the generosity to show, now and again, less wit
Women who misconduct themselves are pitiless and severe Won for
himself a great name and great wealth by words Would you like to
be a cardinal?

I can manage that You know, madame, that he generally gets everything he
wants

MEMOIRS OF LOUIS XIV, BY DUCHESSE D'ORLEANS

MEMOIRS OF LOUIS XIV, BY DUCH D'ORLEANS, V1 [CM#18][cm18b10.txt]3855
A pious Capuchin explained her dream to her Art of satisfying
people even while he reproved their requests Asked the King a hundred
questions, which is not the fashion Because the Queen has only the
rinsings of the glass Duplicity passes for wit, and frankness is looked
upon as folly Even doubt whether he believes in the existence of a God
Follies and superstitions as the rosaries and other things Formerly the
custom to swear horridly on all occasions Great filthiness in the
interior of their houses Great things originated from the most
insignificant trifles He always slept in the Queen's bed He had
good natural wit, but was extremely ignorant He was a good sort of
man, notwithstanding his weaknesses Her teeth were very ugly, being
black and broken (Queen) I am unquestionably very ugly I formed a
religion of my own I have seldom been at a loss for something to
laugh at I never take medicine but on urgent occasions It was not
permitted to argue with him Jewels and decoration attract attention
(to the ugly) Louis XIV. scarcely knew how to read and write Made
his mistresses treat her with all becoming respect My husband
proposed separate beds No man more ignorant of religion than the
King was Nobility becoming poor could not afford to buy the high
offices Not lawful to investigate in matters of religion Robes
battantes for the purpose of concealing her pregnancy Seeing myself
look as ugly as I really am (in a mirror) So great a fear of hell
had been instilled into the King Soon tired of war, and wishing to
return home (Louis XIV) The old woman (Madame Maintenon) To die is
the least event of my life (Maintenon) To tell the truth, I was
never very fond of having children You are a King; you weep, and
yet I go You never look in a mirror when you pass it
MEMOIRS OF LOUIS XIV, BY DUCH D'ORLEANS, V2 [CM#19][cm19b10.txt]3856

Always has a fictitious malady in reserve I had a mind, he said,
to commit one sin, but not two I wished the husband not to be
informed of it Old Maintenon Provided they are talked of, they are
satisfied That what he called love was mere debauchery
MEMOIRS OF LOUIS XIV, BY DUCH D'ORLEANS, V3 [CM#20][cm20b10.txt]3857

Bad company spoils good manners Duc de Grammont, then Ambassador,
played the Confessor Frequent and excessive bathing have undermined
her health It is an unfortunate thing for a man not to know himself
Like will to like
MEMOIRS OF LOUIS XIV, BY DUCH D'ORLEANS, V4 [CM#21][cm21b10.txt]3858

But all shame is extinct in France Exclaimed so long against high
head-dresses Honour grows again as well as hair I thought I should
win it, and so I lost it If I should die, shall I not have lived
long enough?

For
    myself, I wanted to hurry on, and to come at once to the fight with
    my country's foes; and well I knew that the Gospodar Rupert, with a
    lion's heart meet for his giant body, would press on with a matchless
    speed.  We of the Blue Mountains do not lag when our foes are in
    front of us; most of all do we of the Eastern Church press on when
    the Crescent wars against the Cross!

    We took with us no gear or hamper of any kind; no coverings except
    what we stood in; no food--nothing but our handjars and our rifles,
    with a sufficiency of ammunition.  Before starting, the Gospodar gave
    hurried orders by signal from the Castle to have food and ammunition
    sent to us (as we might signal) by the nearest hamlet.

    It was high noon when we started, only ten strong--for our leader
    would take none but approved runners who could shoot straight and use
    the handjar as it should be used.  So as we went light, we expected
    to go fast.  By this time we knew from the reports signalled to
    Vissarion that the enemies were chosen men of no despicable prowess.

    The Keeper of the Green Flag of Islam is well served, and as though
    the Turk is an infidel and a dog, he is sometimes brave and strong.
    Indeed, except when he passes the confines of the Blue Mountains, he
    has been known to do stirring deeds.  But as none who have dared to
    wander in amongst our hills ever return to their own land, we may not
    know of how they speak at home of their battles here.  Still, these
    men were evidently not to be despised; and our Gospodar, who is a
    wise man as well as a valiant, warned us to be prudent, and not to
    despise our foes over much.  We did as he counselled, and in proof we
    only took ten men, as we had only twenty against us.  But then there
    was at stake much beyond life, and we took no risks.  So, as the
    great clock at Vissarion clanged of noon, the eight fastest runners
    of the Blue Mountains, together with the Gospodar Rupert and myself,
    swept out on our journey.  It had been signalled to us that the
    course which the marauders had as yet taken in their flight was a
    zigzag one, running eccentrically at all sorts of angles in all sorts
    of directions.  But our leader had marked out a course where we might
    intercept our foes across the main line of their flight; and till we
    had reached that region we paused not a second, but went as fast as
    we could all night long.  Indeed, it was amongst us a race as was the
    Olympic race of old Greece, each one vying with his fellows, though
    not in jealous emulation, but in high spirit, to best serve his
    country and the Voivodin Teuta.  Foremost amongst us went the
    Gospodar, bearing himself as a Paladin of old, his mighty form
    pausing for no obstacle.  Perpetually did he urge us on.  He would
    not stop or pause for a moment, but often as he and I ran
    together--for, lady, in my youth I was the fleetest of all in the
    race, and even that now can head a battalion when duty calls--he
    would ask me certain questions as to the Lady Teuta and of the
    strange manner of her reputed death, as it was gradually unfolded in
    my answers to his questioning.  And as each new phase of knowledge
    came to him, he would rush on as one possessed of fiends: whereat our
    mountaineers, who seem to respect even fiends for their thoroughness,
    would strive to keep pace with him till they too seemed worked into
    diabolic possession.  And I myself, left alone in the calmness of
    sacerdotal office, forgot even that.  With surging ears and eyes that
    saw blood, I rushed along with best of them.

    Then truly the spirit of a great captain showed itself in the
    Gospodar, for when others were charged with fury he began to force
    himself into calm, so that out of his present self-command and the
    memory of his exalted position came a worthy strategy and thought for
    every contingency that might arise.  So that when some new direction
    was required for our guidance, there was no hesitation in its coming.
    We, nine men of varying kinds, all felt that we had a master; and so,
    being willing to limit ourselves to strict obedience, we were free to
    use such thoughts as well as such powers as we had to the best
    advantage of the doing.

    We came across the trail of the flying marauders on the second
    morning after the abduction, a little before noon.  It was easy
    enough to see, for by this time the miscreants were all together, and
    our people, who were woodlanders, were able to tell much of the party
    that passed.  These were evidently in a terrified hurry, for they had
    taken no precautions such as are necessary baffle pursuit, and all of
    which take time.  Our foresters said that two went ahead and two
    behind.  In the centre went the mass, moving close together, as
    though surrounding their prisoner.  We caught not even a single
    glimpse her--could not have, they encompassed her so closely.  But
    our foresters saw other than the mass; the ground that had been
    passed was before them.  They knew that the prisoner had gone
    unwillingly--nay, more: one of them said as he rose from his knees,
    where he had been examining of the ground:

    "The misbegotten dogs have been urging her on with their yataghans!
    There are drops of blood, though there are no blood-marks on her
    feet."

    Whereupon the Gospodar flamed with passion.  His teeth ground
    together, and with a deep-breathed "On, on!" he sprang off again,
    handjar in hand, on the track.

    Before long we saw the party in the distance.  They this were far
    below us in a deep valley, although the track of their going passed
    away to the right hand.  They were making for the base of the great
    cliff, which rose before us all.  Their reason was twofold, as we
    soon knew.  Far off down the valley which they were crossing we saw
    signs of persons coming in haste, who must be of the search party
    coming from the north.  Though the trees hid them, we could not
    mistake the signs.  I was myself forester enough to have no doubt.
    Again, it was evident that the young Voivodin could travel no longer
    at the dreadful pace at which they had been going.  Those blood-marks
    told their own tale!  They meant to make a last stand here in case
    they should be discovered.

    Then it was that he, who amongst us all had been most fierce and most
    bent on rapid pursuit, became the most the calm.  Raising his hand
    for silence--though, God knows, we were and had been silent enough
    during that long rush through the forest--he said, in a low, keen
    whisper which cut the silence like a knife:

    "My friends, the time is come for action.  God be thanked, who has
    now brought us face to face with our foes!  But we must be careful
    here--not on our own account, for we wish nothing more than to rush
    on and conquer or die--but for the sake of her whom you love, and
    whom I, too, love.  She is in danger from anything which may give
    warning to those fiends.  If they know or even suspect for an instant
    that we are near, they will murder her . . . "

    Here his voice broke for an instant with the extremity of his passion
    or the depth of his feeling--I hardly know which; I think both acted
    on him.

    "We know from those blood-marks what they can do--even to her."  His
    teeth ground together again, but he went on without stopping further:

    "Let us arrange the battle.  Though we are but little distance from
    them as the crow flies, the way is far to travel.  There is, I can
    see, but one path down to the valley from this side.  That they have
    gone by, and that they will sure to guard--to watch, at any rate.
    Let us divide, as to surround them.  The cliff towards which they
    make runs far to the left without a break.  That to the right we
    cannot see from this spot; but from the nature of the ground it is
    not unlikely that it turns round in this direction, making the hither
    end of the valley like a vast pocket or amphitheatre.  As they have
    studied the ground in other places, they may have done so in this,
    and have come hither as to a known refuge.  Let one man, a marksman,
    stay here."

    As he spoke a man stepped to the front.  He was, I knew, an excellent
    shot.

    "Let two others go to the left and try to find a way down the cliff
    before us.  When they have descended to the level of the valley--path
    or no path--let them advance cautiously and secretly, keeping their
    guns in readiness.  But they must not fire till need.  Remember, my
    brothers," said, turning to those who stepped out a pace or two to
    the left, "that the first shot gives the warning which will be the
    signal for the Voivodin's death.  These men will not hesitate.  You
    must judge yourselves of the time to shoot.  The others of us will
    move to the right and try to find a path on that side.  If the valley
    be indeed a pocket between the cliffs, we must find a way down that
    is not a path!"

    As he spoke thus there was a blaze in his eyes that betokened no good
    to aught that might stand in his way.  I ran by his side as we moved
    to the right.

    It was as he surmised about the cliff.  When we got a little on our
    way we saw how the rocky formation trended to our right, till,
    finally, with a wide curve, it came round to the other side.

    It was a fearful valley that, with its narrow girth and its towering
    walls that seemed to topple over.  On the farther side from us the
    great trees that clothed the slope of the mountain over it grew down
    to the very edge of the rock, so that their spreading branches hung
    far over the chasm.  And, so far as we could understand, the same
    condition existed on our own side.  Below us the valley was dark even
    in the daylight.  We could best tell the movement of the flying
    marauders by the flashes of the white shroud of their captive in the
    midst of them.

    From where we were grouped, amid the great tree-trunks on the very
    brow of the cliff, we could, when our eyes were accustomed to the
    shadow, see them quite well.  In great haste, and half dragging, half
    carrying the Voivodin, they crossed the open space and took refuge in
    a little grassy alcove surrounded, save for its tortuous entrance, by
    undergrowth.  From the valley level it was manifestly impossible to
    see them, though we from our altitude could see over the stunted
    undergrowth.  When within the glade, they took their hands from her.
    She, shuddering instinctively, withdrew to a remote corner of the
    dell.

    And then, oh, shame on their manhood!--Turks and heathens though they
    were--we could see that they had submitted her to the indignity of
    gagging her and binding her hands!

    Our Voivodin Teuta bound!  To one and all of us it was like lashing
    us across the face.  I heard the Gospodar's teeth grind again.  But
    once more he schooled himself to calmness ere he said:

    "It is, perhaps, as well, great though the indignity be.  They are
    seeking their own doom, which is coming quickly . . . Moreover, they
    are thwarting their own base plans.  Now that she is bound they will
    trust to their binding, so that they will delay their murderous
    alternative to the very last moment.  Such is our chance of rescuing
    her alive!"

    For a few moments he stood as still as a stone, as though revolving
    something in his mind whilst he watched.  I could see that some grim
    resolution was forming in his mind, for his eyes ranged to the top of
    the trees above cliff, and down again, very slowly this time, as
    though measuring and studying the detail of what was in front of him.
    Then he spoke:

    "They are in hopes that the other pursuing party may not come across
    them.  To know that, they are waiting.  If those others do not come
    up the valley, they will proceed on their way.  They will return up
    the path the way they came.  There we can wait them, charge into the
    middle of them when she is opposite, and cut down those around her.
    Then the others will open fire, and we shall be rid of them!

    Whilst he was speaking, two of the men of our party, who I knew to be
    good sharpshooters, and who had just before lain on their faces and
    had steadied their rifles to shoot, rose to their feet.

    "Command us, Gospodar!" they said simply, as they stood to attention.
    "Shall we go to the head of the ravine road and there take hiding?"
    He thought for perhaps a minute, whilst we all stood as silent as
    images.  I could hear our hearts beating.  Then he said:

    "No, not yet.  There is time for that yet.  They will not--cannot
    stir or make plans in any way till they know whether the other party
    is coming towards them or not.  From our height here we can see what
    course the others are taking long before those villains do.  Then we
    can make our plans and be ready in time."

    We waited many minutes, but could see no further signs the other
    pursuing party.  These had evidently adopted greater caution in their
    movements as they came closer to where they expected to find the
    enemy.  The marauders began to grow anxious.  Even at our distance we
    could gather as much from their attitude and movements.

    Presently, when the suspense of their ignorance grew too much for
    them, they drew to the entrance of the glade, which was the farthest
    place to which, without exposing themselves to anyone who might come
    to the valley, they could withdraw from their captive.  Here they
    consulted together.  We could follow from their gestures what they
    were saying, for as they did not wish their prisoner to hear, their
    gesticulation was enlightening to us as to each other.  Our people,
    like all mountaineers, have good eyes, and the Gospodar is himself an
    eagle in this as in other ways.  Three men stood back from the rest.
    They stacked their rifles so that they could seize them easily.  Then
    they drew their scimitars, and stood ready, as though on guard.

    These were evidently the appointed murderers.  Well they knew their
    work; for though they stood in a desert place with none within long
    distance except the pursuing party, of whose approach they would have
    good notice, they stood so close to their prisoner that no marksman
    in the world--now or that ever had been; not William Tell
    himself--could have harmed any of them without at least endangering
    her.  Two of them turned the Voivodin round so that her face was
    towards the precipice--in which position she could not see what was
    going on--whilst he who was evidently leader of the gang explained,
    in gesture, that the others were going to spy upon the pursuing
    party.  When they had located them he, or one of his men, would come
    out of the opening of the wood wherein they had had evidence of them,
    and hold up his hand.

    That was to be the signal for the cutting of the victim's
    throat--such being the chosen method (villainous even for heathen
    murderers) of her death.  There was not one of our men who did not
    grind his teeth when we witnessed the grim action, only too
    expressive, of the Turk as he drew his right hand, clenched as though
    he held a yataghan in it, across his throat.

    At the opening of the glade all the spying party halted whilst the
    leader appointed to each his place of entry of the wood, the front of
    which extended in an almost straight across the valley from cliff to
    cliff.

    The men, stooping low when in the open, and taking instant advantage
    of every little obstacle on the ground, seemed to fade like spectres
    with incredible swiftness across the level mead, and were swallowed
    up in the wood.

    When they had disappeared the Gospodar Rupert revealed to us the
    details of the plan of action which he had revolving in his mind.  He
    motioned us to follow him: we threaded a way between the tree-trunks,
    keeping all the while on the very edge of the cliff, so that the
    space below was all visible to us.  When we had got round the curve
    sufficiently to see the whole of the wood on the valley level,
    without losing sight of the Voivodin and her appointed assassins, we
    halted under his direction.  There was an added advantage of this
    point over the other, for we could see directly the rising of the
    hill-road, up which farther side ran the continuation of the mountain
    path which the marauders had followed.  It was somewhere on that path
    that the other pursuing party had hoped to intercept the fugitives.
    The Gospodar spoke quickly, though in a voice of command which true
    soldiers love to hear:

    "Brothers, the time has come when we can strike a blow for Teuta and
    the Land.  Do you two, marksmen, take position here facing the wood."
    The two men here lay down and got their rifles ready.  "Divide the
    frontage of the wood between you; arrange between yourselves the
    limits of your positions.  The very instant one of the marauders
    appears, cover him; drop him before he emerges from the wood.  Even
    then still watch and treat similarly whoever else may take his place.
    Do this if they come singly till not a man is left.  Remember,
    brothers, that brave hearts alone will not suffice at this grim
    crisis.  In this hour the best safety of the Voivodin is in the calm
    spirit and the steady eye!"  Then he turned to the rest of us, and
    spoke to me:

    "Archimandrite of Plazac, you who are interpreter to God of the
    prayers of so many souls, my own hour has come.  If I do not return,
    convey my love to my Aunt Janet--Miss MacKelpie, at Vissarion.  There
    is but one thing left to us if we wish to save the Voivodin.  Do you,
    when the time comes, take these men and join the watcher at the top
    of the ravine road.  When the shots are fired, do you out handjar,
    and rush the ravine and across the valley.  Brothers, you may be in
    time to avenge the Voivodin, if you cannot save her.  For me there
    must be a quicker way, and to it I go.  As there is not, and will not
    be, time to traverse the path, I must take a quicker way.  Nature
    finds me a path that man has made it necessary for me to travel.  See
    that giant beech-tree that towers above the glade where the Voivodin
    is held?  There is my path!  When you from here have marked the
    return of the spies, give me a signal with your hat--do not use a
    handkerchief, as others might see its white, and take warning.  Then
    rush that ravine.  I shall take that as the signal for my descent by
    the leafy road.  If I can do naught else, I can crush the murderers
    with my falling weight, even if I have to kill her too.  At least we
    shall die together--and free.  Lay us together in the tomb at St.
    Sava's.  Farewell, if it be the last!"

    He threw down the scabbard in which he carried his handjar, adjusted
    the naked weapon in his belt behind his back, and was gone!

    We who were not watching the wood kept our eyes fixed on the great
    beech-tree, and with new interest noticed the long trailing branches
    which hung low, and swayed even in the gentle breeze.  For a few
    minutes, which seemed amazingly long, we saw no sign of him.  Then,
    high up on one of the great branches which stood clear of obscuring
    leaves, we saw something crawling flat against the bark.  He was well
    out on the branch, hanging far over the precipice.  He was looking
    over at us, and I waved my hand so that he should know we saw him.
    He was clad in green--his usual forest dress--so that there was not
    any likelihood of any other eyes noticing him.  I took off my hat,
    and held it ready to signal with when the time should come.  I
    glanced down at the glade and saw the Voivodin standing, still safe,
    with her guards so close to her as to touch.  Then I, too, fixed my
    eyes on the wood.

    Suddenly the man standing beside me seized my arm and pointed.  I
    could just see through the trees, which were lower than elsewhere in
    the front of the wood, a Turk moving stealthily; so I waved my hat.
    At the same time a rifle underneath me cracked.  A second or two
    later the spy pitched forward on his face and lay still.  At the same
    instant my eyes sought the beech-tree, and I saw the close-lying
    figure raise itself and slide forward to a joint of the branch.  Then
    the Gospodar, as he rose, hurled himself forward amid the mass of the
    trailing branches.  He dropped like a stone, and my heart sank.

    But an instant later he seemed in poise.  He had clutched the thin,
    trailing branches as he fell; and as he sank a number of leaves which
    his motion had torn off floated out round him.

    Again the rifle below me cracked, and then again, and again, and
    again.  The marauders had taken warning, and were coming out in mass.
    But my own eyes were fixed on the tree.  Almost as a thunderbolt
    falls fell the giant body of the Gospodar, his size lost in the
    immensity of his surroundings.  He fell in a series of jerks, as he
    kept clutching the trailing beech-branches whilst they lasted, and
    then other lesser verdure growing out from the fissures in the rock
    after the lengthening branches had with all their elasticity reached
    their last point.

    At length--for though this all took place in a very few seconds the
    gravity of the crisis prolonged them immeasurably--there came a large
    space of rock some three times his own length.  He did not pause, but
    swung himself to one side, so that he should fall close to the
    Voivodin and her guards.  These men did not seem to notice, for their
    attention was fixed on the wood whence they expected their messenger
    to signal.  But they raised their yataghans in readiness.  The shots
    had alarmed them; and they meant to do the murder now--messenger or
    no messenger

    But though the men did not see the danger from above, the Voivodin
    did.  She raised her eyes quickly at the first sound, and even from
    where we were, before we began to run towards the ravine path, I
    could see the triumphant look in her glorious eyes when she
    recognized the identity of the man who was seemingly coming straight
    down from Heaven itself to help her--as, indeed, she, and we too, can
    very well imagine that he did; for if ever heaven had a hand in a
    rescue on earth, it was now.

    Even during the last drop from the rocky foliage the Gospodar kept
    his head.  As he fell he pulled his handjar free, and almost as he
    was falling its sweep took off the head of one of the assassins.  As
    he touched ground he stumbled for an instant, but it was towards his
    enemies.  Twice with lightning rapidity the handjar swept the air,
    and at each sweep a head rolled on the sward.

    The Voivodin held up her tied hands.  Again the handjar flashed, this
    time downwards, and the lady was free.  Without an instant's pause
    the Gospodar tore off the gag, and with his left arm round her and
    handjar in right hand, stood face toward his living foes.  The
    Voivodin stooped suddenly, and then, raising the yataghan which had
    fallen from the hand of one of the dead marauders, stood armed beside
    him.

    The rifles were now cracking fast, as the marauders--those that were
    left of them--came rushing out into the open.  But well the marksmen
    knew their work.  Well they bore in mind the Gospodar's command
    regarding calmness.  They kept picking off the foremost men only, so
    that the onward rush never seemed to get more forward.

    As we rushed down the ravine we could see clearly all before us.  But
    now, just as we were beginning to fear lest some mischance might
    allow some of them to reach the glade, there was another cause of
    surprise--of rejoicing.

    From the face of the wood seemed to burst all at once a body of men,
    all wearing the national cap, so we knew them as our own.  They were
    all armed with the handjar only, and they came like tigers.  They
    swept on the rushing Turks as though, for all their swiftness, they
    were standing still--literally wiping them out as a child wipes a
    lesson from its slate.

    A few seconds later these were followed by a tall figure with long
    hair and beard of black mingled with grey.  Instinctively we all, as
    did those in the valley, shouted with joy.  For this was the Vladika
    Milosh Plamenac himself.

    I confess that, knowing what I knew, I was for a short space of time
    anxious lest, in the terrific excitement in which we were all lapped,
    someone might say or do something which might make for trouble later
    on.  The Gospodar's splendid achievement, which was worthy of any
    hero of old romance, had set us all on fire.  He himself must have
    been wrought to a high pitch of excitement to dare such an act; and
    it is not at such a time that discretion must be expected from any
    man.  Most of all did I fear danger from the womanhood of the
    Voivodin.  Had I not assisted at her marriage, I might not have
    understood then what it must have been to her to be saved from such a
    doom at such a time by such a man, who was so much to her, and in
    such a way.  It would have been only natural if at such a moment of
    gratitude and triumph she had proclaimed the secret which we of the
    Council of the Nation and her father's Commissioners had so
    religiously kept.  But none of us knew then either the Voivodin or
    the Gospodar Rupert as we do now.  It was well that they were as they
    are, for the jealousy and suspicion of our mountaineers might, even
    at such a moment, and even whilst they throbbed at such a deed, have
    so manifested themselves as to have left a legacy of distrust.  The
    Vladika and I, who of all (save the two immediately concerned) alone
    knew, looked at each other apprehensively.  But at that instant the
    Voivodin, with a swift glance at her husband, laid a finger on her
    lip; and he, with quick understanding, gave assurance by a similar
    sign.  Then she sank before him on one knee, and, raising his hand to
    her lips, kissed it, and spoke:

    "Gospodar Rupert, I owe you all that a woman may owe, except to God.
    You have given me life and honour!  I cannot thank you adequately for
    what you have done; my father will try to do so when he returns.  But
    I am right sure that the men of the Blue Mountains, who so value
    honour, and freedom, and liberty, and bravery, will hold you in their
    hearts for ever!"

    This was so sweetly spoken, with lips that trembled and eyes that
    swam in tears, so truly womanly and so in accord with the custom of
    our nation regarding the reverence that women owe to men, that the
    hearts of our mountaineers were touched to the quick.  Their noble
    simplicity found expression in tears.  But if the gallant Gospodar
    could have for a moment thought that so to weep was unmanly, his
    error would have had instant correction.  When the Voivodin had risen
    to her feet, which she did with queenly dignity, the men around
    closed in on the Gospodar like a wave of the sea, and in a second
    held him above their heads, tossing on their lifted hands as if on
    stormy breakers.  It was as though the old Vikings of whom we have
    heard, and whose blood flows in Rupert's veins, were choosing a chief
    in old fashion.  I was myself glad that the men were so taken up with
    the Gospodar that they did not see the glory of the moment in the
    Voivodin's starry eyes; for else they might have guessed the secret.
    I knew from the Vladika's look that he shared my own satisfaction,
    even as he had shared my anxiety.

    As the Gospodar Rupert was tossed high on the lifted hands of the
    mountaineers, their shouts rose to such a sudden volume that around
    us, as far as I could see, the frightened birds rose from the forest,
    and their noisy alarm swelled the tumult.

    The Gospodar, ever thoughtful for others, was the first to calm
    himself.

    "Come, brothers," he said, "let us gain the hilltop, where we can
    signal to the Castle.  It is right that the whole nation should share
    in the glad tidings that the Voivodin Teuta of Vissarion is free.
    But before we go, let us remove the arms and clothing of these
    carrion marauders.  We may have use for them later on."

    The mountaineers set him down, gently enough.  And he, taking the
    Voivodin by the hand, and calling the Vladika and myself close to
    them, led the way up the ravine path which the marauders had
    descended, and thence through the forest to the top of the hill that
    dominated the valley.  Here we could, from an opening amongst the
    trees, catch a glimpse far off of the battlements of Vissarion.
    Forthwith the Gospodar signalled; and on the moment a reply of their
    awaiting was given.  Then the Gospodar signalled the glad news.  It
    was received with manifest rejoicing.  We could not hear any sound so
    far away, but we could see the movement of lifted faces and waving
    hands, and knew that it was well.  But an instant after came a calm
    so dread that we knew before the semaphore had begun to work that
    there was bad news in store for us.  When the news did come, a bitter
    wailing arose amongst us; for the news that was signalled ran:

    "The Voivode has been captured by the Turks on his return, and is
    held by them at Ilsin."

    In an instant the temper of the mountaineers changed.  It was as
    though by a flash summer had changed to winter, as though the yellow
    glory of the standing corn had been obliterated by the dreary waste
    of snow.  Nay, more: it was as when one beholds the track of the
    whirlwind when the giants of the forest are levelled with the sward.
    For a few seconds there was silence; and then, with an angry roar, as
    when God speaks in the thunder, came the fierce determination of the
    men of the Blue Mountains:

    "To Ilsin!  To Ilsin!" and a stampede in the direction of the south
    began.  For, Illustrious Lady, you, perhaps, who have been for so
    short a time at Vissarion, may not know that at the extreme southern
    point of the Land of the Blue Mountains lies the little port of
    Ilsin, which long ago we wrested from the Turk.

    The stampede was checked by the command, "Halt!" spoken in a
    thunderous voice by the Gospodar.  Instinctively all stopped.  The
    Gospodar Rupert spoke again:

    "Had we not better know a little more before we start on our journey?
    I shall get by semaphore what details are known.  Do you all proceed
    in silence and as swiftly as possible.  The Vladika and I will wait
    here till we have received the news and have sent some instructions,
    when we shall follow, and, if we can, overtake you.  One thing: be
    absolutely silent on what has been.  Be secret of every detail--even
    as to the rescue of the Voivodin--except what I send."

    Without a word--thus showing immeasurable trust--the whole body--not
    a very large one, it is true--moved on, and the Gospodar began
    signalling.  As I was myself expert in the code, I did not require
    any explanation, but followed question and answer on either side.
    The first words the Gospodar Rupert signalled were:

    "Silence, absolute and profound, as to everything which has been."
    Then he asked for details of the capture of the Voivode.  The answer
    ran:

    "He was followed from Flushing, and his enemies advised by the spies
    all along the route.  At Ragusa quite a number of
    strangers--travellers seemingly--went on board the packet.  When he
    got out, the strangers debarked too, and evidently followed him,
    though, as yet, we have no details.  He disappeared at Ilsin from the
    Hotel Reo, whither he had gone.  All possible steps are being taken
    to trace his movements, and strictest silence and secrecy are
    observed."

    His answer was:

    "Good!  Keep silent and secret.  Am hurrying back.  Signal request to
    Archbishop and all members of National Council to come to Gadaar with
    all speed.  There the yacht will meet him.  Tell Rooke take yacht all
    speed to Gadaar; there meet Archbishop and Council--give him list of
    names--and return full speed.  Have ready plenty arms, six flying
    artillery.  Two hundred men, provisions three days.  Silence,
    silence.  All depends on that.  All to go on as usual at Castle,
    except to those in secret."

    When the receipt of his message had been signalled, we three--for, of
    course, the Voivodin was with us; she had refused to leave the
    Gospodar--set out hot-foot after our comrades.  But by the time we
    had descended the hill it was evident that the Voivodin could not
    keep up the terrific pace at which we were going.  She struggled
    heroically, but the long journey she had already taken, and the
    hardship and anxiety she had suffered, had told on her.  The Gospodar
    stopped, and said that it would be better that he should press on--it
    was, perhaps, her father's life--and said he would carry her.

    "No, no!" she answered.  "Go on!  I shall follow with the Vladika.
    And then you can have things ready to get on soon after the
    Archbishop and Council arrive."  They kissed each other after, on her
    part, a shy glance at me; and he went on the track of our comrades at
    a great pace.  I could see him shortly after catch them up,--though
    they, too, were going fast.  For a few minutes they ran together, he
    speaking--I could note it from the way they kept turning their heads
    towards him.  Then he broke away from them hurriedly.  He went like a
    stag breaking covert, and was soon out of sight.  They halted a
    moment or two.  Then some few ran on, and all the rest came back
    towards us.  Quickly they improvised a litter with cords and
    branches, and insisted that the Voivodin should use it.  In an
    incredibly short time we were under way again, and proceeding with
    great rapidity towards Vissarion.  The men took it in turns to help
    with the litter; I had the honour of taking a hand in the work
    myself.

    About a third of the way out from Vissarion a number of our people
    met us.  They were fresh, and as they carried the litter, we who were
    relieved were free for speed.  So we soon arrived at the Castle.

    Here we found all humming like a hive of bees.  The yacht, which
    Captain Rooke had kept fired ever since the pursuing party under the
    Gospodar had left Vissarion, was already away, and tearing up the
    coast at a fearful rate.  The rifles and ammunition were stacked on
    the quay.  The field-guns, too, were equipped, and the cases of
    ammunition ready to ship.  The men, two hundred of them, were paraded
    in full kit, ready to start at a moment's notice.  The provision for
    three days was all ready to put aboard, and barrels of fresh water to
    trundle aboard when the yacht should return.  At one end of the quay,
    ready to lift on board, stood also the Gospodar's aeroplane, fully
    equipped, and ready, if need were, for immediate flight.

    I was glad to see that the Voivodin seemed none the worse for her
    terrible experience.  She still wore her shroud; but no one seemed to
    notice it as anything strange.  The whisper had evidently gone round
    of what had been.  But discretion ruled the day.  She and the
    Gospodar met as two who had served and suffered in common; but I was
    glad to notice that both kept themselves under such control that none
    of those not already in the secret even suspected that there was any
    love between them, let alone marriage.

    We all waited with what patience we could till word was signalled
    from the Castle tower that the yacht had appeared over the northern
    horizon, and was coming down fast, keeping inshore as she came.

    When she arrived, we heard to our joy that all concerned had done
    their work well.  The Archbishop was aboard, and of the National
    Council not one was missing.  The Gospodar hurried them all into the
    great hall of the Castle, which had in the meantime been got ready.
    I, too, went with him, but the Voivodin remained without.

    When all were seated, he rose and said:

    "My Lord Archbishop, Vladika, and Lords of the Council all, I have
    dared to summon you in this way because time presses, and the life of
    one you all love--the Voivode Vissarion--is at stake.  This audacious
    attempt of the Turk is the old aggression under a new form.  It is a
    new and more daring step than ever to try to capture your chief and
    his daughter, the Voivodin, whom you love.  Happily, the latter part
    of the scheme is frustrated.  The Voivodin is safe and amongst us.
    But the Voivode is held prisoner--if, indeed, he be still alive.  He
    must be somewhere near Ilsin--but where exactly we know not as yet.
    We have an expedition ready to start the moment we receive your
    sanction--your commands.  We shall obey your wishes with our lives.
    But as the matter is instant, I would venture to ask one question,
    and one only: 'Shall we rescue the Voivode at any cost that may
    present itself?'  I ask this, for the matter has now become an
    international one, and, if our enemies are as earnest as we are, the
    issue is war!"

    Having so spoken, and with a dignity and force which is
    inexpressible, he withdrew; and the Council, having appointed a
    scribe--the monk Cristoferos, whom I had suggested--began its work.

    The Archbishop spoke:

    "Lords of the Council of the Blue Mountains, I venture to ask you
    that the answer to the Gospodar Rupert be an instant 'Yes!' together
    with thanks and honour to that gallant Englisher, who has made our
    cause his own, and who has so valiantly rescued our beloved Voivodin
    from the ruthless hands of our enemies."  Forthwith the oldest member
    of the Council--Nicolos of Volok--rose, and, after throwing a
    searching look round the faces of all, and seeing grave nods of
    assent--for not a word was spoken--said to him who held the door:
    "Summon the Gospodar Rupert forthwith!"  When Rupert entered, he
    spoke to him:

    "Gospodar Rupert, the Council of the Blue Mountains has only one
    answer to give: Proceed!  Rescue the Voivode Vissarion, whatever the
    cost may be!  You hold henceforth in your hand the handjar of our
    nation, as already, for what you have done in your valiant rescue of
    our beloved Voivodin, your breast holds the heart of our people.
    Proceed at once!  We give you, I fear, little time; but we know that
    such is your own wish.  Later, we shall issue formal authorization,
    so that if war may ensue, our allies may understand that you have
    acted for the nation, and also such letters credential as may be
    required by you in this exceptional service.  These shall follow you
    within an hour.  For our enemies we take no account.  See, we draw
    the handjar that we offer you."  As one man all in the hall drew
    their handjars, which flashed as a blaze of lightning.

    There did not seem to be an instant's delay.  The Council broke up,
    and its members, mingling with the people without, took active part
    in the preparations.  Not many minutes had elapsed when the yacht,
    manned and armed and stored as arranged, was rushing out of the
    creek.  On the bridge, beside Captain Rooke, stood the Gospodar
    Rupert and the still-shrouded form of the Voivodin Teuta.  I myself
    was on the lower deck with the soldiers, explaining to certain of
    them the special duties which they might be called on to fulfil.  I
    held the list which the Gospodar Rupert had prepared whilst we were
    waiting for the yacht to arrive from Gadaar.

                                                         PETROF VLASTIMIR.


FROM RUPERT'S JOURNAL--_Continued_.


                                                           _July_ 9, 1907.

We went at a terrific pace down the coast, keeping well inshore so as to
avoid, if possible, being seen from the south.  Just north of Ilsin a
rocky headland juts out, and that was our cover.  On the north of the
peninsula is a small land-locked bay, with deep water.  It is large
enough to take the yacht, though a much larger vessel could not safely
enter.  We ran in, and anchored close to the shore, which has a rocky
frontage--a natural shelf of rock, which is practically the same as a
quay.  Here we met the men who had come from Ilsin and the neighbourhood
in answer to our signalling earlier in the day.  They gave us the latest
information regarding the kidnapping of the Voivode, and informed us that
every man in that section of the country was simply aflame about it.
They assured us that we could rely on them, not merely to fight to the
death, but to keep silence absolutely.  Whilst the seamen, under the
direction of Rooke, took the aeroplane on shore and found a suitable
place for it, where it was hidden from casual view, but from which it
could be easily launched, the Vladika and I--and, of course, my
wife--were hearing such details as were known of the disappearance of her
father.

It seems that he travelled secretly in order to avoid just such a
possibility as has happened.  No one knew of his coming till he came to
Fiume, whence he sent a guarded message to the Archbishop, which the
latter alone would understand.  But this Turkish agents were evidently on
his track all the time, and doubtless the Bureau of Spies was kept well
advised.  He landed at Ilsin from a coasting steamer from Ragusa to the
Levant.

For two days before his coming there had been quite an unusual number of
arrivals at the little port, at which arrivals are rare.  And it turned
out that the little hotel--the only fairly good one in Ilsin--was almost
filled up.  Indeed, only one room was left, which the Voivode took for
the night.  The innkeeper did not know the Voivode in his disguise, but
suspected who it was from the description.  He dined quietly, and went to
bed.  "We returned home.

"The next day, on seeing me, she approached me, cordially holding
out her hand; and we at once became firm friends.

"She was a good creature who had a kind of soul on springs, which became
enthusiastic at a bound. She lacked equilibrium like all women who are
spinsters at the age of fifty. She seemed to be preserved in a pickle
of innocence, but her heart still retained something very youthful and
inflammable. She loved both nature and animals with a fervor, a love like
old wine fermented through age, with a sensuous love that she had
never bestowed on men.

"One thing is certain, that the sight of a bitch nursing her puppies, a
mare roaming in a meadow with a foal at its side, a bird's nest full
of young ones, screaming, with their open mouths and their enormous heads,
affected her perceptibly.

"Poor, solitary, sad, wandering beings! I love you ever since I became
acquainted with Miss Harriet.

"I soon discovered that she had something she would like to tell me, but
dare not, and I was amused at her timidity. When I started out in
the morning with my knapsack on my back, she would accompany me in silence
as far as the end of the village, evidently struggling to find words
with which to begin a conversation. Then she would leave me abruptly
and walk away quickly with her springy step.

"One day, however, she plucked up courage:

"I would like to see how you paint pictures. Are you willing? I have been
very curious.'

"And she blushed as if she had said something very audacious.

"I conducted her to the bottom of the Petit-Val, where I had begun a large
picture.

"She remained standing behind me, following all my gestures with
concentrated attention. Then, suddenly, fearing perhaps that she was
disturbing me, she said: 'Thank you,' and walked away.

"But she soon became more friendly, and accompanied me every day, her
countenance exhibiting visible pleasure.

She carried her camp stool under her arm, not permitting me to carry it.
She would remain there for hours, silent and motionless, following with
her eyes the point of my brush, in its every movement. When I obtained
unexpectedly just the effect I wanted by a dash of color put on
with the palette knife, she involuntarily uttered a little 'Ah!'
of astonishment, of joy, of admiration. She had the most tender
respect for my canvases, an almost religious respect for that human
reproduction of a part of nature's work divine. My studies appeared
to her a kind of religious pictures, and sometimes she spoke to me
of God, with the idea of converting me.
"Oh, he was a queer, good-natured being, this God of hers! He was
a sort of village philosopher without any great resources and without
great power, for she always figured him to herself as inconsolable
over injustices committed under his eyes, as though he were powerless
to prevent them.
"She was, however, on excellent terms with him, affecting even to
be the confidante of his secrets and of his troubles. She would
say:
"'God wills' or 'God does not will,' just like a sergeant announcing
to a recruit: 'The colonel has commanded.'
"At the bottom of her heart she deplored my ignorance of the
intentions of the Eternal, which she endeavored to impart to me.We made further inquiry as to whether there had been any vessel seen in
the neighbourhood during the past few days, and were informed that once
or twice a warship had been seen on the near side of the southern
horizon.  This was evidently the ship which Rooke had seen on his rush
down the coast after the abduction of the Voivodin, and which he had
identified as a Turkish vessel.  The glimpses of her which had been had
were all in full daylight--there was no proof that she had not stolen up
during the night-time without lights.  But the Vladika and I were
satisfied that the Turkish vessel was watching--was in league with both
parties of marauders--and was intended to take off any of the strangers,
or their prey, who might reach Ilsin undetected.  It was evidently with
this view that the kidnappers of Teuta had, in the first instance, made
with all speed for the south.  It was only when disappointed there that
they headed up north, seeking in desperation for some chance of crossing
the border.  That ring of steel had so far well served its purpose.

I sent for Rooke, and put the matter before him.  He had thought it out
for himself to the same end as we had.  His deduction was:

"Let us keep the cordon, and watch for any signal from the Silent Tower.
The Turks will tire before we shall.  I undertake to watch the Turkish
warship.  During the night I shall run down south, without lights, and
have a look at her, even if I have to wait till the grey of the dawn to
do so.  She may see us; but if she does I shall crawl away at such pace
that she shall not get any idea of our speed.  She will certainly come
nearer before a day is over, for be sure the bureau of spies is kept
advised, and they know that when the country is awake each day increases
the hazard of them and their plans being discovered.  From their caution
I gather that they do not court discovery; and from that that they do not
wish for an open declaration of war.  If this be so, why should we not
come out to them and force an issue if need be?"

When Teuta and I got a chance to be alone, we discussed the situation in
every phase.  The poor girl was in a dreadful state of anxiety regarding
her father's safety.  At first she was hardly able to speak, or even to
think, coherently.  Her utterance was choked, and her reasoning palsied
with indignation.  But presently the fighting blood of her race restored
her faculties, and then her woman's quick wit was worth the reasoning of
a camp full of men.  Seeing that she was all on fire with the subject, I
sat still and waited, taking care not to interrupt her.  For quite a long
time she sat still, whilst the coming night thickened.  When she spoke,
the whole plan of action, based on subtle thinking, had mapped itself out
in her mind:

"We must act quickly.  Every hour increases the risk to my father."  Here
her voice broke for an instant; but she recovered herself and went on:

"If you go to the ship, I must not go with you.  It would not do for me
to be seen.  The Captain doubtless knows of both attempts: that to carry
me off as well as that against my father.  As yet he is in ignorance of
what has happened.  You and your party of brave, loyal men did their work
so well that no news could go forth.  So long, therefore, as the naval
Captain is ignorant, he must delay till the last.  But if he saw me he
would know that _that_ branch of the venture had miscarried.  He would
gather from our being here that we had news of my father's capture, and
as he would know that the marauders would fail unless they were relieved
by force, he would order the captive to be slain."

"Yes, dear, to-morrow you had, perhaps, better see the Captain, but
to-night we must try to rescue my father.  Here I think I see a way.  You
have your aeroplane.  Please take me with you into the Silent Tower."

"Not for a world of chrysolite!" said I, horrified.  She took my hand and
held it tight whilst she went on:

"Dear, I know, I know!  Be satisfied.  But it is the only way.  You can,
I know, get there, and in the dark.  But if you were to go in it, it
would give warning to the enemies, and besides, my father would not
understand.  Remember, he does not know you; he has never seen you, and
does not, I suppose, even know as yet of your existence.  But he would
know me at once, and in any dress.  You can manage to lower me into the
Tower by a rope from the aeroplane.  The Turks as yet do not know of our
pursuit, and doubtless rely, at all events in part, on the strength and
security of the Tower.  Therefore their guard will be less active than it
would at first or later on.  I shall post father in all details, and we
shall be ready quickly.  Now, dear, let us think out the scheme together.
Let your man's wit and experience help my ignorance, and we shall save my
father!"

How could I have resisted such pleading--even had it not seemed wise?
But wise it was; and I, who knew what the aeroplane could do under my own
guidance, saw at once the practicalities of the scheme.  Of course there
was a dreadful risk in case anything should go wrong.  But we are at
present living in a world of risks--and her father's life was at stake.
So I took my dear wife in my arms, and told her that my mind was hers for
this, as my soul and body already were.  And I cheered her by saying that
I thought it might be done.

I sent for Rooke, and told him of the new adventure, and he quite agreed
with me in the wisdom of it.  I then told him that he would have to go
and interview the Captain of the Turkish warship in the morning, if I did
not turn up.  "I am going to see the Vladika," I said.  "He will lead our
own troops in the attack on the Silent Tower.  But it will rest with you
to deal with the warship.  Ask the Captain to whom or what nation the
ship belongs.  He is sure to refuse to tell.  In such case mention to him
that if he flies no nation's flag, his vessel is a pirate ship, and that
you, who are in command of the navy of the Blue Mountains, will deal with
him as a pirate is dealt with--no quarter, no mercy.  He will temporize,
and perhaps try a bluff; but when things get serious with him he will
land a force, or try to, and may even prepare to shell the town.  He will
threaten to, at any rate.  In such case deal with him as you think best,
or as near to it as you can."  He answered:

"I shall carry out your wishes with my life.  It is a righteous task.
Not that anything of that sort would ever stand in my way.  If he attacks
our nation, either as a Turk or a pirate, I shall wipe him out.  We shall
see what our own little packet can do.  Moreover, any of the marauders
who have entered the Blue Mountains, from sea or otherwise, shall never
get out by sea!  I take it that we of my contingent shall cover the
attacking party.  It will be a sorry time for us all if that happens
without our seeing you and the Voivodin; for in such case we shall
understand the worst!"  Iron as he was, the man trembled.

"That is so, Rooke," I said.  "We are taking a desperate chance, we know.
But the case is desperate!  But we all have our duty to do, whatever
happens.  Ours and yours is stern; but when we have done it, the result
will be that life will be easier for others--for those that are left."

Before he left, I asked him to send up to me three suits of the Masterman
bullet-proof clothes of which we had a supply on the yacht.

"Two are for the Voivodin and myself," I said; "the third is for the
Voivode to put on.  The Voivodin will take it with her when she descends
from the aeroplane into the Tower."

Whilst any daylight was left I went out to survey the ground.  My wife
wanted to come with me, but I would not let her.  "No," said I; "you will
have at the best a fearful tax on your strength and your nerves.  You
will want to be as fresh as is possible when you get on the aeroplane."
Like a good wife, she obeyed, and lay down to rest in the little tent
provided for her.

I took with me a local man who knew the ground, and who was trusted to be
silent.  We made a long detour when we had got as near the Silent Tower
as we could without being noticed.  I made notes from my compass as to
directions, and took good notice of anything that could possibly serve as
a landmark.  By the time we got home I was pretty well satisfied that if
all should go well I could easily sail over the Tower in the dark.  Then
I had a talk with my wife, and gave her full instructions:

"When we arrive over the Tower," I said, "I shall lower you with a long
rope.  You will have a parcel of food and spirit for your father in case
he is fatigued or faint; and, of course, the bullet-proof suit, which he
must put on at once.  You will also have a short rope with a belt at
either end--one for your father, the other for you.  When I turn the
aeroplane and come back again, you will have ready the ring which lies
midway between the belts.  This you will catch into the hook at the end
of the lowered rope.  When all is secure, and I have pulled you both up
by the windlass so as to clear the top, I shall throw out ballast which
we shall carry on purpose, and away we go!  I am sorry it must be so
uncomfortable for you both, but there is no other way.  When we get well
clear of the Tower, I shall take you both up on the platform.  If
necessary, I shall descend to do it--and then we shall steer for Ilsin."

"When all is safe, our men will attack the Tower.  We must let them do
it, for they expect it.  A few men in the clothes and arms which we took
from your captors will be pursued by some of ours.  It is all arranged.
They will ask the Turks to admit them, and if the latter have not learned
of your father's escape, perhaps they will do so.  Once in, our men will
try to open the gate.  The chances are against them, poor fellows! but
they are all volunteers, and will die fighting.  If they win out, great
glory will be theirs."

"The moon does not rise to-night till just before midnight, so we have
plenty of time.  We shall start from here at ten.  If all be well, I
shall place you in the Tower with your father in less than a quarter-hour
from that.  A few minutes will suffice to clothe him in bullet-proof and
get on his belt.  I shall not be away from the Tower more than a very few
minutes, and, please God, long before eleven we shall be safe.  Then the
Tower can be won in an attack by our mountaineers.  Perhaps, when the
guns are heard on the ship of war--for there is sure to be firing--the
Captain may try to land a shore party.  But Rooke will stand in the way,
and if I know the man and _The Lady_, we shall not be troubled with many
Turks to-night.  By midnight you and your father can be on the way to
Vissarion.  I can interview the naval Captain in the morning."

My wife's marvellous courage and self-possession stood to her.  At half
an hour before the time fixed she was ready for our adventure.  She had
improved the scheme in one detail.  She had put on her own belt and
coiled the rope round her waist, so the only delay would be in bringing
her father's belt.  She would keep the bullet-proof dress intended to be
his strapped in a packet on her back, so that if occasion should be
favourable he would not want to put it on till he and she should have
reached the platform of the aeroplane.  In such case, I should not steer
away from the Tower at all, but would pass slowly across it and take up
the captive and his brave daughter before leaving.  I had learned from
local sources that the Tower was in several stories.  Entrance was by the
foot, where the great iron-clad door was; then came living-rooms and
storage, and an open space at the top.  This would probably be thought
the best place for the prisoner, for it was deep-sunk within the massive
walls, wherein was no loophole of any kind.  This, if it should so
happen, would be the disposition of things best for our plan.  The guards
would at this time be all inside the Tower--probably resting, most of
them--so that it was possible that no one might notice the coming of the
airship.  I was afraid to think that all might turn out so well, for in
such case our task would be a simple enough one, and would in all human
probability be crowned with success.

At ten o'clock we started.  Teuta did not show the smallest sign of fear
or even uneasiness, though this was the first time she had even seen an
aeroplane at work.  She proved to be an admirable passenger for an
airship.  She stayed quite still, holding herself rigidly in the position
arranged, by the cords which I had fixed for her.

When I had trued my course by the landmarks and with the compass lit by
the Tiny my electric light in the dark box, I had time to look about me.
All seemed quite dark wherever I looked--to land, or sea, or sky.  But
darkness is relative, and though each quarter and spot looked dark in
turn, there was not such absolute darkness as a whole.  I could tell the
difference, for instance, between land and sea, no matter how far off we
might be from either.  Looking upward, the sky was dark; yet there was
light enough to see, and even distinguish broad effects.  I had no
difficulty in distinguishing the Tower towards which we were moving, and
that, after all, was the main thing.  We drifted slowly, very slowly, as
the air was still, and I only used the minimum pressure necessary for the
engine.  I think I now understood for the first time the extraordinary
value of the engine with which my Kitson was equipped.  It was noiseless,
it was practically of no weight, and it allowed the machine to progress
as easily as the old-fashioned balloon used to drift before a breeze.
Teuta, who had naturally very fine sight, seemed to see even better than
I did, for as we drew nearer to the Tower, and its round, open top began
to articulate itself, she commenced to prepare for her part of the task.
She it was who uncoiled the long drag-rope ready for her lowering.  We
were proceeding so gently that she as well as I had hopes that I might be
able to actually balance the machine on the top of the curving wall--a
thing manifestly impossible on a straight surface, though it might have
been possible on an angle.

On we crept--on, and on!  There was no sign of light about the Tower, and
not the faintest sound to be heard till we were almost close to the line
of the rising wall; then we heard a sound of something like mirth, but
muffled by distance and thick walls.  From it we took fresh heart, for it
told us that our enemies were gathered in the lower chambers.  If only
the Voivode should be on the upper stage, all would be well.

Slowly, almost inch by inch, and with a suspense that was agonizing, we
crossed some twenty or thirty feet above the top of the wall.  I could
see as we came near the jagged line of white patches where the heads of
the massacred Turks placed there on spikes in old days seemed to give
still their grim warning.  Seeing that they made in themselves a
difficulty of landing on the wall, I deflected the plane so that, as we
crept over the wall, we might, if they became displaced, brush them to
the outside of the wall.  A few seconds more, and I was able to bring the
machine to rest with the front of the platform jutting out beyond the
Tower wall.  Here I anchored her fore and aft with clamps which had been
already prepared.

Whilst I was doing so Teuta had leaned over the inner edge of the
platform, and whispered as softly as the sigh of a gentle breeze:

"Hist! hist!"  The answer came in a similar sound from some twenty feet
below us, and we knew that the prisoner was alone.  Forthwith, having
fixed the hook of the rope in the ring to which was attached her belt, I
lowered my wife.  Her father evidently knew her whisper, and was ready.
The hollow Tower--a smooth cylinder within--sent up the voices from it
faint as were the whispers:

"Father, it is I--Teuta!"

"My child, my brave daughter!"

"Quick, father; strap the belt round you.  See that it is secure.  We
have to be lifted into the air if necessary.  Hold together.  It will be
easier for Rupert to lift us to the airship."

"Rupert?"

"Yes; I shall explain later.  Quick, quick!  There is not a moment to
lose.  He is enormously strong, and can lift us together; but we must
help him by being still, so he won't have to use the windlass, which
might creak."  As she spoke she jerked slightly at the rope, which was
our preconcerted signal that I was to lift.  I was afraid the windlass
might creak, and her thoughtful hint decided me.  I bent my back to the
task, and in a few seconds they were on the platform on which they, at
Teuta's suggestion, lay flat, one at each side of my seat, so as to keep
the best balance possible.

I took off the clamps, lifted the bags of ballast to the top of the wall,
so that there should be no sound of falling, and started the engine.  The
machine moved forward a few inches, so that it tilted towards the outside
of the wall.  I threw my weight on the front part of the platform, and we
commenced our downward fall at a sharp angle.  A second enlarged the
angle, and without further ado we slid away into the darkness.  Then,
ascending as we went, when the engine began to work at its strength, we
turned, and presently made straight for Ilsin.

The journey was short--not many minutes.  It almost seemed as if no time
whatever had elapsed till we saw below us the gleam of lights, and by
them saw a great body of men gathered in military array.  We slackened
and descended.  The crowd kept deathly silence, but when we were amongst
them we needed no telling that it was not due to lack of heart or absence
of joy.  The pressure of their hands as they surrounded us, and the
devotion with which they kissed the hands and feet of both the Voivode
and his daughter, were evidence enough for me, even had I not had my own
share of their grateful rejoicing.

In the midst of it all the low, stern voice of Rooke, who had burst a way
to the front beside the Vladika, said:

"Now is the time to attack the Tower.  Forward, brothers, but in silence.
Let there not be a sound till you are near the gate; then play your
little comedy of the escaping marauders.  And 'twill be no comedy for
them in the Tower.  The yacht is all ready for the morning, Mr. Sent
Leger, in case I do not come out of the scrimmage if the bluejackets
arrive.  In such case you will have to handle her yourself.  God keep
you, my Lady; and you, too, Voivode!  Forward!"

In a ghostly silence the grim little army moved forwards.  Rooke and the
men with him disappeared into the darkness in the direction of the
harbour of Ilsin.


FROM THE SCRIPT OF THE VOIVODE, PETER VISSARION,


                                                           _July_ 7, 1907.

I had little idea, when I started on my homeward journey, that it would
have such a strange termination.  Even I, who ever since my boyhood have
lived in a whirl of adventure, intrigue, or diplomacy--whichever it may
be called--statecraft, and war, had reason to be surprised.  I certainly
thought that when I locked myself into my room in the hotel at Ilsin that
I would have at last a spell, however short, of quiet.  All the time of
my prolonged negotiations with the various nationalities I had to be at
tension; so, too, on my homeward journey, lest something at the last
moment should happen adversely to my mission.  But when I was safe on my
own Land of the Blue Mountains, and laid my head on my pillow, where only
friends could be around me, I thought I might forget care.

But to wake with a rude hand over my mouth, and to feel myself grasped
tight by so many hands that I could not move a limb, was a dreadful
shock.  All after that was like a dreadful dream.  I was rolled in a
great rug so tightly that I could hardly breathe, let alone cry out.
Lifted by many hands through the window, which I could hear was softly
opened and shut for the purpose, and carried to a boat.  Again lifted
into some sort of litter, on which I was borne a long distance, but with
considerable rapidity.  Again lifted out and dragged through a doorway
opened on purpose--I could hear the clang as it was shut behind me.  Then
the rug was removed, and I found myself, still in my night-gear, in the
midst of a ring of men.  There were two score of them, all Turks, all
strong-looking, resolute men, armed to the teeth.  My clothes, which had
been taken from my room, were thrown down beside me, and I was told to
dress.  As the Turks were going from the room--shaped like a vault--where
we then were, the last of them, who seemed to be some sort of officer,
said:

"If you cry out or make any noise whatever whilst you are in this Tower,
you shall die before your time!"  Presently some food and water were
brought me, and a couple of blankets.  I wrapped myself up and slept till
early in the morning.  Breakfast was brought, and the same men filed in.
In the presence of them all the same officer said:

"I have given instructions that if you make any noise or betray your
presence to anyone outside this Tower, the nearest man is to restore you
to immediate quiet with his yataghan.  It you promise me that you will
remain quiet whilst you are within the Tower, I can enlarge your
liberties somewhat.  Do you promise?"  I promised as he wished; there was
no need to make necessary any stricter measure of confinement.  Any
chance of escape lay in having the utmost freedom allowed to me.
Although I had been taken away with such secrecy, I knew that before long
there would be pursuit.  So I waited with what patience I could.  I was
allowed to go on the upper platform--a consideration due, I am convinced,
to my captors' wish for their own comfort rather than for mine.

It was not very cheering, for during the daytime I had satisfied myself
that it would be quite impossible for even a younger and more active man
than I am to climb the walls.  They were built for prison purposes, and a
cat could not find entry for its claws between the stones.  I resigned
myself to my fate as well as I could.  Wrapping my blanket round me, I
lay down and looked up at the sky.  I wished to see it whilst I could.  I
was just dropping to sleep--the unutterable silence of the place broken
only now and again by some remark by my captors in the rooms below
me--when there was a strange appearance just over me--an appearance so
strange that I sat up, and gazed with distended eyes.

Across the top of the tower, some height above, drifted, slowly and
silently, a great platform.  Although the night was dark, it was so much
darker where I was within the hollow of the Tower that I could actually
see what was above me.  I knew it was an aeroplane--one of which I had
seen in Washington.  A man was seated in the centre, steering; and beside
him was a silent figure of a woman all wrapped in white.  It made my
heart beat to see her, for she was figured something like my Teuta, but
broader, less shapely.  She leaned over, and a whispered "Ssh!" crept
down to me.  I answered in similar way.  Whereupon she rose, and the man
lowered her down into the Tower.  Then I saw that it was my dear daughter
who had come in this wonderful way to save me.  With infinite haste she
helped me to fasten round my waist a belt attached to a rope, which was
coiled round her; and then the man, who was a giant in strength as well
as stature, raised us both to the platform of the aeroplane, which he set
in motion without an instant's delay.

Within a few seconds, and without any discovery being made of my escape,
we were speeding towards the sea.  The lights of Ilsin were in front of
us.  Before reaching the town, however, we descended in the midst of a
little army of my own people, who were gathered ready to advance upon the
Silent Tower, there to effect, if necessary, my rescue by force.  Small
chance would there have been of my life in case of such a struggle.
Happily, however, the devotion and courage of my dear daughter and of her
gallant companion prevented such a necessity.  It was strange to me to
find such joyous reception amongst my friends expressed in such a
whispered silence.  There was no time for comment or understanding or the
asking of questions--I was fain to take things as they stood, and wait
for fuller explanation.

This came later, when my daughter and I were able to converse alone.

When the expedition went out against the Silent Tower, Teuta and I went
to her tent, and with us came her gigantic companion, who seemed not
wearied, but almost overcome with sleep.  When we came into the tent,
over which at a little distance a cordon of our mountaineers stood on
guard, he said to me:

"May I ask you, sir, to pardon me for a time, and allow the Voivodin to
explain matters to you?  She will, I know, so far assist me, for there is
so much work still to be done before we are free of the present peril.
For myself, I am almost overcome with sleep.  For three nights I have had
no sleep, but all during that time much labour and more anxiety.  I could
hold on longer; but at daybreak I must go out to the Turkish warship that
lies in the offing.  She is a Turk, though she does not confess to it;
and she it is who has brought hither the marauders who captured both your
daughter and yourself.  It is needful that I go, for I hold a personal
authority from the National Council to take whatever step may be
necessary for our protection.  And when I go I should be clear-headed,
for war may rest on that meeting.  I shall be in the adjoining tent, and
shall come at once if I am summoned, in case you wish for me before
dawn."  Here my daughter struck in:

"Father, ask him to remain here.  We shall not disturb him, I am sure, in
our talking.  And, moreover, if you knew how much I owe to him--to his
own bravery and his strength--you would understand how much safer I feel
when he is close to me, though we are surrounded by an army of our brave
mountaineers."

"But, my daughter," I said, for I was as yet all in ignorance, "there are
confidences between father and daughter which none other may share.  Some
of what has been I know, but I want to know all, and it might be better
that no stranger--however valiant he may be, or no matter in what measure
we are bound to him--should be present."  To my astonishment, she who had
always been amenable to my lightest wish actually argued with me:

"Father, there are other confidences which have to be respected in like
wise.  Bear with me, dear, till I have told you all, and I am right sure
that you will agree with me.  I ask it, father."

That settled the matter, and as I could see that the gallant gentleman
who had rescued me was swaying on his feet as he waited respectfully, I
said to him:

"Rest with us, sir.  We shall watch over your sleep."

Then I had to help him, for almost on the instant he sank down, and I had
to guide him to the rugs spread on the ground.  In a few seconds he was
in a deep sleep.  As I stood looking at him, till I had realized that he
vas really asleep, I could not help marvelling at the bounty of Nature
that could uphold even such a man as this to the last moment of work to
be done, and then allow so swift a collapse when all was over, and he
could rest peacefully.

He was certainly a splendid fellow.  I think I never saw so fine a man
physically in my life.  And if the lesson of his physiognomy be true, he
is as sterling inwardly as his external is fair.  "Now," said I to Teuta,
"we are to all intents quite alone.  Tell me all that has been, so that I
may understand."

Whereupon my daughter, making me sit down, knelt beside me, and told me
from end to end the most marvellous story I had ever heard or read of.
Something of it I had already known from the Archbishop Paleologue's
later letters, but of all else I was ignorant.  Far away in the great
West beyond the Atlantic, and again on the fringe of the Eastern seas, I
had been thrilled to my heart's core by the heroic devotion and fortitude
of my daughter in yielding herself for her country's sake to that fearful
ordeal of the Crypt; of the grief of the nation at her reported death,
news of which was so mercifully and wisely withheld from me as long as
possible; of the supernatural rumours that took root so deep; but no word
or hint had come to me of a man who had come across the orbit of her
life, much less of all that has resulted from it.  Neither had I known of
her being carried off, or of the thrice gallant rescue of her by Rupert.
Little wonder that I thought so highly of him even at the first moment I
had a clear view of him when he sank down to sleep before me.  Why, the
man must be a marvel.  Even our mountaineers could not match such
endurance as his.  In the course of her narrative my daughter told me of
how, being wearied with her long waiting in the tomb, and waking to find
herself alone when the floods were out, and even the Crypt submerged, she
sought safety and warmth elsewhere; and how she came to the Castle in the
night, and found the strange man alone.  I said: "That was dangerous,
daughter, if not wrong.  The man, brave and devoted as he is, must answer
me--your father."  At that she was greatly upset, and before going on
with her narrative, drew me close in her arms, and whispered to me:

"Be gentle to me, father, for I have had much to bear.  And be good to
him, for he holds my heart in his breast!"  I reassured her with a gentle
pressure--there was no need to speak.  She then went on to tell me about
her marriage, and how her husband, who had fallen into the belief that
she was a Vampire, had determined to give even his soul for her; and how
she had on the night of the marriage left him and gone back to the tomb
to play to the end the grim comedy which she had undertaken to perform
till my return; and how, on the second night after her marriage, as she
was in the garden of the Castle--going, as she shyly told me, to see if
all was well with her husband--she was seized secretly, muffled up,
bound, and carried off.  Here she made a pause and a digression.
Evidently some fear lest her husband and myself should quarrel assailed
her, for she said:

"Do understand, father, that Rupert's marriage to me was in all ways
regular, and quite in accord with our customs.  Before we were married I
told the Archbishop of my wish.  He, as your representative during your
absence, consented himself, and brought the matter to the notice of the
Vladika and the Archimandrites.  All these concurred, having exacted from
me--very properly, I think--a sacred promise to adhere to my
self-appointed task.  The marriage itself was orthodox in all
ways--though so far unusual that it was held at night, and in darkness,
save for the lights appointed by the ritual.  As to that, the Archbishop
himself, or the Archimandrite of Spazac, who assisted him, or the
Vladika, who acted as Paranymph, will, all or any of them, give you full
details.  Your representative made all inquiries as to Rupert Sent Leger,
who lived in Vissarion, though he did not know who I was, or from his
point of view who I had been.  But I must tell you of my rescue."

And so she went on to tell me of that unavailing journey south by her
captors; of their bafflement by the cordon which Rupert had established
at the first word of danger to "the daughter of our leader," though he
little knew who the "leader" was, or who was his "daughter"; of how the
brutal marauders tortured her to speed with their daggers; and how her
wounds left blood-marks on the ground as she passed along; then of the
halt in the valley, when the marauders came to know that their road north
was menaced, if not already blocked; of the choosing of the murderers,
and their keeping ward over her whilst their companions went to survey
the situation; and of her gallant rescue by that noble fellow, her
husband--my son I shall call him henceforth, and thank God that I may
have that happiness and that honour!

Then my daughter went on to tell me of the race back to Vissarion, when
Rupert went ahead of all--as a leader should do; of the summoning of the
Archbishop and the National Council; and of their placing the nation's
handjar in Rupert's hand; of the journey to Ilsin, and the flight of my
daughter--and my son--on the aeroplane.

The rest I knew.

As she finished, the sleeping man stirred and woke--broad awake in a
second--sure sign of a man accustomed to campaign and adventure.  At a
glance he recalled everything that had been, and sprang to his feet.  He
stood respectfully before me for a few seconds before speaking.  Then he
said, with an open, engaging smile:

"I see, sir, you know all.  Am I forgiven--for Teuta's sake as well as my
own?"  By this time I was also on my feet.  A man like that walks
straight into my heart.  My daughter, too, had risen, and stood by my
side.  I put out my hand and grasped his, which seemed to leap to meet
me--as only the hand of a swordsman can do.

"I am glad you are my son!" I said.  It was all I could say, and I meant
it and all it implied.  We shook hands warmly.  Teuta was pleased; she
kissed me, and then stood holding my arm with one hand, whilst she linked
her other hand in the arm of her husband.

He summoned one of the sentries without, and told him to ask Captain
Rooke to come to him.  The latter had been ready for a call, and came at
once.  When through the open flap of the tent we saw him coming,
Rupert--as I must call him now, because Teuta wishes it; and I like to do
it myself--said:

"I must be off to board the Turkish vessel before it comes inshore.
Good-bye, sir, in case we do not meet again."  He said the last few words
in so low a voice that I only could hear them.  Then he kissed his wife,
and told her he expected to be back in time for breakfast, and was gone.
He met Rooke--I am hardly accustomed to call him Captain as yet, though,
indeed, he well deserves it--at the edge of the cordon of sentries, and
they went quickly together towards the port, where the yacht was lying
with steam up.


BOOK VII: THE EMPIRE OF THE AIR


FROM THE REPORT OF CRISTOFEROS, WAR-SCRIBE TO THE NATIONAL COUNCIL.


                                                           _July_ 7, 1907.

When the Gospodar Rupert and Captain Rooke came within hailing distance
of the strange ship, the former hailed her, using one after another the
languages of England, Germany, France, Russia, Turkey, Greece, Spain,
Portugal, and another which I did not know; I think it must have been
American.  By this time the whole line of the bulwark was covered by a
row of Turkish faces.  When, in Turkish, the Gospodar asked for the
Captain, the latter came to the gangway, which had been opened, and stood
there.  His uniform was that of the Turkish navy--of that I am prepared
to swear--but he made signs of not understanding what had been said;
whereupon the Gospodar spoke again, but in French this time.  I append
the exact conversation which took place, none other joining in it.  I
took down in shorthand the words of both as they were spoken:

THE GOSPODAR.  "Are you the Captain of this ship?"

THE CAPTAIN.  "I am."

GOSPODAR.  "To what nationality do you belong?"

CAPTAIN.  "It matters not.  I am Captain of this ship."

GOSPODAR.  "I alluded to your ship.  What national flag is she under?"

CAPTAIN (_throwing his eye over the top-hamper_).  "I do not see that any
flag is flying."

GOSPODAR.  "I take it that, as commander, you can allow me on board with
my two companions?"

CAPTAIN.  "I can, upon proper request being made!"

GOSPODAR (_taking off his cap_).  "I ask your courtesy, Captain.  I am
the representative and accredited officer of the National Council of the
Land of the Blue Mountains, in whose waters you now are; and on their
account I ask for a formal interview on urgent matters."

The Turk, who was, I am bound to say, in manner most courteous as yet,
gave some command to his officers, whereupon the companion-ladders and
stage were lowered and the gangway manned, as is usual for the reception
on a ship of war of an honoured guest.

CAPTAIN.  "You are welcome, sir--you and your two companions--as you
request."

The Gospodar bowed.  Our companion-ladder was rigged on the instant, and
a launch lowered.  The Gospodar and Captain Rooke--taking me with
them--entered, and rowed to the warship, where we were all honourably
received.  There were an immense number of men on board, soldiers as well
as seamen.  It looked more like a warlike expedition than a fighting-ship
in time of peace.  As we stepped on the deck, the seamen and marines, who
were all armed as at drill, presented arms.  The Gospodar went first
towards the Captain, and Captain Rooke and I followed close behind him.
The Gospodar spoke:

"I am Rupert Sent Leger, a subject of his Britannic Majesty, presently
residing at Vissarion, in the Land of the Blue Mountains.  I am at
present empowered to act for the National Council in all matters.  Here
is my credential!"  As he spoke he handed to the Captain a letter.  It
was written in five different languages--Balkan, Turkish, Greek, English,
and French.  The Captain read it carefully all through, forgetful for the
moment that he had seemingly been unable to understand the Gospodar's
question spoken in the Turkish tongue.  Then he answered:

"I see the document is complete.  May I ask on what subject you wish to
see me?"

GOSPODAR.  "You are here in a ship of war in Blue Mountain waters, yet
you fly no flag of any nation.  You have sent armed men ashore in your
boats, thus committing an act of war.  The National Council of the Land
of the Blue Mountains requires to know what nation you serve, and why the
obligations of international law are thus broken."

The Captain seemed to wait for further speech, but the Gospodar remained
silent; whereupon the former spoke.

CAPTAIN.  "I am responsible to my own--chiefs.  I refuse to answer your
question."

The Gospodar spoke at once in reply.

GOSPODAR.  "Then, sir, you, as commander of a ship--and especially a ship
of war--must know that in thus violating national and maritime laws you,
and all on board this ship, are guilty of an act of piracy.  This is not
even piracy on the high seas.  You are not merely within territorial
waters, but you have invaded a national port.  As you refuse to disclose
the nationality of your ship, I accept, as you seem to do, your status as
that of a pirate, and shall in due season act accordingly."

CAPTAIN (_with manifest hostility_).  "I accept the responsibility of my
own acts.  Without admitting your contention, I tell you now that
whatever action you take shall be at your own peril and that of your
National Council.  Moreover, I have reason to believe that my men who
were sent ashore on special service have been beleaguered in a tower
which can be seen from the ship.  Before dawn this morning firing was
heard from that direction, from which I gather that attack was made on
them.  They, being only a small party, may have been murdered.  If such
be so, I tell you that you and your miserable little nation, as you call
it, shall pay such blood-money as you never thought of.  I am responsible
for this, and, by Allah! there shall be a great revenge.  You have not in
all your navy--if navy you have at all--power to cope with even one ship
like this, which is but one of many.  My guns shall be trained on Ilsin,
to which end I have come inshore.  You and your companions have free
conduct back to port; such is due to the white flag which you fly.
Fifteen minutes will bring you back whence you came.  Go!  And remember
that whatever you may do amongst your mountain defiles, at sea you cannot
even defend yourselves."

GOSPODAR (_slowly and in a ringing voice_).  "The Land of the Blue
Mountains has its own defences on sea and land.  Its people know how to
defend themselves."

CAPTAIN (_taking out his watch_).  "It is now close on five bells.  At
the first stroke of six bells our guns shall open fire."

GOSPODAR (_calmly_).  "It is my last duty to warn you, sir--and to warn
all on this ship--that much may happen before even the first stroke of
six bells.  Be warned in time, and give over this piratical attack, the
very threat of which may be the cause of much bloodshed."

CAPTAIN (_violently_).  "Do you dare to threaten me, and, moreover, my
ship's company?  We are one, I tell you, in this ship; and the last man
shall perish like the first ere this enterprise fail.  Go!"

With a bow, the Gospodar turned and went down the ladder, we following
him.  In a couple of minutes the yacht was on her way to the port.


FROM RUPERT'S JOURNAL.


                                                          _July_ 10, 1907.

When we turned shoreward after my stormy interview with the pirate
Captain--I can call him nothing else at present, Rooke gave orders to a
quartermaster on the bridge, and _The Lady_ began to make to a little
northward of Ilsin port.  Rooke himself went aft to the wheel-house,
taking several men with him.

When we were quite near the rocks--the water is so deep here that there
is no danger--we slowed down, merely drifting along southwards towards
the port.  I was myself on the bridge, and could see all over the decks.
I could also see preparations going on upon the warship.  Ports were
opened, and the great guns on the turrets were lowered for action.  When
we were starboard broadside on to the warship, I saw the port side of the
steering-house open, and Rooke's men sliding out what looked like a huge
grey crab, which by tackle from within the wheel-house was lowered softly
into the sea.  The position of the yacht hid the operation from sight of
the warship.   The doors were shut again, and the yacht's pace began to
quicken.  We ran into the port.  I had a vague idea that Rooke had some
desperate project on hand.  Not for nothing had he kept the wheel-house
locked on that mysterious crab.

All along the frontage was a great crowd of eager men.  But they had
considerately left the little mole at the southern entrance, whereon was
a little tower, on whose round top a signal-gun was placed, free for my
own use.  When I was landed on this pier I went along to the end, and,
climbing the narrow stair within, went out on the sloping roof.  I stood
up, for I was determined to show the Turks that I was not afraid for
myself, as they would understand when the bombardment should begin.  It
was now but a very few minutes before the fatal hour--six bells.  But all
the same I was almost in a state of despair.  It was terrible to think of
all those poor souls in the town who had done nothing wrong, and who were
to be wiped out in the coming blood-thirsty, wanton attack.  I raised my
glasses to see how preparations were going on upon the warship.

As I looked I had a momentary fear that my eyesight was giving way.  At
one moment I had the deck of the warship focussed with my glasses, and
could see every detail as the gunners waited for the word to begin the
bombardment with the great guns of the barbettes.  The next I saw nothing
but the empty sea.  Then in another instant there was the ship as before,
but the details were blurred.  I steadied myself against the signal-gun,
and looked again.  Not more than two, or at the most three, seconds had
elapsed.  The ship was, for the moment, full in view.  As I looked, she
gave a queer kind of quick shiver, prow and stern, and then sideways.  It
was for all the world like a rat shaken in the mouth of a skilled
terrier.  Then she remained still, the one placid thing to be seen, for
all around her the sea seemed to shiver in little independent eddies, as
when water is broken without a current to guide it.

I continued to look, and when the deck was, or seemed, quite still--for
the shivering water round the ship kept catching my eyes through the
outer rays of the lenses--I noticed that nothing was stirring.  The men
who had been at the guns were all lying down; the men in the
fighting-tops had leaned forward or backward, and their arms hung down
helplessly.  Everywhere was desolation--in so far as life was concerned.
Even a little brown bear, which had been seated on the cannon which was
being put into range position, had jumped or fallen on deck, and lay
there stretched out--and still.  It was evident that some terrible shock
had been given to the mighty war-vessel.  Without a doubt or a thought
why I did so, I turned my eyes towards where _The Lady_ lay, port
broadside now to the inside, in the harbour mouth.  I had the key now to
the mystery of Rooke's proceedings with the great grey crab.

As I looked I saw just outside the harbour a thin line of cleaving water.
This became more marked each instant, till a steel disc with glass eyes
that shone in the light of the sun rose above the water.  It was about
the size of a beehive, and was shaped like one.  It made a straight line
for the aft of the yacht.  At the same moment, in obedience to some
command, given so quietly that I did not hear it, the men went below--all
save some few, who began to open out doors in the port side of the
wheel-house.  The tackle was run out through an opened gangway on that
side, and a man stood on the great hook at the lower end, balancing
himself by hanging on the chain.  In a few seconds he came up again.  The
chain tightened and the great grey crab rose over the edge of the deck,
and was drawn into the wheel-house, the doors of which were closed,
shutting in a few only of the men.

I waited, quite quiet.  After a space of a few minutes, Captain Rooke in
his uniform walked out of the wheel-house.  He entered a small boat,
which had been in the meantime lowered for the purpose, and was rowed to
the steps on the mole.  Ascending these, he came directly towards the
signal-tower.  When he had ascended and stood beside me, he saluted.

"Well?" I asked.

"All well, sir," he answered.  "We shan't have any more trouble with that
lot, I think.  You warned that pirate--I wish he had been in truth a
clean, honest, straightforward pirate, instead of the measly Turkish swab
he was--that something might occur before the first stroke of six bells.
Well, something has occurred, and for him and all his crew that six bells
will never sound.  So the Lord fights for the Cross against the Crescent!
Bismillah.  Amen!"  He said this in a manifestly formal way, as though
declaiming a ritual.  The next instant he went on in the thoroughly
practical conventional way which was usual to him:

"May I ask a favour, Mr. Sent Leger?"

"A thousand, my dear Rooke," I said.  "You can't ask me anything which I
shall not freely grant.  And I speak within my brief from the National
Council.  You have saved Ilsin this day, and the Council will thank you
for it in due time."

"Me, sir?" he said, with a look of surprise on his face which seemed
quite genuine.  "If you think that, I am well out of it.  I was afraid,
when I woke, that you might court-martial me!"

"Court-martial you!  What for?" I asked, surprised in my turn.

"For going to sleep on duty, sir!  And the fact is, I was worn out in the
attack on the Silent Tower last night, and when you had your interview
with the pirate--all good pirates forgive me for the blasphemy!
Amen!--and I knew that everything was going smoothly, I went into the
wheel-house and took forty winks."  He said all this without moving so
much as an eyelid, from which I gathered that he wished absolute silence
to be observed on my part.  Whilst I was revolving this in my mind he
went on:

"Touching that request, sir.  When I have left you and the Voivode--and
the Voivodin, of course--at Vissarion, together with such others as you
may choose to bring there with you, may I bring the yacht back here for a
spell?  I rather think that there is a good deal of cleaning up to be
done, and the crew of _The Lady_ with myself are the men to do it.  We
shall be back by nightfall at the creek."

"Do as you think best, Admiral Rooke," I said.

"Admiral?"

"Yes, Admiral.  At present I can only say that tentatively, but by
to-morrow I am sure the National Council will have confirmed it.  I am
afraid, old friend, that your squadron will be only your flagship for the
present; but later we may do better."

"So long as I am Admiral, your honour, I shall have no other flagship
than _The Lady_.  I am not a young man, but, young or old, my pennon
shall float over no other deck.  Now, one other favour, Mr. Sent Leger?
It is a corollary of the first, so I do not hesitate to ask.  May I
appoint Lieutenant Desmond, my present First Officer, to the command of
the battleship?  Of course, he will at first only command the prize crew;
but in such case he will fairly expect the confirmation of his rank
later.  I had better, perhaps, tell you, sir, that he is a very capable
seaman, learned in all the sciences that pertain to a battleship, and
bred in the first navy in the world."

"By all means, Admiral.  Your nomination shall, I think I may promise
you, be confirmed."

Not another word we spoke.  I returned with him in his boat to _The
Lady_, which was brought to the dock wall, where we were received with
tumultuous cheering.

I hurried off to my Wife and the Voivode.  Rooke, calling Desmond to him,
went on the bridge of _The Lady_, which turned, and went out at terrific
speed to the battleship, which was already drifting up northward on the
tide.


FROM THE REPORT OF CRISTOFEROS, SCRIBE OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE
LAND OF THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.


                                                           _July_ 8, 1907.

The meeting of the National Council, July 6, was but a continuation of
that held before the rescue of the Voivodin Vissarion, the members of the
Council having been during the intervening night housed in the Castle of
Vissarion.   When, in the early morning, they met, all were jubilant; for
late at night the fire-signal had flamed up from Ilsin with the glad news
that the Voivode Peter Vissarion was safe, having been rescued with great
daring on an aeroplane by his daughter and the Gospodar Rupert, as the
people call him--Mister Rupert Sent Leger, as he is in his British name
and degree.

Whilst the Council was sitting, word came that a great peril to the town
of Ilsin had been averted.  A war-vessel acknowledging to no nationality,
and therefore to be deemed a pirate, had threatened to bombard the town;
but just before the time fixed for the fulfilment of her threat, she was
shaken to such an extent by some sub-aqueous means that, though she
herself was seemingly uninjured, nothing was left alive on board.  Thus
the Lord preserves His own!  The consideration of this, as well as the
other incident, was postponed until the coming Voivode and the Gospodar
Rupert, together with who were already on their way hither.


THE SAME (LATER IN THE SAME DAY).


The Council resumed its sitting at four o'clock.  The Voivode Peter
Vissarion and the Voivodin Teuta had arrived with the "Gospodar Rupert,"
as the mountaineers call him (Mr. Rupert Sent Leger) on the armoured
yacht he calls _The Lady_.  The National Council showed great pleasure
when the Voivode entered the hall in which the Council met.  He seemed
much gratified by the reception given to him.  Mr. Rupert Sent Leger, by
the express desire of the Council, was asked to be present at the
meeting.  He took a seat at the bottom of the hall, and seemed to prefer
to remain there, though asked by the President of the Council to sit at
the top of the table with himself and the Voivode.

When the formalities of such Councils had been completed, the Voivode
handed to the President a memorandum of his report on his secret mission
to foreign Courts on behalf of the National Council.  He then explained
at length, for the benefit of the various members of the Council, the
broad results of his mission.  The result was, he said, absolutely
satisfactory.  Everywhere he had been received with distinguished
courtesy, and given a sympathetic hearing.  Several of the Powers
consulted had made delay in giving final answers, but this, he explained,
was necessarily due to new considerations arising from the international
complications which were universally dealt with throughout the world as
"the Balkan Crisis."  In time, however (the Voivode went on), these
matters became so far declared as to allow the waiting Powers to form
definite judgment--which, of course, they did not declare to him--as to
their own ultimate action.  The final result--if at this initial stage
such tentative setting forth of their own attitude in each case can be so
named--was that he returned full of hope (founded, he might say, upon a
justifiable personal belief) that the Great Powers throughout the
world--North, South, East, and West--were in thorough sympathy with the
Land of the Blue Mountains in its aspirations for the continuance of its
freedom.  "I also am honoured," he continued, "to bring to you, the Great
Council of the nation, the assurance of protection against unworthy
aggression on the part of neighbouring nations of present greater
strength."

Whilst he was speaking, the Gospodar Rupert was writing a few words on a
strip of paper, which he sent up to the President.  When the Voivode had
finished speaking, there was a prolonged silence.  The President rose,
and in a hush said that the Council would like to hear Mr. Rupert Sent
Leger, who had a communication to make regarding certain recent events.

Mr. Rupert Sent Leger rose, and reported how, since he had been entrusted
by the Council with the rescue of the Voivode Peter of Vissarion, he had,
by aid of the Voivodin, effected the escape of the Voivode from the
Silent Tower; also that, following this happy event, the mountaineers,
who had made a great cordon round the Tower so soon as it was known that
the Voivode had been imprisoned within it, had stormed it in the night.
As a determined resistance was offered by the marauders, who had used it
as a place of refuge, none of these escaped.  He then went on to tell how
he sought interview with the Captain of the strange warship, which,
without flying any flag, invaded our waters.  He asked the President to
call on me to read the report of that meeting.  This, in obedience to his
direction, I did.  The acquiescent murmuring of the Council showed how
thoroughly they endorsed Mr. Sent Leger's words and acts.

When I resumed my seat, Mr. Sent Leger described how, just before the
time fixed by the "pirate Captain"--so he designated him, as did every
speaker thereafter--the warship met with some under-sea accident, which
had a destructive effect on all on board her.  Then he added certain
words, which I give verbatim, as I am sure that others will some time
wish to remember them in their exactness:

"By the way, President and Lords of the Council, I trust I may ask you to
confirm Captain Rooke, of the armoured yacht _The Lady_, to be Admiral of
the Squadron of the Land of the Blue Mountains, and also Captain
(tentatively) Desmond, late First-Lieutenant of _The Lady_, to the
command of the second warship of our fleet--the as yet unnamed vessel,
whose former Captain threatened to bombard Ilsin.  My Lords, Admiral
Rooke has done great service to the Land of the Blue Mountains, and
deserves well at your hands.  You will have in him, I am sure, a great
official.  One who will till his last breath give you good and loyal
service."

He had sat down, the President put to the Council resolutions, which were
passed by acclamation.  Admiral Rooke was given command of the navy, and
Captain Desmond confirmed in his appointment to the captaincy of the new
ship, which was, by a further resolution, named _The Gospodar Rupert_.

In thanking the Council for acceding to his request, and for the great
honour done him in the naming of the ship, Mr. Sent Leger said:

"May I ask that the armoured yacht _The Lady_ be accepted by you, the
National Council, on behalf of the nation, as a gift on behalf of the
cause of freedom from the Voivodin Teuta?"

In response to the mighty cheer of the Council with which the splendid
gift was accepted the Gospodar Rupert--Mr. Sent Leger--bowed, and went
quietly out of the room.

As no agenda of the meeting had been prepared, there was for a time, not
silence, but much individual conversation.  In 1831, we had thrashing
machines and double plows, and even multiple plows had been proposed,
tried, and abandoned.

Reaping machines had been experimented with and abandoned; sowing machines
were in use, but not many of them; clod crushers and horse rakes were
also in use; but as a fact plowing was done by horse power with a single
furrow at a time, mowing and reaping were done by the scythe or the sickle,
sheaves were bound by hand, hay was tedded by hand-rakes, while all
materials and produce were moved about in carts and in wagons drawn
by horses. At the present time we have multiple plows, making five
or six furrows at a time, these and cultivators also, driven by steam,
commonly from two engines on the head lands, the plow being in between,
and worked by a rope from each engine, or if by one engine, a capstan on
the other head land, with a return rope working the plow backward and
forward; or by what is known as the roundabout system, where the
engine is fixed and the rope carried round about the field; or
else plows and cultivators are worked by ropes from two capstans placed
on the two head lands, and driven by means of a quick-going rope,
actuated by an engine, the position of which is not changed. And then
we have reaping machines, driven at present by horses; but how long it
will be before the energy residing in a battery, or that in a reservoir
of compressed air, will supersede horse power to drive the reaping machine,
I don't know, but I don't suppose it will be very long. The mowing and
reaping machines not only cut the crop and distribute it in swaths, or,
in the case of the reaping machine, in bundles, but now, in the
instance of these latter machines, are competent to bind it into
sheaves.When I pledged to him as security my own estates, he
wished to tear up the bond, and only under pressure would he meet my
wishes in this respect.  Lords of the Council, it was his money, thus
generously advanced, which procured for us the arms with which we hewed
out our freedom.

"Not long ago that noble merchant--and here I trust you will pardon me
that I am so moved as to perhaps appear to suffer in want of respect to
this great Council--this noble merchant passed to his account--leaving to
a near kinsman of his own the royal fortune which he had amassed.  Only a
few hours ago that worthy kinsman of the benefactor of our nation made it
known to me that in his last will he had bequeathed to me, by secret
trust, the whole of those estates which long ago I had forfeited by
effluxion of time, inasmuch as I had been unable to fulfil the terms of
my voluntary bond.  It grieves me to think that I have had to keep you so
long in ignorance of the good thought and wishes and acts of this great
man.

"But it was by his wise counsel, fortified by my own judgment, that I was
silent; for, indeed, I feared, as he did, lest in our troublous times
some doubting spirit without our boundaries, or even within it, might
mistrust the honesty of my purposes for public good, because I was no
longer one whose whole fortune was invested within our confines.  This
prince-merchant, the great English Roger Melton--let his name be for ever
graven on the hearts of our people!--kept silent during his own life, and
enjoined on others to come after him to keep secret from the men of the
Blue Mountains that secret loan made to me on their behalf, lest in their
eyes I, who had striven to be their friend and helper, should suffer
wrong repute.  But, happily, he has left me free to clear myself in your
eyes.  Moreover, by arranging to have--under certain contingencies, which
have come to pass--the estates which were originally my own retransferred
to me, I have no longer the honour of having given what I could to the
national cause.  All such now belongs to him; for it was his money--and
his only--which purchased our national armament.

"His worthy kinsman you already know, for he has not only been amongst
you for many months, but has already done you good service in his own
person.  He it was who, as a mighty warrior, answered the summons of the
Vladika when misfortune came upon my house in the capture by enemies of
my dear daughter, the Voivodin Teuta, whom you hold in your hearts; who,
with a chosen band of our brothers, pursued the marauders, and himself,
by a deed of daring and prowess, of which poets shall hereafter sing,
saved her, when hope itself seemed to be dead, from their ruthless hands,
and brought her back to us; who administered condign punishment to the
miscreants who had dared to so wrong her.  He it was who later took me,
your servant, out of the prison wherein another band of Turkish
miscreants held me captive; rescued me, with the help of my dear
daughter, whom he had already freed, whilst I had on my person the
documents of international secrecy of which I have already advised
you--rescued me whilst I had been as yet unsubjected to the indignity of
search.

"Beyond this you know now that of which I was in partial ignorance: how
he had, through the skill and devotion of your new Admiral, wrought
destruction on a hecatomb of our malignant foes.  You who have received
for the nation the splendid gift of the little warship, which already
represents a new era in naval armament, can understand the great-souled
generosity of the man who has restored the vast possessions of my House.
On our way hither from Ilsin, Rupert Sent Leger made known to me the
terms of the trust of his noble uncle, Roger Melton, and--believe me that
he did so generously, with a joy that transcended my own--restored to the
last male of the Vissarion race the whole inheritance of a noble line.

"And now, my Lords of the Council, I come to another matter, in which I
find myself in something of a difficulty, for I am aware that in certain
ways you actually know more of it than even I myself do.  It is regarding
the marriage of my daughter to Rupert Sent Leger.  It is known to me that
the matter has been brought before you by the Archbishop, who, as
guardian of my daughter during my absence on the service of the nation,
wished to obtain your sanction, as till my return he held her safety in
trust.  This was so, not from any merit of mine, but because she, in her
own person, had undertaken for the service of our nation a task of almost
incredible difficulty.  My Lords, were she child of another father, I
should extol to the skies her bravery, her self-devotion, her loyalty to
the land she loves.  Why, then, should I hesitate to speak of her deeds
in fitting terms, since it is my duty, my glory, to hold them in higher
honour than can any in this land?  I shall not shame her--or even
myself--by being silent when such a duty urges me to speak, as Voivode,
as trusted envoy of our nation, as father.  Ages hence loyal men and
women of our Land of the Blue Mountains will sing her deeds in song and
tell them in story.  Her name, Teuta, already sacred in these regions,
where it was held by a great Queen, and honoured by all men, will
hereafter be held as a symbol and type of woman's devotion.  Oh, my
Lords, we pass along the path of life, the best of us but a little time
marching in the sunlight between gloom and gloom, and it is during that
march that we must be judged for the future.  This brave woman has won
knightly spurs as well as any Paladin of old.  So is it meet that ere she
might mate with one worthy of her you, who hold in your hands the safety
and honour of the State, should give your approval.  To you was it given
to sit in judgment on the worth of this gallant Englisher, now my son.
You judged him then, before you had seen his valour, his strength, and
skill exercised on behalf of a national cause.  You judged wisely, oh, my
brothers, and out of a grateful heart I thank you one and all for it.
Well has he justified your trust by his later acts.  When, in obedience
to the summons of the Vladika, he put the nation in a blaze and ranged
our boundaries with a ring of steel, he did so unknowing that what was
dearest to him in the world was at stake.  He saved my daughter's honour
and happiness, and won her safety by an act of valour that outvies any
told in history.  He took my daughter with him to bring me out from the
Silent Tower on the wings of the air, when earth had for me no
possibility of freedom--I, that had even then in my possession the
documents involving other nations which the Soldan would fain have
purchased with the half of his empire.

"Henceforth to me, Lords of the Council, this brave man must ever be as a
son of my heart, and I trust that in his name grandsons of my own may
keep in bright honour the name which in glorious days of old my fathers
made illustrious.  Did I know how adequately to thank you for your
interest in my child, I would yield up to you my very soul in thanks."

The speech of the Voivode was received with the honour of the Blue
Mountains--the drawing and raising of handjars.


FROM RUPERT'S JOURNAL.


                                                          _July_ 14, 1907.

For nearly a week we waited for some message from Constantinople, fully
expecting either a declaration of war, or else some inquiry so couched as
to make war an inevitable result.  The National Council remained on at
Vissarion as the guests of the Voivode, to whom, in accordance with my
uncle's will, I had prepared to re-transfer all his estates.  He was, by
the way, unwilling at first to accept, and it was only when I showed him
Uncle Roger's letter, and made him read the Deed of Transfer prepared in
anticipation by Mr. Trent, that he allowed me to persuade him.  Finally
he said:

"As you, my good friends, have so arranged, I must accept, be it only in
honour to the wishes of the dead.  But remember, I only do so but for the
present, reserving to myself the freedom to withdraw later if I so
desire."

But Constantinople was silent.  The whole nefarious scheme was one of the
"put-up jobs" which are part of the dirty work of a certain order of
statecraft--to be accepted if successful; to be denied in case of
failure.

The matter stood thus: Turkey had thrown the dice--and lost.  Her men
were dead; her ship was forfeit.  It was only some ten days after the
warship was left derelict with every living thing--that is, everything
that had been living--with its neck broken, as Rooke informed me, when he
brought the ship down the creek, and housed it in the dock behind the
armoured gates--that we saw an item in _The Roma_ copied from _The
Constantinople Journal_ of July 9:

    "LOSS OF AN OTTOMAN IRONCLAD WITH ALL HANDS.

    "News has been received at Constantinople of the total loss, with all
    hands, of one of the newest and finest warships in the Turkish
    fleet--_The Mahmoud_, Captain Ali Ali--which foundered in a storm on
    the night of July 5, some distance off Cabrera, in the Balearic
    Isles.  There were no survivors, and no wreckage was discovered by
    the ships which went in relief--the _Pera_ and the _Mustapha_--or
    reported from anywhere along the shores of the islands, of which
    exhaustive search was made.  _The Mahmoud_ was double-manned, as she
    carried a full extra crew sent on an educational cruise on the most
    perfectly scientifically equipped warship on service in the
    Mediterranean waters."

When the Voivode and I talked over the matter, he said:

"After all, Turkey is a shrewd Power.  She certainly seems to know when
she is beaten, and does not intend to make a bad thing seem worse in the
eyes of the world."

Well, 'tis a bad wind that blows good to nobody.  As _The Mahmoud_ was
lost off the Balearics, it cannot have been her that put the marauders on
shore and trained her big guns on Ilsin.  We take it, therefore, that the
latter must have been a pirate, and as we have taken her derelict in our
waters, she is now ours in all ways.  Anyhow, she is ours, and is the
first ship of her class in the navy of the Blue Mountains.  I am inclined
to think that even if she was--or is still--a Turkish ship, Admiral Rooke
would not be inclined to let her go.  As for Captain Desmond, I think he
would go straight out of his mind if such a thing was to be even
suggested to him.

It will be a pity if we have any more trouble, for life here is very
happy with us all now.  Signum (Signature) JOSEP.

At Portsmouth, in her Maj^tie's Province of New Hampshire, in New England,
the 28th Day of July, in the thirteenth year of our Sovereign Lady Anne,
by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Queen,
Defender of the Faith, &c. [1714]
The several Articles of the foregoing sheet, after a long Conference
with the Delegates of the Eastern Indians, were read to them, & the sense
& meaning thereof explained by two faithful, sworn Interpreters, and
accordingly signed by every of the Sachems and Delegates that were
not present & had not signed the last year.
In the Presence of his Excellency the Governour, and his Excellency
General Nicholson, & the Gentlemen of Her Maj^tie's Councills for
the Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay & New Hampshire, & other
Gentlemen.But there could be no
doubt about it the instant after.  She seemed to beam with happiness.
When Teuta knelt to her, she could only say:

"My dear, my dear, I am glad!  Rupert's wife, you and I must love each
other very much."  Seeing that they were laughing and crying in each
other's arms, I thought it best to come away and leave them alone.  And I
didn't feel a bit lonely either when I was out of sight of them.  I knew
that where those two dear women were there was a place for my own heart.

When I came back, Teuta was sitting on Aunt Janet's knee.  It seemed
rather stupendous for the old lady, for Teuta is such a splendid creature
that even when she sits on my own knee and I catch a glimpse of us in
some mirror, I cannot but notice what a nobly-built girl she is.

My wife was jumping up as soon as I was seen, but Aunt Janet held her
tight to her, and said:

"Don't stir, dear.  It is such happiness to me to have you there.  Rupert
has always been my 'little boy,' and, in spite of all his being such a
giant, he is so still.  And so you, that he loves, must be my little
girl--in spite of all your beauty and your strength--and sit on my knee,
till you can place there a little one that shall be dear to us all, and
that shall let me feel my youth again.  When first I saw you I was
surprised, for, somehow, though I had never seen you nor even heard of
you, I seemed to know your face.  Sit where you are, dear.  It is only
Rupert--and we both love him."

Teuta looked at me, flushing rosily; but she sat quiet, and drew the old
lady's white head on her young breast.


JANET MACKELPIE'S NOTES.


                                                           _July_ 8, 1907.

I used to think that whenever Rupert should get married or start on the
way to it by getting engaged--I would meet his future wife with something
of the same affection that I have always had for himself.  But I know now
that what was really in my mind was _jealousy_, and that I was really
fighting against my own instincts, and pretending to myself that I was
not jealous.  Had I ever had the faintest idea that she would be anything
the least like Teuta, that sort of feeling should never have had even a
foothold.  No wonder my dear boy is in love with her, for, truth to tell,
I am in love with her myself.  I don't think I ever met a creature--a
woman creature, of course, I mean--with so many splendid qualities.  I
almost fear to say it, lest it should seem to myself wrong; but I think
she is as good as a woman as Rupert is as a man.  And what more than that
can I say?  I thought I loved her and trusted her, and knew her all I
could, until this morning.

I was in my own room, as it is still called.  For, though Rupert tells me
in confidence that under his uncle's will the whole estate of Vissarion,
Castle and all, really belongs to the Voivode, and though the Voivode has
been persuaded to accept the position, he (the Voivode) will not allow
anything to be changed.  He will not even hear a word of my going, or
changing my room, or anything.  And Rupert backs him up in it, and Teuta
too.  So what am I to do but let the dears have their way?

Well, this morning, when Rupert was with the Voivode at a meeting of the
National Council in the Great Hall, Teuta came to me, and (after closing
the door and bolting it, which surprised me a little) came and knelt down
beside me, and put her face in my lap.  I stroked her beautiful black
hair, and said:

"What is it, Teuta darling?  Is there any trouble?  And why did you bolt
the door?  Has anything happened to Rupert?"  When she looked up I saw
that her beautiful black eyes, with the stars in them, were overflowing
with tears not yet shed.  But she smiled through them, and the tears did
not fall.  When I saw her smile my heart was eased, and I said without
thinking: "Thank God, darling, Rupert is all right."

"I thank God, too, dear Aunt Janet!" she said softly; and I took her in
my arms and laid her head on my breast.

"Go on, dear," I said; "tell me what it is that troubles you?"  This time
I saw the tears drop, as she lowered her head and hid her face from me.

"I'm afraid I have deceived you, Aunt Janet, and that you will
not--cannot--forgive me."

"Lord save you, child!" I said, "there's nothing that you could do that I
could not and would not forgive.  Not that you would ever do anything
base, for that is the only thing that is hard to forgive.  Tell me now
what troubles you."

She looked up in my eyes fearlessly, this time with only the signs of
tears that had been, and said proudly:

"Nothing base, Aunt Janet.  My father's daughter would not willingly be
base.  I do not think she could.  Moreover, had I ever done anything base
I should not be here, for--for--I should never have been Rupert's wife!"

"Then what is it?  Tell your old Aunt Janet, dearie."  She answered me
with another question:

"Aunt Janet, do you know who I am, and how I first met Rupert?"

"You are the Voivodin Teuta Vissarion--the daughter of the Voivode--Or,
rather, you were; you are now Mrs. Rupert Sent Leger.  For he is still an
Englishman, and a good subject of our noble King."

"Yes, Aunt Janet," she said, "I am that, and proud to be it--prouder than
I would be were I my namesake, who was Queen in the old days.  But how
and where did I see Rupert first?"  I did not know, and frankly told her
so.  So she answered her question herself:

"I saw him first in his own room at night."  I knew in my heart that in
whatever she did had been nothing wrong, so I sat silent waiting for her
to go on:

"I was in danger, and in deadly fear.  I was afraid I might die--not that
I fear death--and I wanted help and warmth.  I was not dressed as I am
now!"

On the instant it came to me how I knew her face, even the first time I
had seen it.  I wished to help her out of the embarrassing part of her
confidence, so I said:

"Dearie, I think I know.  Tell me, child, will you put on the frock . . .
the dress . . . costume you wore that night, and let me see you in it?
It is not mere idle curiosity, my child, but something far, far above
such idle folly."

"Wait for me a minute, Aunt Janet," she said, as she rose up; "I shall
not be long."  Then she left the room.

In a very few minutes she was back.  Her appearance might have frightened
some people, for she was clad only in a shroud.  Her feet were bare, and
she walked across the room with the gait of an empress, and stood before
me with her eyes modestly cast down.  But when presently she looked up
and caught my eyes, a smile rippled over her face.  She threw herself
once more before me on her knees, and embraced me as she said:

"I was afraid I might frighten you, dear."  I knew I could truthfully
reassure her as to that, so I proceeded to do so:

"Do not worry yourself, my dear.  I am not by nature timid.  I come of a
fighting stock which has sent out heroes, and I belong to a family
wherein is the gift of Second Sight.  Why should we fear?  We know!
Moreover, I saw you in that dress before.  Teuta, I saw you and Rupert
married!"  This time she herself it was that seemed disconcerted.

"Saw us married!  How on earth did you manage to be there?"

"I was not there.  My Seeing was long before!  Tell me, dear, what day,
or rather what night, was it that you first saw Rupert?"  She answered
sadly:

"I do not know.  Alas!  I lost count of the days as I lay in the tomb in
that dreary Crypt."

"Was your--your clothing wet that night?" I asked.

"Yes.  I had to leave the Crypt, for a great flood was out, and the
church was flooded.  I had to seek help--warmth--for I feared I might
die.  Oh, I was not, as I have told you, afraid of death.  But I had
undertaken a terrible task to which I had pledged myself.  It was for my
father's sake, and the sake of the Land, and I felt that it was a part of
my duty to live.  And so I lived on, when death would have been relief.
It was to tell you all about this that I came to your room to-day.  But
how did you see me--us--married?"

"Ah, my child!" I answered, "that was before the marriage took place.
The morn after the night that you came in the wet, when, having been
troubled in uncanny dreaming, I came to see if Rupert was a'richt, I lost
remembrance o' my dreaming, for the floor was all wet, and that took off
my attention.  But later, the morn after Rupert used his fire in his room
for the first time, I told him what I had dreamt; for, lassie, my dear, I
saw ye as bride at that weddin' in fine lace o'er yer shrood, and
orange-flowers and ithers in yer black hair; an' I saw the stars in yer
bonny een--the een I love.  But oh, my dear, when I saw the shrood, and
kent what it might mean, I expeckit to see the worms crawl round yer
feet.  But do ye ask yer man to tell ye what I tell't him that morn.
'Twill interest ye to know how the hairt o' men can learn by dreams.  Has
he ever tellt ye aught o' this?"

"No, dear," she said simply.  "I think that perhaps he was afraid that
one or other of us, if not both, might be upset by it if he did.  You
see, he did not tell you anything at all of our meeting, though I am sure
that he will be glad when he knows that we both know all about it, and
have told each other everything."

That was very sweet of her, and very thoughtful in all ways, so I said
that which I thought would please her best--that is, the truth:

"Ah, lassie, that is what a wife should be--what a wife should do.
Rupert is blessed and happy to have his heart in your keeping."

I knew from the added warmth of her kiss what I had said had pleased her.

_Letter from Ernest Roger Halbard Melton_, _Humcroft_, _Salop_, _to
Rupert Sent Leger_, _Vissarion_, _Land of the Blue Mountains_.

                                                          _July_ 29, 1907.

    MY DEAR COUSIN RUPERT,

    We have heard such glowing accounts of Vissarion that I am coming out
    to see you.  As you are yourself now a landowner, you will understand
    that my coming is not altogether a pleasure.  Indeed, it is a duty
    first.  When my father dies I shall be head of the family--the family
    of which Uncle Roger, to whom we were related, was a member.  It is
    therefore meet and fitting that I should know something of our family
    branches and of their Seats.  I am not giving you time for much
    warning, so am coming on immediately--in fact, I shall arrive almost
    as soon as this letter.  But I want to catch you in the middle of
    your tricks.  I hear that the Blue Mountaineer girls are peaches, so
    don't send them _all_ away when you hear I'm coming!

    Do send a yacht up to Fiume to meet me.  I hear you have all sorts of
    craft at Vissarion.  The MacSkelpie, I hear, said you received her as
    a Queen; so I hope you will do the decent by one of your own flesh
    and blood, and the future Head of the House at that.  I shan't bring
    much of a retinue with me.  _I_ wasn't made a billionaire by old
    Roger, so can only take my modest "man Friday"--whose name is
    Jenkinson, and a Cockney at that.  So don't have too much gold lace
    and diamond-hilted scimitars about, like a good chap, or else he'll
    want the very worst--his wyges ryzed.  That old image Rooke that came
    over for Miss McS., and whom by chance I saw at the attorney man's,
    might pilot me down from Fiume.  The old
    gentleman-by-Act-of-Parliament Mr. Bingham Trent (I suppose he has
    hyphened it by this time) told me that Miss McS. said he "did her
    proud" when she went over under his charge.  I shall be at Fiume on
    the evening of Wednesday, and shall stay at the Europa, which is, I
    am told, the least indecent hotel in the place.  So you know where to
    find me, or any of your attendant demons can know, in case I am to
    suffer "substituted service."

                                                 Your affectionate Cousin,
                                              ERNEST ROGER HALBARD MELTON.

_Letter from Admiral Rooke to the Gospodar Rupert_.

                                                         _August_ 1, 1907.

    SIR,

    In obedience to your explicit direction that I should meet Mr. Ernest
    R. H. Melton at Fiume, and report to you exactly what occurred,
    "without keeping anything back,"--as you will remember you said, I
    beg to report.

    I brought the steam-yacht _Trent_ to Fiume, arriving there on the
    morning of Thursday.  At 11.30 p.m.  I went to meet the train from
    St. Peter, due 11.40.  It was something late, arriving just as the
    clock was beginning to strike midnight.  Mr. Melton was on board, and
    with him his valet Jenkinson.  I am bound to say that he did not seem
    very pleased with his journey, and expressed much disappointment at
    not seeing Your Honour awaiting him.  I explained, as you directed,
    that you had to attend with the Voivode Vissarion and the Vladika the
    National Council, which met at Plazac, or that otherwise you would
    have done yourself the pleasure of coming to meet him.  At a
    conference had with them in the presence of the governor of Canada,
    Atewaneto, the chief speaker, made an eloquent reply, in which he
    charged the English with trespassing on their lands: he said, "We
    acknowledge no other land of yours than your settlements,
    wherever you have built, and we will not consent, under any pretext,
    that you pass beyond them. The lands we possess have been given us
    by the Great Master of Life, we acknowledge to hold only from him."
    
    In 1755 they were again in the field, and followed the French armies
    to the head of Lake George, and carried terror into the new townships
    on the Connecticut river. Some of their small parties at that late
    day penetrated within sixty miles of the capital of New England.
    But these long continued aggressions were soon to meet a fearful
    retribution.

    The capture of Quebec, which gave North America to England, had changed
    the relation of the Abenakis. Capt.

    Kennedy having been sent to their villages with a flag of truce,
    was, with his whole party, made prisoners. To chastise them for this
    outrage, as well as to retaliate for their continued cruelty
    and murders on the defenseless frontier settlements, Gen. Amherst
    dispatched the celebrated Major Rogers with a detachment of his
    rangers to the villages on the St. Francis. Just before daybreak, on
    the fifth of October, he surprised and killed at least two hundred
    Indians, and burnt all their wigwams, plunder, and effects. Rogers
    in his journal says: "To my own knowledge, in six years' time,
    the St.

    Francis Indians had killed and carried into captivity on the frontiers
    of New England, four hundred persons; we found in the town, hanging
    on poles over the doors &c., about six hundred scalps, mostly
    English."
The power of the tribe for evil was gone, and we hear no more of
them till the Revolution, when their warriors followed Burgoyne to
Saratoga, where they again used the tomahawk and scalping knife,
but when his fortunes began to wane, they retired to the banks of
the St.We left at ten, and took the electric pinnace out to the _Trent_,
    which lay, with steam up, in the roads.  Breakfast was served on
    board, by his orders, and presently he came up on the bridge, where I
    was in command.  He brought his man Jenkinson with him.  Seeing me
    there, and not (I suppose) understanding that I was in command, he
    unceremoniously ordered me to go on the deck.  Indeed, he named a
    place much lower.  I made a sign of silence to the quartermaster at
    the wheel, who had released the spokes, and was going, I feared, to
    make some impertinent remark.  Jenkinson joined me presently, and
    said, as some sort of explanation of his master's discourtesy (of
    which he was manifestly ashamed), if not as an amende:

    "The governor is in a hell of a wax this morning."

    When we got in sight of Meleda, Mr. Melton sent for me and asked me
    where we were to land.  I told him that, unless he wished to the
    contrary, we were to run to Vissarion; but that my instructions were
    to land at whatever port he wished.  Whereupon he told me that he
    wished to stay the night at some place where he might be able to see
    some "life."  He was pleased to add something, which I presume he
    thought jocular, about my being able to "coach" him in such matters,
    as doubtless even "an old has-been like you" had still some sort of
    an eye for a pretty girl.  I told him as respectfully as I could that
    I had no knowledge whatever on such subjects, which were possibly of
    some interest to younger men, but of none to me.  He said no more; so
    after waiting for further orders, but without receiving any, I said:

    "I suppose, sir, we shall run to Vissarion?"

    "Run to the devil, if you like!" was his reply, as he turned away.
    When we arrived in the creek at Vissarion, he seemed much
    milder--less aggressive in his manner; but when he heard that you
    were detained at Plazac, he got rather "fresh"--I use the American
    term--again.  I greatly feared there would be a serious misfortune
    before we got into the Castle, for on the dock was Julia, the wife of
    Michael, the Master of the Wine, who is, as you know, very beautiful.
    Mr. Melton seemed much taken with her; and she, being flattered by
    the attention of a strange gentleman and Your Honour's kinsman, put
    aside the stand-offishness of most of the Blue Mountain women.
    Whereupon Mr. Melton, forgetting himself, took her in his arms and
    kissed her.  Instantly there was a hubbub.  The mountaineers present
    drew their handjars, and almost on the instant sudden death appeared
    to be amongst us.  Happily the men waited as Michael, who had just
    arrived on the quay-wall as the outrage took place, ran forward,
    wheeling his handjar round his head, and manifestly intending to
    decapitate Mr. Melton.  On the instant--I am sorry to say it, for it
    created a terribly bad effect--Mr. Melton dropped on his knees in a
    state of panic.  There was just this good use in it--that there was a
    pause of a few seconds.  During that time the little Cockney valet,
    who has the heart of a man in him, literally burst his way forward,
    and stood in front of his master in boxing attitude, calling out:

    "'Ere, come on, the 'ole lot of ye! 'E ain't done no 'arm.  He honly
    kissed the gal, as any man would.  If ye want to cut off somebody's
    'ed, cut off mine.  I ain't afride!"  There was such genuine pluck in
    this, and it formed so fine a contrast to the other's craven attitude
    (forgive me, Your Honour; but you want the truth!), that I was glad
    he was an Englishman, too.  The mountaineers recognized his spirit,
    and saluted with their handjars, even Michael amongst the number.
    Half turning his head, the little man said in a fierce whisper:

    "Buck up, guv'nor!  Get up, or they'll slice ye!  'Ere's Mr. Rooke;
    'e'll see ye through it."

    By this time the men were amenable to reason, and when I reminded
    them that Mr. Melton was Your Honour's cousin, they put aside their
    handjars and went about their work.  I asked Mr. Melton to follow,
    and led the way to the Castle.

    When we got close to the great entrance within the walled courtyard,
    we found a large number of the servants gathered, and with them many
    of the mountaineers, who have kept an organized guard all round the
    Castle ever since the abducting of the Voivodin.  As both Your Honour
    and the Voivode were away at Plazac, the guard had for the time been
    doubled.  When the steward came and stood in the doorway, the
    servants stood off somewhat, and the mountaineers drew back to the
    farther sides and angles of the courtyard.  The Voivodin had, of
    course, been informed of the guest's (your cousin) coming, and came
    to meet him in the old custom of the Blue Mountains.  As Your Honour
    only came to the Blue Mountains recently, and as no occasion has been
    since then of illustrating the custom since the Voivode was away, and
    the Voivodin then believed to be dead, perhaps I, who have lived here
    so long, may explain:

    When to an old Blue Mountain house a guest comes whom it is wished to
    do honour, the Lady, as in the vernacular the mistress of the house
    is called, comes herself to meet the guest at the door--or, rather,
    _outside_ the door--so that she can herself conduct him within.  It
    is a pretty ceremony, and it is said that of old in kingly days the
    monarch always set much store by it.  The custom is that, when she
    approaches the honoured guest (he need not be royal), she bends--or
    more properly kneels--before him and kisses his hand.  It has been
    explained by historians that the symbolism is that the woman, showing
    obedience to her husband, as the married woman of the Blue Mountains
    always does, emphasizes that obedience to her husband's guest.  The
    custom is always observed in its largest formality when a young wife
    receives for the first time a guest, and especially one whom her
    husband wishes to honour.  The Voivodin was, of course, aware that
    Mr. Melton was your kinsman, and naturally wished to make the
    ceremony of honour as marked as possible, so as to show overtly her
    sense of her husband's worth.

    When we came into the courtyard, I held back, of course, for the
    honour is entirely individual, and is never extended to any other, no
    matter how worthy he may be.  Naturally Mr. Melton did not know the
    etiquette of the situation, and so for that is not to be blamed.  He
    took his valet with him when, seeing someone coming to the door, he
    went forward.  I thought he was going to rush to his welcomer.  Such,
    though not in the ritual, would have been natural in a young kinsman
    wishing to do honour to the bride of his host, and would to anyone
    have been both understandable and forgivable.  It did not occur to me
    at the time, but I have since thought that perhaps he had not then
    heard of Your Honour's marriage, which I trust you will, in justice
    to the young gentleman, bear in mind when considering the matter.
    Unhappily, however, he did not show any such eagerness.  On the
    contrary, he seemed to make a point of showing indifference.  It
    seemed to me myself that he, seeing somebody wishing to make much of
    him, took what he considered a safe opportunity of restoring to
    himself his own good opinion, which must have been considerably
    lowered in the episode of the Wine Master's wife.

    The Voivodin, thinking, doubtless, Your Honour, to add a fresh lustre
    to her welcome, had donned the costume which all her nation has now
    come to love and to accept as a dress of ceremonial honour.  She wore
    her shroud.  It moved the hearts of all of us who looked on to see
    it, and we appreciated its being worn for such a cause.  But Mr.
    Melton did not seem to care.  As he had been approaching she had
    begun to kneel, and was already on her knees whilst he was several
    yards away.  There he stopped and turned to speak to his valet, put a
    glass in his eye, and looked all round him and up and down--indeed,
    everywhere except at the Great Lady, who was on her knees before him,
    waiting to bid him welcome.  I could see in the eyes of such of the
    mountaineers as were within my range of vision a growing animosity;
    so, hoping to keep down any such expression, which I knew would cause
    harm to Your Honour and the Voivodin, I looked all round them
    straight in their faces with a fixed frown, which, indeed, they
    seemed to understand, for they regained, and for the time maintained,
    their usual dignified calm.  The Voivodin, may I say, bore the trial
    wonderfully.  No human being could see that she was in any degree
    pained or even surprised.  Mr. Melton stood looking round him so long
    that I had full time to regain my own attitude of calm.  At last he
    seemed to come back to the knowledge that someone was waiting for
    him, and sauntered leisurely forward.  There was so much
    insolence--mind you, not insolence that was intended to appear as
    such--in his movement that the mountaineers began to steal forward.
    When he was close up to the Voivodin, and she put out her hand to
    take his, he put forward _one finger_!  I could hear the intake of
    the breath of the men, now close around, for I had moved forward,
    too.  I thought it would be as well to be close to your guest, lest
    something should happen to him.  The Voivodin still kept her splendid
    self-control.  Raising the finger put forward by the guest with the
    same deference as though it had been the hand of a King, she bent her
    head down and kissed it.  Her duty of courtesy now done, she was
    preparing to rise, when he put his hand into his pocket, and, pulling
    out a sovereign, offered it to her.  His valet moved his hand
    forward, as if to pull back his arm, but it was too late.  I am sure,
    Your Honour, that no affront was intended.  He doubtless thought that
    he was doing a kindness of the sort usual in England when one "tips"
    a housekeeper.  But all the same, to one in her position, it was an
    affront, an insult, open and unmistakable.  So it was received by the
    mountaineers, whose handjars flashed out as one.  For a second it was
    so received even by the Voivodin, who, with face flushing scarlet,
    and the stars in her eves flaming red, sprang to her feet.  But in
    that second she had regained herself, and to all appearances her
    righteous anger passed away.  Stooping, she took the hand of her
    guest and raised it--you know how strong she is--and, holding it in
    hers, led him into the doorway, saying:

    "You are welcome, kinsman of my husband, to the house of my father,
    which is presently my husband's also.  Both are grieved that, duty
    having called them away for the time, they are unable to be here to
    help me to greet you."

    I tell you, Your Honour, that it was a lesson in self-respect which
    anyone who saw it can never forget.  As to me, it makes my flesh
    quiver, old as I am, with delight, and my heart leap.

    May I, as a faithful servant who has had many years of experience,
    suggest that Your Honour should seem--for the present, at any
    rate--not to know any of these things which I have reported, as you
    wished me to do.  Be sure that the Voivodin will tell you her
    gracious self aught that she would wish you to know.  And such
    reticence on your part must make for her happiness, even if it did
    not for your own.

    So that you may know all, as you desired, and that you may have time
    to school yourself to whatever attitude you think best to adopt, I
    send this off to you at once by fleet messenger.  Were the aeroplane
    here, I should take it myself.  I leave here shortly to await the
    arrival of Sir Colin at Otranto.

                                           Your Honour's faithful servant,
                                                                    ROOKE.


JANET MACKELPIE'S NOTES.


                                                         _August_ 9, 1907.

To me it seems very providential that Rupert was not at home when that
dreadful young man Ernest Melton arrived, though it is possible that if
Rupert had been present he would not have dared to conduct himself so
badly.  Of course, I heard all about it from the maids; Teuta never
opened her lips to me on the subject.  It was bad enough and stupid
enough for him to try to kiss a decent young woman like Julia, who is
really as good as gold and as modest as one of our own Highland lassies;
but to think of him insulting Teuta!  The little beast!  One would think
that a champion idiot out of an Equatorial asylum would know better!  If
Michael, the Wine Master, wanted to kill him, I wonder what my Rupert and
hers would have done?  I am truly thankful that he was not present.  And
I am thankful, too, that I was not present either, for I should have made
an exhibition of myself, and Rupert would not have liked that.  He--the
little beast! might have seen from the very dress that the dear girl wore
that there was something exceptional about her.  But on one account I
should have liked to see her.  They tell me that she was, in her true
dignity, like a Queen, and that her humility in receiving her husband's
kinsman was a lesson to every woman in the Land.  I must be careful not
to let Rupert know that I have heard of the incident.  Later on, when it
is all blown over and the young man has been got safely away, I shall
tell him of it.  Mr. Rooke--Lord High Admiral Rooke, I should say--must
be a really wonderful man to have so held himself in check; for, from
what I have heard of him, he must in his younger days have been worse
than Old Morgan of Panama.  Mr. Ernest Roger Halbard Melton, of Humcroft,
Salop, little knows how near he was to being "cleft to the chine" also.

Fortunately, I had heard of his meeting with Teuta before he came to see
me, for I did not get back from my walk till after he had arrived.
Teuta's noble example was before me, and I determined that I, too, would
show good manners under any circumstances.  But I didn't know how mean he
is.  Think of his saying to me that Rupert's position here must be a
great source of pride to me, who had been his nursery governess.  He said
"nursemaid" first, but then stumbled in his words, seeming to remember
something.  I did not turn a hair, I am glad to say.  It is a mercy Uncle
Colin was not here, for I honestly believe that, if he had been, he would
have done the "cleaving to the chine" himself.  It has been a narrow
escape for Master Ernest, for only this morning Rupert had a message,
sent on from Gibraltar, saying that he was arriving with his clansmen,
and that they would not be far behind his letter.  He would call at
Otranto in case someone should come across to pilot him to Vissarion.
Uncle told me all about that young cad having offered him one finger in
Mr. Trent's office, though, of course, he didn't let the cad see that he
noticed it.  I have no doubt that, when he does arrive, that young man,
if he is here still, will find that he will have to behave himself, if it
be only on Sir Colin's account alone.


THE SAME (LATER).


I had hardly finished writing when the lookout on the tower announced
that the _Teuta_, as Rupert calls his aeroplane, was sighted crossing the
mountains from Plazac.  I hurried up to see him arrive, for I had not as
yet seen him on his "aero."  Mr. Ernest Melton came up, too.  Teuta was,
of course, before any of us.  She seems to know by instinct when Rupert
is coming.

It was certainly a wonderful sight to see the little aeroplane, with
outspread wings like a bird in flight, come sailing high over the
mountains.  There was a head-wind, and they were beating against it;
otherwise we should not have had time to get to the tower before the
arrival.

When once the "aero" had begun to drop on the near side of the mountains,
however, and had got a measure of shelter from them, her pace was
extraordinary.  We could not tell, of course, what sort of pace she came
at from looking at herself.  But we gathered some idea from the rate at
which the mountains and hills seemed to slide away from under her.  When
she got over the foot-hills, which are about ten miles away, she came on
at a swift glide that seemed to throw the distance behind her.  When
quite close, she rose up a little till she was something higher than the
Tower, to which she came as straight as an arrow from the bow, and glided
to her moorings, stopping dead as Rupert pulled a lever, which seemed to
turn a barrier to the wind.  The Voivode sat beside Rupert, but I must
say that he seemed to hold on to the bar in front of him even more firmly
than Rupert held to his steering-gear.

When they had alighted, Rupert greeted his cousin with the utmost
kindness, and bade him welcome to Vissarion.

"I see," he said, "you have met Teuta.  Now you may congratulate me, if
you wish."

Mr. Melton made a long rodomontade about her beauty, but presently,
stumbling about in his speech, said something regarding it being unlucky
to appear in grave-clothes.  Rupert laughed, and clapped him on the
shoulder as he answered:

"That pattern of frock is likely to become a national dress for loyal
women of the Blue Mountains.  When you know something of what that dress
means to us all at present you will understand.  In the meantime, take it
that there is not a soul in the nation that does not love it and honour
her for wearing it."  To which the cad replied:

"Oh, indeed!  I thought it was some preparation for a fancy-dress ball."
Rupert's comment on this ill-natured speech was (for him) quite grumpily
given:

"I should not advise you to think such things whilst you are in this part
of the world, Ernest.  They bury men here for much less."

The cad seemed struck with something--either what Rupert had said or his
manner of saying it--for he was silent for several seconds before he
spoke.

"I'm very tired with that long journey, Rupert.  Would you and Mrs. Sent
Leger mind if I go to my own room and turn in?  My man can ask for a cup
of tea and a sandwich for me."


RUPERT'S JOURNAL.


                                                        _August_ 10, 1907.

When Ernest said he wished to retire it was about the wisest thing he
could have said or done, and it suited Teuta and me down to the ground.
I could see that the dear girl was agitated about something, so thought
it would be best for her to be quiet, and not worried with being civil to
the Bounder.  Though he is my cousin, I can't think of him as anything
else.  The Voivode and I had certain matters to attend to arising out of
the meeting of the Council, and when we were through the night was
closing in.  When I saw Teuta in our own rooms she said at once:

"Do you mind, dear, if I stay with Aunt Janet to-night?  She is very
upset and nervous, and when I offered to come to her she clung to me and
cried with relief."

So when I had had some supper, which I took with the Voivode, I came down
to my old quarters in the Garden Room, and turned in early.

I was awakened a little before dawn by the coming of the fighting monk
Theophrastos, a notable runner, who had an urgent message for me.  This
was the letter to me given to him by Rooke.  He had been cautioned to
give it into no other hand, but to find me wherever I might be, and
convey it personally.  When he had arrived at Plazac I had left on the
aeroplane, so he had turned back to Vissarion.

When I read Rooke's report of Ernest Melton's abominable conduct I was
more angry with him than I can say.  Indeed, I did not think before that
that I could be angry with him, for I have always despised him.  But this
was too much.  However, I realized the wisdom of Rooke's advice, and went
away by myself to get over my anger and reacquire my self-mastery.  The
aeroplane _Teuta_ was still housed on the tower, so I went up alone and
took it out.

When I had had a spin of about a hundred miles I felt better.  The
bracing of the wind and the quick, exhilarating motion restored me to
myself, and I felt able to cope with Master Ernest, or whatever else
chagrinable might come along, without giving myself away.  As Teuta had
thought it better to keep silence as to Ernest's affront, I felt I must
not acknowledge it; but, all the same, I determined to get rid of him
before the day was much older.

When I had had my breakfast I sent word to him by a servant that I was
coming to his rooms, and followed not long behind the messenger.

He was in a suit of silk pyjamas, such as not even Solomon in all his
glory was arrayed in.  I closed the door behind me before I began to
speak.  He listened, at first amazed, then disconcerted, then angry, and
then cowering down like a whipped hound.  I felt that it was a case for
speaking out.  A bumptious ass like him, who deliberately insulted
everyone he came across--for if all or any of his efforts in that way
were due to mere elemental ignorance he was not fit to live, but should
be silenced on sight as a modern Caliban--deserved neither pity nor
mercy.  To extend to him fine feeling, tolerance, and such-like
gentlenesses would be to deprive the world of them without benefit to
any.  So well as I can remember, what I said was something like this:

"Ernest, as you say, you've got to go, and to go quick, you understand.
I dare say you look on this as a land of barbarians, and think that any
of your high-toned refinements are thrown away on people here.  Well,
perhaps it is so.  Undoubtedly, the structure of the country is rough;
the mountains may only represent the glacial epoch; but so far as I can
gather from some of your exploits--for I have only learned a small part
as yet--you represent a period a good deal farther back.  You seem to
have given our folk here an exhibition of the playfulness of the hooligan
of the Saurian stage of development; but the Blue Mountains, rough as
they are, have come up out of the primeval slime, and even now the people
aim at better manners.  They may be rough, primitive, barbarian,
elemental, if you will, but they are not low down enough to tolerate
either your ethics or your taste.  My dear cousin, your life is not safe
here!  I am told that yesterday, only for the restraint exercised by
certain offended mountaineers on other grounds than your own worth, you
would have been abbreviated by the head.  Another day of your fascinating
presence would do away with this restraint, and then we should have a
scandal.  I am a new-comer here myself--too new a comer to be able to
afford a scandal of that kind--and so I shall not delay your going.
Believe me, my dear cousin, Ernest Roger Halbard Melton, of Humcroft,
Salop, that I am inconsolable about your resolution of immediate
departure, but I cannot shut my eyes to its wisdom.  At present the
matter is altogether amongst ourselves, and when you have gone--if it be
immediately--silence will be observed on all hands for the sake of the
house wherein you are a guest; but if there be time for scandal to
spread, you will be made, whether you be alive or dead, a European
laughing-stock.  Accordingly, I have anticipated your wishes, and have
ordered a fast steam yacht to take you to Ancona, or to whatever other
port you may desire.  The yacht will be under the command of Captain
Desmond, of one of our battleships--a most determined officer, who will
carry out any directions which may be given to him.  This will insure
your safety so far as Italian territory.  Some of his officials will
arrange a special carriage for you up to Flushing, and a cabin on the
steamer to Queenboro'.  A man of mine will travel on the train and
steamer with you, and will see that whatever you may wish in the way of
food or comfort will be provided.  Of course, you understand, my dear
cousin, that you are my guest until you arrive in London.  I have not
asked Rooke to accompany you, as when he went to meet you, it was a
mistake.  Indeed, there might have been a danger to you which I never
contemplated--a quite unnecessary danger, I assure you.  But happily
Admiral Rooke, though a man of strong passions, has wonderful
self-control."

"Admiral Rooke?" he queried.  "Admiral?"

"Admiral, certainly," I replied, "but not an ordinary Admiral--one of
many.  He is _the_ Admiral--the Lord High Admiral of the Land of the Blue
Mountains, with sole control of its expanding navy.  When such a man is
treated as a valet, there may be . . . But why go into this?  It is all
over.  I only mention it lest anything of a similar kind should occur
with Captain Desmond, who is a younger man, and therefore with probably
less self-repression."

I saw that he had learned his lesson, and so said no more on the subject.

There was another reason for his going which I did not speak of.  Sir
Colin MacKelpie was coming with his clansmen, and I knew he did not like
Ernest Melton.  I well remembered that episode of his offering one finger
to the old gentleman in Mr. Trent's office, and, moreover, I had my
suspicions that Aunt Janet's being upset was probably in some measure due
to some rudeness of his that she did not wish to speak about.  He is
really an impossible young man, and is far better out of this country
than in it.  If he remained here, there would be some sort of a tragedy
for certain.

I must say that it was with a feeling of considerable relief that I saw
the yacht steam out of the creek, with Captain Desmond on the bridge and
my cousin beside him.

Quite other were my feelings when, an hour after, _The Lady_ came flying
into the creek with the Lord High Admiral on the bridge, and beside him,
more splendid and soldier-like than ever, Sir Colin MacKelpie.  Mr.
Bingham Trent was also on the bridge.

The General was full of enthusiasm regarding his regiment, for in all,
those he brought with him and those finishing their training at home, the
force is near the number of a full regiment.  When we were alone he
explained to me that all was arranged regarding the non-commissioned
officers, but that he had held over the question of officers until we
should have had a suitable opportunity of talking the matter over
together.  He explained to me his reasons, which were certainly simple
and cogent.  Officers, according to him, are a different class, and
accustomed to a different standard altogether of life and living, of
duties and pleasures.  They are harder to deal with and more difficult to
obtain.  "There was no use," he said, "in getting a lot of failures, with
old-crusted ways of their own importance.  We must have young men for our
purpose--that is, men not old, but with some experience--men, of course,
who know how to behave themselves, or else, from what little I have seen
of the Blue Mountaineers, they wouldn't last long here if they went on as
some of them do elsewhere.  I shall start things here as you wish me to,
for I am here, my dear boy, to stay with you and Janet, and we shall, if
it be given to us by the Almighty, help to build up together a new
'nation'--an ally of Britain, who will stand at least as an outpost of
our own nation, and a guardian of our eastern road.  When things are
organized here on the military side, and are going strong, I shall, if
you can spare me, run back to London for a few weeks.  Whilst I am there
I shall pick up a lot of the sort of officers we want.  I know that there
are loads of them to be had.  I shall go slowly, however, and carefully,
too, and every man I bring back will be recommended to me by some old
soldier whom I know, and who knows the man he recommends, and has seen
him work.  We shall have, I dare say, an army for its size second to none
in the world, and the day may come when your old country will be proud of
your new one.  Now I'm off to see that all is ready for my people--your
people now."

I had had arrangements made for the comfort of the clansmen and the
women, but I knew that the good old soldier would see for himself that
his men were to be comfortable.  It was not for nothing that he
was--is--looked on as perhaps the General most beloved by his men in the
whole British Army.

When he had gone, and I was alone, Mr. Trent, who had evidently been
waiting for the opportunity, came to me.  When we had spoken of my
marriage and of Teuta, who seems to have made an immense impression on
him, he said suddenly:

"I suppose we are quite alone, and that we shall not be interrupted?"  I
summoned the man outside--there is always a sentry on guard outside my
door or near me, wherever I may be--and gave orders that I was not to be
disturbed until I gave fresh orders.  "If," I said, "there be anything
pressing or important, let the Voivodin or Miss MacKelpie know.  If
either of them brings anyone to me, it will be all right."

When we were quite alone Mr. Trent took a slip of paper and some
documents from the bag which was beside him.  He then read out items from
the slip, placing as he did so the documents so checked over before him.

1.  New Will made on marriage, to be signed presently.

2.  Copy of the Re-conveyance of Vissarion estates to Peter Vissarion, as
directed by Will of Roger Melton.

3.  Report of Correspondence with Privy Council, and proceedings
following.

Taking up the last named, he untied the red tape, and, holding the bundle
in his hand, went on:

"As you may, later on, wish to examine the details of the Proceedings, I
have copied out the various letters, the originals of which are put
safely away in my strong-room where, of course, they are always available
in case you may want them.  For your present information I shall give you
a rough synopsis of the Proceedings, referring where advisable to this
paper.

"On receipt of your letter of instructions regarding the Consent of the
Privy Council to your changing your nationality in accordance with the
terms of Roger Melton's Will, I put myself in communication with the
Clerk of the Privy Council, informing him of your wish to be naturalized
in due time to the Land of the Blue Mountains.  After some letters
between us, I got a summons to attend a meeting of the Council.

"I attended, as required, taking with me all necessary documents, and
such as I conceived might be advisable to produce, if wanted.

"The Lord President informed me that the present meeting of the Council
was specially summoned in obedience to the suggestion of the King, who
had been consulted as to his personal wishes on the subject--should he
have any.  The President then proceeded to inform me officially that all
Proceedings of the Privy Council were altogether confidential, and were
not to be made public under any circumstances.  He was gracious enough to
add:

"'The circumstances of this case, however, are unique; and as you act for
another, we have thought it advisable to enlarge your permission in the
matter, so as to allow you to communicate freely with your principal.  As
that gentleman is settling himself in a part of the world which has been
in the past, and may be again, united to this nation by some common
interest, His Majesty wishes Mr. Sent Leger to feel assured of the
good-will of Great Britain to the Land of the Blue Mountains, and even of
his own personal satisfaction that a gentleman of so distinguished a
lineage and such approved personal character is about to be--within his
own scope--a connecting-link between the nations.  To which end he has
graciously announced that, should the Privy Council acquiesce in the
request of Denaturalization, he will himself sign the Patent therefor.

"'The Privy Council has therefore held private session, at which the
matter has been discussed in its many bearings; and it is content that
the change can do no harm, but may be of some service to the two nations.
We have, therefore, agreed to grant the prayer of the Applicant; and the
officials of the Council have the matter of the form of Grant in hand.
So you, sir, may rest satisfied that as soon as the formalities--which
will, of course, require the formal signing of certain documents by the
Applicant--can be complied with, the Grant and Patent will obtain.'"

Having made this statement in formal style, my old friend went on in more
familiar way:

"And so, my dear Rupert, all is in hand; and before very long you will
have the freedom required under the Will, and will be at liberty to take
whatever steps may be necessary to be naturalized in your new country.

"I may tell you, by the way, that several members of the Council made
very complimentary remarks regarding you.  I am forbidden to give names,
but I may tell you facts.  One old Field-Marshal, whose name is familiar
to the whole world, said that he had served in many places with your
father, who was a very valiant soldier, and that he was glad that Great
Britain was to have in the future the benefit of your father's son in a
friendly land now beyond the outposts of our Empire, but which had been
one with her in the past, and might be again.

Having taken up these objects, he thought: "I'll entrust them to the
mayor," and he resumed his journey, but now he kept his eyes open,
expecting to find something else.

All of a sudden he stopped short, as if he had struck against a wooden
barrier.So, too, with the
Will, the more formal and complete document, which is to take the place
of that short one which you forwarded to me the day after your marriage.
It may be, perhaps, necessary or advisable that, later on, when you are
naturalized here, you shall make a new Will in strictest accordance with
local law."


TEUTA SENT LEGER'S DIARY.


                                                        _August_ 19, 1907.

We had a journey to-day that was simply glorious.  We had been waiting to
take it for more than a week.  Rupert not only wanted the weather
suitable, but he had to wait till the new aeroplane came home.  It is
more than twice as big as our biggest up to now.  None of the others
could take all the party which Rupert wanted to go.  When he heard that
the aero was coming from Whitby, where it was sent from Leeds, he
directed by cable that it should be unshipped at Otranto, whence he took
it here all by himself.  I wanted to come with him, but he thought it
better not.  He says that Brindisi is too busy a place to keep anything
quiet--if not secret--and he wants to be very dark indeed about this, as
it is worked by the new radium engine.  Ever since they found radium in
our own hills he has been obsessed by the idea of an aerial navy for our
protection.  And after to-day's experiences I think he is right.  As he
wanted to survey the whole country at a glimpse, so that the general
scheme of defence might be put in hand, we had to have an aero big enough
to take the party as well as fast enough to do it rapidly, and all at
once.  We had, in addition to Rupert, my father, and myself, Sir Colin
and Lord High Admiral Rooke (I do like to give that splendid old fellow
his full title!).  The military and naval experts had with them
scientific apparatus of various kinds, also cameras and range-finders, so
that they could mark their maps as they required.  Rupert, of course,
drove, and I acted as his assistant.  Father, who has not yet become
accustomed to aerial travel, took a seat in the centre (which Rupert had
thoughtfully prepared for him), where there is very little motion.  I
must say I was amazed to see the way that splendid old soldier Sir Colin
bore himself.  He had never been on an aeroplane before, but, all the
same, he was as calm as if he was on a rock.  Height or motion did not
trouble him.  Indeed, he seemed to _enjoy_ himself all the time.  The
Admiral is himself almost an expert, but in any case I am sure he would
have been unconcerned, just as he was in the _Crab_ as Rupert has told
me.

We left just after daylight, and ran down south.  When we got to the east
of Ilsin, we kept slightly within the border-line, and went north or east
as it ran, making occasional loops inland over the mountains and back
again.  When we got up to our farthest point north, we began to go much
slower.  Sir Colin explained that for the rest all would be comparatively
plain-sailing in the way of defence; but that as any foreign Power other
than the Turk must attack from seaward, he would like to examine the
seaboard very carefully in conjunction with the Admiral, whose advice as
to sea defence would be invaluable.

Rupert was fine.  No one could help admiring him as he sat working his
lever and making the great machine obey every touch.  He was wrapped up
in his work.  I don't believe that whilst he was working he ever thought
of even me.  He _is_ splendid!

We got back just as the sun was dropping down over the Calabrian
Mountains.  It is quite wonderful how the horizon changes when you are
sailing away up high on an aeroplane.  Rupert is going to teach me how to
manage one all by myself, and when I am fit he will give me one, which he
is to have specially built for me.

I think I, too, have done some good work--at least, I have got some good
ideas--from our journey to-day.  Mine are not of war, but of peace, and I
think I see a way by which we shall be able to develop our country in a
wonderful way.  I shall talk the idea over with Rupert to-night, when we
are alone.  In the meantime Sir Colin and Admiral Rooke will think their
plans over individually, and to-morrow morning together.  Then the next
day they, too, are to go over their idea with Rupert and my father, and
something may be decided then.


RUPERT'S JOURNAL--_Continued_.


                                                        _August_ 21, 1907.

Our meeting on the subject of National Defence, held this afternoon, went
off well.  We were five in all, for with permission of the Voivode and
the two fighting-men, naval and military, I brought Teuta with me.  She
sat beside me quite quietly, and never made a remark of any kind till the
Defence business had been gone through.  Both Sir Colin and Admiral Rooke
were in perfect agreement as to the immediate steps to be taken for
defence.  In the first instance, the seaboard was to be properly
fortified in the necessary places, and the navy largely strengthened.
When we had got thus far I asked Rooke to tell of the navy increase
already in hand.  Whereupon he explained that, as we had found the small
battleship _The Lady_ of an excellent type for coast defence, acting only
in home waters, and of a size to take cover where necessary at many
places on our own shores, we had ordered nine others of the same pattern.
Of these the first four were already in hand, and were proceeding with
the greatest expedition.  The General then supplemented this by saying
that big guns could be used from points judiciously chosen on the
seaboard, which was in all so short a length that no very great quantity
of armament would be required.

In April, 1725, a delegation of three gentlemen visited Montreal with a
letter from the Governor of Massachusetts, in reply to one addressed
to him some months previously by M. Vaudreuil, relative to the attack at
Norridgewock, and the death of Father Rasle.
Since our aerial journey I have been to it by sea with Admiral
Rooke in _The Lady_, and then on land with the Vladika, who was born on
its shores, and who knows every inch of it.

"It is worth fortifying--and fortifying well, for as a port it is
peerless in Mediterranean seas.  The navies of the world might ride in
it, land-locked, and even hidden from view seawards.  The mountains which
enclose it are in themselves absolute protection.  In addition, these can
only be assailed from our own territory.  Of course, Voivode, you
understand when I say 'our' I mean the Land of the Blue Mountains, for
whose safety and well-being I am alone concerned.  Any ship anchoring in
the roads of the Blue Mouth would have only one need--sufficient length
of cable for its magnificent depth.

"When proper guns are properly placed on the steep cliffs to north and
south of the entrance, and when the rock islet between has been armoured
and armed as will be necessary, the Mouth will be impregnable.  But we
should not depend on the aiming of the entrance alone.  At certain
salient points--which I have marked upon this map--armour-plated sunken
forts within earthworks should be established.  There should be covering
forts on the hillsides, and, of course, the final summits protected.
Thus we could resist attack on any side or all sides--from sea or land.
That port will yet mean the wealth as well as the strength of this
nation, so it will be well to have it properly protected.  This should be
done soon, and the utmost secrecy observed in the doing of it, lest the
so doing should become a matter of international concern."

Here Rooke smote the table hard.

"By God, that is true!  It has been the dream of my own life for this
many a year."

In the silence which followed the sweet, gentle voice of Teuta came clear
as a bell:

