E-text prepared by by James Rusk


HIDE AND SEEK

by Wilkie Collins


TO

CHARLES DICKENS,

THIS STORY IS INSCRIBED,

AS A

TOKEN OF ADMIRATION AND AFFECTION,

BY HIS FRIEND,

THE AUTHOR.


PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION

This novel ranks the third, in order of succession, of the works of
fiction which I have produced. The history of its reception, on its
first appearance, is soon told.

Unfortunately for me, "Hide And Seek" was originally published in the
year eighteen hundred and fifty-four, at the outbreak of the Crimean
War. All England felt the absorbing interest of watching that serious
national event; and new books--some of them books of far higher
pretensions than mine--found the minds of readers in general
pre-occupied or indifferent. My own little venture in fiction
necessarily felt the adverse influence of the time. The demand among
the booksellers was just large enough to exhaust the first edition, and
there the sale of this novel, in its original form, terminated.

Since that period, the book has been, in the technical phrase, "out of
print." Proposals have reached me, at various times, for its
republication; but I have resolutely abstained from availing myself of
them for two reasons.

In the first place, I was anxious to wait until "Hide And Seek" could
make its re-appearance on a footing of perfect equality with my other
works. In the second place, I was resolved to keep it back until it
might obtain the advantage of a careful revisal, guided by the light of
the author's later experience. The period for the accomplishment of
both these objects has now presented itself. "Hide And Seek," in this
edition, forms one among the uniform series of my novels, which has
begun with "Antonina," "The Dead Secret," and "The Woman In White;" and
which will be continued with "Basil," and "The Queen Of Hearts." My
project of revisal has, at the same time, been carefully and rigidly
executed. I have abridged, and in many cases omitted, several passages
in the first edition, which made larger demands upon the reader's
patience than I should now think it desirable to venture on if I were
writing a new book; and I have, in one important respect, so altered
the termination of the story as to make it, I hope, more satisfactory
and more complete than it was in its original form.

With such advantages, therefore, as my diligent revision can give it,
"Hide And Seek" now appeals, after an interval of seven years, for
another hearing. I cannot think it becoming--especially in this age of
universal self-assertion--to state the grounds on which I believe my
book to be worthy of gaining more attention than it obtained, through
accidental circumstances, when it was first published. Neither can I
consent to shelter myself under the favorable opinions which many of my
brother writers--and notably, the great writer to whom "Hide And Seek"
is dedicated--expressed of these pages when I originally wrote them. I
leave it to the reader to compare this novel--especially in reference
to the conception and delineation of character--with the two novels
("Antonina" and "Basil") which preceded it; and then to decide whether
my third attempt in fiction, with all its faults, was, or was not, an
advance in Art on my earlier efforts. This is all the favor I ask for a
work which I once wrote with anxious care--which I have since corrected
with no sparing hand--which I have now finally dismissed to take its
second journey through the world of letters as usefully and
prosperously as it can.

HARLEY STREET, LONDON, SEPTEMBER, 1861.


OPENING CHAPTER.

A CHILD'S SUNDAY.

At a quarter to one o'clock, on a wet Sunday afternoon, in November
1837, Samuel Snoxell, page to Mr. Zachary Thorpe, of Baregrove Square,
London, left the area gate with three umbrellas under his arm, to meet
his master and mistress at the church door, on the conclusion of
morning service. Snoxell had been specially directed by the housemaid
to distribute his three umbrellas in the following manner: the new silk
umbrella was to be given to Mr. and Mrs. Thorpe; the old silk umbrella
was to be handed to Mr. Goodworth, Mrs. Thorpe's father; and the heavy
gingham was to be kept by Snoxell himself, for the special protection
of "Master Zack," aged six years, and the only child of Mr. Thorpe.
Furnished with these instructions, the page set forth on his way to the
church.

The morning had been fine for November; but before midday the clouds
had gathered, the rain had begun, and the inveterate fog of the season
had closed dingily over the wet streets, far and near. The garden in
the middle of Baregrove Square--with its close-cut turf, its vacant
beds, its bran-new rustic seats, its withered young trees that had not
yet grown as high as the railings around them--seemed to be absolutely
rotting away in yellow mist and softly-steady rain, and was deserted
even by the cats. All blinds were drawn down for the most part over all
windows; what light came from the sky came like light seen through
dusty glass; the grim brown hue of the brick houses looked more dirtily
mournful than ever; the smoke from the chimney-pots was lost
mysteriously in deepening superincumbent fog; the muddy gutters
gurgled; the heavy rain-drops dripped into empty areas audibly. No
object great or small, no out-of-door litter whatever appeared
anywhere, to break the dismal uniformity of line and substance in the
perspective of the square. No living being moved over the watery
pavement, save the solitary Snoxell. He plodded on into a Crescent, and
still the awful Sunday solitude spread grimly humid all around him. He
next entered a street with some closed shops in it; and here, at last,
some consoling signs of human life attracted his attention. He now saw
the crossing-sweeper of the district (off duty till church came out)
smoking a pipe under the covered way that led to a mews. He detected,
through half closed shutters, a chemist's apprentice yawing over a
large book. He passed a navigator, an ostler, and two costermongers
wandering wearily backwards and forwards before a closed public-house
door. He heard the heavy _clop clop_ of thickly-booted feet advancing
behind him, and a stern voice growling, "Now then! be off with you, or
you'll get locked up!"--and, looking round, saw an orange-girl, guilty
of having obstructed an empty pavement by sitting on the curb-stone,
driven along before a policeman, who was followed admiringly by a
ragged boy gnawing a piece of orange-peel. Having delayed a moment to
watch this Sunday procession of three with melancholy curiosity as it
moved by him, Snoxell was about to turn the corner of a street which
led directly to the church, when a shrill series of cries in a child's
voice struck on his ear and stopped his progress immediately.

The page stood stock-still in astonishment for an instant--then pulled
the new silk umbrella from under his arm, and turned the corner in a
violent hurry. His suspicions had not deceived him. There was Mr.
Thorpe himself walking sternly homeward through the rain, before church
was over. He led by the hand "Master Zack," who was trotting along
under protest, with his hat half off his head, hanging as far back from
his father's side as he possibly could, and howling all the time at the
utmost pitch of a very powerful pair of lungs.

Mr. Thorpe stopped as he passed the page, and snatched the umbrella out
of Snoxell's hand, with unaccustomed impetuity; said sharply, "Go to
your mistress, go on to the church;" and then resumed his road home,
dragging his son after him faster than ever.

"Snoxy! Snoxy!" screamed Master Zack, turning round towards the page,
so that he tripped himself up and fell against his father's legs at
every third step; "I've been a naughty boy at church!"

"Ah! you look like it, you do," muttered Snoxell to himself
sarcastically, as he went on. With that expression of opinion, the page
approached the church portico, and waited sulkily among his fellow
servants and their umbrellas for the congregation to come out.

When Mr. Goodworth and Mrs. Thorpe left the church, the old gentleman,
regardless of appearances, seized eagerly on the despised gingham
umbrella, because it was the largest he could get, and took his
daughter home under it in triumph. Mrs. Thorpe was very silent, and
sighed dolefully once or twice, when her father's attention wandered
from her to the people passing along the street.

"You're fretting about Zack," said the old gentleman, looking round
suddenly at his daughter. "Never mind! leave it to me. I'll undertake
to beg him off this time."

"It's very disheartening and shocking to find him behaving so," said
Mrs. Thorpe, "after the careful way we've brought him up in, too!"

"Nonsense, my love! No, I don't mean that--I beg your pardon. But who
can be surprised that a child of six years old should be tired of a
sermon forty minutes long by my watch? I was tired of it myself I know,
though I wasn't candid enough to show it as the boy did. There! there!
we won't begin to argue: I'll beg Zack off this time, and we'll say no
more about it."

Mr. Goodworth's announcement of his benevolent intentions towards Zack
seemed to have very little effect on Mrs. Thorpe; but she said nothing
on that subject or any other during the rest of the dreary walk home,
through rain, fog, and mud, to Baregrove Square.

Rooms have their mysterious peculiarities of physiognomy as well as
men. There are plenty of rooms, all of much the same size, all
furnished in much the same manner, which, nevertheless, differ
completely in expression (if such a term may be allowed) one from the
other; reflecting the various characters of their inhabitants by such
fine varieties of effect in the furniture-features generally common to
all, as are often, like the infinitesimal varieties of eyes, noses, and
mouths, too intricately minute to be traceable. Now, the parlor of Mr.
Thorpe's house was neat, clean, comfortably and sensibly furnished. It
was of the average size. It had the usual side-board, dining-table,
looking-glass, scroll fender, marble chimney-piece with a clock on it,
carpet with a drugget over it, and wire window-blinds to keep people
from looking in, characteristic of all respectable London parlors of
the middle class. And yet it was an inveterately severe-looking room--a
room that seemed as if it had never been convivial, never uproarious,
never anything but sternly comfortable and serenely dull--a room which
appeared to be as unconscious of acts of mercy, and easy unreasoning
over-affectionate forgiveness to offenders of any kind--juvenile or
otherwise--as if it had been a cell in Newgate, or a private torturing
chamber in the Inquisition. Perhaps Mr. Goodworth felt thus affected by
the parlor (especially in November weather) as soon as he entered
it--for, although he had promised to beg Zack off, although Mr. Thorpe
was sitting alone by the table and accessible to petitions, with a book
in his hand, the old gentleman hesitated uneasily for a minute or two,
and suffered his daughter to speak first.

"Where is Zack?" asked Mrs. Thorpe, glancing quickly and nervously all
round her.

"He is locked up in my dressing-room," answered her husband without
taking his eyes off the book.

"In your dressing-room!" echoed Mrs. Thorpe, looking as startled and
horrified as if she had received a blow instead of an answer; "in your
dressing-room! Good heavens, Zachary! how do you know the child hasn't
got at your razors?"

"They are locked up," rejoined Mr. Thorpe, with the mildest reproof in
his voice, and the mournfullest self-possession in his manner. "I took
care before I left the boy, that he should get at nothing which could
do him any injury. He is locked up, and will remain locked up,
because"--

"I say, Thorpe! won't you let him off this time?" interrupted Mr.
Goodworth, boldly plunging head foremost, with his petition for mercy,
into the conversation.

"If you had allowed me to proceed, sir," said Mr. Thorpe, who always
called his father-in-law _Sir,_ "I should have simply remarked that,
after having enlarged to my son (in such terms, you will observe, as I
thought best fitted to his comprehension) on the disgrace to his
parents and himself of his behavior this morning, I set him as a task
three verses to learn out of the 'Select Bible Texts for Children;'
choosing the verses which seemed most likely, if I may trust my own
judgment on the point, to impress on him what his behavior ought to be
for the future in church. He flatly refused to learn what I told him.
It was, of course, quite impossible to allow my authority to be set at
defiance by my own child (whose disobedient disposition has always, God
knows, been a source of constant trouble and anxiety to me); so I
locked him up, and locked up he will remain until he has obeyed me. My
dear," (turning to his wife and handing her a key), "I have no
objection, if you wish, to your going and trying what _you_ can do
towards overcoming the obstinacy of this unhappy child."

Mrs. Thorpe took the key, and went up stairs immediately--went up to do
what all women have done, from the time of the first mother; to do what
Eve did when Cain was wayward in his infancy, and cried at her
breast--in short, went up to coax her child.

Mr. Thorpe, when his wife closed the door, carefully looked down the
open page on his knee for the place where he had left off--found
it--referred back a moment to the last lines of the preceding leaf--and
then went on with his book, not taking the smallest notice of Mr.
Goodworth.

"Thorpe!" cried the old gentleman, plunging head-foremost again, into
his son-in-law's reading this time instead of his talk, "You may say
what you please; but your notion of bringing up Zack is a wrong one
altogether."

With the calmest imaginable expression of face, Mr. Thorpe looked up
from his book; and, first carefully putting a paper-knife between the
leaves, placed it on the table. He then crossed one of his legs over
the other, rested an elbow on each arm of his chair, and clasped his
hands in front of him. On the wall opposite hung several lithographed
portraits of distinguished preachers, in and out of the
Establishment--mostly represented as very sturdily-constructed men with
bristly hair, fronting the spectator interrogatively and holding thick
books in their hands. Upon one of these portraits--the name of the
original of which was stated at the foot of the print to be the
Reverend Aaron Yollop--Mr. Thorpe now fixed his eyes, with a faint
approach to a smile on his face (he never was known to laugh), and with
a look and manner which said as plainly as if he had spoken it: "This
old man is about to say something improper or absurd to me; but he is
my wife's father, it is my duty to bear with him, and therefore I am
perfectly resigned."

"It's no use looking in that way, Thorpe," growled the old gentleman;
"I'm not to be put down by looks at my time of life. I may have my own
opinions I suppose, like other people; and I don't see why I shouldn't
express them, especially when they relate to my own daughter's boy.
It's very unreasonable of me, I dare say, but I think I ought to have a
voice now and then in Zack's bringing up."

Mr. Thorpe bowed respectfully--partly to Mr. Goodworth, partly to the
Reverend Aaron Yollop. "I shall always be happy, sir, to listen to any
expression of your opinion--"

"My opinion's this," burst out Mr. Goodworth. "You've no business to
take Zack to church at all, till he's some years older than he is now.
I don't deny that there may be a few children, here and there, at six
years old, who are so very patient, and so very--(what's the word for a
child that knows a deal more than he has any business to know at his
age? Stop! I've got it!--_precocious_--that's the word)--so very
patient and so very precocious that they will sit quiet in the same
place for two hours; making believe all the time that they understand
every word of the service, whether they really do or not. I don't deny
that there may be such children, though I never met with them myself,
and should think them all impudent little hypocrites if I did! But Zack
isn't one of that sort: Zack's a genuine child (God bless him)! Zack--"

"Do I understand you, my dear sir," interposed Mr. Thorpe, sorrowfully
sarcastic, "to be praising the conduct of my son in disturbing the
congregation, and obliging me to take him out of church?"

"Nothing of the sort," retorted the old gentleman; "I'm not praising
Zack's conduct, but I _am_ blaming yours. Here it is in plain
words:--_You_ keep on cramming church down his throat; and _he_ keeps
on puking at it as if it was physic, because he don't know any better,
and can't know any better at his age. Is that the way to make him take
kindly to religious teaching? I know as well as you do, that he roared
like a young Turk at the sermon. And pray what was the subject of the
sermon? Justification by Faith. Do you mean to tell me that he, or any
other child at his time of life, could understand anything of such a
subject as that; or get an atom of good out of it? You can't--you know
you can't! I say again, it's no use taking him to church yet; and
what's more, it's worse than no use, for you only associate his first
ideas of religious instruction with everything in the way of restraint
and discipline and punishment that can be most irksome to him. There!
that's my opinion, and I should like to hear what you've got to say
against it?"

"Latitudinarianism," said Mr. Thorpe, looking and speaking straight at
the portrait of the Reverend Aaron Yollop.

"You can't fob me off with long words, which I don't understand, and
which I don't believe you can find in Johnson's Dictionary," continued
Mr. Goodworth doggedly. "You would do much better to take my advice,
and let Zack go to church, for the present, at his mother's knees. Let
his Morning Service be about ten minutes long; let your wife tell him,
out of the New Testament, about Our Savior's goodness and gentleness to
little children; and then let her teach him, from the Sermon on the
Mount, to be loving and truthful and forbearing and forgiving, for Our
Savior's sake. If such precepts as those are enforced--as they may be
in one way or another--by examples drawn from his own daily life; from
people around him; from what he meets with and notices and asks about,
out of doors and in--mark my words, he'll take kindly to his religious
instruction. I've seen that in other children: I've seen it in my own
children, who were all brought up so. Of course, you don't agree with
me! Of course you've got another objection all ready to bowl me down
with?"

"Rationalism," said Mr. Thorpe, still looking steadily at the
lithographed portrait of the Reverend Aaron Yollop.

"Well, your objection's a short one this time at any rate; and that's a
blessing!" said the old gentleman rather irritably. "Rationalism--eh? I
understand that _ism,_ I rather suspect, better than the other. It
means in plain English, that you think I'm wrong in only wanting to
give religious instruction the same chance with Zack which you let all
other kinds of instruction have--the chance of becoming useful by being
first made attractive. You can't get him to learn to read by telling
him that it will improve his mind--but you can by getting him to look
at a picture book. You can't get him to drink senna and salts by
reasoning with him about its doing him good--but you can by promising
him a lump of sugar to take after it. You admit this sort of principle
so far, because you're obliged; but the moment anybody wants (in a
spirit of perfect reverence and desire to do good) to extend it to
higher things, you purse up your lips, shake your head, and talk about
Rationalism--as if that was an answer! Well! well! it's no use
talking--go your own way--I wash my hands of the business altogether.
But now I _am_ at it I'll just say this one thing more before I've
done:--your way of punishing the boy for his behavior in church is, in
my opinion, about as bad and dangerous a one as could possibly be
devised. Why not give him a thrashing, if you _must_ punish the
miserable little urchin for what's his misfortune as much as his fault?
Why not stop his pudding, or something of that sort? Thorfinn must
have swallowed too much sea water when he cried for help to
have such a bitter tongue.

THORFINN. Take care of your own tongue, Orm.

[Valgerd with drinking horns.]

VALGERD. Here, foster brothers, I drink to your oath of friendship
and better luck for your next voyage.

THORFINN. I forbid you to speak of that again. [They drink.
Thorfinn takes horn hastily from mouth and asks] Where is the child?

VALGERD [Troubled]. She is in the loft.

THORFINN. Call her hither.

VALGERD. She's not well.

THORFINN [Looks sharply at Valgerd].

She shall--come!

VALGERD. You don't mean that.

THORFINN. Did you hear the word?

VALGERD. It is not your last.

THORFINN. A man has but one, though woman must always have the
last.

VALGERD [Weakly]. You mock me.

THORFINN. You are angry I believe.

VALGERD. You laugh so much tonight.

[Goes out.]
THORFINN. Orm! A thought comes to me.

     ORM.

If it's a great one you had better hide it. Great thoughts are scarce
these days.

THORFINN. Did you notice my wife?

ORM. I never notice other men's wives.

THORFINN. How kindly and mild she was.

ORM. She pitied you.

THORFINN. Pitied me?

ORM. Yes, because sorrow that laughs is the laughter of death, she
thought.

THORFINN. Woman cannot think.

ORM. No, not with her head, but with her heart. That's why she has a
smaller head but a bigger breast than we.

THORFINN. Forebodings of evil torture me.

ORM. Poor Thorfinn.

THORFINN.

My child! Orm! When she comes do you bid her drink from the horn to
Asa-Odin.

ORM. The fox scents against, the wind. I understand.

THORFINN. Be ready--they come.

ORM. Be not hard with the child, Thorfinn, or you will have me to
reckon with.

[Valgerd and Gunlöd enter. The latter heavy with sleepiness.]
GUNLÖD. Welcome home, father.

THORFINN. Do you speak truthfully?

GUNLÖD. [Silent.]
THORFINN. You are ill, are you not?

GUNLÖD. I am not quite myself.

THORFINN. I fear so.

ORM [Waning a drinking horn over the fire]. Come, Gunlöd, and empty this
sacred horn to Odin who saved your father from shipwreck.

[All empty their horns except Gunlöd.]
THORFINN [Tremblingly]. Drink, Gunlöd.

[Gunlöd throws the horn on floor and goes to Thorfinn and buries her
head in his lap.]
GUNLÖD. Hear me, father. I am a Christian. Do with me what you will--my
soul you cannot destroy. God and the Saints will protect it.

[Thorfinn is beside himself with grief and rage.

Rises and pushes Gunlöd away from him and tries to speak, but words fail
him. Sits on his high bench again in silence. Orm goes to the women
and speaks quietly to them. They go toward door. Suddenly Gunlöd
turns.]
GUNLÖD. No! I won't go. I must speak that you, my father, may not go to
the grave with a lie--for your whole life has been a lie!

I shall sacrifice the child's respect--love I have never felt--and
prove to you what terrible guilt you have gathered on your head.
Know then, you have taught me to hate--for when did you ever give me
love--you taught me to fear the great Erl Thorfinn and you
have succeeded, because I tremble before your harshness. I respect your
many scars and great deeds, but you never taught me to love my
father. You always thrust me away when I wanted to come to you--you
poisoned my soul and now you see God's punishment. You have made me
a criminal--for such I am at this moment, but it cannot be otherwise.
Why do you hate my belief? Because it is love and yours is hate! Oh,
father, father, I want to kiss the clouds from your brow. I wanted
to caress your white locks and make you forget the sorrows that
whitened them.

I wanted to support you when your steps began to falter--Oh!

forget what I have said--open your arms [falls on her knees] and
take me to your heart.

Look at me tenderly--just once before it is too late. Speak one
word--[springs to her feet] Oh, your glance freezes me! You will not! I
shall pray for power to love you.

[Bursts into tears and goes out, followed by Valgerd, Orm goes forward
to Thorfinn.]

THORFINN. Sing for me, Orm.

ORM. Orm sings nothing but lies.

THORFINN. Lie then.

ORM. Was the truth so bitter?

THORFINN. What do you say?

ORM. Never mind. You shall hear more from me later.

THORFINN. Orm, you are my friend!

ORM. H'm--of course!

THORFINN. I lack peace.

ORM. There are two ways to gain peace: one is never to do anything one
regrets--the other never to regret anything one does!

THORFINN. But if one has already done what one regrets?

ORM. Thorfinn! That is to say, you regret your harshness toward your
child?

THORFINN [Angry]. I regret nothing. And as far as the child is concerned
you had better hold your tongue!

ORM. Hear you, Thorfinn--have you ever thought about what your life has
been?

THORFINN. Thinking is for old women--doing has been my life.

ORM. What do you intend to do now?

THORFINN.

What do I intend to do now?

ORM. Yes.

THORFINN [Shaken, is silent.]
ORM. You see how even a little thought struck you--think then if a big
thought should come. Why don't you dare to look back? Because you
are afraid of the sights you would see.

THORFINN. Let the past remain buried.

ORM. No, I shall tear the corpses from their graves and they shall
stare at you with their empty orbits until you quake with anguish
and fear--and you shall see that with all your strength you were
not a man.

THORFINN. What are you saying, madman?

ORM. Yes, shout--you are still a boy. Yes, you--I have seen big, tall
children with bushy beards and gray hairs and crooked backs as well.

THORFINN. Hold your tongue, Orm.

ORM. Shout until the hut trembles--the truth you cannot shout down.

THORFINN. Silence, before I strike you!

ORM. Strike! Strike me to death--tear the tongue out of my mouth--
with copper trumpets shall the truth be blasted into your ears, "Your
life has been a lie."
THORFINN [With repressed anger and pain]. Orm, I beg of you--speak no
more.

ORM. Yes, Thorfinn, I shall speak. Feel how the earth trembles under
you. That means an earthquake! The whole earth trembles these days, for
she is about to give birth. She is to bring forth in dire pain a glorious
hero. Open your eyes and look. Do you see how the east wars with
the wes.? It is love's first conflict--the new bride trembles under
the elder's embraces, she struggles and suffers--but soon she shall
rejoice, and thousands of torches shall be lighted and radiate peace and
gladness, because he shall he born, the young, the strong, the beautiful
princeling, who shall rule over all peoples and whose sceptre is
called love and whose crown is called light and whose name is the
new age!

Thorfinn! do you remember the saga about Thor at Utgorda Loake? He
lifted the cat so high that the trolls turned pale; he drank so deep
from the horn that the trolls trembled--but when the old woman felled
him to his knees then the trolls laughed.

It was the age that vanquished him, and it is the age that you have
warred against, and which has slain you--it is the lord of the
age, it is God who has crushed you.

THORFINN. I have never known any god but my own strength, and that god I
believe in!

ORM. You don't know him--you who have so long been lying at feud with
him.

It was he who drove you from your native land, and you thought you were
escaping him. It was he who struck your ships to splinters and swallowed
up your treasures and ended your power.

It was he who tore your child from you--and you said you lacked peace!
It was he--[Messenger enters.]
MESSENGER. Are you the Erl Thorfinn.

THORFINN. I am.

MESSENGER. You committed the coast massacre at Reyd-fiord last
spring?

THORFINN [Undisturbed]. I did.

MESSENGER. You plundered and burned Hallfred at Thorvalla?

THORFINN. Yes.

MESSENGER. And then you disappeared.

THORFINN [Silent.]
MESSENGER. The Allting has now declared you an outlaw and pronounced you
a felon. Your house is to be burned to the ground, and whomsoever will
may take your life. Your enemies are at hand, therefore fly while
there is yet time--make your escape this night.

[Messenger goes out and there is a long pause.]
ORM. Do you know who that was?

THORFINN. You may well ask that.

ORM. It--was a messenger from that old woman who felled Thor--the
age!

THORFINN. You talk like an old woman.
ORM. This age does not want to use force, but you have violated it
and it strikes you.
THORFINN. This age cannot suffer strength, therefore it worships
weakness.
ORM. When you came to this island you swore peace. You have broken
your oath, you have violated your honor, therefore you must die
like a felon.

THORFINN. Do you too call me a felon?
ORM. Yes.
THORFINN. Would you dare to break an oath? Would you dare to in
called a felon?

ORM [Silent.]
THORFINN. Poor wretch! It is you who put shackles on me when I want
to fly! Like a snake you coil yourself around my legs. Let go of
me!

ORM. We have sworn the oath of foster-brothers.
THORFINN. I break it!

ORM. You cannot.
THORFINN. Then I'll kick you out of the way.
ORM. That will be our death.

THORFINN. Are you a man, Orm?
ORM. I've become a poet only.
THORFINN. Therefore you have become nothing.
ORM. I knew what I wanted, but I could not attain it. You could
attain anything, but did not know what you wanted.
THORFINN. Thanks for your song. Farewell.
ORM. Who will sing your death song?
THORFINN. The ravens no doubt.
ORM. Do you dare to die, Thorfinn?
THORFINN. I dare more! I dare to be forgotten!
ORM. You were always stronger than I. Farewell. We'll meet again.
[Orm goes out.]
THORFINN. Alone! Alone! Alone! [Pause.] I remember one autumn when
the equinoctial storm raged over England's sun my dragon ship was
wrecked and I was tossd up on the rocks alone. Afterward everything
grew calm. Oh, what long days and nights! Only the cloudless sky
above and endlessly the deep blue sea around me. Not a sound of any
living creature! Not even the gulls to wake me with their screeching!
Not even a breeze stirred the waves to lap against the stones. It
seemed as if I myself were dead! Loudly I talked and shouted, but
the sound of my voice frightened me, and thirst bound my tongue.
Only the even beat of my heart in my breast told me that I was
alive! But after a moment's listening I heard it no longer and,
trembling, I rose to my feet, and so it was each time until,
senseless, I swooned. When at last I revived I heard the slow beats
of a heart beside me and a deep breathing that was not mine, and
courage revived in my soul. I looked about--it was a seal seeking
rest; it gazed at me with its moist eyes as if filled with compassion
for me. Now I was no longer alone! I stretched out my hand to caress
its rough body; then it fled and I was doubly alone.
Again I am on the rocks! What do I fear? Yes, loneliness! What is
loneliness? It is I, myself! Who am I then to fear myself? Am I not
Erl Thorfinn, the strong, who has bowed thousands of wills to
his?
Who never asked for friendship or love but himself bore his own
sorrows! No! No! I am another! And therefore Thorfinn the strong
fears Thorfinn the weak! Who stole my strength? Who struck me
down?
Was it the sea? Have I not vanquished the sea three times ten
voyages? And it, has defeated me but once--but then to the death!
It was the stronger. It was a God. But who subdued the sea that
lately raged? Who? Who? Who? It was the stronger! Who are you then,
the stronger! Oh, answer, that I may believe! He does not answer!--
All is silent!--Again I hear my heart beating. Oh, help, help! I
am cold, I freeze--[Goes to door and calls Valgerd.]
[Enter a thrall.] 
THRALL. You called, Master Erl?
THORFINN [Recovering himself]. You were mistaken.
THRALL. Yes, master.

THORFINN. How many men are we?
THRALL. Oh--half three score I think.
THORFINN. Are you afraid to die, thrall?
THRALL. How can I be when I believe that I shall be saved?
[Crosses himself.] 
THORFINN. What does that mean?
THRALL. The bishop has taught us to do that.
THORFINN. I forgot that you are a Christian.
THRALL. Do you wish me to stay in your service when you are a
heathen?
THORFINN. I want to prove how little I respect their belief. We
must put double bolts on the north gate!
THRALL. Yes, Master, but the belief is stronger than a hundred
bolts.
THORFINN. Who questioned you? [Pause.] What happened when you became
Christians here on the island?
THRALL. Oh, it was easier than any one would think. They only poured
water on us and the bishop read from a big book and then they gave
us each a white shirt.
THORFINN. Tell the twelve strongest to take their new axes--do you
hear?

THRALL [Starting to go]. Yes, Master.
THORFINN. Wait. [Pause.] Do you remember what was written in that
big book?
THRALL. I don't remember much of it, but there was something about
two thieves who were hanged on crosses along with the Son of God.
But one of them went to heaven.
THORFINN. Did they pour water on him, too?
THRALL. The bishop didn't say.
THORFINN. Do you know whether there are any horses in the
stable?
THRALL. They must be out at pasture--but I'll see. [Starts to go.]

THORFINN. You mustn't leave me--Stay. [Pause.] Could you die in
peace this night?
THRALL. Yes, if I only had time for a prayer first.
THORFINN. Does that bring peace to one?
THRALL. Oh, yes, Master.
THORFINN [Rises, takes up a goblet]. This you shall have if you
will pray for me.

THRALL. That's not enough.
THORFINN. You shall have ten, but if you ever tell of it--I'll take
your life.
THRALL. It would not help even if you gave me a hundred. You must
pray yourself.

THORFINN. I cannot, but. I command you to pray.
THRALL. I will obey--but you will see that it does not help.
[Praying.] Jesus Christ, have pity on this poor sinner who begs for
mercy.

THORFINN. That's a lie. I never begged for anything!
THRALL. You see now that it doesn't help.
THORFINN. Give me my armor and help me buckle.
THRALL [Helping]. You are not keeping still. I can't fasten the
buckles.

THORFINN. Wretch!
THRALL. But your whole body is shaking.
THORFINN. That's a lie!

[Valgerd and Gunlöd enter.]
THRALL. May I go now?

THORFINN. Go.
VALGERD [Coming forward]. You called me.
THORFINN. That's not true.
VALGERD. Your enemies are upon you.
THORFINN. What does that concern you?
VALGRED. Make ready. I have heard what has come to pass.
THORFINN. Then it is best that you [indicating both Valgerd and
Gunlöd] hide yourselves in the cellar passage.
[Another messenger enters.]
MESSENGER. Erl Thorfinn, we are here. Will you surrender to our
superior strength?

THORFINN [Silent.]
MESSENGER. You do not answer. Let the women go as we shall burn
your home. [Thorfinn is silent.] Your answer!
[Gunlöd who has been standing by the door, comes forward and takes
a battle axe from wall.]
GUNLÖD. I give you your answer! Ill must Erl Thorfinn have brought
up his daughter and little would his wife have loved him if they
should desert him now. Here is your answer. [Throws battle axe at
messenger's feet.]
MESSENGER. You are stronger than I thought, Thorfinn. For your
daughter's sake you shall have a chance to fall like a hero and not
as a felon. Make ready for open conflict--out on the field. [Goes
out.]
THORFINN [to Valgerd]. Out on you, cowardly, faithless woman, to
guard my treasure so ill! To make my child mine enemy.
GUNLÖD. O, my father, am I your enemy?
THORFINN. You are a Christian; but it is not too late yet. Will you
deny the white Christ?
GUNLÖD. Never! But I will follow you to death.
VALGERD. Thorfinn, you call me cowardly. I can suffer that, but
faithless--there you wrong me."Put back the stick," repeated Mr. Thorpe.

Zack remembered the dressing-room and the "Select Bible Texts for
Children," and wisely obeyed. He was by this time completely crushed
down into as rigid a state of Sunday discipline as his father could
desire. After depositing the stick in the corner, he slowly walked up
to Mr. Goodworth, with a comical expression of amazement and disgust in
his chubby face, and meekly laid down his head on his grandfather's
knee.

"Never say die, Zack," said the kind old gentleman, rising and taking
the boy in his arms. "While nurse is getting your dinner ready, let's
look out of window, and see if it's going to clear up."

Mr. Thorpe raised his head disapprovingly from his book, but said
nothing this time.

"Ah, rain! rain! rain!" muttered Mr. Goodworth, staring desperately out
at the miserable prospect, while Zack amused himself by rubbing his
nose vacantly backwards and forwards against a pane of glass. "Rain!
rain! Nothing but rain and fog in November. Hold up, Zack! Ding-dong,
ding-dong; there go the bells for afternoon church! I wonder whether it
will be fine to-morrow? Think of the pudding, my boy!" whispered the
old gentleman with a benevolent remembrance of the consolation which
that thought had often afforded to him, when he was a child himself.

"Yes," said Zack, acknowledging the pudding suggestion, but declining
to profit by it. "And, please, when I've had my dinner, will somebody
put me to bed?"

"Put you to bed!" exclaimed Mr. Goodworth. "Why, bless the boy! what's
come to him now? He used always to be wanting to stop up."

"I want to go to bed, and get to to-morrow, and have my picture-book,"
was the weary and whimpering answer.

"I'll be hanged, if I don't want to go to bed too!" soliloquized the
old gentleman under his breath, "and get to to-morrow, and have my
'Times' at breakfast. I'm as bad as Zack, every bit!"

"Grandpapa," continued the child, more wearily than before, "I want to
whisper something in your ear."

Mr. Goodworth bent down a little. Zack looked round cunningly towards
his father--then putting his mouth close to his grandfather's ear,
communicated the conclusion at which he had arrived, after the events
of the day, in these words--

_"I say, granpapa, I hate Sunday!"_


BOOK I

THE HIDING.

CHAPTER I.

A NEW NEIGHBORHOOD, AND A STRANGE CHARACTER.

At the period when the episode just related occurred in the life of Mr.
Zachary Thorpe the younger--that is to say, in the year 1837--Baregrove
Square was the farthest square from the city, and the nearest to the
country, of any then existing in the north-western suburb of London.
But, by the time fourteen years more had elapsed--that is to say, in
the year 1851--Baregrove Square had lost its distinctive character
altogether; other squares had filched from it those last remnants of
healthy rustic flavor from which its good name had been derived; other
streets, crescents, rows, and villa-residences had forced themselves
pitilessly between the old suburb and the country, and had suspended
for ever the once neighborly relations between the pavement of
Baregrove Square and the pathways of the pleasant fields.

Alexander's armies were great makers of conquests; and Napoleon's
armies were great makers of conquests; but the modern Guerilla
regiments of the hod, the trowel, and the brick-kiln, are the greatest
conquerors of all; for they hold the longest the soil that they have
once possessed. How mighty the devastation which follows in the wake of
these tremendous aggressors, as they march through the kingdom of
nature, triumphantly bricklaying beauty wherever they go! What
dismantled castle, with the enemy's flag flying over its crumbling
walls, ever looked so utterly forlorn as a poor field-fortress of
nature, imprisoned on all sides by the walled camp of the enemy, and
degraded by a hostile banner of pole and board, with the conqueror's
device inscribed on it--"THIS GROUND TO BE LET ON BUILDING LEASES?"
What is the historical spectacle of Marius sitting among the ruins of
Carthage, but a trumpery theatrical set-scene, compared with the
mournful modern sight of the last tree left standing, on the last few
feet of grass left growing, amid the greenly-festering stucco of a
finished Paradise Row, or the naked scaffolding poles of a
half-completed Prospect Place? Oh, gritty-natured Guerilla regiments of
the hod, the trowel, and the brick-kiln! the town-pilgrim of nature,
when he wanders out at fall of day into the domains which you have
spared for a little while, hears strange things said of you in secret,
as he duteously interprets the old, primeval language of the leaves; as
he listens to the death-doomed trees, still whispering mournfully
around him the last notes of their ancient even-song!

But what avails the voice of lamentation? What new neighborhood ever
stopped on its way into the country, to hearken to the passive
remonstrance of the fields, or to bow to the indignation of outraged
admirers of the picturesque? Never was suburb more impervious to any
faint influences of this sort, than that especial suburb which grew up
between Baregrove Square and the country; removing a walk among the
hedge-rows a mile off from the resident families, with a ruthless
rapidity at which sufferers on all sides stared aghast. First stories
were built, and mortgaged by the enterprising proprietors to get money
enough to go on with the second; old speculators failed and were
succeeded by new; foundations sank from bad digging; walls were blown
down in high winds from hasty building; bricks were called for in such
quantities, and seized on in such haste, half-baked from the kilns,
that they set the carts on fire, and had to be cooled in pails of water
before they could be erected into walls--and still the new suburb
defied all accidents, and grew irrepressibly into a little town of
houses, ready to be let and lived in, from the one end to the other.

The new neighborhood offered house-accommodation--accepted at the
higher prices as yet only to a small extent--to three distinct
subdivisions of the great middle class of our British population. Rents
and premises were adapted, in a steeply descending scale, to the means
of the middle classes with large incomes, of the middle classes with
moderate incomes, and of the middle classes with small incomes. The
abodes for the large incomes were called "mansions," and were fortified
strongly against the rest of the suburb by being all built in one wide
row, shut in at either end by ornamental gates, and called a "park."
The unspeakable desolation of aspect common to the whole suburb, was in
a high state of perfection in this part of it. Irreverent street noises
fainted dead away on the threshold of the ornamental gates, at the
sight of the hermit lodge-keeper. The cry of the costermonger and the
screech of the vagabond London boy were banished out of hearing. Even
the regular tradesman's time-honored business noises at customers'
doors, seemed as if they ought to have been relinquished here. The
frantic falsetto of the milkman, the crash of the furious butcher's
cart over the never-to-be pulverized stones of the new road through the
"park," always sounded profanely to the passing stranger, in the
spick-and-span stillness of this Paradise of the large incomes.

The hapless small incomes had the very worst end of the whole locality
entirely to themselves, and absorbed all the noises and nuisances, just
as the large incomes absorbed all the tranquillities and luxuries of
suburban existence. Here were the dreary limits at which architectural
invention stopped in despair. Each house in this poor man's purgatory
was, indeed, and in awful literalness, a brick box with a slate top to
it. Every hole drilled in these boxes, whether door-hole or
window-hole, was always overflowing with children. They often mustered
by forties and fifties in one street, and were the great pervading
feature of the quarter. In the world of the large incomes, young life
sprang up like a garden fountain, artificially playing only at stated
periods in the sunshine. In the world of the small incomes, young life
flowed out turbulently into the street, like an exhaustless
kennel-deluge, in all weathers. Next to the children of the
inhabitants, in visible numerical importance, came the shirts and
petticoats, and miscellaneous linen of the inhabitants; fluttering out
to dry publicly on certain days of the week, and enlivening the
treeless little gardens where they hung, with lightsome avenues of
pinafores, and solemn-spreading foliage of stout Welsh flannel. Here
that absorbing passion for oranges (especially active when the fruit is
half ripe, and the weather is bitter cold), which distinguishes the
city English girl of the lower orders, flourished in its finest
development; and here, also, the poisonous fumes of the holyday
shop-boy's bad cigar told all resident nostrils when it was Sunday, as
plainly as the church bells could tell it to all resident ears. The one
permanent rarity in this neighborhood, on week days, was to discover a
male inhabitant in any part of it, between the hours of nine in the
morning and six in the evening; the one sorrowful sight which never
varied, was to see that every woman, even to the youngest, looked more
or less unhappy, often care-stricken, while youth was still in the
first bud; oftener child-stricken before maturity was yet in the full
bloom.

As for the great central portion of the suburb--or, in other words, the
locality of the moderate incomes--it reflected exactly the lives of
those who inhabited it, by presenting no distinctive character of its
own at all.

In one part, the better order of houses imitated as pompously as they
could, the architectural grandeur of the mansions owned by the large
incomes; in another, the worst order of houses respectably, but
narrowly, escaped a general resemblance to the brick boxes of the small
incomes. In some places, the "park" influences vindicated their
existence superbly in the persons of isolated ladies who, not having a
carriage to go out in for an airing, exhibited the next best thing, a
footman to walk behind them: and so got a pedestrian airing genteelly
in that way. In other places, the obtrusive spirit of the brick boxes
rode about, thinly disguised, in children's carriages, drawn by
nursery-maids; or fluttered aloft, delicately discernible at angles of
view, in the shape of a lace pocket-handkerchief or a fine-worked
chemisette, drying modestly at home in retired corners of back gardens.
Generally, however, the hostile influences of the large incomes and the
small mingled together on the neutral ground of the moderate incomes;
turning it into the dullest, the dreariest, the most oppressively
conventional division of the whole suburb. It was just that sort of
place where the thoughtful man looking about him mournfully at the
locality, and physiologically observing the inhabitants, would be prone
to stop suddenly, and ask himself one plain, but terrible question: "Do
these people ever manage to get any real enjoyment out of their lives,
from one year's end to another?"

To the looker-on at the system of life prevailing among the moderate
incomes in England, the sort of existence which that system embodies
seems in some aspects to be without a parallel in any other part of the
civilized world. Is it not obviously true that, while the upper classes
and the lower classes of English society have each their own
characteristic recreations for leisure hours, adapted equally to their
means and to their tastes, the middle classes, in general, have (to
expose the sad reality) nothing of the sort? To take an example from
those eating and drinking recreations which absorb so large a portion
of existence:--If the rich proprietors of the "mansions" in the "park"
could give their grand dinners, and be as prodigal as they pleased with
their first-rate champagne, and their rare gastronomic delicacies; the
poor tenants of the brick boxes could just as easily enjoy their
tea-garden conversazione, and be just as happily and hospitably
prodigal, in turn, with their porter-pot, their teapot, their plate of
bread-and-butter, and their dish of shrimps. On either side, these
representatives of two pecuniary extremes in society, looked for what
recreations they wanted with their own eyes, pursued those recreations
within their own limits, and enjoyed themselves unreservedly in
consequence. Not so with the moderate incomes: they, in their social
moments, shrank absurdly far from the poor people's porter and shrimps;
crawled contemptibly near to the rich people's rare wines and luxurious
dishes; exposed their poverty in imitation by chemical champagne from
second-rate wine merchants, by flabby salads and fetid oyster-patties
from second-rate pastry-cooks; were, in no one of their festive
arrangements, true to their incomes, to their order, or to themselves;
and, in very truth, for all these reasons and many more, got no real
enjoyment out of their lives, from one year's end to another.

On the outskirts of that part of the new suburb appropriated to these
unhappy middle classes with moderate incomes, there lived a gentleman
(by name Mr. Valentine Blyth) whose life offered as strong a practical
contradiction as it is possible to imagine to the lives of his
neighbors.

He was by profession an artist--an artist in spite of circumstances.
Neither his father, nor his mother, nor any relation of theirs, on
either side, had ever practiced the Art of Painting, or had ever
derived any special pleasure from the contemplation of pictures. They
were all respectable commercial people of the steady fund-holding old
school, who lived exclusively within their own circle; and had never so
much as spoken to a live artist or author in the whole course of their
lives. The City-world in which Valentine's boyhood was passed, was as
destitute of art influences of any kind as if it had been situated on
the coast of Greenland; and yet, to the astonishment of everybody, he
was always drawing and painting, in his own rude way, at every leisure
hour. His father was, as might be expected, seriously disappointed and
amazed at the strange direction taken by the boy's inclinations. No one
(including Valentine himself) could ever trace them back to any
recognizable source; but everyone could observe plainly enough that
there was no hope of successfully opposing them by fair means of any
kind. Seeing this, old Mr. Blyth, like a wise man, at last made a
virtue of necessity; and, giving way to his son, entered him, under
strong commercial protest, as a student in the Schools of the Royal
Academy.

Here Valentine remained, working industriously, until his twenty-first
birthday. On that occasion, Mr. Blyth had a little serious talk with
him about his prospects in life. In the course of this conversation,
the young man was informed that a rich merchant-uncle was ready to take
him into partnership; and that his father was equally ready to start
him in business with his whole share, as one of three children, in the
comfortable inheritance acquired for the family by the well-known City
house of Blyth and Company. If Valentine consented to this arrangement,
his fortune was secured, and he might ride in his carriage before he
was thirty. If, on the other hand, he really chose to fling away a
fortune, he should not be pinched for means to carry on his studies as
a painter. The interest of his inheritance on his father's death,
should be paid quarterly to him during his father's lifetime: the
annual independence thus secured to the young artist, under any
circumstances, being calculated as amounting to a little over four
hundred pounds a year.

Valentine was not deficient in gratitude. He took a day to consider
what he should do, though his mind was quite made up about his choice
beforehand; and then persisted in his first determination; throwing
away the present certainty of becoming a wealthy man, for the sake of
the future chance of turning out a great painter.

If he had really possessed genius, there would have been nothing very
remarkable in this part of his history, so far; but having nothing of
the kind, holding not the smallest spark of the great creative fire in
his whole mental composition, surely there was something very
discouraging to contemplate, in the spectacle of a man resolutely
determining, in spite of adverse home circumstances and strong home
temptation, to abandon all those paths in life, along which he might
have walked fairly abreast with his fellows, for the one path in which
he was predestinated by Nature to be always left behind by the way. Do
the announcing angels, whose mission it is to whisper of greatness to
great spirits, ever catch the infection of fallibility from their
intercourse with mortals? Do the voices which said truly to
Shakespeare, to Raphael, and to Mozart, in their youth-time,--You are
chosen to be gods in this world--ever speak wrongly to souls which they
are not ordained to approach? It may be so. There are men enough in all
countries whose lives would seem to prove it--whose deaths have not
contradicted it.

But even to victims such as these, there are pleasant resting-places on
the thorny way, and flashes of sunlight now and then, to make the
cloudy prospect beautiful, though only for a little while. It is not
all misfortune and disappointment to the man who is mentally unworthy
of a great intellectual vocation, so long as he is morally worthy of
it; so long as he can pursue it honestly, patiently, and
affectionately, for its own dear sake. Let him work, though ever so
obscurely, in this spirit towards his labor, and he shall find the
labor itself its own exceeding great reward. In that reward lives the
divine consolation, which, though Fame turn her back on him
contemptuously, and Affluence pass over unpitying to the other side of
the way, shall still pour oil upon all his wounds, and take him quietly
and tenderly to the hard journey's end. To this one exhaustless solace,
which the work, no matter of what degree, can yield always to earnest
workers, the man who has succeeded, and the man who has failed, can
turn alike, as to a common mother--the one, for refuge from mean envy
and slanderous hatred, from all the sorest evils which even the
thriving child of Fame is heir to; the other, from neglect, from
ridicule, from defeat, from all the petty tyrannies which the pining
bondman of Obscurity is fated to undergo.

Thus it was with Valentine. He had sacrificed a fortune to his Art; and
his Art--in the world's eye at least--had given to him nothing in
return. Friends and relatives who had not scrupled, on being made
acquainted with his choice of a vocation, to call it in question, and
thereby to commit that worst and most universal of all human
impertinences, which consists of telling a man to his face, by the
plainest possible inference, that others are better able than he is
himself to judge what calling in life is fittest and worthiest for
him--friends and relatives who thus upbraided Valentine for his refusal
to accept the partnership in his uncle's house, affected, on
discovering that he made no public progress whatever in Art, to believe
that he was simply an idle fellow, who knew that his father's
liberality placed him beyond the necessity of working for his bread,
and who had taken up the pursuit of painting as a mere amateur
amusement to occupy his leisure hours. To a man who labored like poor
Blyth, with the steadiest industry and the highest aspirations, such
whispered calumnies as these were of all mortifications the most cruel,
of all earthly insults the hardest to bear.

Still he worked on patiently, never losing faith or hope, because he
never lost the love of his Art, or the enjoyment of pursuing it,
irrespective of results, however disheartening. Like most other men of
his slight intellectual caliber, the works he produced were various, if
nothing else. He tried the florid style, and the severe style; he was
by turns devotional, allegorical, historical, sentimental, humorous. At
one time, he abandoned figure-painting altogether, and took to
landscape; now producing conventional studies from Nature,--and now,
again, reveling in poetical compositions, which might have hung
undetected in many a collection as doubtful specimens of Berghem or
Claude.

But whatever department of painting Valentine tried to excel in, the
same unhappy destiny seemed always in reserve for each completed
effort. For years and years his pictures pleaded hard for admission at
the Academy doors, and were invariably (and not unfairly, it must be
confessed) refused even the worst places on the walls of the Exhibition
rooms. Season after season he still bravely struggled on, never
depressed, never hopeless while he was before his easel, until at last
the day of reward--how long and painfully wrought for!--actually
arrived. A small picture of a very insignificant subject--being only a
kitchen "interior," with a sleek cat on a dresser, stealing milk from
the tea-tray during the servant's absence--was benevolently marked
"doubtful" by the Hanging Committee; was thereupon kept in reserve, in
case it might happen to fit any forgotten place near the floor--did fit
such a place--and was really hung up, as Mr. Blyth's little unit of a
contribution to the one thousand and odd works exhibited to the public,
that year, by the Royal Academy.

But Valentine's triumph did not end here. His picture of the
treacherous cat stealing the household milk--entitled, by way of
appealing jocosely to the strong Protestant interest, "The Jesuit in
the Family,"--was really sold to an Art-Union prize-holder for ten
pounds. Once furnished with a bank note won by his own brush, Valentine
indulged in the most extravagant anticipations of future celebrity and
future wealth; and proved, recklessly enough, that he believed as
firmly as any other visionary in the wildest dreams of his own
imagination, by marrying, and setting up an establishment, on the
strength of the success which had been achieved by "The Jesuit in the
Family."

He had been for some time past engaged to the lady who had now become
Mrs. Valentine Blyth. She was the youngest of eight sisters, who formed
part of the family of a poor engraver, and who, in the absence of any
mere money qualifications, were all rich alike in the ownership of most
magnificent Christian names. Mrs. Blyth was called Lavinia-Ada; and
hers was by far the humblest name to be found among the whole
sisterhood. Valentine's relations all objected strongly to this match,
not only on account of the bride's poverty, but for another and a very
serious reason, which events soon proved to be but too well founded.

Lavinia had suffered long and severely, as a child, from a bad spinal
malady. Constant attention, and such medical assistance as her father
could afford to employ, had, it was said, successfully combated the
disorder; and the girl grew up, prettier than any of her sisters, and
apparently almost as strong as the healthiest of them. Old Mr. Blyth,
however, on hearing that his son was now just as determined to become a
married man as he had formerly been to become a painter, thought it
advisable to make certain inquiries about the young lady's
constitution; and addressed them, with characteristic caution, to the
family doctor, at a private interview.

The result of this conference was far from being satisfactory. The
doctor was suspiciously careful not to commit himself: he said that he
hoped the spine was no longer in danger of being affected; but that he
could not conscientiously express himself as feeling quite sure about
it. Having repeated these discouraging words to his son, old Mr. Blyth
delicately and considerately, but very plainly, asked Valentine
whether, after what he had heard, he still honestly thought that he
would be consulting his own happiness, or the lady's happiness either,
by marrying her at all? or, at least, by marrying her at a time when
the doctor could not venture to say that the poor girl might not be
even yet in danger of becoming an invalid for life?

Valentine, as usual, persisted at first in looking exclusively at the
bright side of the question, and made light of the doctor's authority
accordingly.

"Lavvie and I love each other dearly," he said with a little trembling
in his voice, but with perfect firmness of manner. "I hope in God that
what you seem to fear will never happen; but even if it should, I shall
never repent having married her, for I know that I am just as ready to
be her nurse as to be her husband. I am willing to take her in sickness
and in health, as the Prayer-Book says. In my home she would have such
constant attention paid to her wants and comforts as she could not have
at her father's, with his large family and his poverty, poor fellow!
And this is reason enough, I think, for my marrying her, even if the
worst should take place. But I always have hoped for the best, as you
know, father: and I mean to go on hoping for poor Lavvie, just the same
as ever!"

What could old Mr. Blyth, what could any man of heart and honor, oppose
to such an answer as this? Nothing. The marriage took place; and
Valentine's father tried hard, and not altogether vainly, to feel as
sanguine about future results as Valentine himself.

For several months--how short the time seemed, when they looked back on
it in after-years!--the happiness of the painter and his wife more than
fulfilled the brightest hopes which they had formed as lovers. As for
the doctor's cautious words, they were hardly remembered now; or, if
recalled, were recalled only to be laughed over. But the time of bitter
grief, which had been appointed, though they knew it not, came
inexorably, even while they were still lightly jesting at all medical
authority round the painter's fireside. Lavinia caught a severe cold.
The cold turned to rheumatism, to fever, then to general debility, then
to nervous attacks--each one of these disorders, being really but so
many false appearances, under which the horrible spinal malady was
treacherously and slowly advancing in disguise.

When the first positive symptoms appeared, old Mr. Blyth acted with all
his accustomed generosity towards his son. "My purse is yours,
Valentine," said he; "open it when you like; and let Lavinia, while
there is a chance for her, have the same advice and the same remedies
as if she was the greatest duchess in the land." The old man's
affectionate advice was affectionately followed. The most renowned
doctors in England prescribed for Lavinia; everything that science and
incessant attention could do, was done; but the terrible disease still
baffled remedy after remedy, advancing surely and irresistibly, until
at last the doctors themselves lost all hope. So far as human science
could foretell events, Mrs. Blyth, in the opinion of all her medical
advisers, was doomed for the rest of her life never to rise again from
the bed on which she lay; except, perhaps, to be sometimes moved to the
sofa, or, in the event of some favorable reaction, to be wheeled about
occasionally in an invalid chair.

What the shock of this intelligence was, both to husband and wife, no
one ever knew; they nobly kept it a secret even from each other. Mrs.
Blyth was the first to recover courage and calmness. She begged, as an
especial favor, that Valentine would seek consolation, where she knew
he must find it sooner or later, by going back to his studio, and
resuming his old familiar labors, which had been suspended from the
time when her illness had originally declared itself.

On the first day when, in obedience to her wishes, he sat before his
picture again--the half-finished picture from which he had been
separated for so many months--on that first day, when the friendly
occupation of his life seemed suddenly to have grown strange to him;
when his brush wandered idly among the colors, when his tears dropped
fast on the palette every time he looked down on it; when he tried hard
to work as usual, though only for half an hour, only on simple
background places in the composition; and still the brush made false
touches, and still the tints would not mingle as they should, and still
the same words, repeated over and over again, would burst from his
lips: "Oh, poor Lavvie! oh, poor, dear, dear Lavvie!"--even then, the
spirit of that beloved art, which he had always followed so humbly and
so faithfully, was true to its divine mission, and comforted and upheld
him at the last bitterest moment when he laid down his palette in
despair.

While he was still hiding his face before the very picture which he and
his wife had once innocently and secretly glorified together, in those
happy days of its beginning that were never to come again, the sudden
thought of consolation shone out on his heart, and showed him how he
might adorn all his afterlife with the deathless beauty of a pure and
noble purpose. Thenceforth, his vague dreams of fame, and of rich men
wrangling with each other for the possession of his pictures, took the
second place in his mind; and, in their stead, sprang up the new
resolution that he would win independently, with his own brush, no
matter at what sacrifice of pride and ambition, the means of
surrounding his sick wife with all those luxuries and refinements which
his own little income did not enable him to obtain, and which he shrank
with instinctive delicacy from accepting as presents bestowed by his
father's generosity. Here was the consoling purpose which robbed
affliction of half its bitterness already, and bound him and his art
together by a bond more sacred than any that had united them before. In
the very hour when this thought came to him, he rose without a pang to
turn the great historical composition, from which he had once hoped so
much, with its face to the wall, and set himself to finish an
unpretending little "Study" of a cottage courtyard, which he was
certain of selling to a picture-dealing friend. The first approach to
happiness which he had known for a long, long time past, was on the
evening of that day, when he went upstairs to sit with Lavinia; and,
keeping secret his purpose of the morning, made the sick woman smile in
spite of her sufferings, by asking her how she should like to have her
room furnished, if she were the lady of a great lord, instead of being
only the wife of Valentine Blyth.

Then came the happy day when the secret was revealed, and afterwards
the pleasant years when poor Mrs. Blyth's most splendid visions of
luxury were all gradually realized through her husband's exertions in
his profession. But for his wife's influence, Valentine would have been
in danger of abandoning high Art and Classical Landscape altogether,
for cheap portrait-painting, cheap copying, and cheap studies of Still
Life. But Mrs. Blyth, bedridden as she was, contrived to preserve all
her old influence over the labors of the Studio, and would ask for
nothing new, and receive nothing new, in her room, except on condition
that her husband was to paint at least one picture of High Art every
year, for the sake (as she proudly said) of "asserting his intellect
and his reputation in the eyes of the public." Accordingly, Mr. Blyth's
time was pretty equally divided between the production of great
unsaleable "compositions," which were always hung near the ceiling in
the Exhibition, and of small marketable commodities, which were as
invariably hung near the floor.

Valentine's average earnings from his art, though humble enough in
amount, amply sufficed to fulfill the affectionate purpose for which,
to the last farthing, they were rigorously set aside. "Lavvie's
Drawing-Room" (this was Mr. Blyth's name for his wife's bed-room)
really looked as bright and beautiful as any royal chamber in the
universe. And-- --
JEAN. Things remain as they are.

JULIE. Do you think I could remain under this roof after----Do you
think I will allow the people to point at me in scorn, or that I can
ever look my father in the face again? Never! Take me away from
this humiliation and dishonor. Oh, what have I done! Oh, my God, what
have I done! [Weeping.]
JEAN. So, you are beginning in that tune now. What have you done?
The same as many before you.

JULIE. And now you despise me. I am falling! I am falling!

JEAN. Fall down to my level, I'll lift you up afterwards.

JULIE. What strange power drew me to you--the weak to the strong-- the
falling to the rising, or is this love! This--love!

Do you know what love is?

JEAN. I? Yes! Do you think it's the first time?

JULIE. What language, what thoughts.

JEAN. I am what life has made me. Don't be nervous and play the high
and mighty, for now we are on the same level. Look here, my little
girl, let me offer you a glass of something extra fine.
[Opens drawer of table and takes out wine bottle, then fills two
glasses that have been already used.]
JULIE. Where did you get that wine?

JEAN. From the cellar.

JULIE. My father's Burgundy.

JEAN. What's the matter, isn't that good enough for the son-in-law?

JULIE. And I drink beer--I!

JEAN. That only goes to prove that your taste is poorer than mine.

JULIE. Thief!

JEAN. Do you intend to tattle?

JULIE. Oh ho! Accomplice to a house thief.

Was I intoxicated--have I been walking in my sleep this night--midsummer
night, the night for innocent play--

JEAN.

Innocent, eh!

JULIE [Pacing back and forth]. Is there a being on earth so miserable
as I.

JEAN. Why are you, after such a conquest. Think of Kristin in there,
don't you think she has feelings too?

JULIE. I thought so a little while ago, but I don't any more. A
servant is a servant.

JEAN. And a whore is a whore.

JULIE [Falls on her knees with clasped hands]. Oh, God in heaven,
end my wretched life, save me from this mire into which I'm sinking--Oh
save me, save me.

JEAN. I can't deny that it hurts me to see you like this.

JULIE. And you who wanted to die for me.

JEAN. In the oat-bin? Oh, that was only talk.

JULIE. That is to say--a lie!

JEAN [Beginning to show sleepiness]. Er--er almost. I believe I
read something of the sort in a newspaper about a chimney-sweep
who made a death bed for himself of syringa blossoms in a wood-bin--
[laughs] because they were going to arrest him for non-support of
his children.

JULIE. So you are such a--
JEAN. What better could I have hit on! One must always be romantic to
capture a woman.

JULIE. Wretch! Now you have seen the eagle's back, and I suppose I
am to be the first limb--
JEAN. And the limb is rotten--
JULIE [Without seeming to hear]. And I am to be the hotel's signboard--

JEAN. And I the hotel--
JULIE. And sit behind the desk and allure guests and overcharge them--

JEAN.

Oh, that'll be my business.

JULIE. That a soul can be so degraded!

JEAN. Look to your own soul.

JULIE. Lackey! Servant! Stand up when I speak.

JEAN. Don't you dare to moralize to me. Lackey, eh! Do you think you
have shown yourself finer than any maid-servant tonight?

JULIE [Crushed]. That is right, strike me, trample on me, I deserve
nothing better. I have done wrong, but help me now. Help me out of
this if there is any possible way.

JEAN [Softens somewhat]. I don't care to shirk my share of the
blame, but do you think any one of my position would ever have dared
to raise his eyes to you if you yourself had not invited it?
Even now I am astonished--
JULIE. And proud.

JEAN. Why not? Although I must confess that the conquest was too
easy to be exciting.

JULIE. Go on, strike me again--
JEAN [Rising]. No, forgive me, rather, for what I said. I do not strike
the unarmed, least of all, a woman. But I can't deny that from a
certain point of view it gives me satisfaction to know that it is the
glitter of brass, not gold, that dazzles us from below, and that the
eagle's back is grey like the rest of him.

On the other hand, I'm sorry to have to realize that all that I have
looked up to is not worth while, and it pains me to see you fallen
lower than your cook as it pains me to see autumn blossoms whipped to
pieces by the cold rain and transformed into--dirt!

JULIE. You speak as though you were already my superior.

JEAN. And so I am! For I can make you a countess and you could never
make me a count.

JULIE. But I am born of a count, that you can never be.

JEAN. That is true, but I can be the father of counts--if--
JULIE. But you are a thief--that I am not.

JEAN. There are worse things than that, and for that matter when I
serve in a house I regard myself as a member of the family, a
child of the house as it were. And one doesn't consider it theft if
children snoop a berry from full bushes. [With renewed passion].

Miss Julie, you are a glorious woman--too good for such as I. You have
been the victim of an infatuation and you want to disguise this fault
by fancying that you love me. But you do not--unless perhaps
my outer self attracts you. And then your love is no better than
mine. But I cannot be satisfied with that, and your real love I can
never awaken.

JULIE. Are you sure of that?

JEAN. You mean that we could get along with such an arrangement?
There's no doubt about my loving you--you are beautiful, you are
elegant--[Goes to her and takes her hand] accomplished, lovable
when you wish to be, and the flame that you awaken in man does not
die easily.

[Puts arm around her.] You are like hot wine with strong spices, and
your lips--
[Tries to kiss her. Julie pulls herself away slowly.]
JULIE. Leave me--I'm not to be won this way.

JEAN. How then? Not with caresses and beautiful words? Not by thoughts
for the future, to save humiliation? How then?

JULIE. How? I don't know. I don't know! I shrink from you as I would from
a rat.

But I cannot escape from you.

JEAN. Escape with me.

JULIE. Escape? Yes, we must escape.--But I'm so tired. Give me a
glass of wine. [Jean fills a glass with wine, Julie looks at her
watch.] We must talk it over first for we have still a little time
left.

[She empties the glass and puts it out for more.]
JEAN. Don't drink too much. It will go to your head.

JULIE. What harm will that do?

JEAN. What harm? It's foolish to get intoxicated. But what did you want
to say?

JULIE. We must go away, but we must talk first. That is, I must speak,
for until now you have done all the talking. You have told me about
your life--now I will tell you about mine, then we will know each other
through and through before we start on our wandering together.

JEAN. One moment, pardon. Think well whether you won't regret having
told your life's secrets.

JULIE. Aren't you my friend?

JEAN. Yes. Sometimes. But don't depend on me.

JULIE. You only say that. And for that matter I have no secrets.
You see, my mother was not of noble birth. She was brought up with ideas
of equality, woman's freedom and all that. She had very decided
opinions against matrimony, and when my father courted her she declared
that she would never be his wife--but she did so for all that. I came
into the world against my mother's wishes, I discovered, and was
brought up like a child of nature by my mother, and taught everything
that a boy must know as well; I was to be an example of a woman
being as good as a man--I was made to go about in boy's clothes and take
care of the horses and harness and saddle and hunt, and all such things;
in fact, all over the estate women servants were taught to do men's
work, with the result that the property came near being ruined--and
so we became the laughing stock of the countryside. At last my
father must have awakened from his bewitched condition, for he revolted,
and ran things according to his ideas. My mother became ill--what
it was I don't know, but she often had cramps and acted queerly--sometimes
hiding in the attic or the orchard, and would even be gone all night at
times.
Then came the big fire which of course you have heard about. The house,
the stables--everything was burned, under circumstances that pointed
strongly to an incendiary, for the misfortune happened the day after
the quarterly insurance was due and the premiums sent in by father
were strangely delayed by his messenger so that they arrived too
late.

[She fills a wine glass and drinks.]
JEAN. Don't drink any more.

JULIE. Oh, what does it matter? My father was utterly at a loss to know
where to get money to rebuild with. Then my mother suggested that
he try to borrow from a man who had been her friend in her
youth--a brick manufacturer here in the neighborhood. My father made
the loan, but wasn't allowed to pay any interest, which suprised
him.

Then the house was rebuilt. [Julie drinks again.] Do you know who burned
the house?

JEAN. Her ladyship, your mother?

JULIE. Do you know who the brick manufacturer was?

JEAN. Your mother's lover?

JULIE. Do you know whose money it was?

JEAN. Just a moment, that I don't know.

JULIE. It was my mother's.

JEAN. The Count's--that is to say, unless there was a contract.

JULIE. There was no contract. My mother had some money which she had
not wished to have in my father's keeping and therefore, she had entrusted
it to her friend's care.

JEAN. Who kept it.

JULIE. Quite right--he held on to it. All this came to my father's
knowledge. He couldn't proceed against him, wasn't allowed to
pay his wife's friend, and couldn't prove that it was his wife's
money.

That was my mother's revenge for his taking the reins of the establishment
into his own hands. At that time he was ready to shoot himself.
Gossip had it that he had tried and failed. Well, he lived it down--and
my mother paid full penalty for her misdeed.
Those were five terrible years for me, as you can fancy. I sympathized
with my father, but I took my mother's part, for I didn't know the
true circumstances. Through her I learned to distrust and hate men,
and I swore to her never to be a man's slave.

JEAN. But you became engaged to the Lieutenant Governor.

JULIE. Just to make him my slave.

JEAN. But that he didn't care to be.

JULIE. He wanted to be, fast enough, but I grew tired of him.

JEAN. Yes--I noticed that--in the stable-yard!

JULIE. What do you mean?

JEAN. I saw how he broke the engagement.

JULIE. That's a lie. It was I who broke it. Did he say he broke it-- the
wretch!

JEAN. I don't believe that he was a wretch. You hate men, Miss Julie.

JULIE. Most of them. Sometimes one is weak--
JEAN. You hate me?

JULIE. Excessively. I could see you shot--
JEAN. Like a mad dog?

JULIE. Exactly!

JEAN. But there is nothing here to shoot with. What shall we do
then?

JULIE [Rousing herself].We must get away from here--travel.

JEAN. And torture each other to death?

JULIE. No--to enjoy, a few days, a week--as long as we can. And then
to die.

JEAN. Die! How silly. I think it's better to start the hotel.

JULIE [Not heeding him]. By the Lake of Como where the sun is always
shining, where the laurel is green at Christmas and the oranges glow.

JEAN. The Lake of Como is it rain hole, I never saw any oranges there
except on fruit stands. But it's a good resort, and there are many
villas to rent to loving couples. That's a very paying industry. You
know why?

They take leases for half a year at least, but they usually leave
in three weeks.

JULIE [Naively]. Why after three weeks?

JEAN. Why? They quarrel of course, but the rent must be paid all the same.
Then you re-let, and so one after another they come and go, for there
is plenty of love, although it doesn't last long.

JULIE. Then you don't want to die with me?

JEAN. I don't want to die at all, both because I enjoy living and
because I regard suicide as a crime to Him who has given us
life.

JULIE. Then you believe in God?
JEAN. Yes. Of course I do, and I go to church every other Sunday--
But I'm tired of all this and I'm going to bed.
JULIE. Do you think I would allow myself to be satisfied with such
an ending? Do you know what a man owes to a woman he hits-- --
JEAN [Takes out a silver coin and throws it on the table]. Allow
me, I don't want to owe anything to anyone.
JULIE [Pretending not to notice the insult]. Do you know what the
law demands?
JEAN. I know that the law demands nothing of a woman who seduces a
man.
JULIE [Again not heeding him]. Do you see any way out of it but to
travel?--wed--and separate?
JEAN. And if I protest against this misalliance?
JULIE. Misalliance!
JEAN. Yes, for me. For you see I have a finer ancestry than you,
for I have no fire-bug in my family.

JULIE. How do you know?
JEAN. You can't prove the contrary. We have no family record except
that which the police keep. But your pedigree I have read in a book
on the drawing room table. Do you know who the founder of your
family was? It was a miller whose wife found favor with the king
during the Danish War. Such ancestry I have not.
JULIE. This is my reward for opening my heart to anyone so unworthy,
with whom I have talked about my family honor.
JEAN. Dishonor--yes, I said it. I told you not to drink because
then one talks too freely and one should never talk.
JULIE. Oh, how I repent all this. If at least you loved me!
JEAN. For the last time--what do you mean? Shall I weep, shall I
jump over your riding whip, shall I kiss you, lure you to Lake Como
for three weeks, and then--what do you want anyway? This is getting
tiresome. But that's the way it always is when you get mixed up in
women's affairs. Miss Julie, I see that you are unhappy, I know
that you suffer, but I can't understand you. Among my kind there
is no nonsense of this sort; we love as we play when work gives us
time. We haven't the whole day and night for it like you.
JULIE. You must be good to me and speak to me as though I were a
human being.
JEAN. Be one yourself. You spit on me and expect me to stand
it.
JULIE. Help me, help me. Only tell me what to do--show me a way out
of this!

JEAN. In heaven's name, if I only knew myself.
JULIE. I have been raving, I have been mad, but is there no means
of deliverance?
JEAN. Stay here at home and say nothing. No one knows.
JULIE. Impossible. These people know it, and Kristin.
JEAN. They don't know it and could never suspect such a thing.
JULIE [Hesitating]. But--it might happen again.
JEAN. That is true.

JULIE. And the consequences?
JEAN [Frightened]. Consequences--where were my wits not to have
thought of that! There is only one thing to do. Get away from here
immediately. I can't go with you or they will suspect. You must go
alone--away from here--anywhere.

JULIE. Alone? Where? I cannot.
JEAN. You must--and before the Count returns. If you stay, we know
how it will be. If one has taken a false step it's likely to happen
again as the harm has already been done, and one grows more and
more daring until at last all is discovered. Write the Count afterward
and confess all--except that it was I. That he could never guess,
and I don't think he'll be so anxious to know who it was, anyway.
JULIE. I will go if you'll go with me.
JEAN. Are you raving again? Miss Julie running away with her coachman?
All the papers would be full of it and that the Count could never
live through.
JULIE. I can't go--I can't stay. Help me, I'm so tired--so
weary.
Command me, set me in motion--I can't think any more,--can't act--

JEAN. See now, what creatures you aristocrats are! Why do you bristle
up and stick up your noses as though you were the lords of creation.
Very well--I will command you! Go up and dress yourself and see to
it that you have travelling money and then come down.
[She hesitates.] Go immediately.
[She still hesitates. He takes her hand and leads her to door.]
JULIE. Speak gently to me, Jean.
JEAN. A command always sounds harsh. Feel it yourself now.
[Exit Julie.]
[Jean draws a sigh of relief, seats himself by the table, takes out
a notebook and pencil and counts aloud now and then until, Kristin
comes in, dressed for church.]
KRISTIN. My heavens, how it looks here. What's been going on?
JEAN. Oh, Miss Julie dragged in the people. Have you been sleeping
so soundly that you didn't hear anything?
KRISTIN. I've slept like a log.
JEAN. And already dressed for church!
KRISTIN. Ye-es, [Sleepily] didn't you promise to go to early service
with me?
JEAN. Yes, quite so, and there you have my stock and front. All
right.

[He seats himself. Kristin putting on his stock.]
JEAN [Sleepily]. What is the text today?
KRISTIN. St. John's Day! It is of course about the beheading of
John the Baptist.
JEAN. I'm afraid it will be terribly long drawn out--that. Hey,
you're choking me. I'm so sleepy, so sleepy.
KRISTIN. What have you been doing up all night? You are actually
green in the face.
JEAN. I have been sitting here talking to Miss Julie.
KRISTIN. Oh you don't know your place.

[Pause.]
JEAN. Listen, Kristin.

KRISTIN. Well?
JEAN. It's queer about her when you think it over.
KRISTIN. What is queer?

JEAN. The whole thing.
[Pause. Kristin looks at half empty glasses on table.]
KRISTIN. Have you been drinking together, too?

JEAN. Yes!
KRISTIN. For shame. Look me in the eye.

JEAN. Yes.
KRISTIN. Is it possible? Is it possible?
JEAN [After reflecting]. Yes, it is.
KRISTIN. Ugh! That I would never have believed. For shame, for
shame!

JEAN. You are not jealous of her?
KRISTIN. No, not of her. But if it had been Clara or Sophie--then
I would have scratched your eyes out. So that is what has happened--
how I can't understand! No, that wasn't very nice!
JEAN. Are you mad at her?
KRISTIN. No, but with you. That was bad of you, very bad. Poor girl.
Do you know what--I don't want to be here in this house any longer
where one cannot respect one's betters.
JEAN. Why should one respect them?
KRISTIN. Yes, you can say that, you are so smart. But I don't want
to serve people who behave so. It reflects on oneself, I think.
JEAN. Yes, but it's a comfort that they're not a bit better than
we.
KRISTIN. No, I don't, think so, for if they are not better there's
no use in our trying to better ourselves in this world. And to think
of the Count! Think of him who has had so much sorrow all his days?
No, I don't want to stay in this house any longer! And to think of
it being with such as you! If it had been the Lieutenant--
JEAN. What's that?
KRISTIN. Yes! He was good enough, to be sure, but there's a difference
between people just the same. No, this I can never forget. Miss
Julie who was always so proud and indifferent to men!
One never would believe that she would give herself--and to one
like you! She who was ready to have Diana shot because she would
run after the gatekeeper's mongrels. Yes, I say it--and here I won't
stay any longer and on the twenty-fourth of October I go my way.
JEAN. And then?
KRISTIN. Well, as we've come to talk about it, it's high time you
looked around for something else, since we're going to get
married.
JEAN. Well, what'll I look for? A married man couldn't get a place
like this.
KRISTIN. No, of course not. But you could take a gatekeeper's job
or look for it watchman's place in some factory. The government's
plums are few, but they are sure. And then the wife and children
get a pension--
JEAN [With a grimace]. That's all very fine--all that, but it's not
exactly in my line to think about dying for my wife and children
just now. I must confess that I have slightly different
aspirations.
KRISTIN. Aspirations? Aspirations--anyway you have obligations.
Think of those, you.
JEAN. Don't irritate me with talk about my obligations. I know my
own business. [He listens.] We'll have plenty of time for all this
some other day. Go and get ready and we'll be off to church.
KRISTIN [Listening]. Who's that walking upstairs?
JEAN. I don't know--unless it's Clara.
KRISTIN [Starting to go]. It could never be the Count who has come
home without anyone hearing him?
JEAN [Frightened]. The Count! I can't believe that. He would have
rung the bell.
KRISTIN. God help us! Never have I been mixed up in anything like
this!
[Exit Kristin. The sun has risen and lights up the scene. Presently
the sunshine comes in through windows at an angle. Jean goes to
door and motions. Enter Julie, dressed for travelling, carrying a
small bird cage covered with a cloth, which she places on a chair.]
JULIE. I am ready!

JEAN. Hush, Kristin is stirring!
[Julie frightened and nervous throughout following scene.] 
JULIE."The man may know something about
pictures, but he is an idiot about women. Her complexions indeed! I
could make as good a complexion for myself (we old women are painters
too, in our way, Blyth). Don't tell me about her complexion--it's her
eyes! her incomparable blue eyes, which would have driven the young men
of _my_ time mad--mad, I give you my word of honor! Not a gentleman,
sir, in my youthful days--and they _were_ gentlemen then--but would
have been too happy to run away with her for her eyes alone; and what's
more, to have shot any man who said as much as 'Stop him!' Complexion,
indeed, Mr. Gimble? I'll complexion you, next time I find my way into
your picture-gallery! Take a pinch of snuff, Blyth; and never repeat
nonsense in my hearing again."

There was Mr. Bullivant, the enthusiastic young sculptor, with the
mangy flow of flaxen hair, and the plump, waxy face, who wrote poetry,
and showed, by various sonnets, that he again differed completely about
the young lady from the Dowager Countess of Brambledown and Mr. Gimble.
This gentleman sang fluently, on paper--using, by the way, a
professional epithet--about her "chiselled mouth,"

     "Which breathed of rapture and the balmy South."

He expatiated on

     "Her sweet lips smiling at her dimpled chin,
      Whose wealth of kisses gods might long to win--"

and much more to the same maudlin effect. In plain prose, the ardent
Bullivant was all for the lower part of the young lady's face, and
actually worried her, and Mr. Blyth, and everybody in the house, until
he got leave to take a cast of it.

Lastly, there was Mrs. Blyth's father; a meek old gentleman, with a
continual cold in the head; who lived on marvelously to the utmost
verge of human existence--as very poor men, with very large families,
who would be much better out of this world than in it, very often do.
There was this low-speaking, mildly-infirm, and perpetually-snuffling
engraver, who, on being asked to mention what he most admired in her,
answered that he thought it was her hair, "which was of such a nice
light brown color; or, perhaps, it might be the pleasant way in which
she carried her head, or, perhaps, her shoulders--or, perhaps, her head
_and_ shoulders, both together. Not that his opinion was good for much
in tasty matters of this kind, for which reason he begged to apologize
for expressing it at all." In speaking thus of his opinion, the worthy
engraver surely depreciated himself most unjustly: for, if the father
of eight daughters cannot succeed in learning (philoprogenitively
speaking) to be a good judge of women, what man can?

However, there was one point on which Mr. Gimble, Lady Brambledown, Mr.
Bullivant, Mrs. Blyth's father, and hosts of friends besides, were all
agreed, without one discordant exception.

They unanimously asserted that the young lady's face was the nearest
living approach they had ever seen to that immortal "Madonna" face,
which has for ever associated the idea of beauty with the name of
RAPHAEL. The resemblance struck everybody alike, even those who were
but slightly conversant with pictures, the moment they saw her. Taken
in detail, her features might be easily found fault with. Her eyes
might be pronounced too large, her mouth too small, her nose not
Grecian enough for some people's tastes. But the general effect of
these features, the shape of her head and face, and especially her
habitual expression, reminded all beholders at once, and irresistibly,
of that image of softness, purity, and feminine gentleness, which has
been engraven on all civilized memories by the "Madonnas" of Raphael.

It was in consequence of this extraordinary resemblance, that her own
English name of Mary had been, from the first, altered and Italianized
by Mr. and Mrs. Blyth, and by all intimate friends, into "Madonna." One
or two extremely strict and extremely foolish people objected to any
such familiar application of this name, as being open, in certain
directions, to an imputation of irreverence. Mr. Blyth was not
generally very quick at an answer; but, on this occasion, he had three
answers ready before the objections were quite out of his friends'
mouths.

In the first place, he said that he and his friends used the name only
in an artist-sense, and only with reference to Raphael's pictures. In
the next place, he produced an Italian dictionary, and showed that
"Madonna" had a second meaning in the language, signifying simply and
literally, "My lady." And, in conclusion, he proved historically, that
"Madonna" had been used in the old times as a prefix to the names of
Italian women; quoting, for example, "Madonna Pia," whom he happened to
remember just at that moment, from having once painted a picture from
one of the scenes of her terrible story. These statements silenced all
objections; and the young lady was accordingly much better known in the
painter's house as "Madonna" than as "Mary."

On now entering the studio, she walked up to Valentine, laid a hand
lightly on each of his shoulders, and so lifted herself to be kissed on
the forehead. Then she looked down on his palette, and observing that
some colors were still missing from it, began to search for them
directly in the painting-box. She found them in a moment, and appealed
to Mr. Blyth with an arch look of inquiry and triumph. He nodded,
smiled, and held out his palette for her to put the colors on it
herself. Having done this very neatly and delicately, she next looked
round the room, and at once observed the bust of Venus placed on the
office stool.

At the same time, Mr. Blyth, who saw the direction taken by her eyes,
handed to her a port-crayon with some black chalk, which he had been
carefully cutting to a point for the last minute or two. She took it
with a little mock curtsey, pouting her lip slightly, as if drawing the
Venus was work not much to her taste--smiled when she saw Valentine
shaking his head, and frowning comically at her--then went away at once
to the drawing-board, and sat down opposite Venus, in which position
she offered as decided a living contradiction as ever was seen to the
assertion of the classical idea of beauty, as expressed in the cast
that she was about to copy.

Mr. Blyth, on his side, set to work at last on the Landscape; painting
upon the dancing Bacchantes in the foreground of his picture, whose
scanty dresses stood sadly in need of a little brightening up. While
the painter and the young lady are thus industriously occupied with the
business of the studio, there is leisure to remark on one rather
perplexing characteristic of their intercourse, so far as it has yet
proceeded on this particular winter's morning.

Ever since Madonna has been in the room, not one word has she spoken to
Valentine; and not one word has Valentine (who can talk glibly enough
to himself) spoken to her. He never said "Good morning," when he kissed
her--or, "Thank you for finding my lost colors,"--or, "I have set the
Venus, my dear, for your drawing lesson to-day." And she, woman as she
is, has actually not asked him a single question, since she entered the
studio! What can this absolute and remarkable silence mean between two
people who look as affectionately on each other as these two look,
every time their eyes meet!

Is this one of the Mysteries of the painter's fireside?

Who is Madonna?

What is her real name besides Mary?

Is it Mary Blyth?

     -------

Some years ago, an extraordinary adventure happened to Valentine in the
circus of an itinerant Equestrian Company. In that adventure, and in
the strange results attending it, the clue lies hidden, which leads to
the Mystery of the painter's fireside, and reveals the story of this
book.


CHAPTER III.

MADONNA'S CHILDHOOD.

In the autumn of 1838, Mrs. Blyth's malady had for some time past
assumed the permanent form from which it seldom afterwards varied. She
now suffered little actual pain, except when she quitted a recumbent
posture. But the general disorganization produced by almost exclusive
confinement to one position, had, even at this early period, begun to
work sad changes in her personal appearance. She suffered that
mortifying misfortune just as bravely and resignedly as she had
suffered the first great calamity of her incurable disorder. Valentine
never showed that he thought her altered; Valentine's kindness was just
as affectionate and as constant as it had ever been in the happier days
of their marriage. So encouraged, Lavinia had the heart to bear all
burdens patiently; and could find sources of happiness for herself,
where others could discover nothing but causes for grief.

The room she inhabited was already, through Valentine's self-denying
industry, better furnished than any other room in the house; but was
far from presenting the same appearance of luxury and completeness to
which it attained in the course of after-years.

The charming maple-wood and ivory bookcase, with the prettily-bound
volumes ranged in such bright regularity along its shelves, was there
certainly, as early as the autumn of 1838. It would not, however, at
that time have formed part of the furniture of Mrs. Blyth's room, if
her husband had not provided himself with the means of paying for it,
by accepting a certain professional invitation to the country, which he
knew before, and would enable him to face the terrors of the
upholsterer's bill.

The invitation in question had been sent to him by a clerical friend,
the Reverend Doctor Joyce, Rector of St. Judy's, in the large
agricultural town of Rubbleford. Valentine had produced a water-color
drawing of one of the Doctor's babies, when the family at the Rectory
were in London for a season, and this drawing had been shown to all the
neighbors by the worthy clergyman on his return. Now, although Mr.
Blyth was not over-successful in the adult department of portrait-art,
he was invariably victorious in the infant department. He painted all
babies on one ingenious plan; giving them the roundest eyes, the
chubbiest red cheeks, the most serenely good-humored smiles, and the
neatest and whitest caps ever seen on paper. If fathers and their male
friends rarely appreciated the fidelity of his likenesses, mothers and
nurses invariably made amends for their want of taste. It followed,
therefore, almost as a matter of course, that the local exhibition of
the Doctor's drawing must bring offers of long-clothes-portrait
employment to Valentine. Three resident families decided immediately to
have portraits of their babies, if the painter would only travel to
their houses to take the likenesses. A bachelor sporting squire in the
neighborhood also volunteered a commission of another sort. This
gentleman arrived (by a logical process which it is hopeless to think
of tracing) at the conclusion, that a man who was great at babies, must
necessarily be marvelous at horses; and determined, in consequence,
that Valentine should paint his celebrated cover-hack. In writing to
inform his friend of these offers, Doctor Joyce added another
professional order on his own account, by way of appropriate conclusion
to his letter. Here, then, were five commissions, which would produce
enough--cheaply as Valentine worked--to pay, not only for the new
bookcase, but for the books to put in it when it came home.

Having left his wife in charge of two of her sisters, who were
forbidden to leave the house till his return, Mr. Blyth started for the
rectory; and once there, set to work on the babies with a zeal and
good-humor which straightway won the hearts of mothers and nurses, and
made him a great Rubbleford reputation in the course of a few days.
Having done the babies to admiration, he next undertook the bachelor
squire's hack. Here he had some trouble. The sporting gentleman would
look over him while he painted; would bewilder him with the pedigree of
the horse; would have the animal done in the most unpicturesque view;
and sternly forbade all introduction of "tone," "light and shade," or
purely artistic embellishment of any kind, in any part of the canvas.
In short, the squire wanted a sign-board instead of a picture, and he
at last got what he wanted to his heart's content.

One evening, while Valentine--still deeply immersed in the difficulties
of depicting the cover-hack--was returning to the Rectory, after a
day's work at the Squire's house, his attention was suddenly attracted
in the high street of Rubbleford, by a flaming placard pasted up on a
dead wall opposite the market-house.

He immediately joined the crowd of rustics congregated round the
many-colored and magnificent sheet of paper, and read at the top of it,
in huge blue letters:--"JUBBER'S CIRCUS. THE EIGHTH WONDER OF THE
WORLD." After this came some small print, which nobody lost any time in
noticing. But below the small print appeared a perfect galaxy of
fancifully shaped scarlet letters, which fascinated all eyes, and
informed the public that the equestrian company included "MISS FLORINDA
BEVERLEY, known," (here the letters turned suddenly green) "wherever
the English language was known, as The Amazonian Empress of
Equitation." This announcement was followed by the names of inferior
members of the Company; by a program of the evening's entertainments;
by testimonials extracted from the provincial press; by illustrations
of gentlemen with lusty calves and spangled drawers, and of ladies with
smiling faces, shameless petticoats, and pirouetting legs. These
illustrations, and the particulars which preceded them were carefully
digested by all Mr. Blyth's neighbors; but Mr. Blyth himself passed
them over unnoticed. His eye had been caught by something at the bottom
of the placard, which instantly absorbed his whole attention.

In this place the red letters appeared again, and formed the following
words and marks of admiration:--

     THE MYSTERIOUS FOUNDLING!
     AGED TEN YEARS!!
     TOTALLY DEAF AND DUMB!!!

Underneath came an explanation of what the red letters referred to,
occupying no less than three paragraphs of stumpy small print, every
word of which Valentine eagerly devoured. This is what he read:--

"Mr. Jubber, as proprietor of the renowned Circus, has the honor of
informing the nobility, gentry, and public, that the above wonderful
Deaf and Dumb Female Child will appear between the first and second
parts of the evening's performances. Mr. J. has taken the liberty of
entitling this Marvel of Nature, The Mysterious Foundling; no one
knowing who her father is, and her mother having died soon after her
birth, leaving her in charge of the Equestrian Company, who have been
fond parents and careful guardians to her ever since.

"She was originally celebrated in the annals of Jubber's Circus, or
Eighth Wonder of the World, as The Hurricane Child of the Desert;
having appeared in that character, whirled aloft at the age of seven
years in the hand of Muley Ben Hassan, the renowned Scourer of Sahara,
in his daring act of Equitation, as exhibited to the terror of all
England, in Jubber's Circus. At that time she had her hearing and
speech quite perfect. But Mr. J. deeply regrets to state that a
terrific accident happened to her soon afterwards. Through no fault on
the part of The Scourer (who, overcome by his feelings at the result of
the above-mentioned frightful accident, has gone back to his native
wilds a moody and broken-hearted man), she slipped from his hand while
the three horses bestrode by the fiery but humane Arab were going at a
gallop, and fell, shocking to relate, outside the Ring, on the boarded
floor of the Circus. She was supposed to be dead. Mr. Jubber instantly
secured the inestimable assistance of the Faculty, who found that she
was still alive, and set her arm, which had been broken. It was only
afterwards discovered that she had utterly lost her sense of hearing.
To use the emphatic language of the medical gentlemen (who all spoke
with tears in their eyes), she had been struck stone deaf by the shock.
Under these melancholy circumstances, it was found that the faculty of
speech soon failed her altogether; and she is now therefore Totally
Deaf AND Dumb--but Mr. J. rejoices to say, quite cheerful and in good
health notwithstanding.

"Mr. Jubber being himself the father of a family, ventures to think
that these little particulars may prove of some interest to an
Intelligent, a Sympathetic, and a Benevolent Public. He will simply
allude, in conclusion, to the performances of the Mysterious Foundling,
as exhibiting perfection hitherto unparalleled in the Art of
Legerdemain, with wonders of untraceable intricacy on the cards,
originally the result of abstruse calculations made by that renowned
Algebraist, Mohammed Engedi, extending over a period of ten years,
dating from the year 1215 of the Arab Chronology. More than this Mr.
Jubber will not venture to mention, for 'Seeing is Believing,' and the
Mysterious Foundling must be seen to be believed. For prices of
admission consult bottom of bill."

Mr. Blyth read this grotesquely shocking narrative with sentiments
which were anything rather than complimentary to the taste, the
delicacy, and the humanity of the fluent Mr. Jubber. He consulted the
bottom of the bill, however, as requested; and ascertained what were
the prices of admission--then glanced at the top, and observed that the
first performance was fixed for that very evening--looked about him
absently for a minute or two--and resolved to be present at it.

Most assuredly, Valentine's resolution did not proceed from that
dastard insensibility to all decent respect for human suffering which
could feast itself on the spectacle of calamity paraded for hire, in
the person of a deaf and dumb child of ten years old. His motives for
going to the circus were stained by no trace of such degradation as
this. But what were they then? That question he himself could not have
answered: it was a common predicament with him not to know his own
motives, generally from not inquiring into them. There are men who run
breathlessly--men who walk cautiously--and men who saunter easily
through the journey of life. Valentine belonged to the latter class;
and, like the rest of his order, often strayed down a new turning,
without being able to realize at the time what purpose it was which
first took him that way. Our destinies shape the future for us out of
strange materials: a traveling circus sufficed them, in the first
instance, to shape a new future for Mr. Blyth.

He first went on to the Rectory to tell them where he was going, and to
get a cup of tea, and then hurried off to the circus, in a field
outside the town.

The performance had begun some time when he got in. The Amazonian
Empress (known otherwise as Miss Florinda Beverley) was dancing
voluptuously on the back of a cantering piebald horse with a Roman
nose. Round and round careered the Empress, beating time on the saddle
with her imperial legs to the tune of "Let the Toast be Dear Woman,"
played with intense feeling by the band. Suddenly the melody changed to
"See the Conquering Hero Comes;" the piebald horse increased his speed;
the Empress raised a flag in one hand, and a javelin in the other, and
began slaying invisible enemies in the empty air, at full (circus)
gallop. The result on the audience was prodigious; Mr. Blyth alone sat
unmoved. Miss Florinda Beverley was not even a good model to draw legs
from, in the estimation of this anti-Amazonian painter!

When the Empress was succeeded by a Spanish Guerilla, who robbed,
murdered, danced, caroused, and made love on the back of a
cream-colored horse--and when the Guerilla was followed by a clown who
performed superhuman contortions, and made jokes by the yard, without
the slightest appearance of intellectual effort--still Mr. Blyth
exhibited no demonstration of astonishment or pleasure. It was only
when a bell rang between the first and second parts of the performance,
and the band struck up "Gentle Zitella," that he showed any symptoms of
animation. Then he suddenly rose; and, moving down to a bench close
against the low partition which separated the ring from the audience,
fixed his eyes intently on a doorway opposite to him, overhung by a
frowzy red curtain with a tinsel border.

From this doorway there now appeared Mr. Jubber himself, clothed in
white trousers with a gold stripe, and a green jacket with military
epaulettes. He had big, bold eyes, a dyed mustache, great fat, flabby
cheeks, long hair parted in the middle, a turn-down collar with a
rose-colored handkerchief; and was, in every respect, the most
atrocious looking stage vagabond that ever painted a blackguard face.
He led with him, holding her hand, the little deaf and dumb girl, whose
misfortune he had advertised to the whole population of Rubbleford.

The face and manner of the child, as she walked into the center of the
circus, and made her innocent curtsey and kissed her hand, went to the
hearts of the whole audience in an instant. They greeted her with such
a burst of applause as might have frightened a grown actress. But not a
note from those cheering voices, not a breath of sound from those
loudly clapping hands could reach her; she could see that they were
welcoming her kindly, and that was all!

When the applause had subsided, Mr. Jubber asked for the loan of a
handkerchief from one of the ladies present, and ostentatiously
bandaged the child's eyes. He then lifted her upon the broad low wall
which encircled the ring, and walked her round a little way (beginning
from the door through which he had entered), inviting the spectators to
test her total deafness by clapping their hands, shouting, or making
any loud noise they pleased close at her ear. "You might fire off a
cannon, ladies and gentlemen," said Mr. Jubber, "and it wouldn't make
her start till after she'd smelt the smoke!"

To the credit of the Rubbleford audience, the majority of them declined
making any practical experiments to test the poor child's utter
deafness. The women set the example of forbearance, by entreating that
the handkerchief might be taken off so that they might see her pretty
eyes again. This was done at once, and she began to perform her
conjuring tricks with Mr. Jubber and one of the ring-keepers on either
side of her, officiating as assistants. These tricks, in themselves,
were of the simplest and commonest kind; and derived all their
attraction from the child's innocently earnest manner of exhibiting
them, and from the novelty to the audience of communicating with her
only by writing on a slate. They never tired of scrawling questions, of
saying "poor little thing!" and of kissing her whenever they could get
the opportunity, while she slowly went round the circus. "Deaf and
dumb! ah, dear, dear, deaf and dumb!" was the general murmur of
sympathy which greeted her from each new group, as she advanced; Mr.
Jubber invariably adding with a smile: "And as you see, ladies and
gentlemen, in excellent health and spirits, notwithstanding: as hearty
and happy, I pledge you my sacred word of honor, as the very best of
us!"

While she was thus delighting the spectators on one side of the circus,
how were the spectators on the other side, whose places she had not yet
reached, contriving to amuse themselves?

From the moment of the little girl's first appearance, ample recreation
had been unconsciously provided for them by a tall, stout, and florid
stranger, who appeared suddenly to lose his senses the moment he set
eyes on the deaf and dumb child. This gentleman jumped up and sat down
again excitably a dozen times in a minute; constantly apologizing on
being called to order, and constantly repeating the offense the moment
afterwards. Mad and mysterious words, never heard before in Rubbleford,
poured from his lips. "Devotional beauty," "Fra Angelico's angels,"
"Giotto and the cherubs," "Enough to bring the divine Raphael down from
heaven to paint her." Such were a few fragments of the mad gentleman's
incoherent mutterings, as they reached his neighbors' ears. The
amusement they yielded was soon wrought to its climax by a joke from an
attorney's clerk, who suggested that this queer man, with the rosy
face, must certainly be the long-lost father of the "Mysterious
Foundling!" Great gratification was consequently anticipated from what
might take place when the child arrived opposite the bench occupied by
the excitable stranger.

Slowly, slowly, the little light figure went round upon the broad
partition wall of the ring, until it came near, very near, to the place
where Valentine was sitting.

Ah, woeful sight! so lovely, yet so piteous to look on! Shall she never
hear kindly human voices, the song of birds, the pleasant murmur of the
trees again? Are all the sweet sounds that sing of happiness to
childhood, silent for ever to _her?_ From those fresh, rosy lips shall
no glad words pour forth, when she runs and plays in the sunshine?
Shall the clear, laughing tones be hushed always? the young, tender
life be for ever a speechless thing, shut up in dumbness from the free
world of voices? Oh! Angel of judgment! hast thou snatched her hearing
and her speech from this little child, to abandon her in helpless
affliction to such profanation as she now undergoes? Oh, Spirit of
mercy! how long thy white-winged feet have tarried on their way to this
innocent sufferer, to this lost lamb that cannot cry to the fold for
help! Lead, ah, lead her tenderly to such shelter as she has never yet
found for herself! Guide her, pure as she is now, from this tainted
place to pleasant pastures, where the sunshine of human kindness shall
be clouded no more, and Love and Pity shall temper every wind that
blows over her with the gentleness of perpetual spring!

Slowly, slowly, the light figure went round the great circle of gazers,
ministering obediently to their pleasure, waiting patiently till their
curiosity was satisfied. ROD. Hear me, Don Julian; I have heard thy
wrath Who am thy king, nor heard man's wrath before.

JUL.

Thou shalt hear mine, for thou art not my king.

ROD. Knowest thou not the altered face of war?
Xeres is ours; from every region round True loyal Spaniards throng into
our camp:
Nay, thy own friends and thy own family, From the remotest provinces,
advance To crush rebellion: Sisabert is come, Disclaiming thee and
thine; the Asturian hills Opposed to him their icy chains in vain:
But never wilt thou see him, never more, Unless in adverse war, and
deadly hate.

JUL. So lost to me! So generous, so deceived!
I grieve to hear it.

ROD. Come, I offer grace, Honour, dominion: send away these slaves,
Or leave them to our sword, and all beyond The distant Ebro to the
towns of France Shall bless thy name, and bend before thy throne.
I will myself accompany thee, I, The king, will hail thee brother.

JUL. Ne'er shalt thou Henceforth be king: the nation in thy name May
issue edicts, champions may command The vassal multitudes of marshalled
war, And the fierce charger shrink before the shouts, Lowered as if
earth had opened at his feet, While thy mailed semblance rises toward
the ranks, But God alone sees thee.

ROD. What hopest thou?
To conquer Spain, and rule a ravaged land?
To compass me around, to murder me?

JUL. No, Don Roderigo: swear thou, in the fight That thou wilt meet
me, hand to hand, alone, That, if I ever save thee from a foe -

ROD. I swear what honour asks--first, to Covilla Do thou present my crown
and dignity.

JUL. Darest thou offer any price for shame?

ROD. Love and repentance.

JUL. Egilona lives:
And were she buried with her ancestors, Covilla should not be the
gaze of men, Should not, despoiled of honour, rule the free.

ROD. Stern man! her virtues well deserve the throne.

JUL. And Egilona--what hath she deserved, The good, the lovely?

ROD. But the realm in vain Hoped a succession.

JUL. Thou hast torn away The roots of royalty.

ROD. For her, for thee.

JUL. Blind insolence!

base insincerity!
Power and renown no mortal ever shared, Who could retain or grasp
them to himself:

And, for Covilla? patience! peace! for her?
She call upon her God, and outrage Him At His own altar! she repeat the
vows She violates in repeating!

who abhors Thee and thy crimes, and wants no crown of thine.
Force may compel the abhorrent soul, or want Lash and pursue it to
the public ways; Virtue looks back and weeps, and may return To
these, but never near the abandoned one Who drags religion to
adultery's feet, And rears the altar higher for her sake.

ROD. Have then the Saracens possessed thee quite, And wilt thou never
yield me thy consent?

JUL. Never.

ROD. So deep in guilt, in treachery!
Forced to acknowledge it! forced to avow The traitor!

JUL. Not to thee, who reignest not, But to a country ever dear to me,
And dearer now than ever: what we love Is loveliest in departure!
One I thought, As every father thinks, the best of all, Graceful,
and mild, and sensible, and chaste:
Now all these qualities of form and soul Fade from before me, nor
on anyone Can I repose, or be consoled by any.

And yet in this torn heart I love her more Than I could love her when
I dwelt on each, Or clasped them all united, and thanked God, Without
a wish beyond.--Away, thou fiend!

O ignominy, last and worst of all!
I weep before thee--like a child--like mine - And tell my woes, fount
of them all, to thee!

FIRST ACT: FOURTH SCENE.

ABDALAZIS enters.

ABD. Julian, to thee, the terror of the faithless, I bring my father's
order, to prepare For the bright day that crowns thy brave exploits:

Our enemy is at the very gate!
And art thou here, with women in thy train, Crouching to gain admittance
to their lord, And mourning the unkindness of delay!

JUL. [much agitated, goes towards the door, and returns.] I am prepared:
Prince, judge not hastily.

ABD. Whether I should not promise all they ask, I too could hesitate,
though earlier taught The duty to obey, and should rejoice To shelter
in the universal storm A frame so delicate, so full of fears, So
little used to outrage and to arms, As one of these; so humble, so
uncheered At the gay pomp that smoothes the track of war.

When she beheld me from afar dismount, And heard my trumpet, she
alone drew back, And, as though doubtful of the help she seeks,
Shuddered to see the jewels on my brow, And turned her eyes away,
and wept aloud.

The other stood awhile, and then advanced:
I would have spoken, but she waved her hand And said, "Proceed, protect
us, and avenge, And be thou worthier of the crown thou wearest."
Hopeful and happy is indeed our cause, When the most timid of the
lovely hail Stranger and foe -
ROD.

[unnoticed by ABDALAZIS.] And shrink but to advance.

ABD. Thou tremblest? whence, O Julian! whence this change?
Thou lovest still thy country.

JUL. Abdalazis!
All men with human feelings love their country.
Not the highborn or wealthy man alone, Who looks upon his children,
each one led By its gay handmaid, from the high alcove, And hears
them once a day: not only he Who hath forgotten, when his guest
inquires The name of some far village all his own; Whose rivers bound
the province, and whose hills Touch the last cloud upon the level
sky:
No; better men still better love their country.

'Tis the old mansion of their earliest friends, The chapel of their first
and best devotions; When violence or perfidy invades, Or when
unworthy lords hold wassail there, And wiser heads are drooping
round its moats, At last they fix their steady and stiff eye There,
there alone--stand while the trumpet blows, And view the hostile
flames above its towers Spire, with a bitter and severe delight.

ABD. [taking his hand.] Thou feelest what thou speakest, and thy Spain
Will ne'er be sheltered from her fate by thee.

We, whom the prophet sends o'er many lands, Love none above another;
Heaven assigns Their fields and harvests to our valiant swords, And
'tis enough--we love while we enjoy.

Whence is the man in that fantastic guise?
Suppliant? or herald? he who stalks about, And once was even seated
while we spoke:

For never came he with us o'er the sea.

JUL. He comes as herald.

ROD. Thou shalt know full soon, Insulting Moor.

ABD.

He cannot bear the grief His country suffers; I will pardon him.
He lost his courage first, and then his mind; His courage rushes back,
his mind still wanders.
The guest of heaven was piteous to these men, And princes stoop to
feed them in their courts.

FIRST ACT: FIFTH SCENE.

RODERIGO is going out when MUZA enters with EGILONA; RODERIGO starts
back.

MUZA [sternly to EGILONA.] Enter, since 'tis the custom in this
land.

EGI. [passing MUZA disdainfully, points to ABDALAZIS, and says to
JULIAN.] Is this our future monarch, or art thou?

JUL. 'Tis Abdalazis, son of Muza, prince Commanding Africa, from Abyla
To where Tunisian pilots bend the eye O'er ruined temples in the glassy
wave.
Till quiet times and ancient laws return, He comes to govern
here.

ROD. To-morrow's dawn Proves that.

MUZA. What art thou?

ROD. [drawing his sword.] King.

ABD. Amazement!

MUZA. Treason!

EGI. O horror!

MUZA. Seize him.

EGI. Spare him! fly to me!

JUL. Urge me not to protect a guest, a herald - The blasts of war roar
over him unfelt.

EGI. Ah fly, unhappy!

ROD. Fly! no, Egilona - Dost thou forgive me? dost thou love me?
still?

EGI. I hate, abominate, abhor thee--go, Or my own vengeance -
ROD. [taking JULIAN's hand, and inviting him to attack MUZA and ABDALAZIS.]
Julian!

JUL. Hence, or die.

SECOND ACT: FIRST SCENE.

Camp of JULIAN.

JULIAN and COVILLA.

JUL. Obdurate! I am not as I appear.
Weep, my beloved child, Covilla, weep Into my bosom; every drop be
mine Of this most bitter soul-empoisoning cup:
Into no other bosom than thy father's Canst thou, or wouldst thou, pour
it.

COV. Cease, my lord, My father, angel of my youth, when all Was
innocence and peace.

JUL.

Arise, my love, Look up to heaven--where else are souls like thine!
Mingle in sweet communion with its children, Trust in its providence, its
retribution, And I will cease to mourn; for, O my child, These
tears corrode, but thine assuage the heart.

COV. And never shall I see my mother too, My own, my blessed mother!

JUL. Thou shalt see Her and thy brothers.

COV. No! I cannot look On them, I cannot meet their lovely eyes, I
cannot lift mine up from under theirs.

We all were children when they went away; They now have fought hard
battles, and are men, And camps and kings they know, and woes and
crimes.
Sir, will they never venture from the walls Into the plain?

Remember, they are young, Hardy and emulous and hazardous; And who is
left to guard them in the town?

JUL. Peace is throughout the land: the various tribes Of that vast region
sink at once to rest, Like one wide wood when every wind lies hushed.

COV. And war, in all its fury, roams o'er Spain.

JUL. Alas!

and will for ages: crimes are loose At which ensanguined War stands
shuddering; And calls for vengeance from the powers above, Impatient
of inflicting it himself.

Nature in these new horrors is aghast At her own progeny, and
knows them not.

I am the minister of wrath; the hands That tremble at me, shall applaud
me too, And seal their condemnation.

COV. O kind father, Pursue the guilty, but remember Spain.

JUL. Child, thou wert in thy nursery short time since, And
latterly hast passed the vacant hour Where the familiar voice of
history Is hardly known, however nigh, attuned In softer accents
to the sickened ear; But thou hast heard, for nurses tell these
tales, Whether I drew my sword for Witiza Abandoned by the people
he betrayed, Though brother to the woman who of all Was ever dearest
to this broken heart, Till thou, my daughter, wert a prey to grief,
And a brave country brooked the wrongs I bore.

For I had seen Rusilla guide the steps Of her Theodofred, when burning
brass Plunged its fierce fang into the founts of light, And
Witiza's the guilt! when, bent with age, He knew the voice again,
and told the name, Of those whose proffered fortunes had been laid
Before his throne, while happiness was there, And strained the
sightless nerve tow'rd where they stood At the forced memory of the
very oaths He heard renewed from each, but heard afar, For they
were loud, and him the throng spurned off.

COV. Who were all these?

JUL.

All who are seen to-day On prancing steeds richly caparisoned In loyal
acclamation round Roderigo; Their sons beside them, loving one another
Unfeignedly, through joy, while they themselves In mutual homage mutual
scorn suppress.
Their very walls and roofs are welcoming The king's approach, their
storied tapestry Swells its rich arch for him triumphantly At every
clarion blowing from below.

COV. Such wicked men will never leave his side.

JUL. For they are insects which see nought beyond Where they now crawl;
whose changes are complete, Unless of habitation.

COV. Whither go Creatures unfit for better, or for worse?

JUL. Some to the grave--where peace be with them! some Across the Pyrenean
mountains far, Into the plains of France; suspicion there Will hang on
every step from rich and poor, Grey quickly-glancing eyes will
wrinkle round, And courtesy will watch them day and night.

Shameless they are, yet will they blush, amid A nation that ne'er
blushes: some will drag The captive's chain, repair the shattered bark,
Or heave it from a quicksand to the shore, Among the marbles of the
Libyan coast; Teach patience to the lion in his cage, And, by
the order of a higher slave, Hold to the elephant their scanty
fare, To please the children while the parent sleeps.

COV. Spaniards? must they, dear father, lead such lives?

JUL. All are not Spaniards who draw breath in Spain; Those are, who
live for her, who die for her, Who love her glory and lament her
fall.

Oh, may I too -
COV.

But peacefully, and late, Live and die here!

JUL. I have, alas! myself Laid waste the hopes where my fond fancy
strayed, And view their ruins with unaltered eyes.

COV. My mother will at last return to thee.
Might I once more, but--could I now behold her, Tell her--ah me!

what was my rash desire?
No, never tell her these inhuman things, For they would waste her
tender heart away As they waste mine; or tell when I have died,
Only to show her that her every care Could not have saved, could
not have comforted.

That she herself, clasping me once again To her sad breast, had said,
Covilla! go, Go, hide them in the bosom of thy God!
Sweet mother, that far-distant voice I hear, And passing out of
youth and out of life, I would not turn at last, and disobey.

SECOND ACT: SECOND SCENE.

SISABERT enters.

SIS.

Uncle, and is it true, say, can it be, That thou art leader of
these faithless Moors?
That thou impeachest thy own daughter's fame Through the whole land,
to seize upon the throne By the permission of those recreant slaves?

What shall I call thee? art thou--speak, Count Julian - A father, or a
soldier, or a man?

JUL. All--or this day had never seen me here.

SIS. O falsehood!

worse than woman's!

COV. Once, my cousin, Far gentler words were uttered from your
lips.
If you loved me, you loved my father first, More justly and more
steadily, ere love Was passion and illusion and deceit.

SIS.

I boast not that I never was deceived, Covilla, which beyond all
boasts were base, Nor that I never loved; let this be thine.

Illusions! just to stop us, not delay; Amuse, not occupy! Too true! when
love Scatters its brilliant foam, and passes on To some fresh object
in its natural course, Widely and openly and wanderingly, 'Tis
better! narrow it, and it pours its gloom In one fierce cataract that
stuns the soul.
Ye hate the wretch ye make so, while ye choose Whoever knows you best
and shuns you most.

COV. Shun me then: be beloved, more and more.
Honour the hand that showed you honour first, Love--O my father!
speak, proceed, persuade, Thy voice alone can mutter it--another -
SIS. Ah lost Covilla! can a thirst of power Alter thy heart thus to
abandon mine, And change my very nature at one blow?

COV.

I told you, dearest Sisabert, 'twas vain To urge me more, to question,
or confute.

SIS. I know it, for another wears the crown Of Witiza my father; who
succeeds To king Roderigo will succeed to me.
Yet thy cold perfidy still calls me dear, And o'er my aching temples
breathes one gale Of days departed to return no more.

JUL. Young man, avenge our cause.

SIS. What cause avenge?
COV. If I was ever dear to you, hear me, Not vengeance; Heaven will
give that signal soon.
O Sisabert, the pangs I have endured On your long absence -
SIS. Will be now consoled.
Thy father comes to mount my father's throne; But though I would
not a usurper king, I prize his valour and defend his crown:
No stranger and no traitor rules o'er me, Or unchastised inveigles
humbled Spain.
Covilla, gavest thou no promises?
Nor thou, Don Julian? Seek not to reply - Too well I know, too
justly I despise, Thy false excuse, thy coward effrontery; Yes,
when thou gavest them across the sea, An enemy wert thou to Mahomet,
And no appellant to his faith or leagues.
JUL. 'Tis well: a soldier hears throughout in silence.
I urge no answer: to those words, I fear, Thy heart with sharp
compunction will reply.
SIS. [to COVILLA.] Then I demand of thee before thou reign, Answer
me--while I fought against the Frank Who dared to smite thee?
blazoned in the court, Not trailed through darkness, were our nuptial
bands; No: Egilona joined our hands herself, The peers applauded,
and the king approved.
JUL. Hast thou yet seen that king since thy return?
COV. Father! O father!
SIS. I will not implore Of him or thee what I have lost for ever.
These were not when we parted thy alarms; Far other, and far worthier
of thy heart Were they; which Sisabert could banish then.
Fear me not now, Covilla! thou hast changed - I am changed too--I
lived but where thou livedst, My very life was portioned off from
thine.
Upon the surface of thy happiness Day after day I gazed, I doted--there
Was all I had, was all I coveted; So pure, serene, and boundless
it appeared:
Yet, for we told each other every thought, Thou knowest well, if
thou rememberest, At times I feared; as though some demon sent
Suspicion without form into the world, To whisper unimaginable
things.
Then thy fond arguing banished all but hope, Each wish, and every
feeling, was with thine, Till I partook thy nature, and became
Credulous, and incredulous, like thee.
We, who have met so altered, meet no more.
Mountains and seas! ye are not separation:
Death! thou dividest, but unitest too, In everlasting peace and
faith sincere.
Confiding love! where is thy resting-place?
Where is thy truth, Covilla? where!--Go, go, I should adore thee
and believe thee still.
[Goes.
COV. O Heaven! support me, or desert me quite, And leave me lifeless
this too trying hour!
He thinks me faithless.
JUL. He must think thee so.
COV. Oh, tell him, tell him all, when I am dead - He will die too,
and we shall meet again.
He will know all when these sad eyes are closed.
Ah, cannot he before? must I appear The vilest?--O just Heaven! can
it be thus?
I am--all earth resounds it--lost, despised, Anguish and shame
unutterable seize me.
'Tis palpable, no phantom, no delusion, No dream that wakens with
o'erwhelming horror:
Spaniard and Moor fight on this ground alone, And tear the arrow
from my bleeding breast To pierce my father's, for alike they
fear.
JUL. Invulnerable, unassailable Are we, alone perhaps of human kind,
Nor life allures us more, nor death alarms.
COV. Fallen, unpitied, unbelieved, unheard!
I should have died long earlier: gracious God!
Desert me to my sufferings, but sustain My faith in Thee! O hide
me from the world, And from thyself, my father, from thy fondness,
That opened in this wilderness of woe A source of tears--it else
had burst my heart, Setting me free for ever: then perhaps A cruel
war had not divided Spain, Had not o'erturned her cities and her
altars, Had not endangered thee! Oh, haste afar Ere the last dreadful
conflict that decides Whether we live beneath a foreign sway -
JUL. Or under him whose tyranny brought down The curse upon his
people. O child! child!
Urge me no further, talk not of the war, Remember not our country.
COV. Not remember!
What have the wretched else for consolation!
What else have they who pining feed their woe?
Can I, or should I, drive from memory All that was dear and sacred,
all the joys Of innocence and peace? when no debate Was in the
convent, but what hymn, whose voice, To whom among the blessed it
arose, Swelling so sweet; when rang the vesper-bell And every finger
ceased from the guitar, And every tongue was silent through our
land; When, from remotest earth, friends met again Hung on each
other's neck, and but embraced, So sacred, still, and peaceful was
the hour.
Now, in what climate of the wasted world, Not unmolested long by
the profane, Can I pour forth in secrecy to God My prayers and my
repentance? where besides Is the last solace of the parting
soul?
Friends, brethren, parents--dear indeed, too dear Are they, but
somewhat still the heart requires, That it may leave them lighter,
and more blest.

JUL. Wide are the regions of our far-famed land:
Thou shalt arrive at her remotest bounds, See her best people,
choose some holiest house; Whether where Castro from surrounding
vines Hears the hoarse ocean roar among his caves, And, through the
fissure in the green churchyard, The wind wail loud the calmest
summer day; Or where Santona leans against the hill, Hidden from
sea and land by groves and bowers.
COV. Oh! for one moment in those pleasant scenes Thou placest me,
and lighter air I breathe:
Why could I not have rested, and heard on!
My voice dissolves the vision quite away, Outcast from virtue, and
from nature too!

JUL. Nature and virtue! they shall perish first.
God destined them for thee, and thee for them, Inseparably and
eternally!
The wisest and the best will prize thee most, And solitudes and
cities will contend Which shall receive thee kindliest--sigh not
so; Violence and fraud will never penetrate Where piety and poverty
retire, Intractable to them, and valueless, And looked at idly,
like the face of heaven.
If strength be wanted for security, Mountains the guard, forbidding
all approach With iron-pointed and uplifted gates, Thou wilt be
welcome too in Aguilar, Impenetrable, marble-turreted, Surveying
from aloft the limpid ford, The massive fane, the sylvan avenue;
Whose hospitality I proved myself, A willing leader in no impious
war When fame and freedom urged me; or mayst dwell In Reynosa's dry
and thriftless dale, Unharvested beneath October moons, Among those
frank and cordial villagers.
They never saw us, and, poor simple souls!
So little know they whom they call the great, Would pity one another
less than us, In injury, disaster, or distress.A
prettier scene of garden beauty and family repose could not be found in
all England, than the scene which the view through the Rectory window
now presents. The household tranquillity, however, is not entirely
uninterrupted. Across the picture, of which Vance and the
luncheon-table form the foreground, and the garden with Mrs. Joyce and
the young ladies the middle-distance and background, there flits from
time to time an unquiet figure. This personage is always greeted by
Leo, the Newfoundland dog, with an extra wag of the tail; and is
apostrophized laughingly by the young ladies, under the appellation of
"funny Mr. Blyth."

Valentine has in truth let nobody have any rest, either in the house or
the garden, since the first thing in the morning. The rector having
some letters to write, has bolted himself into his study in despair,
and defies his excitable friend from that stronghold, until the arrival
of Mrs. Peckover with the deaf and dumb child has quieted the painter's
fidgety impatience for the striking of twelve o'clock, and the presence
of the visitors from the circus. As for the miserable Vance, Mr. Blyth
has discomposed, worried, and put him out, till he looks suffocated
with suppressed indignation. Mr. Blyth has invaded his sanctuary to ask
whether the hall clock is right, and has caught him "cleaning himself"
in his shirt sleeves. Mr. Blyth has broken one of his tumblers, and has
mutinously insisted on showing him how to draw the cork of the cowslip
wine bottle. Mr. Blyth has knocked down a fork and two spoons, just as
they were laid straight, by whisking past the table like a madman on
his way into the garden. Mr. Blyth has bumped up against the housemaid
in returning to the dining-room, and has apologized to Susan by a joke
which makes her giggle ecstatically in Vance's own face. If this sort
of thing is to go on for a day or two longer, though he has been twenty
years at the Rectory, Vance will be goaded into giving the doctor
warning.

It is five minutes to twelve. Valentine has skipped into the garden for
the thirtieth time at least, to beg that Mrs. Joyce and the young
ladies will repair to the dining-room, and be ready to set Mrs.
Peckover and her little charge quite at their ease the moment they come
in. Mrs. Joyce consents to this proposal at last, and takes his offered
arm; touching it, however, very gingerly, and looking straight before
her, while he talks, with an air of matronly dignity and virtuous
reserve. She is still convinced that Mr. Blyth's principles are
extremely loose, and treats him as she might have treated Don Juan
himself under similar circumstances.

They all go into the dining-room. Mrs. Joyce and her daughters take
their places, looking deliciously cool and neat in their bright morning
dresses. Leo drops down lazily on the rug inside the window, with a
thump of his great heavy body that makes the glasses ring. The doctor
comes in with his letters for the post, and apostrophizes Valentine
with a harmless clerical joke. Vance solemnly touches up the already
perfect arrangement of the luncheon table. The clock strikes twelve. A
faint meek ring is heard at the Rectory bell.

Vance struts slowly to the door, when--Heaven and earth! are no
conventions held sacred by these painters of pictures?--Mr. Blyth
dashes past him with a shout of "Here they are!" and flies into the
hall to answer the gate himself. Vance turns solemnly round towards his
master, trembling and purple in the face, with an appealing expression,
which says plainly enough:--"If _you_ mean to stand this sort of
outrage, sir, I beg most respectfully to inform you that _I_ don't."
The rector bursts out laughing; the young ladies follow his example;
the Newfoundland dog jumps up, and joins in with his mighty bark. Mrs.
Joyce sits silent, and looks at Vance, and sympathizes with him.

Mr. Blyth is soon heard again in the hall, talking at a prodigious
rate, without one audible word of answer proceeding from any other
voice. The door of the dining-room, which has swung to, is suddenly
pushed open, jostling the outraged Vance, who stands near it, into such
a miserably undignified position flat against the wall, that the young
ladies begin to titter behind their handkerchiefs as they look at him.
Valentine enters, leading in Mrs. Peckover and the deaf and dumb child,
with such an air of supreme happiness, that he looks absolutely
handsome for the moment. The rector, who is, in the best and noblest
sense of the word, a gentleman, receives Mrs. Peckover as politely and
cordially as he would have received the best lady in Rubbleford. Mrs.
Joyce comes forward with him, very kind too, but a little reserved in
her manner, nevertheless; being possibly apprehensive that any woman
connected with the circus must be tainted with some slight flavor of
Miss Florinda Beverley. The young ladies drop down into the most
charming positions on either side of the child, and fall straightway
into fits of ecstasy over her beauty. The dog walks up, and pokes his
great honest muzzle among them companionably. Vance stands rigid
against the wall, and disapproves strongly of the whole proceeding.

Poor Mrs. Peckover! She had never been in such a house as the Rectory,
she had never spoken to a doctor of divinity before in her life. She
was very hot and red and trembling, and made fearful mistakes in
grammar, and clung as shyly to Mr. Blyth as if she had been a little
girl. The rector soon contrived, however, to settle her comfortably in
a seat by the table. She curtseyed reverentially to Vance, as she
passed by him; doubtless under the impression that he was a second
doctor of divinity, even greater and more learned than the first. He
stared in return straight over her head, with small unwinking eyes, his
cheeks turning slowly from deep red to dense purple. Mrs. Peckover
shuddered inwardly, under the conviction that she had insulted a
dignitary, who was hoisted up on some clerical elevation, too
tremendous to be curtseyed to by such a social atom as a clown's wife.

Mrs. Joyce had to call three times to her daughters before she could
get them to the luncheon-table. If she had possessed Valentine's eye
for the picturesque and beautiful, she would certainly have been
incapable of disturbing the group which her third summons broke up.

In the center stood the deaf and dumb child, dressed in a white frock,
with a little silk mantilla over it, made from a cast-off garment
belonging to one of the ladies of the circus. She wore a plain straw
hat, ornamented with a morsel of narrow white ribbon, and tied under
the chin with the same material. Her clear, delicate complexion was
overspread by a slight rosy tinge--the tender coloring of nature,
instead of the coarsely-glaring rouge with which they disfigured her
when she appeared before the public. Her wondering blue eyes, that
looked so sad in the piercing gas-light, appeared to have lost that
sadness in the mellow atmosphere of the Rectory dining-room. The tender
and touching stillness which her affliction had cast over her face,
seemed a little at variance with its childish immaturity of feature and
roundness of form, but harmonized exquisitely with the quiet smile
which seemed habitual to her when she was happy--gratefully and
unrestrainedly happy, as she now felt among the new friends who were
receiving her, not like a stranger and an inferior, but like a younger
sister who had been long absent from them.

She stood near the window, the center figure of the group, offering a
little slate that hung by her side, with a pencil attached to it, to
the rector's eldest daughter, who was sitting at her right hand on a
stool. The second of the young ladies knelt on the other side, with
both her arms round the dog's neck; holding him back as he stood in
front of the child, so as to prevent him from licking her face, which
he had made several resolute attempts to do, from the moment when she
first entered the room. Both the Doctor's daughters were healthy, rosy
English beauties in the first bloom of girlhood; and both were attired
in the simplest and prettiest muslin dresses, very delicate in color
and pattern. Pity and admiration, mixed with some little perplexity and
confusion, gave an unusual animation to their expressions; for they
could hardly accustom themselves as yet to the idea of the poor child's
calamity. They talked to her eagerly, as if she could hear and answer
them--while she, on her part, stood looking alternately from one to the
other, watching their lips and eyes intently, and still holding out the
slate, with her innocent gesture of invitation and gentle look of
apology, for the eldest girl to write on. The varying expressions of
the three; the difference in their positions, the charming contrast
between their light, graceful figures and the bulky strength and grand
solidity of form in the noble Newfoundland dog who stood among them;
the lustrous background of lawn and flowers and trees, seen through the
open window; the sparkling purity of the sunshine which fell brightly
over one part of the group; the transparency of the warm shadows that
lay so caressingly, sometimes on a round smooth cheek, sometimes over
ringlets of glistening hair, sometimes on the crisp folds of a muslin
dress--all these accidental combinations of the moment, these natural
and elegant positions of nature's setting, these accessories of light
and shade and background garden objects beautifully and tenderly
filling up the scene, presented together a picture which it was a
luxury to be able to look on, which it seemed little short of absolute
profanation to disturb.

Mrs. Joyce, nevertheless, pitilessly disarranged it. In a moment the
living picture was destroyed; the young ladies were called to their
mother's side; the child was placed between Valentine and Mrs.
Peckover, and the important business of luncheon began in earnest.

It was wonderful to hear how Mr. Blyth talked; how he alternately
glorified the clown's wife for the punctual performance of her promise,
and appealed triumphantly to the rector to say, whether he had not
underrated rather than exaggerated little Mary's beauty. It was also
wonderful to see Mrs. Peckover's blank look of astonishment when she
found the rigid doctor of divinity, who would not so much as notice her
curtsey, suddenly relax into blandly supplying her with everything she
wanted to eat or drink. But a very much more remarkable study of human
nature than either of these, was afforded by the grimly patronizing and
profoundly puzzled aspect of Vance, as he waited, under protest, upon a
woman from a traveling circus. It is something to see the Pope serving
the Pilgrims their dinner, during the Holy Week at Rome. Even that
astounding sight, however, fades into nothing, as compared with the
sublimer spectacle of Mr. Vance waiting upon Mrs. Peckover.

The rector, who was a sharp observer in his own quiet, unobtrusive way,
was struck by two peculiarities in little Mary's behavior during lunch.
In the first place, he remarked with some interest and astonishment,
that while the clown's wife was, not unnaturally, very shy and
embarrassed in her present position, among strangers who were greatly
her social superiors, little Mary had maintained her self-possession,
and had unconsciously adapted herself to her new sphere from the moment
when she first entered the dining-room. In the second place, he
observed that she constantly nestled close to Valentine; looked at him
oftener than she looked at any one else; and seemed to be always
trying, sometimes not unsuccessfully, to guess what he was saying to
others by watching his expression, his manner, and the action of his
lips. "That child's character is no common one," thought Doctor Joyce;
"she is older at heart than she looks; and is almost as fond of Blyth
already as he is of her."

When lunch was over, the eldest Miss Joyce whispered a petition in her
mother's ear, "May Carry and I take the dear little girl out with us to
see our gardens, mamma?"

"Certainly, my love, if she likes to go. You had better ask her--Ah,
dear! dear! I forgot--I mean, write on her slate. It's so hard to
remember she's deaf and dumb, when one sees her sitting there looking
so pretty and happy. She seems to like the cake. Remind me, Emmy, to
tie some up for her in paper before she goes away."

Miss Emily and Miss Caroline went round to the child directly, and made
signs for the slate. These before the time. . .That is, these
were ready for every occasion.

6:37. And upon the beast, there were strong wooden towers which covered
every one of them: and engines upon them, and upon every one thirty-two
valiant men, who fought from above: and an Indian to rule the
beast.

6:38. And the rest of the horsemen he placed on this side and on that
side, at the two wings, with trumpets to stir up the army, and to
hasten them forward that stood thick together in the legions
thereof.

6:39.

Now when the sun shone upon the shields of gold, and of brass, the
mountains glittered therewith, and they shone like lamps of fire.

6:40. And part of the king's army was distinguished by the high mountains,
and the other part by the low places: and they marched on warily
and orderly.

6:41. And all the inhabitants of the land were moved at the noise of their
multitude, and the marching of the company, and the rattling of the
armour, for the army was exceeding great and strong.

6:42.

And Judas and his army drew near for battle: and there fell of the king's
army six hundred men.

6:43. And Eleazar, the son of Saura, saw one of the beasts harnessed with
the king's harness: and it was higher than the other beasts; and it
seemed to him that the king was on it:

6:44. And he exposed himself to deliver his people, and to get himself
an everlasting name.

6:45.

And he ran up to it boldly in the midst of the legion, killing on
the right hand, and on the left, and they fell by him on this side
and that side.

6:46.

And he went between the feet of the elephant, and put himself under it:
and slew it, and it fell to the ground upon him, and he died there.

6:47. Then they seeing the strength of the king and the fierceness of his
army, turned away from them.

6:48. But the king's army went up against them to Jerusalem: and the
king's army pitched their tents against Judea and Mount Sion.

6:49.

And he made peace with them that were in Bethsura: and they came forth
out of the city, because they had no victuals, being shut up there,
for it was the year of rest to the land.

6:50.

And the king took Bethsura: and he placed there a garrison to keep
it.

6:51. And he turned his army against the sanctuary for many days:
and he set up there battering slings, and engines, and instruments to
cast fire, and engines to cast stones and javelins, and pieces to shoot
arrows, and slings.

6:52. And they also made engines against their engines, and they
fought for many days.

6:53. But there were no victuals in the city, because it was the seventh
year: and such as had stayed in Judea of them that came from among
the nations, had eaten the residue of all that which had been stored
up.

6:54.

And there remained in the holy places but a few, for the famine had
prevailed over them: and they were dispersed every man to his own
place.

6:55.

Now Lysias heard that Philip; whom king Antiochus while he lived had
appointed to bring up his son, Antiochus, and to reign,
6:56. Was returned from Persia, and Media, with the army that went with
him and that he sought to take upon him the affairs of the kingdom:

6:57. Wherefore he made haste to go, and say to the king and to
the captains of the army: We decay daily, and our provision of
victuals is small, and the place that we lay siege to is strong, and
it lieth upon us to take order for the affairs of the kingdom.

6:58. Now, therefore, let us come to an agreement with these men, and
make peace with them and with all their nation.

6:59.

And let us covenant with them, that they may live according to their
own laws, as before. For because of our despising their laws, they
have been provoked, and have done all these things.
6:60. And the proposal was acceptable in the sight of the king, and
of the princes: and he sent to them to make peace: and they accepted
of it.
6:61. And the king and the princes swore to them: and they came out
of the strong hold.
6:62. Then the king entered into Mount Sion, and saw the strength
of the place: and he quickly broke the oath that he had taken, and
gave commandment to throw down the wall round about.
6:63. And he departed in haste and returned to Antioch, where he
found Philip master of the city: and he fought against him, and
took the city.

1 Machabees Chapter 7
Demetrius is made king, and sends Bacchides and Alcimus the priest
into Judea, and after them Nicanor, who is slain by Judas with all
his army.
7:1. In the hundred and fifty-first year, Demetrius, the son of
Seleucus, departed from the city of Rome, and came up with few men
into a city of the sea coast, and reigned there.
7:2. And it came to pass as he entered into the house of the kingdom
of his fathers, that the army seized upon Antiochus, and Lysias,
to bring them unto him.

7:3."Now, Valentine, if you don't leave off apologizing, and sit down
directly in that arm-chair against the wall, I shall take Mrs. Peckover
into my study, and hear everything she has to say, at a private
interview. There! we are all comfortable and composed again at last,
and ready to be told how little Mary and the good friend who has been
like a mother to her first met."

Thus appealed to, Mrs. Peckover began her narrative; sometimes
addressing it to the Doctor, sometimes to Mrs. Joyce, and sometimes to
Valentine. From beginning to end, she was only interrupted at rare
intervals by a word of encouragement, or sympathy, or surprise, from
her audience. Even Mr. Blyth sat most uncharacteristically still and
silent; his expression alone showing the varying influences of the
story on him, from its strange commencement to its melancholy close.


"It's better than ten years ago, sir," began the clown's wife, speaking
first to Doctor Joyce, "since my little Tommy was born; he being now,
if you please, at school and costing nothing, through a presentation,
as they call it I think, which was given us by a kind patron to my
husband. Some time after I had got well over my confinement, I was out
one afternoon taking a walk with baby and Jemmy; which last is my
husband, ma'am. We were at Bangbury, then, just putting up the circus:
it was a fine large neighborhood, and we hoped to do good business
there. Jemmy and me and the baby went out into the fields, and enjoyed
ourselves very much; it being such nice warm spring weather, though it
was March at the time. We came back to Bangbury by the road; and just
as we got near the town, we see a young woman sitting on the bank, and
holding her baby in her arms, just as I had got my baby in mine.

"'How dreadful ill and weak she do look, don't she?' says Emmy. Before
I could say as much as 'Yes,' she stares up at us, and asks in a wild
voice, though it wasn't very loud either, if we can tell her the way to
Bangbury workhouse. Having pretty sharp eyes of our own, we both of us
knew that a workhouse was no fit place for her. Her gown was very
dusty, and one of her boots was burst, and her hair was draggled all
over her face, and her eyes was sunk in her head, like; but we saw
somehow that she was a lady--or, if she wasn't exactly a lady, that no
workhouse was proper for her, at any rate. I stooped down to speak to
her; but her baby was crying so dreadful she could hardly hear me. 'Is
the poor thing ill?' says I. 'Starving,' says she, in such a desperate,
fierce way, that it gave me a turn. 'Is that your child?' says I, a bit
frightened about how she'd answer me. 'Yes,' she says in quite a new
voice, very soft and sorrowful, and bending her face away from me over
the child. 'Then why don't you suckle it?' says I. She looks up at me,
and then at Jenny and shakes her head, and says nothing. I give my baby
to Jemmy to hold, and went and sat down by her. He walked away a
little; and I whispered to her again, 'Why don't you suckle it?' and
she whispered to me, 'My milk's all dried up. I couldn't wait to hear
no more till I'd got her baby at my own breast.

"That was the first time I suckled little Mary, ma'am. She wasn't a
month old then, and oh, so weak and small! such a mite of a baby
compared to mine!

"You may be sure, sir, that I asked the young woman lots of questions,
while I was sitting side by side with her. She stared at me with a
dazed look in her face, seemingly quite stupefied by weariness or
grief, or both together. Sometimes she give me an answer and sometimes
she wouldn't. She was very secret. She wouldn't say where she come
from, or who her friends were, or what her name was. She said she
should never have name or home or friends again. I just quietly stole a
look down at her left hand, and saw that there was no wedding-ring on
her finger, and guessed what she meant. 'Does the father know you are
wandering about in this way?' says I. She flushes up directly; 'No;'
says she, 'he doesn't know where I am. He never had any love for me,
and he has no pity for me now. God's curse on him wherever he goes!'--
'Oh, hush! hush!' says I, 'don't talk like that!' 'Why do you ask me
questions?' says she more fiercely than ever. 'What business have you
to ask me questions that make me mad?' 'I've only got one more to
bother you with,' says I, quite cool; 'and that is, haven't you got any
money at all with you?' You see, ma'am, now I'd got her child at my own
bosom, I didn't care for what she said, or fear for what she might do
to me. The poor mite of a baby was sure to be a peacemaker between us,
sooner or later.

"It turned out she'd got sixpence and a few half-pence--not a farthing
more, and too proud to ask help from any one of her friends. I managed
to worm out of her that she had run away from home before her
confinement, and had gone to some strange place to be confined, where
they'd ill-treated and robbed her. She hadn't long got away from the
wretches who'd done it. By the time I'd found out all this, her baby
was quite quiet, and ready to go to sleep. I gave it her back. She said
nothing, but took and kissed my hand, her lips feeling like burning
coals on my flesh. 'You're kindly welcome,' says I, a little flustered
at such a queer way of thanking me. 'Just wait a bit while I speak to
my husband.' Though she'd been and done wrong, I couldn't for the life
of me help pitying her, for her fierce ways. She was so young, and so
forlorn and ill, and had such a beautiful face (little Mary's is the
image of it, 'specially about the eyes), and seemed so like a lady,
that it was almost a sin, as I thought, to send her to such a place as
a workhouse.

"Well: I went and told Jemmy all I had got out of her--my own baby
kicking and crowing in my arms again, as happy as a king, all the time
I was speaking. 'It seems shocking,' says I, 'to let such as her go
into a workhouse. What had we better do?'--Says Jemmy, 'Let's take her
with us to the circus and ask Peggy Burke.'

"Peggy Burke, if you please, sir, was the finest rider that ever
stepped on a horse's back. We've had nothing in our circus to come near
her, since she went to Astley's. She was the wildest devil of an Irish
girl--oh! I humbly beg your pardon, sir, for saying such a word; but
she really _was_ so wild, I hope you'll excuse it. She'd go through
fire and water, as they say, to serve people she liked; but as for them
she didn't, she'd often use her riding-whip among 'em as free as her
tongue. That cowardly brute Jubber would never have beaten my little
Mary, if Peggy had been with us still! He was so frightened of her that
she could twist him round her finger; and she did, for he dursn't
quarrel with the best rider in England, and let other circuses get hold
of her. Peggy was a wonderful sharp girl besides, and was always fond
of me, and took my part; so when Jemmy said he thought it best to ask
her what we had better do, you may be sure that I thought it best too.
We took the young woman and the baby with us to the circus at once. She
never asked any questions; she didn't seem to care where she went, or
what she did; she was dazed and desperate--a sight, Ma'am, to make your
heart ache.

"They were just getting tea in the circus, which was nearly finished.
We mostly have tea and dinner there, sir; finding it come cheaper in
the end to mess together when we can. Peggy Burke, I remember, was
walking about on the grass outside, whistling (that was one of her
queer ways) 'The girl I left behind me.' 'Ah! Peck,' says she, 'what
have you been after now? Who's the company lady ye've brought to tea
with us?' I told her, sir, all I have told you; while Jemmy set the
young woman down on one of our trunks, and got her a cup of tea. 'It
seems dreadful,' says I when I'd done, 'to send such as her to the
workhouse, don't it?' 'Workhouse!' says Peggy, firing up directly; 'I
only wish we could catch the man who's got her in that scrape, and put
him in there on water-gruel for the rest of his life. I'd give a
shillin' a wheal out of my own pocket for the blessed privilege of
scoring the thief's face with my whip, till his own mother wouldn't
know him!' And then she went on, sir, abusing all the men in her Irish
way, which I can't repeat. At last she stops, and claps me on the back.
'You're a darlin' old girl, Peck!' says she, 'and your friends are my
friends. Stop where you are, and let me speak a word to the young woman
on the trunk.'

"After a little while she comes back, and says, 'I've done it, Peck!
She's mighty close, and as proud as Lucifer; but she's only a
dressmaker, for all that.' 'A dressmaker!' says I; 'how did you find
out she was a dressmaker?' 'Why, I looked at her forefinger, in
course,' says Peggy, 'and saw the pricks of the needle on it, and soon
made her talk a bit after that. She knows fancy-work and cuttin'
out--would ye ever have thought it? And I'll show her how to give the
workhouse the go-by to-morrow, if she only holds out, and keeps in her
senses. Stop where you are, Peck! I'm going to make Jubber put his
dirty hand into his pocket and pull out some money; and that's a sight
worth stoppin' to see any day in the week.'

"I waited as she told me; and she called for Jubber, just as if he'd
been her servant; and he come out of the circus. 'I want ten shillings
advance of wages for that lady on the trunk,' says Peggy. He laughed at
her. 'Show your ugly teeth at me again,' says she, 'and I'll box your
ears. I've my light hand for a horse's mouth, and my heavy hand for a
man's cheek; you ought to know that by this time! Pull out the ten
shillings.' 'What for?' said he, frowning at her. 'Just this,' says
she. 'I mean to leave your circus, unless I get those six character
dresses you promised me; and the lady there can do them up beautiful.
Pull out the ten shillings! for I've made up my mind to appear before
the Bangbury public on Garryowen's back, as six women at once.'

"What she meant by this, sir, was, that she was to have six different
dresses on, one over another; and was to go galloping round the ring on
Garryowen (which was a horse), beginning, I think it was, as Empress of
Roossia; and then throwing off the top dress without the horse
stopping, and showing next as some famous Frenchwoman, in the dress
underneath; and keeping on so with different nations, till she got down
to the last dress, which was to be Britannia and the Union-Jack. We'd
got bits of remnants, and old dresses and things to make and alter, but
hadn't anybody clever enough at cutting out, and what they call
'Costoom,' to do what Peggy wanted--Jubber being too stingy to pay the
regular people who understand such things. The young woman, knowing as
she did about fancy work, was just what was wanted, if she could only
get well enough to use her needle. 'I'll see she works the money out,'
says Peggy; 'but she's dead beat to-night, and must have her rest and
bit o' supper, before she begins to-morrow.' Jubber wanted to give less
than ten shillings; but between threatening, and saying it should buy
twenty shillings' worth of tailor's work, she got the better of him.
And he gave the money, sulky enough.

"'Now,' says Peggy, 'you take her away, and get her a lodging in the
place where you're staying; and I'll come tomorrow with some of the
things to make up.' But, ah dear me! sir, she was never to work as much
as sixpence of that ten shillings out. She was took bad in the night,
and got so much worse in the morning that we had to send for the
doctor.

"As soon as he'd seen her, he takes me into the passage, and says he to
me, 'Do you know who her friends are?' 'No, sir,' says I; 'I can't get
her to tell me. I only met her by accident yesterday.' 'Try and find
out again,' says he; 'for I'm afraid she won't live over the night.
I'll come back in the evening and see if there is any change.'

"Peggy and me went into her room together; but we couldn't even get her
to speak to us for ever so long a time. All at once she cries out, 'I
can't see things as I ought. Where's the woman who suckled my baby when
I was alone by the roadside?' 'Here,' says I--'here; I've got hold of
your hand. Do tell us where we can write to about you.' 'Will you
promise to take care of my baby, and not let it go into the workhouse?'
says she. 'Yes, I promise,' says I; 'I do indeed promise with my whole
heart.' 'We'll all take care of the baby,' says Peggy; 'only you try
and cheer up, and you'll get well enough to see me on Garryowen's back,
before we leave Bangbury--you will for certain, if you cheer up a bit.'
'I give my baby,' she says, clutching tight at my hand, 'to the woman
who suckled it by the roadside; and I pray God to bless _her_ and
forgive _me,_ for Jesus Christ's sake.' After that, she lay quiet for a
minute or two. Then she says faintly, 'Its name's to be Mary. Put it
into bed to me again; I should like to touch its cheek, and feel how
soft and warm it is once more.' And I took the baby out of its crib,
and lifted it, asleep as it was, into the bed by her side, and guided
her hand up to its cheek. I saw her lips move a little, and bent down
over her. 'Give me one kiss,' she whispered, 'before I die.' And I
kissed her, and tried to stop crying as I did it. Then I says to Peggy,
'You wait here while I run and fetch the doctor back; for I'm afraid
she's going fast.' He wasn't at home when I got to his house. I did'n't
know what to do next, when I see a gentleman in the street who looked
like a clergyman, and I asked him if he was one; and he said 'Yes;' and
he went back with me. I heard a low wailing and crying in the room, and
saw Peggy sitting on the bundle of dresses she'd brought in the
morning, rocking herself backwards and forwards as Irish people always
do when they're crying. I went to the bed, and looked through the
curtains. The baby was still sleeping as pretty as ever, and its
mother's hand was touching one of its arms. I was just going to speak
to her again, when the clergyman said 'Hush,' and took a bit of
looking-glass that was set up on the chimney-piece, and held it over
her lips. She was gone. Her poor white wasted hand lay dead on the
living baby's arm.

"I answered all the clergyman's questions quite straightforward,
telling him everything I knew from beginning to end. When I'd done,
Peggy starts up from the bundle and says, 'Mind, sir, whatever you do,
the child's not to be took away from this person here, and sent to the
workhouse. The mother give it to her on that very bed, and I'm a
witness of it.' 'And I promised to be a mother to the baby, sir,' says
I. He turns round to me, and praises me for what I done, and says
nobody shall take it away from me, unless them as can show their right
comes forward to claim it. 'But now,' says he, 'we must think of other
things. We must try and find out something about this poor woman who
has died in such a melancholy way.'

"It was easier to say that than to do it. The poor thing had nothing
with her but a change of linen for herself and the child, and that gave
us no clue. Then we searched her pocket. There was a cambric
handkerchief in it, marked 'M. G.;' and some bits of rusks to sop for
the child; and the sixpence and halfpence which she had when I met her;
and beneath all, in a corner, as if it had been forgotten there, a
small hair bracelet. It was made of two kinds of hair--very little of
one kind, and a good deal of the other. And on the flat clasp of the
bracelet there was cut in tiny letters, _'In memory of S. G.'_ I
remember all this, sir, for I've often and often looked at the bracelet
since that time.

"We found nothing more--no letters, or cards, or anything. The
clergyman said that the 'M. G.' on the handkerchief must be the
initials of her name; and the 'S. G.' on the bracelet must mean, he
thought, some relation whose hair she wore as a sort of keepsake. I
remember Peggy and me wondering which was S. G.'s hair; and who the
other person might be, whose hair was wove into the bracelet. But the
clergyman he soon cut us short by asking for pen, ink, and paper
directly. Rather say, perhaps My place of refuge will receive me
soon.
Could I extend it even to thy crimes, It should be open; but the wrath
of heaven Turns them against thee, and subverts thy sway:
It leaves thee not, what wickedness and woe Oft in their drear communion
taste together, Hope and repentance.

ROD.

But it leaves me arms, Vigour of soul and body, and a race Subject by
law, and dutiful by choice, Whose hand is never to be holden fast
Within the closing cleft of gnarled creeds; No easy prey for these vile
mitred Moors.
I, who received thy homage, may retort Thy threats, vain prelate, and
abase thy pride.

OPAS. Low must be those whom mortal can sink lower, Nor high are
they whom human power may raise.

ROD. Judge now: for, hear the signal.

OPAS. And derides The buoyant heart the dubious gulfs of war?
Trumpets may sound, and not to victory.

ROD. The traitor and his daughter feel my power.

OPAS. Just God! avert it!

ROD. Seize this rebel priest.
I will alone subdue my enemies. [Goes out.

THIRD ACT: SECOND SCENE.

RAMIRO and OSMA enter from opposite sides.

RAM. Where is the king? his car is at the gate, His ministers attend
him, but his foes Are yet more prompt, nor will await delay.

OSMA. Nor need they--for he meets them as I speak.

RAM. With all his forces? or our cause is lost.
Julian and Sisabert surround the walls.

OSMA. Surround, sayst thou? enter they not the gates?

RAM. Perhaps ere now they enter.

OSMA. Sisabert Brings him our prisoner.

RAM. They are friends! they held A parley; and the soldiers, when they
saw Count Julian, lowered their arms and hailed him king?

OSMA. How? and he leads them in the name of king?

RAM. He leads them; but amid that acclamation He turned away his head,
and called for vengeance.

OSMA. In Sisabert, and in the cavalry He led, were all our hopes.

OPAS. Woe, woe is theirs Who have no other.

OSMA.

What are thine? obey The just commands of our offended king:
Conduct him to the tower--off--instantly.
[Guard hesitates: OPAS goes.

Ramiro, let us haste to reinforce - 
RAM.

Hark! is the king defeated?

hark!

OSMA. I hear Such acclamation as from victory Arises not, but rather from
revolt, Reiterated, interrupted, lost.
Favour like this his genius will retrieve By time, or promises,
or chastisement, Whiche'er line choose--the speediest is the
best - His danger and his glory let us share; 'Tis ours to serve
him.

RAM. While he rules 'tis ours.
What chariot-wheels are thundering o'er the bridge?

OSMA. Roderigo's--I well know them.

RAM. Now, the burst Of acclamation! now! again, again.

OSMA. I know the voices; they are for Roderigo.

RAM. Stay, I entreat thee--one hath now prevailed.
So far is certain.

OSMA. Ay, the right prevails.

RAM.

Transient and vain their joyance, who rejoice Precipitately and
intemperately, And bitter thoughts grow up where'er it fell.

OSMA. Nor vain and transient theirs, who idly float Down popularity's
unfertile stream, And fancy all their own that rises round?

RAM. If thou still lovest, as I know thou dost, Thy king -
OSMA. I love him; for he owes me much, Brave soul! and cannot, though
he would, repay.
Service and faith, pure faith and service hard, Throughout his reign,
if these things be desert, These have I borne toward him, and still
bear.

RAM. Come, from thy solitary eiry come, And share the prey, so plenteous
and profuse, Which a less valorous brood will else consume.
Much fruit is shaken down in civil storms:
And shall not orderly and loyal hands Gather it up? (Loud shouts.)
Again! and still refuse?
How different are those citizens without From thee! from thy
serenity! thy arch, Thy firmament, of intrepidity!
For their new lord, whom they have never served, Afraid were they
to shout, and only struck The pavement with their ferrules and
their feet:
Now they are certain of the great event Voices and hands they raise,
and all contend Who shall be bravest in applauding most.

Knowest thou these?

OSMA. Their voices I know well - And can they shout for him they would
have slain?
A prince untried they welcome; soon their doubts Are blown afar.

RAM. Yes, brighter scenes arise.
The disunited he alone unites, The weak with hope he strengthens, and
the strong With justice.

OSMA. Wait: praise him when time hath given A soundness and consistency
to praise:
He shares it amply who bestows it right.

RAM. Doubtest thou?

OSMA. Be it so: let us away; New courtiers come -
RAM. And why not join the new?
Let us attend him, and congratulate; Come on: they enter.

OSMA. This is now my post No longer: I could face them in the field, I
cannot here.

RAM. To-morrow all may change; Be comforted.

OSMA. I want nor change nor comfort.

RAM. The prisoner's voice!

OSMA. The metropolitan's?
Triumph he may--not over me forgiven.
This way, and through the chapel--none are there.
[Goes out.

THIRD ACT: THIRD SCENE.

OPAS and SISABERT.

OPAS. The royal threat still sounds along these halls:
Hardly his foot hath passed them, and he flees From his own treachery;
all his pride, his hopes, Are scattered at a breath; even courage
fails Now falsehood sinks from under him.

Behold, Again art thou where reigned thy ancestors; Behold the chapel of
thy earliest prayers, Where I, whose chains are sundered at thy sight
Ere they could close around these aged limbs, Received and blest thee,
when thy mother's arm Was doubtful if it loosed thee! with delight
Have I observed the promises we made Deeply impressed and manfully
performed.
Now, to thyself beneficent, O prince, Never henceforth renew those weak
complaints Against Covilla's vows and Julian's faith, His honour
broken, and her heart estranged.

Oh, if thou holdest peace or glory dear, Away with jealousy; brave
Sisabert, Smite from thy bosom, smite that scorpion down.
It swells and hardens amid mildewed hopes, O'erspreads and blackens
whate'er most delights, And renders us haters of loveliness, The lowest
of the fiends: ambition led The higher on, furious to dispossess,
From admiration sprung and frenzied love.
This disingenuous soul-debasing passion, Rising from abject and most
sordid fear, Stings her own breast with bitter self-reproof,
Consumes the vitals, pines, and never dies.

Love, Honour, Justice, numberless the forms, Glorious and high the
stature, she assumes; But watch the wandering changeful mischief
well, And thou shalt see her with low lurid light Search where the
soul's most valued treasure lies, Or, more embodied to our vision,
stand With evil eye, and sorcery hers alone, Looking away her helpless
progeny, And drawing poison from its very smiles.
For Julian's truth have I not pledged my own?
Have I not sworn Covilla weds no other?

SIS. Her persecutor have not I chastised?
Have not I fought for Julian, won the town, And liberated
thee?

OPAS. But left for him The dangers of pursuit, of ambuscade, Of absence
from thy high and splendid name.

SIS. Do probity and truth want such supports?

OPAS. Griffins and eagles, ivory and gold, Can add no clearness
to the lamp above; But many look for them in palaces Who have them not,
and want them not, at home.

Virtue and valour and experience Are never trusted by themselves
alone Further than infancy and idiocy:
The men around him, not the man himself, Are looked at, and by these
is he preferred.

'Tis the green mantle of the warrener And his loud whistle, that
alone attract The lofty gazes of the noble herd:
And thus, without thy countenance and help Feeble and faint is still
our confidence, Brief perhaps our success.

SIS. Should I resign To Abdalazis her I once adored?
He truly, he must wed a Spanish queen!
He rule in Spain! ah! whom could any land Obey so gladly as the meek,
the humble, The friend of all who have no friend besides, Covilla!
could he choose, or could he find Another who might so confirm his
power?

And now indeed from long domestic wars Who else survives of all our
ancient house -
OPAS. But Egilona.

SIS. Vainly she upbraids Roderigo.

OPAS. She divorces him, abjures, And carries vengeance to that hideous
height Which piety and chastity would shrink To look from, on the
world, or on themselves.

SIS. She may forgive him yet.

OPAS. Ah, Sisabert!
Wretched are those a woman has forgiven:
With her forgiveness ne'er hath love returned.
Ye know not till too late the filmy tie That holds heaven's precious boon
eternally To such as fondly cherish her; once go Driven by mad passion,
strike but at her peace, And, though she step aside from broad
reproach, Yet every softer virtue dies away.
Beaming with virtue inaccessible Stood Egilona; for her lord she
lived, And for the heavens that raised her sphere so high:
All thoughts were on her--all, beside her own.

Negligent as the blossoms of the field, Arrayed in candour and
simplicity, Before her path she heard the streams of joy Murmur her
name in all their cadences, Saw them in every scene, in light, in
shade, Reflect her image; but acknowledged them Hers most complete when
flowing from her most.
All things in want of her, herself of none, Pomp and dominion lay beneath
her feet Unfelt and unregarded: now behold The earthly
passions war against the heavenly!
Pride against love, ambition and revenge Against devotion and compliancy:

Her glorious beams adversity hath blunted; And coming nearer to our
quiet view The original clay of coarse mortality Hardens and flaws
around her.

SIS. Every germ Of virtue perishes, when love recedes From those hot
shifting sands, the female heart.

OPAS. His was the fault; be his the punishment 'Tis not their own crimes
only, men commit, They harrow them into another's breast, And they
shall reap the bitter growth with pain.

SIS. Yes, blooming royalty will first attract These creatures of the
desert--now I breathe More freely--she is theirs if I pursue The fugitive
again--he well deserves The death he flies from--stay!

Don Julian twice Called him aloud, and he, methinks, replied.
Could not I have remained a moment more, And seen the end? although with
hurried voice He bade me intercept the scattered foes, And hold the
city barred to their return.
May Egilona be another's wife Whether he die or live! but oh!--Covilla
- She never can be mine! yet she may be Still happy--no, Covilla, no--not
happy, But more deserving happiness without it.
Mine never! nor another's--'tis enough.
The tears I shed no rival can deride; In the fond intercourse, a name
once cherished Will never be defended by faint smiles, Nor given
up with vows of altered love.

And is the passion of my soul at last Reduced to this? is this my
happiness?
This my sole comfort? this the close of all Those promises, those tears,
those last adieus, And those long vigils for the morrow's dawn?

OPAS. Arouse thee! be thyself. O Sisabert, Awake to glory from these
feverish dreams:
The enemy is in our land--two enemies - We must quell both--shame on
us, if we fail.

SIS. Incredible! a nation be subdued Peopled as ours!

OPAS. Corruption may subvert What force could never.

SIS. Traitors may.

OPAS. Alas If traitors can, the basis is but frail.
I mean such traitors as the vacant world Echoes most stunningly: not
fur-robed knaves Whose whispers raise the dreaming bloodhound's ear
Against benighted famished wanderers; While with remorseless guilt
they undermine Palace and shed, their very father's house, O blind!
their own, their children's heritage, To leave more ample space for
fearful wealth.
Plunder in some most harmless guise they swathe, Call it some very meek
and hallowed name, Some known and borne by their good forefathers,
And own and vaunt it thus redeemed from sin.
These are the plagues heaven sends o'er every land Before it sink, the
portents of the street, Not of the air, lest nations should complain
Of distance or of dimness in the signs, Flaring from far to Wisdom's
eye alone:
These are the last! these, when the sun rides high, In the forenoon of
doomsday, revelling, Make men abhor the earth, arraign the skies.

Ye who behold them spoil field after field, Despising them in individual
strength, Not with one torrent sweeping them away Into the ocean of
eternity, Arise! despatch! no renovating gale, No second spring
awaits you--up, begone - If you have force and courage even for
flight - The blast of dissolution is behind.

SIS. How terrible! how true! what voice like thine Can rouse and
warn the nation! if she rise, Say, whither go, where stop we?

OPAS. God will guide.
Let us pursue the oppressor to destruction; The rest is heaven's:
must we move no step Because we cannot see the boundaries Of our
long way, and every stone between?

SIS. Is not thy vengeance for the late affront, For threats and outrage
and imprisonment -
OPAS. For outrage, yes--imprisonment and threats I pardon him, and
whatsoever ill He could do ME.

SIS. To hold Covilla from me!

To urge her into vows against her faith, Against her beauty, youth,
and inclination, Without her mother's blessing, nay without Her
father's knowledge and authority - So that she never will behold me
more, Flying afar for refuge and for help Where never friend but God
will comfort her -
OPAS. These, and more barbarous deeds were perpetrated.

SIS. Yet her proud father deigned not to inform Me, whom he loved and
taught, in peace and war, Me, whom he called his son, before I
hoped To merit it by marriage or by arms.
He offered no excuse, no plea; expressed No sorrow; but with firm
unfaltering voice Commanded me--I trembled as he spoke - To follow where
he led, redress his wrongs, And vindicate the honour of his child.
He called on God, the witness of his cause, On Spain, the partner
of his victories, And yet amid these animating words Rolled the
huge tear down his unvisored face - A general swell of indignation
rose Through the long line, sobs burst from every breast, Hardly
one voice succeeded--you might hear The impatient hoof strike the
soft sandy plain:
But when the gates flew open, and the king In his high car came
forth triumphantly, Then was Count Julian's stature more elate;
Tremendous was the smile that smote the eyes Of all he passed.

"Fathers, sons, and brothers," He cried, "I fight your battles, follow
me!
Soldiers, we know no danger but disgrace!" "Father, and general, and
king," they shout, And would proclaim him: back he cast his face,
Pallid with grief, and one loud groan burst forth; It kindled vengeance
through the Asturian ranks, And they soon scattered, as the blasts of
heaven Scatter the leaves and dust, the astonished foe.

OPAS. And doubtest thou his truth?

SIS. I love--and doubt - Fight--and believe: Roderigo spoke untruths -
In him I place no trust; but Julian holds Truths in reserve--how
should I quite confide!

OPAS. By sorrows thou beholdest him oppressed; Doubt the more prosperous:
march, Sisabert, Once more against his enemy and ours:
Much hath been done, but much there still remains.

FOURTH ACT.--FIRST SCENE.

Tent of JULIAN.
RODERIGO and JULIAN.
JUL. To stop perhaps at any wickedness Appears a merit now, and at
the time Prudence and policy it often is Which afterward seems
magnanimity.
The people had deserted thee, and thronged My standard, had I raised
it, at the first; But once subsiding, and no voice of mine Calling
by name each grievance to each man, They, silent and submissive by
degrees, Bore thy hard yoke, and, hadst thou but oppressed, Would
still have borne it: thou hast now deceived; Thou hast done all a
foreign foe could do, And more, against them; with ingratitude Not
hell itself could arm the foreign foe:
'Tis forged at home, and kills not from afar.
Amid whate'er vain glories fell upon Thy rainbow span of power,
which I dissolve, Boast not how thou conferredst wealth and rank,
How thou preservedst me, my family, All my distinctions, all my
offices, When Witiza was murdered, that I stand Count Julian at
this hour by special grace.
The sword of Julian saved the walls of Ceuta, And not the shadow
that attends his name:
It was no badge, no title, that o'erthrew Soldier, and steed, and
engine--Don Roderigo, The truly and the falsely great here differ:
These by dull wealth or daring fraud advance; Him the Almighty calls
amid his people To sway the wills and passions of mankind.
The weak of heart and intellect beheld Thy splendour, and adored
thee lord of Spain:
I rose--Roderigo lords o'er Spain no more.
ROD. Now to a traitor's add a boaster's name.
JUL. Shameless and arrogant, dost thou believe I boast for pride
or pastime? forced to boast, Truth costs me more than falsehood
e'er cost thee.
Divested of that purple of the soul, That potency, that palm of
wise ambition, Cast headlong by thy madness from that height, That
only eminence 'twixt earth and heaven, Virtue, which some desert,
but none despise, Whether thou art beheld again on earth, Whether
a captive or a fugitive, Miner or galley-slave, depends on me:
But he alone who made me what I am Can make me greater, or can make
me less.
ROD. Chance, and chance only, threw me in thy power; Give me my
sword again and try my strength.
JUL. I tried it in the front of thousands.
ROD. Death At least vouchsafe me from a soldier's hand.
JUL. I love to hear thee ask for it--now my own Would not be bitter;
no, nor immature.

ROD. Defy it, say thou rather.
JUL. Death itself Shall not be granted thee, unless from God; A
dole from his and from no other hand.
Thou shalt now hear and own thine infamy -
ROD. Chains, dungeons, tortures--but I hear no more.
JUL. Silence, thou wretch, live on--ay, live--abhorred.
Thou shalt have tortures, dungeons, chains, enough - They naturally
rise and grow around Monsters like thee, everywhere, and for
ever.
ROD. Insulter of the fallen! must I endure Commands as well as
threats? my vassal's too?
Nor breathe from underneath his trampling feet?
JUL. Could I speak patiently who speak to thee, I would say more--part
of thy punishment It should be to be taught.
ROD. Reserve thy wisdom Until thy patience come, its best ally:
I learn no lore, of peace or war, from thee.
JUL. No, thou shalt study soon another tongue, And suns more ardent
shall mature thy mind.
Either the cross thou bearest, and thy knees Among the silent caves
of Palestine Wear the sharp flints away with midnight prayer; Or
thou shalt keep the fasts of Barbary, Shalt wait amid the crowds
that throng the well From sultry noon till the skies fade again,
To draw up water and to bring it home In the cracked gourd of some
vile testy knave, Who spurns thee back with bastinadoed foot For
ignorance or delay of his command.
ROD. Rather the poison or the bowstring.
JUL. Slaves To other's passions die such deaths as those:
Slaves to their own should die - 
ROD. What worse?
JUL. Their own.

ROD. Is this thy counsel, renegade?
JUL. Not mine; I point a better path, nay, force thee on.
I shelter thee from every brave man's sword While I am near thee:
I bestow on thee Life: if thou die, 'tis when thou sojournest
Protected by this arm and voice no more; 'Tis slavishly, 'tis
ignominiously, 'Tis by a villain's knife.

ROD. By whose?
JUL. Roderigo's.
ROD. O powers of vengeance! must I hear? endure?
Live?
JUL. Call thy vassals? no! then wipe the drops Of froward childhood
from thy shameless eyes.
So! thou canst weep for passion--not for pity.
ROD. One hour ago I ruled all Spain! a camp Not larger than a
sheepfold stood alone Against me: now, no friend throughout the
world Behold the turns of fortune, and expect Follows my steps or
hearkens to my call.
No better; of all faithless men, the Moors Are the most faithless:
from thy own experience Thou canst not value nor rely on them.
JUL. I value not the mass that makes my sword, Yet while I use it
I rely on it.
Rod. Julian, thy gloomy soul still meditates - Plainly I see it--death
to me--pursue The dictates of thy leaders, let revenge Have its
full sway, let Barbary prevail, And the pure creed her elders have
embraced:
Those placid sages hold assassination A most compendious supplement
to law.
JUL. Thou knowest not the one, nor I the other, Torn hast thou from
me all my soul held dear!
Her form, her voice, all, hast thou banished from me; Nor dare I,
wretched as I am! recall Those solaces of every grief, erewhile.
I stand abased before insulting crime - I falter like a criminal
myself.
The hand that hurled thy chariot o'er its wheels, That held thy
steeds erect and motionless As molten statues on some palace-gates,
Shakes, as with palsied age, before thee now.
Gone is the treasure of my heart, for ever, Without a father, mother,
friend, or name.
Daughter of Julian--such was her delight - Such was mine too! what
pride more innocent, What, surely, less deserving pangs like these,
Than springs from filial and parental love!
Debarred from every hope that issues forth To meet the balmy breath
of early life, Her saddened days, all, cold and colourless, Will
stretch before her their whole weary length Amid the sameness of
obscurity.
She wanted not seclusion, to unveil Her thoughts to heaven, cloister,
nor midnight bell; She found it in all places, at all hours:
While, to assuage my labours, she indulged A playfulness that shunned
a mother's eye, Still, to avert my perils, there arose A piety that,
even from ME, retired.
ROD. Such was she! what am I! those are the arms That are triumphant
when the battle fails.
O Julian, Julian! all thy former words Struck but the imbecile
plumes of vanity; These, through its steely coverings, pierce the
heart.
I ask not life nor death; but, if I live, Send my most bitter enemy
to watch My secret paths, send poverty, send pain - I will add
more--wise as thou art, thou knowest No foe more furious than
forgiven kings.
I ask not then what thou wouldst never grant:
May heaven, O Julian, from thy hand receive A pardoned man, a
chastened criminal.
JUL. This further curse hast thou inflicted; wretch, I cannot pardon
thee.

ROD. Thy tone, thy mien, Refute those words.'The shock of
that fall has, I believe, paralyzed the auditory nerve in her, as it
did in him.' I remember those words exactly, sir, though I didn't quite
understand them at the time. But he explained himself to me very
kindly; telling me over again, in a plain way, what he'd just told the
doctor. He reminded me, too, that the remedies which had been already
tried had been of no use; and told me I might feel sure that any others
would only end in the same way, and put her to useless pain into the
bargain. 'I hope,' says he, 'the poor child is too young to suffer much
mental misery under her dreadful misfortune. Keep her amused, and keep
her talking, if you possibly can--though I doubt very much whether, in
a little time, you won't fail completely in getting her to speak at
all.'

"'Don't say that, sir,' says I; 'don't say she'll be dumb as well as
deaf; it's enough to break one's heart only to think of it.' 'But I
_must_ say so,' says he; 'for I'm afraid it's the truth.' And then he
asks me whether I hadn't noticed already that she was unwilling to
speak; and that, when she did speak, her voice wasn't the same voice it
used to be. I said 'Yes,' to that; and asked him whether the fall had
had anything to do with it. He said, taking me up very short, it had
everything to do with it, because the fall had made her, what they
call, stone deaf, which prevented her from hearing the sound of her own
voice. So it was changed, he told me, because she had no ear now to
guide herself by in speaking, and couldn't know in the least whether
the few words she said were spoken soft or loud, or deep or clear. 'So
far as the poor child herself is concerned,' says he, 'she might as
well be without a voice at all; for she has nothing but her memory left
to tell her that she has one.'

"I burst out a-crying as he said this; for somehow I'd never thought of
anything so dreadful before. 'I've been a little too sudden in telling
you the worst, haven't I?' says the old gentleman kindly; 'but you must
be taught how to make up your mind to meet the full extent of this
misfortune for the sake of the child, whose future comfort and
happiness depend greatly on you.' And then he bid me keep up her
reading and writing, and force her to use her voice as much as I could,
by every means in my power. He told me I should find her grow more and
more unwilling to speak every day, just for the shocking reason that
she couldn't hear a single word she said, or a single tone of her own
voice. He warned me that she was already losing the wish and the want
to speak; and that it would very soon be little short of absolute pain
to her to be made to say even a few words; but he begged and prayed me
not to let my good nature get the better of my prudence on that
account, and not to humor her, however I might feel tempted to do
so--for if I did, she would be dumb as well as deaf most certainly. He
told me my own common sense would show me the reason why; but I suppose
I was too distressed or too stupid to understand things as I ought. He
had to explain it to me in so many words, that if she wasn't constantly
exercised in speaking, she would lose her power of speech altogether,
for want of practice--just the same as if she'd been born dumb. 'So,
once again,' says he, 'mind you make her use her voice. Don't give her
her dinner, unless she asks for it. Treat her severely in that way,
poor little soul, because it's for her own good.'

"It was all very well for _him_ to say that, but it was impossible for
_me_ to do it. The dear child, ma'am, seemed to get used to her
misfortune, except when we tried to make her speak. It was the saddest,
prettiest sight in the world to see how patiently and bravely she bore
with her hard lot from the first. As she grew better in her health, she
kept up her reading and writing quite cleverly with my husband and me;
and all her nice natural cheerful ways come back to her just the same
as ever. I've read or heard somewhere, sir, about God's goodness in
tempering the wind to the shorn lamb. I don't know who said that first;
but it might well have been spoken on account of my own darling little
Mary, in those days. Instead of us being the first to comfort her, it
was she that was first to comfort us. And so she's gone on ever
since--bless her heart! Only treat her kindly, and, in spite of her
misfortune, she's the merriest, happiest little thing--the easiest
pleased and amused, I do believe, that ever lived.

"If we were wrong in not forcing her to speak more than we did, I must
say this much for me and my husband, that we hadn't the heart to make
her miserable and keep on tormenting her from morning to night, when
she was always happy and comfortable if we would only let her alone. We
tried our best for some time to do what the gentleman told us; but it's
so hard--as you've found I dare say, ma'am--not to end by humoring them
you love! I never see the tear in her eye, except when we forced her to
speak to us; and then she always cried, and was fretful and out of
sorts for the whole day. It seemed such a dreadful difficulty and pain
to her to say only two or three words; and the shocking husky moaning
voice that sounded somehow as if it didn't belong to her, never
changed. My husband first gave up worrying her to speak. He practiced
her with her book and writing, but let her have her own will in
everything else; and he teached her all sorts of tricks on the cards,
for amusement, which was a good way of keeping her going with her
reading and her pen pleasantly, by reason, of course, of him and her
being obliged to put down everything they had to say to each other on a
little slate that we bought for her after she got well.

"It was Mary's own notion, if you please, ma'am, to have the slate
always hanging at her side. Poor dear! she thought it quite a splendid
ornament, and was as proud of it as could be. Jemmy, being neat-handed
at such things, did the frame over for her prettily with red morocco,
and got our propertyman to do it all round with a bright golden border.
And then we hung it at her side, with a nice little bit of silk
cord--just as you see it now.

"I held out in making her speak some time after my husband: but at last
I gave in too. I know it was wrong and selfish of me; but I got a fear
that she wouldn't like me as well as she used to do, and would take
more kindly to Jemmy than to me, if I went on. Oh, how happy she was
the first day I wrote down on her slate that I wouldn't worry her about
speaking any more! She jumped up on my knees--being always as nimble as
a squirrel--and kissed me over and over again with all her heart. For
the rest of the day she run about the room, and all over the house,
like a mad thing, and when Jemmy came home at night from performing,
she would get out of bed and romp with him, and ride pickaback on him,
and try and imitate the funny faces she'd seen him make in the ring. I
do believe, sir, that was the first regular happy night we had all had
together since the dreadful time when she met with her accident.

"Long after that, my conscience was uneasy though, at times, about
giving in as I had. At last I got a chance of speaking to another
doctor about little Mary; and he told me that if we had kept her up in
her speaking ever so severely, it would still have been a pain and a
difficulty to her to say her words, to her dying day. He said too, that
he felt sure--though he couldn't explain it to me--that people
afflicted with such stone deafness as hers didn't feel the loss of
speech, because they never had the want to use their speech; and that
they took to making signs, and writing, and such like, quite kindly as
a sort of second nature to them. This comforted me, and settled my mind
a good deal. I hope in God what the gentleman said was true; for if I
was in fault in letting her have her own way and be happy, it's past
mending by this time. For more than two years, ma'am, I've never heard
her say a single word, no more than if she'd been born dumb, and it's
my belief that all the doctors in the world couldn't make her speak
now.

"Perhaps, sir, you might wish to know how she first come to show her
tricks on the cards in the circus. There was no danger in her doing
that, I know--and yet I'd have given almost everything I have, not to
let her be shown about as she is. But I was threatened again, in the
vilest, wickedest way--I hardly know how to tell it, gentlemen, in the
presence of such as you--Jubber, you must know--"


Just as Mrs. Peckover, with very painful hesitation, pronounced the
last words, the hall clock of the Rectory struck two. She heard it, and
stopped instantly.

"Oh, if you please, sir, was that two o'clock?" she asked, starting up
with a look of alarm.

"Yes, Mrs. Peckover," said the rector; "but really, after having been
indebted to you for so much that has deeply interested and affected us,
we can't possibly think of letting you and little Mary leave the
Rectory yet."

"Indeed we must, sir; and many thanks to you for wanting to keep us
longer," said Mrs. Peckover. "What I was going to say isn't much; it's
quite as well you shouldn't hear it--and indeed, indeed, ma'am, we must
go directly. I told this gentleman here, Mr. Blyth, when I come in,
that I'd stolen to you unawares, under pretense of taking little Mary
out for a walk. If we are not back to the two o'clock dinner in the
circus, it's unknown what Jubber may not do. This gentleman will tell
you how infamously he treated the poor child last night--we must go,
sir, for her sake; or else--"

"Stop!" cried Valentine, all his suppressed excitability bursting
bounds in an instant, as he took Mrs. Peckover by the arm, and pressed
her back into her chair. "Stop!--hear me; I must speak, or I shall go
out of my senses! Don't interrupt me, Mrs. Peckover; and don't get up.
All I want to say is this: you must never take that little angel of a
child near Jubber again--no, never! By heavens! if I thought he was
likely to touch her any more, I should go mad, and murder him!--Let me
alone, doctor! I beg Mrs. Joyce's pardon for behaving like this; I'll
never do it again. Be quiet, all of you! I must take the child home
with me--oh, Mrs. Peckover, don't, don't say no! I'll make her as happy
as the day is long. I've no child of my own: I'll watch over her, and
love her, and teach her all my life. I've got a poor, suffering,
bedridden wife at home, who would think such a companion as little Mary
the greatest blessing God could send her. My own dear, patient Lavvie!
Oh, doctor, doctor! think how kind Lavvie would be to that afflicted
little child; and try if you can't make Mrs. Peckover consent. I can't
speak any more--I know I'm wrong to burst out in this way; and I beg
all your pardons for it, I do indeed! Speak to her, doctor--pray speak
to her directly, if you don't want to make me miserable for the rest of
my life!"

With those words, Valentine darted precipitately into the garden, and
made straight for the spot where the little girls were still sitting
together in their shady resting-place among the trees.


CHAPTER VI.

MADONNA GOES TO LONDON.

The clown's wife had sat very pale and very quiet under the whole
overwhelming torrent of Mr. Blyth's apostrophes, exclamations, and
entreaties. She seemed quite unable to speak, after he was fairly gone;
and only looked round in a bewildered manner at the rector, with fear
as well as amazement expressed vividly in her hearty, healthy face.

"Pray compose yourself, Mrs. Peckover," said Doctor Joyce; "and kindly
give me your best attention to what I am about to say. Let me beg you,
in the first place, to excuse Mr. Blyth's odd behavior, which I see has
startled and astonished you. But, however wildly he may talk, I assure
you he means honorably and truthfully in all that he says. You will
understand this better if you will let me temperately explain to you
the proposal, which he has just made so abruptly and confusedly in his
own words."

"Proposal, sir!" exclaimed Mrs. Peckover faintly, looking more
frightened than ever--"Proposal! Oh, sir! you don't mean to say that
you're going to ask me to part from little Mary?"

"I will ask you to do nothing that your own good sense and kind heart
may not approve," answered the rector. "In plain terms then, and not to
waste time by useless words of preface, my friend, Mr. Blyth, feels
such admiration for your little Mary, and such a desire to help her, as
far as may be, in her great misfortune, that he is willing and eager to
make her future prospects in life his own peculiar care, by adopting
her as his daughter. This offer, though coming, as I am aware, from a
perfect stranger, can hardly astonish you, I think, if you reflect on
the unusually strong claims which the child has to the compassion and
kindness of all her fellow-creatures. Other strangers, as you have told
us, have shown the deepest interest in her on many occasions. It is not
therefore at all wonderful that a gentleman, whose Christian integrity
of motive I have had opportunities of testing during a friendship of
nearly twenty years, should prove the sincerity of his sympathy for the
poor child, by such a proposal as I have now communicated to you."

"Don't ask me to say yes to it, sir!" pleaded Mrs. Peckover, with tears
in her eyes. "Don't ask me to do that! Anything else to prove my
gratitude for your kindness to us; but how can I part from my own
little Mary? You can't have the heart to ask it of me!"

"I have the heart, Mrs. Peckover, to feel deeply for your distress at
the idea of parting from the child; but, for her sake, I must again ask
you to control your feelings. And, more than that, I must appeal to you
by your love to her, to grant a fair hearing to the petition which I
now make on Mr. Blyth's behalf."

"I would, indeed, if I could, sir,--but it's just because I love her
so, that I can't! Besides, as you yourself said, he's a perfect
stranger."

"I readily admit the force of that objection on your part, Mrs.
Peckover; but let me remind you, that I vouch for the uprightness of
his character, and his fitness to be trusted with the child, after
twenty years' experience of him. You may answer to that, that I am a
stranger, too; and I can only ask you, in return, frankly to accept my
character and position as the best proofs I can offer you that I am not
unworthy of your confidence. If you placed little Mary for instruction
(as you well might) in an asylum for the deaf and dumb, you would be
obliged to put implicit trust in the authorities of that asylum, on
much the same grounds as those I now advance to justify you in putting
trust in me."

"Oh, sir! don't think--pray don't think I am unwilling to trust you--so
kind and good as you have been to us to-day--and a clergyman too--I
should be ashamed of myself, if I could doubt--"

"Let me tell you, plainly and candidly, what advantages to the child
Mr. Blyth's proposal holds out. He has no family of his own, and his
wife is, as he has hinted to you, an invalid for life. If you could
only see the gentleness and sweet patience with which she bears her
affliction, you would acknowledge that little Mary could appeal for an
affectionate welcome to no kinder heart than Mrs. Blyth's. I assure you
most seriously, that the only danger I fear for the child in my
friend's house, is that she would be spoilt by excessive indulgence.
Though by no means a rich man, Mr. Blyth is in an independent position,
and can offer her all the comforts of life. In one word, the home to
which he is ready to take her, is a home of love and happiness and
security, in the best and purest meaning of those words."

"Don't say any more, sir! Don't break my heart by making me part with
her!"

"You will live, Mrs. Peckover, to thank me for trying your fortitude as
I try it now. Hear me a little longer, while I tell you what terms Mr.
Blyth proposes. He is not only willing but anxious--if you give the
child into his charge--that you should have access to her whenever you
like. He will leave his address in London with you. He desires, from
motives alike honorable to you and to himself, to defray your traveling
expenses whenever you wish to see the child. He will always acknowledge
your prior right to her affection and her duty. He will offer her every
facility in his power for constantly corresponding with you; and if the
life she leads in his house be, even in the slightest respect,
distasteful to her, he pledges himself to give her up to you again--if
you and she desire it--at any sacrifice of his own wishes and his own
feelings. These are the terms he proposes, Mrs. Peckover, and I can
most solemnly assure you on my honor as a clergyman and a gentleman,
that he will hold sacred the strict performance of all and each of
these conditions, exactly as I have stated them."

"I ought to let her go, sir--I know I ought to show how grateful I am
for Mr. Blyth's generosity by letting her go--but how can I, after all
the long time she's been like my own child to me? Oh, ma'am, say a word
for me!--I seem so selfish for not giving her up--say a word for me!"

"Will you let me say a word for little Mary, instead?" rejoined Mrs.
Joyce. "Will you let me remind you that Mr. Blyth's proposal offers her
a secure protection against that inhuman wretch who has ill-used her
already, and who may often ill-use her again, in spite of everything
you can do to prevent him. Pray think of that, Mrs. Peckover--pray do!"

Poor Mrs. Peckover showed that she thought of it bitterly enough, by a
fresh burst of tears.

The rector poured out a glass of water, and gave it to her. "Do not
think us inconsiderate or unfeeling," he said, "in pressing Mr. Blyth's
offer on you so perseveringly. Only reflect on Mary's position, if she
remains in the circus as she grows up! Would all your watchful kindness
be sufficient to shield her against dangers to which I hardly dare
allude?--against wickedness which would take advantage of her
defenselessness, her innocence, and even her misfortune? Consider all
that Mr. Blyth's proposal promises for her future life; for the sacred
preservation of her purity of heart and mind. Look forward to the day
when little Mary will have gown up to be a young woman; and I will
answer, Mrs. Peckover, for your doing full justice to the importance of
my friend's offer."

"I know it's all true, sir; I know I'm an ungrateful, selfish
wretch--but only give me a little time to think; a little time longer
to be with the poor darling that I love like my own child!"

Doctor Joyce was just drawing his chair closer to Mrs. Peckover before
he answered, when the door opened, and the respectable Vance softly
entered the room.

"What do you want here?" said the rector, a little irritably. "Didn't I
tell you not to come in again till I rang for you?'

"I beg your pardon, sir," answered Vance, casting rather a malicious
look at the clown's wife as he closed the door behind him--"but there's
a person waiting in the hall, who says he comes on important business,
and must see you directly."

"Who is he? What's his name?"

"He says his name is Jubber, if you please, sir."

Mrs. Peckover started from her chair with a scream. "Don't--pray, for
mercy's sake, sir, don't let him into the garden where Mary is!" she
gasped, clutching Doctor Joyce by the arm in the extremity of her
terror. "He's found us out, and come here in one of his dreadful
passions! He cares for nothing and for nobody, sir: he's bad enough to
ill-treat her even before you. What am I to do? Oh, good gracious
heavens! what am I to do?"

"Leave everything to me, and sit down again," said the rector kindly.
Then, turning to Vance, he added:--"Show Mr. Jubber into the
cloak-room, and say I will be with him directly."

"Now, Mrs. Peckover," continued Doctor Joyce, in the most perfectly
composed manner, "before I see this man (whose business I can guess at)
I have three important questions to ask of you. In the first place,
were you not a witness, last night, of his cruel ill-usage of that poor
child? (Mr. Blyth told me of it.) The fellow actually beat her, did he
not?"

"Oh, indeed he did, sir!--beat her most cruelly with a cane."

"And you saw it all yourself?"

"I did, sir. He'd have used her worse, if I hadn't been by to prevent
him."

"Very well. Now tell me if you or your husband have signed any
agreement--any papers, I mean, giving this man a right to claim the
child as one of his performers?"

_"Me_ sign an agreement, sir! I never did such a thing in all my life.
Jubber would think himself insulted, if you only talked of his signing
an agreement with such as me or Jemmy."

"Better and better. Now, my third question refers to little Mary
herself. I will undertake to put it out of this blackguard's power ever
to lay a finger on her again--but I can only do so on one condition,
which it rests entirely with you to grant."

"I'll do anything to save her, sir; I will indeed."

"The condition is that you consent to Mr. Blyth's proposal; for I can
only ensure the child's safety on those terms."

"Then, sir, I consent to it," said Mrs. Peckover, speaking with a
sudden firmness of tone and manner which almost startled Mrs. Joyce,
who stood by listening anxiously. "I consent to it; for I should be the
vilest wretch in the world, if I could say 'no' at such a time as this.
I will trust my precious darling treasure to you, sir, and to Mr.
Blyth; from this moment. God bless _her,_ and comfort _me!_ for I want
comfort badly enough. Oh, Mary! Mary! my own little Mary! to think of
you and me ever being parted like this!" The poor woman turned towards
the garden as she pronounced those words; all her fortitude forsook her
in an instant; and she sank back in her chair, sobbing bitterly.

"Take her out into the shrubbery where the children are, as soon as she
recovers a little," whispered the rector to his wife, as he opened the
dining-room door.

Though Mr. Jubber presented, to all appearance, the most scoundrelly
aspect that humanity can assume, when he was clothed in his evening
uniform, and illuminated by his own circus lamplight, he nevertheless
reached an infinitely loftier climax of blackguard perfection when he
was arrayed in his private costume, and was submitted to the tremendous
ordeal of pure daylight. The most monstrous ape that could be picked
from the cages of the Zoological Gardens would have gained by
comparison with him as he now appeared, standing in the Rectory
cloak-room, with his debauched bloodshot eyes staring grimly
contemptuous all about him, with his yellow flabby throat exposed by a
turn-down collar and a light blue neck-tie, with the rouge still
smeared over his gross unhealthy cheeks, with his mangy shirt-front
bespattered with bad embroidery and false jewelry that had not even the
politic decency to keep itself clean. He had his hat on, and was
sulkily running his dirty fingers through the greasy black ringlets
that flowed over his coat-collar, when Doctor Joyce entered the
cloak-room.

"You wished to speak with me?" said the rector, not sitting down
himself, and not asking Mr. Jubber to sit down.

"Oh! you're Doctor Joyce?" said the fellow, assuming his most insolent
familiarity of manner directly.

"That is my name," said Dr. Joyce very quietly. "Will you have the
goodness to state your business with me immediately, and in the fewest
possible words?"

"Hullo! You take that tone with me, do you?" said Jubber, setting his
arms akimbo, and tapping his foot fiercely on the floor; "you're trying
to come Tommy Grand over me already, are you? Very good! I'm the man to
give you change in your own coin--so here goes! What do you mean by
enticing away my Mysterious Foundling? What do you mean by this private
swindle of talent that belongs to my circus?"

"You had better proceed a little," said the rector, more quietly than
before. "Thus far I understand nothing whatever, except that you wish
to behave offensively to me; which, in a person of your appearance, is,
I assure you, of not the slightest consequence. You had much better
save time by stating what you have to say in plain words."

"You want plain words--eh?" cried Jubber, losing his temper. "Then, by
God, you shall have them, and plain enough!"

"Stop a minute," said Doctor Joyce. "If you use oaths in my presence
again, I shall ring for my servant, and order him to show you out of
the house."

"You will?"

"I will, most certainly."

There was a moment's pause, and the blackguard and the gentleman looked
one another straight in the face. It was the old, invariable struggle,
between the quiet firmness of good breeding, and the savage obstinacy
of bad; and it ended in the old, invariable way. The blackguard
flinched first.

"If your servant lays a finger on me, I'll thrash him within an inch of
his life," said Jubber, looking towards the door, and scowling as he
looked. "But that's not the point, just now--the point is, that I
charge you with getting my deaf and dumb girl into your house, to
perform before you on the sly. If you're too virtuous to come to my
circus--and better than you have been there--you ought to have paid the
proper price for a private performance. What do you mean by treating a
public servant, like me, with your infernal aristocratic looks, as if I
was dirt under your feet, after such shabby doings as you've been
guilty of--eh?"

"May I ask how you know that the child you refer to has been at my
house to-day?" asked Doctor Joyce, without taking the slightest notice
of Mr. Jubber's indignation.

"One of my people saw that swindling hypocrite of a Peckover taking her
in, and told me of it when I missed them at dinner. There! that's good
evidence, I rather think! Deny it if you can."

"I have not the slightest intention of denying it. The child is now in
my house."

"And has gone through all her performances, of course? Ah! shabby!
shabby! I should be ashamed of myself, if _I'd_ tried to do a man out
of his rights like that."

"I am most unaffectedly rejoiced to hear that you are capable, under
any circumstances, of being ashamed of yourself at all," rejoined the
rector. "The child, however, has gone through no performances here, not
having been sent for with any such purpose as you suppose. But, as you
said just now, that's not the point. Pray, why did you speak of the
little girl, a moment ago, as _your_ child?"

"Because she's one of my performers, of course. But, come! I've had
enough of this; I can't stop talking here all day; I want the child--so
just deliver her up at once, will you?--and turn out Peck as soon as
you like after. I'll cure them both of ever doing this sort of thing
again! I'll make them stick tight to the circus for the future! I'll
show them--"

"You would be employing your time much more usefully," said Doctor
Joyce, "if you occupied it in altering the bills of your performance,
so as to inform the public that the deaf and dumb child will not appear
before them again."

"Not appear again?--not appear to-night in my circus? Why, hang me! if
I don't think you're trying to be funny all of a sudden! Alter my
bills--eh? Not bad! Upon my soul, not at all bad for a parson! Give us
another joke, sir; I'm all attention." And Mr. Jubber put his hand to
his ear, grinning in a perfect fury of sarcasm.

"I am quite in earnest," said the rector. "A friend of mine has adopted
the child, and will take her home with him tomorrow morning. Mrs.
Peckover (the only person who has any right to exercise control over
her) has consented to this arrangement. If your business here was to
take the child back to your circus, it is right to inform you that she
will not leave my house till she goes to London to-morrow with my
friend."

"And you think I'm the sort of man to stand this?--and give up the
child?--and alter the bills?--and lose money?--and be as mild as
mother's milk all the time? Oh! yes, of course! I'm so devilish fond of
you and your friend! You're such nice men, you can make me do anything!
Damn all this jabber and nonsense!" roared the ruffian, passing
suddenly from insolence to fury, and striking his fist on the table.
"Give me the child at once, do you hear? Give her up, I say. I won't
leave the house till I've got her!"

Just as Mr. Jubber swore for the second time, Doctor Joyce rang the
bell. "I told you what I should do, if you used oaths in my presence
again," said the rector.

"And _I_ told _you_ I'd kill the servant, if he laid a finger on me,"
said Jubber, knocking his hat firmly on his head, and tucking up his
cuffs.

Vance appeared at the door, much less pompous than usual and displaying
an interesting paleness of complexion. Jubber spat into the palm of
each of his hands, and clenched his fists.

"Have you done dinner down stairs?" asked Doctor Joyce, reddening a
little, but still very quiet.

"Yes, sir," answered Vance, in a remarkably conciliating voice.

"Tell James to go to the constable, and say I want him; and let the
gardener wait with you outside there in the hall."

"Now," said the rector, shutting the door again after issuing these
orders, and placing himself once more face to face with Mr. Jubber.
"Now I have a last word or two to say, which I recommend you to hear
quietly. In the first place, you have no right over the child whatever;
for I happen to know that you are without a signed agreement promising
you her services. (You had better hear me out for your own sake.) You
have no legal right, I say, to control the child in any manner. She is
a perfectly free agent, so far as you are concerned.--Yes! yes! you
deny it, of course! I have only to say that, if you attempt to back
that denial by still asserting your claim to her, and making a
disturbance in my house, as sure as you stand there, I'll ruin you in
Rubbleford and in all the country round. (It's no use laughing--I can
do it!) You beat the child in the vilest manner last night. I am a
magistrate; and I have my prosecutor and my witness of the assault
ready whenever I choose to call them. I can fine or imprison you, which
I please. You know the public; you know what they think of people who
ill-use helpless children. If you appeared in that character before me,
the Rubbleford paper would report it; and, so far as the interests of
your circus are concerned, you would be a ruined man in this part of
the country--you would, you know it! Now I will spare you this--not
from any tenderness towards _you_--on condition that you take yourself
off quietly, and never let us hear from you again. I strongly advise
you to go at once; for if you wait till the constable comes, I will not
answer for it that my sense of duty may not force me into giving you
into custody." With which words Doctor Joyce threw open the door, and
pointed to the hall.

Throughout the delivery of this speech, violent indignation,
ungovernable surprise, abject terror, and impotent rage ravaged by
turns the breast of Mr. Jubber. He stamped about the room, and uttered
fragments of oaths, but did not otherwise interrupt Dr. Joyce, while
that gentleman was speaking to him. When the rector had done, the
fellow had his insolent answer ready directly. To do him justice, he
was consistent, if he was nothing else--he was bully and blackguard to
the very last.

"Magistrate or parson," he cried, snapping his fingers, "I don't care a
damn for you in either capacity. You keep the child here at your peril!
I'll go to the first lawyer in Rubbleford, and bring an action against
you. I'll show you a little legal law! _You_ ruin me indeed! I can
prove that I only thrashed the little toad, the nasty deaf idiot,
because she deserved it. I'll be even with you! I'll have the child
back wherever you take her to. I'll show you a little legal law! (Here
he stepped to the hall door.) I'll be even with you, damme! I'll charge
you with setting on your menial servants to assault me. (Here he looked
fiercely at the gardener, a freckled Scotch giant of six feet three,
and instantly descended five steps.) Lay a finger on me, if you dare!
I'm going straight from this house to the lawyer's. I'm a free
Englishman, and I'll have my rights and my legal law! I'll bring my
action! I'll ruin you! I'll strip your gown off your back I'll stop
your mouth in your own pulpit!" Here he strutted into the front garden;
his words grew indistinct, and his gross voice became gradually less
and less audible. The coachman at the outer gate saw the last of him,
and reported that he made his exit striking viciously at the flowers
with his cane, and swearing that he would ruin the rector with "legal
law."

After leaving certain directions with his servants, in the very
improbable event of Mr. Jubber's return, Doctor Joyce repaired
immediately to his dining-room. No one was there, so he went on into
the garden.

Here he found the family and the visitors all assembled together; but a
great change had passed over the whole party during his absence. Mr.
Blyth, on being informed of the result of the rector's conversation
with Mrs. Peckover, acted with his usual impetuosity and utter want of
discretion; writing down delightedly on little Mary's slate, without
the slightest previous preparation or coaxing, that she was to go home
with him to-morrow, and be as happy as the day was long, all the rest
of her life. The result of this incautious method of proceeding was
that the child became excessively frightened, and ran away from
everybody to take refuge with Mrs. Peckover. She was still crying, and
holding tight by the good woman's gown with both hands; and Valentine
was still loudly declaring to everybody that he loved her all the
better for showing such faithful affection to her earliest and best
friend, when the rector joined the party under the coolly-murmuring
trees.

Doctor Joyce spoke but briefly of his interview with Mr. Jubber,
concealing much that had passed at it, and making very light of the
threats which the fellow had uttered on his departure. Mrs. Peckover,
whose self-possession seemed in imminent danger of being overthrown by
little Mary's mute demonstrations of affection, listened anxiously to
every word the Doctor uttered; and, as soon as he had done, said that
she must go back to the circus directly, and tell her husband the truth
about all that had occurred, as a necessary set-off against the
slanders that were sure to be spoken against her by Mr. Jubber.

"Oh, never mind me, ma'am!" she said, in answer to the apprehensions
expressed by Mrs. Joyce about her reception when she got to the circus.
"The dear child's safe; and that's all I care about. I'm big enough and
strong enough to take my own part; and Jemmy, he's always by to help me
when I can't. May I come back, if you please, sir, this evening; and
say--and say?--"

She would have added, "and say good-bye;" but the thoughts which now
gathered round that one word, made it too hard to utter. She silently
curtseyed her thanks for the warm invitation that was given to her to
return; stooped down to the child; and, kissing her, wrote on the
slate, "I shall be back, dear, in the evening, at seven o'clock"--then
disengaged the little hands that still held fast by her gown, and
hurried from the garden, without once venturing to look behind her as
she crossed the sunny lawn.

Mrs. Joyce, and the young ladies, and the rector, all tried their best
to console little Mary; and all failed. She resolutely, though very
gently, resisted them; walking away into corners by herself, and
looking constantly at her slate, as if she could only find comfort in
reading the few words which Mrs. Peckover had written on it. At last,
Mr. Blyth took her up on his knee. She struggled to get away, for a
moment--then looked intently in his face; and, sighing very mournfully,
laid her head down on his shoulder. There was a world of promise for
the future success of Valentine's affectionate project in that simple
action, and in the preference which it showed.

The day wore on quietly--evening came--seven o'clock struck--then
half-past--then eight--and Mrs. Peckover never appeared. Doctor Joyce
grew uneasy, and sent Vance to the circus to get some news of her.

It was again Mr. Blyth--and Mr. Blyth only--who succeeded in partially
quieting little Mary under the heavy disappointment of not seeing Mrs.
Peckover at the appointed time. The child had been restless at first,
and had wanted to go to the circus. Finding that they tenderly, but
firmly, detained her at the Rectory, she wept bitterly--wept so long,
that at last she fairly cried herself asleep in Valentine's arms. He
sat anxiously supporting her with a patience that nothing could tire.
The sunset rays, which he had at first carefully kept from falling on
her face, vanished from the horizon; the quiet luster of twilight
overspread the sky--and still he refused to let her be taken from him;
and said he would sit as he was all through the night rather than let
her be disturbed.

Vance came back, and brought word that Mrs. Peckover would follow him
in half an hour. They had given her some work to do at the circus,
which she was obliged to finish before she could return to the Rectory.

Having delivered this message, Vance next produced a handbill, which he
said was being widely circulated all over Rubbleford; and which proved
to be the composition of Mr. Jubber himself. That ingenious ruffian,
having doubtless discovered that "legal law" was powerless to help him
to his revenge, and that it would be his wisest proceeding to keep
clear of Doctor Joyce in the rectory's magisterial capacity, was now
artfully attempting to turn the loss of the child to his own profit, by
dint of prompt lying in his favorite large type, sprinkled with red
letters. He informed the public, through the medium of his hand-bills,
that the father of the Mysterious Foundling had been "most
providentially" discovered, and that he (Mr. Jubber) had given the
child up immediately, without a thought of what he might personally
suffer, in pocket as well as in mind, by his generosity. After this, he
appealed confidently to the sympathy of people of every degree, and of
"fond parents" especially, to compensate him by flocking in crowds to
the circus; adding, that if additional stimulus were wanting to urge
the public into "rallying round the Ring," he was prepared to
administer it forthwith, in the shape of the smallest dwarf in the
world, for whose services he was then in treaty, and whose first
appearance before a Rubbleford audience would certainly take place in
the course of a few days.

And a rattledum, &c.

* * * * *

HORSE-CHESTNUTS.

(_To the Editor of the Mirror._)

In a recent number there was a notice of the uses of the _Esculus
Hippocastaneus_, or horse chestnuts; but a very important one was
omitted, namely, its substitution occasionally for Peruvian bark
in cases of intermittent fever. This disorder, known better by the name
of ague, had been formerly epidemic in Ireland, where the humidity
of the atmosphere is continually increased by the exhalation of the
lochs and bogs with which the country abounds.

In consequence, however, of the formation of the Grand and Royal Canals,
and the drainage of the waters in their vicinity, the tendency to
this disease was greatly lessened; and about twenty years ago the
disorder was so rare in Dublin and the neighbourhood, that the
medical students often complained that they graduated without ever
having an opportunity of seeing in the hospitals a single case of
this once almost universal disorder.

In consequence, however, of the extreme wetness of one summer and
autumn, agues again resumed their ascendancy, and the hospitals and
dispensaries became crowded with intermittent patients, and all
the bark of the druggists and apothecaries was put into requisition;
but to the surprise and disappointment of all the medical men,
this infallible specific was altogether inert and powerless, and
after repeated trials and disappointments, it was abandoned as
useless.

It was now a matter of importance to ascertain the cause of this
extraordinary failure, whether it arose from the altered character of
the complaint, or from the deteriorated quality of the medicine;
and it was found to be the latter.

In consequence of the long cessation of intermittent fever, bark had
been little used or called for, and the stock had remained so long on
hand, that it had become effete and worthless. It was necessary then
to try some substitute. Quassia-wood, the acorus calamus, and
other bitters and aromatics, were tried; but that which seemed to
succeed best was the bark and kernel of the horse-chestnut.

The nut was moderately dried in a stove, so as to be capable of
being powdered, and in that state was exhibited in substance with
cayenne pepper and other aromatics. The bark was taken in infusions
and decoctions with quassia, and the effects were sometimes very decided
and satisfactory, forming a providential substitute for the only
kind of bark then to be procured in Ireland.

W.

* * * * *

SONNET.

(_For the Mirror._)

Say what repays the gamester's nightly toil, Can hell itself more hideous
woes impart?
Can glitt'ring heaps of ill-begotten spoil, Appease the cravings
of his callous heart?

For this alone he severs every tie, For this he marks unmov'd the orphan's
tear, E'en nature's charms, a smile from beauty's eye No longer
can his blasted prospects cheer.

But now prevails the dice's rattling sound, The loud blaspheming
oath, and cry of woe, From tables set with spectre forms around,
Hurrying with frantic haste, th' expected throw!

Than this no greater foe to man remains This is the mightiest triumph
Satan gains!

E.L.

* * * * *

ORIGINAL TRANSLATIONS.

(_For the Mirror._)
Horace.--Ode xxx.--B. 1.

TO VENUS.

_He invokes her to be present at Glycera's private sacrifice_

Venus! leave thy loved isle, And on Glycera's altar smile; Breathing
perfumes hail the day, Haste thee, Venus! haste away.

Bring with thee the am'rous boy; The loose-rob'd Graces crown our
joy!
Youth swell thy train, who owes to thee Her charms, and winged
Mercury!

ODE xxvi.--B. 3.

TO THE SAME.

_He renounces Love._

Not without renown was I, In the ranks of gallantry.
Now, when Love no more will call, To battle; on this sacred wall, Venus,
where her statue stands, To hang my arms, and lute commands; Here the
bright torch to hang, and bars, Which wag'd so oft loud midnight
wars.

But, O blessed Cyprian queen!
Blest in Memphian bow'rs serene, Raise high the lash, and Chloe's be, All
e'er proud Chloe dealt to me!

W.P.

* * * * *

Arcana of Science.

* * * * *
_Smoke of Lamps._
A recent number of Gill's "Technical Repository," contains a simple mode
of consuming the smoke that ascends from the turner of an argand lamp.
It consists of a thin concave of copper, fixed by three wires, at about
an inch above the chimney-glass of the lamp, yet capable of being
taken off at pleasure. The gaseous carbonaceous matter which
occasionally escapes from the top of lamps, is thus arrested
beneath the concave cap, and subsequently consumed by the heat of the
flame, instead of passing off into the room, in the form of smoke
or smut on the ceiling and walls.

[The "Technical Repository," may have the credit of introducing
this contrivance to the British public; but it is somewhat curious that
it had not been previously adopted, since scores of lamps thus provided,
are to be seen in the cafés and restaurateurs of Paris. _Apropos_, the
French oil burns equal in brightness to our best gas, and as we are
informed, this purity is obtained by filtration through charcoal.

--ED.]

_Caddis Worms._
The transformation of the deserted cases of numberless minute insects
into a constituent part of a solid rock, first formed at the
bottom of a lake, then constituting the sides of deep valleys, and the
tabular summits of lofty hills, is a phenomenon as striking as the
vast reefs of coral constructed by the labours of minute polyps. We
remember to have seen such _caddis-worms_, as they are called by
fishermen, very abundant in the wooden troughs constructed by the late
Dr. Sibthorp, for aquatic plants, in the botanic garden at Oxford, to
the cases of which many small shells of the G. Planorbis Limnea
and Cyclas were affixed, precisely in the same manner as in the fossil
tubes of Auvergne; an incrusting spring, therefore, may, perhaps,
be all that is wanting to reproduce, on the banks of the Isis or the
Charwell, a rock similar in structure to that of the Limagne. Mr.
Kirby, in his "Entomology," informs us, that these larvae ultimately
change into a four-winged insect.

If you are desirous to examine them in their aquatic state, "you have
only, (he says) to place yourself by the side of a clear and shallow
pool of water, and you cannot fail to observe at the bottom little
oblong moving masses, resembling pieces of straw, wood, or even
stone--of the larvae itself, nothing is to be seen but the head and
six legs, by means of which it moves itself in the water, and drags
after it the case in which the rest of the body is enclosed, and into
which, on any alarm, it instantly retires. The construction of these
habitations is very various. Some select four or five pieces of
the leaves of grass, which they glue together into a shapely polygonal
case; others employ portions of the stems of rushes, placed side by side,
so as to form an elegant fluted cylinder; some arrange round them
pieces of leaves like a spirally-rolled riband; other species construct
houses which may be called alive, forming them of the shells of various
aquatic snails of different kinds and sizes, even while inhabited,
all of which are immovably fixed to them, and dragged about
at pleasure. However various may be the form of the case externally,
within it is usually cylindrical and lined with silk."--_Introduction
to Entomology, by Kirby and Spence._

_Engraving on Glass._
Cover one side of a flat piece of glass, after having made it perfectly
clean, with bees' wax, and trace figures upon it with a needle, taking
care that every stroke cuts completely through the wax. Next, make a
border of wax all round the glass, to prevent any liquor, when poured
on, from running off. Then take some finely powdered fluate of lime
(fluor spar,) strew it even over the glass plate upon the waxed side,
and then gently pour upon it, so as not to displace the powder,
as much concentrated sulphuric acid diluted with thrice its weight
of water, as is sufficient to cover the powdered fluor spar. Let every
thing remain in this state for three hours; then remove
the mixture, and clean the glass, by washing it with oil of turpentine;
the figures which were traced through the wax will be found engraven
on the glass, while the parts which the wax covered will be uncorroded.

The fluate of lime is decomposed by the sulphuric acid, and sulphate
of lime is formed. The fluoric acid, disengaged in the gaseous state,
combines with the water that diluted the sulphuric acid, and forms
liquid fluoric acid, by which the glass is corroded.

_Habits of Seals._
The brain of this animal, observes Dr. Harwood, is I think, doubtless,
of greater proportionate magnitude than in any other quadruped,
and not only does it exhibit in its countenance, the appearance of
sagacity, but its intelligence is in reality far greater than in most
land quadrupeds: hence its domestication is rendered much easier than
that of other animals, and it is susceptible of more powerful attachment.
The large seal, which was exhibited some time ago at Exeter 'Change,
appeared to me to understand the language of its keeper as perfectly
as the most faithful dog. When he entered at one end of its long
apartment, it raised its body from the water, in which it was
injudiciously too constantly kept, supporting itself erect against
the bar of its enclosure, and wherever he moved, keeping its large,
dark eyes steadfastly fixed upon him.

When desired to make obeisance to visitors, it quickly threw itself on
one side, and struck the opposite one several times in quick succession
with its fore-foot, producing a loud noise. The young
seal, again, which was kept on board the Alexander, in one of the northern
expeditions, became so much attached to its new mode of life, that after
being thrown into the sea, and it had become tired of swimming at
liberty, it regularly returned to the side of the beat, to be retaken
on board. Such examples might be greatly multiplied; and I cannot help
stating, that aware of this disposition to become familiar, and this
participation in the good qualities of the dog, it is astonishing
that mankind have not chosen this intellectual and finely organized
quadruped, for aquatic services scarcely less important than some
of those in which the dog is employed on the surface of the land.

--_Quarterly Journal._

_Gas from Resin._
Mr. Daniel, the meteorologist, has contrived a process for generating
gas from resin; which he effects by dissolving the resin in turpentine,
or any other essential oil, and then allowing the fluid to drop
gradually in a heated cylinder of iron.

_Liquorice Paper._

A mode has been discovered in France of fabricating paper solely from
the Glycyrrhiza Germanica, or liquorice plant. It is said that this
paper is cheap, that it is of a whiteness superior to that generally
made, and that size is not requisite in its manufacture.

_Tachygraphy._
A mathematical instrument maker at Paris, of the name of Conti, has
conceived the notion of a portable instrument which he calls a
tachygraph, by means of which any person may write, or rather print,
as fast as any other person can speak. M. Conti, however, like many other
ingenious men, is not rich; and he has applied to the Académiè des
Sciences, for pecuniary assistance, and a very favourable report
has been made upon his request.

_Valuable Discovery in Agriculture._
One of the most recent of useful discoveries in agriculture is to
mix layers of green or new cut clover with layers of straw in ricks or
stacks; thus the strength of the clover is absorbed by the straw, which,
thus impregnated, both horses and cattle eat greedily, and the clover
is dried and prevented from heating. This practice is particularly
calculated for second crops of clover and rye-grass.

_Pine Apples._
The largest pine ever grown in this kingdom was cut lately from the
hothouse of John Edwards, Esq. of Rheola, Glamorganshire, and was
presented to his Majesty at Windsor. It weighed 14 lbs. 12
oz. avoirdupois, was 12-1/2 inches high, exclusive of the crown, and
26 inches in circumference.

_Sea Couch for preventing Sickness._
An elastic or swinging seat, couch, or bed, for preventing the
uneasy motions of a ship or a carriage, has recently been invented.

To effect this, the frame of the seat or couch is suspended on juribals
or joints, turning at right angles to each other, and an elasticity
is produced both in the seat or cushion, and in the swinging frames, by
the use of spiral metal springs. These springs are made by twisting
steel or iron wire into the form of an hour glass, that is, like two
cones united at their apices.
The lower points of their springs are to be sown to the canvass or
webbing, and their upper parts secured in their proper situations
and erect positions by pack-thread or small cords, tied or braced
from one to the other, crossing like a net. On the tops of these
springs the usual covering of canvass is laid, and then a thin layer
of horsehair or wool, upon which the outer covering is bitted. Sir
Richard Phillips, in the _Monthly Magazine_, describes the following
successful experiment for preventing sea-sickness, made on his
crossing from Dover to Calais, a few years since. He caused an armed
chair to be placed on the deck of the vessel, and being seated in
it, he began to raise himself up and down, as on horseback. The
passengers laughed at his eccentricity, but before they reached
Calais, many of them were sea-sick, whilst Sir Richard continued
to enjoy his usual health and vigour.
_Bites of Venomous Reptiles._
M. le D'Record, sen. discovered, during a long residence in America,
what he considers a sure mode of preventing mischief from such
bites. "It is sufficient," he says, "to pour a few drops of tincture
of cantharides on the wound, to cause a redness and vesiccation;
not only is the poison rendered harmless, but the stings of the
reptiles are removed with the epidermis that the bladder raises."--_Med.
Journal._ 

_Naval Schools of France._
In France, the system of mutual instruction among the working classes
prospers in the bosoms of the ports, and schools are founded for
the particular instruction of the sons of the inferior officers of
the arsenals, in the elements of calculation, of geometry, and of
design, as far as necessary for the plans of ships; also the
principles of statics, so as to enable them to judge of the action
and effect of machinery. Prizes of gold medals and special promotions
are the rewards of the most deserving students. Brest was formerly
the only port furnished with these schools; since the peace, however,
libraries are forming in each of the others; and in almost all,
cabinets of natural history and botanical gardens are enriched at
every voyage undertaken by French ships, either to foreign coasts,
or to those of the French colonies. An observatory has been given
to Toulon and Rochefort. In both these ports naval museums are
formed, in order to preserve types of the most eminent vessels,
whose originals either have been, or soon will be, destroyed by
time. Models of ingenious machines, representations of interesting
manoeuvres, a methodical collection of raw materials, of tools, and
of the product of all the arts exercised in a dock-yard--Such are
the rich materials collected in these interesting repositories.--_From
the French of M. Dupin._ 

_Antiquity of Locks._
Locks were known in Egypt above four thousand years since, as was
inferred by M. Denon, from some sculptures of the great temple of
Karnac, representing locks similar to those now used in that country.
A lock resembling the Egyptian is used in Cornwall, and the same
has been seen in the Faro Islands; to both which places it was
probably taken by the Phoenicians.Persons who knew
little or nothing of his real disposition and his early life, all shook
their heads, and laughed in secret; asserting that the mystery was
plain enough to the most ordinary capacity, and that the young lady
could be nothing more nor less than a natural child of his own.

Mrs. Blyth was far more indignant at this report than her husband, when
in due time it reached the painter's house. Valentine rather approved
of the scandal than not, because it was likely to lead inquisitive
people in the wrong direction. He might have been now perfectly easy
about the preservation of his secret, but for the distrust which still
clung to him, in spite of himself, on the subject of Mrs. Peckover's
discretion. He never wearied of warning that excellent woman to be
careful in keeping the important secret, every time she came to London
to see Madonna. Whether she only paid them a visit for the day, and
then went away again; or whether she spent her Christmas with them,
Valentine's greeting always ended nervously with the same distrustful
question:--"Excuse me for asking, Mrs. Peckover, but are you quite sure
you have kept what you know about little Mary and her mother, and dates
and places and all that, properly hidden from prying people, since you
were here last?" At which point Mrs. Peckover generally answered by
repeating, always with the same sarcastic emphasis:--"Properly hidden,
did you say, sir? Of course I keep what I know properly hidden, for of
course I can hold my tongue. In my time, sir, it used always to take
two parties to play at a game of Hide and Seek. Who in the world is
seeking after little Mary, I should like to know?"

Perhaps Mrs. Peckover's view of the case was the right one; or,
perhaps, the extraordinary discretion observed by the persons who were
in the secret of Madonna's history, prevented any disclosure of the
girl's origin from reaching her father or friends--presuming them to be
still alive and anxiously looking for her. But, at any rate, this much
at least is certain:--Nobody appeared to assert a claim to Valentine's
adopted child, from the time when he took her home with him as his
daughter, to the time when the reader first made his acquaintance, many
pages back, in the congenial sphere of his own painting-room.*

* See note at the end of the book.


CHAPTER VIII.

MENTOR AND TELEMACHUS.

It is now some time since we left Mr. Blyth and Madonna in the studio.
The first was engaged, it may be remembered, in the process of brushing
up Bacchanalian Nymphs in the foreground of a Classical landscape. The
second was modestly occupied in making a copy of the head of the Venus
de' Medici.

The clock strikes one--and a furious ring is heard at the house-bell.

"There he is!" cries Mr. Blyth to himself. "There's Zack! I know his
ring among a thousand; it's worse even than the postman's; it's like an
alarm of fire!"

Here Valentine drums gently with his mahl-stick on the floor. Madonna
looks towards him directly; he waves his hand round and round rapidly
above his head. This is the sign which means "Zack." The girl smiles
brightly, and blushes as she sees it. Zack is apparently one of her
special favorites.

While the young gentleman is being admitted at the garden gate, there
is a leisure moment to explain how he became acquainted with Mr. Blyth.

Valentine's father, and Mrs. Thorpe's father (the identical Mr.
Goodworth who figures at the beginning of this narrative as one of the
actors in the Sunday Drama at Baregrove Square), had been intimate
associates of the drowsy-story-telling and copious-port-drinking old
school. The friendly intercourse between these gentlemen spread,
naturally enough, to the sons and daughters who formed their respective
families. From the time of Mr. Thorpe's marriage to Miss Goodworth,
however, the connection between the junior Goodworths and Blyths began
to grow less intimate--so far, at least, as the new bride and Valentine
were concerned. The rigid modern Puritan of Baregrove Square, and the
eccentric votary of the Fine Arts, mutually disapproved of each other
from the very first. Visits of ceremony were exchanged at long
intervals; but even these were discontinued on Madonna's arrival under
Valentine's roof: Mr. Thorpe being one of the first of the charitable
friends of the family who suspected her to be the painter's natural
child. An almost complete separation accordingly ensued for some years,
until Zack grew up to boy's estate, and was taken to see Valentine, one
day in holiday time, by his grandfather. He and the painter became
friends directly. Mr. Blyth liked boys, and boys of all degrees liked
him. From this time, Zack frequented Valentine's house at every
opportunity, and never neglected his artist-friend in after years. At
the date of this story, one of the many points in his son's conduct of
which Mr. Thorpe disapproved on the highest moral grounds, was the firm
determination the lad showed to keep up his intimacy with Mr. Blyth.

We may now get back to the ring at the bell.

Zack's approach to the painting-room was heralded by a scuffling of
feet, a loud noise of talking, and a great deal of suspicious giggling
on the part of the housemaid, who had let him in. Suddenly these sounds
ceased--the door was dashed open--and Mr. Thorpe, junior, burst into
the room.

"Dear old Blyth! how are you?" cried Zack. "Have you had any leap-frog
since I was here last? Jump up, and let's celebrate my return to the
painting-room with a bit of manly exercise in our old way. Come on!
I'll give the first back. No shirking! Put down your palette; and one,
two, three--and over!"

Pronouncing these words, Zack ran to the end of the room opposite to
Valentine; and signalized his entry into the studio by the
extraordinary process of giving its owner, what is termed in the
technical language of leap-frog, "a capital back."

Mr. Blyth put down his palette, brushes, and mahl-stick--tucked up his
cuffs and smiled--took a little trial skip into the air--and, running
down the room with the slightly tremulous step of a gentleman of fifty,
cleared Zack in gallant style; fell over on the other side, all in a
lump on his hands and feet; gave the return "back" conscientiously, at
the other end of the studio; and was leapt over in an instant, with a
shout of triumph, by Zack. The athletic ceremonies thus concluded, the
two stood up together and shook hands heartily.

"Too stiff, Blyth--too stiff and shaky by half," said young Thorpe. "I
haven't kept you up enough in your gymnastics lately. We must have some
more leap-frog in the garden; and I'll bring my boxing gloves next
time, and open your chest by teaching you to fight. Splendid exercise,
and so good for your sluggish old liver."

Delivering this opinion, Zack ran off to Madonna, who had been keeping
the Venus de' Medici from being shaken down, while she looked on at the
leap-frog. "How is the dearest, prettiest, gentlest love in the world?"
cried Zack, taking her hand, and kissing it with boisterous fondness.
"Ah! she lets other old friends kiss her cheek, and only lets me kiss
her hand!--I say, Blyth, what a little witch she is--I'll lay you two
to one she's guessed what I've just been saying to her."

A bright flush overspread the girl's face while Zack addressed her. Her
tender blue eyes looked up at him, shyly conscious of the pleasure that
their expression was betraying; and the neat folds of her pretty grey
dress, which had lain so still over her bosom when she was drawing,
began to rise and fall gently now, when Zack was holding her hand. If
young Thorpe had not been the most thoughtless of human beings--as much
a boy still, in many respects, as when he was locked up in his father's
dressing-room for bad behavior at church--he might have guessed long
ago why he was the only one of Madonna's old friends whom she did not
permit to kiss her on the cheek!

But Zack neither guessed, nor thought of guessing, anything of this
sort. His flighty thoughts flew off in a moment from the young lady to
his cigar-case; and he walked away to the hearth-rug, twisting up a
piece of waste paper into a lighter as he went.

When Madonna returned to her drawing, her eyes wandered timidly once or
twice to the place where Zack was standing, when she thought he was not
looking at her; and, assuredly, so far as personal appearance was
concerned, young Thorpe was handsome enough to tempt any woman into
glancing at him with approving eyes. He was over six feet in height;
and, though then little more than nineteen years old, was well
developed in proportion to his stature. His boxing, rowing, and other
athletic exercises had done wonders towards bringing his naturally
vigorous, upright frame to the perfection of healthy muscular
condition. Tall and strong as he was, there was nothing stiff or
ungainly in his movements, He trod easily and lightly, with a certain
youthful suppleness and hardy grace in all his actions, which set off
his fine bodily formation to the best advantage. He had keen, quick,
mischievous grey eyes--a thoroughly English red and white
complexion--admirably bright and regular teeth--and curly light brown
hair, with a very peculiar golden tinge in it, which was only visible
when his head was placed in a particular light. In short, Zack was a
manly, handsome fellow, a thorough Saxon, every inch of him; and
(physically speaking at least) a credit to the parents and the country
that had given him birth.

"I say, Blyth, do you and Madonna mind smoke?" asked Zack, lighting his
cigar before there was time to answer him.

"No--no," said Valentine. "But, Zack, you wrote me word that your
father had taken all your cigars away from you--"

"So he has, and all my pocket-money too. But I've taken to helping
myself, and I've got some splendid cigars. Try one, Blyth," said the
young gentleman, luxuriously puffing out a stream of smoke through each
nostril.

"Taken to helping yourself!" exclaimed Mr. Blyth. "What do you mean?"

"Oh!" said Zack, "don't be afraid. It's not thieving--it's only barter.
Look here, my dear fellow, this is how it is. A friend of mine, a
junior clerk in our office, has three dozen cigars, and I have two
staring flannel shirts, which are only fit for a snob to wear. The
junior clerk gives me the three dozen cigars, and I give the junior
clerk the two staring flannel shirts. That's barter, and barter's
commerce, old boy! it's all my father's fault; he will make a tradesman
of me. Dutiful behavior, isn't it, to be doing a bit of commerce
already on my own account?"

"I'll tell you what, Zack," said Mr. Blyth, "I don't like the way
you're going on in at all. Your last letter made me very uneasy, I can
promise you."

"You can't be half as uneasy as I am," rejoined Zack. "I'm jolly enough
here, to be sure, because I can't help it somehow; but at home I'm the
most miserable devil on the face of the earth. My father baulks me in
everything, and makes me turn hypocrite, and take him in, in all sorts
of ways--which I hate myself for doing; and yet can't help doing,
because he forces me to it. Why does he want to make me live in the
same slow way that he does himself? There's some difference in our
ages, I rather think! Why does he bully me about being always home by
eleven o'clock? Why does he force me into a tea-merchant's office, when
I want to be an artist, like you? I'm a perfect slave to commerce
already. What do you think? I'm supposed to be sampling in the city at
this very moment. The junior clerk's doing the work for me; and he's to
have one of my dress-waistcoats to compensate him for the trouble.
Alexander Puschkin, Russia's greatest poet, died of torture front the
reports circulated about his wife's unfaithfulness rather than by
the bullet in his breast, from a duel.

On his death-bed he swore she was innocent. Ass, ass! How could he
swear to it?

You see, I read my books. Ah, Jonas, art you here? and the doctor,
naturally. Have you heard what I answered when an English lady
complained about Irishmen who used to throw lighted lamps in their
wives' faces? "God, what women," I cried.
"Women," she gasped. "Yes, of course," I answered. "When things go
so far that a man, a man who loved and worshipped a woman, takes a lighted
lamp and throws it in her face, then one may know."

PASTOR. Know what?

CAPTAIN. Nothing. One never knows anything. One only believes.
Isn't that true, Jonas? One believes and then one is saved! Yes, to
be sure. No, I know that one can be damned by his faith. I know
that.

DOCTOR. Captain!

CAPTAIN. Silence! I don't want to talk to you; I won't listen to you
repeating their chatter in there, like a telephone! In there!
You know! Look here, Jonas; do you believe that you are the father of
your children? I remember that you had a tutor in your house who had
a handsome face, and the people gossiped about him.

PASTOR. Adolf, take care!

CAPTAIN. Grope under your toupee and feel if there are not
two bumps there. By my soul, I believe he turns pale! Yes, yes, they
will talk; but, good Lord, they talk so much. Still we are a lot of
ridiculous dupes, we married men. Isn't that true, Doctor? How was
it with your marriage bed? Didn't you have a lieutenant in the
house, eh? Wait a moment and I will make a guess--his name was--
[whispers in the Doctor's ear].

You see he turns pale, too! Don't be disturbed. She is dead and buried
and what is done can't be undone. I knew him well, by the way, and he
is now--look at me, Doctor--No, straight in my eyes--a major in the
cavalry! By God, if I don't believe he has horns, too.

DOCTOR [Tortured]. Captain, won't you talk about something else?

CAPTAIN. Do you see? He immediately wants to talk of something else
when I mention horns.

PASTOR. Do you know, Adolf, that you are insane?

CAPTAIN. Yes; I know that well enough. But if I only had the handling
of your illustrious brains for awhile I'd soon have you shut up, too!
I am mad, but how did I become so?

That doesn't concern you, and it doesn't concern anyone. But you want
to talk of something else now. [Takes the photograph album from
the table.] Good Lord, that is my child! Mine? We can never know. Do you
know what we would have to do to make sure? First, one should marry
to get the respect of society, then be divorced soon after and become
lovers, and finally adopt the children.

Then one would at least be sure that they were one's adopted children.
Isn't that right? But how can all that help us now? What can keep me
now that you have taken my conception of immortality from me, what
use is science and philosophy to me when I have nothing to live
for, what can I do with life when I am dishonored?

I grafted my right arm, half my brain, half my marrow on another trunk,
for I believed they would knit themselves together and grow into a more
perfect tree, and then someone came with a knife and cut below the
graft, and now I am only half a tree. But the other half goes
on growing with my arm and half my brain, while I wither and die,
for they were the best parts I gave away.

Now I want to die. Do with me as you will. I am no more.

[Buries his head on his arms on table. The Doctor whispers to the
Pastor, and they go out through the door left.

Soon after Bertha comes in.]
BERTRA [Goes up to Captain]. Are you ill, Father?

CAPTAIN [Looks up dazed]. I?

BERTHA. Do you know what you have done? Do you know that you threw the
lamp at Mother?

CAPTAIN. Did I?

BERTHA. Yes, you did. Just think if she had been hurt.

CAPTAIN. What would that have mattered?

BERTHA. You are not my father when you talk like that.

CAPTAIN. What do you say? Am I not your father? How do you know that?
Who told you that? And who is your father, then? Who?

BERTHA. Not you at any rate.

CAPTAIN. Still not I? Who, then? Who? You seem to be well informed.

Who told you? That I should live to see my child come and tell
me to my face that I am not her father! But don't you know that you
disgrace your mother when you say that? Don't you know that it is to
her shame if it is so?

BERTHA. Don't say anything bad about Mother; do you hear?

CAPTAIN. No; you hold together, every one of you, against me! and you
have always done so.

BERTHA. Father!

CAPTAIN. Don't use that word again!

BERTHA. Father, father!

CAPTAIN [Draws her to him]. Bertha, dear, dear child, you are my
child!

Yes, Yes; it cannot be otherwise. It is so. The other was only
sickly thoughts that come with the wind like pestilence and fever. Look
at me that I may see my soul in your eyes!--But I see her soul, too!
You have two souls and you love me with one and hate me with the
other. But you must only love me!

You must have only one soul, or you will never have peace, nor I either.
You must have only one mind, which is the child of my mind and one will,
which is my will.

BERTHA. But I don't want to, I want to be myself.

CAPTAIN. You must not. You see, I am a cannibal, and I want to eat
you. Your mother wanted to eat me, but she was not allowed to. I am
Saturn who ate his children because it had been prophesied that they
would eat him. To eat or be eaten! That is the question. If I do not
eat you, you will eat me, and you have already shown your teeth! But
don't be frightened my dear child; I won't harm you.
[Goes and takes a revolver from the wall.]
BERTHA [Trying to escape]. Help, Mother, help, he wants to kill me.

NURSE [Comes in]. Mr. Adolf, what is it?

CAPTAIN [Examining revolver]. Have you taken out the cartridges?

NURSE. Yes, I put them away when I was tidying up, but sit down and be
quiet and I'll get them out again!

[She takes the Captain by the arm and gets him into a chair, into
which he sinks feebly.

Then she takes out the straitjacket and goes behind the chair. Bertha
slips out left.]
NURSE. Mr. Adolf, do you remember when you were my dear little boy and
I tucked you in at night and used to repeat: "God who holds his
children dear" to you, and do you remember how I used to get up in
the night and give you a drink, how I would light the candle and
tell you stories when you had bad dreams and couldn't sleep?

Do you remember all that?

CAPTAIN. Go on talking, Margret, it soothes my head so. Tell me some
more.

NURSE. O yes, but you must listen then! Do you remember when you
took the big kitchen knife and wanted to cut out boats with it, and how
I came in and had to get the knife away by fooling you? You were just
a little child who didn't understand, so I had to fool you, for
you didn't know that it was for your own good.

"Give me that snake," I said, "or it will bite you!" and then you let
go of the knife. [Takes the revolver out of the Captain's hand.] And
then when you had to be dressed and didn't want to, I had to
coax you and say that you should have a coat of gold and be dressed
like a prince.

And then I took your little blouse that was just made of green wool and
held it in front of you and said: "In with both arms," and then I
said, "Now sit nice and still while I button it down the back," [She
puts the straightjacket on] and then I said, "Get up now, and walk
across the floor like a good boy so I can see how it fits."

[She leads him to the sofa.] And then I said, "Now you must go to
bed."
CAPTAIN. What did you say? Was I to go to bed when I was dressed--
damnation! what have you done to me? [Tries to get free.] Ah! you cunning
devil of a woman! Who would have thought you had so much wit. [Lies
down on sofa.] Trapped, shorn, outwitted, and not to be able to
die!

NURSE. Forgive me, Mr. Adolf, forgive me, but I wanted to keep you
from killing your child.

CAPTAIN. Why didn't you let me? You say life is hell and death the kingdom
of heaven, and children belong to heaven.

NURSE.

How do you know what comes after death?

CAPTAIN. That is the only thing we do know, but of life we know
nothing! Oh, if one had only known from the beginning.

NURSE. Mr. Adolf, humble your hard heart and cry to God for mercy; it
is not yet too late. It was not too late for the thief on the cross,
when the Saviour said, "Today shalt thou be with me in Paradise."

CAPTAIN. Are you croaking for a corpse already, you old crow?

[Nurse takes a hymnbook out of her pocket.]
CAPTAIN [Calls]. Nöjd, is Nöjd out there?

[Nöjd comes in.]
CAPTAIN. Throw this woman out! She wants to suffocate me with her
hymn-book. Throw her out of the window, or up the chimney,
or anywhere.

NÖJD. [Looks at Nurse]. Heaven help you, Captain, but I can't do
that, I can't. If it were only six men, but a woman!

CAPTAIN. Can't you manage one woman, eh?

NÖJD. Of course I can,--but--well, you see, it's queer, but one never
wants to lay hands on a woman.

CAPTAIN. Why not? Haven't they laid hands on me?

NÖJD. Yes, but I can't, Captain. It's just as if you asked me to strike
the Pastor. It's second nature, like religion, I can't!

[Laura comes in, she motions Nöjd to go.]
CAPTAIN. Omphale, Omphale! Now you play with the club while Hercules spins
your wool.

LAURA [Goes to sofa].

Adolf, look at me. Do you believe that I am your enemy?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I do. I believe that you are all my enemies! My mother was
my enemy when she did not want to bring me into the world because I was
to be born with pain, and she robbed my embryonic life of its
nourishment, and made a weakling of me. My sister was my enemy when she
taught me that I must be submissive to her. The first woman I
embraced was my enemy, for she gave me ten years of illness in return
for the love I gave her. My daughter became my enemy when she had to
choose between me and you. And you, my wife, you have been my arch enemy,
because you never let up on me till I lay here lifeless.

LAURA. I don't know that. I ever thought or even intended what you think
I did. It may be that a dim desire to get rid of you as an obstacle lay
at the bottom of it, and if you see any design in my behavior, it is
possible that it existed, although I was unconscious of it. I have never
thought how it all came about, but it is the result of the course
you yourself laid out, and before God and my conscience I feel
that I am innocent, even if I am not.

Your existence has lain like a stone on my heart--lain so heavily that
I tried to shake off the oppressive burden. This is the truth, and if I
have unconsciously struck you down, I ask your forgiveness.

CAPTAIN. All that sounds plausible. But how does it help me? And whose
fault is it? Perhaps spiritual marriages! Formerly one married a wife,
now, one enters into partnership with a business woman, or goes to live
with a friend--and then one ruins the partner, and dishonors the
friend!--What has become of love, healthy sensuous love? It died in the
transformation. And what is the result of this love in shares, payable
to the bearer without joint liability? Who is the bearer when the
crash comes? Who is the fleshly father of the spiritual child?

LAURA. And as for your suspicions about the child, they are absolutely
groundless.

CAPTAIN. That's just what makes it so horrible. If at least there were
any grounds for them, it would be something to get hold of, to cling
to. Now there are only shadows that hide themselves in the bushes, and
stick out their heads and grin; it is like fighting with the air, or
firing blank cartridges in a sham fight.

A fatal reality would have called forth resistance, stirred life and
soul to action; but now my thoughts dissolve into air, and my brain
grinds a void until it is on fire.--Put a pillow under my head, and
throw something over me, I am cold. I am terribly cold!

[Laura takes her shawl and spreads it over him. Nurse goes
to get a pillow.]
LAURA. Give me your hand, friend.

CAPTAIN. My band! The hand that you have bound! Omphale! Omphale!--
But I feel your shawl against my mouth; it is as warm and soft as
your arm, and it smells of vanilla, like your hair when you were young!
Laura, when you were young, and we walked in the birch woods, with
the primroses and the thrushes--glorious, glorious!

Think how beautiful life was, and what it is now. You didn't want to
have it like this, nor did I, and yet it happened. Who then rules over
life?

LAURA. God alone rules--
CAPTAIN. The God of strife then! Or the Goddess perhaps, nowadays.--
Take away the cat that is lying on me! Take it away!

[Nurse brings in a pillow and takes the shawl away.]
CAPTAIN. Give me my army coat!--Throw it over me! [Nurse gets the
coat and puts it over him.] Ah, my rough lion skin that, you wanted to
take away from me! Omphale! Omphale! You cunning woman, champion of
peace and contriver of man's disarmament. Wake, Hercules, before they
take your club away from you! You would wile our armor from us too,
and make believe that it is nothing but glittering finery. No, it was
iron, let me tell you, before it ever glittered. In olden days the
smith made the armor, now it is the needle woman. Omphale!
Omphale! Rude strength has fallen before treacherous weakness. Out on you
infernal woman, and damnation on your sex! [He raises himself to spit
but falls back on the sofa.] What have you given me for a pillow, Margret?
It is so hard, and so cold, so cold. Come and sit near me. There.
May I put my head on your knee? So!--This is warm! Bend over
me so that I can feel your breast! Oh, it is sweet to sleep against
a woman's breast, a mother's, or a mistress's, but the mother's is
sweetest.

LAURA. Would you like to see your child, Adolf?

CAPTAIN. My child?

A man has no children, it is only woman who has children, and
therefore the future is hers when we die childless.
Oh, God, who holds his children dear!

NURSE. Listen, he is praying to God.

CAPTAIN. No, to you to put me to sleep, for I am tired, so tired.
Good night, Margret, and blessed be you among women.

[He raises himself, but falls with a cry on the nurses's lap. Laura goes
to left and calls the Doctor who comes in with the Pastor.]
LAURA. Help us, Doctor, if it isn't too late. Look, he has stopped
breathing.

DOCTOR [Feels the Captain's pulse.] It is a stroke.

PASTOR. Is he dead?

DOCTOR. No, he may yet cone back to life, but to what an awakening
we cannot tell.

PASTOR. "First death, and then the judgment."
DOCTOR. No judgment, and no accusations, you who believe that a God
shapes man's destiny must go to him about this.

NURSE. Ah, Pastor, with his last breath he prayed to God.

PASTOR [To Laura]. Is that true?

LAURA. It is.

DOCTOR. In that case, which I can understand as little as the cause of
his illness, my skill is at an end. You try yours now, Pastor.

LAURA. Is that all you have to say at this death-bed, Doctor?

DOCTOR. That is all! I know no more. Let him speak who knows more.

[Bertha comes in from left and runs to her mother.]

BERTHA. Mother, Mother!

LAURA. My child, my own child!

PASTOR. Amen.

CURTAIN.

COUNTESS JULIE
CHARACTERS
COUNTESS JULIE, twenty-five years old JEAN, a valet, thirty KRISTIN,
a cook, thirty-five FARM SERVANTS
The action takes place on Saint John's night, the mid-summer festival
surviving from pagan times.

COUNTESS JULIE
[SCENE.--A large kitchen. The ceiling and walls are partially covered
by draperies and greens. The back wall slants upward from left side
of scene. On back wall, left, are two shelves filled with copper kettles,
iron casseroles and tin pans. The shelves are trimmed with fancy scalloped
paper. To right of middle a large arched entrance with glass doors
through which one sees a fountain with a statue of Cupid, syringa
bushes in bloom and tall poplars.
To left corner of scene a large stove with hood decorated with birch
branches. To right, servants' dining table of white pine and a
few chairs. On the cud of table stands a Japanese jar filled with
syringa blossoms. The floor is strewn with juniper branches.]
[Near stove, an ice-box, sink and dish-table. A large old-fashioned
bell, hangs over the door, to left of door a speaking tube.]
[Kristin stands at stork engaged in cooking something. She wears a
light cotton dress and kitchen apron. Jean comes in wearing livery;
he carries a large pair of riding-boots with spurs, which he puts
on floor.]
JEAN. Tonight Miss Julie is crazy again, perfectly crazy.

KRISTIN. So--you're back at last.

JEAN. I went to the station with the Count and coming back I went in to
the barn and danced and then I discovered Miss Julie there leading
the dance with the gamekeeper. When she spied me, she rushed right
toward me and asked me to waltz, and then she waltzed so--never in my
life have I seen anything like it! Ah--she is crazy tonight.

KRISTIN. She has always been. But never so much as in the last fortnight,
since her engagement was broken off.

JEAN. Yes, what about that gossip? He seemed like a fine fellow although
he wasn't rich! Ach! they have so much nonsense about them. [Seats himself
at table.] It's queer about Miss Julie though-- to prefer staying here
at home among these people, eh, to going away with her father to
visit her relatives, eh?

KRISTIN. She's probably shamefaced about breaking off with her
intended.
JEAN. No doubt! but he was a likely sort just the same. Do you know,
Kristin, how it happened? I saw it, although I didn't let on.
KRISTIN. No--did you see it?
JEAN. Yes, indeed, I did. They were out in the stable yard one
evening and she was "training" him as she called it. Do you know
what happened? She made him leap over her riding whip, the way you
teach a dog to jump. He jumped it twice and got a lash each time;
but the third time he snatched the whip from her hand and broke it
into pieces. And then he vanished!
KRISTIN. Was that the way it happened? No, you don't say so!
JEAN. Yes, that's the way the thing happened. But what have you got
to give me that's good, Kristin?
KRISTIN. [She takes things from the pans on stove and serves them
to him.] Oh, it's only a bit of kidney that I cut out of the veal
steak for you.
JEAN [Smelling the food]. Splendid! My favorite delicacy. [Feeling
of plate]. But you might have warmed the plate.
KRISTIN. You're fussier than the Count, when you get started.
[Tweaks his hair.]
JEAN. Don't pull my hair! You know how sensitive I am.
KRISTIN. Oh--there, there! you know I was only loving you.
[Jean eats, and Kristin opens bottle of beer.]
JEAN. Beer on midsummer night--thank you, no! I have something
better than that myself. [Takes bottle of wine from drawer of table.]
Yellow seal, how's that? Now give me a glass--a wine glass you
understand, of course, when one drinks the genuine.
KRISTIN. [Fetches a glass. Then goes to stove and puts on casserole.]
Heaven help the woman who gets you for her husband.
Such a fuss budget!
JEAN. Oh, talk! You ought to be glad to get such a fine fellow as
I am. And I don't think it's done you any harm because I'm considered
your intended. [Tastes wine.] Excellent, very excellent! Just a
little too cold. [Warms glass with hands]. We bought this at Dijon.
It stood at four francs a litre in the bulk; then of course there
was the duty besides. What are you cooking now that smells so
infernally?
KRISTIN. Oh, it's some devil's mess that Miss Julie must have for
Diana.
JEAN. Take care of your words, Kristin. But why should you stand
there cooking for that damned dog on a holiday evening? Is it sick,
eh?
KRISTIN. Yes, it's sick. Diana sneaked out with the gatekeeper's
mongrels and now something is wrong. Miss Julie can't stand
that.
JEAN. Miss Julie has a great deal of pride about some things--but
not enough about others! Just like her mother in her lifetime; she
thrived best in the kitchen or the stable, but she must always drive
tandem--never one horse! She would go about with soiled cuffs but
she had to have the Count's crest on her cuff buttons. And as for
Miss Julie, she doesn't take much care of her appearance either. I
should say she isn't refined. Why just now out there she pulled the
forester from Anna's side and asked him to dance with her. We
wouldn't do things that way. But when the highborn wish to unbend
they become vulgar. Splendid she is though! Magnificent!
Ah, such shoulders and--
KRISTIN. Oh, don't exaggerate. I've heard what Clara says who dresses
her sometimes, I have.
JEAN. Ha! Clara--you women are always jealous of each other. I
who've been out riding with her--!!! And such a dancer!
KRISTIN. Come now, Jean, don't you want to dance with me when I'm
through?

JEAN. Of course I want to.

KRISTIN. That is a promise?
JEAN. Promise! When I say I will do a thing I do it! Thanks for the
supper--it was excellent.
[Pushes cork in the bottle with a bang. Miss Julie appears in
doorway, speaking to someone outside.]
JULIE. I'll be back soon, but don't let things wait for me.
[Jean quickly puts bottle in table drawer and rises very respectfully.]
[Enter Miss Julie and goes to Kristin.] 
JULIE. Is it done?
[Kristin indicating Jean's presence.]
JEAN [Gallantly]. Have you secrets between you?
JULIE. [Flipping handkerchief in his face]. Curious, are you?
JEAN. How sweet that violet perfume is!
JULIE [Coquettishly]. Impudence! Do you appreciate perfumes
too?
Dance--that you can do splendidly. [Jean looks towards the cooking
store]. Don't look. Away with you.
JEAN [Inquisitive but polite]. Is it some troll's dish that you are
both concocting for midsummer night? Something to pierce the future
with and evoke the face of your intended?
JULIE [Sharply]. To see him one must have sharp eyes. [To Kristin].
Put it into a bottle and cork it tight. Come now, Jean and dance a
schottische with me.

[Jean hesitates.]
JEAN. I don't wish to be impolite to anyone but--this dance I
promised to Kristin.
JULIE. Oh, she can have another--isn't that so, Kristin? Won't you
lend Jean to me.
KRISTIN. It's not for me to say, if Miss Julie is so gracious it's
not for me to say no. [To Jean]. Go you and be grateful for the
honor.
JEAN. Well said--but not wishing any offense I wonder if it is
prudent for Miss Julie to dance twice in succession with her servant,
especially as people are never slow to find meaning in--
JULIE [Breaking out]. In what? What sort of meaning? What were you
going to say?
JEAN [Taken aback]. Since Miss Julie does not understand I must
speak plainly. It may look strange to prefer one of your--
underlings--to others who covet the same honor--
JULIE. To prefer--what a thought! I, the lady of the house! I honor
the people with my presence and now that I feel like dancing I want
to have a partner who knows how to lead to avoid being ridiculous.
JEAN. As Miss Julie commands. I'm here to serve.
JULIE [Mildly]. You mustn't look upon that as a command. Tonight
we are all in holiday spirits--full of gladness and rank is flung
aside. So, give me your arm! Don't be alarmed, Kristin, I shall not
take your sweetheart away from you.
[Jean offers arm. They exit.]
[PANTOMIME.--Played as though the actress were really alone. Turns
her back to the audience when necessary. Does not look out into the
auditorium. Does not hurry as though fearing the audience might
grow restless. Soft violin music from the distance, schottische
time. Kristin hums with the music. She cleans the table; washes
plate, wipes it and puts it in the china closet. Takes off her apron
and then opens drawer of table and takes a small hand glass and
strands it against a flower pot on table. Lights a candle and heats
a hair pin with which she crimps her hair around her forehead. After
that she goes to door at back and listens. Then she returns to table
and sees the Countess' handkerchief, picks it up, smells of it,
then smooths it out and folds it. Enter Jean.]
JEAN. She is crazy I tell you! To dance like that! And the people
stand grinning at her behind the doors. What do you say to that,
Kristin?
KRISTIN. Oh, didn't I say she's been acting queer lately? But isn't
it my turn to dance now?
JEAN. You are not angry because I let myself be led by the
forelock?
KRISTIN. No, not for such a little thing. That you know well enough.
And I know my place too--
JEAN [Puts arm around her waist]. You're a pretty smart girl,
Kristin, and you ought to make a good wife.
[Enter Miss Julie.]
JULIE [Disagreeably surprised, but with forced gaiety]. You're a
charming cavalier to run away from your partner.
JEAN. On the contrary, Miss Julie, I have hastened to my neglected
one as you see.
JULIE [Changing subject]. Do you know, you dance wonderfully well!
But why are you in livery on a holiday night? Take it off
immediately.
JEAN. Will you excuse me--my coat hangs there. [Goes R. and takes
coat.]
JULIE. Does it embarrass you to change your coat in my presence?
Go to your room then--or else stay and I'll turn my back.
JEAN. With your permission, Miss Julie.He had still grace enough left to feel ashamed of his own
successful duplicity, when he was in his mother's presence.

But circumstances unhappily kept him too much apart from Mrs. Thorpe,
and so prevented the natural growth of a good feeling, which flourished
only under her influence: and which, had it been suffered to arrive at
maturity, might have led to his reform. All day he was at the office,
and his irksome life there only inclined him to look forward with
malicious triumph to the secret frolic of the night. Then, in the
evening, Mr. Thorpe often thought it advisable to harangue him
seriously, by way of not letting the reformed rake relapse for want of
a little encouraging admonition of the moral sort. Nor was Mr. Yollop
at all behindhand in taking similar precautions to secure the new
convert permanently, after having once caught him. Every word these two
gentlemen spoke only served to harden the lad afresh, and to deaden the
reproving and reclaiming influence of his mother's affectionate looks
and confiding words. "I should get nothing by it, even if I _could_
turn over a new leaf;" thought Zack, shrewdly and angrily, when his
father or his father's friend favored him with a little improving
advice: "Here they are, worrying away again already at their pattern
good boy, to make him a better."

Such was the point at which the Tribulations of Zack had arrived, at
the period when Mr. Valentine Blyth resolved to set up a domestic
Drawing Academy in his wife's room; with the double purpose of amusing
his family circle in the evening, and reforming his wild young friend
by teaching him to draw from the "glorious Antique."


CHAPTER X.

MR. BLYTH'S DRAWING ACADEMY.

When the week of delay had elapsed, and when Mrs. Blyth felt strong
enough to receive company in her room, Valentine sent the promised
invitation to Zack which summoned him to his first drawing-lesson.

The locality in which the family drawing academy was to be held
deserves a word of preliminary notice. It formed the narrow world which
bounded, by day and night alike, the existence of the painter's wife.

By throwing down a partition-wall, Mrs. Blyth's room had been so
enlarged, as to extend along the whole breadth of one side of the
house, measuring from the front to the back garden windows.
Considerable as the space was which had been thus obtained, every part
of it from floor to ceiling was occupied by objects of beauty proper to
the sphere in which they were placed: some, solid and serviceable,
where usefulness was demanded; others light and elegant, where ornament
alone was necessary--and all won gloriously by Valentine's brush; by
the long, loving, unselfish industry of many years. Mrs. Blyth's bed,
like everything else that she used in her room, was so arranged as to
offer her the most perfect comfort and luxury attainable in her
suffering condition. The framework was broad enough to include within
its dimensions a couch for day and a bed for night. Her reading easel
and work-table could be moved within reach, in whatever position she
lay. Immediately above her hung an extraordinary complication of loose
cords, which ran through ornamental pulleys of the quaintest kind,
fixed at different places in the ceiling, and communicating with the
bell, the door, and a pane of glass in the window which opened easily
on hinges. These were Valentine's own contrivances to enable his wife
to summon attendance, admit visitors, and regulate the temperature of
her room at will, by merely pulling at any one of the loops hanging
within reach of her hand, and neatly labeled with ivory tablets,
inscribed "Bell," "Door," "Window." The cords comprising this rigging
for invalid use were at least five times more numerous than was
necessary for the purpose they were designed to serve; but Mrs. Blyth
would never allow them to be simplified by dexterous hands. Clumsy as
their arrangement might appear to others, in her eyes it was without a
fault: every useless cord was sacred from the reforming knife, for
Valentine's sake.

Imprisoned to one room, as she had now been for years, she had not lost
her natural womanly interest in the little occupations and events of
household life. From the studio to the kitchen, she managed every day,
through channels of communication invented by herself, to find out the
latest domestic news; to be present in spirit at least if not in body,
at family consultations which could not take place in her room; to know
exactly how her husband was getting on downstairs with his pictures; to
rectify in time any omission of which Mr. Blyth or Madonna might be
guilty in making the dinner arrangements, or in sending orders to
tradespeople; to keep the servants attentive to their work, and to
indulge or control them, as the occasion might require. Neither by look
nor manner did she betray any of the sullen listlessness or fretful
impatience sometimes attendant on long, incurable illness. Her voice,
low as its tones were, was always cheerful, and varied musically and
pleasantly with her varying thoughts. On her days of weakness, when she
suffered much under her malady, she was accustomed to be quite still
and quiet, and to keep her room darkened--these being the only signs by
which any increase in her disorder could be detected by those about
her. She never complained when the bad symptoms came on; and never
voluntarily admitted, even on being questioned, that the spine was more
painful to her than usual.

She was dressed very prettily for the opening night of the Drawing
Academy, wearing a delicate lace cap, and a new silk gown of
Valentine's choosing, made full enough to hide the emaciation of her
figure. Her husband's love, faithful through all affliction and change
to the girlish image of its first worship, still affectionately exacted
from her as much attention to the graces and luxuries of dress as she
might have bestowed on them of her own accord, in the best and gayest
days of youth and health. She had never looked happier and better in
any new gown than in that, which Mr. Blyth had insisted on giving her,
to commemorate the establishment of the domestic drawing school in her
own room.

Seven o'clock had been fixed as the hour at which the business of the
academy was to begin. Always punctual, wherever his professional
engagements were concerned, Valentine put the finishing touch to his
preparations as the clock struck; and perching himself gaily on a
corner of Mrs. Blyth's couch, surveyed his drawing-boards, his lamps,
and the plaster cast set up for his pupils to draw from, with bland
artistic triumph.

"Now, Lavvie," he said, "before Zack comes and confuses me, I'll just
check off all the drawing things one after another, to make sure that
nothing's left down stairs in the studio, which ought to be up here."

As her husband said these words, Mrs. Blyth touched Madonna gently on
the shoulder. For some little time the girl had been sitting
thoughtfully, with her head bent down, her cheek resting on her hand,
and a bright smile just parting her lips very prettily. The affliction
which separated her from the worlds of hearing and speech--which set
her apart among her fellow-creatures, a solitary living being in a
sphere of death-silence that others might approach, but might never
enter--gave a touching significance to the deep, meditative stillness
that often passed over her suddenly, even in the society of her adopted
parents, and of friends who were all talking around her. Sometimes, the
thoughts by which she was thus absorbed--thoughts only indicated to
others by the shadow of their mysterious presence, moving in the
expression that passed over her face--held her long under their
influence: sometimes, they seemed to die away in her mind almost as
suddenly as they had arisen to life in it. It was one of Valentine's
many eccentric fancies that she was not meditating only, at such times
as these, but that, deaf and dumb as she was with the creatures of this
world, she could talk with the angels, and could hear what the heavenly
voices said to her in return.

The moment she was touched on the shoulder, she looked up, and nestled
close to her adopted mother; who, passing one arm round her neck,
explained to her, by means of the manual signs of the deaf and dumb
alphabet, what Valentine was saying at that moment.

Nothing was more characteristic of Mrs. Blyth's warm sympathies and
affectionate consideration for Madonna than this little action. The
kindest people rarely think it necessary, however well practiced in
communicating by the fingers with the deaf, to keep them informed of
any ordinary conversation which may be proceeding in their presence.
Wise disquisitions, witty sayings, curious stories, are conveyed to
their minds by sympathizing friends and relatives, as a matter of
course; but the little chatty nothings of everyday talk, which most
pleasantly and constantly employ our speaking and address our hearing
faculties, are thought too slight and fugitive in their nature to be
worthy of transmission by interpreting fingers or pens, and are
consequently seldom or never communicated to the deaf. No deprivation
attending their affliction is more severely felt by them than the
special deprivation which thus ensues; and which exiles their
sympathies, in a great measure, from all share in the familiar social
interests of life around them.

Mrs. Blyth's kind heart, quick intelligence, and devoted affection for
her adopted child, had long since impressed it on her, as the first of
duties and pleasures, to prevent Madonna from feeling the excluding
influences of her calamity, while in the society of others, by keeping
her well informed of every one of the many conversations, whether
jesting or earnest, that were held in her presence, in the
invalid-room. For years and years past, Mrs. Blyth's nimble fingers had
been accustomed to interpret all that was said by her bedside before
the deaf and dumb girl, as they were interpreting for her now.

"Just stop me, Lavvie, if I miss anything out, in making sure that I've
got all that's wanted for everybody's drawing lesson," said Valentine,
preparing to reckon up the list of his materials correctly, by placing
his right forefinger on his left thumb. "First, there's the statue that
all my students are to draw from--the Dying Gladiator. Secondly, the
drawing-boards and paper. Thirdly, the black and white chalk.
Fourthly,--where are the port-crayons to hold the chalk? Down in the
painting-room, of course. No! no! don't trouble Madonna to fetch them.
Tell her to poke the fire instead: I'll be back directly." And Mr.
Blyth skipped out of the room as nimbly as if he had been fifteen
instead of fifty.

No sooner was Valentine's back turned than Mrs. Blyth's hand was passed
under the pretty swan's-down coverlet that lay over her couch, as if in
search of something hidden beneath it. In a moment the hand reappeared,
holding a chalk drawing very neatly framed. It was Madonna's copy from
the head of the Venus de' Medici--the same copy which Zack had honored
with his most superlative exaggeration of praise, at his last visit to
the studio. She had not since forgotten, or altered her purpose of
making him a present of the drawing which he had admired so much. It
had been finished with the utmost care and completeness which she could
bestow upon it; had been put into a very pretty frame which she had
paid for out of her own little savings of pocket-money; and was now
hidden under Mrs. Blyth's coverlet, to be drawn forth as a grand
surprise for Zack, and for Valentine too, on that very evening.

After looking once or twice backwards and forwards between the copyist
and the copy, her pale kind face beaming with the quiet merriment that
overspread it, Mrs. Blyth laid down the drawing, and began talking with
her fingers to Madonna.

"So you will not even let me tell Valentine who this is a present for?"
were the first words which she signed.

The girl was sitting with her back half turned on the drawing; glancing
at it quickly from time to time with a strange shyness and indecision,
as if the work of her own hands had undergone some transformation which
made her doubt whether she was any longer privileged to look at it. She
shook her head in reply to the question just put to her, then moved
round suddenly on her chair; her fingers playing nervously with the
fringes of the coverlet at her side.

"We all like Zack," proceeded Mrs. Blyth, enjoying the amusement which
her womanly instincts extracted from Madonna's confusion; "but you must
like him very much, love, to take more pains with this particular
drawing than with any drawing you ever did before."

This time Madonna neither looked up nor moved an inch in her chair, her
fingers working more and more nervously amid the fringe; her
treacherous cheeks, neck, and bosom answered for her.

Mrs. Blyth touched her shoulder gaily, and, after placing the drawing
again under the coverlet, made her look up, while signing these words;

"I shall give the drawing to Zack very soon after he comes in. It is
sure to make him happy for the rest of the evening, and fonder of you
than ever."

Madonna's eyes followed Mrs. Blyth's fingers eagerly to the last letter
they formed; then rose softly to her face with the same wistful
questioning look which they had assumed before Valentine, years and
years ago, when he first interfered to protect her in the traveling
circus. There was such an irresistible tenderness in the faint smile
that wavered about her lips; such a sadness of innocent beauty in her
face, now growing a shade paler than it was wont to be, that Mrs.
Blyth's expression became serious the instant their eyes met. She drew
the girl forward and kissed her. The kiss was returned many times, with
a passionate warmth and eagerness remarkably at variance with the usual
gentleness of all Madonna's actions. What had changed her thus? Before
it was possible to inquire or to think, she had broken away from the
kind arms that were round her, and was kneeling with her face hidden in
the pillows that lay over the head of the couch.

"I must quiet her directly. I ought to make her feel that this is
wrong," said Mrs. Blyth to herself; looking startled and grieved as she
withdrew her hand wet with tears, after trying vainly to raise the
girl's face from the pillows. "She has been thinking too much
lately--too much about that drawing; too much, I am afraid, about
Zack."

Just at that moment Mr. Blyth opened the door. Feeling the slight
shock, as he let it bang to after entering, Madonna instantly started
up and ran to the fireplace. Valentine did not notice her when he came
in.

He bustled about the neighborhood of the Dying Gladiator, talking
incessantly, arranging his port-crayons by the drawing-boards, and
trimming the lamps that lit the model. Mrs. Blyth cast many an anxious
look towards the fireplace. After the lapse of a few minutes Madonna
turned round and came back to the couch. The traces of tears had almost
entirely disappeared from her face. She made a little appealing gesture
that asked Mrs. Blyth to be silent about what had happened while they
were alone; kissed, as a sign that she wished to be forgiven, the hand
that was held out to her; and then sat down quietly again in her
accustomed place.

At the same moment a voice was heard talking and laughing boisterously
in the hall. Then followed a long whispering, succeeded by a burst of
giggling from the housemaid, who presently ascended to Mrs. Blyth's
room alone, and entered--after an explosion of suppressed laughter
behind the door--holding out at arm's length a pair of boxing-gloves.

"If you please, sir," said the girl, addressing Valentine, and
tittering hysterically at every third word, "Master Zack's down stairs
on the landing, and he says you're to be so kind as put on these things
(he's putting another pair on hisself) and give him the pleasure of
your company for a few minutes in the painting-room."

"Come on, Blyth," cried the voice from the stairs. "I told you I should
bring the gloves, and make a fighting man of you, last time I was here,
you know. Come on! I only want to open your chest by knocking you about
a little in the painting-room before we begin to draw."

The servant still held the gloves away from her at the full stretch of
her arm, as if she feared they were yet alive with the pugilistic
energies that had been imparted to them by their last wearer. Mrs.
Blyth burst out laughing, Valentine followed her example. The housemaid
began to look bewildered, and begged to know if her master would be so
kind as to take "the things" away from her.

"Did you say, come up stairs?" continued the voice outside. "All right;
I have no objection, if Mrs. Blyth hasn't." Here Zack came in with his
boxing-gloves fitted on. "How are you, Blyth? These are the pills for
that sluggish old liver of yours that you're always complaining of. Put
'em on. Stand with your left leg forward--keep your right leg easily
bent--and fix your eye on me!"

"Hold your tongue!" cried Mr. Blyth, at last recovering breath enough
to assert his dignity as master of the new drawing-school. "Take off
those things directly! What do you mean, sir, by coming into my
academy, which is devoted to the peaceful arts, in the attitude of a
prize-fighter?"

"Don't lose your temper, my dear fellow," rejoined Zack; "you will
never learn to use your fists prettily if you do. Here, Patty, the
boxing lesson's put off till to-morrow. Take the gloves up-stairs into
your master's dressing-room, and put them in the drawer where his clean
shirts are, because they must be kept nice and dry. Shake hands, Mrs.
Blyth: it does one good to see you laugh like that, you look so much
the better for it. And how is Madonna? I'm afraid she's been sitting
before the fire, and trying to spoil her pretty complexion. Why, what's
the matter with her? Poor little darling, her hands are quite cold!"

"Come to your lesson, sir, directly," said Valentine, assuming his most
despotic voice, and leading the disorderly student by the collar to his
appointed place.

"Hullo!" cried Zack, looking at the Dying Gladiator. "The gentleman in
plaster's making a face--I'm afraid he isn't quite well. I say, Blyth,
is that the statue of an ancient Greek patient, suffering under the
prescription of an ancient Greek physician?"

_"Will_ you hold your tongue and take up your drawing-board?" cried Mr.
Blyth. "You young barbarian, you deserve to be expelled my academy for
talking in that way of the Dying Gladiator. Now then; where's Madonna?
No! stop where you are, Zack. I'll show her her place, and give her the
drawing-board. Wait a minute, Lavvie! Let me prop you up comfortably
with the pillows before you begin. There! I never saw a more beautiful
effect of light and shade, my dear, than there is on your view of the
model. Has everybody got a port-crayon and two bits of chalk? Yes,
everybody has. Order! order! order!" shouted Valentine, suddenly
forgetting his assumed dignity in the exultation of the moment. "Mr.
Blyth's drawing academy for the promotion of family Art is now open,
and ready for general inspection. Hooray!"

"Hooray!" echoed Zack, "hooray for family Art! I say, Blyth, which
chalk do I begin with--the white or the black? The black--eh? Do I
start with the what's his name's wry face? and if so, where am I to
begin? With his eyes, or his nose, or his mouth, or the top of his
head, or the bottom of his chin--or what?"

"First sketch in the general form with a light and flowing stroke, and
without attention to details," said Mr. Blyth, illustrating these
directions by waving his hand gracefully about his own person. "Then
measure with the eye, assisted occasionally by the port-crayon, the
proportion of the parts. Then put dots on the paper; a dot where his
head comes; another dot where his elbows and knees come, and so forth.
Then strike it all in boldly--it's impossible to give you better advice
than that--strike it in, Zack; strike it in boldly!"

"Here goes at his head and shoulders to begin with," said Zack, taking
one comprehensive and confident look at the Dying Gladiator, and
drawing a huge half circle, with a preliminary flourish of his hand on
the paper. "Oh, confound it, I've broken the chalk!"

"Of course you have," retorted Valentine. "Take another bit; the
Academy grants supplementary chalk to ignorant students, who dig their
lines on the paper, instead of drawing them. Now, break off a bit of
that bread-crumb, and rub out what you have done. 'Buy a penny loaf,
and rub it all out,' as Mr. Fuseli once said to me in the Schools of
the Royal Academy, when I showed him my first drawing, and was
excessively conceited about it."

"I remember," said Mrs. Blyth, "when my father was working at his great
engraving, from Mr. Scumble's picture of the 'Fair Gleaner Surprised,'
that he used often to say how much harder his art was than drawing,
because you couldn't rub out a false line on copper, like you could on
paper. We all thought he never would get that print done, he used to
groan over it so in the front drawing-room, where he was then at work.
And the publishers paid him infamously, all in bills, which he had to
get discounted; and the people who gave him the money cheated him. My
mother said it served him right for being always so imprudent; which I
thought very hard on him, and I took his part--so harassed too as he
was by the tradespeople at that time."

"I can feel for him, my love," said Valentine, pointing a piece of
chalk for Zack. "The tradespeople have harassed _me_--not because I
could not pay them certainly, but because I could not add up their
bills. Never owe any man enough, Zack, to give him the chance of
punishing you for being in his debt, with a sum to do in simple
addition. At the time when I had bills (go on with your drawing; you
can listen, and draw too), I used, of course, to think it necessary to
check the tradespeople, and see that their Total was right. You will
hardly believe me, but I don't remember ever making the sum what the
shop made it, on more than about three occasions. And, what was worse,
if I tried a second time, I could not even get it to agree with what I
had made it myself the first time. Thank Heaven, I've no difficulties
of that sort to grapple with now! Everything's paid for the moment it
comes in. If the butcher hands a leg of mutton to the cook over the
airey railings, the cook hands him back six and nine--or whatever it
is--and takes his bill and receipt. I eat my dinners now, with the
blessed conviction that they won't all disagree with me in an
arithmetical point of view at the end of the year. What are you
stopping and scratching your head for in that way?"

"It's no use," replied Zack; "I've tried it a dozen times, and I find I
can't draw a Gladiator's nose."

"Can't!" cried Mr. Blyth, "what do you mean by applying the word
'can't' to any process of art in _my_ presence? There, that's the line
of the Gladiator's nose. Go over it yourself with this fresh piece of
chalk. No; wait a minute. Come here first, and see how Madonna is
striking in the figure; the front view of it, remember, which is the
most difficult. She hasn't worked as fast as usual, though. Do you find
your view of the model a little too much for you, my love?" continued
Valentine, transferring the last words to his fingers, to communicate
them to Madonna.

She shook her head in answer. It was not the difficulty of drawing from
the cast before her, but the difficulty of drawing at all, which was
retarding her progress. Her thoughts would wander to the copy of the
Venus de Medici that was hidden under Mrs. Blyth's coverlid; would
vibrate between trembling eagerness to see it presented without longer
delay, and groundless apprehension that Zack might, after all, not
remember it, or not care to have it when it was given to him. And as
her thoughts wandered, so her eyes followed them. Now she stole an
anxious, inquiring look at Mrs. Blyth, to see if her hand was straying
towards the hidden drawing. Now she glanced shyly at Zack--only by
moments at a time, and only when he was hardest at work with his
port-crayon--to assure herself that he was always in the same good
humor, and likely to receive her little present kindly, and with some
appearance of being pleased to see what pains she had taken with it. In
this way her attention wandered incessantly from her employment; and
thus it was that she made so much less progress than usual, and caused
Mr. Blyth to suspect that the task he had set her was almost beyond her
abilities.

"Splendid beginning, isn't it?" said Zack, looking over her drawing. "I
defy the whole Royal Academy to equal it," continued the young
gentleman, scrawling this uncompromising expression of opinion on the
blank space at the bottom of Madonna's drawing, and signing his name
with a magnificent flourish at the end.

His arm touched her shoulder while he wrote. She colored a little, and
glanced at him, playfully affecting to look very proud of his sentence
of approval--then hurriedly resumed her drawing as their eyes met. He
was sent back to his place by Valentine before he could write anything
more. She took some of the bread-crumb near her to rub out what he had
written--hesitated as her hand approached the lines--colored more
deeply than before, and went on with her drawing, leaving the letters
beneath it to remain just as young Thorpe had traced them.

"I shall never be able to draw as well as she does," said Zack, looking
at the little he had done with a groan of despair. "The fact is, I
don't think drawing's my forte. It's color, depend upon it. Only wait
till I come to that; and see how I'll lay on the paint! Didn't you find
drawing infernally difficult, Blyth, when you first began?"

"I find it difficult still, Master Zack," replied Mr. Blyth. "Art
wouldn't be the glorious thing it is, if it wasn't all difficulty from
beginning to end; if it didn't force out all the fine points in a man's
character as soon as he takes to it. Just eight o'clock," continued
Valentine, looking at his watch. "Put down your drawing-boards for the
present. I pronounce the sitting of this Academy to be suspended till
after tea."

"Valentine, dear," said Mrs. Blyth, smiling mysteriously, as she
slipped her hand under the coverlid of the couch, "I can't get Madonna
to look at me, and I want her here. Will you oblige me by bringing her
to my bedside?"

"Certainly, my love," returned Mr. Blyth, obeying the request. "You
have a double claim on my services to-night, for you have shown
yourself the most promising of my pupils. Come here, Zack, and see what
Mrs. Blyth has done. The best drawing of the evening--just what I
thought it would be--the best drawing of the evening!"

Zack, who had been yawning disconsolately over his own copy, with his
fists stuck into his cheeks, and his elbows on his knees, bustled up to
the couch directly. As he approached, Madonna tried to get back to her
former position at the fireplace, but was prevented by Mrs. Blyth, who
kept tight hold of her hand. Just then, Zack fixed his eyes on her and
increased her confusion.

"She looks prettier than ever to-night, don't she, Mrs. Blyth?" he
said, sitting down and yawning again. "I always like her best when her
eyes brighten up and look twenty different ways in a minute, just as
they're doing now. She may not be so like Raphael's pictures at such
times, I dare say (here he yawned once more); but for my part--What's
she wanting to get away for? And what are you laughing about, Mrs.
Blyth? I say, Valentine, there's some joke going on here between the
ladies!"

"Do you remember this, Zack?" asked Mrs. Blyth, tightening her hold of
Madonna with one hand, and producing the framed drawing of the Venus
de' Medici with the other.

"Madonna's copy from my bust of the Venus!" cried Valentine,
interposing with his usual readiness, and skipping forward with his
accustomed alacrity.

"Madonna's copy from Blyth's bust of the Venus," echoed Zack, coolly;
his slippery memory not having preserved the slightest recollection of
the drawing at first sight of it.

"Dear me! how nicely it's framed, and how beautifully she has finished
it!" pursued Valentine, gently patting Madonna's shoulder, in token of
his high approval and admiration.

"Very nicely framed, and beautifully finished, as you say, Blyth,"
glibly repeated Zack, rising from his chair, and looking rather
perplexed, as he noticed the expression with which Mrs. Blyth was
regarding him.

"But who got it framed?" asked Valentine. "She would never have any of
her drawings framed before. I don't understand what it all means."

"No more do I," said Zack, dropping back into his chair in lazy
astonishment. "Is it some riddle, Mrs. Blyth? Something about why is
Madonna like the Venus de' Medici, eh? If it is, I object to the
riddle, because she's a deal prettier than any plaster face that ever
was made. Your face beats Venus's hollow," continued Zack,
communicating this bluntly sincere compliment to Madonna by the signs
of the deaf and dumb alphabet.

She smiled as she watched the motion of his fingers--perhaps at his
mistakes, for he made two in expressing one short sentence of five
words--perhaps at the compliment, homely as it was.

"Oh, you men, how dreadfully stupid you are sometimes!" exclaimed Mrs.
Blyth. "Why, Valentine, dear, it's the easiest thing in the world to
guess what she has had the drawing framed for. To make it a present to
somebody, of course! And who does she mean to give it to?"

"Ah! who indeed?" interrupted Zack, sliding down cozily in his chair,
resting his head on the back rail, and spreading his legs out before
him at full stretch.

"I have a great mind to throw the drawing at your head, instead of
giving it to you!" cried Mrs. Blyth, losing all patience.

"You don't mean to say the drawing's a present to _me!"_ exclaimed
Zack, starting from his chair with one prodigious jump of astonishment.

"You deserve to have your ears well boxed for not having guessed that
it was long ago!" retorted Mrs. Blyth. "Have you forgotten how you
praised that very drawing, when you saw it begun in the studio? Didn't
you tell Madonna--"

"Oh! the dear, good, generous, jolly little soul!" cried Zack,
snatching up the drawing from the couch, as the truth burst upon him at
last in a flash of conviction. "Tell her on _your_ fingers, Mrs. Blyth,
how proud I am of my present. I can't do it with mine, because I can't
let go of the drawing. Here, look here!--make her look here, and see
how I like it!" And Zack hugged the copy of the Venus de' Medici to his
waistcoat, by way of showing how highly he prized it.

At this outburst of sentimental pantomime, Madonna raised her head and
glanced at young Thorpe. Her face, downcast, anxious, and averted even
from Mrs. Blyth's eyes during the last few minutes (as if she had
guessed every word that could pain her, out of all that had been said
in her presence), now brightened again with pleasure as she looked
up--with innocent, childish pleasure, that affected no reserve, dreaded
no misconstruction, foreboded no disappointment. Her eyes, turning
quickly from Zack, and appealing gaily to Valentine, beamed with
triumph when he pointed to the drawing, and smilingly raised his hands
in astonishment, as a sign that he had been pleasantly surprised by the
presentation of her drawing to his new pupil. Mrs. Blyth felt the hand
which she still held in hers, and which had hitherto trembled a little
from time to time, grow steady and warm in her grasp, and dropped it.
There was no fear that Madonna would now leave the side of the couch
and steal away by herself to the fireplace.

"Go on, Mrs. Blyth--you never make mistakes in talking on your fingers,
and I always do--go on, please, and tell her how much I thank her,"
continued Zack, holding out the drawing at arm's length, and looking at
it with his head on one side, by way of imitating Valentine's manner of
studying his own pictures. "Tell her I'll take such care of it as I
never took of anything before in my life. Tell her I'll hang it up in
my bed-room, where I can see it every morning as soon as I wake. Have
you told her that?--or shall I write it on her slate? Hullo! here comes
the tea. And, by heavens, a whole bagful of muffins! What!!! the
kitchen fire's too black to toast them. _I'll_ undertake the whole lot
in the drawing academy. Here, Patty, give us the toasting-fork: I'm
going to begin. I never saw such a splendid fire for toasting muffins
before in my life! Rum-dum-diddy-iddy-dum-dee, dum-diddy-iddy-dum!" And
Zack fell on his knees at the fireplace, humming "Rule Britannia," and
toasting his first muffin in triumph; utterly forgetting that he had
left Madonna's drawing lying neglected, with its face downwards, on the
end of Mrs. Blyth's couch.

Valentine, who in the innocence of his heart suspected nothing, burst
out laughing at this new specimen of Zack's inveterate flightiness. His
kind instincts, however, guided his hand at the same moment to the
drawing. He took it up carefully, and placed it on a low bookcase at
the opposite side of the room. If any increase had been possible in his
wife's affection for him, she would have loved him better than ever at
the moment when he performed that one little action.

As her husband removed the drawing, Mrs. Blyth looked at Madonna. The
poor girl stood shrinking close to the couch, with her hands clasped
tightly together in front of her, and with no trace of their natural
lovely color left on her cheeks. Her eyes followed Valentine listlessly
to the bookcase, then turned towards Zack, not reproachfully nor
angrily--not even tearfully--but again with that same look of patient
sadness, of gentle resignation to sorrow, which used to mark their
expression so tenderly in the days of her bondage among the mountebanks
of the traveling circus. So she stood, looking towards the fireplace
and the figure kneeling at it, bearing her new disappointment just as
she had borne many a former mortification that had tried her sorely
while she was yet a little child. How carefully she had labored at that
neglected drawing in the secrecy of her own room! How happy she had
been in anticipating the moment when it would be given to young Thorpe;
in imagining what he would say on receiving it, and how he would
communicate his thanks to her; in wondering what he would do with it
when he got it: where he would hang it, and whether he would often look
at his present after he had got used to seeing it on the wall! Thoughts
such as these had made the moment of presenting that drawing the moment
of a great event in her life--and there it was now, placed on one side
by other hands than the hands into which it had been given; laid down
carelessly at the mere entrance of a servant with a tea-tray; neglected
for the childish pleasure of kneeling on the hearth-rug, and toasting a
muffin at a clear coal-fire!

Mrs. Blyth's generous, impulsive nature, and sensitively tempered
affection for her adopted child, impelled her to take instant and not
very merciful notice of Zack's unpardonable thoughtlessness. Her face
flushed, her dark eyes sparkled, as he turned quickly on her couch
towards the fire-place. But, before she could utter a word, Madonna's
hand was on her lips, and Madonna's eyes were fixed with a terrified,
imploring expression on her face. The next instant, the girl's
trembling fingers rapidly signed these words:

"Pray--pray don't say anything! I would not have you speak to him just
now for the world!"

Mrs. Blyth hesitated, and looked towards her husband; but he was away
at the other end of the room, amusing himself professionally by casting
the drapery of the window-curtains hither and thither into all sorts of
picturesque folds. She looked next at Zack. Just at that moment he was
turning his muffin and singing louder than ever. The temptation to
startle him out of his provoking gaiety by a good sharp reproof was
almost too strong to be resisted; but Mrs. Blyth forced herself to
resist it, nevertheless, for Madonna's sake. She did not, however,
communicate with the girl, either by signs or writing, until she had
settled herself again in her former position; then her fingers
expressed these sentences of reply:

"If you promise not to let his thoughtlessness distress you, my love, I
promise not to speak to him about it. Do you agree to that bargain? If
you do, give me a kiss."

Madonna only paused to repress a sigh that was just stealing from her,
before she gave the required pledge. Her cheeks did not recover their
color, nor her lips the smile that had been playing on them earlier in
the evening; but she arranged Mrs. Blyth's pillow even more carefully
than usual, before she left the couch, and went away to perform as
neatly and prettily as ever, her own little household duty of making
the tea.

Zack, entirely unconscious of having given pain to one lady and cause
of anger to another, had got on to his second muffin, and had changed
his accompanying song from "Rule Britannia" to the "Lass o' Gowrie,"
when the hollow, ringing sound of rapidly-running wheels penetrated
into the room from the frosty road outside; advancing nearer and
nearer, and then suddenly ceasing opposite Mr. Blyth's own door.

"Dear me!--surely that's at our gate," exclaimed Valentine; "who can be
coming to see us so late, on such a cold night as this? And in a
carriage, too!"

"It's a cab, by the rattling of the wheels, and it brings us the 'Lass
o' Gowrie,'" sang Zack, combining the original text of his song, and
the suggestion of a possible visitor, in his concluding words.

"Do leave off singing nonsense out of tune, and let us listen when the
door opens," said Mrs. Blyth, glad to seize the slightest opportunity
of administering the smallest reproof to Zack.

"Suppose it should be Mr. Gimble, come to deal at last for that picture
of mine that he has talked of buying so long," exclaimed Valentine.

"Suppose it should be my father!" cried Zack, suddenly turning round on
his knees with a very blank face. "Or that infernal old Yollop, with
his gooseberry eyes and his hands full of tracts. They're both of them
quite equal to coming after me and spoiling my pleasure here, just as
they spoil it everywhere else."

"Hush!" said Mrs. Blyth. "The visitor has come in, whoever it is. It
can't be Mr. Gimble, Valentine; he always runs up two stairs at a
time."

"And this is one of the heavy-weights. Not an ounce less than sixteen
stone, I should say, by the step," remarked Zack, letting his muffin
burn while he listened.

"It can't be that tiresome old Lady Brambledown come to worry you again
about altering her picture," said Mrs. Blyth.

"Stop! surely it isn't--" began Valentine. But before he could say
another word, the door opened; and, to the utter amazement of everybody
but the poor girl whose ear no voice could reach, the servant
announced:

"MRS. PECKOVER."


CHAPTER XI.

THE BREWING OF THE STORM.

Time had lavishly added to Mrs. Peckover's size, but had generously
taken little or nothing from her in exchange. Her hair had certainly
turned grey since the period when Valentine first met her at the
circus; but the good-humored face beneath was just as hearty to look at
now, as ever it had been in former days. Her cheeks had ruddily
expanded; her chin had passed from the double to the triple stage of
jovial development--any faint traces of a waist which she might
formerly have possessed were utterly obliterated--but it was pleasantly
evident, to judge only from the manner of her bustling entry into Mrs.
Blyth's room, that her active disposition had lost nothing of its early
energy, and could still gaily defy all corporeal obstructions to the
very last.

Nodding and smiling at Mr. and Mrs. Blyth, and Zack, till her vast
country bonnet trembled aguishly on her head, the good woman advanced,
shaking every moveable object in the room, straight to the tea-table,
and enfolded Madonna in her capacious arms. The girl's light figure
seemed to disappear in a smothering circumambient mass of bonnet
ribbons and unintelligible drapery, as Mrs. Is there no gain to live in
amity?

MUZA. The gain of traffickers and idle men:
Courage and zeal expire upon such calms.
Further, what amity can Moors expect When you have joined your
forces?

JUL. From the hour That he was vanquished I have laid aside All power,
all arms.

MUZA. How can we trust thee, once Deceived, and oftener than this once
despised?
Thou camest hither with no other aim Than to deprive Roderigo of
his crown For thy own brow.

EGI. Julian, base man, 'tis true.
He comes a prince, no warrior, at this hour.

MUZA. His sword, O queen, would not avail him now.

ABD. Julian, I feel less anger than regret.
No violence of speech, no obloquy, No accusation shall escape my
lips:
Need there is none, nor reason, to avoid My questions: if thou value
truth, reply.

Hath not Roderigo left the town and camp?
Hath not thy daughter?

EGI. Past the little brook Toward the Betis--from a tower I saw The
fugitives, far on their way; they went Over one bridge, each with armed
men--not half A league of road between them--and had joined But that
the olive-groves along the path Concealed them from each other--not
from me:
Beneath me the whole level I surveyed, And, when my eyes no longer
could discern Which track they took, I knew it from the storks
Rising in clouds above the reedy plain.

MUZA. Deny it, if thou canst.

JUL. I ordered it.

ABD. None could besides: lo!

things in such a mass Falling together on observant minds, Create
suspicion and establish proof:
Wanted there fresh--why not employ our arms?

Why go alone?

MUZA.

To parley, to conspire, To reunite the Spaniards, which we saw, To
give up treaties, close up enmities, And ratify the deed with Moorish
blood.

JUL. Gladly would Spain procure your safe return, Gladly would pay large
treasures, for the aid You brought against oppression - 
MUZA.

Pay she shall - The treasures of her soil, her ports, her youth:
If she resist, if she tumultuously Call forth her brigands and we
lose a man, Dreadful shall be our justice; war shall rage Through
every city, hamlet, house, and field, And, universal o'er the gasping
land, Depopulation.

JUL. They shall rue the day Who dare these things.

MUZA. Let order then prevail.

In vain thou sendest far away thy child, Thy counsellor the
metropolitan, And Sisabert--prudence is mine no less.

Divide with us our conquests, but the king Must be delivered up.

JUL. Never by me.

MUZA. False then were thy reproaches, false thy grief.

JUL. O Egilona! were thine also feigned?

ABD. Say, lovely queen, neglectful of thy charms Turned he his
eyes toward the young Covilla?
Did he pursue her to the mad excess Of breaking off her vows to Sisabert,
And marrying her, against the Christian law?

MUZA. Did he prefer her so?

ABD. Could he prefer To Egilona -
EGI. Her! the child Covilla?
Eternal hider of a foolish face, Incapable of anything but shame,
To me?

old man! to me? O Abdalazis!
No: he but followed with slow pace my hate.
And cannot pride check these unseemly tears.

[Goes.

MUZA. The most offended, an offended woman, A wife, a queen, is silent
on the deed.

ABD.

Thou disingenuous and ignoble man, Spreading these rumours! sending
into exile All those their blighting influence injured most:
And whom?

thy daughter and adopted son, The chieftains of thy laws and
of thy faith.
Call any witnesses, proclaim the truth, And set, at last, thy heart, thy
fame, at rest.

JUL. Not, if I purposed or desired to live, My own dishonour would I
e'er proclaim Amid vindictive and reviling foes.

MUZA. Calling us foes, avows he not his guilt?
Condemns he not the action we condemn, Owning it his, and owning
it dishonour?

'Tis well my cares pressed forward, and struck home.

JUL. Why smilest thou?

I never saw that smile But it portended an atrocious deed.

MUZA. After our manifold and stern assaults, With every tower and
battlement destroyed, The walls of Ceuta still were strong enough -
JUL. For what? who boasted now her brave defence, Or who forbade your
entrance, after peace?

MUZA. None: for who could?

their engines now arose To throw thy sons into the arms of
death.
For this erect they their proud crests again.
Mark him at last turn pale before a Moor.

JUL. Imprudent have they been, their youth shall plead.

ABD. O father, could they not have been detained?

MUZA. Son, thou art safe and wert not while they lived.

ABD. I feared them not.

MUZA. And therefore wert not safe:

Under their star the blooming Egilona Would watch for thee the
nuptial lamp in vain.

JUL. Never, oh never, hast thou worked a wile So barren of all good! speak
out at once, What hopest thou by striking this alarm?
It shocks my reason, not my fears or fondness.

MUZA. Be happy then as ignorance can be; Soon wilt thou hear it shouted
from our ranks.
Those who once hurled defiance o'er our heads, Scorning our arms, and
scoffing at our faith, The nightly wolf hath visited, unscared, And
loathed them as her prey; for famine first, Achieving in few days
the boast of year; Sank their young eyes and opened us the
gates:
Ceuta, her port, her citadel, is ours.

JUL. Blessed boys! inhuman as thou art, what guilt Was theirs?

MUZA. Their father's.

JUL. Oh, support me, Heaven!
Against this blow! all others I have borne.
Ermenegild! thou mightest, sure, have lived!
A father's name awoke no dread of thee!
Only thy mother's early bloom was thine!
There dwelt on Julian's brow--thine was serene - The brightened clouds
of elevated souls, Feared by the most below: those who looked up Saw,
at their season, in clear signs, advance Rapturous valour, calm
solicitude, All that impatient youth would press from age, Or sparing
age sigh and detract from youth:
Hence was his fall! my hope! myself! my Julian!
Alas! I boasted--but I thought on him, Inheritor of all--all what?

my wrongs - Follower of me--and whither? to the grave - Ah, no: it should
have been so years far hence!
Him at this moment I could pity most, But I most prided in him; now
I know I loved a name, I doted on a shade.

Sons! I approach the mansions of the just, And my arms clasp you in the
same embrace, Where none shall sever you--and do I weep!
And do they triumph o'er my tenderness!
I had forgotten my inveterate foes Everywhere nigh me, I had half
forgotten Your very murderers, while I thought on you:
For, O my children, ye fill all the space My soul would wander
o'er--O bounteous heaven!

There is a presence, if the well-beloved Be torn from us by human violence,
More intimate, pervading, and complete, Than when they lived and spoke
like other men; And there pale images are our support When reason
sinks, or threatens to desert us.
I weep no more--pity and exultation Sway and console me: are they--no!

--both dead?

MUZA. Ay, and unsepulchred.

JUL. Nor wept nor seen By any kindred and far-following eye?

MUZA. Their mother saw them, if not dead, expire.

JUL. O cruelty--to them indeed the least!
My children, ye are happy--ye have lived Of heart unconquered, honour
unimpaired, And died, true Spaniards, loyal to the last.

MUZA. Away with him.

JUL. Slaves! not before I lift My voice to heaven and man: though enemies
Surround me, and none else, yet other men And other times shall hear:
the agony Of an oppressed and of a bursting heart No violence can
silence; at its voice The trumpet is o'erpowered, and glory mute,
And peace and war hide all their charms alike.

Surely the guests and ministers of heaven Scatter it forth through all
the elements; So suddenly, so widely, it extends, So fearfully men
breathe it, shuddering To ask or fancy how it first arose.

MUZA. Yes, they shall shudder--but will that, henceforth, Molest my
privacy, or shake my power?

JUL. Guilt hath pavilions, but no privacy.
The very engine of his hatred checks The torturer in his transport
of revenge, Which, while it swells his bosom, shakes his power And raises
friends to his worst enemy.

MUZA. Where now are thine? will they not curse the day That gave thee
birth, and hiss thy funeral!
Thou hast left none who could have pitied thee.

JUL. Many, nor those alone of tenderer mould, For me will weep--many
alas through me!
Already I behold my funeral.
The turbid cities wave and swell with it, And wrongs are lost in that
day's pageantry:
Oppressed and desolate, the countryman Receives it like a gift; he
hastens home, Shows where the hoof of Moorish horse laid waste His
narrow croft and winter garden-plot, Sweetens with fallen pride his
children's lore, And points their hatred; but applauds their tears.

Justice, who came not up to us through life, Loves to survey our
likeness on our tombs, When rivalry, malevolence, and wrath, And
every passion that once stormed around, Is calm alike without them
as within.

Our very chains make the whole world our own, Bind those to us who else
had passed us by, Those at whose call brought down to us, the light
Of future ages lives upon our name.

MUZA. I may accelerate that meteor's fall, And quench that idle ineffectual
light Without the knowledge of thy distant world.

JUL. My world and thine are not that distant one.
Is age less wise, less merciful, than grief, To keep this secret from
thee, poor old man?

Thou canst not lessen, canst not aggravate My sufferings, canst not shorten
nor extend Half a sword's length between my God and me.
I thank thee for that better thought than fame, Which none, however,
who deserve, despise, Nor lose from view till all things else are
lost.

ABD. Julian, respect his age, regard his power.
Many who feared not death have dragged along A piteous life in
darkness and in chains.
Never was man so full of wretchedness But something may be
suffered after all, Perhaps in what clings round his breast, and helps
To keep the ruin up, which he amid His agony and frenzy overlooks, But
droops upon at last, and clasps, and dies.

JUL.

Although a Muza send far underground, Into the quarry whence the
palace rose, His mangled prey, climes alien and remote Mark and record
the pang. While overhead Perhaps he passes on his favourite steed,
Less heedful of the misery he inflicts Than of the expiring sparkle
from a stone; Yet we, alive or dead, have fellow men If ever we have
served them, who collect From prisons and from dungeons our remains,
And bear them in their bosom to their sons.
Man's only relics are his benefits; These, be there ages, be there
worlds, between, Retain him in communion with his kind:
Hence is our solace, our security, Our sustenance, till heavenly
truth descends - Losing in brightness and beatitude The frail
foundations of these humbler hopes - And, like an angel guiding us,
at once Leaves the loose chain and iron gate behind.

MUZA. Take thou my justice first, then hope for theirs.
I, who can bend the living to my will, Fear not the dead, and court
not the unborn:
Their arm will never reach me, nor shall thine.

ABD. Pity, release him, pardon him, my father.
Forget how much thou hatest perfidy; Think of him, once so potent,
still so brave, So calm, so self-dependent in distress - I marvel
at him--hardly dare I blame, When I behold him fallen from so high,
And so exalted after such a fall.

Mighty must that man be who can forgive A man, so mighty; seize the hour
to rise, Another never comes. Oh, say, my father, Say, "Julian, be my
enemy no more." He fills me with a greater awe than e'er The field of
battle, with himself the first, When every flag that waved along
our host Drooped down the staff, as if the very winds Hung in
suspense before him--bid him go And peace be with him, or let me
depart.

Lo! like a god, sole and inscrutable, He stands above our pity.

JUL. For that wish - Vain as it is, 'tis virtuous--oh, for that, However
wrong thy censure and thy praise, Kind Abdalazis, mayst thou never feel
The rancour that consumes thy father's breast, Nor want the pity thou
hast sought for me.

MUZA. Now hast thou sealed thy doom.
JUL. And thou thy crimes.
ABD. O father, heed him not: those evil words Leave neither blight
nor blemish--let him go.

MUZA. A boy, a very boy, art thou indeed!
One who in early day would sally out To chase the lion, and would
call it sport, But, when more wary steps had closed him round, Slink
from the circle, drop the toils, and blanch Like a lithe plant from
under snow in spring.
ABD. He who ne'er shrank from danger might shrink now, And ignominy
would not follow here.
MUZA. Peace, Abdalazis! how is this? he bears Nothing that warrants
him invulnerable:
Shall I then shrink to smite him? shall my fears Be greatest at the
blow that ends them all?
Fears? no! 'tis justice--fair, immutable, Whose measured step, at
times, advancing nigh, Appalls the majesty of kings themselves.
Oh, were he dead! though then revenge were o'er.
FINAL ACT.--FIFTH SCENE.

OFF. Thy wife, Count Julian -
JUL. Speak!

OFF. --Is dead.
JUL. Adieu, Earth, and the humblest of all earthly hopes, To hear
of comfort, though to find it vain.
Thou murderer of the helpless! shame of man!
Shame of thy own base nature! 'tis an act He who could perpetrate
could not avow, Stained, as he boasts to be, with innocent blood,
Deaf to reproach, and blind to retribution.
OFF. Julian, be just; 'twill make thee less unhappy.
Grief was her end: she held her younger boy And wept upon his cheek;
his naked breast By recent death now hardening and inert, Slipped
from her knee; again with frantic grasp She caught it, and it weighed
her to the ground:
There lay the dead.

JUL. She?
OFF. And the youth her son.
JUL. Receive them to thy peace, eternal God!
O soother of my hours, while I beheld The light of day, and thine!
adieu, adieu!
And, my Covilla! dost thou yet survive?
Yes, my lost child, thou livest yet--in shame!
Oh, agony past utterance! past thought!
That throwest death, as some light idle thing, With all its terrors,
into dust and air, I will endure thee; I, whom heaven ordained Thus
to have served beneath my enemies, Their conqueror, thus to have
revisited My native land with vengeance and with woe.
Henceforward shall she recognise her sons, Impatient of oppression
or disgrace, And rescue them, or perish; let her hold This compact,
written with her blood, and mine.
Now follow me--but tremble--years shall roll, And wars rage on, and
Spain at last be free.

Footnote:
{1} "Ah, what avails the sceptred race, Ah, what the form divine!
What every virtue, every grace!
Rose Aylmer, all were thine.
"Rose Aylmer, whom these wakeful eyes May weep, but never see, A
night of memories and sighs I consecrate to thee.""Well, I have been thinking what the
present ought to be--something pretty, of course. I can't do her a
drawing worth a farthing; and even if I could--"

"Suppose you come here and sit down, Zack," interposed Mrs. Blyth.
"While you are wandering backwards and forwards in that way before the
card-table, you take Madonna's attention off the game."

No doubt he did. How could she see him walking about close by her, and
carrying her drawing with him wherever he went--as if he prized it too
much to be willing to put it down--without feeling gratified in more
than one of the innocent little vanities of her sex, without looking
after him much too often to be properly alive to the interests of her
game?

Zack took Mrs. Blyth's advice, and sat down by her, with his back
towards the cribbage players.

"Well, the question is, What present am I to give her?" he went on.
"I've been twisting and turning it over in my mind, and the long and
the short of it is--"

("Fifteen two, fifteen four, and a pair's six," said Valentine,
reckoning up the tricks he had in his hand at that moment.)

"Did you ever notice that she has a particularly pretty hand and arm?"
proceeded Zack, somewhat evasively. "I'm rather a judge of these things
myself; and of all the other girls I ever saw--"

"Never mind about other girls," said Mrs. Blyth. "Tell me what you mean
to give Madonna."

("Two for his heels," cried Mrs. Peckover, turning up a knave with
great glee.)

"I mean to give her a Bracelet," said Zack.

Valentine looked up quickly from the card table.

("Play, please sir," said Mrs. Peckover; "little Mary's waiting for
you.")

"Well, Zack," rejoined Mrs. Blyth, "your idea of returning a present
only errs on the side of generosity. I should recommend something less
costly. Don't you know that it's one of Madonna's oddities not to care
about jewelry? She might have bought herself a bracelet long ago, out
of her own savings, if trinkets had been things to tempt her."

"Wait a bit, Mrs. Blyth," said Zack, "you haven't heard the best of my
notion yet: all the pith and marrow of it has got to come. The bracelet
I mean to give her is one that she will prize to the day of her death,
or she's not the affectionate, warm-hearted girl I take her for. What
do you think of a bracelet that reminds her of you and Valentine, and
jolly old Peck there--and a little of me, too, which I hope won't make
her think the worse of it. I've got a design against all your heads,"
he continued, imitating the cutting action of a pair of scissors with
two of his fingers, and raising his voice in high triumph. "It's a
splendid idea: I mean to give Madonna a Hair Bracelet!"

Mrs. Peckover and Mr. Blyth started back in their chairs, and stared at
each other as amazedly as if Zack's last words had sprung from a
charged battery, and had struck them both at the same moment with a
smart electrical shock.

"Of all the things in the world, how came he ever to think of giving
her that!" ejaculated Mrs. Peckover under her breath; her memory
reverting, while she spoke, to the mournful day when strangers had
searched the body of Madonna's mother, and had found the Hair Bracelet
hidden away in a corner of the dead woman's pocket.

"Hush! let's go on with the game," said Valentine. He, too, was
thinking of the Hair Bracelet--thinking of it as it now lay locked up
in his bureau down stairs, remembering how he would fain have destroyed
it years ago, but that his conscience and sense of honor forbade him;
pondering on the fatal discoveries to which, by bare possibility, it
might yet lead, if ever it should fall into strangers' hands.

"A Hair Bracelet," continued Zack, quite unconscious of the effect he
was producing on two of the card-players behind him; "and _such_ hair,
too, as I mean it to be made of!--Why, Madonna will think it more
precious than all the diamonds in the world. I defy anybody to have hit
on a better idea of the sort of present she's sure to like; it's
elegant and appropriate, and all that sort of thing--isn't it?"

"Oh, yes! very nice and pretty indeed," replied Mrs. Blyth, rather
absently and confusedly. She knew as much of Madonna's history as her
husband did; and was wondering what he would think of the present which
young Thorpe proposed giving to their adopted child.

"The thing I want most to know," said Zack, "is what you think would be
the best pattern for the bracelet. There will be two kinds of hair in
it, which can be made into any shape, of course--your hair and Mrs.
Peckover's."

("Not a morsel of my hair shall go towards the bracelet!" muttered Mrs.
Peckover, who was listening to what was said, while she went on
playing.)

"The difficult hair to bring in, will be mine and Valentine's," pursued
Zack. "Mine's long enough, to be sure; I ought to have got it cut a
month ago; but it's so stiff and curly; and Blyth keeps his cropped so
short--I don't see what they can do with it (do you?), unless they make
rings, or stars, or knobs, or something stumpy, in the way of a cross
pattern of it."

"The people at the shop will know best," said Mrs. Blyth, resolving to
proceed cautiously.

"One thing I'm determined on, though, beforehand," cried Zack,--"the
clasp. The clasp shall be a serpent, with turquoise eyes, and a
carbuncle tail; and all our initials scored up somehow on his scales.
Won't that be splendid? I should like to surprise Madonna with it this
very evening."

("You shall never give it to her, if _I_ can help it," grumbled Mrs.
Peckover, still soliloquizing under her breath. "If anything in this
world can bring her ill-luck, it will be a Hair Bracelet!")

These last words were spoken with perfect seriousness; for they were
the result of the strongest superstitious conviction.

From the time when the Hair Bracelet was found on Madonna's mother,
Mrs. Peckover had persuaded herself--not unnaturally, in the absence of
any information to the contrary--that it had been in some way connected
with the ruin and shame which had driven its unhappy possessor forth as
an outcast, to die amongst strangers. To believe, in consequence, that
a Hair Bracelet had brought "ill-luck" to the mother, and to derive
from that belief the conviction that a Hair Bracelet would therefore
also bring "ill-luck" to the child, was a perfectly direct and
inevitable deductive process to Mrs. Peckover's superstitious mind. The
motives which had formerly influenced her to forbid her "little Mary"
ever to begin anything important on a Friday, or ever to imperil her
prosperity by walking under a ladder, were precisely the motives by
which she was now actuated in determining to prevent the presentation
of young Thorpe's ill-omened gift.

Although Valentine had only caught a word here and there, to guide him
to the subject of Mrs. Peckover's mutterings to herself while the game
was going on, he guessed easily enough the general tenor of her
thoughts, and suspected that she would, ere long, begin to talk louder
than was at all desirable, if Zack proceeded much further with his
present topic of conversation. Accordingly, he took advantage of a
pause in the game, and of a relapse into another restless fit of
walking about the room on young Thorpe's part, to approach his wife's
couch, as if he wanted to find something lying near it, and to whisper
to her, "Stop his talking any more about that present to Madonna; I'll
tell you why another time."

Mrs. Blyth very readily and easily complied with this injunction, by
telling Zack (with perfect truth) that she had been already a little
too much excited by the events of the evening; and that she must put
off all further listening or talking, on her part, till the next night,
when she promised to advise him about the bracelet to the best of her
power.

He was, however, still too full of his subject to relinquish it easily
under no stronger influence than the influence of a polite hint. Having
lost one listener in Mrs. Blyth, he boldly tried the experiment of
inviting two others to replace her, by addressing himself to the
players at the card-table.

"I dare say you have heard what I have been talking about to Mrs.
Blyth?" he began.

"Lord, Master Zack!" said Mrs. Peckover, "do you think we haven't had
something else to do here, besides listening to you? There, now, don't
talk to us, please, till we are done, or you'll throw us out
altogether. Don't, sir, on any account, because we are playing for
money--sixpence a game."

Repelled on both sides, Zack was obliged to give way. He walked off to
try and amuse himself at the book-case. Mrs. Peckover, with a very
triumphant air, nodded and winked several times at Valentine across the
table; desiring, by these signs, to show him that she could not only be
silent herself when the conversation was in danger of approaching a
forbidden subject, but could make other people hold their tongues too.

The room was now perfectly quiet, and the game at cribbage proceeded
smoothly enough, but not so pleasantly as usual on other occasions.
Valentine did not regain his customary good spirits; and Mrs. Peckover
relapsed into whispering discontentedly to herself--now and then
looking towards the bookcase, where young Thorpe was sitting sleepily,
with a volume of engravings on his knee. It was, more or less, a relief
to everybody when the supper-tray came up, and the cards were put away
for the night.

Zack, becoming quite lively again at the prospect of a little eating
and drinking, tried to return to the dangerous subject of the Hair
Bracelet; addressing himself, on this occasion, directly to Valentine.
He was interrupted, however, before he had spoken three words. Mr.
Blyth suddenly remembered that he had an important communication of his
own to make to young Thorpe.

"Excuse me, Zack," he said, "I have some news to tell you, which Mrs.
Peckover's arrival drove out of my head; and which I must mention at
once, while I have the opportunity. Both my pictures are done--what do
you think of that?--done, and in their frames. I settled the titles
yesterday. The classical landscape is to be called 'The Golden Age,'
which is a pretty poetical sort of name; and the figure-subject is to
be 'Columbus in Sight of the New World;' which is, I think, simple,
affecting, and grand. Wait a minute! the best of it has yet to come. I
am going to exhibit both the pictures in the studio to my friends, and
my friends' friends, as early as Saturday next."

"You don't mean it!" exclaimed Zack. "Why, it's only January now; and
you always used to have your private view of your own pictures, in
April, just before they were sent into the Academy Exhibition."

"Quite right," interposed Valentine, "but I am going to make a change
this year. The fact is, I have got a job to do in the provinces, which
will prevent me from having my picture-show at the usual time. So I
mean to have it now. The cards of invitation are coming home from the
printer's tomorrow morning. I shall reserve a packet, of course, for
you and your friends, when we see you to-morrow night."

Just as Mr. Blyth spoke those words, the clock on the mantel-piece
struck the half hour after ten. Having his own private reasons for
continuing to preserve the appearance of perfect obedience to his
father's domestic regulations, Zack rose at once to say good night,
in order to insure being home before the house-door was bolted at
eleven o'clock. This time he did not forget Madonna's drawing;
but, on the contrary, showed such unusual carefulness in tying his
pocket-handkerchief over the frame to preserve it from injury as he
carried it through the streets, that she could not help--in the
fearless innocence of her heart--unreservedly betraying to him, both by
look and manner, how warmly she appreciated his anxiety for the safe
preservation of her gift. Never had the bright, kind young face been
lovelier in its artless happiness than it appeared at the moment when
she was shaking hands with Zack.

Just as Valentine was about to follow his guest out of the room, Mrs.
Blyth called him back, reminding him that he had a cold, and begging
him not to expose himself to the wintry night air by going down to the
door.

"But the servants must be going to bed by this time; and somebody ought
to fasten the bolts," remonstrated Mr. Blyth.

"I'll go, sir," said Mrs. Peckover, rising with extraordinary alacrity.
"I'll see Master Zack out, and do up the door. Bless your heart! it's
no trouble to me. I'm always moving about at home from morning to
night, to prevent myself getting fatter. Don't say no, Mr. Blyth,
unless you are afraid of trusting an old gossip like me alone with your
visitors."

The last words were intended as a sarcasm, and were whispered into
Valentine's ear. He understood the allusion to their private
conversation together easily enough; and felt that unless he let her
have her own way without further contest, he must risk offending an old
friend by implying a mistrust of her, which would be simply ridiculous,
under the circumstances in which they were placed. So, when his wife
nodded to him to take advantage of the offer just made, he accepted it
forthwith.

"Now, I'll stop his giving Mary a Hair Bracelet!" thought Mrs.
Peckover, as she bustled out after young Thorpe, and closed the room
door behind her.

"Wait a bit, young gentleman," she said, arresting his further progress
on the first landing. "Just leave off talking a minute, and let me
speak. I've got something to say to you. Do you really mean to give
Mary that Hair Bracelet?"

"Oho! then you did hear something at the card-table about it, after
all?" said Zack. "Mean? Of course I mean--"

"And you want to put some of my hair in it?"

"To be sure I do! Madonna wouldn't like it without."

"Then you had better make up your mind at once to give her some other
present; for not one morsel of my hair shall you have. There now! what
do you think of that?"

"I don't believe it, my old darling."

"It's true enough, I can tell you. Not a hair of my head shall you
have."

"Why not?"

"Never mind why. I've got my own reasons."

"Very well: if you come to that, I've got my reasons for giving the
bracelet; and I mean to give it. If you won't let any of your hair be
plaited up along with the rest, it's Madonna you will disappoint--not
me."

Mrs. Peckover saw that she must change her tactics, or be defeated.

"Don't you be so dreadful obstinate, Master Zack, and I'll tell you the
reason," she said in an altered tone, leading the way lower down into
the passage. "I don't want you to give her a Hair Bracelet, because I
believe it will bring ill-luck to her--there!"

Zack burst out laughing. "Do you call that a reason? Who ever heard of
a Hair Bracelet being an unlucky gift?"

At this moment, the door of Mrs. Blyth's room opened.

"Anything wrong with the lock?" asked Valentine from above. He was
rather surprised at the time that elapsed without his hearing the
house-door shut.

"All quite right, sir," said Mrs. Peckover; adding in a whisper to
Zack:--"Hush! don't say a word!"

"Don't let him keep you in the cold with his nonsense," said Valentine.

"My nonsense!--" began Zack, indignantly.

"He's going, sir," interrupted Mrs. Peckover. "I shall be upstairs in a
moment."

"Come in, dear, pray! You're letting all the cold air into the room,"
exclaimed the voice of Mrs. Blyth.

The door of the room closed again.

"What _are_ you driving at?" asked Zack, in extreme bewilderment.

"I only want you to give her some other present," said Mrs. Peckover,
in her most persuasive tones. "You may think it all a whim of mine, if
you like--I dare say I'm an old fool; but I don't want you to give her
a Hair Bracelet."

"A whim of yours!!!" repeated Zack, with a look which made Mrs.
Peckover's cheeks redden with rising indignation. "What! a woman at
your time of life subject to whims! My darling Peckover, it won't do!
My mind's made up to give her the Hair Bracelet. Nothing in the world
can stop me--except, of course, Madonna's having a Hair Bracelet
already, which I know she hasn't."

"Oh! you know that, do you, you mischievous Imp? Then, for once in a
way, you just know wrong!" exclaimed Mrs. Peckover, losing her temper
altogether.

"You don't mean to say so? How very remarkable, to think of her having
a Hair Bracelet already, and of my not knowing it!--Mrs. Peckover,"
continued Zack, mimicking the tone and manner of his old clerical
enemy, the Reverend Aaron Yollop, "what I am now about to say grieves
me deeply; but I have a solemn duty to discharge, and in the
conscientious performance of that duty, I now unhesitatingly express my
conviction that the remark you have just made is--a flam."

"It isn't--Monkey!" returned Mrs. Peckover, her anger fairly boiling
over, as she nodded her head vehemently in Zack's face.

Just then, Valentine's step became audible in the room above; first
moving towards the door, then suddenly retreating from it, as if he had
been called back.

"I hav'n't let out what I oughtn't, have I?" thought Mrs. Peckover;
calming down directly, when she heard the movement upstairs.

"Oh, you stick to it, do you?" continued Zack. "It's rather odd, old
lady, that Mrs. Blyth should have said nothing about this
newly-discovered Hair Bracelet of yours while I was talking to her. But
she doesn't know, of course: and Valentine doesn't know either, I
suppose? By Jove! he's not gone to bed yet: I'll run back, and ask him
if Madonna really _has_ got a Hair Bracelet!"

"For God's sake don't!--don't say a word about it, or you'll get me
into dreadful trouble!" exclaimed Mrs. Peckover, turning pale as she
thought of possible consequences, and catching young Thorpe by the arm
when he tried to pass her in the passage.

The step up stairs crossed the room again.

"Well, upon my life," cried Zack, "of all the extraordinary old women

"Hush! he's going to open the door this time; he is indeed!"

"Never mind if he does; I won't say anything," whispered young Thorpe,
his natural good nature prompting him to relieve Mrs. Peckover's
distress, the moment he became convinced that it was genuine.

"That's a good chap! that's a dear good chap!" exclaimed Mrs. Peckover,
squeezing Zack's hand in a fervor of unbounded gratitude.

The door of Mrs. Blyth's room opened for the second time.

"He's gone, sir; he's gone at last!" cried Mrs. Peckover, shutting the
house door on the parting guest with inhospitable rapidity, and locking
it with elaborate care and extraordinary noise.

"I must manage to make it all safe with Master Zack tomorrow night;
though I don't believe I have said a single word I oughtn't to say,"
thought she, slowly ascending the stairs. "But Mr. Blyth makes such
fusses, and works himself into such fidgets about the poor thing being
traced and taken away from him (which is all stuff and nonsense), that
he would go half distracted if he knew what I said just now to Master
Zack. Not that it's so much what I said to _him,_ as what he made out
somehow and said to _me._ But they're so sharp, these young London
chaps--they are so awful sharp!"

Here she stopped on the landing to recover her breath; then whispered
to herself, as she went on and approached Mr. Blyth's door:

"But one thing I'm determined on; little Mary shan't have that Hair
Bracelet!"

               * * * * *

Even as Mrs. Peckover walked thinking all the way up-stairs, so did
Zack walk wondering all the way home.

What the deuce could these extraordinary remonstrances about his
present to Madonna possibly mean? Was it not at least clear from Mrs.
Peckover's terror when he talked of asking Blyth whether Madonna really
had a Hair Bracelet, that she had told the truth after all? And was it
not even plainer still that she had let out a secret in telling that
truth, which Blyth must have ordered her to keep? Why keep it? Was this
mysterious Hair Bracelet mixed up somehow with the grand secret about
Madonna's past history, which Valentine had always kept from him and
from everybody? Very likely it was--but why cudgel his brains about
what didn't concern him? Was it not--considering the fact, previously
forgotten, that he had but fifteen shillings and threepence of
disposable money in the world--rather lucky than otherwise that Mrs.
Peckover had taken it into her head to stop him from buying what he
hadn't the means of paying for? What other present could he buy for
Madonna that was pretty, and cheap enough to suit the present state of
his pocket? Would she like a thimble? or an almanack? or a pair of
cuffs? or a pot of bear's grease?

Here Zack suddenly paused in his mental interrogatories; for he had
arrived within sight of his home in Baregrove Square.

A change passed over his handsome face: he frowned, and his color
deepened as he looked up at the light in his father's window.

"I'll slip out again to-night, and see life," he muttered doggedly to
himself, approaching the door. "The more I'm bullied at home, the
oftener I'll go out on the sly."

This rebellious speech was occasioned by the recollection of a domestic
scene, which had contributed, early that evening, to swell the list of
the Tribulations of Zack. Mr. Thorpe had moral objections to Mr.
Blyth's profession, and moral doubts on the subject of Mr. Blyth
himself--these last being strengthened by that gentleman's own refusal
to explain away the mystery which enveloped the birth and parentage of
his adopted child. As a necessary consequence, Mr. Thorpe considered
the painter to be no fit companion for a devout young man; and
expressed, severely enough, his unmeasured surprise at finding that his
son had accepted an invitation from a person of doubtful character.
Zack's rejoinder to his father's reproof was decisive, if it was
nothing else. He denied everything alleged or suggested against his
friend's reputation--lost his temper on being sharply rebuked for the
"indecent vehemence" of his language--and left the paternal tea-table
in defiance, to go and cultivate the Fine Arts in the doubtful company
of Mr. Valentine Blyth.

"Just in time, sir," said the page, grinning at his young master as he
opened the door. "It's on the stroke of eleven."

Zack muttered something savage in reply, which it is not perhaps
advisable to report. The servant secured the lock and bolts, while he
put his hat on the hall table, and lit his bedroom candle.

              * * * * *

Rather more than an hour after this time--or, in other words, a little
past midnight--the door opened again softly, and Zack appeared on the
step, equipped for his nocturnal expedition.

He hesitated, as he put the key into the lock from outside, before he
closed the door behind him. He had never done this on former occasions;
he could not tell why he did it now. We are mysteries even to
ourselves; and there are times when the Voices of the future that are
in us, yet not ours, speak, and make the earthly part of us conscious
of their presence. Oftenest our mortal sense feels that they are
breaking their dread silence at those supreme moments of existence,
when on the choice between two apparently trifling alternatives hangs
suspended the whole future of a life. And thus it was now with the
young man who stood on the threshold of his home, doubtful whether he
should pursue or abandon the purpose which was then uppermost in his
mind. On his choice between the two alternatives of going on, or going
back--which the closing of a door would decide--depended the future of
his life, and of other lives that were mingled with it.

He waited a minute undecided, for the warning Voices within him were
stronger than his own will: he waited, looking up thoughtfully at the
starry loveliness of the winter's night--then closed the door behind
him as softly as usual--hesitated again at the last step that led on to
the pavement--and then fairly set forth from home, walking at a rapid
pace through the streets.

He was not in his usual good spirits. He felt no inclination to sing as
was his wont, while passing through the fresh, frosty air: and he
wondered why it was so.

The Voices were still speaking faintly and more faintly within him. But
we must die before we can become immortal as they are; and their
language to us in this life is often as an unknown tongue.


BOOK II.

THE SEEKING.

CHAPTER I.

THE MAN WITH THE BLACK SKULL-CAP.

The Roman poet who, writing of vice, ascribed its influence entirely to
the allurement of the fair disguises that it wore, and asserted that it
only needed to be seen with the mask off to excite the hatred of all
mankind, uttered a very plausible moral sentiment, which wants nothing
to recommend it to the admiration of posterity but a seasoning of
practical truth. Even in the most luxurious days of old Rome, it may
safely be questioned whether vice could ever afford to disguise itself
to win recruits, except from the wealthier classes of the population.
But in these modern times it may be decidedly asserted as a fact, that
vice, in accomplishing the vast majority of its seductions, uses no
disguise at all; appears impudently in its naked deformity; and,
instead of horrifying all beholders, in accordance with the prediction
of the classical satirist, absolutely attracts a much more numerous
congregation of worshippers than has ever yet been brought together by
the divinest beauties that virtue can display for the allurement of
mankind.

That famous place of public amusement known, a few years since, to the
late-roaming youth of London by the name of the Snuggery, affords,
among hosts of other instances which might be cited, a notable example
to refute the assertion of the ancient poet. The place was principally
devoted to the exhibition of musical talent, and opened at a period of
the night when the performances at the theaters were over. The
orchestral arrangements were comprised in one bad piano, to which were
occasionally added, by way of increasing the attractions, performances
on the banjo and guitar. All the singers were called "ladies and
gentlemen;" and the one long room in which the performances took place
was simply furnished with a double row of benches, bearing troughs at
their backs for the reception of glasses of liquor.

Innocence itself must have seen at a glance that the Snuggery was an
utterly vicious place. Vice never so much as thought of wearing any
disguise here. No glimmer of wit played over the foul substance of the
songs that were sung, and hid it in dazzle from too close observation.
No relic of youth and freshness, no artfully-assumed innocence and
vivacity, concealed the squalid deterioration of the worn-out human
counterfeits which stood up to sing, and were coarsely painted and
padded to look like fine women. Their fellow performers among the men
were such sodden-faced blackguards as no shop-boy who applauded them at
night would dare to walk out with in the morning. The place itself had
as little of the allurement of elegance and beauty about it as the
people. Here was no bright gilding on the ceiling--no charm of
ornament, no comfort of construction even, in the furniture. Here were
no viciously-attractive pictures on the walls--no enervating sweet
odors in the atmosphere--no contrivances of ventilation to cleanse away
the stench of bad tobacco-smoke and brandy-flavored human breath with
which the room reeked all night long. Here, in short, was vice wholly
undisguised; recklessly showing itself to every eye, without the
varnish of beauty, without the tinsel of wit, without even so much as
the flavor of cleanliness to recommend it. Were all beholders
instinctively overcome by horror at the sight? Far from it. The
Snuggery was crammed to its last benches every night; and the
proprietor filled his pockets from the purses of applauding audiences.
For, let classical moralists say what they may, vice gathers followers
as easily, in modern times, with the mask off, as ever it gathered them
in ancient times with the mask on.


It was two o'clock in the morning; and the entertainments in the
Snuggery were fast rising to the climax of joviality. A favorite comic
song had just been sung by a bloated old man with a bald head and a
hairy chin. There was a brief lull of repose, before the amusements
resumed their noisy progress. Orders for drink were flying abroad in
all directions. Friends were talking at the tops of their voices, and
strangers were staring at each other--except at the lower end of the
room, where the whole attention of the company was concentrated
strangely upon one man.

The person who thus attracted to himself the wandering curiosity of all
his neighbors had come in late, had taken the first vacant place he
could find near the door, and had sat there listening and looking about
him very quietly. He drank and smoked like the rest of the company; but
never applauded, never laughed, never exhibited the slightest symptom
of astonishment, or pleasure, or impatience, or disgust--though it was
evident, from his manner of entering and giving his orders to the
waiters, that he visited the Snuggery that night for the first time.

He was not in mourning, for there was no band round his hat; but he was
dressed nevertheless in a black frock-coat, waistcoat, and trousers,
and wore black kid gloves. He seemed to be very little at his ease in
this costume, moving his limbs, whenever he changed his position, as
cautiously and constrainedly as if he had been clothed in gossamer
instead of stout black broadcloth, shining with its first new gloss on
it. His face was tanned to a perfectly Moorish brown, was scarred in
two places by the marks of old wounds, and was overgrown by coarse,
iron-grey whiskers, which met under his chin. His eyes were light, and
rather large, and seemed to be always quietly but vigilantly on the
watch. Indeed the whole expression of his face, coarse and heavy as it
was in form, was remarkable for its acuteness, for its cool, collected
penetration, for its habitually observant, passively-watchful look. Any
one guessing at his calling from his manner and appearance would have
set him down immediately as the captain of a merchantman, and would
have been willing to lay any wager that he had been several times round
the world.

But it was not his face, or his dress, or his manner, that drew on him
the attention of all his neighbors; it was his head. Under his hat,
(which was bran new, like everything else he wore), there appeared,
fitting tight round his temples and behind his ears, a black velvet
skull-cap. Not a vestige of hair peeped from under it. All round his
head, as far as could be seen beneath his hat, which he wore far back
over his coat collar, there was nothing but bare flesh, encircled by a
rim of black velvet.

From a great proposal for reform, to a small eccentricity in costume,
the English are the most intolerant people in the world, in their
reception of anything which presents itself to them under the form of a
perfect novelty. Let any man display a new project before the
Parliament of England, or a new pair of light-green trousers before the
inhabitants of London, let the project proclaim itself as useful to all
listening ears, and the trousers eloquently assert themselves as
beautiful to all beholding eyes, the nation will shrink suspiciously,
nevertheless, both from the one and the other; will order the first to
"lie on the table," and will hoot, laugh, and stare at the second;
will, in short, resent either novelty as an unwarrantable intrusion,
for no other discernible reason than that people in general are not
used to it.

Quietly as the strange man in black had taken his seat in the Snuggery,
he and his skull-cap attracted general attention; and our national
weakness displayed itself immediately.

Nobody paused to reflect that he probably wore his black velvet
head-dress from necessity; nobody gave him credit for having objections
to a wig, which might be perfectly sensible and well founded; and
nobody, even in this free country, was liberal enough to consider that
he had really as much right to put on a skull-cap under his hat if he
chose, as any other man present had to put on a shirt under his
waistcoat. The audience saw nothing but the novelty in the way of a
head-dress which the stranger wore, and they resented it unanimously,
because it was a novelty. First, they expressed this resentment by
staring indignantly at him, then by laughing at him, then by making
sarcastic remarks on him. He bore their ridicule with the most perfect
and provoking coolness. He did not expostulate, or retort, or look
angry, or grow red in the face, or fidget in his seat, or get up to go
away. He just sat smoking and drinking as quietly as ever, not taking
the slightest notice of any of the dozens of people who were all taking
notice of him.

His unassailable composure only served to encourage his neighbors to
take further liberties with him. One rickety little man, with a
spirituous nose and watery eyes, urged on by some women near him,
advanced to the stranger's bench, and, expressing his admiration of a
skull-cap as a becoming ornamental addition to a hat, announced, with a
bow of mock politeness, his anxiety to feel the quality of the velvet.
He stretched out his hand as he spoke, not a word of warning or
expostulation being uttered by the victim of the intended insult; but
the moment his fingers touched the skull-cap, the strange man, still
without speaking, without even removing his cigar from his mouth, very
deliberately threw all that remained of the glass of hot brandy and
water before him in the rickety gentleman's face.

With a scream of pain as the hot liquor flew into his eyes, the
miserable little man struck out helplessly with both his fists, and
fell down between the benches. A friend who was with him, advanced to
avenge his injuries, and was thrown sprawling on the floor. Yells of
"Turn him out!" and "Police!" followed; people at the other end of the
room jumped up excitably on their seats; the women screamed, the men
shouted and swore, glasses were broken, sticks were waved, benches were
cracked, and, in one instant, the stranger was assailed by every one of
his neighbors who could get near him, on pretense of turning him out.

Just as it seemed a matter of certainty that he must yield to numbers,
in spite of his gallant resistance, and be hurled out of the door down
the flight of stairs that led to it, a tall young gentleman, with a
quantity of light curly hair on his hatless head, leapt up on one of
the benches at the opposite side of the gangway running down the middle
of the room, and apostrophized the company around him with vehement
fistic gesticulation. Alas for the tranquillity of parents with
pleasure-loving sons!--alas for Mr. Valentine Blyth's idea of teaching
his pupil to be steady, by teaching him to draw!--this furious young
gentleman was no other than Mr. Zachary Thorpe, Junior, of Baregrove
Square.

"Damn you all, you cowardly counter-jumping scoundrels!" Now Judas sent
necessaries to them that were within
13:21. But Rhodocus, one of the Jews' army, disclosed the secrets to the
enemies, so he was sought out, and taken up, and put in prison.
13:22.

Again the king treated with them that were in Bethsura: gave his right
hand: took theirs: and went away.

13:23. He fought with Judas: and was overcome. And when he understood
that Philip, who had been left over the affairs, had rebelled at Antioch,
he was in a consternation of mind, and entreating the Jews, and
yielding to them, he swore to all things that seemed reasonable, and,
being reconciled, offered sacrifice, honoured the temple, and left
gifts.

13:24.

He embraced Machabeus, and made him governor and prince from
Ptolemais unto the Gerrenians.

13:25. But when he was come to Ptolemais, the men of that city were much
displeased with the conditions of the peace, being angry for fear
they should break the covenant.

13:26. Then Lysias went up to the judgment seat, and set forth the
reason, and appeased the people, and returned to Antioch: and thus
matters went with regard to the king's coming and his return.
2 Machabees Chapter 14 

Demetrius challenges the kingdom.

Alcimus applies to him to be made high priest: Nicanor is sent into Judea:
his dealings with Judas: his threats. The history of Razias.

14:1. But after the space of three years Judas, and they that were with
him, understood that Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, was come
up with a great power, and a navy by the haven of Tripolis, to places
proper for his purpose,
14:2. And had made himself master of the countries against Antiochus,
and his general, Lysias.

14:3. Now one Alcimus, who had been chief priest, but had wilfully
defiled himself in the time of mingling with the heathens, seeing that
there was no safety for him, nor access to the altar,
Now Alcimus, who had been chief priest. . .This Alcimus was of the
stock of Aaron, but for his apostasy here mentioned was incapable
of the high priesthood, but king Antiochus Eupator appointed him
in place of the high priest, (see above, 1 Mac. chap. 7., ver. 9,)
as Menelaus had been before him, set up by Antiochus (above chap.
4.), yet neither of them were truly high priests; for the true high
priesthood was amongst the Machabees, who were also of the stock
of Aaron, and had strictly held their religion, and were ordained
according to the rites commanded in the law of Moses.

--Ibid. Mingling. . .with the heathens; that is, in their idolatrous
worship.

14:4. Came to king Demetrius in the year one hundred and fifty, presenting
unto him a crown of gold, and a palm, and besides these, some boughs
that seemed to belong to the temple. And that day indeed he held his
peace.

14:5.

But having gotten a convenient time to further his madness, being called
to counsel by Demetrius, and asked what the Jews relied upon, and what
were their counsels,
14:6. He answered thereunto: They among the Jews that are called Assideans,
of whom Judas Machabeus is captain, nourish wars, and raise seditions,
and will not suffer the realm to be in peace.

14:7. For I also being deprived of my ancestor's glory (I mean of
the high priesthood) am now come hither:

14:8. Principally indeed out of fidelity to the king's interests, but in
the next place also to provide for the good of my countrymen: for all
our nation suffereth much from the evil proceedings of these men.

14:9. Wherefore, O king, seeing thou knowest all these things, take
care, I beseech thee, both of the country, and of our nation, according
to thy humanity which is known to all men.

14:10.

For as long as Judas liveth it is not possible that the state should
be quiet.

14:11. Now when this man had spoken to this effect the rest also of
the king's friends, who were enemies of Judas, incensed Demetrius against
him.

14:12. And forthwith he sent Nicanor, the commander over the
elephants, governor into Judea:

14:13.

Giving him in charge, to take Judas himself: and disperse all them that
were with him, and to make Alcimus the high priest of the great
temple.

14:14.

Then the Gentiles who had fled out of Judea, from Judas, came to
Nicanor by flocks, thinking the miseries and calamities of the Jews to
be the welfare of their affairs.

14:15. Now when the Jews heard of Nicanor's coming, and that the nations
were assembled against them, they cast earth upon their heads, and
made supplication to him who chose his people to keep them for ever,
and who protected his portion by evident signs.

14:16.

Then at the commandment of their captain, they forthwith removed from
the place where they were, and went to the town of Dessau, to meet
them.

14:17.

Now Simon, the brother of Judas, had joined battle with Nicanor:
but was frightened with the sudden coming of the adversaries.

14:18. Nevertheless Nicanor hearing of the valour of Judas's companions,
and the greatness of courage, with which they fought for their
country, was afraid to try the matter by the sword.

14:19.

Wherefore he sent Posidonius, and Theodotius and Matthias before to present
and receive the right hands.

14:20.

And when there had been a consultation thereupon, and the captain had
acquainted the multitude with it, they were all of one mind to
consent to covenants.

14:21. So they appointed a day upon which they might come together by
themselves: and seats were brought out, and set for each one.

14:22. But Judas ordered armed men to be ready in convenient places,
lest some mischief might be suddenly practised by the enemies: so they
made an agreeable conference.

14:23. And Nicanor abode in Jerusalem, and did no wrong, but sent
away the flocks of the multitudes that had been gathered together.

14:24. And Judas was always dear to him from the heart, and he was well
affected to the man.

14:25. And he desired him to marry a wife, and to have children. So
he married: he lived quietly, and they lived in common.

14:26. But Alcimus seeing the love they had one to another, and the
covenants, came to Demetrius, and told him that Nicanor had assented
to the foreign interest, for that he meant to make Judas, who was a
traitor to the kingdom, his successor.

14:27.

Then the king, being in a rage, and provoked with this man's wicked
accusation, wrote to Nicanor, signifying that he was greatly
displeased with the covenant of friendship: and that he commanded
him nevertheless to send Machabeus prisoner in all haste to
Antioch.

14:28.

When this was known, Nicanor was in a consternation, and took it grievously
that he should make void the articles that were agreed upon, having
received no injury from the man.

14:29. But because he could not oppose the king, he watched an
opportunity to comply with the orders
14:30. But when Machabeus perceived that Nicanor was more stern
to him, and that when they met together as usual he behaved himself in
a rough manner; and was sensible that this rough behaviour came not
of good, he gathered together a few of his men, and hid himself from
Nicanor.

14:31. But he finding himself notably prevented by the man, came to
the great and holy temple: and commanded the priests that were
offering the accustomed sacrifices, to deliver him the man.

14:32.

And when they swore unto him, that they knew not where the man was whom
he sought, he stretched out his hand to the temple,
14:33. And swore, saying: Unless you deliver Judas prisoner to me, I will
lay this temple of God even with the ground, and will beat down
the altar, and I will dedicate this temple to Bacchus.

14:34.

And when he had spoken thus, he departed. But the priests stretching
forth their hands to heaven, called upon him that was ever the defender
of their nation, saying in this manner:

14:35.

Thou, O Lord of all things, who wantest nothing, wast pleased that the
temple of thy habitation should be amongst us.

14:36. Therefore now, O Lord, the holy of all holies, keep this house
for ever undefiled, which was lately cleansed.

14:37.

Now Razias, one of the ancients of Jerusalem, was accused to Nicanor,
a man that was a lover of the city, and of good report, who for his
kindness was called the father of the Jews.

14:38.

This man, for a long time, had held fast his purpose of keeping
himself pure in the Jews' religion, and was ready to expose his
body and life, that he might persevere therein.

14:39.

So Nicanor being willing to declare the hatred that he bore the Jews,
sent five hundred soldiers to take him.

14:40.

For he thought by ensnaring him to hurt the Jews very much.

14:41.

Now as the multitude sought to rush into his house, and to break
open the door, and to set fire to it, when he was ready to be taken,
he struck himself with his sword:

He struck himself, etc. . .St.

Augustine, (Epist. 61, ad Dulcitium, et lib. 2, cap. 23, ad Epist. 2,
Gaud.) discussing this fact of Razias, says, that the holy scripture
relates it, but doth not praise it, as to be admired or imitated,
and that either it was not well done by him, or at least not proper
in this time of grace.

14:42.

Choosing to die nobly rather than to fall into the hands of the wicked,
and to suffer abuses unbecoming his noble birth.

14:43.

But whereas through haste he missed of giving a sure wound, and the
crowd was breaking into the doors, he ran boldly to the wall, and
manfully threw himself down to the crowd:

14:44.

But they quickly making room for his fall, he came upon the midst of
the neck.

He came upon the midst of the neck. . .Venit per mediam cervicem. In the
Greek it is keneona, which signifies a void place, where there is no
building.

14:45.

And as he had yet breath in him, being inflamed in mind, he arose: and
while his blood ran down with a great stream, and he was grievously
wounded, he ran through the crowd:

14:46.

And standing upon a steep rock, when he was now almost without blood,
grasping his bowels, with both hands he cast them upon the throng,
calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, to restore these to him
again: and so he departed this life.

2 Machabees Chapter 15

Judas encouraged by a vision gains a glorious victory over Nicanor.
The conclusion.

15:1.

But when Nicanor understood that Judas was in the places of Samaria,
he purposed to set upon him with all violence, on the sabbath day.

15:2. And when the Jews that were constrained to follow him, said: Do
not act so fiercely and barbarously, but give honour to the day that
is sanctified: and reverence him that beholdeth all things:

15:3. That unhappy man asked, if there were a mighty One in heaven,
that had commanded the sabbath day to be kept.

15:4.

And when they answered: There is the living Lord himself in heaven,
the mighty One, that commanded the seventh day to be kept.

15:5.

Then he said: And I am mighty upon the earth, and I command to take
arms, and to do the king's business. Nevertheless he prevailed not to
accomplish his design.

15:6. So Nicanor being puffed up with exceeding great pride, thought
to set up a public monument of his victory over Judas.

15:7. But Machabeus ever trusted with all hope that God would help
them.

15:8. And he exhorted his people not to fear the coming of the nations,
but to remember the help they had before received from heaven, and now
to hope for victory from the Almighty.

15:9. And speaking to them out of the law, and the prophets, and
withal putting them in mind of the battles they had fought before, he
made them more cheerful:

15:10. Then after he had encouraged them, he shewed withal the falsehood
of the Gentiles, and their breach of oaths.

15:11.

So he armed every one of them, not with defence of shield and spear,
but with very good speeches, and exhortations, and told them a dream
worthy to be believed, whereby he rejoiced them all.

15:12. Now the vision was in this manner.

Onias, who had been high priest, a good and virtuous man, modest in
his looks, gentle in his manners, and graceful in speech, and who from
a child was exercised in virtues holding up his hands, prayed for
all the people of the Jews:

15:13.

After this there appeared also another man, admirable for age, and
glory, and environed with great beauty and majesty:

15:14. Then Onias answering, said: This is a lover of his brethren,
and of the people of Israel: this is he that prayeth much for the people,
and for all the holy city, Jeremias, the prophet of God.

15:15. Whereupon Jeremias stretched forth his right hand, and gave to
Judas a sword of gold, saying:

15:16.

Take this holy sword, a gift from God, wherewith thou shalt overthrow
the adversaries of my people Israel.

15:17. Thus being exhorted with the words of Judas, which were very
good, and proper to stir up the courage, and strengthen the hearts
of the young men, they resolved to fight, and to set upon them
manfully:

that valour might decide the matter, because the holy city, and the
temple were in danger.

15:18.

For their concern was less for their wives, and children, and for their
brethren, and kinsfolks: but their greatest and principal fear was for
the holiness of the temple.

15:19. And they also that were in the city, had no little concern for
them that were to be engaged in battle.

15:20. And now when all expected what judgment would be given, and
the enemies were at hand, and the army was set in array, the beasts
and the horsemen ranged in convenient places,

15:21. Machabeus considering the coming of the multitude, and the
divers preparations of armour, and the fierceness of the beasts,
stretching out his hands to heaven, called upon the Lord, that
worketh wonders, who giveth victory to them that are worthy, not
according to the power of their arms, but according as it seemeth
good to him.

15:22.

And in his prayer he said after this manner: Thou, O Lord, who didst send
thy angel in the time of Ezechias, king of Juda, and didst kill a
hundred and eighty-five thousand of the army of Sennacherib:

15:23.

Send now also, O Lord of heaven, thy good angel before us, for
the fear and dread of the greatness of thy arm,
15:24. That they may be afraid, who come with blasphemy against thy
holy people. And thus he concluded his prayer.

15:25.

But Nicanor, and they that were with him came forward, with trumpets
and songs.

15:26.

But Judas, and they that were with him, encountered them, calling upon
God by prayers:

15:27. So fighting with their hands, but praying to the Lord with their
hearts, they slew no less than five and thirty thousand, being greatly
cheered with the presence of God.

15:28. And when the battle was over, and they were returning with joy,
they understood that Nicanor was slain in his armour.

15:29. Then making a shout, and a great noise, they blessed the
Almighty Lord in their own language.

15:30.

And Judas, who was altogether ready, in body and mind, to die for his
countrymen, commanded that Nicanor's head, and his hand, with the
shoulder, should be cut off, and carried to Jerusalem.

15:31.

And when he was come thither, having called together his countrymen,
and the priests to the altar, he sent also for them that were in the
castle,
15:32. And shewing them the head of Nicanor, and the wicked hand, which
he had stretched out, with proud boasts, against the holy house of the
Almighty God,
15:33. He commanded also, that the tongue of the wicked Nicanor should
be cut out, and given by pieces to birds, and the hand of the
furious man to be hanged up over against the temple.

15:34.

Then all blessed the Lord of heaven, saying: Blessed be he that hath
kept his own place undefiled.

15:35. And he hung up Nicanor's head in the top of the castle, that
it might be an evident and manifest sign of the help of God.

15:36.

And they all ordained by a common decree, by no means to let this
day pass without solemnity:

15:37.

But to celebrate the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, called
in the Syrian language, the day before Mardochias' day.

15:38.

So these things being done with relation to Nicanor, and from that
time the city being possessed by the Hebrews, I also will here make
an end of my narration.

15:39.

Which if I have done well, and as it becometh the history, it is
what I desired: but if not so perfectly, it must be pardoned me.

If not so perfectly, etc. . .This is not said with regard to the truth
of the narration; but with regard to the style and manner of writing:

which in the sacred penmen is not always the most accurate. See St.
Paul, 2 Cor. 11.6.

15:40. For as it is hurtful to drink always wine, or always water, but
pleasant to use sometimes the one, and sometimes the other: so if the
speech be always nicely framed, it will not be grateful to the readers.

But here it shall be ended.

THE NEW TESTAMENT OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST

THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO SAINT MATTHEW

Saint Matthew, one of the twelve Apostles, who from being a publican,
that is, a taxgatherer, was called by our Saviour to the Apostleship:
in that profession his name is Levi. (Luke 5.27, and Mark 2.14.) He
was the first of the Evangelists that wrote the Gospel, and that in
Hebrew or Syro-Chaldaic which the Jews in Palestine spoke at that time.
The original is not now extant; but it was translated in the time
of the Apostles into Greek, that version was of equal authority.

He wrote about six years after the Lord's Ascension.

Matthew Chapter 1

The genealogy of Christ: he is conceived and born of a virgin.

1:1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,
the son of Abraham:

1:2.

Abraham begot Isaac. And Isaac begot Jacob. And Jacob begot Judas and
his brethren.

1:3. And Judas begot Phares and Zara of Thamar. And Phares begot
Esron.
And Esron begot Aram.

1:4. And Aram begot Aminadab. And Aminadab begot Naasson. And Naasson
begot Salmon.

1:5. And Salmon begot Booz of Rahab. And Booz begot Obed of Ruth. And
Obed begot Jesse.

1:6. And Jesse begot David the king. And David the king begot Solomon,
of her that had been the wife of Urias.

1:7. And Solomon begot Roboam. And Roboam begot Abia. And Abia begot
Asa.

1:8. And Asa begot Josaphat. And Josaphat begot Joram. And Joram begot
Ozias.

1:9. And Ozias begot Joatham. And Joatham begot Achaz. And Achaz
begot Ezechias.

1:10. And Ezechias begot Manasses. And Manasses begot Amon. And Amon
begot Josias.

1:11. And Josias begot Jechonias and his brethren in the transmigration
of Babylon.

1:12. And after the transmigration of Babylon, Jechonias begot Salathiel.
And Salathiel begot Zorobabel.

1:13. And Zorobabel begot Abiud. And Abiud begot Eliacim. And Eliacim
begot Azor.

1:14. And Azor begot Sadoc. And Sadoc begot Achim. And Achim begot
Eliud.

1:15. And Eliud begot Eleazar. And Eleazar begot Mathan. And
Mathan begot Jacob.

1:16. And Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born
Jesus, who is called Christ.

The husband of Mary. . .The Evangelist gives us rather the pedigree of
St. Joseph, than that of the blessed Virgin, to conform to the custom
of the Hebrews, who in their genealogies took no notice of women;
but as they were near akin, the pedigree of the one sheweth that
of the other.

1:17. So all the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen
generations.

And from David to the transmigration of Babylon, are fourteen
generations: and from the transmigration of Babylon to Christ are
fourteen generations.

1:18. Now the generation of Christ was in this wise. When as his
mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she
was found with child, of the Holy Ghost.
1:19. Whereupon Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing
publicly to expose her, was minded to put her away privately.
1:20. But while he thought on these things, behold the Angel of the
Lord appeared to him in his sleep, saying: Joseph, son of David,
fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived
in her, is of the Holy Ghost.
1:21. And she shall bring forth a son: and thou shalt call his name
Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins.
1:22. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which the
Lord spoke by the prophet, saying:
1:23. Behold a virgin shall be with child, and bring forth a son,
and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is,
God with us.
1:24. And Joseph rising up from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord
had commanded him, and took unto him his wife.
1:25. And he knew her not till she brought forth her first born
son:
and he called his name Jesus.
Till she brought forth her firstborn son. . .From these words
Helvidius and other heretics most impiously inferred that the blessed
Virgin Mary had other children besides Christ; but St. Jerome shews,
by divers examples, that this expression of the Evangelist was a
manner of speaking usual among the Hebrews, to denote by the word
until, only what is done, without any regard to the future. Thus
it is said, Genesis 8. 6 and 7, that Noe sent forth a raven, which
went forth, and did not return till the waters were dried up on the
earth. That is, did not return any more. Also Isaias 46. 4, God
says: I am till you grow old. Who dare infer that God should then
cease to be: Also in the first book of Machabees 5. 54, And they
went up to mount Sion with joy and gladness, and offered holocausts,
because not one of them was slain till they had returned in peace.
That is, not one was slain before or after they had returned. God
saith to his divine Son: Sit on my right hand till I make thy enemies
thy footstool. Shall he sit no longer after his enemies are subdued?
Yea and for all eternity. St. Jerome also proves by Scripture
examples, that an only begotten son, was also called firstborn, or
first begotten: because according to the law, the firstborn males
were to be consecrated to God; Sanctify unto me, saith the Lord,
every firstborn that openeth the womb among the children of Israel,
etc. Ex. 13. 2.

Matthew Chapter 2
The offerings of the wise men: the flight into Egypt: the massacre
of the Innocents.
2:1. When Jesus therefore was born in Bethlehem of Juda, in the
days of king Herod, behold, there came wise men from the East to
Jerusalem,
2:2. Saying: Where is he that is born king of the Jews? For we have
seen his star in the East, and are come to adore him.
2:3. And king Herod hearing this, was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him.
2:4. And assembling together all the chief priests and the scribes
of the people, he inquired of them where Christ should be born.
2:5. But they said to him: In Bethlehem of Juda. For so it is written
by the prophet:
2:6. And thou Bethlehem the land of Juda art not the least among
the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come forth the captain
that shall rule my people Israel.
2:7. Then Herod, privately calling the wise men learned diligently
of them the time of the star which appeared to them;
2:8. And sending them into Bethlehem, said: Go and diligently inquire
after the child, and when you have found him, bring me word again,
that I also may come and adore him.
2:9. Who having heard the king, went their way; and behold the star
which they had seen in the East, went before them, until it came
and stood over where the child was.
2:10. And seeing the star they rejoiced with exceeding great
joy.
2:11. And entering into the house, they found the child with Mary
his mother, and falling down they adored him: and opening their
treasures, they offered him gifts; gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
2:12. And having received an answer in sleep that they should not
return to Herod, they went back another way into their country.
2:13. And after they were departed, behold an angel of the Lord
appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying: Arise, and take the child and
his mother, and fly into Egypt: and be there until I shall tell
thee. For it will come to pass that Herod will seek the child to
destroy him.
2:14. Who arose, and took the child and his mother by night, and
retired into Egypt: and he was there until the death of Herod:
2:15. That it might be fulfilled which the Lord spoke by the prophet,
saying: Out of Egypt have I called my son.
2:16. Then Herod perceiving that he was deluded by the wise men,
was exceeding angry: and sending killed all the menchildren that
were in Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from two years
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired
of the wise men.
2:17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the
prophet, saying:
2:18. A voice in Rama was heard, lamentation and great mourning;
Rachel bewailing her children, and would not be comforted, because
they are not.
2:19. But when Herod was dead, behold an angel of the Lord appeared
in sleep to Joseph in Egypt,
2:20. Saying: Arise, and take the child and his mother, and go into
the land of Israel. For they are dead that sought the life of the
child.
2:21. Who arose, and took the child and his mother, and came into
the land of Israel.

2:22.He went up, however, directly, with the recklessness of despair; every
separate stair creaking and cracking under him, as if a young elephant
had been retiring to bed instead of a young man. He blew out his light,
tore off his clothes, and, slipping between the sheets, began to
breathe elaborately, as if he was fast asleep--in the desperate hope of
being still able to deceive his father, if Mr. Thorpe came up stairs to
look after him.

No sooner had he assumed a recumbent position than a lusty and
ceaseless singing began in his ears, which bewildered and half deafened
him. His bed, the room, the house, the whole world tore round and
round, and heaved up and down frantically with him. He ceased to be a
human being: he became a giddy atom, spinning drunkenly in illimitable
space. He started up in bed, and was recalled to a sense of his
humanity by a cold perspiration and a deathly qualm. Hiccups burst from
him no longer; but they were succeeded by another and a louder series
of sound--sounds familiar to everybody who has ever been at sea--sounds
nautically and lamentably associated with white basins, whirling waves,
and misery of mortal stomachs wailing in emetic despair.

In the momentary pauses between the rapidly successive attacks of the
malady which now overwhelmed him, and which be attributed in after-life
entirely to the dyspeptic influences of toasted cheese, Zack was
faintly conscious of the sound of slippered feet ascending the stairs.
His back was to the door. He had no strength to move, no courage to
look round, no voice to raise in supplication. He knew that his door
was opened--that a light came into the room--that a voice cried
"Degraded beast!"--that the door was suddenly shut again with a
bang--and that he was left once more in total darkness. He did not care
for the light, or the voice, or the banging of the door: he did not
think of them afterwards; he did not mourn over the past, or speculate
on the future. He just sank back on his pillow with a gasp, drew the
clothes over him with a groan, and fell asleep, blissfully reckless of
the retribution that was to come with the coming daylight.

When he woke, late the next morning, conscious of nothing, at first,
except that it was thawing fast out of doors, and that he had a violent
headache, but gradually recalled to a remembrance of the memorable
fight in the Snuggery by a sense of soreness in his ribs, and a growing
conviction that his nose had become too large for his face, Zack's
memory began, correctly though confusedly, to retrace the circumstances
attending his return home, and his disastrous journey up stairs to bed.
With these recollections were mingled others of the light which had
penetrated into his room, after his own candle was out; of the voice
which had denounced him as a "Degraded beast;" and of the banging of
the door which had followed. There could be no doubt that it was his
father who had entered the room and apostrophized him in the briefly
emphatic terms which he was now calling to mind. Never had Mr. Thorpe,
on any former occasion, been known to call names, or bang doors. It was
quite clear that he had discovered everything, and was exasperated with
his son as he had never been exasperated with any other human being
before in his life.

Just as Zack arrived at this conclusion, he heard the rustling of his
mother's dress on the stairs, and Mrs. Thorpe, with her handkerchief to
her eyes, presented herself woefully at his bedside. Profoundly and
penitently wretched, he tried to gain his mother's forgiveness before
he encountered his father's wrath. To do him justice, he was so
thoroughly ashamed to meet her eye, that he turned his face to the
wall, and in that position appealed to his mother's compassion in the
most moving terms, and with the most vehement protestations which he
had ever addressed to her.

The only effect he produced on Mrs. Thorpe was to make her walk up and
down the room in violent agitation, sobbing bitterly. Now and then a
few words burst lamentably and incoherently from her lips. They were
just articulate enough for him to gather from them that his father had
discovered everything, had suffered in consequence from an attack of
palpitation of the heart, and had felt himself, on rising that morning,
so unequal, both in mind and body, to deal unaided with the enormity of
his son's offense, that he had just gone out to request the
co-operation of the Reverend Aaron Yollop. On discovering this, Zack's
penitence changed instantly into a curious mixture of indignation and
alarm. He turned round quickly towards his mother. But, before he could
open his lips, she informed him, speaking with an unexampled severity
of tone, that he was on no account to think of going to the office as
usual, but was to wait at home until his father's return--and then
hurried from the room. The fact was, that Mrs. Thorpe distrusted her
own inflexibility, if she stayed too long in the presence of her
penitent son; but Zack could not, unhappily, know this. He could only
see that she left him abruptly, after delivering an ominous message;
and could only place the gloomiest interpretation on her conduct.

"When mother turns against me, I've lost my last chance." He stopped
before he ended the sentence, and sat up in bed, deliberating with
himself for a minute or two. "I could make up my mind to bear anything
from my father, because he has a right to be angry with me, after what
I've done. But if I stand old Yollop again, I'll be--" Here, whatever
Zack said was smothered in the sound of a blow, expressive of fury and
despair, which he administered to the mattress on which he was sitting.
Having relieved himself thus, he jumped out of bed, pronouncing at last
in real earnest those few words of fatal slang which had often burst
from his lips in other days as an empty threat:--

"It's all over with me; I must bolt from home."

He refreshed both mind and body by a good wash; but still his
resolution did not falter. He hurried on his clothes, looked out of
window, listened at his door; and all this time his purpose never
changed. Remembering but too well the persecution he had already
suffered at the hands of Mr. Yollop, the conviction that it would now
be repeated with fourfold severity was enough of itself to keep him
firm to his desperate intention. When he had done dressing, his
thoughts were suddenly recalled by the sight of his pocket-book to his
companion of the past night. As he reflected on the appointment for
Thursday morning, his eyes brightened, and he said to himself aloud,
while he turned resolutely to the door, "That queer fellow talked of
going back to America. If I can't do anything else, I'll go back with
him!"

Just as his hand was on the lock, he was startled by a knock at the
door. He opened it, and found the housemaid on the landing with a
letter for him. Returning to the window, he hastily undid the envelope.
Several gaily-printed invitation cards with gilt edges dropped out.
There was a letter among them, which proved to be in Mr. Blyth's
handwriting, and ran thus:--

                 "Wednesday.

"MY DEAR ZACK--The enclosed are the tickets for my picture show, which
I told you about yesterday evening. I send them now, instead of waiting
to give them to you to-night, at Lavvie's suggestion. She thinks only
three days' notice, from now to Saturday, rather short, and considers
it advisable to save even a few hours, so as to enable you to give your
friends the most time possible to make their arrangements for coming to
my studio. Post all the invitation tickets, therefore, that you send
about among your connection, at once, as I am posting mine; and you
will save a day by that means, which is a good deal. Patty is obliged
to pass your house this morning on an errand, so I send my letter by
her. How conveniently things sometimes turn out, don't they?

"Introduce anybody you like; but I should prefer _intellectual_ people;
my figure-subject of 'Columbus in sight of the New World' being treated
mystically, and, therefore, adapted to tax the popular mind to the
utmost. Please warn your friends beforehand that it is a work of high
art, and that nobody can hope to understand it in a hurry.

                            "Affectionately yours,

                            "V. BLYTH."


The perusal of this letter reminded Zack of certain recent aspirations
in the direction of the fine arts, which had escaped his slippery
memory altogether, while he was thinking of his future prospects. "I'll
stick to my first idea," he thought, "and be an artist, if Blyth will
let me, after what's happened. If he won't, I've got Mat to fall back
upon; and I'll run as wild in America as ever he did."

Reflecting thus, Zack descended cautiously to the back parlor, which
was called a "library." The open door showed him that no one was in the
room. He went in, and in great haste scrawled the following answer to
Mr. Blyth's letter:--


"MY DEAR BLYTH--Thank you for the tickets. I have got into a dreadful
scrape, having been found out coming home tipsy at four in the morning,
which I did by stealing the family door-key. My prospects after this
are so extremely unpleasant that I am going to make a bolt of it. I
write these lines in a tearing hurry, for fear my father should come
home before I have done--he having gone to Yollop's to set the parson
at me again worse than ever.

"I can't come to you to-night, because your house would be the first
place they would send to after me. But I mean to be an artist, if you
won't desert me. Don't, my dear fellow! I know I'm a scamp; but I'll
try and be a reformed character, if you will only stick by me. When you
take your walk tomorrow, I shall be at the turnpike in the Laburnum
Road, waiting for you, at three o'clock. If you won't come there, or
won't speak to me when you do come, I shall leave England and take to
something desperate.

"I have got a new friend--the best and most interesting fellow in the
world. He has been half his life in the wilds of America; so, if you
don't give me the go-by, I shall bring him to see your picture of
Columbus.

"I feel so miserable, and have got such a headache, that I can't write
any more. Ever yours,

                            "Z. THORPE, JUN."


After directing this letter, and placing it in his pocket to be put
into the post by his own hand, Zack looked towards the door and
hesitated--advanced a step or two to go out--and ended by returning to
the writing-table, and taking a fresh sheet of paper out of the
portfolio before him.

"I can't leave the old lady (though she won't forgive me) without
writing a line to keep up her spirits and say goodbye," he thought, as
he dipped the pen in the ink, and began in his usual dashing, scrawling
way. But he could not get beyond "My dear Mother." The writing of those
three words seemed to have suddenly paralyzed him. The strong hand that
had struck out so sturdily all through the fight, trembled now at
merely touching a sheet of paper. Still, he tried desperately to write
something, even if it were only the one word, "Goodbye."--tried till
the tears came into his eyes, and made all further effort hopeless.

He crumpled up the paper and rose hastily, brushing away the tears with
his hand, and feeling a strange dread and distrust of himself as he did
so. It was rarely, very rarely, that his eyes were moistened as they
were moistened now. Few human beings have lived to be twenty years of
age without shedding more tears than had ever been shed by Zack.

"I can't write to her while I'm at home, and I know she's in the next
room to me. I will send her a letter when I'm out of the house, saying
it's only for a little time, and that I'm coming back when the angry
part of this infernal business is all blown over." Such was his
resolution, as he tore up the crumpled paper, and went out quickly into
the passage.

He took his hat from the table. _His_ hat? No: he remembered that it
was the hat which had been taken from the man at the tavern. At the
most momentous instant of his life--when his heart was bowing down
before the thought of his mother--when he was leaving home in secret,
perhaps for ever--the current of his thoughts could be incomprehensibly
altered in its course by the influence of such a trifle as this!

It was thus with him; it is thus with all of us. Our faculties are
never more completely at the mercy of the smallest interests of our
being, than when they appear to be most fully absorbed by the
mightiest. And it is well for us that there exists this seeming
imperfection in our nature. The first cure of many a grief, after the
hour of parting, or in the house of death, has begun, insensibly to
ourselves, with the first moment when we were betrayed into thinking of
so little a thing even as a daily meal.

The rain which had accompanied the thaw was falling faster and faster;
inside the house was dead silence, and outside it damp desolation, as
Zack opened the street door, and, without hesitating a moment, dashed
out desperately through mud and wet, to cast himself loose on the
thronged world of London as a fugitive from his own home.

He paused before he took the turning out of the square; the
recollections of weeks, months, years past, all whirling through his
memory in a few moments of time. He paused, looking through the damp,
foggy atmosphere at the door which he had just left--never, it might
be, to approach it again; then moved away, buttoned his coat over his
chest with trembling, impatient fingers, and saying to himself, "I've
done it, and nothing can undo it now," turned his back resolutely on
Baregrove Square.


CHAPTER III.

THE SEARCH BEGUN.

The street which Mat had chosen for his place of residence in London,
was situated in a densely populous, and by no means respectable
neighborhood. In Kirk Street the men of the fustian-jacket and
seal-skin cap clustered tumultuous round the lintels of the gin-shop
doors. Here ballad-bellowing, and organ grinding, and voices of
costermongers, singing of poor men's luxuries, never ceased all through
the hum of day, and penetrated far into the frowzy repose of latest
night. Here, on Saturday evenings especially, the butcher smacked with
appreciating hand the fat carcasses that hung around him; and
flourishing his steel, roared aloud to every woman who passed the shop
door with a basket, to come in and buy--buy--buy! Here, with foul
frequency, the language of the natives was interspersed with such words
as reporters indicate in the newspapers by an expressive black line;
and on this "beat," more than on most others, the night police were
chosen from men of mighty strength to protect the sober part of the
street community, and of notable cunning to persuade the drunken part
to retire harmlessly brawling into the seclusion of their own homes.

Such was the place in which Mat had set up his residence, after twenty
years of wandering amid the wilds of the great American Continent.

Never was tenant of any order or degree known to make such conditions
with a landlord as were made by this eccentric stranger. Every
household convenience with which the people at the lodgings could offer
to accommodate him, Mat considered to be a domestic nuisance which it
was particularly desirable to get rid of. He stipulated that nobody
should be allowed to clean his room but himself; that the
servant-of-all-work should never attempt to make his bed, or offer to
put sheets on it, or venture to cook him a morsel of dinner when he
stopped at home; and that he should be free to stay away unexpectedly
for days and nights together, if he chose, without either landlord or
landlady presuming to be anxious or to make inquiries about him, as
long as they had his rent in their pockets. This rent he willingly
covenanted to pay beforehand, week by week, as long as his stay lasted;
and he was also ready to fee the servant occasionally, provided she
would engage solemnly "not to upset his temper by doing anything for
him."

The proprietor of the house (and tobacco-shop) was at first extremely
inclined to be distrustful; but as he was likewise extremely familiar
with poverty, he was not proof against the auriferous halo which the
production of a handful of bright sovereigns shed gloriously over the
oddities of the new lodger. The bargain was struck; and Mat went away
directly to fetch his personal baggage.

After an absence of some little time, he returned with a large
corn-sack on his back, and a long rifle in his hand. This was his
luggage.

First putting the rifle on his bed, in the back room, he cleared away
all the little second-hand furniture with which the front room was
decorated; packing the three rickety chairs together in one corner, and
turning up the cracked round table in another. Then, untying a piece of
cord which secured the mouth of the corn-sack, he emptied it over his
shoulder into the middle of the room--just (as the landlady afterwards
said) as if it was coals coming in instead of luggage. Among the things
which fell out on the floor in a heap, were--some bearskins and a
splendid buffalo-hide, neatly packed; a pipe, two red flannel shirts, a
tobacco-pouch, and an Indian blanket; a leather bag, a gunpowder flask,
two squares of yellow soap, a bullet mold, and a nightcap; a tomahawk,
a paper of nails, a scrubbing-brush, a hammer, and an old gridiron.
Having emptied the sack, Mat took up the buffalo hide, and spread it
out on his bed, with a very expressive sneer at the patchwork
counterpane and meager curtains. He next threw down the bear skins,
with the empty sack under them, in an unoccupied corner; propped up the
leather bag between two angles of the wall; took his pipe from the
floor; left everything else lying in the middle of the room; and,
sitting down on the bearskins with his back against the bag, told the
astonished landlord that he was quite settled and comfortable, and
would thank him to go down stairs, and send up a pound of the strongest
tobacco he had in the shop.

Mat's subsequent proceedings during the rest of the day--especially
such as were connected with his method of laying in a stock of
provisions, and cooking his own dinner--exhibited the same
extraordinary disregard of all civilized precedent which had marked his
first entry into the lodgings. After he had dined, he took a nap on his
bear skins; woke up grumbling at the close air and the confined room;
smoked a long series of pipes, looking out of window all the time with
quietly observant, constantly attentive eyes; and, finally, rising to
the climax of all his previous oddities, came down when the tobacco
shop was being shut up after the closing of the neighboring theater,
and coolly asked which was his nearest way into the country, as he
wanted to clear his head, and stretch his legs, by making a walking
night of it in the fresh air.

Also a kinde of daintie birde in Italie, some take it to be the linnet"
(Florio). We may compare Fr. _bouvreuil_, bull-finch, a diminutive of
_bouvier_, ox-herd.
This is called in German _Dompfaffe_, a contemptuous name for a cathedral
canon. Fr. _moineau_, sparrow, is a diminutive of _moine_, monk.
The wagtail is called in French _lavandière_, laundress, from the up
and down motion of its tail suggesting the washerwoman's beetle, and
_bergeronnette_, little shepherdess, from its habit of following
the sheep.

_Adjutant_, the nickname of the solemn Indian stork, is clearly due
to Mr Atkins, and the _secretary_ bird is so named because some of his
head feathers suggest a quill pen behind an ear.

The converse process of people being nicknamed from animals is
also common and the metaphor is usually pretty obvious. An interesting
case is _shrew_, a libel on a very inoffensive little animal, the
_shrew-mouse_, Anglo-Sax. _scr[=e]awa_. Cooper describes _mus araneus_
as "a kinde of mise called a _shrew_, which if he go over a beastes
backe he shall be lame in the chyne; if he byte it swelleth to the
heart and the beast dyeth." This "information" is derived from Pliny,
but the superstition is found in Greek. The epithet was, up to
Shakespeare's time, applied indifferently to both sexes. From
_shrew_ is derived _shrewd_, earlier _shrewed_,[29] the meaning of
which has become much milder than when Henry VIII. said to Cranmer--

"The common voice I see is verified Of thee which says, 'Do my lord
of Canterbury A _shrewd_ turn, and he's your friend for ever.'"

(_Henry VIII._, v. 2.)
The title _Dauphin_, lit. dolphin, commemorates the absorption into
the French monarchy, in 1349, of the lordship of Dauphiné, the cognisance
of which was three dolphins.

The application of animals' names to diseases is a familiar phenomenon,
e.g., _cancer_ (and _canker_), crab, and _lupus_, wolf.

To this class belongs _mulligrubs_, for which we find in the 17th
century also _mouldy grubs_. Its oldest meaning is stomach-ache, still
given in Hotten's Slang Dictionary (1864). _Mully_ is still used
in dialect for mouldy, earthy, and _grub_ was once the regular word
for worm.

The Latin name for the same discomfort was _verminatio_, from
_vermis_, a worm. For the later transition of meaning we may compare
_megrims_, from Fr.
_migraine_, head-ache, Greco-Lat. _hemicrania_, lit. half-skull,
because supposed to affect one side only of the head.Down the whole
perspective of the High Street there appeared only three human
figures--a woman in pattens; a child under a large umbrella; and a man
with a hamper on his back, walking towards the yard of the principal
inn.

Mat had slackened his pace more and more as he approached the town,
until he slackened it altogether at last, by coming to a dead
stand-still under the walls of the old church, which stood at one
extremity of the High Street, in what seemed to be the suburban
district of Dibbledean. He waited for some time, looking over the low
parapet wall which divided the churchyard from the road--then slowly
approached a gate leading to a path among the grave-stones--stopped at
it--apparently changed his purpose--and, turning off abruptly, walked
up the High Street.

He did not pause again till he arrived opposite a long, low, gabled
house, evidently one of the oldest buildings in the place, though
brightly painted and whitewashed, to look as new and unpicturesque as
possible. The basement story was divided into two shops; which,
however, proclaimed themselves as belonging now, and having belonged
also in former days, to one and the same family. Over the larger of the
two was painted in letters of goodly size:--

_Bradford and Son (late Joshua Grice), Linendrapers, Hosiers, &c., &c._

The board on which these words were traced was continued over the
smaller shop, where it was additionally superscribed thus:--

_Mrs. Bradford (late Joanna Grice), Milliner and Dressmaker._

Regardless of rain, and droppings from eaves that trickled heavily down
his hat and coat, Mat stood motionless, reading and re-reading these
inscriptions from the opposite side of the way. Though the whole man,
from top to toe, was the very impersonation of firmness, he
nevertheless hesitated most unnaturally now. At one moment he seemed to
be on the point of entering the shop before him--at another, he turned
half round towards the churchyard which he had left behind him. At last
he decided to go back to the churchyard, and retraced his steps
accordingly.

He entered quickly by the gate at which he had delayed before; and
pursued the path among the graves a little way. Then striking off over
the grass, after a moment's consideration and looking about him, he
wound his course hither and thither among the turf mounds, and stopped
suddenly at a plain flat tombstone, raised horizontally above the earth
by a foot or so of brickwork. Bending down over it, he read the
characters engraven on the slab.

There were four inscriptions, all of the simplest and shortest kind,
comprising nothing but a record of the names, ages, and birth and death
dates of the dead who lay beneath. The first two inscriptions notified
the deaths of children:--"Joshua Grice, son of Joshua and Susan Grice,
of this parish, aged four years;" and "Susan Grice, daughter of the
above, aged thirteen years." The next death recorded was the mother's:
and the last was the father's, at the age of sixty-two. Below this
followed a quotation from the New Testament:--_Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest._ It was on
these lines, and on the record above them of the death of Joshua Grice
the elder, that the eyes of the lonely reader rested longest; his lips
murmuring several times, as he looked down on the letters:--"He lived
to be an old man--he lived to be an old man after all!"

There was sufficient vacant space left towards the bottom of the
tombstone for two or three more inscriptions; and it appeared as if Mat
expected to have seen more. He looked intently at the vacant space, and
measured it roughly with his fingers, comparing it with the space
above, which was occupied by letters. "Not there, at any rate!" he said
to himself, as he left the churchyard, and walked back to the town.

This time he entered the double shop--the hosiery division of
it--without hesitation. No one was there, but the young man who served
behind the counter. And right glad the young man looked, having been
long left without a soul to speak to on that rainy morning, to see some
one--even a stranger with an amazing skull-cap under his hat--enter the
shop at last.

What could he serve the gentleman with? The gentleman had not come to
buy. He only desired to know whether Joanna Grice, who used to keep the
dressmaker's shop, was still living?

Still living, certainly! the young man replied, with brisk civility.
Miss Grice, whose brother once had the business now carried on by
Bradford and Son, still resided in the town; and was a very curious old
person, who never went out, and let nobody inside her doors. Most of
her old friends were dead; and those who were still alive she had
broken with. She was full of fierce, wild ways; was suspected of being
crazy; and was execrated by the boys of Dibbledean as an "old
tiger-cat." In all probability, her intellects were a little shaken,
years ago, by a dreadful scandal in the family, which quite crushed
them down, being very respectable, religious people--

At this point the young man was interrupted, in a very uncivil manner,
by the stranger, who desired to hear nothing about the scandal, but who
had another question to ask. This question seemed rather a difficult
one to put; for he began it two or three times, in two or three
different forms of words, and failed to get on with it. At last, he
ended by asking, generally, whether any other members of old Mr.
Grice's family were still alive.

For a moment or so the shopman was stupid and puzzled, and asked what
other members the gentleman meant. Old Mrs. Grice had died some time
ago; and there had been two children who died young, and whose names
were in the churchyard. "Did the gentleman mean the second daughter,
who lived and grew up beautiful, and was, as the story went, the cause
of all the scandal? If so, the young person ran away, and died
miserably somehow--nobody knew how; and was supposed to have been
buried like a pauper somewhere--nobody knew where, unless it was Miss
Grice--"

The young man stopped and looked perplexed. A sudden change had passed
over the strange gentleman's face. His swarthy cheeks had turned to a
cold clay color, through which his two scars seemed to burn fiercer
than ever, like streaks of fire. His heavy hand and arm trembled a
little as he leaned against the counter. Was he going to be taken ill?
No: he walked at once from the counter to the door--turned round there,
and asked where Joanna Grice lived. The young man answered, the second
turning to the right, down a street, which ended in a lane of cottages.
Miss Grice's was the last cottage on the left hand; but he could assure
the gentleman that it would be quite useless to go there, for she let
nobody in. The gentleman thanked him, and went, nevertheless.

"I didn't think it would have took me so," Mat said, walking quickly up
the street; "and it wouldn't if I'd heard it anywhere else. But I'm not
the man I was, now I'm in the old place again. Over twenty year of
hardening, don't seem to have hardened me yet!"

He followed the directions given him, correctly enough, arrived at the
last cottage on his left hand, and tried the garden gate. It was
locked; and there was no bell to ring. But the paling was low, and Mat
was not scrupulous. He got over it, and advanced to the cottage door.
It opened, like other doors in the country, merely by turning the
handle of the lock. He went in without any hesitation, and entered the
first room into which the passage led him. It was a small parlor; and,
at the back window, which looked out on a garden, sat Joanna Grice, a
thin, dwarfish old woman, poring over a big book which looked like a
Bible. She started from her chair, as she heard the sound of footsteps,
and tottered up fiercely, with wild wandering grey eyes and horny
threatening hands, to meet the intruder. He let her come close to him;
then mentioned a name--pronouncing it twice, very distinctly.

She paused instantly, livid pale, with gaping lips, and arms hanging
rigid at her side; as if that name, or the voice in which it had been
uttered, had frozen up in a moment all the little life left in her.
Then she moved back slowly, groping with her hands like one in the
dark--back, till she touched the wall of the room Against this she
leaned, trembling violently; not speaking a word; her wild eyes staring
panic-stricken on the man who was confronting her.

He sat down unbidden, and asked if she did not remember him. No answer
was given; no movement made that might serve instead of an answer. He
asked again; a little impatiently this time. She nodded her head and
stared at him--still speechless, still trembling.

He told her what he had heard at the shop; and using the shopman's
phrases, asked whether it was true that the daughter of old Mr. Grice,
who was the cause of all the scandal in the family, had died long
since, away from her home, and in a miserable way?

There was something in his look, as he spoke, which seemed to oblige
her to answer against her will. She said Yes; and trembled more
violently than ever.

He clasped his hands together; his head drooped a little; dark shadows
seemed to move over his bent face; and the scars of the old wounds
deepened to a livid violet hue.

His silence and hesitation seemed to inspire Joanna Grice with sudden
confidence and courage. She moved a little away from the wall, and a
gleam of triumph lightened over her face, as she reiterated her last
answer of her own accord. "Yes! the wretch who ruined the good name of
the family _was_ dead--dead, and buried far off, in some grave by
herself--not there, in the churchyard with her father and mother--no,
thank God, not there!"

He looked up at her instantly, when she said those words, There was
some warning influence in his eye, as it rested on her, which sent her
cowering back again to her former place against the wall. Mentioning
the name for the first time, he asked sternly where Mary was buried.
The reply--doled out doggedly and slowly, forced from her word by
word--was, that Mary was buried among strangers, as she deserved to
be--at a place called Bangbury--far away in the next county, where she
died, and where money was sent to bury her.

His manner became less roughly imperative; his eyes softened; his voice
saddened in tone, when he spoke again. And yet, the next question that
he put to Joanna Grice seemed to pierce her to the quick, to try her to
the heart, as no questioning had tried her before. The muscles were
writhing on her haggard face, her breath burst from her in quick,
fierce pantings, as he asked plainly, whether it was only suspicion, or
really the truth, that Mary was with child when she left her home?

No answer was given to him. He repeated the question, and insisted on
having one. Was it suspicion, or truth? The reply hissed out at him in
one whispered word--Truth.

Was the child born alive?

The answer came again in the same harsh whisper--Yes: born alive.

What became of it?

She never saw it--never asked about it--never knew. While she replied
thus, her whispering accents changed, and rose sullenly to hoarse,
distinct tones. But it was not till the questioner spoke to her once
more that the smothered fury flashed out into flaming rage. Then, even
as he raised his head and opened his lips, she staggered, with
outstretched arms, up to the table at which she had been reading when
he came in; and struck her bony hands on the open Bible; and swore by
the Word of Truth in that Book, that she would answer him no more.

He rose calmly; and with something of contempt in his look, approached
the table and spoke. But his voice was drowned by hers, bursting from
her in screams of fury. No! no! no! Not a word more! How dare he come
there, with his shameless face and his threatening eyes, and make her
speak of what should never have passed her lips again--never till she
went up to render her account at the Judgment Seat! Relations! let him
not speak to her of relations. The only kindred she ever cared to own,
lay heart-broken under the great stone in the churchyard. Relations! if
they all came to life again this very minute, what could she have to do
with them, whose only relation was Death? Yes; Death, that was father,
mother, brother, sister to her now! Death, that was waiting to take her
in God's good time. What! would he stay on in spite of her? stay after
she had sworn not to answer him another word?

Yes; he was resolved to stay--and resolved to know more. Had Mary left
nothing behind her, on the day when she fled from her home?

Some suddenly-conceived resolution seemed to calm the first fury of
Joanna Grice's passion, while he said those words. She stretched out
her hand quickly, and griped him by the arm, and looked up in his face
with a wicked exultation in her wild eyes.

He was bent on knowing what that ruined wretch left behind her? Well!
he should see for himself!

Between the leaves of Joanna Grice's Bible there was a key, which
seemed to be used as a marker. She took it out, and led the way, with
toilsome step, and hands outstretched for support to the wall on one
side and the banisters on the other, up the one flight of stairs which
communicated with the bed-room story of the cottage.

He followed close behind her: and was standing by her side, when she
opened a door, and pointed into a room, telling him to take what he
found there, and then go--she cared not whither, so long as he went
from her.

She descended the stairs again, as he entered the room. There was a
close, faint, airless smell in it. Cobwebs, pendulous and brown with
dirt, hung from the ceiling. The grimy window-panes saddened all the
light that poured through them faintly. He looked round him, and saw no
furniture anywhere; no sign that the room had ever been lived in, ever
entered even, for years and years past. He looked again, more
carefully: and detected, in one dim corner, something covered with dust
and dirt, which looked like a small box.

He pulled it out towards the window. Dust flew from it in clouds.
Loathsome, crawling creatures crept from under it and from off it. He
stirred it with his foot still nearer to the faint light, and saw that
it was a common deal-box, corded. He looked closer, and through
cobwebs, and dead insects, and foul stains of all kinds, spelt out a
name that was painted on it: MARY GRICE.

At the sight of that name, and of the pollution which covered it, he
paused, silent and thoughtful; and, at the same moment, heard the
parlor door below, locked. He stooped hastily, took up the box by the
cord round it, and left the room. His hand touched a substance, as he
grasped the cord, which did not feel like wood. Examining the box by
the clearer light falling on the landing from a window in the roof, he
discovered a letter nailed to the cover. There was something written on
it; but the paper was dusty, the ink was faded by time, and the
characters were hard to decipher. By dint of perseverance, however, he
made out from them this inscription: "Justification of my conduct
towards my niece: to be read after my death. Joanna Grice."

As he passed the parlor door, he heard her voice, reading. He stopped
and listened. The words that reached his ears seemed familiar to them;
and yet he knew not, at first, what book they came from. He listened a
little longer; his recollections of his boyhood and of home helped him;
and he knew that the book from which Joanna Grice was reading aloud to
herself was the Bible.

His face darkened, and he went out quickly into the garden; but stopped
before he reached the paling, and, turning back to the front window of
the parlor, looked in. He saw her sitting with her back to him, with
elbows on the table, and hands working feverishly in her tangled grey
hair. Her voice was still audible; but the words it pronounced could no
longer be distinguished. He waited at the window for a few moments;
then left it suddenly, saying to himself: "I wonder the book don't
strike her dead!" Those were his only words of farewell. With that
thought in his heart, he turned his back on the cottage, and on Joanna
Grice.

He went on through the rain, taking the box with him, and looking about
for some sheltered place in which he could open it. After walking
nearly a mile, he saw an old cattle-shed, a little way off the road--a
rotten, deserted place; but it afforded some little shelter, even yet:
so he entered it.

There was one dry corner left; dry enough, at least, to suit his
purpose. In that he knelt down, and cut the cord round the
box--hesitated before he opened it--and began by tearing away the
letter outside, from the nail that fastened it to the cover.

It was a long letter, written in a close, crabbed hand. He ran his eye
over it impatiently, till his attention was accidentally caught and
arrested by two or three lines, more clearly penned than the rest, near
the middle of a page. For many years he had been unused to reading any
written characters; but he spelt out resolutely the words in the few
lines which first struck his eye, and found that they ran thus:--


"I have now only to add, before proceeding to the miserable confession
of our family dishonor, that I never afterwards saw, and only once
heard of, the man who tempted my niece to commit the deadly sin, which
was her ruin in this world, and will be her ruin in the next."


Beyond those words, he made no effort to read further. Thrusting the
letter hastily into his pocket, he turned once more to the box.

It was sealed up with strips of tape, but not locked. He forced the lid
open, and saw inside a few simple articles of woman's wearing apparel;
a little work-box; a lace collar, with the needle and thread still
sticking in it; several letters, here tied up in a packet, there
scattered carelessly; a gaily-bound album; a quantity of dried ferns
and flower leaves that had apparently fallen from between the pages: a
piece of canvas with a slipper-pattern worked on it; and a black dress
waistcoat with some unfinished embroidery on the collar. It was plain
to him, at a first glance, that these things had been thrown into the
box anyhow, and had been left just as they were thrown. For a moment or
two, he kept his eyes fixed on the sad significance of the confusion
displayed before him; then turned away his head, whispering to himself,
mournfully and many times, that name of "Mary," which he had already
pronounced while in the presence of Joanna Grice. After a little, he
mechanically picked out the letters that lay scattered about the box;
mechanically eyed the broken seals and the addresses on each;
mechanically put them back again unopened, until he came to one which
felt as if it had something inside it. This circumstance stimulated him
into unfolding the enclosure, and examining what the letter might
contain.

Nothing but a piece of paper neatly folded. He undid the folds, and
found part of a lock of hair inside, which he wrapped up again the
moment he saw it, as if anxious to conceal it from view as soon as
possible. The letter he examined more deliberately. It was in a woman's
handwriting; was directed to "Miss Mary Grice, Dibbledean:" and was
only dated "Bond Street, London. Wednesday." The post-mark, however,
showed that it had been written many years ago. It was not very long;
so he set himself to the task of making it all out from beginning to
end.

This was what he read:--


"MY DEAREST MARY,

"I have just sent you your pretty hair bracelet by the coach, nicely
sealed and packed up by the jeweler. I have directed it to you by your
own name, as I direct this, remembering what you told me about your
father making it a point of honor never to open your letters and
parcels; and forbidding that ugly aunt Joanna of yours, ever to do so
either. I hope you will receive this and the little packet about the
same time.

"I will answer for your thinking the pattern of your bracelet much
improved since the new hair has been worked in with the old. How slyly
you will run away to your own room, and _blush unseen,_ like the flower
in the poem, when you look at it! You may be rather surprised, perhaps,
to see some little gold fastenings introduced as additions; but this,
the jeweler told me, was a matter of necessity. Your poor dear sister's
hair being the only material of the bracelet, when you sent it up to me
to be altered, was very different from the hair of that faultless
true-love of yours which you also sent to be worked in with it. It was,
in fact, hardly half long enough to plait up properly with poor
Susan's, from end to end; so the jeweler had to join it with little
gold clasps, as you will see. It is very prettily run in along with the
old hair though. No country jeweler could have done it half as nicely,
so you did well to send it to London after all. I consider myself
rather a judge of these things; and I say positively that it is now the
prettiest hair bracelet I ever saw.

"Do you see him as often as ever? He ought to be true and faithful to
you, when you show how dearly you love him, by mixing his hair with
poor Susan's, whom you were always so fondly attached to. I say he
_ought;_ but _you_ are sure to say he will--and I am quite ready,
love, to believe that you are the wiser of the two.

"I would write more, but have no time. It is just the regular London
season now, and we are worked out of our lives. I envy you dressmakers
in the country; and almost wish I was back again at Dibbledean, to be
tyrannized over from morning to night by Miss Joanna. I know she is
your aunt, my dear; but I can't help saying that I hate her very name!

                            "Ever your affectionate friend,

                            "JANE HOLDSWORTH.

"P. S.--The jeweler sent back the hair he did not want; and I, as in
duty bound, return it enclosed to you, its lawful owner."


Those scars on Mat's face, which indicated the stir of strong feelings
within him more palpably than either his expression or his manner,
began to burn redly again while he spelt his way through this letter.
He crumpled it up hastily round the enclosure, instead of folding it as
it had been folded before; and was about to cast it back sharply into
the box, when the sight of the wearing apparel and half-finished work
lying inside seemed to stay his hand, and teach it on a sudden to move
tenderly. He smoothed out the paper with care, and placed it very
gently among the rest of the letters--then looked at the box
thoughtfully for a moment or two; took from his pocket the letter that
he had first examined, and dropped it in among the others--then
suddenly and sharply closed the lid of the box again.

"I can't touch any more of her things," he said to himself; "I can't so
much as look at 'em, somehow, without its making me--" he stopped to
tie up the box; straining at the cords, as if the mere physical
exertion of pulling hard at something were a relief to him at that
moment. "I'll open it again and look it over in a day or two, when I'm
away from the old place here," he resumed, jerking sharply at the last
knot--"when I'm away from the old place, and have got to be my own man
again."

He left the shed; regained the road; and stopped, looking up and down,
and all round him, indecisively. Where should he go next? To the grave,
where he had been told that Mary lay buried? No: not until he had first
read all the letters and carefully examined all the objects in the box.
Back to London, and to his promised meeting next morning with Zack?
Yes: nothing better was left to be done--back to London.


Before nightfall he was journeying again to the great city, and to his
meeting with Zack; journeying (though he little thought it) to the
place where the clue lay hid--the clue to the Mystery of Mary Grice.


CHAPTER IV.

FATE WORKS, WITH ZACK FOR AN INSTRUMENT.

A quarter of an hour's rapid walking from his father's door, took Zack
well out of the neighborhood of Baregrove Square, and launched him in
vagabond independence loose on the world. He had a silk handkerchief
and sevenpence halfpenny in his pockets--his available assets consisted
of a handsome gold watch and chain--his only article of baggage was a
blackthorn stick--and his anchor of hope was the Pawnbroker.

His first action, now that he had become his own master, was to go
direct to the nearest stationer's shop that he could find, and there to
write the penitent letter to his mother over which his heart had failed
him in the library at Baregrove Square. It was about as awkward,
scrambling, and incoherent an epistolary production as ever was
composed. But Zack felt easier when he had completed it--easier still
when he had actually dropped it into the post-office along with his
other letter to Mr. Valentine Blyth.

The next duty that claimed him was the first great duty of civilized
humanity--the filling of an empty purse. Most young gentlemen in his
station of life would have found the process of pawning a watch in the
streets of London, and in broad daylight, rather an embarrassing one.
But Zack was born impervious to a sense of respectability. He marched
into the first pawnbroker's he came to with as solemn an air of
business, and marched out again with as serene an expression of
satisfaction, as if he had just been drawing a handsome salary, or just
been delivering a heavy deposit into the hands of his banker.

Once provided with pecuniary resources, Zack felt himself at liberty to
indulge forthwith in a holiday of his own granting. He opened the
festival by a good long ride in a cab, with a bottle of pale ale and a
packet of cigars inside, to keep the miserable state of the weather
from affecting his spirits. He closed the festival with a visit to the
theater, a supper in mixed company, total self-oblivion, a bed at a
tavern, and a blinding headache the next morning. Thus much, in brief,
for the narrative of his holiday. The proceedings, on his part, which
followed that festival, claim attention next; and are of sufficient
importance, in the results to which they led, to be mentioned in
detail.


The new morning was the beginning of an important day in Zack's life.
Much depended on the interviews he was about to seek with his new
friend, Mat, in Kirk Street, and with Mr. Blyth, at the turnpike in the
Laburnum Road. As he paid his bill at the tavern, his conscience was
not altogether easy, when he recalled a certain passage in his letter
to his mother, which had assured her that he was on the high road to
reformation already. "I'll make a clean breast of it to Blyth, and do
exactly what he tells me, when I meet him at the turnpike." Fortifying
himself with this good resolution, Zack arrived at Kirk Street, and
knocked at the private door of the tobacconist's shop.

Mat, having seen him from the window, called to him to come up, as soon
as the door was opened. The moment they shook hands, young Thorpe
noticed that his new friend looked altered. His face seemed to have
grown downcast and weary--heavy and vacant, since they had last met.

"What's happened to you?" asked Zack. "You have been somewhere in the
country, haven't you? What news do you bring back, my dear fellow?
Good, I hope?"

"Bad as can be," returned Mat, gruffly. "Don't you say another word to
me about it. If you do, we part company again. Talk of something else.
Anything you like; and the sooner the better."

Forbidden to discourse any more concerning his friend's affairs, Zack
veered about directly, and began to discourse concerning his own.
Candor was one of his few virtues: and he now confided to Mat the
entire history of his tribulations, without a single reserved point at
any part of the narrative, from beginning to end.

Without putting a question, or giving an answer, without displaying the
smallest astonishment or the slightest sympathy, Mat stood gravely
listening until Zack had quite done. He then went to the corner of the
room where the round table was; pulled the upturned lid back upon the
pedestal; drew from the breast pocket of his coat a roll of
beaver-skin; slowly undid it; displayed upon the table a goodly
collection of bank notes; and pointing to them, said to young
Thorpe,--"Take what you want."

The mode of infection is the same as in the pyogenic diseases of bone,
the metastasis occurring most frequently from the mucous membrane
of the pharynx (J. B. Murphy). The localisation of the infection in a
particular joint is determined by injury, exposure to cold, antecedent
disease of the joint, or other factors, the nature of which is not
always apparent.

The effects on the joint vary in severity. In the milder forms, there
is engorgement and infiltration of the synovial membrane, and an effusion
into the cavity of the joint of serous fluid mixed with flakes of
fibrin--_serous synovitis_.

In more severe infections the exudate consists of pus mixed with
fibrin, and, it may be, red blood corpuscles--_purulent_ or _suppurative
synovitis_; the synovial membrane and the ligaments are softened, and
the surface of the membrane presents granulations resembling those
on an ulcer; foci of suppuration may develop in the peri-articular
cellular tissue and result in abscesses.
In _acute arthritis_, all the structures of the joint are involved; the
articular cartilage is invaded by granulation tissue derived from the
synovial membrane, and from the marrow of the subjacent bone; it
presents a worm-eaten or ulcerated appearance, or it may undergo
necrosis and separate, exposing the subjacent bone and leading to
disintegration of the osseous trabeculæ--_caries_.

With the destruction of the ligaments, the stability of the joint
is lost, and it becomes disorganised.

The _clinical features_ vary with the extent of the infection. When this
is confined to the synovial and peri-synovial tissues--_acute
serous_ and _purulent synovitis_--there is the usual general reaction,
associated with pyrexia and great pain in the joint. The part
is hot and swollen, the swelling assuming the shape of the distended
synovial sac, fluctuation can usually be elicited, and the joint is held
in the flexed position.

When the joint is infected by extension from the surrounding cellular
tissue, the joint lesion may not be recognised at an early stage
because of the swollen condition of the limb, and because there
are already symptoms of toxæmia.

We have observed a case in which both the hip and knee joints were
infected from the cellular tissue.

If the infection involves all the joint structures--_acute arthritis_--the
general and local phenomena are intensified, the temperature rises
quickly, often with a rigor, and remains high; the patient looks ill,
and is either unable to sleep or the sleep is disturbed by starting
pains.

The joint is held rigid in the flexed position, and the least attempt
at movement causes severe pain; the slightest jar--even the shaking
of the bed--may cause agony.

The joint is hot, tensely distended, and there may be oedema of the
peri-articular tissues or of the limb as a whole. If the pus perforates
the joint capsule, there are signs of abscess or of diffuse suppuration
in the cellular tissue. The final disorganisation of the joint is
indicated by abnormal mobility and grating of the articular surfaces,
or by spontaneous displacement of the bones, and this may amount to
dislocation.

In the acute arthritis of infants, the epiphysis concerned may be
separated and displaced.

When the _joint is infected through an external wound_, the anatomical
features are similar to those observed when the infection has reached
the joint by the blood-stream, but the destructive changes tend to be
more severe and are more likely to result in disorganisation.

The _terminations_ vary with the gravity of the infection and with the
stage at which treatment is instituted. In the milder forms recovery
is the rule, with more or less complete restoration of function.
In more severe forms the joint may be permanently damaged as a result
of fibrous or bony ankylosis, or from displacement or dislocation.
From changes in the peri-articular structures there may be contracture
in an undesirable position, and in young subjects the growth of
the limb may be interfered with. The persistence of sinuses is usually
due to disease in one or other of the adjacent bones. In the most
severe forms, and especially when several joints are involved, death
may result from toxæmia.

The _treatment_ is carried out on the same principles as in other
pyogenic infections. The limb is immobilised in such an attitude that
should stiffness occur there will be the least interference with
function.

Extension by weight and pulley is the most valuable means of allaying
muscular spasm and relieving intra-articular tension and of counteracting
the tendency to flexion; as much as 15 or 20 pounds may be required to
relieve the pain.

The induction of hyperæmia is sometimes remarkably efficacious in
relieving pain and in arresting the progress of the infection. If the
fluid in the joint is in sufficient quantity to cause tension, if it
persists, or if there is reason to suspect that it is purulent, it
should be withdrawn without delay; an exploring syringe usually suffices,
the skin being punctured with a tenotomy knife, and, as practised by
Murphy, 5 to 15 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of formalin in glycerin
are injected and the wound is closed.

In virulent infections the injection may be repeated in twenty-four hours.
Drainage by tube or otherwise is to be condemned (Murphy). A vaccine
may be prepared from the fluid in the joint and injected into the
subcutaneous cellular tissue.

Suppuration in the peri-articular soft parts or in one of the adjacent
bones must be looked for and dealt with.

When convalescence is established, attention is directed to the
restoration of the functions of the limb, and to the prevention
of stiffness and deformity by movements and massage, and the use
of hot-air and other baths.

At a later stage, and especially in neglected cases, operative and other
measures may be required for deformity or ankylosis.

#Metastatic Forms of Pyogenic Infection#

In #pyæmia#, one or more joints may fill with pus without marked
symptoms or signs, and if the pus is aspirated without delay the
joint often recovers without impairment of function.

In #typhoid fever#, joint lesions result from infection with the
typhoid bacillus alone or along with pyogenic organisms, and run
their course with or without suppuration; there is again a remarkable
absence of symptoms, and attention may only be called to the
condition by the occurrence of dislocation.

Joint lesions are comparatively common in #scarlet fever#, and were
formerly described as scarlatinal rheumatism. The most frequent
clinical type is that of a serous synovitis, occurring within a week or
ten days from the onset of the fever. Its favourite seat is in the
hand and wrist, the sheaths of the extensor tendons as well as
the synovial membrane of the joints being involved. It does not tend
to migrate to other joints, and rarely lasts longer than a few days.
It is probably due to the specific virus of scarlet fever.

At a later stage, especially in children and in cases in which the
throat lesion is severe, an arthritis is sometimes observed that
is believed to be a metastasis from the throat; it may be acute and
suppurative, affect several joints, and exhibit a septicæmic or
pyæmic character.

The joints of the lower extremity are especially apt to suffer; the
child is seriously ill, is delirious at night, develops bed-sores
over the sacrum and, it may happen that, not being expected to recover,
the legs are allowed to assume contracture deformities with ankylosis
or dislocation at the hip and flexion ankylosis at the knees; should
the child survive, the degree of crippling may be pitiable in the
extreme; prolonged orthopædic treatment and a series of operations--arthroplasty,
osteotomies, and resections--may be required to restore even a
limited capacity of locomotion.

#Pneumococcal affections of joints#, the result of infection
with the pneumococcus of Fraenkel, are being met with in increasing
numbers.

The local lesion varies from a _synovitis_ with infiltration of
the synovial membrane and effusion of serum or pus, to an _acute
arthritis_ with erosion of cartilage, caries of the articular surfaces,
and disorganisation of the joint.

The knee is most frequently affected, but several joints may suffer
at the same time. In most cases the joint affection makes its
appearance a few days after the commencement of a pneumonia, but in
a number of instances, especially among children, the lung is not
specially involved, and the condition is an indication of a generalised
pneumococcal infection, which may manifest itself by endocarditis,
empyema, meningitis, or peritonitis, and frequently has a fatal
termination.

The differential diagnosis from other forms of pyogenic
infection is established by bacteriological examination of the fluid
withdrawn from the joint. The treatment is carried out on the same lines
as in other pyogenic infections, considerable reliance being
placed on the use of autogenous vaccines.

In #measles#, #diphtheria#, #smallpox#, #influenza#, and #dysentery#,
similar joint lesions may occur.

The joint lesions which accompany #acute rheumatism# or "rheumatic
fever" are believed to be due to a diplococcus. In the course of
a general illness in which there is moderate pyrexia and profuse
sweating, some of the larger joints, and not infrequently the smaller
ones also, become swollen and extremely sensitive, so that the sufferer
lies in bed helpless, dreading the slightest movement. From day to day
fresh joints are attacked, while those first affected subside,
often with great rapidity.

Affections of the heart-valves and of the pericardium are commonly present.
On recovery from the acute illness, it may be found that the
joints have entirely recovered, but in a small proportion of cases
certain of them remain stiff and pass into the crippled condition
described under chronic rheumatism. There is no call for operative
interference.

#Gonococcal Affections of Joints.#--These include all forms of joint
lesion occurring in association with gonorrhoeal urethritis, vulvo-vaginitis,
or gonorrhoeal ophthalmia. They may develop at any stage of the
urethritis, but are most frequently met with from the eighteenth to the
twenty-second day after the primary infection, when the organisms
have reached the posterior urethra; they have been observed,
however, after the discharge has ceased.

There is no connection between the severity of the gonorrhoea and
the incidence of joint disease. In women, the gonorrhoeal nature of
the discharge must be established by bacteriological examination.

As a complication of ophthalmia, the joint lesions are met with
in infants, and occur more commonly towards the end of the second
or during the third week.

The gonococcus is carried to the joint in the blood-stream and is first
deposited in the synovial membrane, in the tissues of which it can
usually be found; it may be impossible to find it in the exudate within
the joint. The joint lesions may be the only evidence of metastasis,
or they may be part of a general infection involving the endocardium,
pleura, and tendon sheaths.

The joints most frequently affected are the knee, elbow, ankle, wrist,
and fingers. Usually two or more joints are affected.

Several clinical types are differentiated. (1) A _dry poly-arthritis_
met with in the joints and tendon sheaths of the wrist and hand,
formerly described as gonorrhoeal rheumatism, which in some cases
is trifling and evanescent, and in others is persistent and
progressive, and results in stiffness of the affected joints and permanent
crippling of the hand and fingers.

(2) The commonest type is a _chronic synovitis_ or _hydrops_, in which
the joint--very often the knee--becomes filled with a serous or
sero-fibrinous exudate. There are no reactive changes in the synovial
membrane, cellular tissue, or skin, nor is there any fever or
disturbance of health. The movements are free except in so far as they
are restricted by the amount of fluid in the joint. It usually subsides
in two or three weeks under rest, but tends to relapse.

(3) An _acute synovitis_ with peri-articular phlegmon is most often
met with in the elbow, but it occurs also in the knee and ankle. There
is a sudden onset of severe pain and swelling in and around the joint,
with considerable fever and disturbance of health. The slightest
movement causes pain, and the part is sensitive to touch. The skin
is hot and tense, and in the case of the elbow may be red and fiery
as in erysipelas.

The deposit of fibrin on the synovial membrane and on the articular
surfaces may lead to the formation of adhesions, sometimes in the
form of isolated bands, sometimes in the form of a close fibrous
union between the bones.

(4) A _suppurative arthritis_, like that caused by ordinary pus
microbes, may be the result of gonococcal infection alone or of a
mixed infection.

Usually only one joint is affected, but the condition may be multiple.
The articular cartilages are destroyed, the ends of the bones are covered
with granulations, extra-articular abscesses form, and complete
osseous ankylosis results.

The _diagnosis_ is often missed because the possibility of gonorrhoea
is not suspected.

The denial of the disease by the patient is not always to be relied
upon, especially in the case of women, as they may be ignorant of its
presence. The chief points in the differential diagnosis from acute
articular rheumatism are, that the gonorrhoeal affection is more
often confined to one or two joints, has little tendency to wander
from joint to joint, and its progress is not appreciably influenced
by salicylates, although these drugs may relieve pain. The
conclusive point is the recognition of a gonorrhoeal discharge or
of threads in the urine.

The disease may persist or may relapse, and the patient may be laid
up for weeks or months, and may finally be crippled in one or
in several joints.

The _treatment_--besides that of the urethral disease or of the
ophthalmia--consists in rest until all pain and sensitiveness have
disappeared.

The pain is relieved by salicylates, but most benefit follows
weight extension, the induction of hyperæmia by the rubber bandage
and hot-air baths; if the joint is greatly distended, the fluid
may be withdrawn by a needle and syringe. Detoxicated vaccines should
be given from the first, and in afebrile cases the injection of a
foreign protein, such as anti-typhoid vaccine, is beneficial
(Harrison).

Murphy has found benefit from the introduction into the joint, in the
early stages, of from 5 to 15 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of
formalin in glycerin.

This may be repeated within a week, the patient being kept in bed with
light weight extension. In the chronic hydrops the fluid is
withdrawn, and about an ounce of a 1 per cent. solution of
protargol injected; the patient should be warned of the marked
reaction which follows.

After all symptoms have settled down, but not till then, for fear of
exciting relapse or metastasis, the joint is massaged and exercised.

Stiffness from adhesions is most intractable, and may, in spite of every
attention, terminate in ankylosis even in cases where there has been no
suppuration. Forcible breaking down of adhesions under anæsthesia
is not recommended, as it is followed by great suffering and the adhesions
re-form. Operation for ankylosis--arthroplasty--should not be
undertaken, as the ankylosis recurs.

TUBERCULOUS DISEASE
Tuberculous disease of joints results from bacillary infection through
the arteries. The disease may commence in the synovial membrane or
in the marrow of one of the adjacent bones, and the relative frequency
of these two seats of infection has been the subject of considerable
difference of opinion.

The traditional view of König is that in the knee and most of the larger
joints the disease arises in the bone and in the synovial membrane
in about equal proportion, and that in the hip the number of cases
beginning in the bones is about five times greater than that
originating in the membrane.

This estimate, so far as the actual frequency of bone lesions is concerned,
has been generally accepted, but recent observers, notably John
Fraser, do not accept the presence of bone lesions as necessarily
proving that the disease commenced in the bones; he maintains, and
we think with good grounds, that in many cases the disease having
commenced in the synovial membrane, slowly spreads to the bone by
way of the blood vessels and lymphatics, and gives rise to lesions
in the marrow.

#Morbid Anatomy.#--Tuberculous disease in the articular end of a long
bone may give rise to _reactive changes_ in the adjacent joint,
characterised by effusion and by the extension of the synovial
membrane over the articular surfaces.

This may result in the formation of adhesions which obliterate the
cavity of the joint or divide it into compartments. These lesions
are comparatively common, and are not necessarily due to actual
tuberculous infection of the joint.

The _infection of the joint_ by tubercle originating in the adjacent
bone may take place at the periphery, the osseous focus reaching
the surface of the bone at the site of reflection of the synovial
membrane, and the infection which begins at this point then spreads
to the rest of the membrane.

Or it may take place in the central area, by the projection of tuberculous
granulation tissue into the joint following upon erosion of the
cartilage (Fig. 156).

[Illustration: FIG. 156.--Section of Upper End of Fibula, showing
caseating focus in marrow, erupting on articular surface and infecting
joint.]
_Changes in the Synovial Membrane.

_--In the majority of cases there is a _diffuse thickening of the
synovial membrane_, due to the formation of granulation tissue, or
of young connective tissue, in its substance.
This new tissue is arranged in two layers--the outer composed of fully
formed connective or fibrous tissue, the inner of embryonic tissue,
usually permeated with miliary tubercles. On opening the joint,
these tubercles may be seen on the surface of the membrane, or the
surface may be covered with a layer of fibrinous or caseating tissue.
Where there is greater resistance on the part of the tissues, there
is active formation of young connective tissue which circumscribes
or encapsulates the tubercles, so that they remain embedded in the
substance of the membrane, and are only seen on cutting into it.

The thickened synovial membrane is projected into the cavity of the
joint, filling up its pouches and recesses, and spreading over the
surface of the articular cartilage "like ivy growing on a wall."

Wherever the synovial tissue covers the cartilage it becomes adherent
to and fused with it. The morbid process may be arrested at this
stage, and fibrous adhesions form between the opposing articular
surfaces, or it may progress, in which case further changes occur,
resulting in destruction of the articular cartilage and exposure
of the subjacent bone.I wish you were not so dreadfully careless about whom
you get acquainted with. I have often warned you that you will bring
yourself or your friends into trouble some day, when you least expect
it. Where are you going now?"

"Back to Kirk Street. This is my nearest way; and I promised Mat--"

"Remember what you promised _me,_ and what I am going to promise your
mother--"

"I'll remember everything, Blyth. Good bye and thank you. Only wait
till we meet on Saturday, and you see my new friend; and you will find
it all right."

"I hope I shan't find it all wrong," said Mr. Blyth, forebodingly, as
he followed the road to his own house.


CHAPTER V.

FATE WORKS, WITH MR. BLYTH FOR AN INSTRUMENT.

The great day of the year in Valentine's house was always the day on
which his pictures for the Royal Academy Exhibition were shown in their
completed state to friends and admiring spectators, congregated in his
own painting room. His visitor represented almost every variety of rank
in the social scale; and grew numerous in proportion as they descended
from the higher to the lower degrees. Thus, the aristocracy of race was
usually impersonated, in his studio, by his one noble patron, the
Dowager Countess of Brambledown; the aristocracy of art by two or three
Royal Academicians; and the aristocracy of money by eight or ten highly
respectable families, who came quite as much to look at the Dowager
Countess as to look at the pictures. With these last, the select
portion of the company might be said to terminate; and, after them,
flowed in promiscuously the obscure majority of the visitors--a
heterogeneous congregation of worshippers at the shrine of art, who
were some of them of small importance, some of doubtful importance,
some of no importance at all; and who included within their numbers,
not only a sprinkling of Mr. Blyth's old-established tradesmen, but
also his gardener, his wife's old nurse, the brother of his housemaid,
and the father of his cook. Some of his respectable friends deplored,
on principle, the "leveling tendencies" which induced him thus to admit
a mixture of all classes into his painting-room, on the days when he
exhibited his pictures. But Valentine was warmly encouraged in taking
this course by no less a person than Lady Brambledown herself, whose
perverse pleasure it was to exhibit herself to society as an
uncompromising Radical, a reviler of the Peerage, a teller of
scandalous Royal anecdotes, and a worshipper of the memory of Oliver
Cromwell.

On the eventful Saturday which was to display his works to an
applauding public of private friends, Mr. Blyth's studio, thanks to
Madonna's industry and attention, looked really in perfect order
--as neat and clean as a room could be. A semicircle of all the
available chairs in the house--drawing-room and bed-room chairs
intermingled--ranged itself symmetrically in front of the pictures.
That imaginative classical landscape, "The Golden Age," reposed grandly
on its own easel; while "Columbus in Sight of the New World"--the
largest canvas Mr. Blyth had ever worked on, encased in the most
gorgeous frame he had ever ordered for one of his own pictures--was
hung on the wall at an easy distance from the ground, having proved too
bulky to be safely accommodated by any easel in Valentine's possession.

Except Mr. Blyth's bureau, all the ordinary furniture and general
litter of the room had been cleared out of it, or hidden away behind
convenient draperies in corners. Backwards and forwards over the open
space thus obtained, Mr. Blyth walked expectant, with the elastic skip
peculiar to him; looking ecstatically at his pictures, as he passed and
repassed them--now singing, now whistling; sometimes referring
mysteriously to a small manuscript which he carried in his hand,
jauntily tied round with blue ribbon; sometimes following the lines of
the composition in "Columbus," by flourishing his right hand before it
in the air, with dreamy artistic grace;--always, turn where he would,
instinct from top to toe with an excitable activity which defied the
very idea of rest--and always hospitably ready to rush to the door and
receive the first enthusiastic visitor with open arms, at a moment's
notice.

Above stairs, in the invalid room, the scene was of a different kind.
Here also the arrival of the expected visitors was an event of
importance; but it was awaited in perfect tranquillity and silence.
Mrs. Blyth lay in her usual position on the couch-side of the bed,
turning over a small portfolio of engravings; and Madonna stood at the
front window, where she could command a full view of the garden gate,
and of the approach from it to the house. This was always her place on
the days when the pictures were shown; for, while occupying this
position, she was able, by signs, to indicate the arrival of the
different guests to her adopted mother, who lay too far from the window
to see them. On all other days of the year, it was Mrs. Blyth who
devoted herself to Madonna's service, by interpreting for her advantage
the pleasant conversations that she could not hear. On this day, it was
Madonna who devoted herself to Mrs. Blyth's service, by identifying for
her amusement the visitors whose approach up the garden walk she could
not safely leave her bed to see.

No privilege that the girl enjoyed under Valentine's roof was more
valued by her than this; for by the exercise of it, she was enabled to
make some slight return in kind for the affectionate attention of which
she was the constant object. Mrs. Blyth always encouraged her to
indicate who the different guests were, as they followed each other, by
signs of her own choosing,--these signs being almost invariably
suggested by some characteristic peculiarity of the person represented,
which her quick observation had detected at a first interview, and
which she copied with the quaintest exactness of imitation. The
correctness with which her memory preserved these signs, and retained,
after long intervals, the recollection of the persons to whom they
alluded, was very extraordinary. The name of any mere acquaintance, who
came seldom to the house, she constantly forgot, having only perhaps
had it interpreted to her once or twice, and not hearing it as others
did, whenever it accidentally occurred in conversation. But if the sign
by which she herself had once designated that acquaintance--no matter
how long ago--happened to be repeated by those about her, it was then
always found that the forgotten person was recalled to her recollection
immediately.

From eleven till three had been notified in the invitation cards as the
time during which the pictures would be on view. It was now long past
ten. Madonna still stood patiently by the window, going on with a new
purse which she was knitting for Valentine; and looking out attentively
now and then towards the road. Mrs. Blyth, humming a tune to herself,
slowly turned over the engravings in her portfolio, and became so
thoroughly absorbed in looking at them, that she forgot altogether how
time was passing, and was quite astonished to hear Madonna suddenly
clap her hands at the window, as a signal that the first punctual
visitor had passed the garden-gate.

Mrs. Blyth raised her eyes from the prints directly, and smiled as she
saw the girl puckering up her fresh, rosy face into a childish
imitation of old age, bending her light figure gravely in a succession
of formal bows, and kissing her hand several times with extreme suavity
and deliberation. These signs were meant to indicate Mrs. Blyth's
father, the poor engraver, whose old-fashioned habit it was to pay
homage to all his friends among the ladies, by saluting them from afar
off with tremulous bows and gallant kissings of the hand.

"Ah!" thought Mrs. Blyth, nodding, to show that she understood the
signs--"Ah! there's father. I felt sure he would be the first; and I
know exactly what he will do when he gets in. He will admire the
pictures more than anybody, and have a better opinion to give of them
than anybody else has; but before he can mention a word of it to
Valentine, there will be dozens of people in the painting-room, and
then he will get taken suddenly nervous, and come up here to me."

While Mrs. Blyth was thinking about her father, Madonna signalized the
advent of two more visitors. First, she raised her hand sharply, and
began pulling at an imaginary whisker on her own smooth cheek--then
stood bolt upright, and folded her arms majestically over her bosom.
Mrs. Blyth immediately recognized the originals of these two pantomime
portrait-sketches. The one represented Mr. Hemlock, the small critic of
a small newspaper, who was principally remarkable for never letting his
whiskers alone for five minutes together. The other portrayed Mr.
Bullivant, the aspiring fair-haired sculptor, who wrote poetry, and
studied dignity in his attitudes so unremittingly, that he could not
even stop to look in at a shop-window, without standing before it as if
he was his own statue.

In a minute or two more, Mrs. Blyth heard a prodigious grating of
wheels, and trampling of horses, and banging of carriage-steps
violently let down. Madonna immediately took a seat on the nearest
chair, rolled the skirt of her dress up into her lap, tucked both her
hands inside it, then drew one out, and imitated the action of
snuff-taking--looking up merrily at Mrs. If she remains unmarried she
will be able to support herself, and at any rate she wouldn't be any
worse off than the poor schoolmasters who have to share their
salaries with a family.

If she marries she can use her knowledge in the education of her
children. Am I right?

PASTOR. Quite right. But, on the other hand, hasn't she shown such
talent for painting that it would be a great pity to crush
it?

CAPTAIN. No!

I have shown her sketches to an eminent painter, and he says they are
only the kind of thing that can be learned at schools. But then a
young fop came here in the summer who, of course, understands the matter
much better, and he declared that she had colossal genius, and so
that settled it to Laura's satisfaction.

PASTOR. Was he quite taken with Bertha?

CAPTAIN.

That goes without saying.

PASTOR. Then God help you, old man, for in that case I see no hope.

This is pretty bad--and, of course, Laura has her supporters--in
there?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you may be sure of that; the whole house is already up
in arms, and, between ourselves, it is not exactly a noble conflict
that is being waged from that quarter.

PASTOR. Don't you think I know that?

CAPTAIN. You do?

PASTOR. I do.

CAPTAIN. But the worst of it is, it strikes me that Bertha's future is
being decided from spiteful motives.

They hint that men better be careful, because women can do this
or that now-a-days. All day long, incessantly, it is a conflict
between man and woman. Are you going? No, stay for supper. I have no
special inducements to offer, but do stay.

You know I am expecting the new doctor. Have you seen him?

PASTOR. I caught a glimpse of him as I came along. He looked pleasant,
and reliable.

CAPTAIN. That's good. Do you think it possible he may become my ally?

PASTOR. Who can tell? It depends on how much he has been among
women.

CAPTAIN. But won't you really stay?

PASTOR.

No thanks, my dear fellow; I promised to be home for supper, and the
wife gets uneasy if I am late.

CAPTAIN. Uneasy? Angry, you mean. Well, as you will. Let me help you
with your coat.

PASTOR. It's certainly pretty cold tonight. Thanks. You must take care
of your health, Adolf, you seem rather nervous.

CAPTAIN. Nervous?

PASTOR. Yes, you are not, really very well.

CAPTAIN. Has Laura put that into your head? She has treated me for the
last twenty years as if I were at the point of death.

PASTOR. Laura? No, but you make me uneasy about you. Take care of
yourself--that's my advice! Good-bye, old man; but didn't you want
to talk about the confirmation?

CAPTAIN. Not at all! I assure you that matter will have to take
its course in the ordinary way at the cost of the clerical conscience
for I am neither a believer nor a martyr.

PASTOR. Good-bye. Love to Laura. [Goes.]
[The Captain opens his desk and seats himself at it. Takes up account
books.]
CAPTAIN [Figuring.] Thirty-four--nine, forty-three--seven, eight, fifty-six--

LAURA [Coming in from inner room.] Will you be kind enough--
CAPTAIN. Just a moment! Sixty-six--seventy-one, eighty-four, eighty-nine,
ninety-two, a hundred. What is it?

LAURA. Am I disturbing you?

CAPTAIN. Not at all. Housekeeping money, I suppose?

LAURA. Yes, housekeeping money.

CAPTAIN. Put the accounts down there and I will go over them.

LAURA. The accounts?

CAPTAIN. Yes.

LAURA.

Am I to keep accounts now?

CAPTAIN. Of course you are to keep accounts. Our affairs are in a
precarious condition, and in case of a liquidation, accounts are
necessary, or one is liable to punishment for being careless.

LAURA. It's not my fault that our affairs are in a precarious
condition.

CAPTAIN. That is exactly what the accounts will decide.

LAURA. It's not my fault that our tenant doesn't pay.

CAPTAIN. Who recommended this tenant so warmly? You! Why did you recommend
a--good-for-nothing, we'll call him?

LAURA. But why did you rent to this good-for-nothing?

CAPTAIN. Because I was not allowed to eat in peace, nor sleep in
peace, nor work in peace, till you women got that man here. You
wanted him so that your brother might be rid of him, your mother wanted
him because I didn't want him, the governess wanted him because he
reads his Bible, and old Margret because she had known his grandmother
from childhood.

That's why he was taken, and if he hadn't been taken, I'd be in a
madhouse by now or lying in my grave.

However, here is the housekeeping money and your pin money.
You may give me the accounts later.

LAURA [Curtesies.] Thanks so much. Do you too keep an account of what
you spend besides the housekeeping money?

CAPTAIN. That doesn't concern you.

LAURA. No, that's true--just as little as my child's education concerns
me. Have the gentlemen come to a decision after this evening's
conference?

CAPTAIN. I had already come to a decision, and therefore it only remained
for me to talk it over with the one friend I and the family have
in common.

Bertha is to go to boarding school in town, and starts in a fortnight.

LAURA.

To which boarding school, if I may venture to ask?

CAPTAIN. Professor Säfberg's.

LAURA. That free thinker!

CAPTAIN. According to the law, children are to be brought up in
their father's faith.

LAURA. And the mother has no voice in the matter?

CAPTAIN. None whatever. She has sold her birthright by a legal transaction,
and forfeited her rights in return for the man's responsibility of
caring for her and her children.

LAURA. That is to say she has no rights concerning her child.

CAPTAIN. No, none at all. When once one has sold one's goods,
one cannot have them back and still keep the money.

LAURA. But if both father and mother should agree?

CAPTAIN. Do you think that could ever happen? I want her to live in town,
you want her to stay at home. The arithmetical result would be that she
remain at the railway station midway between train and home.
This is a knot that cannot be untied, you see.

LAURA. Then it must be broken. What did Nöjd want here?

CAPTAIN. That is an official secret.

LAURA. Which the whole kitchen knows!

CAPTAIN. Good, then you must know it.

LAURA. I do know it.

CAPTAIN.

And have your judgment ready-made?

LAURA. My judgment is the judgment of the law.

CAPTAIN. But it is not written in the law who the child's father
is.

LAURA. No, but one usually knows that.

CAPTAIN. Wise minds claim that one can never know.

LAURA. That's strange. Can't one ever know who the father of a
child is?

CAPTAIN. No; so they claim.

LAURA. How extraordinary! How can the father have such control over
the children then?

CAPTAIN. He has control only when he has assumed the responsibilities
of the child, or has had them forced upon him. But in wedlock, of course,
there is no doubt about the fatherhood.

LAURA. There are no doubts then?

CAPTAIN. Well, I should hope not.

LAURA. But if the wife has been unfaithful?

CAPTAIN. That's another matter. Was there anything else you wanted to
say?

LAURA.

Nothing.

CAPTAIN. Then I shall go up to my room, and perhaps you will be
kind enough to let me know when the doctor arrives. [Closes desk and
rises]
LAURA. Certainly.

[Captain goes through the primate door right.]
CAPTAIN. As soon as he comes. For I don't want to seem rude to him, you
understand. [Goes.]
LAURA. I understand. [Looks at the money she holds in her hands.]
MOTHER-IN-LAW'S VOICE [Within.] Laura!

LAURA. Yes.

MOTHER-IN-LAW'S VOICE. Is my tea ready?

LAURA [In doorway to inner room]. In just a moment.

[Laura goes toward hall door at back as the orderly opens it.]
ORDERLY. Doctor Ostermark.

DOCTOR. Madam!

LAURA [Advances and offers her hand]. Welcome, Doctor--you are heartily
welcome. The Captain is out, but he will be back soon.

DOCTOR.

I hope you will excuse my coming so late, but I have already been called
upon to pay some professional visits.

LAURA. Sit down, won't you?

DOCTOR. Thank you.

LAURA. Yes, there is a great deal of illness in the neighborhood just
now, but I hope it will agree with you here. For us country
people living in such isolation it is of great value to find
a doctor who is interested in his patients, and I hear so many nice
things of you, Doctor, that I hope the pleasantest relations will
exist between us.

DOCTOR. You are indeed kind, and I hope for your sake my visits to you
will not often be caused by necessity.

Your family is, I believe, as a rule in good health--
LAURA. Fortunately we have bear spared acute illnesses, but still things
are not altogether as they should be.

DOCTOR. Indeed?

LAURA. Heaven knows, things are not as might be wished.

DOCTOR. Really, you alarm me.

LAURA. There are some circumstances in a family which through honor and
conscience one is forced to conceal from the whole world--
DOCTOR. Excepting the doctor.

LAURA. Exactly. It is, therefore, my painful duty to tell you the whole
truth immediately.

DOCTOR. Shouldn't we postpone this conference until I have had the honor
of being introduced to the Captain?

LAURA. No! You must hear me before seeing him.

DOCTOR. It relates to him then?

LAURA. Yes, to him, my poor, dear husband.

DOCTOR. You alarm me, indeed, and believe me, I sympathize with
your misfortune.

LAURA [Taking out handkerchief]. My husband's mind is affected.
Now you know all, and may judge for yourself when you see him.

DOCTOR. What do you say?

I have read the Captain's excellent treatises on mineralogy with
admiration, and have found that they display a clear and powerful
intellect.

LAURA. Really? How happy I should be if we should all prove to be
mistaken.

DOCTOR. But of course it is possible that his mind might be affected in
other directions.

LAURA. That is just what we fear, too. You see he has sometimes the
most extraordinary ideas which, of course, one might expect in a
learned man, if they did not have a disastrous effect on the welfare
of his whole family.

For instance, one of his whims is buying all kinds of things.

DOCTOR. That is serious; but what does he buy?

LAURA. Whole boxes of books that he never reads.

DOCTOR. There is nothing strange about a scholar's buying books.

LAURA. You don't believe what I am saying?

DOCTOR. Well, Madam, I am convinced that you believe what you are
saying.

LAURA.

Tell me, is it reasonable to think that one can see what is happening on
another planet by looking through a microscope?

DOCTOR. Does he say he can do that?
LAURA. Yes, that's what he says.

DOCTOR. Through a microscope?
LAURA. Through a microscope, yes.
DOCTOR. This is serious, if it is so.
LAURA. If it is so! Then you have no faith in me, Doctor, and here
I sit confiding the family secret to--
DOCTOR. Indeed, Madam, I am honored by your confidence, but as a
physician I must investigate and observe before giving an opinion.
Has the Captain ever shown any symptoms of indecision or instability
of will?
LAURA. Has he! We have been married twenty years, and he has never
yet made a decision without changing his mind afterward.
DOCTOR. Is he obstinate?
LAURA. He always insists on having his own way, but once he has got
it he drops the whole matter and asks me to decide.
DOCTOR. This is serious, and demands close observation. The will,
you see, is the mainspring of the mind, and if it is affected the
whole mind goes to pieces.
LAURA. God knows how I have taught myself to humor his wishes through
all these long years of trial. Oh, if you knew what a life I have
endured with him--if you only knew.
DOCTOR. Your misfortune touches me deeply, and I promise you to see
what can be done. I pity you with all my heart, and I beg you to
trust me completely. But after what I have heard I must ask you to
avoid suggesting any ideas that might make a deep impression on the
patient, for in a weak brain they develop rapidly and quickly turn
to monomania or fixed ideas.
LAURA. You mean to avoid arousing suspicions?
DOCTOR. Exactly. One can make the insane believe anything, just
because they are receptive to everything.
LAURA. Indeed? Then I understand. Yes--yes. [A bell rings within.]
Excuse me, my mother wishes to speak to me. One moment-- --Ah, here
is Adolf.

[Captain comes in through private door.]
CAPTAIN. Oh, here already, Doctor? You are very welcome.
DOCTOR. Captain! It is a very great pleasure to me to make the
acquaintance of so celebrated a man of science.
CAPTAIN. Oh, I beg of you. The duties of service do not allow me
to make any very profound investigations, but I believe I am now
really on the track of a discovery.

DOCTOR. Indeed?
CAPTAIN. You see, I have submitted meteoric stones to spectrum
analysis, with the result that I have found carbon, that, is to
say, a clear trace of organic life. What do you say to that?
DOCTOR. Can you see that with it microscope?
CAPTAIN. Lord, no--with the spectroscope.
DOCTOR. The spectroscope! Pardon. Then you will soon be able to
tell us what is happening on Jupiter.
CAPTAIN. Not what is happening, but what has happened. If only the
confounded booksellers in Paris would send me the books; but I
believe all the booksellers in the universe have conspired against
me. Think of it, for the last two months not a single one has ever
answered my communications, neither letters nor abusive telegrams.
I shall go mad over it, and I can't imagine what's the matter.
DOCTOR. Oh, I suppose it's the usual carelessness; you mustn't let
it vex you so.
CAPTAIN. But the devil of it is I shall not get my treatise done
in time, and I know they are working along the same lines in
Berlin.
But we shouldn't be talking about this--but about you. If you care
to live here we have rooms for you in the wing, or perhaps you would
rather live in the old quarters?

DOCTOR. Just as you like.
CAPTAIN. No, as you like. Which is it to be?
DOCTOR. You must decide that, Captain.
CAPTAIN. No, it's not for me to decide. You must say which you
prefer. I have no preference in the matter, none at all.
DOCTOR. Oh, but I really cannot decide.
CAPTAIN. For heaven's sake, Doctor, say which you prefer. I have
no choice in the matter, no opinion, no wishes. Haven't you got
character enough to know what you want? Answer me, or I shall be
provoked.
DOCTOR. Well, if it rests with me, I prefer to live here.
CAPTAIN. Thank you--forgive me, Doctor, but nothing annoys me so
touch as to see people undecided about anything. [Nurse comes in.]
Oh, there you are, Margret. Do you happen to know whether the rooms
in the wing are in order for the Doctor?
NURSE. Yes, sir, they are.
CAPTAIN. Very well. Then I won't detain you, Doctor; you must be
tired. Good bye, and welcome once more. I shall see you tomorrow,
I hope.

DOCTOR. Good evening, Captain.
CAPTAIN. I daresay that my wife explained conditions here to you a
little, so that you have some idea how the land lies?
DOCTOR. Yes, your excellent wife has given me a few hints about
this and that, such as were necessary to a stranger. Good evening,
Captain.
CAPTAIN [To Nurse]. What do you want, you old dear? What is it?
NURSE. Now, little Master Adolf, just listen--
CAPTAIN. Yes, Margret, you are the only one I can listen to without
having spasms.
NURSE. Now, listen, Mr. Adolf. Don't you think you should go half-way
and come to an agreement with Mistress in this fuss over the child?
Just think of a mother-- 
CAPTAIN. Think of a father, Margret.
NURSE. There, there, there. A father has something besides his
child, but a mother has nothing but her child.
CAPTAIN. Just so, you old dear. She has only one burden, but I have
three, and I have her burden too. Don't you think that I should
hold a better position in the world than that of a poor soldier if
I had not had her and her child?
NURSE. Well, that isn't what I wanted to talk about.
CAPTAIN. I can well believe that, for you wanted to make it appear
that I am in the wrong.
NURSE. Don't you believe, Mr. Adolf, that I wish you well?
CAPTAIN. Yes, dear friend, I do believe it; but you don't know what
is for my good. You see it isn't enough for me to have given the
child life, I want to give her my soul, too.
NURSE. Such things I don't understand. But I do think that you ought
to be able to agree.

CAPTAIN. You are not my friend, Margret.
NURSE. I? Oh, Lord, what are you saying, Mr. Adolf? Do you think I
can forget that you were my child when you were little?
CAPTAIN. Well, you dear, have I forgotten it? You have been like a
mother to me, and always have stood by me when I had everybody
against me, but now, when I really need you, you desert me and go
over to the enemy.

NURSE. The enemy!
CAPTAIN, Yes, the enemy! You know well enough how things are in
this house! You have seen everything from the beginning.
NURSE. Indeed I have seen! But, God knows, why two people should
torment the life out of each other; two people who are otherwise
so good and wish all others well. Mistress is never like that to
me or to others--
CAPTAIN. Only to me, I know it. But let me tell you, Margret, if
you desert me now, you will do wrong. For now they have begun to
weave a plot against me, and that doctor is not my friend.
NURSE. Oh, Mr. Adolf, you believe evil about everybody. But you see
it's because you haven't the true faith; that's just what it
is.
CAPTAIN. Yes, you and the Baptists have found the only true faith.
You are indeed lucky!
NURSE. Anyway, I'm not unhappy like you, Mr. Adolf. Humble your
heart and you will see that God will make you happy in your love
for your neighbor.
CAPTAIN. It's a strange thing that you no sooner speak of God and
love than your voice becomes hard and your eyes fill with hate. No,
Margret, surely you have not the true faith.
NURSE. Yes, go on being proud and hard in your learning, but it
won't amount to much when it comes to the test.
CAPTAIN. How mightily you talk, humble heart. I know very well that
knowledge is of no use to you women.
NURSE. You ought to be ashamed of yourself. But in spite of everything
old Margret cares most for her great big boy, and he will come back
to the fold when it's stormy weather.
CAPTAIN. Margret! Forgive me, but believe me when I say that there
is no one here who wishes me well but you. Help me, for I feel that
something is going to happen here. What it is, I don't know, but
something evil is on the way. [Scream from within.] What's that?
Who's that screaming?

[Berths enters from inner room.]
BERTHA. Father! Father! Help me; save me.
CAPTAIN. My dear child, what is it? Speak!
BERTHA. Help me. She wants to hurt me.
CAPTAIN. Who wants to hurt you? Tell me! Speak!
BERTHA. Grandmother! But it's my fault for I deceived her.
CAPTAIN. Tell me more.
BERTHA. Yes, but you mustn't say anything about it. Promise me you
won't.

CAPTAIN. Tell me what it is then.

[Nurse goes.]
BERTHA. In the evening she generally turns down the lamp and then
she makes me sit at a table holding a pen over a piece of paper.
And then she says that the spirits are to write.
CAPTAIN. What's all this--and you have never told me about it?
BERTHA. Forgive me, but I dared not, for Grandmother says the spirits
take revenge if one talks about them. And then the pen writes, but
I don't know whether I'm doing it or not. Sometimes it goes well,
but sometimes it won't go at all, and when I am tired nothing comes,
but she wants it to come just the same. And tonight I thought I was
writing beautifully, but then grandmother said it was all from
Stagnelius, and that I had deceived her, and then she got terribly
angry.

CAPTAIN. Do you believe that there are spirits?
BERTHA. I don't know.

CAPTAIN. But I know that there are none.shouted Mr. Blyth, with a tap on Columbus, which struck a
sound from the canvas like a thump on a muffled drum. "On art, Doctor?
I only want to say that, as Columbus's early life must have exercised
him considerably in hauling ropes and pulling oars, I have shown the
large development of his _Biceps_ muscle (which is principally used in
those actions) through his sleeves, as a good characteristic point to
insist on in his physical formation.--That's all! As to the origin--"

"The origin of the _Biceps Flexor Cubiti,_ your Ladyship," resumed the
pertinacious Doctor; "is by two heads. The first begins, if I may so
express myself, _tendinous,_ from the glenoid cavity of the scapula--"

"That man is a pedantic jackass," whispered Mr. Hemlock to his friend.

"And yet he hasn't a bad head for a bust!" rejoined Mr. Bullivant.

"Pray, Mr. Blyth," pleaded the polite and ever-admiring Mr.
Gimble--"pray let me beg you, in the name of the company to proceed
with your most interesting and suggestive explanations and views on
art!"

"Indeed, Mr. Gimble," said Valentine, a little crest-fallen under the
anatomical castigation inflicted on him by the Doctor, "I am very much
delighted and gratified by your approval; but I have nothing more to
read. I thought that point about Columbus a good point to leave off
with, and considered that I might safely allow the rest of the picture
to explain itself to the intelligent spectator."

Hearing this, some of the spectators, evidently distrusting their own
intelligence, rose to take leave--new visitors making their appearance,
however, to fill the vacant chairs and receive Mr. Blyth's hearty
welcome. Meanwhile, through all the bustle of departing and arriving
friends, and through all the fast-strengthening hum of general talk,
the voice of the unyielding doctor still murmured solemnly of "capsular
ligaments," "adjacent tendons," and "corracoid processes" to Lady
Brambledown, who listened to him with satirical curiosity, as a species
of polite medical buffoon whom it rather amused her to become
acquainted with.

Among the next applicants for admission at the painting-room door were
two whom Valentine had expected to see at a much earlier period of the
day--Mr. Matthew Marksman and Zack.

"How late you are!" he said, as he shook hands with young Thorpe.

"I wish I could have come earlier, my dear fellow," answered Zack,
rather importantly; "but I had some business to do" (he had been
recovering his watch from the pawnbroker); "and my friend here had some
business to do also" (Mr. Marksman had been toasting red herrings for
an early dinner); "and so somehow we couldn't get here before. Mat, let
me introduce you. This is my old friend, Mr. Blyth, whom I told you
of."

Valentine had barely time to take the hand of the new guest before his
attention was claimed by fresh visitors. Young Thorpe did the honors of
the painting-room in the artist's absence. "Lots of people, as I told
you. My friend's a great genius," whispered Zack, wondering, as he
spoke, whether the scene of civilized life now displayed before Mr.
Marksman would at all tend to upset his barbarian self-possession.

No: not in the least. There stood Mat, just as grave, cool, and quietly
observant of things about him as ever. Neither the pictures, nor the
company, nor the staring of many eyes that wondered at his black
skull-cap and scarred swarthy face, were capable of disturbing the
Olympian serenity of this Jupiter of the back-woods.

"There!" cried Zack, pointing triumphantly across the room to
"Columbus." "Cudgel your brains, old boy, and guess what that is a
picture of, without coming to me to help you."

Mat attentively surveyed the figure of Columbus, the rig of his ship,
and the wings of the typical female spirits, hovering overhead in the
morning clouds--thought a little--then gravely and deliberately
answered:--

"Peter Wilkins taking a voyage along with his flying wives."

Zack pulled out his handkerchief, and stifled his laughter as well as
he could, out of consideration for Mat, who, however, took not the
smallest notice of him, but added, still staring intently at the
picture.

"Peter Wilkins was the only book I had, when I was a lad aboard ship. I
used to read it over and over again, at odds and ends of spare time,
till I pretty nigh got it by heart. That was many a year ago; and a
good lot of what I knowed then I don't know now. But, mind ye, it's my
belief that Peter Wilkins was something of a sailor."

"Well?" whispered Zack, humoring him, "suppose he was, what of that?"

"Do you think a man as was anything of a sailor would ever be fool
enough to put to sea in such a craft as that?" asked Mr. Marksman,
pointing scornfully to Columbus's ship.

"Hush! old Rough and Tough: the picture hasn't anything to do with
Peter Wilkins," said Zack. "Keep quiet, and wait here a minute for me.
There are some friends of mine at the other end of the room that I must
go and speak to. And, I say, if Blyth comes up to you and asks you
about the picture, say it's Columbus, and remarkably like him."

Left by himself, Mat looked about for better standing-room than he then
happened to occupy; and seeing a vacant space left between the
door-post and Mr. Blyth's bureau, retreated to it. Putting his hands in
his pockets, he leaned comfortably against the wall, and began to
examine the room and everything in it at his leisure. It was not long,
however, before he was disturbed. One of his neighbors, seeing that his
back was against a large paper sketch nailed on the wall behind him,
told him bluntly that he was doing mischief there, and made him change
his position. He moved accordingly to the door-post; but even here he
was not left in repose. A fresh relay of visitors arrived, and obliged
him to make way for them to pass into the room--which he did by
politely rolling himself round the door-post into the passage.

As he disappeared in this way, Mr. Blyth bustled up to the place where
Mat had been standing, and received his guests there, with great
cordiality, but also with some appearance of flurry and perplexity of
mind. The fact was, that Lady Brambledown had just remembered that she
had not examined Valentine's works yet, through one of those artistic
tubes which effectively concentrate the rays of light on a picture,
when applied to the eye. Knowing, by former experience, that the studio
was furnished with one of these little instruments, her ladyship now
intimated her ardent desire to use it instantly on "Columbus."
Valentine promised to get it, with his usual ready politeness; but he
had not the slightest idea where it actually was, for all that. Among
the litter of small things that had been cleared out of the way, when
the painting-room was put in order, there were several which he vaguely
remembered having huddled together for safety in the bottom of his
bureau. The tube might possibly have been among them; so in this place
he determined to look for it--being quite ignorant, if the search
turned out unsuccessful, where he ought to look next.

After begging the new visitors to walk in, he opened the bureau, which
was large and old-fashioned, with a little bright key hanging by a
chain that he unhooked from his watch-guard; and began searching inside
amid infinite confusion--all his attention concentrated in the effort
to discover the lost tube. It was not to be found in the bottom of the
bureau. He next looked, after a little preliminary hesitation, into a
long narrow drawer opening beneath some pigeon-hole recesses at the
back.

The tube was not there, either; and he shut the drawer to again,
carefully and gently--for inside it was the Hair Bracelet that had
belonged to Madonna's mother, lying on the white handkerchief, which
had also been taken from the dead woman's pocket. Just as he closed the
drawer, he heard footsteps at his right hand, and turned in that
direction rather suspiciously--locking down the lid of the bureau as he
looked round. It was only the civil Mr. Gimble, wanting to know what
Mr. Blyth was searching for, and whether he could help him. Valentine
mentioned the loss of the tube; and Mr. Gimble immediately volunteered
to make one of pasteboard. "Ten thousand thanks," said Mr. Blyth,
hooking the key to his watch-guard again, as he returned to Lady
Brambledown with his friend. "Ten thousand thanks; but the worst of it
is, I don't know where to find the pasteboard."

If, instead of turning to the right hand to speak to Mr. Gimble,
Valentine had turned to the left, he would have seen that, just as he
opened the bureau and began to search in it, Mr. Marksman finding the
way into the painting-room clear once more, had rolled himself quietly
round the door-post again; and had then, just as quietly, bent forward
a little, so as to look sideways into the bureau with those observant
eyes of his which nothing could escape, and which had been trained by
his old Indian experience to be always unscrupulously at work, watching
something. Little did Mr. Blyth think, as he walked away, talking with
Mr. Gimble, and carefully hooking his key on to its swivel again, that
Zack's strange friend had seen as much of the inside of the bureau as
he had seen of it himself.

"He shut up his big box uncommon sharp, when that smilin' little chap
come near him," thought Mat. "And yet there didn't seem nothing in it
that strangers mightn't see. There wasn't no money there--at least none
that _I_ set eyes on. Well! it's not my business. Let's have another
look at the picter."

In the affairs of art, as in other matters, important discoveries are
sometimes made, and great events occasionally accomplished, by very
ignoble agencies. Mat's deplorable ignorance of Painting in general,
and grossly illiterate misunderstanding of the subject represented by
Columbus in particular, seemed to mark him out as the last man in the
world who could possibly be associated with Art Mystic in the character
of guardian genius. Yet such was the proud position which he was now
selected by Fate to occupy. In plain words, Mr. Blyth's greatest
historical work had been for some little time in imminent danger of
destruction by falling; and Mat's "look at the picter," was the
all-important look which enabled him to be the first person in the room
who perceived that it was in peril.

The eye with which Mr. Marksman now regarded the picture was certainly
the eye of a barbarian; but the eye with which he afterwards examined
the supports by which it was suspended, was the eye of a sailor, and of
a good practical carpenter to boot. He saw directly, that one of the
two iron clamps to which the frame-lines of "Columbus" were attached,
had been carelessly driven into a part of the wall that was not strong
enough to hold it against the downward stress of the heavy frame.
Little warning driblets of loosened plaster had been trickling down
rapidly behind the canvas; but nobody heard them fall in the general
buzz of talking; and nobody noticed the thin, fine crack above the iron
clamp, which was now lengthening stealthily minute by minute.

"Just let me by, will you?" said Mat quietly to some of his neighbors.
"I want to stop those flying women and the man in the crank ship from
coming down by the long run."

Dozens of alarmed ladies and gentlemen started up from their chairs.
Mat pushed through them unceremoniously; and was indebted to his want
of politeness for being in time to save the picture. With a grating
crack, and an accompanying descent of a perfect slab of plaster, the
loose clamp came clean out of the wall, just as Mat seized the
unsupported end and side of the frame in his sturdy hands, and so
prevented the picture from taking the fatal swing downwards, which
would have infallibly torn it from the remaining fastening, and
precipitated it on the chairs beneath.

A prodigious confusion and clamoring of tongues ensued; Mr. Blyth being
louder, wilder, and more utterly useless in the present emergency than
any of his neighbors. Mat, cool as ever, kept his hold of the picture;
and, taking no notice of the confused advice and cumbersome help
offered to him, called to Zack to fetch a ladder, or, failing that, to
"get a hoist" on some chairs, and cut the rope from the clamp that
remained firm. Wooden steps, as young Thorpe knew, were usually kept in
the painting-room. Where had they been removed to now? Mr. Blyth's
memory was lost altogether in his excitement. Zack made a speculative
dash at the flowing draperies which concealed the lumber in one corner,
and dragged out the steps in triumph.

"All right; take your time, young 'un: there's a knife in my left-hand
breeches' pocket," said Mat. "Now then, cut away at that bit of
rope's-end, and hold on tight at top, while I lower away at bottom.
Steady! Take it easy, and--there yon are!" With which words, the
guardian genius left Art-Mystic resting safely on the floor, and began
to shake his coattails free of the plaster that had dropped on them.

"My dear sir! you have saved the finest picture I ever painted," cried
Valentine, warmly seizing him by both hands. "I can't find words to
express my gratitude and admiration--"

"Don't worry yourself about that," answered Mat; "I don't suppose I
should understand you if you _could_ find 'em. If you want the picter
put up again, I'll do it. And if you want the carpenter's muddle head
punched, who put it up before, I shouldn't much mind doing that
either," added Mat, looking at the hole from which the clamp had been
torn with an expression of the profoundest workmanlike disgust.

A new commotion in the room--near the door this time--prevented Mr.
Blyth from giving an immediate answer to the two friendly propositions
just submitted to him.

At the first alarm of danger, all the ladies--headed by the Dowager
Countess, in whom the instinct of self-preservation was largely
developed--had got as far away as they could from the falling picture,
before they ventured to look round at the process by which it was at
last safely landed on the floor. Just as this had been accomplished,
Lady Brambledown--who stood nearest to the doorway--caught sight of
Madonna in the passage that led to it. Mrs. Blyth had heard the noise
and confusion downstairs, and finding that her bell was not answered by
the servants, and that it was next to impossible to overcome her
father's nervous horror of confronting the company alone, had sent
Madonna down-stairs with him, to assist in finding out what had
happened in the studio.

While descending the stairs with her companion, the girl had
anticipated that they might easily discover whether anything was amiss,
without going further than the passage, by merely peeping through the
studio door. But all chance of escaping the ordeal of the painting-room
was lost the moment Lady Brambledown set eyes on her. The Dowager
Countess was one of Madonna's warmest admirers; and now expressed that
admiration by pouncing on her with immense affection and enthusiasm
from the painting-room door-way. Other people, to whom the deaf and
dumb girl was a much more interesting sight than "Columbus," or the
"Golden Age," crowded round her; all trying together, with great
amiability and small intelligence, to explain what had happened by
signs which no human being could possibly understand. Fortunately for
Madonna, Zack (who ever since he had cut the picture down had been
assailed by an incessant fire of questions about his strange friend,
from dozens of inquisitive gentlemen) happened to look towards her,
over the ladies' heads, and came directly to explain the danger from
which "Columbus" had escaped. She tried hard to get away, and bear the
intelligence to Mrs. Blyth; but Lady Brambledown, feeling amiably
unwilling to resign her too soon, pitched on the poor engraver standing
tremulous in the passage, as being quite clever enough to carry a
message up-stairs, and sent him off to take the latest news from the
studio to his daughter immediately.

Thus it was that when Mr. Blyth left Zack's friend to see what was
going on near the door, he found Madonna in the painting-room,
surrounded by sympathizing and admiring ladies. The first words of
explanation by which Lady Brambledown answered his mute look of
inquiry, reminded him of the anxiety and alarm that his wife must have
suffered; and he ran up-stairs directly, promising to be back again in
a minute or two.

Mat carelessly followed Valentine to the group at the
doorway--carelessly looked over some ladies' bonnets--and saw Madonna,
offering her slate to the Dowager Countess at that moment.

The sweet feminine gentleness and youthful softness of the girl's face,
looked inexpressibly lovely, as she now stood shy and confused under
the eager eyes that were all gazing on her. Her dress, too, had never
more powerfully aided the natural attractions of her face and figure by
its own loveable charms of simplicity and modesty, than now, when the
plain grey merino gown, and neat little black silk apron which she
always wore, were contrasted with the fashionable frippery of fine
colors shining all around her. Was the rough Mr. Marksman himself lured
at first sight into acknowledging her influence? If he was, his face
and manner showed it very strangely.

Almost at the instant when his eyes fell on her, that clay-cold change
which had altered the color of his swarthy cheeks in the hosier's shop
at Dibbledean, passed over them again. The first amazed look that he
cast on her, slowly darkened, while his eyes rested on her face, into a
fixed, heavy, vacant stare of superstitious awe. He never moved, he
hardly seemed to breathe, until the head of a person before him
accidentally intercepted his view. Then he stepped back a few paces;
looked about him bewildered, as if he had forgotten where he was; and
turned quickly towards the door, as if resolved to leave the room
immediately.

But there was some inexplicable influence at work in his heart that
drew him back, in spite of his own will. He retraced his steps to the
group round Madonna--looked at her once more--and, from that moment,
never lost sight of her till she went up stairs again. Whichever way
her face turned, he followed the direction, outside the circle, so as
to be always in front of it. When Valentine re-appeared in the studio,
and Madonna besought him by a look, to set her free from general
admiration, and send her back to Mrs. Blyth, Mat was watching her over
the painter's shoulder. And when young Thorpe, who had devoted himself
to helping her in communicating with the visitors, nodded to her as she
left the room, his friend from the backwoods was close behind him.


CHAPTER VI.

THE FINDING OF THE CLUE.

Mr. Blyth's visitors, now that their common center of attraction had
disappeared, either dispersed again in the painting-room, or approached
the door to take their departure. Zack, turning round sharply after
Madonna had left the studio, encountered his queer companion, who had
not stirred an inch while other people were all moving about him.

"In the name of wonder, what has come to you now? Are you ill? Have you
hurt yourself with that picture?" asked Zack, startled by the
incomprehensible change which he beheld in his friend's face and
manner.

"Come out," said Mat. Young Thorpe looked at him in amazement; even the
sound of his voice had altered!

"What's wrong?" asked Zack. No answer. They went quickly along the
passage and down to the garden gate, in silence. As soon as they had
got into one of the lonely bye-roads of the new suburb, Mat stopped
short; and, turning full on his companion, said: "Who is she?" The
sudden eagerness with which he spoke, so strangely at variance with his
usual deliberation of tone and manner, made those three common words
almost startling to hear.

_"She?_ Who do you mean?" inquired young Thorpe.

"I mean that young woman they were all staring at."

For a moment, Zack contemplated the anxiety visible in his friend's
face, with an expression of blank astonishment; then burst into one of
his loudest, heartiest, and longest fits of laughter. "Oh, by Jove, I
wouldn't have missed this for fifty pounds. Here's old Rough and Tough
smitten with the tender passion, like all the rest of us! Blush, you
brazen old beggar, blush! You've fallen in love with Madonna at first
sight!"

"Damn your laughing! Tell me who she is."

"Tell you who she is? That's exactly what I can't do."

"Why not? What do you mean? Does she belong to painter-man?"

"Oh, fie, Mat! You mustn't talk of a young lady _belonging_ to anybody,
as if she was a piece of furniture, or money in the Three per Cents, or
something of that sort. Confound it man, don't shake me in that way!
You'll pull my arm off. Let me have my laugh, and I'll tell you every
thing."

"Tell it then; and be quick about it."

"Well, first of all, she is not Blyth's daughter--though some
scandal-mongering people have said she is--"

"Nor yet his wife?"

"Nor yet his wife. What a question! He adopted her, as they call it,
years ago, when she was a child. But who she is, or where he picked her
up, or what is her name, Blyth never _has_ told anybody, and never
_will._ She's the dearest, kindest, prettiest little soul that ever
lived; and that's all I know about her. It's a short story, old boy;
but surprisingly romantic--isn't it?"

Mat did not immediately answer. He paid the most breathless attention
to the few words of information which Zack had given him--repeated them
over again to himself--reflected for a moment--then said--

"Why won't the painter-man tell any body who she is?"

"How should I know? It's a whim of his. And, I'll tell you what, here's
a piece of serious advice for you:--If you want to go there again, and
make her acquaintance, don't you ask Blyth who she is, or let him fancy
you want to know. He's touchy on that point--I can't say why; but he
is. Every man has a raw place about him somewhere: that's Blyth's raw
place, and if you hit him on it, you won't get inside of his house
again in a hurry, I can tell you."

Still, Mat's attention fastened greedily on every word--still, his eyes
fixed eagerly on his informant's face--still, he repeated to himself
what Zack was telling him.

"By the bye, I suppose you saw the poor dear little soul is deaf and
dumb," young Thorpe continued. "She's been so from a child. Some
accident; a fall, I believe. But it don't affect her spirits a bit.
She's as happy as the day is long--that's one comfort."

"Deaf and dumb! So like her, it was a'most as awful as seeing the dead
come to life again. She had Mary's turn with her head; Mary's--poor
creature! poor creature!" He whispered those words to himself, under
his breath, his face turned aside, his eyes wandering over the ground
at his feet, with a faint, troubled, vacantly anxious expression.

"Come! come! don't be getting into the dolefuls already," cried Zack,
administering an exhilarating thump on the back to his friend. "Cheer
up! We're all in love with her; you're rowing in the same boat with
Bullivant, and Gimble, and me, and lots more; and you'll get used to it
in time, like the rest of us. I'll act the generous rival with you,
brother Mat! You shall have all the benefit of my advice gratis; and
shall lay siege to our little beauty in regular form. I don't think
your own experience among the wild Indians will help you much, over
here. How do you mean to make love to her? Did you ever make love to a
Squaw?"

"She isn't his wife; and she isn't his daughter; he won't say where he
picked her up, or who she is." Repeating these words to himself in a
quick, quiet whisper, Mat did not appear to be listening to a single
word that young Thorpe said. His mind was running now on one of the
answers that he had wrested from Joanna Grice, at Dibbledean--the
answer which had informed him that Mary's child had been born alive!

"Wake up, Mat! You shall have your fair chance with the lady, along
with the rest of us; and I'll undertake to qualify you on the spot for
civilized courtship," continued Zack, pitilessly carrying on his joke.
"In the first place, always remember that you mustn't go beyond
admiration at a respectful distance, to begin with. At the second
interview, you may make amorous faces at close quarters--what you call
looking unutterable things, you know. At the third, you may get bold,
and try her with a little present. Lots of people have done that,
before you. Gimble tried it, and Bullivant wanted to; but Blyth
wouldn't let him; and I mean to give her--oh, by the bye, I have
another important caution for you." Here he indulged himself in a fresh
burst of laughter, excited by the remembrance of his interview with
Mrs. Peckover, in Mr. Blyth's hall. "Remember that the whole round of
presents is open for you to choose from, except one; and that one is a
Hair Bracelet."

Zack's laughter came to an abrupt termination. Mat had raised his head
suddenly, and was now staring him full in the face again, with a
bright, searching look--an expression in which suspicious amazement and
doubting curiosity were very strangely mingled together.

"You're not angry with me for cracking a few respectable old jokes?"
said Zack. "Have I said anything?--Stop! yes, I have, though I didn't
mean it. You looked up at me in that savage manner, when I warned you
not to give her a Hair Bracelet. Surely you don't think me brute enough
to make fun of your not having any hair on your own head to give
anybody? Surely you have a better opinion of me than that? I give you
my word of honor, I never thought of you, or your head, or that
infernal scalping business, when I said what I did. It was true--it
happened to _me."_

"How did it happen?" said. Mat, with eager, angry curiosity.

"Only in this way. I wanted to give her a Hair Bracelet myself--my hair
and Blyth's, and so on. And an addle-headed old woman who seems to know
Madonna (that's a name we give her) as well as Blyth himself, and keeps
what she knows just as close, got me into a corner, and talked nonsense
about the whole thing, as old women will."

"What did she say?" asked Mat, more eager, more angry, and more curious
than ever.

"She talked nonsense, I tell you. She said a Hair Bracelet would be
unlucky to Madonna; and then told me Madonna had one already; and then
wouldn't let me ask Blyth whether it was true, because I should get her
into dreadful trouble if I said anything to him about it; besides a
good deal more which you wouldn't care to be bothered with. But I have
told you enough--haven't I?--to show I was not thinking of you, when I
said that just now by way of a joke. Come, shake hands, old fellow.
You're not offended with me, now I have explained everything?"

Mat gave his hand, but he put it out like a man groping in the dark.
His mind was full of that memorable letter about a Hair Bracelet, which
he had found in the box given to him by Joanna Grice.

"A Hair Bracelet?" he said, vacantly.

"Don't be sulky!" cried Zack, clapping him on the shoulder.

"A Hair Bracelet is unlucky to the young woman--and she's got one
already" (he was weighing attentively the lightest word that Zack had
spoken to him). "What's it like?" he asked aloud, turning suddenly to
young Thorpe.

"What's what like?"

"A Hair Bracelet."

"Still harping on that, after all my explanations! Like? Why it's hair
plaited up, and made to fasten round the wrist, with gold at each end
to clasp it by. What are you stopping for again? I'll tell you what,
Mat, I can make every allowance for a man in your love-struck
situation; but if I didn't know how you had been spending the morning,
I should say you were drunk."

They had been walking along quickly, while Mat asked what a Hair
Bracelet was like. But no sooner had Zack told him than he came to a
dead pause--started and changed color--opened his lips to speak--then
checked himself, and remained silent. The information which he had just
received had recalled to him a certain object that he had seen in the
drawer of Mr. Blyth's bureau; and the resemblance between the two had
at once flashed upon him. The importance which this discovery assumed
in his eyes, in connection with what he had already heard, may be
easily estimated, when it is remembered that his barbarian life had
kept him totally ignorant that a Hair Bracelet is in England one of the
commonest ornaments of woman's wear.

"Are we going to stop here all day?" asked Zack. "If you're turning
from sulky to sentimental again, I shall go back to Blyth's, and pave
the way for you with Madonna, old boy!" He turned gaily in the
direction of Valentine's house, as he said those words.

Mat did not offer to detain him; did not say a word at parting. He
passed his hand wearily over his eyes as Zack left him. "I'm sober," he
said vacantly to himself; "I'm not dreaming; I'm not light-headed,
though I feel a'most like it. I saw that young woman as plain as I see
them houses in front of me now; and by God, if she had been Mary's
ghost, she couldn't have been more like her!"

He stopped. His hand fell to his side; then fastened mechanically on
the railings of a house near him. His rough, misshapen fingers trembled
round the iron. Recollections that had slumbered for years and years
past, were awakening again awfully to life within him. Through the
obscurity and oblivion of long absence, through the changeless darkness
of the tomb, there was shining out now, vivid and solemn on his memory,
the image--as she had been in her youth-time--of the dead woman whose
name was "Mary." And it was only the sight of that young girl, of that
poor, shy, gentle, deaf and dumb creature, that had wrought the
miracle!

He tried to shake himself clear of the influences which were now at
work on him. He moved forward a step or two, and looked up.
Zack?--where was Zack?

Away, at the other end of the solitary suburban street, just visible
sauntering along and swinging his stick in his hand.

Without knowing why he did so, Mat turned instantly and walked after
him, calling to him to come back. The third summons reached him: he
stopped, hesitated, made comic gesticulations with his stick in the
air--then began to retrace his steps.

The effort of walking and calling after him, had turned Mat's thoughts
in another direction. They now occupied themselves again with the hints
that Zack had dropped of some incomprehensible connection between a
Hair Bracelet, and the young girl who was called by the strange name of
"Madonna." With the remembrance of this, there came back also the
recollection of the letter about a bracelet, and its enclosure of hair,
which he had examined in the lonely cattle-shed at Dibbledean, and
which still lay in the little box bearing on it the name of "Mary
Grice."

"Well!" cried Zack, speaking as he came on. "Well, Cupid! what do you
want with me now?"

Mat did not immediately answer. His thoughts were still traveling back
cautiously over the ground which they had already explored. Once more,
he was pondering on that little circle of plaited hair, having gold at
each end, and looking just big enough to go round a woman's wrist,
which he had seen in the drawer of Mr. Blyth's bureau. And once again,
the identity between this object and the ornament which young Thorpe
had described as being the thing called a Hair Bracelet, began surely
and more surely to establish itself in his mind.

"Now then, don't keep me waiting," continued Zack, laughing again as he
came nearer; "clap your hand on your heart, and give me your tender
message for the future Mrs. Marksman."

It was on the tip of Mat's tongue to emulate the communicativeness of
young Thorpe, and to speak unreservedly of what he had seen in the
drawer of the bureau--but he suddenly restrained the words just as they
were dropping from his lips. At the same moment his eyes began to lose
their vacant perturbed look, and to brighten again with something of
craft and cunning, added to their customary watchful expression.

"What's the young woman's real name?" he asked carelessly, just as Zack
was beginning to banter him for the third time.

"Is that all you called me back for? Her real name's Mary."

Mat had made his inquiry with the air of a man whose thoughts were far
away from his words, and who only spoke because he felt obliged to say
something. Zack's reply to his question startled him into instant and
anxious attention.

"Mary!" he repeated in a tone of surprise. "What else, besides Mary?"

"How should I know? Didn't I try and beat it into your muddled old
head, half-an-hour ago, that Blyth won't tell his friends anything
about her?" There was another pause. The secrecy in which Mr. Blyth
chose to conceal Madonna's history, and the sequestered place in the
innermost drawer of his bureau where he kept the Hair Bracelet, began
vaguely to connect themselves together in Mat's mind. A curious smile
hovered about his lips, and the cunning look brightened in his eyes.
"The Painter-Man won't tell anything about her, won't he? Perhaps that
thing in his drawer will." He muttered the words to himself, putting
his hands in his pockets, and mechanically kicking away a stone which
happened to lie at his feet on the pavement.

"What are you grumbling about now?" asked Zack. "Do you think I'm going
to stop here all day for the pleasure of hearing you talk to yourself?"
As he spoke, he vivaciously rapped his friend on the shoulder with his
stick. "Trust me to pave the way for you with Madonna!" he called out
mischievously, as he turned back in the direction of Mr. Blyth's house.

"Trust _me_ to have another look at your friend's Hair Bracelet," said
Mat quietly to himself. "I'll handle it this time, before I'm many days
older."

He nodded over his shoulder at Zack, and walked away quickly in the
direction of Kirk Street.


CHAPTER VII.

THE BOX OF LETTERS.

The first thing Mat did when he got to his lodgings, was to fill and
light his pipe. He then sat down on his bear-skins, and dragged the box
close to him which he had brought from Dibbledean.

Although the machinery of Mat's mind was constructed of very clumsy and
barbaric materials; although book-learning had never oiled it, and wise
men's talk had never quickened it; nevertheless, it always contrived to
work on--much as it was working now--until it reached, sooner or later,
a practical result. Solitude and Peril are stern schoolmasters, but
they do their duty for good or evil, thoroughly with some men; and they
had done it thoroughly, amid the rocks and wildernesses of the great
American continent, with Mat.

Many a pipe did he empty and fill again, many a dark change passed over
his heavy features, as he now pondered long and laboriously over every
word of the dialogue that had just been held between himself and Zack.
But not so much as five minutes out of all the time he thus consumed,
was, in any true sense of the word, time wasted. He had sat down to his
first pipe, resolved that, if any human means could compass it, he
would find out how the young girl whom he had seen in Mr. Blyth's
studio, had first come there, and who she really was. When he rose up
at last, and put the pipe away to cool, he had thought the matter
fairly out from beginning to end, had arrived at his conclusions, and
had definitely settled his future plans.

Reflection had strengthened him in the resolution to follow his first
impulse when he parted from Zack in the street, and begin the attempt
to penetrate the suspicious secret that hid from him and from every one
the origin of Valentine's adopted child, by getting possession of the
Hair Bracelet which he had seen laid away in the inner drawer of the
bureau. Even if a clot does form, when the blood-pressure rises it is
readily displaced, leading to reactionary hæmorrhage. Should the wound
become infected, secondary hæmorrhage is specially liable to occur. A
further risk attends this form of injury, in that the intra-vascular
tension may in time lead to gradual stretching of the scar tissue which
closes the gap in the vessel wall, with the result that a localised
dilatation or diverticulum forms, constituting a _traumatic
aneurysm_.

(c) When the injury merely takes the form of a _puncture_ or _small
incision_ a blood-clot forms between the edges, becomes
organised, and is converted into cicatricial tissue which seals the
aperture. Such wounds may also be followed by reactionary or
secondary hæmorrhage, or later by the formation of a traumatic
aneurysm.

_Conditions which influence the Natural Arrest of Hæmorrhage._--The
natural arrest of bleeding is favoured by tearing or crushing of the
vessel walls, owing to the contraction and retraction of the coats and
the tendency of blood to coagulate when in contact with damaged
tissue.
Hence the primary hæmorrhage following lacerated wounds is seldom
copious.

The occurrence of syncope or of profound shock also helps to stop
bleeding by reducing the force of the heart's action.

On the other hand, there are conditions which retard the natural
arrest.
When, for example, a vessel is only partly divided, the contraction and
retraction of the muscular coat, instead of diminishing the calibre
of the artery, causes the wound in the vessel to gape; by completing the
division of the vessel under these circumstances the bleeding can often
be arrested. In certain situations, also, the arteries are so intimately
connected with their sheaths, that when cut across they were unable
to retract and contract--for example, in the scalp, in the penis, and
in bones--and copious bleeding may take place from comparatively small
vessels. This inability of the vessels to contract and retract is
met with also in inflamed and oedematous parts and in scar tissue.

Arteries divided in the substance of a muscle also sometimes bleed
unduly. Any increase in the force of the heart's action, such as
may result from exertion, excitement, or over-stimulation, also interferes
with the natural arrest. Lastly, in bleeders, there are conditions which
interfere with the natural arrest of hæmorrhage.

#Repair of a Vessel ligated in its Continuity.#--When a ligature is
applied to an artery it should be pulled sufficiently tight to occlude
the lumen without causing rupture of its coats. It often happens,
however, that the compression causes rupture of the inner and
middle coats, so that only the outer coat remains in the grasp of
the ligature.

While this weakens the wall of the vessel, it has the advantage of
hastening coagulation, by bringing the blood into contact with damaged
tissue. Whether the inner and middle coats are ruptured or not, blood
coagulates both above and below the ligature, the proximal clot being
longer and broader than that on the distal side. In small arteries
these clots extend as far as the nearest collateral branch, but
in the larger trunks their length varies. The permanent occlusion
of those portions of the vessel occupied by clot is brought about
by the formation of granulation tissue, and its replacement by
cicatricial tissue, so that the occluded segment of the vessel is
represented by a fibrous cord. In this process the coagulum only plays
a passive rôle by forming a scaffolding on which the granulation tissue
is built up. The ligature surrounding the vessel, and the elements
of the clot, are ultimately absorbed.

#Repair of Veins.#--The process of repair in veins is the same as that
in arteries, but the thrombosed area may become canalised and the
circulation through the vessel be re-established.

HÆMORRHAGE IN SURGICAL OPERATIONS
The management of the hæmorrhage which accompanies an operation
includes (a) preventive measures, and (b) the arrest of the
bleeding.

#Prevention of Hæmorrhage.#--Whenever possible, hæmorrhage should be
controlled by _digital compression_ of the main artery supplying the
limb rather than by a tourniquet. If efficiently applied compression
reduces the immediate loss of blood to a minimum, and the bleeding from
small vessels that follows the removal of the tourniquet is avoided.
Further, the pressure of a tourniquet has been shown to be a material
factor in producing shock.

In selecting a point at which to apply digital compression, it is
essential that the vessel should be lying over a bone which will furnish
the necessary resistance. The common carotid, for example, is pressed
backward and medially against the transverse process (carotid tubercle)
of the sixth cervical vertebra; the temporal against the temporal
process (zygoma) in front of the ear; and the facial against the
mandible at the anterior edge of the masseter.

In the upper extremity, the subclavian is pressed against the first rib
by making pressure downwards and backwards in the hollow above the
clavicle; the axillary and brachial by pressing against the
shaft of the humerus.

In the lower extremity, the femoral is controlled by pressing in a
direction backward and slightly upward against the brim of the pelvis,
midway between the symphysis pubis and the anterior superior iliac
spine.

The abdominal aorta may be compressed against the bodies of the
lumbar vertebræ opposite the umbilicus, if the spine is arched well
forwards over a pillow or sand-bag, or by the method suggested by Macewen,
in which the patient's spine is arched forwards by allowing the lower
extremities and pelvis to hang over the end of the table, while the
assistant, standing on a stool, applies his closed fist over the
abdominal aorta and compresses it against the vertebral column.

Momburg recommends an elastic cord wound round the body between the iliac
crest and the lower border of the ribs, but this procedure has caused
serious damage to the intestine.

When digital compression is not available, the most convenient and
certain means of preventing hæmorrhage--say in an amputation--is by the
use of some form of _tourniquet_, such as the elastic tube of Esmarch
or of Foulis, or an elastic bandage, or the screw tourniquet of
Petit.

Before applying any of these it is advisable to empty the limb of
blood.
This is best done after the manner suggested by Lister: the limb is
held vertical for three or four minutes; the veins are thus emptied
by gravitation, and they collapse, and as a physiological result
of this the arteries reflexly contract, so that the quantity of blood
entering the limb is reduced to a minimum. With the limb still elevated
the tourniquet is firmly applied, a part being selected where the
vessel can be pressed directly against a bone, and where there is
no risk of exerting injurious pressure on the nerve-trunks.

The tourniquet should be applied over several layers of gauze or lint
to protect the skin, and the first turn of the tourniquet must
be rapidly and tightly applied to arrest completely the arterial flow,
otherwise the veins only are obstructed and the limb
                            becomes congested.

In the lower extremity the best place to apply a tourniquet is the
middle third of the thigh; in the upper extremity, in the middle of the
arm. A tourniquet should never be applied tighter or left on longer than
is absolutely necessary.

The screw tourniquet of Petit is to be preferred when it is desired
to intermit the flow through the main artery as in operations for
aneurysm.

When a tourniquet cannot conveniently be applied, or when its
presence interferes with the carrying out of the operation--as, for
example, in amputations at the hip or shoulder--the hæmorrhage may
be controlled by preliminary ligation of the main artery above the
seat of operation--for instance, the external iliac or the subclavian.

For such contingencies also the steel skewers used by Spence and Wyeth,
or a special clamp or forceps, such as that suggested by Lynn Thomas,
may be employed. In the case of vessels which it is undesirable to occlude
permanently, such as the common carotid, the temporary application
of a ligature or clamp is useful.

#Arrest of Hæmorrhage.#--_Ligature._--This is the best means of securing
the larger vessels. The divided vessel having been caught with forceps
as near to its cut end as possible, a ligature of catgut or silk is tied
round it. When there is difficulty in applying a ligature securely,
for example in a dense tissue like the scalp or periosteum, or in a
friable tissue like the thyreoid gland or the mesentery, a stitch
should be passed so as to surround the bleeding vessel a short distance
from its end, in this way ensuring a better hold and preventing
the ligature from slipping.

If the hæmorrhage is from a partly divided vessel, this should be
completely cut across to enable its walls to contract and retract,
and to facilitate the application of forceps and ligatures.

_Torsion._--This method is seldom employed except for comparatively
small vessels, but it is applicable to even the largest arteries. In
employing torsion, the end of the vessel is caught with forceps,
and the terminal portion twisted round several times. The object is to
tear the inner and middle coats so that they curl up inside the lumen,
while the outer fibrous coat is twisted into a cord which occludes
the end of the vessel.

_Forci-pressure._--Bleeding from the smallest arteries and from
arterioles can usually be arrested by firmly squeezing them for a few
minutes with artery forceps. It is usually found that on the removal
of the forceps at the end of an operation no further hæmorrhage takes
place. By the use of specially strong clamps, such as the angiotribes
of Doyen, large trunks may be occluded by pressure.

_Cautery._--The actual cautery or Paquelin's thermo-cautery is
seldom employed to arrest hæmorrhage, but is frequently useful in
preventing it, as, for example, in the removal of piles, or in
opening the bowel in colostomy.

It is used at a dull-red heat, which sears the divided ends of
the vessel and so occludes the lumen. A bright-red or a white heat
cuts the vessel across without occluding it. The separation of the
slough produced by the charring of the tissues is sometimes
attended with secondary bleeding.

_Hæmostatics_ or _Styptics_.--The local application of hæmostatics is
seldom to be recommended. In the treatment of epistaxis or bleeding from
the nose, of hæmorrhage from the socket of a tooth, and sometimes
from ulcerating or granulating surfaces, however, they may be useful.
All clots must be removed and the drug applied directly to the
bleeding surface.

Adrenalin and turpentine are the most useful drugs for this
purpose.

Hæmorrhage from bone, for example the skull, may be arrested by means
of Horsley's aseptic plastic wax. To stop persistent oozing from soft
tissues, Horsley successfully applied a portion of living vascular tissue,
such as a fragment of muscle, which readily adheres to the oozing
surface and yields elements that cause coagulation of the blood by
thrombo-kinetic processes. When examined after two or three days the
muscle has been found to be closely adherent and undergoing
organisation.

#Arrest of Accidental Hæmorrhage.#--The most efficient means of temporarily
controlling hæmorrhage is by pressure applied with the finger, or with
a pad of gauze, directly over the bleeding point. While this is
maintained an assistant makes digital pressure, or applies a tourniquet,
over the main vessel of the limb on the proximal side of the bleeding
point.

A useful _emergency tourniquet_ may be improvised by folding a large
handkerchief _en cravatte_, with a cork or piece of wood in the fold
to act as a pad. The handkerchief is applied round the limb, with the
pad over the main artery, and the ends knotted on the lateral aspect
of the limb. With a strong piece of wood the handkerchief is wound up
like a Spanish windlass, until sufficient pressure is exerted to
arrest the bleeding.

When hæmorrhage is taking place from a number of small vessels, its
arrest may be effected by elevation of the bleeding part, particularly
if it is a limb. By this means the force of the circulation is
diminished and the formation of coagula favoured. Similarly, in wounds
of the hand or forearm, or of the foot or leg, bleeding may be
arrested by placing a pad in the flexure and acutely flexing the
limb at the elbow or knee respectively.

#Reactionary Hæmorrhage.#--Reactionary or intermediary hæmorrhage is
really a recurrence of primary bleeding. As the name indicates, it
occurs during the period of reaction--that is, within the first twelve
hours after an operation or injury. It may be due to the increase in the
blood-pressure that accompanies reaction displacing clots which have
formed in the vessels, or causing vessels to bleed which did not bleed
during the operation; to the slipping of a ligature; or to the giving
way of a grossly damaged portion of the vessel wall.

In the scrotum, the relaxation of the dartos during the first few hours
after operation occasionally leads to reactionary hæmorrhage.

As a rule, reactionary hæmorrhage takes place from small vessels as a
result of the displacement of occluding clots, and in many cases the
hæmorrhage stops when the bandages and soaked dressings are
removed. If not, it is usually sufficient to remove the clots and apply
firm pressure, and in the case of a limb to elevate it. Should the
hæmorrhage recur, the wound must be reopened, and ligatures applied to
the bleeding vessels. Douching the wound with hot sterilised water
(about 110° F.), and plugging it tightly with gauze, are often
successful in arresting capillary oozing.

When the bleeding is more copious, it is usually due to a ligature having
slipped from a large vessel such as the external jugular vein after
operations in the neck, and the wound must be opened up and the vessel
again secured. The internal administration of heroin or morphin, by
keeping the patient quiet, may prove useful in preventing the recurrence
of hæmorrhage.

#Secondary Hæmorrhage.#--The term secondary hæmorrhage refers to
bleeding that is delayed in its onset and is due to pyogenic infection
of the tissues around an artery. The septic process causes softening and
erosion of the wall of the artery so that it gives way under the
pressure of the contained blood. The leakage may occur in drops, or
as a rush of blood, according to the extent of the erosion, the
size of the artery concerned, and the relations of the erosion to
the surrounding tissues.

When met with as a complication of a wound there is an interval--usually
a week to ten days--between the receipt of the wound and the first
hæmorrhage, this time being required for the extension of the septic
process to the wall of the artery and the consequent erosion
of its coats. When secondary hæmorrhage occurs apart from a wound,
there is a similar septic process attacking the wall of the artery from
the outside; for example in sloughing sore-throat, the separation of a
slough may implicate the wall of an artery and be followed by
serious and it may be fatal hæmorrhage.

The mechanical pressure of a fragment of bone or of a rubber drainage
tube upon the vessel may aid the septic process in causing erosion of
the artery. In pre-Listerian days, the silk ligature around the artery
likewise favoured the changes that lead to secondary hæmorrhage, and
the interesting observation was often made, that when the collateral
circulation was well established, the leakage occurred on the _distal_
side of the ligature. While it may happen that the initial hæmorrhage
is rapidly fatal, as for example when the external carotid or one of
its branches suddenly gives way, it is quite common to have one,
two or more _warning hæmorrhages_ before the leakage on a
large scale, which is rapidly fatal.

The _appearances of the wound_ in cases complicated by secondary
hæmorrhage are only characteristic in so far that while obviously infected,
there is an absence of all reaction; instead of frankly suppurating,
there is little or no discharge and the surrounding cellular tissue
and the limb beyond are oedematous and pit on pressure.

The _general symptoms_ of septic poisoning in cases of secondary
hæmorrhage vary widely in severity: they may be so slight that the
general health is scarcely affected and the convalescence from an
operation, for example, may be apparently normal except that the
wound does not heal satisfactorily.

For example, a patient may be recovering from an operation such as
the removal of an epithelioma of the mouth, pharynx or larynx and
the associated lymph glands in the neck, and be able to be up and
going about his room, when, suddenly, without warning and without
obvious cause, a rush of blood occurs from the mouth or the
incompletely healed wound in the neck, causing death within a few
minutes.

On the other hand, the toxæmia may be of a profound type associated with
marked pallor and progressive failure of strength, which, of itself,
even when the danger from hæmorrhage has been overcome, may have a fatal
termination. The _prognosis_ therefore in cases of secondary
hæmorrhage can never be other than uncertain and unfavourable; the danger
from loss of blood _per se_ is less when the artery concerned is
amenable to control by surgical measures.
_Treatment._--The treatment of secondary hæmorrhage includes the
use of local measures to arrest the bleeding, the employment of
general measures to counteract the accompanying toxæmia, and when
the loss of blood has been considerable, the treatment of the
bloodless state.

_Local Measures to arrest the Hæmorrhage.There may still be living one member of my late
brother's family, whose voice would, I feel sure, be raised against me
for what I have done. The relation to whom I refer has been--"


(Here Mat, who had read carefully thus far, grew impatient, and
growling out some angry words, guided himself hastily down the letter
with his finger till he arrived at the second paragraph.)


"--It was in the April month of 1827 that the villain who was the ruin
of my niece, and the dishonor of the once respectable family to which
she belonged, first came to Dibbledean. He took the little four room
cottage called Jay's Cottage, which was then to be let furnished, and
which stands out of the town about a quarter of a mile down
Church-lane. He called himself Mr. Carr, and the few letters that came
to him were directed to 'Arthur Carr, Esq.'

"He was quite a young man,--I should say not more than four or five and
twenty--very quiet mannered and delicate--or rather effeminate looking,
as I thought--for he wore his hair quite long over his shoulders, in
the foreign way, and had a clear, soft complexion, almost like a
woman's. Though he appeared to be a gentleman, he always kept out of
the way of making acquaintances among the respectable families about
Dibbledean. He had no friends of his own to come and see him that I
heard of, except an old gentleman who might have been his father, and
who came once or twice. His own account of himself was, that he came to
Jay's Cottage for quiet, and retirement, and study; but he was very
reserved, and would let nobody make up to him until the miserable day
when he and my brother Joshua, and then my niece Mary, all got
acquainted together.

"Before I go on to anything else, I must say first, that Mr. Carr was
what they call a botanist. Whenever it was fine, he was always out of
doors, gathering bits of leaves, which it seems he carried home in a
tin case, and dried, and kept by him. He hired a gardener for the bit
of ground round about Jay's Cottage; and the man told me once, that his
master knew more about flowers and how to grow them than anybody he
ever met with. Mr. Carr used to make little pictures, too, of flowers
and leaves set together in patterns. These things were thought very odd
amusements for a young man to take up with; but he was as fond of them
as others of his age might be hunting or shooting. He brought down many
books with him, and read a great deal; but from all that I heard, he
spent more time over his flowers and his botany than anything else.

"We had, at that time, the two best shops in Dibbledean. Joshua sold
hosiery, and I carried on a good dress-making and general millinery
business. Both our shops were under the same roof, with a partition
wall between. One day Mr. Carr came in Joshua's shop, and wanted
something which my brother had not got as ready to hand as the common
things that the townspeople generally bought. Joshua begged him to sit
down for a few minutes; but Mr. Carr (the parlor door at the bottom of
the shop being left open) happened to look into the garden, which he
could see very well through the window, and said that he would like to
wait there, and look at the flowers. Joshua was only too glad to have
his garden taken such notice of, by a gentleman who was a botanist; so
he showed his customer in there, and then went up into the warehouse to
look for what was wanted.

"My niece, Mary, worked in my part of the house, along with the other
young women. The room they used to be in looked into the garden; and
from the window my niece must have seen Mr. Carr, and must have slipped
down stairs (I not being in the way just then) to peep at the strange
gentleman--or, more likely, to make believe she was accidentally
walking in the garden, and so get noticed by him. All I know is, that
when I came up into the workroom and found she was not there, and
looked out of the window, I saw her, and Joshua, and Mr. Carr all
standing together on the grass plot, the strange gentleman talking to
her quite intimate, with a flower in his hand.

"I called out to her to come back to her work directly. She looked up
at me, smiling in her bold impudent way, and said:--'Father has told me
I may stop and learn what this gentleman is so kind as to teach me
about my geraniums.' After that, I could say nothing more before the
stranger: and when he was gone, and she came back triumphing, and
laughing, and singing about the room, more like a mad play-actress than
a decent young woman, I kept quiet and bore with her provocation. But I
went down to my brother Joshua the same day, and talked to him
seriously, and warned him that she ought to be kept stricter, and never
let to have her own way, and offered to keep a strict hand over her
myself, if he would only support me properly. But he put me off with
careless, jesting words, which he learned to repent of bitterly
afterwards.

"Joshua was as pious and respectable a man as ever lived: but it was
his misfortune to be too easy-tempered, and too proud of his daughter.
Having lost his wife, and his eldest boy and girl, he seemed so fond of
Mary, that he could deny her nothing. There was, to be sure, another
one left of his family of children, who--"


(Here, again, Mat lost patience. He had been muttering to himself
angrily for the last minute or two, while he read--and now once more he
passed over several lines of the letter, and went on at once to a new
paragraph.)


"I have said she was vain of her good looks, and bold, and flighty; and
I must now add, that she was also hasty and passionate, and reckless.
But she had wheedling ways with her, which nobody was sharp enough to
see through but me. When I made complaints against her to her father,
and proved that I was right in making them, she always managed to get
him to forgive her. She behaved, from the outset, (though I stood in
the place of a mother to her,) as perversely towards me as usual, in
respect to Mr. Carr. It had flattered her pride to be noticed and bowed
to just as if she was a born lady, by a gentleman, and a customer at
the shop. And the very same evening, at tea time, she undid before my
face the whole effect of the good advice I had been giving her father.
What with jumping on his knee, kissing him, tying and untying his
cravat, sticking flowers in his button-hole, and going on altogether
more like a child than a grown-up young woman, she wheedled him into
promising that he would take her next Sunday to see Mr. Carr's garden;
for it seems the gentleman had invited them to look at his flowers. I
had tried my best, when I heard it, to persuade my brother not to
accept the invitation and let her scrape acquaintance with a stranger
under her father's own nose; but all that I could say was useless now.
She had got the better of me, and when I put in my word, she had her
bold laugh and her light answer ready to insult me with directly. Her
father said he wondered I was not amused at her high spirits. I shook
my head, but said nothing in return. Poor man! he lived to see where
her 'high spirits' led her to.

"On the Sunday, after church, they went to Mr. Carr's. Though my advice
was set at defiance in this way, I determined to persevere in keeping a
stricter watch over my niece than ever. I felt that the maintaining the
credit and reputation of the family rested with me, and I determined
that I would try my best to uphold our good name. It is some little
comfort to me, after all that has happened, to remember that I did my
utmost to carry out this resolution. The blame of our dishonor lies not
at my door. I disliked and distrusted Mr. Carr from the very first; and
I tried hard to make others as suspicious of him as I was. But all I
could say, and all I could do, availed nothing against the wicked
cunning of my niece. Watch and restrain her as I might, she was
sure--"


(Once more Mat broke off abruptly in the middle of a sentence. This
time, however, it was to strike a light. The brief day of winter was
fast fading out--the coming darkness was deepening over the pages of
Joanna Grice's narrative. When he had lit his candle, and had sat down
to read again, he lost his place, and, not having patience to look for
it carefully, went on at once with the first lines that happened to
strike his eye.)


"Things were now come, then, to this pass, that I felt certain she was
in the habit of meeting him in secret; and yet I could not prove it to
my brother's satisfaction. I had no help that I could call in to assist
me against the diabolical cunning that was used to deceive me. To set
other people to watch them, when I could not, would only have been
spreading through Dibbledean the very scandal that I was most anxious
to avoid. As for Joshua, his infatuation made him deaf to all that I
could urge. He would see nothing suspicious in the fondness Mary had
suddenly taken for Botany, and drawing flowers. He let Mr. Carr lend
her paintings to copy from, just as if they had known each other all
their lives. Next to his blind trust in his daughter, because he was so
fond of her, was his blind trust in this stranger, because the
gentleman's manners were so quiet and kind, and because he sent us
presents of expensive flowers to plant in our garden. He would not
authorize me to open Mary's letters, or to forbid her ever to walk out
alone; and he even told me once that I did not know how to make proper
allowances for young people.

"Allowances! I knew my niece better, and my duty as one of an honest
family better, than to make allowances for such conduct as hers. I kept
the tightest hand over her that I could. I advised her, argued with
her, ordered her, portioned out her time for her, watched her, warned
her, told her in the plainest terms, that she should not deceive
me--she or her gentleman! I was honest and open, and said I disapproved
so strongly of the terms she kept up with Mr. Carr, that if ever it lay
in my power to cut short their acquaintance together, I would most
assuredly do it. I even told her plainly that if she once got into
mischief, it would then be too late to reclaim her; and she answered in
her reckless, sluttish way, that if she ever did get into mischief it
would be nothing but my aggravation that would drive her to it; and
that she believed her father's kindness would never find it too late to
reclaim her again. This is only one specimen of the usual insolence and
wickedness of all her replies to me."


(As he finished this paragraph, Mat dashed the letter down angrily on
his knee, and cursed the writer of it with some of those gold-digger's
imprecations which it had been his misfortune to hear but too often in
the past days of his Californian wanderings. It was evidently only by
placing considerable constraint upon himself, that he now refrained
from crumpling up the letter and throwing it from him in disgust.
However, he spread it out flat before him once more--looked first at
one paragraph, then at another, but did not read them; hesitated--and
then irritably turned over the leaf of paper before him, and began at a
new page.)


"When I told Joshua generally what I had observed, and particularly
what I myself had seen and heard on the evening in question, he seemed
at last a little staggered, and sent for my niece, to insist on an
explanation. On his repeating to her what I had mentioned to him, she
flung her arms round his neck, looked first at me and then at him,
burst out sobbing and crying, and so got from bad to worse, till she
had a sort of fit. I was not at all sure that this might not be one of
her tricks; but it frightened her father so that he forgot himself, and
threw all the blame on me, and said my prudery and conspiring had
tormented and frightened the poor girl out of her wits. After being
insulted in this way, of course the only thing I could do was to leave
the room, and let her have it all her own way with him.

"It was now the autumn, the middle of September; and I was at my wit's
end to know what I ought to think and do next--when Mr. Carr left
Dibbledean. He had been away once or twice before, in the summer, but
only for a day or two at a time. On this occasion, my niece received a
letter from him. He had never written to her when he was away in the
summer; so I thought this looked like a longer absence than usual, and
I determined to take advantage of it to try if I could not break off
the intimacy between them, in case it went the length of any more
letter-writing.

"I most solemnly declare, and could affirm on oath if necessary, that
in spite of all I had seen and all I suspected for these many months, I
had not the most distant idea of the wickedness that had really been
committed. I thank God I was not well enough versed in the ways of sin
to be as sharp in coming to the right conclusion as other women might
have been in my situation. I only believed that the course she was
taking might be fatal to her at some future day; and, acting on that
belief, I thought myself justified in using any means in my power to
stop her in time. I therefore resolved with myself that if Mr. Carr
wrote again, she should get none of his letters; and I knew her
passionate and proud disposition well enough to know that if she could
once be brought to think herself neglected by him, she would break off
all intercourse with him, if ever he came back, immediately.

"I thought myself perfectly justified, standing towards her as I did in
the place of a mother, and having only her good at heart, in taking
these measures. On that head my conscience is still quite easy. I
cannot mention what the plan was that I now adopted, without seriously
compromising a living person. All I can say is, that every letter from
Mr. Carr to our house, passed into my hands only, and was by me
committed to the flames unread. These letters were at first all for my
niece; but towards the end of the year two came, at different
intervals, directed to my brother. I distrusted the cunning of the
writer and the weakness of Joshua; and I put both those letters into
the fire, unread like the rest. After that, no more came; and Mr. Carr
never returned to Jay's Cottage. In reference to this part of my
narrative, therefore, I have only now to add, before proceeding to the
miserable confession of our family dishonor, that I never afterwards
saw, and only once heard of the man who tempted my niece to commit the
deadly sin which was her ruin in this world, and will be her ruin in
the next.

"I must return first, however, to what happened from my burning of the
letters. When my niece found that week after week passed, and she never
heard from Mr. Carr, she fretted about it much more than I had fancied
she would. And Joshua unthinkingly made her worse by wondering, in her
presence, at the long absence of the gentleman of Jay's Cottage. My
brother was a man who could not abide his habits being broken in on. He
had been in the habit of going on certain evenings to Mr. Carr's (and,
I grieve to say, often taking his daughter with him) to fetch the
London paper, to take back drawings of flowers, and to let my niece
bring away new ones to copy. And now, he fidgeted, and was restless,
and discontented (as much as so easy-tempered a man could be) at not
taking his usual walks to Jay's Cottage. This, as I have said, made his
daughter worse. She fretted and fretted, and cried in secret, as I
could tell by her eyes, till she grew to be quite altered. Now and
then, the angry fit that I had expected to see, came upon her; but it
always went away again in a manner not at all natural to one of her
passionate disposition. All this time, she led me as miserable a life
as she could; provoking and thwarting and insulting me at every
opportunity. I believe she suspected me, in the matter of the letters.
But I had taken my measures so as to make discovery impossible; and I
determined to wait, and be patient and persevering, and get the better
of her and her wicked fancy for Mr. Carr, just as I had made up my mind
to do.

MUZA, Prince of Mauritania.
ABDALAZIS, Son of Muza.
TARIK, Moorish Chieftain.
COVILLA, Daughter of Julian.
EGILONA, Wife of Roderigo.
HERNANDO, } OSMA, } Officers.
RAMIRO, &c. }

FIRST ACT: FIRST SCENE.

Camp of JULIAN.

OPAS. JULIAN.

OPAS. See her, Count Julian: if thou lovest God, See thy lost child.

JUL. I have avenged me, Opas, More than enough: I only sought to hurl
The brands of war on one detested head, And die upon his ruin.

O my country!
O lost to honour, to thyself, to me, Why on barbarian hands devolves
thy cause, Spoilers, blasphemers!

OPAS. Is it thus, Don Julian, When thy own offspring, that beloved child,
For whom alone these very acts were done By them and thee, when thy
Covilla stands An outcast and a suppliant at thy gate, Why that still
stubborn agony of soul, Those struggles with the bars thyself imposed?

Is she not thine? not dear to thee as ever?

JUL. Father of mercies! shew me none, whene'er The wrongs she suffers
cease to wring my heart, Or I seek solace ever, but in death.

OPAS. What wilt thou do then, too unhappy man?

JUL. What have I done already? All my peace Has vanished; my fair
fame in after-times Will wear an alien and uncomely form, Seen o'er
the cities I have laid in dust, Countrymen slaughtered, friends
abjured!

OPAS. And faith?

JUL. Alone now left me, filling up in part The narrow and waste
intervals of grief:
It promises that I shall see again My own lost child.
OPAS. Yes, at this very hour.
JUL. Till I have met the tyrant face to face, And gained a conquest
greater than the last; Till he no longer rules one rood of Spain,
And not one Spaniard, not one enemy, The least relenting, flags
upon his flight; Till we are equal in the eyes of men, The humblest
and most wretched of our kind, No peace for me, no comfort, no--no
child!
OPAS. No pity for the thousands fatherless, The thousands childless
like thyself, nay more, The thousands friendless, helpless, comfortless
- Such thou wilt make them, little thinking so, Who now perhaps,
round their first winter fire, Banish, to talk of thee, the tales
of old, Shedding true honest tears for thee unknown:
Precious be these, and sacred in thy sight, Mingle them not with
blood from hearts thus kind.
If only warlike spirits were evoked By the war-demon, I would not
complain, Or dissolute and discontented men; But wherefore hurry
down into the square The neighbourly, saluting, warm-clad race, Who
would not injure us, and cannot serve; Who, from their short and
measured slumber risen, In the faint sunshine of their balconies,
With a half-legend of a martyrdom And some weak wine and withered
graces before them, Note by their foot the wheel of melody That
catches and rolls on the sabbath dance.Carr's having written, and
my having burned his letters. It was at this time also, and a little
before it, that I noticed the alteration in her dress. She fell into
wearing her things in a slovenly way, and sitting at home in her shawl,
on account of feeling cold, she said, when I reprimanded her for such
untidyness.

"I don't know how long things might have lasted like this, or what the
end might have been, if events had gone on in their own way. But the
dreadful truth made itself known at last suddenly, by a sort of
accident. She had a quarrel with one of the other young women in the
dressmaking-room, named Ellen Gough, about a certain disreputable
friend of hers, one Jane Holdsworth, whom I had once employed, and had
dismissed for impertinence and slatternly conduct. Ellen Gough having,
it seems, been provoked past all bearing by something my niece said to
her, came away to me in a passion, and in so many words told me the
awful truth, that my brother's only daughter had disgraced herself and
her family for ever. The horror and misery of that moment is present to
me now, at this distance of time. The shock I then received struck me
down at once; I never have recovered from it, and I never shall.

"In the first distraction of the moment, I must have done or said
something down stairs, where I was, which must have warned the wretch
in the room above that I had discovered her infamy. I remember going to
her bed-chamber, and finding the door locked, and hearing her refuse to
open it. After that, I must have fainted, for I found myself, I did not
know how, in the work-room, and Ellen Gough giving me a bottle to smell
to. With her help, I got into my own room; and there I fainted away
dead again.

"When I came to, I went once more to my niece's bed-chamber. The door
was now open; and there was a bit of paper on the looking-glass
directed to my brother Joshua. She was gone from the honest house that
her sin had defiled--gone from it for ever. She had written only a few
scrawled wild lines to her father, but in them there was full
acknowledgment of her crime and a confession that it was the villain
Carr who had caused her to commit it. She said she was gone to take her
shame from our doors. She entreated that no attempt might be made to
trace her, for she would die rather than return to disgrace her family,
and her father in his old age. After this came some lines, which seemed
to have been added, on second thoughts, to what went before. I do not
remember the exact words; but the sense referred, shamelessly enough as
I thought, to the child that was afterwards born, and to her
resolution, if it came into the world alive, to suffer all things for
its sake.

"It was at first some relief to know that she was gone. The dreadful
exposure and degradation that threatened us, seemed to be delayed at
least by her absence. On questioning Ellen Gough, I found that the
other two young women who worked under me, and who were most
providentially absent on a Christmas visit to their friends, were not
acquainted with my niece's infamous secret. Ellen had accidentally
discovered it; and she had, therefore, been obliged to confess to
Ellen, and put trust in her. Everybody else in the house had been as
successfully deceived as I had been myself. When I heard this, I began
to have some hope that our family disgrace might remain unknown in the
town.

"I wrote to my brother, not telling him what had happened, but only
begging him to come back instantly. It was the bitterest part of all
the bitter misery I then suffered, to think of what I had now to tell
Joshua, and of what dreadful extremities his daughter's ruin might
drive him to. I strove hard to prepare myself for the time of coming
trial; but what really took place was worse than my worst forebodings.

"When my brother heard the shocking news I had to tell, and saw the
scrawled paper she had left for him, he spoke and acted as if he was
out of his mind. It was only charitable, only fair to his previous
character, to believe, as I then believed, that distress had actually
driven him, for the time, out of his senses. He declared that he would
go away instantly and search for her, and set others seeking for her
too. He said, he even swore, that he would bring her back home the
moment he found her; that he would succor her in her misery, and accept
her penitence, and shelter her under his roof the same as ever, without
so much as giving a thought to the scandal and disgrace that her
infamous situation would inflict on her family. He even wrested
Scripture from its true meaning to support him in what he said, and in
what he was determined to do. And, worst of all, the moment he heard
how it was that I had discovered his daughter's crime, he insisted that
Ellen Gough should be turned out of the house: he declared, in such
awful language as I had never believed it possible he could utter, that
she should not sleep under his roof that night. It was hopeless to
attempt to appease him. He put her out at the door with his own hand
that very day. She was an excellent and a regular workwoman, but sullen
and revengeful when her temper was once roused. By the next morning our
disgrace was known all over Dibbledean.

"There was only one more degradation now to be dreaded; and that it
sickened me to think of. I knew Joshua well enough to know that if he
found the lost wretch he was going in search of, he would absolutely
and certainly bring her home again. I had been born in our house at
Dibbledean; my mother before me had been born there; our family had
lived in the old place, honestly and reputably, without so much as a
breath of ill report ever breathing over them, for generations and
generations back. When I thought of this, and then thought of the bare
possibility that an abandoned woman might soon be admitted, and a
bastard child born, in the house where so many of my relations had
lived virtuously and died righteously, I resolved that the day when
_she_ set her foot on our threshold, should be the day when _I_ left my
home and my birth place for ever.

"While I was in this mind, Joshua came to me--as determined in his way
as I secretly was in mine--to ask if I had any suspicions about what
direction she had taken. All the first inquiries after her that he had
made in Dibbledean, had, it seems, given him no information whatever. I
said I had no positive knowledge (which was strictly true), but told
him I suspected she was gone to London. He asked why? I answered,
because I believed she was gone to look after Mr. Carr; and said that I
remembered his letter to her (the first and only one she received) had
a London post-mark upon it. We could not find this letter at the time:
the hiding-place she had for it, and for all the others she left behind
her, was not discovered till years after, when the house was repaired
for the people who bought our business. Joshua, however, having nothing
better to guide himself by, and being resolved to begin seeking her at
once, said my suspicion was a likely one; and went away to London by
that night's coach, to see what he could do, and to get advice from his
lawyers about how to trace her.

"This, which I have been just relating, is the only part of my conduct,
in the time of our calamity, which I now think of with an uneasy
conscience. When I told Joshua I suspected she was gone to London I was
not telling him the truth. I knew nothing certainly about where she was
gone; but I did assuredly suspect that she had turned her steps exactly
in the contrary direction to London--that is to say, far out Bangbury
way. She had been constantly asking all sorts of questions of Ellen
Gough, who told me of it, about roads, and towns, and people in that
distant part of the country: and this was my only reason for thinking
she had taken herself away in that direction. Though it was but a
matter of bare suspicion at the best, still I deceived my brother as to
my real opinion when he asked it of me: and this was a sin which I now
humbly and truly repent of. But the thought of helping him, by so
little even as a likely guess, to bring our infamy home to our own
doors, by actually bringing his degraded daughter back with him into my
presence, in the face of the whole town--this thought, I say, was too
much for me. I believed that the day when she crossed our threshold
again would be the day of my death, as well as the day of my farewell
to home; and under that conviction I concealed from Joshua what my real
opinion was.

"I deserved to suffer for this; and I did suffer for it.

"Two or three days after the lonely Christmas Day that I passed in
utter solitude at our house in Dibbledean, I received a letter from
Joshua's lawyer in London, telling me to come up and see my brother
immediately, for he was taken dangerously ill. In the course of his
inquiries (which he would pursue himself, although the lawyers, who
knew better what ought to be done, were doing their utmost to help
him), he had been misled by some false information, and had been robbed
and ill-used in some place near the river, and then turned out at night
in a storm of snow and sleet. It is useless now to write about what I
suffered from this fresh blow, or to speak of the awful time I passed
by his bed-side in London. Let it be enough to say, that he escaped out
of the very jaws of death; and that it was the end of February before
he was well enough to be taken home to Dibbledean.

"He soon got better in his own air--better as to his body, but his mind
was in a sad way. Every morning he used to ask if any news of Mary had
come? and when he heard there was none, he used to sigh, and then
hardly say another word, or so much as hold up his head, for the rest
of the day. At one time, he showed a little anxiety now and then about
a letter reaching its destination, and being duly received; peevishly
refusing to mention to me even so much as the address on it. But I
guessed who it had been sent to easily enough, when his lawyers told me
that he had written it in London, and had mentioned to them that it was
going to some place beyond the seas. He soon seemed to forget this
though, and to forget everything, except his regular question about
Mary, which he sometimes repeated in his dazed condition, even after I
had broken it to him that she was dead.

"The news of her death came in the March month of the new year, 1828.

"All inquiries in London had failed up to that time in discovering the
remotest trace of her. In Dibbledean we knew she could not be; and
elsewhere Joshua was now in no state to search for her himself; or to
have any clear notions of instructing others in what direction to make
inquiries for him. But in this month of March, I saw in the Bangbury
paper (which circulates in our county besides its own) an advertisement
calling on the friends of a young woman who had just died and left
behind her an infant, to come forward and identify the body, and take
some steps in respect to the child. The description was very full and
particular, and did not admit of a doubt, to any one that knew her as
well as I did, that the young woman referred to was my guilty and
miserable niece. My brother was in no condition to be spoken to in this
difficulty; so I determined to act for myself. I sent by a person I
could depend upon, money enough to bury her decently in Bangbury
churchyard, putting no name or date to my letter. There was no law to
oblige me to do more, and more I was determined not to do. As to the
child, that was the offspring of her sin; it was the infamous father's
business to support and own it, and not mine.

"When people in the town, who knew of our calamity, and had seen the
advertisement, talked to me of it, I admitted nothing, and denied
nothing--I simply refused to speak with them on the subject of what had
happened in our family.

"Having endeavored to provide in this way for the protection of my
brother and myself against the meddling and impertinence of idle
people, I believed that I had now suffered the last of the many bitter
trials which had assailed me as the consequences of my niece's guilt: I
was mistaken: the cup of my affliction was not yet full. One day,
hardly a fortnight after I had sent the burial money anonymously to
Bangbury, our servant came to me and said there was a stranger at the
door who wished to see my brother, and was so bent on it that he would
take no denial. I went down, and found waiting on the door-steps a very
respectable-looking, middle-aged man, whom I had certainly never set
eyes on before in my life.

"I told him that I was Joshua's sister, and that I managed my brother's
affairs for him in the present state of his health. The stranger only
answered, that he was very anxious to see Joshua himself. I did not
choose to expose the helpless condition into which my brother's
intellects had fallen, to a person of whom I knew nothing; so I merely
said, the interview he wanted was out of the question, but that if he
had any business with Mr. Grice, he might, for the reasons I had
already given, mention it to me. He hesitated, and smiled, and said he
was very much obliged to me; and then, making as if he was going to
step in, added that I should probably be able to appreciate the
friendly nature of the business on which he came, when he informed me
that he was confidentially employed by Mr. Arthur Carr.

"The instant he spoke it, I felt the name go to my heart like a
knife--then my indignation got the better of me. I told him to tell Mr.
Carr that the miserable creature whom his villainy had destroyed, had
fled away from her home, had died away from her home, and was buried
away from her home; and, with that, I shut the door in his face. My
agitation, and a sort of terror that I could not account for, so
overpowered me that I was obliged to lean against the wall of the
passage, and was unable, for some minutes, to stir a step towards going
up stairs. As soon as I got a little better, and began to think about
what had taken place, a doubt came across me as to whether I might not
have acted wrong. I remembered that Joshua's lawyers in London had made
it a great point that this Mr. Carr should be traced; and, though,
since then, our situation had been altered by my niece's death, still I
felt uncertain and uneasy--I could hardly tell why--at what I had done.
It was as if I had taken some responsibility on myself which ought not
to have been mine. In short, I ran back to the door and opened it, and
looked up and down the street. It was too late: the strange man was out
of sight, and I never set eyes on him again.

"This was in March, 1828, the same month in which the advertisement
appeared. I am particular in repeating the date because it marks the
time of the last information I have to give, in connection with the
disgraceful circumstances which I have here forced myself to relate. Of
the child mentioned in the advertisement, I never heard anything, from
that time to this. I do not even know when it was born. I only know
that its guilty mother left her home in the December of 1827. Whether
it lived after the date of the advertisement, or whether it died, I
never discovered, and never wished to discover. I have kept myself
retired since the days of my humiliation, hiding my sorrow in my own
heart, and neither asking questions nor answering them."


At this place Mat once more suspended the perusal of the letter. He had
now read on for an unusually long time with unflagging attention, and
with the same stern sadness always in his face, except when the name of
Arthur Carr occurred in the course of the narrative. Almost on every
occasion, when the finger by which he guided himself along the close
lines of the letter, came to those words, it trembled a little, and the
dangerous look grew ever brighter and brighter in his eyes. It was in
them now, as he dropped the letter on his knee, and, turning round,
took from the wall behind him, against which it leaned, a certain
leather bag, already alluded to, as part of the personal property that
he brought with him on installing himself in Kirk Street. He opened it,
took out a feather fan, and an Indian tobacco-pouch of scarlet cloth;
and then began to search in the bottom of the bag, from which, at
length, he drew forth a letter. It was torn in several places, the ink
of the writing in it was faded, and the paper was disfigured by stains
of grease, tobacco, and dirt generally. The direction was in such a
condition, that the word "Brazils," at the end, was alone legible.
Inside, it was not in a much better state. The date at the top,
however, still remained tolerably easy to distinguish: it was "December
20th, 1827."

Mat looked first at this, and then at the paragraph he had just been
reading, in Joanna Grice's narrative. After that, he began to count on
his fingers, clumsily enough--beginning with the year 1828 as Number
One, and ending with the current year, 1851, as Number Twenty-three.
"Twenty-three," he repeated aloud to himself, "twenty-three years: I
shall remember that."

He looked down a little vacantly, the next moment, at the old torn
letter again. Some of the lines, here and there, had escaped stains and
dirt sufficiently to be still easily legible; and it was over these
that his eyes now wandered. The first words that caught his attention
ran thus:--"I am now, therefore, in this bitter affliction, more than
ever desirous that all past differences between us should be forgotten,
and"--here the beginning of another line was hidden by a stain, beyond
which, on the cleaner part of the letter, the writing proceeded:--"In
this spirit, then, I counsel you, if you can get continued employment
anywhere abroad, to accept it, instead of coming back"--(a rent in the
paper made the next words too fragmentary to be easily legible). * * *
"any good news be sure of hearing from me again. In the mean time, I
say it once more, keep away, if you can. Your presence could do no
good; and it is better for you, at your age, to be spared the sight of
such sorrow as that we are now suffering." (After this, dirt and the
fading of the ink made several sentences near the end of the page
almost totally illegible--the last three or four lines at the bottom
of the letter alone remaining clear enough to be read with any ease.)
* * * "the poor, lost, unhappy creature! But I shall find her, I know
I shall find her; and then, let Joanna say or do what she may, I will
forgive my own Mary, for I know she will deserve her pardon. As for
_him,_ I feel confident that he may be traced yet; and that I can shame
him into making the atonement of marrying her. If he should refuse,
then the black-hearted villain shall--"

At this point, Mat abruptly stopped in his reading; and, hastily
folding up the letter, put it back in the bag again, along the feather
fan and the Indian pouch. "I can't go on that part of the story now,
but the time _may_ come--" He pursued the thought which thus expressed
itself in him no further, but sat still for a few minutes, with his
head on his hand and his heavy eyebrows contracted by an angry frown,
staring sullenly at the flame of the candle. Joanna Grice's letter
still remained to be finished. He took it up, and looked back to the
paragraph that he had last read.

"As for the child mentioned in the advertisement"--those were the words
to which he was now referring. _"The child?"_--There was no mention of
its sex. "I should like to know if it was a boy or a girl," thought
Mat.

Though he was now close to the end of the letter, he roused himself
with difficulty to attend to the last few sentences which remained to
be read. They began thus:--

"Before I say anything in conclusion, of the sale of our business, of
my brother's death, and of the life which I have been leading since
that time, I should wish to refer, once for all, and very briefly, to
the few things which my niece left behind her, when she abandoned her
home. Circumstances may, one day, render this necessary. I desire then
to state, that everything belonging to her is preserved in one of her
boxes (now in my possession), just as she left it. When the letters
signed 'A. C.' were discovered, as I have mentioned, on the occasion of
repairs being made in the house, I threw them into the box with my own
hand. They will all be found, more or less, to prove the justice of
those first suspicions of mine, which my late brother so unhappily
disregarded. In reference to money or valuables, I have only to mention
that my niece took all her savings with her in her flight. I knew in
what box she kept them, and I saw that box open and empty on her table,
when I first discovered that she was gone. As for the only three
articles of jewelry that she had, her brooch I myself saw her give to
Ellen Gough--her earrings she always wore--and I can only presume
(never having found it anywhere) that she took with her, in her flight,
her Hair Bracelet."


"There it is again!" cried Mat, dropping the letter in astonishment,
the instant those two significant words, "Hair Bracelet," caught his
eye.

He had hardly uttered the exclamation, before he heard the door of the
house flung open, then shut to again with a bang. Zack had just let
himself in with his latch-key.

"I'm glad he's come," muttered Mat, snatching up the letter from the
floor, and crumpling it into his pocket. "There's another thing or two
I want to find out, before I go any further--and Zack's the lad to help
me."


CHAPTER IX.

MORE DISCOVERIES.

When Zack entered the room, and saw his strange friend, with legs
crossed and hands in pockets, sitting gravely in the usual corner, on
the floor, between a brandy-bottle on one side, and a guttering,
unsnuffed candle on the other, he roared with laughter, and stamped
about in his usual boisterous way, till the flimsy little house seemed
to be trembling under him to its very foundations. Mat bore all this
noise and ridicule, and all the jesting that followed it about the
futility of drowning his passion for Madonna in the brandy-bottle, with
the most unruffled and exemplary patience. The self-control which he
thus exhibited did not pass without its reward. Zack got tired of
making jokes which were received with the serenest inattention; and,
passing at once from the fanciful to the practical, astonished his
fellow-lodger, by suddenly communicating a very unexpected and very
important piece of news.

"By-the-bye, Mat," he said, "we must sweep the place up, and look as
respectable as we can, before to-morrow night. My friend Blyth is
coming to spend a quiet evening with us. I stayed behind till all the
visitors had gone, on purpose to ask him."

"Do you mean he's coming to have a drop of grog and smoke a pipe along
with us two?" asked Mat rather amazedly.

"I mean he's coming here, certainly; but as for grog and pipes, he
never touches either. He's the best and dearest fellow in the world;
but I'm ashamed to say he's spooney enough to like lemonade and tea.
Smoking would make him sick directly; and, as for grog, I don't believe
a drop ever passes his lips from one year's end to another. A weak
head--a wretchedly weak head for drinking," concluded Zack, tapping his
forehead with an air of bland Bacchanalian superiority.

Mat seemed to have fallen into one of his thoughtful fits again. He
made no answer, but holding the brandy-bottle standing by his side, up
before the candle, looked in to see how much liquor was left in it.

"Don't begin to bother your head about the brandy: you needn't get any
more of it for Blyth," continued Zack, noticing his friend's action. "I
say, do you know that the best thing you ever did in your life was
saving Valentine's picture in that way? You have regularly won his
heart by it. He was suspicious of my making friends with you before;
but now he doesn't seem to think there's a word in the English language
that's good enough for you. He said he should be only too glad to thank
you again, when I asked him to come and judge of what you were really
like in your own lodging. Tell him some of those splendid stories of
yours. I've been terrifying him already with one or two of them at
secondhand. Oh Lord! how hospitably we'll treat him--won't we? You
shall make his hair stand on end, Mat; and I'll drown him in his
favorite tea."

"What does he do with them picters of his?" asked Mat. "Sell 'em?"

"Of course!" answered the other, confidently; "and gets enormous sums
of money for them." Whenever Zack found an opportunity of magnifying a
friend's importance, he always rose grandly superior to mere
matter-of-fact restraints, and seized the golden moment without an
instant of hesitation or a syllable of compromise.

"Get lots of money, does he?" proceeded Mat. "And keeps on hoarding of
it up, I daresay, like all the rest of you over here?"

_"He_ hoard money!" retorted Zack, "You never made a worse guess in
your life. I don't believe be ever hoarded six-pence since he was a
baby. If Mrs. Blyth didn't look after him, I don't suppose there would
be five pounds in the house from one year's end to another."

There was a moment's silence. (It wasn't because he had money in it,
then, thought Mat, that he shut down the lid of that big chest of his
so sharp. I wonder whether--)

"He's the most generous fellow in the world," continued Zack, lighting
a cigar; "and the best pay: ask any of his tradespeople."

This remark suspended the conjecture that was just forming in Mat's
mind. He gave up pursuing it quite readily, and went on at once with
his questions to Zack. Some part of the additional information that he
desired to obtain from young Thorpe, he had got already. He knew now,
that when Mr. Blyth, on the day of the picture-show, shut down the
bureau so sharply on Mr. Gimble's approaching him, it was not, at any
rate, because there was money in it.

"Is he going to bring anybody else in here along with him, to-morrow
night?" asked Mat.

"Anybody else? Who should he bring? Why, you old barbarian, you don't
expect him to bring Madonna into our jolly bachelor den to preside over
the grog and pipes--do you?"

"How old is the young woman?" inquired Mat, contemplatively snuffing
the candle with his fingers, as he put the question.

"Still harping on my daughter!" shouted Zack, with a burst of laughter.
"She's older than she looks, I can tell you that. You wouldn't guess
her at more than eighteen or nineteen. But the fact is, she's actually
twenty-three;--steady there! you'll be through the window if you don't
sit quieter in your queer corner than that."

(Twenty-three! The very number he had stopped at, when he reckoned off
the difference on his fingers between 1828 and 1851, just before young
Thorpe came in.)

"I suppose the next cool thing you will say, is that she's too old for
you," Zack went on; "or, perhaps, you may prefer asking another
question or two first. I'll tell you what, old Rough and Tough, the
inquisitive part of your character is beginning to be--"

"Bother all this talking!" interrupted Mat, jumping up suddenly as he
spoke, and taking a greasy pack of cards from the chimney-piece. "I
don't ask no questions, and don't want no answers. Let's have a drop of
grog and a turn-to at Beggar-my-Neighbor. Sixpence a time. Come on!"

They sat down at once to their cards and their brandy-and-water;
playing uninterruptedly for an hour or more. Zack won; and--being
additionally enlivened by the inspiring influences of grog--rose to a
higher and higher pitch of exhilaration with every additional sixpence
which his good luck extracted from his adversary's pocket. His gaiety
seemed at last to communicate itself even to the imperturbable Mat, who
in an interval of shuffling the cards, was heard to deliver himself
suddenly of one of those gruff chuckles, which have been already
described as the nearest approach he was capable of making towards a
civilized laugh.

He was so seldom in the habit of exhibiting any outward symptoms of
hilarity, that Zack, who was dealing for the new game, stopped in
astonishment, and inquired with great curiosity what it was his friend
was "grunting about." At first, Mat declined altogether to say;--then,
on being pressed, admitted that his mind was just then running on the
"old woman" Zack had spoken of; as having "suddenly fallen foul of him
in Mr. Blyth's house, because he wanted to give the young woman a
present:" which circumstance, Mat added, "so tickled his fancy, that he
would have paid a crown piece out of his pocket only to have seen and
heard the whole squabble all through from beginning to end."

Zack, whose fancy was now exactly in the right condition to be
"tickled" by anything that "tickled" his friend, seized in high glee
the humorous side of the topic suggested to him; and immediately began
describing poor Mrs. Peckover's personal peculiarities in a strain of
the most ridiculous exaggeration. Mat listened, as he went on, with
such admiring attention, and seemed to be so astonishingly amused by
everything he said, that, in the excitement of success, he ran into the
next room, snatched the two pillows off the bed, fastened one in front
and the other behind him, tied the patchwork counterpane over all for a
petticoat, and waddled back into his friend's presence, in the
character of fat Mrs. Peckover, as she appeared on the memorable
evening when she stopped him mysteriously in the passage of Mr. Blyth's
house.

Zack was really a good mimic; and he now hit off all the peculiarities
of Mrs. Peckover's voice, manner, and gait to the life--Mat chuckling
all the while, rolling his huge head from side to side, and striking
his heavy fist applaudingly on the table. Encouraged by the
extraordinary effect his performances produced, Zack went through the
whole of his scene with Mrs. Peckover in the passage, from beginning to
end; following that excellent woman through all the various mazes of
"rhodomontade" in which she then bewildered herself, and imitating her
terror when he threatened to run upstairs and ask Mr. Blyth if Madonna
really had a hair bracelet, with such amazing accuracy and humor, as
made Mat declare that what he had just beheld for nothing, would cure
him of ever paying money again to see any regular play-acting as long
as he lived.

By the time young Thorpe had reached the climax of his improvised
dramatic entertainment, he had so thoroughly exhausted himself that he
was glad to throw aside the pillows and the counterpane, and perfectly
ready to spend the rest of the evening quietly over the newspaper. His
friend did not interrupt him by a word, except at the moment when he
sat down; and then Mat said, simply and carelessly enough, that he
thought he should detect the original Mrs. Peckover directly by Zack's
imitation, if ever he met with her in the streets. To which Young
Thorpe merely replied that he was not very likely to do anything of the
sort; because Mrs. Peckover lived at Rubbleford, where her husband had
some situation, and where she herself kept a little dairy and muffin
shop. "She don't come to town above once a-year," concluded Zack as he
lit a cigar; "and then the old beauty stops in-doors all the time at
Blyth's!"

Mat listened to this answer attentively, but offered no further remark.
He went into the back room, where the water was, and busied himself in
washing up all the spare crockery of the bachelor household in honor of
Mr. Blyth's expected visit.

In process of time, Zack--on whom literature of any kind, high or low,
always acted more or less as a narcotic--grew drowsy over his
newspaper, let his grog get cold, dropped his cigar out of his mouth,
and fell fast asleep in his chair. When he woke up, shivering, his
watch had stopped, the candle was burning down in the socket, the fire
was out, and his fellow-lodger was not to be seen either in the front
or the back room. Young Thorpe knew his friend's strange fancy for
"going out over night (as Mat phrased it) to catch the morning the
first thing in the fields" too well to be at all astonished at now
finding himself alone. Don't expect me home before midnight. [Goes.]
NURSE. Lord preserve us, whatever will be the end of this!

ACT II.

[The same scene as in previous act. A lighted lamp is on the table; it
is night. The Doctor and Laura are discovered at rise of curtain.]

DOCTOR. From what I gathered during my conversation with him the case is
not fully proved to me. In the first place you made a mistake in saying
that he had arrived at these astonishing results about other heavenly
bodies by means of a microscope. Now that I have learned that it
was a spectroscope, he is not only cleared of any suspicion of insanity,
but has rendered a great service to science.

LAURA. Yes, but I never said that.

DOCTOR. Madam, I made careful notes of our conversation, and I
remember that I asked about this very point because I thought I had
misunderstood you.

One must be very careful in making such accusations when a certificate
in lunacy is in question.

LAURA. A certificate in lunacy?

DOCTOR. Yes, you must surely know that an insane person loses
both civil and family rights.

LAURA. No, I did not know that.

DOCTOR. There was another matter that seemed to me suspicious. He
spoke of his communications to his booksellers not being answered.
Permit me to ask if you, through motives of mistaken kindness, have
intercepted them?

LAURA. Yes, I have. It was my duty to guard the interests of the
family, and I could not let him ruin us all without some intervention.

DOCTOR. Pardon me, but I think you cannot have considered the consequences
of such an act. If he discovers your secret interference in his affairs,
he will have grounds for suspicions, and they will grow like an
avalanche. And besides, in doing this you have thwarted his will and
irritated him still more. You must have felt yourself how the
mind rebels when one's deepest desires are thwarted and one's will is
crossed.

LAURA. Haven't I felt that!

DOCTOR. Think, then, what he must have gone through.

LAURA [Rising]. It is midnight and he hasn't come home. Now we may fear
the worst.

DOCTOR. But tell me what actually happened this evening after I
left. I must know everything.

LAURA. He raved in the wildest way and had the strangest ideas. For
instance, that he is not the father of his child.

DOCTOR. That is strange. How did such an idea come into his head?

LAURA. I really can't imagine, unless it was because he had to
question one of the men about supporting a child, and when I tried
to defend the girl, he grew excited and said no one could tell who
was the father of a child.

God knows I did everything to calm him, but now I believe there
is no help for him. [Cries.]
DOCTOR. But this cannot go on. Something must be done here without, of
course, arousing his suspicions. Tell me, has the Captain ever had such
delusions before?

LAURA. Six years ago things were in the same state, and then he, himself,
confessed in his own letter to the doctor that he feared for his
reason.

DOCTOR. Yes, yes, yes, this is a story that has deep roots and the sanctity
of the family life--and so on--of course I cannot ask about everything,
but must limit myself to appearances. What is done can't be undone,
more's the pity, yet the remedy should be based upon all the past.--Where
do you think he is now?

LAURA. I have no idea, he has such wild streaks.

DOCTOR. Would you like to have me stay until he returns? To avoid
suspicion, I could say that I had come to see your mother who is
not well.

LAURA. Yes, that will do very nicely. Don't leave us, Doctor; if you
only knew how troubled I am! But wouldn't it be better to tell him
outright what you think of his condition.

DOCTOR. We never do that unless the patient mentions the subject
himself, and very seldom even then. It depends entirely on the
case. But we mustn't sit here; perhaps I had better go into the next
room; it will look more natural.

LAURA. Yes, that will be better, and Margret can sit here. She always
waits up when he is out, and she is the only one who has any power over
him. [Goes to the door left] Margret, Margret!

NURSE. Yes, Ma'am. Has the master come home?

LAURA. No; but you are to sit here and wait for him, and when he does
come you are to say my mother is ill and that's why the doctor is
here.

NURSE. Yes, yes. I'll see that everything is all right.

LAURA [Opens the door to inner rooms]. Will you come in here, Doctor?

DOCTOR. Thank you.

[Nurse seats herself at the table and takes up a hymn book and spectacles
and reads.]
NURSE. Ah, yes, ah yes!
[Reads half aloud] Ah woe is me, how sad a thing Is life within
this vale of tears, Death's angel triumphs like a king, And calls
aloud to all the spheres-- Vanity, all is vanity.
Yes, yes! Yes, yes!
[Reads again] All that on earth hath life and breath To earth must fall
before his spear, And sorrow, saved alone from death, Inscribes above
the mighty bier.
Vanity, all is vanity.
Yes, Yes.

BERTHA [Comes in with a coffee-pot and some embroidery. She speaks
in a low voice]. Margret, may I sit with you? It is so frightfully
lonely up there.

NURSE. For goodness sake, are you still up, Bertha?

BERTHA. You see I want to finish Father's Christmas present. And
here's something that you'll like.

NURSE. But bless my soul, this won't do. You must be up in the morning,
and it's after midnight now.

BERTHA. What does it matter? I don't dare sit up there alone. I
believe the spirits are at work.

NURSE. You see, just what I've said. Mark my words, this house was not
built on a lucky spot. What did you hear?

BERTHA. Think of it, I heard some one singing up in the attic!

NURSE. In the attic? At this hour?

BERTHA. Yes, it was such it sorrowful, melancholy song! I never heard
anything like it. It sounded as if it came from the store-room, where
the cradle stands, you know, to the left-- -- --
NURSE. Dear me, Dear me! And such a fearful night. It seems as if
the chimneys would blow down. "Ah, what is then this earthly life, But
grief, afiction and great strife? E'en when fairest it has seemed,
Nought but pain it can be deemed." Ah, dear child, may God give us a
good Christmas!

BERTHA. Margret, is it true that Father is ill?

NURSE. Yes, I'm afraid he is.

BERTHA. Then we can't keep Christmas eve? But how can he be up and
around if he is 111?

NURSE. You see, my child, the kind of illness he has doesn't keep him
from being up. Hush, there's some one out in the hall. Go to bed
now and take the coffee pot away or the master will be angry.

BERTHA [Going out with tray]. Good night, Margret.

NURSE. Good night, my child. God bless you.

[Captain comes in, takes off his overcoat.]

CAPTAIN. Are you still up? Go to bed.

NURSE. I was only waiting till-- --
[Captain lights a candle, opens his desk, sits down at it and takes
letters and newspapers out of his pocket.]
NURSE. Mr. Adolf.

CAPTAIN. What do you want?

NURSE. Old mistress is ill and the doctor is here.

CAPTAIN. Is it anything dangerous?

NURSE. No, I don't think so. Just a cold.

CAPTAIN [Gets up]. Margret, who was the father of your child?

NURSE. Oh, I've told you many and many a time; it was that scamp
Johansson.

CAPTAIN. Are you sure that it was he?

NURSE. How childish you are; of course I'm sure when he was the only
one.

CAPTAIN. Yes, but was he sure that he was the only one? No, he could
not be, but you could be sure of it. There is a difference, you see.

NURSE. Well, I can't see any difference.

CAPTAIN. No, you cannot see it, but the difference exists, nevertheless.
[Turns over the pages of a photograph album which is on the table.] Do
you think Bertha looks like me?

NURSE. Of course! Why, you are as like as two peas.

CAPTAIN. Did Johansson confess that he was the father?

NURSE. He was forced to!

CAPTAIN. How terrible! Here is the Doctor. [Doctor comes in.] Good
evening, Doctor. How is my mother-in-law?

DOCTOR. Oh, it's nothing serious; merely a slight sprain of the left
ankle.

CAPTAIN. I thought Margret said it was a cold. There seem to be different
opinions about the same case. Go to bed, Margret.

[Nurse goes. A pause.]
CAPTAIN. Sit down, Doctor.

DOCTOR [Sits]. Thanks.

CAPTAIN. Is it true that you obtain striped foals if you cross a
zebra and a mare?

DOCTOR [Astonished]. Perfectly true.

CAPTAIN.

Is it true that the foals continue to be striped if the breed is
continued with a stallion?

DOCTOR. Yes, that is true, too.

CAPTAIN. That is to say, under certain conditions a stallion can
be sire to striped foals or the opposite?

DOCTOR. Yes, so it seems.

CAPTAIN. Therefore an offspring's likeness to the father proves
nothing?

DOCTOR. Well-- -- --
CAPTAIN. That is to say, paternity cannot be proven.

DOCTOR. H'm-- --well-- --
CAPTAIN. You are a widower, aren't you, and have had children?

DOCTOR. Ye-es.

CAPTAIN. Didn't you ever feel ridiculous as a. father? I know of nothing
so ludicrous as to see a father leading his children by the hand
around the streets, or to hear it father talk about his children. "My
wife's children," he ought to say.

Did you ever feel how false your position was? Weren't you ever afflicted
with doubts, I won't say suspicions, for, as a gentleman, I assume that
your wife was above suspicion.

DOCTOR. No, really, I never was; but, Captain, I believe Goethe says
a man must take his children on good faith.

CAPTAIN. It's risky to take anything on good faith where a woman
is concerned.

DOCTOR. Oh, there are so many kinds of women.

CAPTAIN. Modern investigations have pronounced that there is only one
kind! Lately I have recalled two instances in my life that make me
believe this. When I was young I was strong and, if I may boast, handsome.
Once when I was making a trip on a steamer and sitting with a few friends
in the saloon, the young stewardess came and flung herself down
by me, burst into tears, and told us that her sweetheart was drowned.
We sympathized with her, and I ordered some champagne. After the second
glass I touched her foot; after the fourth her knee, and before
morning I had consoled her.

DOCTOR. That was just a winter fly.

CAPTAIN. Now comes the second instance--and that was a real summer
fly. I was at Lyskil. There was a young married woman stopping there
with her children, but her husband was in town. She was religious, had
extremely strict principles, preached morals to me, and was, I
believe, entirely honorable. I lent her a book, two books, and when she
was leaving, she returned them, strange to say!
Three months later, in those very books I found her card with a declaration
on it.

It was innocent, as innocent its it declaration of love can be from a
married woman to a strange man who never made any advances. Now comes
the moral: Just don't have too much faith.

DOCTOR. Don't have too little faith either.

CAPTAIN. No, but just enough. But, you see, Doctor, that woman
was so unconsciously dishonest that she talked to her husband about
the fancy she had taken to me. That's what makes it dangerous, this very
unconsciousness of their instinctive dishonesty. That is a mitigating
circumstance, I admit, but it cannot nullify judgment, only soften
it.

DOCTOR. Captain, your thoughts are taking a morbid turn, and you ought
to control them.

CAPTAIN. You must not use the word morbid.

Steam boilers, as you know, explode at it certain pressure, but the
same pressure is not needed for all boiler explosions. You understand?
However, you are here to watch me. If I were not a man I should have
the right to make accusations or complaints, as they are so cleverly
called, and perhaps I should be able to give you the whole diagnosis,
and, what is more, the history of my disease. But unfortunately, I
am a man, and there is nothing for me to do but, like a Roman,
fold my arms across my breast and hold my breath till I die.

DOCTOR. Captain, if you are ill, it will not reflect upon your
honor as a man to tell me all. In fact, I ought to hear the other
side.

CAPTAIN. You have had enough in hearing the one, I imagine.

Do you know when I heard Mrs. Alving eulogizing her dead husband, I
thought to myself what a damned pity it was the fellow was dead.

Do you suppose that he would have spoken if he had been alive? And
do you suppose that if any of the dead husbands came back they would be
believed? Good night, Doctor. You see that I am calm, and you can
retire without fear.

DOCTOR. Good night, then, Captain. I'm afraid. I can be of no
further use in this case.

CAPTAIN. Are we enemies?

DOCTOR. Far from it. But it is too bad we cannot be friends.

Good night.

[Goes. The Captain follows the Doctor to the door at back and then
goes to the door at left and opens it slightly.]
CAPTAIN. Come in, and we'll talk. I heard you out there listening.
[Laura, embarrassed. Captain sits at desk.] It is late, but we must
come to some decision. Sit down.

[Pause.] I have been at the post office tonight to get my letters.
From these it appears that you have been keeping back my mail, both
coming and going. The consequence of which is that the loss of time
has its good as destroyed the result I expected from my work.

LAURA. It was an act of kindness on my part, as you neglected the
service for this other work.

CAPTAIN.

It was hardly kindness, for you were quite sure that some day I
should win more honor from that, than from the service; but you were
particularly anxious that I should not win such honors, for fear your
own insignificance would be emphasized by it. In consequence of all
this I have intercepted letters addressed to you.

LAURA. That was a noble act.

CAPTAIN. You see, you have, as you might say, a high opinion of me.
It appears from these letters that, for some time past you have been
arraying my old friends against me by spreading reports about
my mental condition. And you Dave succeeded in your efforts, for now
not more than one person exists from the Colonel down to the
cook, who believes that I am sane. Now these are the facts about my
illness; my mind is sound, as you know, so that I can take care of
my duties in the service as well its my responsibilities as a father;
my feelings are more or less under my control, as my will has not been
completely undermined; but you have gnawed and nibbled at it so that
it will soon slip the cogs, and then the whole mechanism will slip and
go to smash. I will not appeal to your feelings, for you have none; that
is your strength; but I will appeal to your interests.

LAURA. Let me hear.

CAPTAIN. You have succeeded in arousing my suspicions to such an
extent that my judgment is no longer clear, and my thoughts begin
to wander. This is the approaching insanity that you are waiting for,
which may come at any time now. So you are face to face with the
question whether it is more to your interest that I should
be sane or insane. Consider. If I go under I shall lose the service,
and where will you be then? If I die, my life insurance will fall to
you. But if I take my own life, you will get nothing.
Consequently, it is to your interest that I should live out my life.

LAURA. Is this a trap?

CAPTAIN. To be sure. But it rests with you whether you will run around
it or stick your head into it.

LAURA. You say that you will kill yourself! You won't do that!
CAPTAIN. Are you sure? Do you think a man can live when he has
nothing and no one to live for?

LAURA. You surrender, then?
CAPTAIN. No, I offer peace.

LAURA. The conditions?
CAPTAIN. That I may keep my reason. Free me from my suspicions and
I give up the conflict.

LAURA. What suspicions?
CAPTAIN. About Bertha's origin.
LAURA. Are there any doubts about that?
CAPTAIN. Yes, I have doubts, and you have awakened them.
LAURA. I?
CAPTAIN. Yes, you have dropped them like henbane in my ears, and
circumstances have strengthened them. Free me from the uncertainty;
tell me outright that it is true and I will forgive you beforehand.
LAURA. How can I acknowledge a sin that I have not committed?
CAPTAIN. What does it matter when you know that I shall not divulge
it? Do you think a man would go and spread his own shame
broadcast?
LAURA. If I say it isn't true, you won't be convinced; but if I say
it is, then you will be convinced. You seem to hope it is true!
CAPTAIN. Yes, strangely enough; it must be, because the first
supposition can't be proved; the latter can be.
LAURA. Have you tiny ground for your suspicions?
CAPTAIN. Yes, and no.
LAURA. I believe you want to prove me guilty, so that you can get
rid of me and then have absolute control over the child. But you
won't catch me in any such snare.
CAPTAIN. Do you think that I would want to be responsible for another
man's child, if I were convinced of your guilt?
LAURA. No, I'm sure you wouldn't, and that's what makes me know you
lied just now when you said that you would forgive me beforehand.
CAPTAIN. [Rises]. Laura, save me and my reason. You don't seem to
understand what I say. If the child is not mine I have no control
over her and don't want to have any, and that is precisely what you
do want, isn't it? But perhaps you want even more--to have power
over the child, but still have me to support you.
LAURA. Power, yes! What has this whole life and death struggle been
for but power?
CAPTAIN. To me it has meant more. I do not believe in a hereafter;
the child was my future life. That was my conception of immortality,
and perhaps the only one that has any analogy in reality. If you
take that away from me, you cut off my life.
LAURA. Why didn't we separate in time?
CAPTAIN. Because the child bound us together; but the link became
a chain. And how did it happen; how? I have never thought about
this, but now memories rise up accusingly, condemningly perhaps.
We had been married two years, and had no children; you know why.
I fell ill and lay at the point of death. During a conscious interval
of the fever I heard voices out in the drawing-room. It was you and
the lawyer talking about the fortune that I still possessed. He
explained that you could inherit nothing because we had no children,
and he asked you if you were expecting to become a mother. I did
not hear your reply. I recovered and we had a child.
Who is its father?

LAURA. You.
CAPTAIN. No, I am not. Here is a buried crime that begins to stench,
and what a hellish crime! You women have been compassionate enough
to free the black slaves, but you have kept the white ones.
I have worked and slaved for you, your child, your mother, your
servants; I have sacrificed promotion and career; I have endured
torture, flaggellation, sleeplessness, worry for your sake, until
my hair has grown gray; and all that you might enjoy a life without
care, and when you grew old, enjoy life over again in your child.
I have borne everything without complaint, because I thought myself
the father of your child. This is the commonest kind of theft, the
most brutal slavery. I have had seventeen years of penal servitude
and have been innocent. What can you give me in return for that?
LAURA. Now you are quite mad.
CAPTAIN. That is your hope!--And I see how you have labored to
conceal your crime. I sympathized with you because I did not
understand your grief. I have often lulled your evil conscience to
rest when I thought I was driving away morbid thoughts. I have heard
you cry out in your sleep and not wanted to listen. I remember now
night before last--Bertha's birthday--it was between two and three
in the morning, and I was sitting up reading; you shrieked, "Don't,
don't!" as if someone were strangling you; I knocked on the wall--I
didn't want to hear any more. I have had my suspicions for a long
time but I did not dare to hear them confirmed. All this I have
suffered for you. What will you do for me?
LAURA. What can I do? I will swear by God and all I hold sacred
that you are Bertha's father.
CAPTAIN. What use is that when you have often said that a mother
can and ought to commit any crime for her child? I implore you as
a wounded man begs for a death blow, to tell me all. Don't you see
I'm as helpless as a child? Don't you hear me complaining as to a
mother? Won't you forget that I am a man, that I am a soldier who
can tame men and beasts with a word? Like a sick man I only ask for
compassion. I lay down the tokens of my power and implore you to
have mercy on my life.
[Laura approaches him and lays her hand on his brow.]
LAURA. What! You are crying, man!
CAPTAIN. Yes, I am crying although I am a man. But has not a man
eyes! Has not a man hands, limbs, senses, thoughts, passions? Is
he not fed with the wine food, hurt by the same weapons, warmed and
cooled by the same summer and winter as a woman? If you prick us
do we not bleed? If you tickle us do we not laugh? And if you poison
us, do we not die? Why shouldn't a man complain, a soldier weep?
Because it is unmanly? Why is it unmanly?
LAURA. Weep then, my child, as if you were with your mother once
more. Do you remember when I first came into your life, I was like
a second mother? Your great strong body needed nerves; you were a
giant child that had either come too early into the world, or perhaps
was not wanted at all.
CAPTAIN. Yes, that's how it was. My father's and my mother's will
was against my coming into the world, and consequently I was born
without a will. I thought I was completing myself when you and I
became one, and therefore you were allowed to rule, and I, the
commander at the barracks and before the troops, became obedient
to you, grew through you, looked up to you as to it more highly-gifted
being, listened to you as if I had been your undeveloped child.
LAURA. Yes, that's the way it was, and therefore I loved you as my
child. But you know, you must have seen, when the nature of your
feelings changed and you appeared as my lover that I blushed, and
your embraces were joy that was followed by a remorseful conscience
as if my blood were ashamed. The mother became the mistress.
Ugh!
CAPTAIN. I saw it, but I did not understand. I believed you despised
me for my unmanliness, and I wanted to win you as a woman by being
a man.
LAURA. Yes, but there was the mistake. The mother was your friend,
you see, but the woman was your enemy, and love between the sexes
is strife. Do not think that I gave myself; I did not give, but I
took--what I wanted. But you had one advantage. I felt that, and I
wanted you to feel it.
CAPTAIN. You always had the advantage. You could hypnotize me when
I was wide awake, so that I neither saw nor heard, but merely obeyed;
you could give me a raw potato and make me imagine it was a peach;
you could force me to admire your foolish caprices as though they
were strokes of genius. You could have influenced me to crime, yes,
even to mean, paltry deeds. Because you lacked intelligence, instead
of carrying out my ideas you acted on your own judgment.
But when at last I awoke, I realized that my honor had been corrupted
and I wanted to blot out the memory by a great deed, an achievement,
a discovery, or an honorable suicide. I wanted to go to war, but
was not permitted. It was then that I threw myself into science.
And now when I was about to reach out my hand to gather in its
fruits, you chop off my arm. Now I am dishonored and can live no
longer, for a man cannot live without honor.
LAURA. But a woman?
CAPTAIN. Yes, for she has her children, which he has not. But, like
the rest of mankind, we lived our lives unconscious as children,
full of imagination, ideals, and illusions, and then we awoke; it
was all over. But we awoke with our feet on the pillow, and he who
waked us was himself a sleep-walker. When women grow old and cease
to be women, they get beards on their chins; I wonder what men get
when they grow old and cease to be men. Those who crowed were no
longer cocks but capons, and the pullets answered their call, so
that when we thought the sun was about to rise we found ourselves
in the bright moon light amid ruins, just as in the good old times.
It had only been a little morning slumber with wild dreams, and
there was no awakening.
LAURA. Do you know, you should have been a poet!
CAPTAIN. Who knows.
LAURA. Now I am sleepy, so if you have any more fantastic visions
keep them till to-morrow.
CAPTAIN. First, a word more about realities. Do you hate me?
LAURA. Yes, sometimes, when you are a man.
CAPTAIN. This is like race hatred. If it is true that we are descended
from monkeys, at least it must be from two separate species. We are
certainly not like one another, are we?
LAURA. What do you mean to say by all this?
CAPTAIN. I feel that one of us must go under in this struggle.
LAURA. Which?

CAPTAIN. The weaker, of course.
LAURA. And the stronger will be in the right?
CAPTAIN. Always, since he has the power.
LAURA. Then I am in the right.
CAPTAIN. Have you the power already then?
LAURA. Yes, and a legal power with which I shall put you under the
control of a guardian.

CAPTAIN. Under a guardian?

LAURA.When the tumbler was full, he set it down on the table, with
an indicative bang, close to Valentine's plate.

"Just try a toothful of that to begin with," said Mat. "If you like it,
say Yes; if you don't, say No; and I'll make it better next time."

"You are very kind, very kind indeed," answered Mr. Blyth, eyeing the
tumbler by his side with some little confusion and hesitation; "but
really, though I should be shocked to appear ungrateful, I'm afraid I
must own--Zack, you ought to have told your friend--"

"So I did," said Zack, sipping his rum-and-water with infinite relish.

"The fact is, my dear sir," continued Valentine, "I have the most
wretched head in the world for strong liquor of any kind--"

"Don't call it strong liquor," interposed Mat, emphatically tapping the
rim of his guest's tumbler with his fore-finger.

"Perhaps," pursued Mr. Blyth, with a polite smile, "I ought to have
said grog."

"Don't call it grog," retorted Mat, with two disputatious taps on the
rim of the glass.

"Dear me!" asked Valentine, amazedly, "what is it then?"

"It's Squaw's Mixture," answered Mat, with three distinct taps of
asseveration.

Mr. Blyth and Zack laughed, under the impression that their queer
companion was joking with them. Mat looked steadily and sternly from
one to the other; then repeated with the gruffest gravity--"I tell you,
it's Squaw's Mixture."

"What a very curious name! how is it made?" asked Valentine.

"Enough Brandy to spile the Water. Enough Rum to spile the Brandy and
Water. Enough Lemon to spile the Rum _and_ Brandy _and_ Water. Enough
Sugar to spile everything. That's 'Squaw's Mixture,'" replied Mat with
perfect calmness and deliberation.

Zack began to laugh uproariously. Mat became more inflexibly grave than
ever. Mr. Blyth felt that he was growing interested on the subject of
the Squaw's Mixture. He stirred it diffidently with his spoon, and
asked with great curiosity how his host first learnt to make it.

"When I was out, over there, in the Nor'-West," began Mat, nodding
towards the particular point of the compass that he mentioned.

"When he says Nor'-West, and wags his addled old head like that at the
chimney-pots over the way, he means North America," Zack explained.

"When I was out Nor'-West," repeated Mat, heedless of the interruption,
"working along with the exploring gang, our stock of liquor fell short,
and we had to make the best of it in the cold with a spirt of spirits
and a pinch of sugar, drowned in more hot water than had ever got down
the throat of e'er a man of the lot of us before. We christened the
brew 'Squaw's Mixture,' because it was such weak stuff that even a
woman couldn't have got drunk on it if she tried. Squaw means woman in
those parts, you know; and Mixture means--what you've got afore you
now. I knowed you couldn't stand regular grog, and that's why I cooked
it up for you. Don't keep on stirring of it with a spoon like that, or
you'll stir it away altogether. Try it."

"Let _me_ try it--let's see how weak it is," cried Zack, reaching over
to Valentine.

"Don't you go a-shoving of your oar into another man's rollocks," said
Mat, dexterously knocking Zack's spoon out of his hand just as it
touched Mr. Blyth's tumbler. "You stick to _your_ grog; I'll stick to
_my_ grog; and _he'll_ stick to Squaw's Mixture." With those words, Mat
leant his bare elbows on the table, and watched Valentine's first
experimental sip with great curiosity.

The result was not successful. When Mr. Blyth put down the tumbler, all
the watery part of the Squaw's Mixture seemed to have got up into his
eyes, and all the spirituous part to have stopped short at his lungs.
He shook his head, coughed, and faintly exclaimed--"Too strong."

"Too hot you mean?" said Mat.

"No, indeed," pleaded poor Mr. Blyth, "I really meant too strong."

"Try again," suggested Zack, who was far advanced towards the bottom of
his own tumbler already. "Try again. Your liquor all went the wrong way
last time."

"More sugar," said Mat, neatly tossing two lumps into the glass from
where he sat. "More lemon (squeezing one or two drops of juice, and
three or four pips, into the mixture). More water (pouring in about a
tea-spoonful, with a clumsy flourish of the kettle). Try again."

"Thank you, thank you a thousand times. Really, do you know, it tastes
much nicer now," said Mr. Blyth, beginning cautiously with a spoonful
of the squaw's mixture at a time.

Mat's spirits seemed to rise immensely at this announcement. He lit his
pipe, and took up his glass of grog; nodded to Valentine and young
Thorpe, just as he had nodded to the northwest point of the compass a
minute or two before; muttered gruffly, "Here's all our good healths;"
and finished half his liquor at a draught.

"All our good healths!" repeated Mr. Blyth, gallantly attacking the
squaw's mixture this time without any intermediate assistance from the
spoon.

"All our good healths!" chimed in Zack, draining his glass to the
bottom. "Really, Mat, it's quite bewildering to see how your dormant
social qualities are waking up, now you're plunged into the vortex of
society. What do you say to giving a ball here next? You're just the
man to get on with the ladies, if you could only be prevailed on to
wear your coat, and give up airing your tawny old arms in public."

"Don't, my dear sir! I particularly beg you won't," cried Valentine, as
Mat, apparently awakened to a sense of polite propriety by Zack's last
hint, began to unroll one of his tightly-tucked-up shirt-sleeves. "Pray
consult your own comfort, and keep your sleeves as they were--pray do!
As an artist, I have been admiring your arms from the professional
point of view ever since we first sat down to table. I never remember,
in all my long experience of the living model, having met with such a
splendid muscular development as yours."

Saying those words, Mr. Blyth waved his hand several times before his
host's arms, regarding them with his eyes partially closed, and his
head very much on one side, just as he was accustomed to look at his
pictures. Mat stared, smoked vehemently, folded the objects of
Valentine's admiration over his breast, and, modestly scratching his
elbows, looked at young Thorpe with an expression of utter
bewilderment. "Yes! decidedly the most magnificent muscular development
I ever remember studying," reiterated Mr. Blyth, drumming with his
fingers on the table, and concentrating the whole of his critical
acumen in one eye by totally closing the other.

"Hang it, Blyth!" remonstrated Zack, "don't keep on looking at his arms
as if they were a couple of bits of prize beef! You may talk about his
muscular development as much as you please, but you can't have the
smallest notion of what it's really equal to till you try it. I say,
old Rough-and-Tough! jump up, and show him how strong you are. Just
lift him on your toe, like you did me. (Here Zack pulled Mat
unceremoniously out of his chair.) Come along, Blyth! Get opposite to
him--give him hold of your hand--stand on the toe part of his right
foot--don't wriggle about--stiffen your hand and aim, and--there!--what
do you say to his muscular development now?" concluded Zack, with an
air of supreme triumph, as Mat slowly lifted from the ground the foot
on which Mr. Blyth was standing, and, steadying himself on his left
leg, raised the astonished painter with his right nearly two feet high
in the air.

Any spectator observing the performance of this feat of strength, and
looking only at Mat, might well have thought it impossible that any
human being could present a more comical aspect than he now exhibited,
with his black skull-cap pushed a little on one side, and showing an
inch or so of his bald head, with his grimly-grinning face empurpled by
the violent physical exertion of the moment, and with his thick heavy
figure ridiculously perched on one leg. Mr. Blyth, however, was beyond
all comparison the more laughable object of the two, as he soared
nervously into the air on Mat's foot, tottering infirmly in the strong
grasp that supported him, till he seemed to be trembling all over, from
the tips of his crisp black hair to the flying tails of his frock-coat.
As for the expression of his round rosy face, with the bright eyes
fixed in a startled stare, and the plump cheeks crumpled up by an
uneasy smile, it was so exquisitely absurd, as young Thorpe saw it over
his fellow-lodger's black skull-cap, that he roared again with
laughter. "Oh! look up at him!" cried Zack, falling back in his chair.
"Look at his face, for heaven's sake, before you put him down!"

But Mat was not to be moved by this appeal. All the attention his eyes
could spare during those few moments, was devoted, not to Mr. Blyth's
face but to Mr. Blyth's watch-chain. There hung the bright little key
of the painter's bureau, dangling jauntily to and fro over his
waistcoat-pocket. As the right foot of the Sampson of Kirk Street
hoisted him up slowly, the key swung temptingly backwards and forwards
between them. "Come take me! come take me!" it seemed to say, as Mat's
eyes fixed greedily on it every time it dangled towards him.

"Wonderful! wonderful!" cried Mr. Blyth, looking excessively relieved
when he found himself safely set down on the floor again.

"That's nothing to some of the things he can do," said Zack. "Look
here! Put yourself stomach downwards on the carpet; and if you think
the waistband of your trousers will stand it, he'll take you up in his
teeth."

"Thank you, Zack, I'm perfectly satisfied without risking the waistband
of my trousers," rejoined Valentine, returning in a great hurry to the
table.

"The grog's getting cold," grumbled Mat. "Do you find it slip down easy
now?" he continued, handing the squaw's mixture in the friendliest
manner to Mr. Blyth.

"Astonishingly easy!" answered Valentine, drinking this time almost
with the boldness of Zack himself. "Now it's cooler, one tastes the
sugar. Whenever I've tried to drink regular grog, I have never been
able to get people to give it me sweet enough. The delicious part of
this is that there's plenty of sugar in it. And, besides, it has the
merit (which real grog has not) of being harmless. It tastes strong to
me, to be sure; but then I'm not used to spirits. After what you say,
however, of course it must be harmless--perfectly harmless, I have no
doubt." Here he sipped again, pretty freely this time, by way of
convincing himself of the innocent weakness of the squaw's mixture.

While Mr. Blyth had been speaking, Mat's hands had been gradually
stealing down deeper and deeper into the pockets of his trousers, until
his finger and thumb, and a certain plastic substance hidden away in
the left-hand pocket came gently into contact, just as Valentine left
off speaking. "Let's have another toast," cried Mat, quite briskly, the
instant the last word was out of his guest's mouth. "Come on, one of
you and give us another toast," he reiterated, with a roar of barbarous
joviality, taking up his glass in his right hand, and keeping his left
still in his pocket.

"Give you another toast, you noisy old savage!" repeated Zack, "I'll
give you _five,_ all at once! Mr. Blyth, Mrs. Blyth, Madonna, Columbus,
and The Golden Age--three excellent people and two glorious pictures;
let's lump them all together, in a friendly way, and drink long life
and success to them in beakers of fragrant grog!" shouted the young
gentleman, making perilously rapid progress through his second glass,
as he spoke.

"Do you know, I'm afraid I must change to some other place, if you have
no objection," said Mr. Blyth, after he had duly honored the composite
toast just proposed. "The fire here, behind me, is getting rather too
hot."

"Change along with me," said Mat. "I don't mind heat, nor cold neither,
for the matter of that."

Valentine accepted this offer with great gratitude. "By-the-bye, Zack,"
he said, placing himself comfortably in his host's chair, between the
table and the wall--"I was going to ask a favor of our excellent friend
here, when you suggested that wonderful and matchless trial of strength
which we have just had. You have been of such inestimable assistance to
me already, my dear sir," he continued, turning towards Mat, with all
his natural cordiality of disposition now fully developed, under the
fostering influence of the Squaw's Mixture. "You have laid me under
such an inexpressible obligation in saving my picture from
destruction--"

"I wish you could make up your mind to say what you want in plain
words," interrupted Mat. "I'm one of your rough-handed, thick-headed
sort, _I_ am. I'm not gentleman enough to understand parlarver. It
don't do me no good: it only worrits me into a perspiration." And Mat,
shaking down his shirt-sleeve, drew it several times across his
forehead, as a proof of the truth of his last assertion.

"Quite right! quite right!" cried Mr. Blyth, patting him on the
shoulder in the most friendly manner imaginable. "In plain words, then,
when I mentioned, just now, how much I admired your arms in an artistic
point of view, I was only paving the way for asking you to let me make
a drawing of them, in black and white, for a large picture that I mean
to paint later in the year. My classical figure composition, you know,
Zack--you have seen the sketch--Hercules bringing to Eurystheus the
Erymanthian boar--a glorious subject; and our friend's arms, and,
indeed, his chest, too, if he would kindly consent to sit for it, would
make the very studies I most want for Hercules."

"What on earth _is_ he driving at?" asked Mat, addressing himself to
young Thorpe, after staring at Valentine for a moment or two in a state
of speechless amazement.

"He wants to draw your arms--of course you will be only too happy to
let him--you can't understand anything about it now--but you will when
you begin to sit--pass the cigars--thank Blyth for meaning to make a
Hercules of you-and tell him you'll come to the painting-room whenever
he likes," answered Zack, joining his sentences together in his most
offhand manner, all in a breath.

"What painting-room? Where is it?" asked Mat, still in a densely
stupefied condition.

"My painting-room," replied Valentine. "Where you saw the pictures, and
saved Columbus, yesterday."

Mat considered for a moment--then suddenly brightened up, and began to
look quite intelligent again. "I'll come," he said, "as soon as you
like--the sooner the better," clapping his fist emphatically on the
table, and drinking to Valentine with his heartiest nod.

"That's a worthy, good-natured fellow!" cried Mr. Blyth, drinking to
Mat in return, with grateful enthusiasm. "The sooner the better, as you
say. Come to-morrow evening."

"All right. To-morrow evening," assented Mat. His left hand, as he
spoke, began to work stealthily round and round in his pocket, molding
into all sorts of strange shapes, that plastic substance, which had
lain hidden there ever since his shopping expedition in the morning.

"I should have asked you to come in the day-time," continued Valentine;
"but, as you know, Zack, I have the Golden Age to varnish, and one or
two little things to alter in the lower part of Columbus; and then, by
the latter end of the week, I must leave home to do those portraits in
the country which I told you of, and which are wanted before I thought
they would be. You will come with our friend, of course, Zack? I dare
say I shall have the order for you to study at the British Museum, by
to-morrow. As for the Private Drawing Academy--"

"No offense; but I can't stand seeing you stirring up them grounds in
the bottom of your glass any longer," Mat broke in here; taking away
Mr. Blyth's tumbler as he spoke, throwing the sediment of sugar, the
lemon pips, and the little liquor left to cover them, into the grate
behind; and then, hospitably devoting himself to the concoction of a
second supply of that palatable and innocuous beverage, the Squaw's
Mixture.

"Half a glass," cried Mr. Blyth. "Weak--remember my wretched head for
drinking, and pray make it weak."

As he spoke, the clock of the neighboring parish church struck.

"Only nine," exclaimed Zack, referring ostentatiously to the watch
which he had taken out of pawn the day before. "Pass the rum, Mat, as
soon as you've done with it--put the kettle on to boil--and now, my
lads, we'll begin spending the evening in earnest!"

              * * * * * *

If any fourth gentleman had been present to assist in "spending the
evening," as Zack chose to phrase it, at the small social _soiree_ in
Kirk Street; and if that gentleman had deserted the festive board as
the clock struck nine--had walked about the streets to enjoy himself in
the fresh air--and had then, as the clock struck ten, returned to the
society of his convivial companions, he would most assuredly have been
taken by surprise, on beholding the singular change which the lapse of
one hour had been sufficient to produce in the manners and conversation
of Mr. Valentine Blyth.

It might have been that the worthy and simple-hearted gentleman had
been unduly stimulated by the reek of hot grog, which in harmonious
association with a heavy mist of tobacco smoke, now filled the room; or
it might have been that the second brew of the Squaw's Mixture had
exceeded half a glassful in quantity, had not been diluted to the
requisite weakness, and had consequently got into his head; but,
whatever the exciting cause might be, the alteration that had taken
place since nine o'clock, in his voice, looks, and manners, was
remarkable enough to be of the nature of a moral phenomenon. He now
talked incessantly about nothing but the fine arts; he differed with
both his companions, and loftily insisted on his own superior sagacity,
whenever either of them ventured to speak a word; he was by turns as
noisy as Zack, and as gruff as Mat; his hair was crumpled down over his
forehead, his eyes were dimmed, his shirt collar was turned rakishly
over his cravat: in short, he was not the genuine Valentine Blyth at
all,--he was only a tipsy counterfeit of him.

As for young Thorpe, any slight steadiness of brain which he might
naturally possess, he had long since parted with, as a matter of
course, for the rest of the evening. Mat alone remained unchanged.
There he sat, reckless of the blazing fire behind him, still with that
left hand of his dropping stealthily every now and then into his
pocket; smoking, drinking, and staring at his two companions, just as
gruffly self-possessed as ever.

"There's ten," muttered Mat, as the clock struck. "I said we should be
getting jolly by ten. So we are."

Zack nodded his head solemnly, and stared hard at one of the empty
bottles on the floor, which had rolled out from the temporary
store-room under the table.

"Hold your tongues, both of you!" cried Mr. Blyth. "I insist on
clearing up that disputed point about whether artists are not just as
hardy and strong as other men. I'm an artist myself, and I say they
are. I'll agree with you in everything else; for you're the two best
fellows in the world; but if you say a word against artists, I'm your
enemy for life. You may talk to me, by the hour together about
admirals, generals, and prime ministers--I mention the glorious names
of Michael Angelo and Raphael; and down goes your argument directly.
When Michael Angelo's nose was broken do you think he minded it? Look
in his Life, and see if he did--that's all! Ha! ha! My painting-room is
forty feet long (now this is an important proof). While I was painting
Columbus and the Golden Age, one was at one end--north; and the other
at the other--south. Very good. I walked backwards and forwards between
those two pictures incessantly; and never sat down all day long. This
is a fact--and the proof is, that I worked on both of them at once. A
touch on Columbus--a walk into the middle of the room to look at the
effect--turn round--walk up to The Golden Age opposite--a touch on The
Golden Age--another walk into the middle of the room to look at the
effect-another turn round--and back again to Columbus. Fifteen miles
a-day of in-door exercise, according to the calculation of a
mathematical friend of mine; and _not_ including the number of times I
had to go up and down my portable wooden steps to get at the top parts
of Columbus. Isn't a man hardy and strong who can stand that? Ha! ha!
Just feel my legs, Zack. Are they hard and muscular, or are they not?"

Here Mr. Blyth, rapping young Thorpe smartly on the head with his
spoon, tried to skip out of his chair as nimbly as usual; but only
succeeded in floundering awkwardly into an upright position, after he
had knocked down his plate with all the greasy remains of the liver and
bacon on it. Zack roused himself from muddled meditation with a start;
and, under pretense of obeying his friend's injunction, pinched
Valentine's leg with such vigorous malice, that the painter fairly
screamed again under the infliction. All this time Mat sat immovably
serene in his place next to the fire. He just kicked Mr. Blyth's broken
plate, with the scraps of liver and bacon, and the knife and fork that
had fallen with them, into the temporary storeroom under the table--and
then pushed towards him another glass of the squaw's mixture, quietly
concocted while he had been talking.

The effect on Valentine of this hospitable action proved to be
singularly soothing and beneficial. He had been getting gradually more
and more disputatious for the last ten minutes; but the moment the
steaming glass touched his hand, it seemed to change his mood with the
most magical celerity. As he looked down at it, and felt the fragrant
rum steaming softy into his nostrils, his face expanded, and while his
left hand unsteadily conveyed the tumbler to his lips, his right
reached across the table and fraternally extended itself to Mat. "My
dear friend," said Mr. Blyth affectionately, "how kind you are! Pray
how do you make the Squaw's mixture?"

"I say, Mat, leave off smoking, and tell us something," interposed
Zack. "Bowl away at once with one of your tremendous stories, or Blyth
will be bragging again about his rickety old legs. Talk, man! Tell us
your famous story of how you lost your scalp."

Mat laid down his pipe, and for a moment looked very attentively at Mr.
Blyth--then, with the most uncharacteristic readiness and docility,
began his story at once, without requiring another word of persuasion.
In general, the very reverse of tedious when he related any experiences
of his own, he seemed, on this occasion, perversely bent on letting his
narrative ooze out to the most interminable length. Instead of adhering
to the abridged account of his terrible adventure, which he had given
Zack when they first talked together on Blackfriars Bridge, he now
dwelt drowsily on the minutest particulars of the murderous chase that
had so nearly cost him his life, enumerating them one after the other
in the same heavy droning voice which never changed its tone in the
slightest degree as he went on. After about ten minutes' endurance of
the narrative-infliction which he had himself provoked, young Thorpe
was just beginning to feel a sensation of utter oblivion stealing over
him, when a sound of lusty snoring close at his back startled him into
instant wakefulness. He looked round. There was Mr. Blyth placidly and
profoundly asleep, with his mouth wide open and his head resting
against the wall.

"Stop!" whispered Mat, as Zack seized on a half-squeezed lemon and took
aim at Valentine's mouth. "Don't wake him yet. What do you say to some
oysters?"

"Give us a dish, and I'll show you," returned young Thorpe. "Sally's in
bed by this time--I'll fetch the oysters myself from over the way. But,
I say, I must have a friendly shot with something or other, at dear old
Blyth's gaping mouth."

"Try him with an oyster, when you come back," said Mat, producing from
the cupboard behind him a large yellow pie-dish. "Go on! I'll see you
down stairs, and leave the candle on the landing, and the door on the
jar, so as you can get in quietly. Steady, young 'un! and mind the dish
when you cross the road." With these words Mat dismissed Zack from the
street-door to the oyster shop; and then returned immediately to his
guest upstairs.

Valentine was still fast asleep and snoring vehemently. Mat's hand
descended again into his pocket, reappearing, however, quickly enough
on this occasion, with the piece of wax which he had purchased that
morning. Steadying his arms coolly on the table, he detached the little
chain which held the key of Mr. Blyth's bureau, from the watchguard to
which it was fastened, took off on his wax a perfect impression of the
whole key from the pipe to the handle, attached it again to the
sleeper's watchguard, pared away the rough ends of the piece of wax
till it fitted into an old tin tobacco-box which he took from the
chimney-piece, pocketed this box, and then quietly resumed his original
place at the table.

"Now," said Mat, looking at the unconscious Mr. Blyth, after he had lit
his pipe again; "Now, Painter-Man! wake up as soon as you like."

It was not long before Zack returned. A violent bang of the street-door
announced his entry into the passage--a confused clattering and
stumbling marked his progress up stairs--a shrill crash, a heavy thump,
and a shout of laughter indicated his arrival on the landing. Mat ran
out directly, and found him prostrate on the floor, with the yellow
pie-dish in halves at the bottom of the stairs, and dozens of
oyster.-shells scattered about him in every direction.

"Hurt?" inquired Mat, pulling him up by the collar, and dragging him
into the room.

"Not a bit of it," answered Zack. "I've woke Blyth, though (worse
luck!) and spoilt our shot with the oyster, havn't I? Oh, Lord! how he
stares!"

Valentine certainly did stare. He was standing up, leaning against the
wall, and looking about him in a woefully dazed condition. Either his
nap, or the alarming manner in which he had been awakened from it, had
produced a decided change for the worst in him. As he slowly recovered
what little sense he had left to make use of, all his talkativeness and
cordiality seemed to desert him. He shook his head mournfully; refused
to eat or drink anything; declared with sullen solemnity, that his
digestion was "a perfect wreck in consequence of his keeping drunken
society;" and insisted on going home directly, in spite of everything
that Zack could say to him. The landlord, who had been brought from his
shop below by the noise, and who thought it very desirable to take the
first opportunity that offered of breaking up the party before any more
grog was consumed, officiously ran down stairs, and called a cab--the
result of this maneuver proving in the sequel to be what the
tobacconist desired. The moment the sound of wheels was heard at the
door, Mr. Blyth clamored peremptorily for his hat and coat; and, after
some little demur, was at last helped into the cab in the most friendly
and attentive manner by Mat himself.

"Just see the lights out upstairs, and the young 'un in bed, will ye?"
said Mat to his landlord, as they stood together on the door-step. "I'm
going to blow some of the smoke out of me by taking a turn in the fresh
air."

He walked away briskly, as he said the last words; but when he got to
the end of the street, instead of proceeding northwards towards the
country, and the cool night-breeze that was blowing from it, he
perversely turned southwards towards the filthiest little lanes and
courts in the whole neighborhood.

Stepping along at a rapid pace, he directed his course towards that
particular row of small and vile houses which he had already visited
early in the day; and stopped, as before, at the second-hand iron shop.
It was shut up for the night; but a dim light, as of one farthing
candle, glimmered through the circular holes in the tops of the
shutters; and when Mat knocked at the door with his knuckles; it was
opened immediately by the same hump-backed shopman with whom he had
conferred in the morning.

"Got it?" asked the hunch-back in a cracked querulous voice the moment
the door was ajar.

"All right," answered Mat in his gruffest bass tones, handing to the
little man the tin tobacco-box.

"We said to-morrow evening, didn't we?" continued the squalid shopman.

"Not later than six," added Mat.

"Not later than six," repeated the other, shutting the door softly as
his customer walked away--northward this time--to seek the fresh air in
good earnest.


CHAPTER XI.

THE GARDEN DOOR.

"Hit or miss, I'll chance it to-night" Those words were the first that
issued from Mat's lips on the morning after Mr. Blyth's visit, as he
stood alone amid the festive relics of the past evening, in the front
room at Kirk Street. "To-night," he repeated to himself, as he pulled
off his coat and prepared to make his toilette for the day in a pail of
cold water, with the assistance of a short bar of wholesome yellow
soap.

Though it was still early, his mind had been employed for some hours
past in considering how the second and only difficulty, which now stood
between him and the possession of the Hair Bracelet, might best be
overcome. Having already procured the first requisite for executing his
design, how was he next to profit by what he had gained? Knowing that
the false key would be placed in his hands that evening, how was he to
open Mr. Blyth's bureau without risking discovery by the owner, or by
some other person in the house?

To this important question he had as yet found no better answer than
was involved in the words he had just whispered to himself, while
preparing for his morning ablutions. As for any definite plan, by which
to guide himself; he was desperately resigned to trust for the
discovery of it to the first lucky chance which might be brought about
by the events of the day. "I should like though to have one good look
by daylight round that place they call the Painting Room," thought Mat,
plunging his face into two handsful of hissing soap-suds.

He was still vigorously engaged over the pail of cold water, when a
loud yawn, which died away gradually into a dreary howl, sounded from
the next room, and announced that Zack was awake. In another minute the
young gentleman appeared gloomily, in his night gown, at the folding
doors by which the two rooms communicated. His eyes looked red-rimmed
and blinking, his cheeks mottled and sodden, his hair tangled and
dirty. He had one hand to his forehead, and groaning with the corners
of his mouth lamentably drawn down, exhibited a shocking and salutary
picture of the consequences of excessive conviviality.

"Oh Lord, Mat!" he moaned, "my head's coming in two."

"Souse it in a pail of cold water, and walk off what you can't get rid
of; after that, along with me," suggested his friend.

Zack wisely took this advice. As they left Kirk Street for their walk,
Mat managed that they should shape their course so as to pass
Valentine's house on their way to the fields. As he had anticipated,
young Thorpe proposed to call in for a minute, to see how Mr. Blyth was
after the festivities of the past night, and to ascertain if he still
remained in the same mind about making the drawing of Mat's arms that
evening.

"I suspect you didn't brew the Squaw's Mixture half as weak as you told
us you did," said Zack slily, when they rang at the bell. "It wasn't a
bad joke for once in a way. But really, Blyth is such a good
kind-hearted fellow, it seems too bad--in short, don't let's do it next
time, that's all!"

The tuberculous infection spreads slowly up the limb by way of the lymph
vessels, and as these are obliterated the skin and cellular tissues
become hypertrophied, and the surface is studded over with fungating
tuberculous masses of a livid blue colour. As the more severe forms
of the disease may prove dangerous to life by pyogenic complications
inducing gangrene of the limb, the question of amputation may have
to be considered.

[Illustration: FIG. 98.--Elephantiasis of Penis and Scrotum in
native of Demerara.

(Mr. Annandale's case.)]
Belonging to this group also is a form of _congenital elephantiasis_
resulting from the circular constriction of a limb _in utero_ by
amniotic bands.

_Elephantiasis occurring apart from lymphatic or venous obstruction_
is illustrated by _elephantiasis nervorum_, in which there is an
overgrowth of the skin and cellular tissue of an extremity in association
with neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 89); and by
_elephantiasis Græcorum_--a form of leprosy in which the skin
of the face becomes the seat of tumour-like masses consisting of leprous
nodules.

It is also illustrated by _elephantiasis involving the scrotum_ as a
result of prolonged irritation by the urine in cases in which the
penis has been amputated and the urine has infiltrated the scrotal tissues
over a period of years.

#Sebaceous Cysts.#--Atheromatous cysts or wens are formed in
relation to the sebaceous glands and hair follicles.

They are commonly met with in adults, on the scalp (Fig. 99), face,
neck, back, and external genitals.
Sometimes they are multiple, and they may be met with in several members
of the same family. They are smooth, rounded, or discoid cysts,
varying in size from a split-pea to a Tangerine orange. In consistence
they are firm and elastic, or fluctuating, and are incorporated
with the overlying skin, but movable on the deeper structures. The
orifice of the partly blocked sebaceous follicle is sometimes visible,
and the contents of the cyst can be squeezed through the opening. The
wall of the cyst is composed of a connective-tissue capsule lined by
stratified squamous epithelium.

The contents consist of accumulated epithelial cells, and are at first
dry and pearly white in appearance, but as a result of fatty
degeneration they break down into a greyish-yellow pultaceous and
semi-fluid material having a peculiar stale odour. It is probable that
the decomposition of the contents is the result of the presence of
bacteria, and that from the surgical point of view they should be
regarded as infective. A sebaceous cyst may remain indefinitely without
change, or may slowly increase in size, the skin over it becoming
stretched and closely adherent to the cyst wall as a result of
friction and pressure.

The contents may ooze from the orifice of the duct and dry on the
skin surface, leading to the formation of a sebaceous horn (Fig. 100).
As a result of injury the cyst may undergo sudden enlargement from
hæmorrhage into its interior.

Recurrent attacks of inflammation frequently occur, especially in
wens of the face and scalp.

Suppuration may ensue and be followed by cure of the cyst, or an
offensive fungating ulcer forms which may be mistaken for epithelioma.
True cancerous transformation is rare.

Wens are to be _diagnosed_ from dermoids, from fatty tumours, and from
cold abscesses. Dermoids usually appear before adult life, and as they
nearly always lie beneath the fascia, the skin is movable over them. A
fatty tumour is movable, and is often lobulated. The confusion with a
cold abscess is most likely to occur in wens of the neck or back, and
it may be impossible without the use of an exploring needle to differentiate
between them.

[Illustration: FIG. 99.--Multiple Sebaceous Cysts or Wens; the larger
ones are of many years' duration.]
_Treatment._--The removal of wens is to be recommended while they are
small and freely movable, as they are then easily shelled out
after incising the overlying skin; sometimes splitting the cyst makes
its removal easier. Local anæsthesia is to be preferred. It is
important that none of the cyst wall be left behind. In large and
adherent wens an ellipse of skin is removed along with the cyst.

When inflamed, it may be impossible to dissect out the cyst, and the
wall should be destroyed with carbolic acid, the resulting wound
being treated by the open method.

#Moles.#--The term mole is applied to a pigmented, and usually hairy,
patch of skin, present at or appearing shortly after birth. The
colour varies from brown to black, according to the amount of
melanin pigment present. The lesion consists in an overgrowth of
epidermis which often presents an alveolar arrangement. Moles vary
greatly in size: some are mere dots, others are as large as the
palm of the hand, and occasionally a mole covers half the face.
In addition to being unsightly, they bleed freely when abraded, are
liable to ulcerate from friction and pressure, and occasionally
become the starting-point of melanotic cancer. Rodent cancer sometimes
originates in the slightly pigmented moles met with on the face.

Overgrowths in relation to the cutaneous nerves, especially the
plexiform neuroma, occasionally originate in pigmented moles. Soldau
believes that the pigmentation and overgrowth of the epidermis in moles
are associated with, and probably result from, a fibromatosis of the
cutaneous nerves.

_Treatment._--The quickest way to get rid of a mole is to excise it; if
the edges of the gap cannot be brought together with sutures, recourse
should be had to grafting. In large hairy moles of the face whose size
forbids excision, radium or the X-rays should be employed.

Excellent results have been obtained by refrigeration with solid
carbon dioxide.
In children and women with delicate skin, applications of from ten to
thirty seconds suffice. In persons with coarse skin an application of
one minute may be necessary, and it may have to be repeated.

#Horns.#--The _sebaceous_ horn results from the accumulation of the
dried contents of a wen on the surface of the skin: the sebaceous
material after drying up becomes cornified, and as fresh material is
added to the base the horn increases in length (Fig. 100).

The _wart_ horn grows from a warty papilloma of the skin. _Cicatrix_
horns are formed by the heaping up of epidermis in the scars that
result from burns. _Nail_ horns are overgrown nails (keratomata of
the nail bed), and are met with chiefly in the great toe of elderly
bedridden patients.
If an ulcer forms at the base of a horn, it may prove the starting-point
of epithelioma, and for this reason, as well as for others, horns
should be removed.

[Illustration: FIG. 100.--Sebaceous Horn growing from Auricle.

(Dr. Kenneth Maclachan's case.)]
#New Growths in the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue.#--The _Angioma_ has
been described with diseases of blood vessels. _Fibroma._--Various types
of fibroma occur in the skin. A soft pedunculated fibroma, about the
size of a pea, is commonly met with, especially on the neck and trunk;
it is usually solitary, and is easily removed with scissors. The
multiple, soft fibroma known as _molluscum fibrosum_, which depends
upon a neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves, is described
with the tumours of nerves.

Hard fibromas occurring singly or in groups may be met with, especially
in the skin of the buttock, and may present a local malignancy, recurring
after removal like the "recurrent fibroid" of Paget. The "painful
subcutaneous nodule" is a solitary fibroma related to one of the
cutaneous nerves. The hard fibroma known as _keloid_ is described
with the affections of scars.

#Papilloma.#--The _common wart_ or verruca is an outgrowth of the
surface epidermis. It may be sessile or pedunculated hard or soft.
The surface may be smooth, or fissured and foliated like a cauliflower,
or it may be divided up into a number of spines.

Warts are met with chiefly on the hands, and are often multiple,
occurring in clusters or in successive crops. Multiple warts appear
to result from some contagion, the nature of which is unknown; they
sometimes occur in an epidemic form among school-children, and show a
remarkable tendency to disappear spontaneously. The solitary flat-topped
wart which occurs on the face of old people may, if irritated,
become the seat of epithelioma. A warty growth of the epidermis is a
frequent accompaniment of moles and of that variety of lupus known
as _lupus verrucosus_.

_Treatment._--In the multiple warts of children the health should be
braced up by a change to the seaside.

A dusting-powder, consisting of boracic acid with 5 per cent. salicylic
acid, may be rubbed into the hands after washing and drying. The
persistent warts of young adults should be excised after freezing
with chloride of ethyl. When cutting is objected to, they may be
painted night and morning with salicylic collodion, the epidermis being
dehydrated with alcohol before each application.

_Venereal warts_ occur on the genitals of either sex, and may form large
cauliflower-like masses on the inner surface of the prepuce or of the
labia majora.

Although frequently co-existing with gonorrhoea or syphilis, they
occur independently of these diseases, being probably acquired by
contact with another individual suffering from warts (C. W. Cathcart).
They give rise to considerable irritation and suffering, and when
cleanliness is neglected there may be an offensive discharge.

In the female, the cauliflower-like masses are dissected from the
labia; in the male, the prepuce is removed and the warts on the
glans are snipped off with scissors.

In milder cases, the warts usually disappear if the parts are kept
absolutely dry and clean.

A useful dusting-powder is one consisting of calamine and 5 per cent.
salicylic acid; the exsiccated sulphate of iron, in the form of a
powder, may be employed in cases which resist this treatment.

#Adenoma.#--This is a comparatively rare tumour growing from the glands
of the skin. One variety, known as the "tomato tumour," which apparently
originates from _the sweat glands_, is met with on the scalp and face
in women past middle life.

These growths are often multiple; the individual tumours vary in size,
and the skin, which is almost devoid of hairs, is glistening and tightly
stretched over them. A similar tumour may occur on the nose. The
_sebaceous adenoma_, which originates from the sebaceous glands,
forms a projecting tumour on the face or scalp, and when the skin
is irritated it may ulcerate and fungate.

The treatment consists in the removal of the tumour along with the
overlying skin.

The exuberant masses on the nose known as "rhinophyma," "lipoma nasi,"
or "potato nose" are of the nature of sebaceous adenoma, and are removed
by shaving them off with a knife until the normal shape of the nose
is restored Healing takes place with remarkable rapidity.

#Cancer.#--There are several types of primary cancer of the skin,
the most important being squamous epithelioma, rodent cancer, and
melanotic cancer.

[Illustration: FIG. 101.--Paraffin Epithelioma.]
#Epithelioma# occurs in a variety of forms. When originating in a small
ulcer or wart-for example on the face in old people--it presents
the features of a chronic indurated ulcer. A more exuberant and rapidly
growing form of epithelial cancer, described by Hutchinson as the
_crateriform ulcer_, commences on the face as a small red pimple
which rapidly develops into an elevated mass shaped like a bee-hive,
and breaks down in the centre.

Epithelioma may develop anywhere on the body in relation to long-standing
ulcers, especially that resulting from a burn or from lupus; this
form usually presents an exuberant outgrowth of epidermis not unlike
a cauliflower. An interesting example of epithelioma has been described
by Neve of Kashmir. The natives in that province are in the habit of
carrying a fire-basket suspended from the waist, which often burns the
skin and causes a chronic ulcer, and many of these ulcers become the
seat of epithelioma, due, in Neve's opinion, to the actual contact of
the sooty pan with the skin.

The term _trade epithelioma_ has been applied to that form met with
in those who follow certain occupations, such as paraffin workers
and chimney-sweeps.

The most recent member of this group is the _X-ray carcinoma_,
which is met with in those who are constantly exposed to the irritation
of the X-rays; there is first a chronic dermatitis with warty
overgrowth of the surface epithelium, pigmentation, and the formation
of fissures and warts. The trade epithelioma varies a good deal in
malignancy, but it tends to cause death in the same manner as other
epitheliomas.

Epithelial cancer has also been observed in those who have taken arsenic
over long periods for medicinal purposes.

[Illustration: FIG. 102.--Rodent Cancer of Inner Canthus.]
#Rodent Cancer# (Rodent Ulcer).--This is a cancer originating in the
sweat glands or sebaceous follicles, or in the foetal residues of
cutaneous glands. The cells are small and closely packed together in
alveoli or in reticulated columns; cell nests are rare. It is remarkably
constant in its seat of origin, being nearly always located
on the lateral aspect of the nose or in the vicinity of the lower
eyelid (Fig. 102). It is rare on the trunk or limbs. It commences as a
small flattened nodule in the skin, the epidermis over it being
stretched and shining. The centre becomes depressed, while the margins
extend in the form of an elevated ridge. Sooner or later the
epidermis gives way in the centre, exposing a smooth raw surface
devoid of granulations.

[Illustration: FIG. 103.--Rodent Cancer of fifteen years' duration,
which has destroyed the contents of the Orbit.

(Sir Montagu Cotterill's case)]
The margin, while in parts irregular, is typically represented by a
well-defined "rolled" border which consists of the peripheral portion
of the cancer that has not broken down. The central ulcer may temporarily
heal.

There is itching but little pain, and the condition progresses
extremely slowly; rodent cancers which have existed for many years are
frequently met with. The disease attacks and destroys every structure
with which it comes in contact, such as the eyelids, the walls of the
nasal cavities, and the bones of the face; hence it may produce
the most hideous deformities (Fig. 103). The patient may succumb to
hæmorrhage or to infective complications such as erysipelas or
meningitis.

Secondary growths in the lymph glands, while not unknown, are extremely
rare. We have only seen them once--in a case of rodent cancer in the
groin.

_Diagnosis._--Lupus is the disease most often mistaken for rodent
cancer.

Lupus usually begins earlier in life, it presents apple-jelly nodules,
and lacks the rounded, elevated border. Syphilitic lesions progress
more rapidly, and also lack the characteristic margin. The
differentiation from squamous epithelioma is of considerable importance,
as the latter affection spreads more rapidly, involves the lymph glands
early, and is much more dangerous to life.

_Treatment.

_--In rodent cancers of limited size--say less than one inch in diameter--free
excision is the most rapid and certain method of treatment. The
alternative is the application of radium or of the Röntgen rays, which,
although requiring many exposures, results in cure with the minimum
of disfigurement.

If the cancer already covers an extensive area, or has invaded the cavity
of the orbit or nose, radium or X-rays yield the best results. The
effect is soon shown by the ingrowth of healthy epithelium from
the surrounding skin, and at the same time the discharge is lessened.

Good results are also reported from the application of carbon dioxide
snow, especially when this follows upon a course of X-ray
treatment.

#Paget's disease# of the nipple is an epithelioma occurring in women
over forty years of age: a similar form of epithelioma is sometimes met
with at the umbilicus or on the genitals.

#Melanotic Cancer.#--Under this head are included all new growths which
contain an excess of melanin pigment. Many of these were formerly
described as melanotic sarcoma. They nearly always originate
in a pigmented mole which has been subjected to irritation. The
primary growth may remain so small that its presence is not even suspected,
or it may increase in size, ulcerate, and fungate. The amount of pigment
varies: when small in amount the growth is brown, when abundant it
is a deep black. The most remarkable feature is the rapidity with
which the disease becomes disseminated along the lymphatics, the
first evidence of which is an enlargement of the lymph glands.

As the primary growth is often situated on the sole of the foot or in the
matrix of the nail of the great toe, the femoral and inguinal
glands become enlarged in succession, forming tumours much larger
than the primary growth.
Sometimes the dissemination involves the lymph vessels of the limb,
forming a series of indurated pigmented cords and nodules (Fig.
104).

Lastly, the dissemination may be universal throughout the body, and this
usually occurs at a comparatively early stage. The secondary growths
are deeply pigmented, being usually of a coal-black colour, and
melanin pigment may be present in the urine. When recurrence takes place
in or near the scar left by the operation, the cancer nodules are
not necessarily pigmented.
[Illustration: FIG. 104.--Diffuse Melanotic Cancer of Lymphatics
of Skin secondary to a Growth in the Sole of the Foot.]
To extirpate the disease it is necessary to excise the tumour, with
a zone of healthy skin around it and a somewhat large zone of the
underlying subcutaneous tissue and deep fascia. Hogarth Pringle
recommends that a broad strip of subcutaneous fascia up to and
including the nearest anatomical group of glands should be removed
with the tumour in one continuous piece.
#Secondary Cancer of the Skin.#--Cancer may spread to the skin from
a subjacent growth by direct continuity or by way of the lymphatics.
Both of these processes are so well illustrated in cases of mammary
cancer that they will be described in relation to that disease.
#Sarcoma# of various types is met with in the skin. The fibroma,
after excision, may recur as a fibro-sarcoma. The alveolar sarcoma
commences as a hard lump and increases in size until the epidermis
gives way and an ulcer is formed.
[Illustration: FIG. 105.--Melanotic Cancer of Forehead with Metastases
in Lymph Vessels and Glands.

(Mr. D. P. D. Wilkie's case.)]
A number of fresh tumours may spring up around the original
growth.
Sometimes the primary growth appears in the form of multiple nodules
which tend to become confluent. Excision, unless performed early,
is of little avail, and in any case should be followed up by exposure
to radium.

AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES
A cicatrix or scar consists of closely packed bundles of white
fibres covered by epidermis; the skin glands and hair follicles are
usually absent.If you're too proud to let your wife have the thing, throw it into
the fire. I hav'n't got nobody to give it to; and I can't keep it by
me, and won't keep it by me, no longer."

In the utterance of these words there was a certain rough pathos and
bitter reference to past calamity, which touched Valentine in one of
his tender places. His generous instincts overcame his prudent doubts
in a moment; and moved him, not merely to accept the present, but also
to predict warmly that Mrs. Blyth would be delighted with it.

"Zack," he said, speaking in an undertone to young Thorpe, who had been
listening to Mat's last speech, and observing his production of the
fan, in silent curiosity and surprise. "Zack, I'll run up stairs with
the fan to Lavvie at once, so as not to seem careless about your
friend's gift. Mind you do the honors of the supper table with proper
hospitality, while I am away."

Speaking these words, Mr. Blyth bustled out of the room as nimbly as
usual. A minute or two after his departure, Mat put his hand into his
pocket once more; mysteriously approached young Thorpe, and opened
before him the paper containing the Indian tobacco pouch, which was
made of scarlet cloth, and was very prettily decorated with colored
beads.

"Do you think the young woman would fancy this for a kind of
plaything?" he asked.

Zack, with a shout of laughter, snatched the pouch out of his hands,
and began to rally his friend more unmercifully than ever. For the
first time, Mat seemed to be irritated by the boisterous merriment of
which he was made the object; and cut his tormentor short quite
fiercely, with a frown and an oath.

"Don't lose your temper, you amorous old savage!" cried Zack, with
incorrigible levity. "I'll take your pouch upstairs to the Beloved
Object; and, if Blyth will let her have it, I'll bring her down here to
thank you for it herself!" Saying this, young Thorpe ran laughing out
of the room, with the scarlet pouch in his hand.

Mat listened intently till the sound of Zack's rapid footsteps died
away upstairs--then walked quickly and softly down the studio to the
garden door--gently unlocked it--gently drew the bolts back--gently
opened it, and ascertained that it could also be opened from without,
merely by turning the handle--then, quietly closing it again, left it,
to all appearance, as fast for the night as before; provided no one
went near enough, or had sufficiently sharp eyes, to observe that it
was neither bolted nor locked.

"Now for the big chest!" thought Mat, taking the false key out of his
pocket, and hastening back to the bureau. "If Zack or the Painter Man
come down before I've time to get at the drawer inside, I've made sure
of my second chance with the garden door."

He had the key in the lock of the bureau, as this thought passed
through his mind. He was just about to turn it, when the sound of
rapidly-descending footsteps upon the stairs struck on his quick ear.

"Too late!" muttered Mat. "I must chance it, after all, with the garden
door."

Putting the key into his pocket again, as he said this, he walked back
to the fireplace. The moment after he got there, Mr. Blyth entered the
studio.

"I am quite shocked that you should have been so unceremoniously left
alone," said Valentine, whose naturally courteous nature prompted him
to be just as scrupulously polite in his behavior to his rough guest,
as if Mat had been a civilized gentleman of the most refined feeling
and the most exalted rank. "I am so sorry you should have been left,
through Zack's carelessness, without anybody to ask you to take a
little supper," continued Valentine, turning to the table. "Mrs. Blyth,
my dear sir (do take a sandwich!), desires me to express her best
thanks for your very pretty present (that is the brandy in the bottle
next to you). She admires the design (spongecake? Ah! you don't care
about sweets), and thinks the color of the center feathers--"

At this moment the door opened, and Mr. Blyth, abruptly closing his
lips, looked towards it with an expression of the blankest
astonishment; for he beheld Madonna entering the painting-room in
company with Zack.

Valentine had been persuaded to let the deaf and dumb girl accept the
scarlet pouch by his wife; but neither she nor Zack had said a word
before him upstairs about taking Madonna into the studio. When the
painter was well out of earshot, young Thorpe had confided to Mrs.
Blyth the new freak in which he wanted to engage; and, signing
unscrupulously to Madonna that she was wanted in the studio, to be
presented to the "generous man who had given her the tobacco-pouch,"
took her out of the room without stopping to hear to the end the
somewhat faint remonstrance by which his proposition was met. To
confess the truth, Mrs. Blyth--seeing no great impropriety in the
girl's being introduced to the stranger, while Valentine was present in
the room, and having moreover a very strong curiosity to hear all she
could about Zack's odd companion--was secretly anxious to ascertain
what impressions Madonna would bring away of Mat's personal appearance
and manners. And thus it was that Zack, by seizing his opportunity at
the right moment, and exerting a little of that cool assurance in which
he was never very deficient, now actually entered the painting-room in
a glow of mischievous triumph with Madonna on his arm.

Valentine gave him a look as he entered which he found it convenient
not to appear to see. The painter felt strongly inclined, at that
moment, to send his adopted child upstairs again directly; but he
restrained himself out of a feeling of delicacy towards his guest--for
Mat had not only seen Madonna, but had hesitatingly advanced a step or
two to meet her, the instant she came into the room.

Few social tests for analyzing female human nature can be more safely
relied on than that which the moral investigator may easily apply, by
observing how a woman conducts herself towards a man who shows symptoms
of confusion on approaching her for the first time. If she has nothing
at all in her, she awkwardly forgets the advantage of her sex, and
grows more confused than he is. If she has nothing but brains in her,
she cruelly abuses the advantage, and treats him with quiet contempt.
If she has plenty of heart in her, she instinctively turns the
advantage to its right use, and forthwith sets him at his ease by the
timely charity of a word or the mute encouragement of a look.

Now Madonna, perceiving that the stranger showed evident signs, on
approaching her, of what appeared like confusion to her apprehension,
quietly drew her arm out of Zack's, and, to his unmeasured
astonishment, stepped forward in front of him--looked up brightly into
the grim, scarred face of Mat--dropped her usual curtsey--wrote a line
hurriedly on her slate--then offered it to him with a smile and a nod,
to read if he pleased, and to write on in return.

"Who would ever have thought it?" cried Zack, giving vent to his
amazement; "she has taken to old Rough and Tough, and made him a prime
favorite at first sight!"

Valentine was standing near, but he did not appear to hear this speech.
He was watching the scene before him closely and curiously. Accustomed
as he was to the innocent candor with which the deaf and dumb girl
always showed her approval or dislike of strangers at a first
interview--as also to her apparent perversity in often displaying a
decided liking for the very people whose looks and manners had been
previously considered certain to displease her--he was now almost as
much surprised as Zack, when he witnessed her reception of Mat. It was
an infallible sign of Madonna's approval, if she followed up an
introduction by handing her slate of her own accord to a stranger. When
she was presented to people whom she disliked, she invariably kept it
by her side until it was formally asked for.

Eccentric in everything else, Mat was consistently eccentric even in
his confusion. Some men who are bashful in a young lady's presence show
it by blushing--Mat's color sank instead of rising. Other men,
similarly affected, betray their burdensome modesty by fidgeting
incessantly.--Mat was as still as a statue. His eyes wandered heavily
and vacantly over the girl, beginning with her soft brown hair, then
resting for a moment on her face, then descending to the gay pink
ribbon on her breast, and to her crisp black silk apron with its smart
lace pockets--then dropping at last to her neat little shoes, and to
the thin bright line of white stocking that just separated them from
the hem of her favorite grey dress. He only looked up again, when she
touched his hand and put her slate pencil into it. At that signal he
raised his eyes once more, read the line she had written to thank him
for the scarlet pouch, and tried to write something in return. But his
hand shook, and his thoughts seemed to fail him, he gave her back the
slate and pencil, looking her full in the eyes as he did so. A curious
change came over his face at the same time--a change like that which
had altered him so remarkably in the hosier's shop at Dibbledean.

"Zack might, after all, have made many a worse friend than this man,"
thought Mr. Blyth, still attentively observing Mat. "Vagabonds don't
behave in the presence of young girls as he is behaving now."

With this idea in his mind, Valentine advanced to help his guest by
showing Mat how to communicate with Madonna. The painter was
interrupted, however, by young Thorpe, who, the moment he recovered
from his first sensations of surprise began to talk nonsense again, at
the top of his voice, with the mischievous intention of increasing
Mat's embarrassment.

While Mr. Blyth was attempting to silence Zack by leading him to the
supper table, Madonna was trying her best to reassure the great bulky,
sunburnt man who seemed to be absolutely afraid of her! She moved to a
stool, which stood near a second table in a corner by the fireplace;
and sitting down, produced the scarlet pouch, intimating by a gesture
that Mat was to look at what she was now doing. She then laid the pouch
open on her lap, and put into it several little work-box toys, a
Tonbridge silk-reel, an ivory needle case, a silver thimble with an
enameled rim, a tiny pair of scissors, and other things of the same
kind--which she took first from one pocket of her apron and then from
another. While she was engaged in filling the pouch, Zack, standing at
the supper-table, drummed on the floor with his foot to attract her
attention, and interrogatively held up a decanter of wine and a glass.
She started as the sound struck on her delicate nerves; and, looking at
young Thorpe directly, signed that she did not wish for any wine. The
sudden movement of her body thus occasioned, shook off her lap a little
mother-of-pearl bodkin case, which lay more than half out of one of the
pockets of her apron. The bodkin case rolled under the stool, without
her seeing it, for she was looking towards the supper-table: without
being observed by Mat, for his eyes were following the direction of
her's: without being heard by Mr. Blyth, for Zack was, as usual,
chattering and making a noise.

When she had put two other little toys that remained in her pockets
into the pouch, she drew the mouth of it tight, passed the loops of the
loose thongs that fastened it, over one of her arms, and then, rising
to her feet, pointed to it, and looked at Mat with a very significant
nod. The action expressed the idea she wished to communicate, plainly
enough:--"See," it seemed to say, "see what a pretty work-bag I can
make of your tobacco-pouch!"

But Mat, to all appearance, was not able to find out the meaning of one
of her gestures, easy as they were to interpret. His senses seemed to
grow more and more perturbed the longer he looked at her. As she
curtseyed to him again, and moved away in despair, he stepped forward a
little, and suddenly and awkwardly held out his hand. "The big man
seems to be getting a little less afraid of me," thought Madonna,
turning directly, and meeting his clumsy advance towards her, with a
smile. But the instant he took her hand, her lips closed, and she
shivered through her whole body as if dead fingers had touched her.
"Oh!" she thought now, "how cold his hand is! how cold his hand is!"

"If I hadn't felt her warm to touch, I should have been dreaming
to-night that I'd seen Mary's ghost." This was the grim fancy which
darkly troubled Mat's mind, at the very same moment when Madonna was
thinking how cold his hand was. He turned away impatiently from some
wine offered to him just then by Zack; and, looking vacantly into the
fire, drew his coat-cuff several times over his eyes and forehead.

The chill from the strange man's hand still lingered icily about
Madonna's fingers, and made her anxious, though she hardly knew why, to
leave the room. She advanced hastily to Valentine, and made the sign
which indicated Mrs. Blyth, by laying her hand on her heart; she then
pointed up-stairs. Valentine, understanding what she wanted, gave her
leave directly to return to his wife's room. Before Zack could make
even a gesture to detain her, she had slipped out of the studio, after
not having remained in it much longer than five minutes.

"Zack," whispered Mr. Blyth, as the door closed, "I am anything but
pleased with you for bringing Madonna down-stairs. You have broken
through all rule in doing so; and, besides that, you have confused your
friend by introducing her to him without any warning or preparation."

"Oh, that doesn't matter," interrupted young Thorpe. "He's not the sort
of man to want warning about anything. I apologize for breaking rules;
but as for Mat--why, hang it, Blyth, it's plain enough what has been
wrong with him since supper came in! He's fairly knocked up with doing
Hercules for you. You have kept the poor old Guy for near two hours
standing in one position, without a rag on his back; and then you
wonder--"

"Bless my soul! that never occurred to me. I'm afraid you're right,"
exclaimed Valentine. "Do let us make him take something hot and
comfortable! Dear, dear me! how ought one to mix grog?"

Mr. Blyth had been for some little time past trying his best to
compound a species of fiery and potential Squaw's Mixture for Mat. He
had begun the attempt some minutes before Madonna left the studio;
having found it useless to offer any explanations to his inattentive
guest of the meaning of the girl's signs and gestures with the slate
and tobacco-pouch. He had persevered in his hospitable endeavor all
through the whispered dialogue which had just passed between Zack and
himself; and he had now filled the glass nearly to the brim, when it
suddenly occurred to him that he had put sherry in at the top of the
tumbler, after having begun with brandy at the bottom; also that he had
altogether forgotten some important ingredient which he was, just then,
perfectly incapable of calling to mind.

"Here, Mat!" cried Zack. "Come and mix yourself something hot. Blyth's
been trying to do it for you, and can't."

Mat, who had been staring more and more vacantly into the fire all this
time, turned round again at last towards his friends at the supper
table. He started a little when he saw that Madonna was no longer in
the room--then looked aside from the door by which she had departed, to
the bureau. He had been pretty obstinately determined to get possession
of the Hair Bracelet from the first: but he was doubly and trebly
determined now.

"It's no use looking about for the young lady," said Zack; "you behaved
so clumsily and queerly, that you frightened her out of the room."

"No! no! nothing of the sort," interposed Valentine, good-naturedly.
"Pray take something to warm you. I am quite ashamed of my want of
consideration in keeping you standing so long, when I ought to have
remembered that you were not used to being a painter's model. I hope I
have not given you cold--"

"Given me cold?" repeated Mat, amazedly. He seemed about to add a
sufficiently indignant assertion of his superiority to any such
civilized bodily weakness, as a liability to catch cold--but just as
the words were on his lips, he looked fixedly at Mr. Blyth, and checked
himself.

"I am afraid you must be tired with the long sitting you have so kindly
given me," added Valentine.

"No," answered Mat, after a moment's consideration; "not tired. Only
sleepy. I'd best go home. What's o'clock?"

A reference to young Thorpe's watch showed that it was ten minutes past
ten. Mat held out his hand directly to take leave; but Valentine
positively refused to let him depart until he had helped himself to
something from the supper-table. Hearing this, he poured out a glass of
brandy and drank it off; then held out his hand once more, and said
good night.

"Well, I won't press you to stay against your will," said Mr. Blyth,
rather mournfully. "I will only thank you most heartily for your
kindness in sitting to me, and say that I hope to see you again when I
return from the country. Good bye, Zack. I shall start in the morning
by an early train. Pray, my dear boy, be steady, and remember your
mother and your promises, and call on Mr. Strather in good time
to-morrow, and stick to your work, Zack--for all our sakes, stick to
your work!"

As they left the studio, Mat cast one parting glance at the garden
door. Would the servant, who had most likely bolted and locked it early
in the evening, go near it again, before she went to bed? Would Mr.
Blyth walk to the bottom of the room to see that the door was safe,
after he had raked the fire out? Important questions these, which only
the events of the night could answer.

A little way down Kirk Street, at the end by which Zack and his friend
entered it on returning from Mr. Blyth's, stood the local theater--all
ablaze with dazzling gas, and all astir with loitering blackguards.
Young Thorpe stopped, as he and his companion passed under the portico,
on the way to their lodgings further up the street.

"It's only half-past ten, now," he said. "I shall drop in here, and see
the last scenes of the pantomime. Won't you come too?"

"No," said Mat; "I'm too sleepy. I shall go on home."

They separated. While Zack entered the theater, Mat proceeded steadily
in the direction of the tobacco shop. As soon, however, as he was well
out of the glare of gas from the theater door, he crossed the street;
and, returning quickly by the opposite side of the way, took the road
that led him back to Valentine's house.


CHAPTER XII.

THE HAIR BRACELET.

Mr. Blyth's spirits sank apace, as he bolted and locked the front door,
when his guests had left him. He actually sighed as he now took a turn
or two alone, up and down the studio.

Three times did he approach close to the garden door, as he walked
slowly from end to end of the room. But he never once looked up at it.
His thoughts were wandering after Zack, and Zack's friend; and his
attention was keeping them company. "Whoever this mysterious Mat may
be," mused Valentine, stopping at the fourth turn, and walking up to
the fireplace; "I don't believe there's anything bad about him; and so
I shall tell Mrs. Thorpe the next time I see her."

He set himself to rake out the fire, leaving only a few red embers and
tiny morsels of coal to flame up fitfully from time to time in the
bottom of the grate. Having done this, he stood and warmed himself for
a little while, and tried to whistle a favorite tune. The attempt was a
total failure. He broke down at the third bar, and ended lamentably in
another sigh.

"What can be the matter with me? I never felt so miserable about going
away from home before." Puzzling himself uselessly with such
reflections as these, he went to the supper-table, and drank a glass of
wine, picked a bit of a sandwich, and unnecessarily spoilt the
appearance of two sponge cakes, by absently breaking a small piece off
each of them. He was in no better humor for eating or drinking, than
for whistling; so he wisely determined to light his candle forthwith,
and go to bed.

After extinguishing the lights that had been burning on the
supper-table, he cast a parting glance all round the room, and was then
about to leave it, when the drawing of the old five-barred gate, which
he had taken down for Mat to look at, and had placed on a painting-stand
at the lower end of the studio, caught his eye. He advanced towards it
directly--stopped half-way--hesitated--yawned--shivered a little--thought
to himself that it was not worth while to trouble about hanging the
drawing up over the garden door, that night--and so, yawning again,
turned on his heel and left the studio.

Mr. Blyth's two servants slept up-stairs. About ten minutes after their
master had ascended to his bed-room, they left the kitchen for their
dormitory on the garret floor. Patty, the housemaid, stopped as she
passed the painting room, to look in, and see that the lights were out,
and the fire safe for the night. Polly, the cook, went on with the
bedroom candle; and, after having ascended the stairs as far as the
first landing from the hall, discreetly bethought herself of the garden
door, the general care and superintendence of which was properly
attached to her department in the household.

"I say, did you lock the garden door?" said Polly to Patty through the
banisters.

"Yes; I did it when I took up master's tea," said Patty to Polly,
appearing lazily in the hall, after one sleepy look round the
fast-darkening studio.

"Hadn't you better see to it again, to make sure?" suggested the
cautious cook.

"Hadn't _you?_ It's _your_ place," retorted the careless house-maid.

"Hush!" whispered Valentine, suddenly appearing on the landing above
Polly, from his bedroom, arrayed in his flannel dressing-gown and
nightcap. "Don't talk here, or you'll disturb your mistress. Go up to
bed, and talk there. Good night."

"Good night, sir," answered together the two faithful female dependents
of the house of Blyth, obeying their master's order with simpering
docility, and deferring to a future opportunity all further
considerations connected with the garden door.


JEAN. She knows nothing. But, good heavens, how you look!

JULIE. Why?

JEAN. You are pale as a ghost.

JULIE [Sighs]. Am I? Oh, the sun is rising, the sun!

JEAN. And now the troll's spell is broken.

JULIE. The trolls have indeed been at work this night. But, Jean,
listen--come with me, I have money enough.

JEAN. Plenty?

JULIE. Enough to start with. Go with me for I can't go alone-- today,
midsummer day. Think of the stuffy train, packed in with the crowds of
people staring at one; the long stops at the stations when one would
be speeding away. No, I cannot, I cannot! And then the memories,
childhood's memories of midsummer day--the church decorated with birch
branches and syringa blossoms; the festive dinner table with relations
and friends, afternoon in the park, music, dancing, flowers and
games--oh, one may fly, fly, but anguish and remorse follow in the
pack wagon.

JEAN. I'll go with you--if we leave instantly--before it's too
late.

JULIE. Go and dress then. [She takes up bird cage.]
JEAN. But no baggage! That would betray us.

JULIE. Nothing but what we can take in the coupé.

[Jean has picked up his hat.]
JEAN. What have you there?

JULIE. It's only my canary. I cannot, will not, leave it behind.

JEAN. So we are to lug a bird cage with us. Are you crazy? Let go of
it.

JULIE. It is all I take from home. The only living creature that cares
for me. Don't be hard--let me take it with me.

JEAN. Let go the cage and don't talk so loud. Kristin will hear
us.

JULIE.

No, I will not leave it to strange hands. I would rather see it dead.

JEAN. Give me the creature. I'll fix it.

JULIE. Yes, but don't hurt it. Don't--no, I cannot.

JEAN. Let go. I can.

JULIE [Takes the canary from cage]. Oh, my little siren.

Must your mistress part with you?

JEAN. Be so good as not to make a scene. Your welfare, your life, is at
stake. So--quickly. [Snatches bird from her and goes to chopping block
and takes up meat chopper]. You should have learned how to chop off a
chicken's head instead of shooting with a revolver. [He chops
off the bird's head]. Then you wouldn't swoon at a drop of
blood.

JULIE [Shrieks]. Kill me, too. Kill me! You who can butcher an innocent
bird without a tremble. Oh, how I shrink from you. I curse the moment
I first saw you.

I curse the moment I was conceived in my mother's womb.

JEAN. Come now! What good is your cursing, let's be off.

JULIE [Looks toward chopping block as though obsessed by thought of the
slain bird]. No, I cannot. I must see-- --hush, a carriage is passing.
Don't you think I can stand the sight of blood? You think I am weak. Oh,
I should like to see your blood flowing--to see your brain on the chopping
block, all your sex swimming in a sea of blood.

I believe I could drink out of your skull, bathe my feet in your breast
and eat your heart cooked whole. You think I am weak; you
believe that I love you because my life has mingled with yours; you
think that I would carry your offspring under my heart, and nourish
it with my blood--give birth to your child and take your name! Hear,
you, what are you called, what is your family name? But I'm sure you
have none. I should be "Mrs. Gate-Keeper," perhaps, or "Madame
Dumpheap." You dog with my collar on, you lackey with my father's
hallmark on your buttons. I play rival to my cook--oh--oh-- oh! You
believe that I am cowardly and want to run away. No, now I shall
stay. The thunder may roll. My father will return--and find his desk
broken into--his money gone! Then he will ring--that bell.
A scuffle with his servant--then sends for the police--and then I
tell all--everything!

Oh, it will be beautiful to have it all over with--if only that were the
end! And my father--he'll have a shock and die, and then that will be
the end. Then they will place his swords across the coffin--and the
Count's line is extinct. The serf's line will continue in an orphanage,
win honors in the gutter and end in prison.

JEAN.

Now it is the king's blood talking. Splendid, Miss Julie!
Only keep the miller in his sack.

[Enter Kristin with prayer-book in hand.]
JULIE [Hastening to Kristin and falls in her arms as though seeking
protection]. Help me, Kristin, help me against this man.

KRISTIN [Cold and unmoved]. What kind of performance is this for a
holy day morning? What does this mean--this noise and fuss?

JULIE. Kristin, you are a woman,--and my friend. Beware of this wretch.

JEAN [A little embarrassed and surprised].

While the ladies are arguing I'll go and shave myself.

[Jean goes, R.]
JULIE. You must understand me--you must listen to me.

KRISTIN. No--I can't understand all this bosh. Where may you be going
in your traveling dress?--and he had his hat on! Hey?

JULIE. Listen to me, Kristin, listen to me and I'll tell you
everything.

KRISTIN. I don't want to know anything--
JULIE. You must listen to me--
KRISTIN. What about? Is it that foolishness with Jean? That doesn't
concern me at all. That I won't be mixed up with, but if you're trying
to lure him to run away with you then we must put a stop to it.

JULIE [Nervously]. Try to be calm now Kristin, and listen to me. I can't
stay here and Jean can't stay here. That being true, we must leave--
--Kristin.

KRISTIN. Hm, hm!

JULIE [Brightening up]. But I have an idea--what if we three should
go--away--to foreign parts. To Switzerland and set up a hotel
together--I have money you see--and Jean and I would back the whole
thing, you could run the kitchen. Won't that be fine? Say yes, now--
and come with us--there everything would be arranged--say yes!
[Throws her arms around Kristin and coaxes her].

KRISTIN [Cold and reflecting]. Hm--hm!

JULIE [Presto tempo]. You leave never been out and traveled, Kristin. You
shall look about you in the world.

Yon can't believe how pleasant traveling on a train is--new faces
continually, new countries--and we'll go to Hamburg--and passing through
we'll see the zoological gardens--that you will like--then we'll go
to the theatre and hear the opera--and when we reach Munich there will
be the museum--there are Rubins and Raphaels and all the big painters
that you know--you have heard of Munich--where King Ludwig lived-- the
King, you know, who went mad. Then we'll see his palace--a palace like
those in the Sagas--and from there it isn't far to Switzerland--and
the Alps, the Alps mind you with snow in mid-summer. And there
oranges grow and laurel--green all the year round if--[Jean is
seen in the doorway R. stropping his razor on the strop which he
holds between his teeth and left hand.

He listens and nods his head favorably now and then. Julie continues,
tempo prestissimo] And there we'll take a hotel and I'll sit taking
the cash while Jean greets the guests--goes out and markets writes
letters--that will be life, you may believe--then the train
whistles--then the omnibus comes--then a bell rings upstairs, then
in the restaurant--and then I make out the bills--and I can salt them--you
can't think how people tremble when they receive their bill--and
you--you can sit like a lady--of course you won't have to stand over the
stove--you can dress finely and neatly when you show yourself to the
people--and you with your appearance--Oh, I'm not flattering, you
can catch a husband some fine day--a rich Englishman perhaps--they
are so easy to--[Slowing up] to catch-- --Then we'll be rich--and
then we'll build a villa by Lake Como--to be sure it rains
sometimes--but [becoming languid] the sun must shine too sometimes--
-- --although it seems dark-- -- --and if not--we can at least
travel homeward--and come back--here--or some other place.

KRISTIN. Listen now. Does Miss Julie believe in all this?

[Julie going to pieces.]
JULIE. Do I believe in it?

KRISTIN. Yes.

JULIE [Tired]. I don't know. I don't believe in anything any more.
[Sinks down on bench, and takes head in her hand on table.] In
nothing--nothing!

KRISTIN [Turns to R. and looks toward Jean]. So--you intended to run
away?

JEAN [Rather shamefaced comes forward and puts razor on table]. Run
away? That's putting it rather strong.

You heard Miss Julie's project, I think it might be carried out.

KRISTIN. Now listen to that! Was it meant that I should be her cook--
JEAN [Sharply]. Be so good as to use proper language when you speak
of your mistress.

              KRISTIN.

Mistress?

JEAN. Yes.

KRISTIN. No--hear! Listen to him!

JEAN. Yes, you listen--you need to, and talk less. Miss Julie is your
mistress and for the same reason that you do not respect her now you
should not respect yourself.

KRISTIN. I have always had so much respect for myself--
JEAN. That you never had any left for others!

KRISTIN. I have never lowered my position. Let any one say, if they
can, that the Count's cook has had anything to do with the riding
master or the swineherd. Let them come and say it!

JEAN. Yes, you happened to get a fine fellow. That was your good
luck.

KRISTIN. Yes, a fine fellow--who sells the Count's oats from
his stable.

JEAN. Is it for you to say anything--you who get a commission on all the
groceries and a bribe from the butcher?

KRISTIN. What's that?

JEAN. And you can't have respect for your master and mistress any
longer--you, you!

KRISTIN [Glad to change the subject].

Are you coming to church with me? You need a good sermon for your
actions.

JEAN. No, I'm not going to church today. You can go alone--and
confess your doings.

KRISTIN.

Yes, that I shall do, and I shall return with so much forgiveness
that there will be enough for you too.

The Savior suffered and died on the cross for all our sins, and when
we go to Him in faith and a repentant spirit he takes our sins on
Himself.

JULIE. Do you believe that, Kristin?

KRISTIN. That is my life's belief, as true as I stand here. And that was
my childhood's belief that I have kept since my youth, Miss Julie.

And where sin overflows, there mercy overflows also.

JULIE. Oh, if I only had your faith. Oh, if--

KRISTIN.

Yes, but you see that is not given without God's particular grace, and
that is not allotted to all, that!

JULIE. Who are the chosen?

KRISTIN. That is the great secret of the Kingdom of Grace, and the
Lord has no respect for persons. But there the last shall be
first.

JULIE.

But then has he respect for the last--the lowliest person?

KRISTIN [Continuing]. It is easier for a camel to pass through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven.

That's the way it is, Miss Julie.

However--now I am going--alone.
And on any way I shall stop in and tell the stable boy not to let any
horses go out in case any one wants to get away before the Count comes
home. Good bye.

[Exit Kristin.]
JEAN. Such a devil. And all this on account of your confounded canary!

JULIE [Tired]. Oh, don't speak of the canary--do you see any way out--any
end to this?

JEAN [Thinking]. No.

JULIE. What would you do in my place?

JEAN. In your place--wait. As a noble lady, as a woman--fallen--I don't
know. Yes, now I know.

JULIE [She takes up razor from table and makes gestures saying] This?

JEAN. Yes.

But _I_ should not do it, mark you, for there is a difference between
us.

JULIE. Because you are a man and I am a woman? What other difference
is there?

JEAN.

That very difference--of man and woman.

JULIE [Razor in hand].

I want to do it--but I can't.

My father couldn't either that time when he should have done it.

JEAN. No, he was right, not to do it--he had to avenge himself
first.

JULIE. And now my mother revenges herself again through me.

JEAN. Haven't you loved your father, Miss Julie?

JULIE. Yes, deeply. But I have probably hated him too, I must have--
without being aware of it.

And it is due to my father's training that I have learned to scorn my
own sex. Between them both they have made me half man, half woman. Whose
is the fault for what has happened--my father's? My mother's? My
own?

I haven't anything of my own. I haven't a thought which was not nay
father's--not a passion that wasn't my mother's. And last of all from
my betrothed the idea that all people are equal.

For that I now call him a wretch. How can it be my own fault then? Throw
the burden on Jesus as Kristin did? No, I am too proud, too
intelligent, thanks to my father's teaching.-- --And that a rich man
cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven--that is a lie, and Kristin, who
has money in the savings bank--she surely cannot enter there. Whose is
the fault?

What does it concern us whose fault it is?

It is I who must bear the burden and the consequences.

JEAN. Yes, but-- --
[Two sharp rings on bell are heard. Julie starts to her feet. Jean
changes his coat.]
JEAN. The Count--has returned. Think if Kristin has-- [Goes up to
speaking tube and listens.]
JULIE. Now he has seen the desk!

JEAN [Speaking in the tube]. It is Jean, Excellency. [Listens].
Yes, Excellency. [Listens] .Yes, Excellency,--right away-- immediately,
Excellency. Yes--in half an hour.

JULIE [In great agitation]. What did he say? In Heaven's name, what did
he say?

JEAN.

He wants his boots and coffee in a half hour.

JULIE. In half an hour then. Oh, I'm so tired--I'm incapable of feeling,
not able to be sorry, not able to go, not able to stay, not able
to live--not able to die.

Help me now. Command me--I will obey like a dog. Do me this last service
save my honor. Save his name. You know what I have the will to
do--but cannot do.

You will it and command me to execute your will.

JEAN.

I don't know why--but now I can't either.

--I don't understand myself.

It is absolutely as though this coat does it--but I can't command you
now. And since the Count spoke to me-- --I can't account for
it--but oh, it is that damned servant in my back--I believe if the
Count came in here now and told me to cut my throat I would do it
on the spot.

JULIE. Make believe you are he--and I you.

You could act so well a little while ago when you knelt at my feet.

Then you were a nobleman--or haven't you ever been at the theatre and
seen the hypnotist--[Jean nods] He says to his subject "Take the broom,"
and he takes it; he says, "Sweep," and he sweeps.

JEAN. Then the subject must be asleep!

JULIE [Ecstatically]. I sleep already. The whole room is like smoke before
me--and you are like a tall black stove, like a man clad in black
clothes with a high hat; and your eyes gleam like the hot coals
when the fire is dying; and your face a white spot like fallen ashes.

[The sunshine is coming in through the windows and falls on
Jean. Julie rubs her hands as though warming them before a fire].
It is so warm and good--and so bright and quiet!

JEAN [Takes razor and puts it in her hand]. There is the broom, go now
while it's bright--out to the hay loft--and--[He whispers in her ear.]

JULIE [Rousing herself]. Thanks. And now I go to rest. But tell me
this--the foremost may receive the gift of Grace?

Say it, even if you don't believe it.

JEAN. The foremost? No, I can't say that. But wait, Miss Julie--you
are no longer among the foremost since you are of the lowliest.

JULIE.

That's true, I am the lowliest--the lowliest of the lowly.

Oh, now I can't go. Tell me once more that I must go.

JEAN. No, now I cannot either--I cannot.

JULIE. And the first shall be last-- -- --

JEAN. Don't think. You take my strength from me, too, so that I become
cowardly.--What-- --I thought I heard the bell!-- -- No! To be afraid
of the sound of is bell! But it's not the bell--it's someone behind the
bell, the hand that sets the lull in motion--and something else that
sets the land in motion. But stop your cars, stop your ears. Then he
will only ring louder and keep on ringing until it's answered--and
then it is too late! Then come the police and then--[Two loud rings on
bell are heard, Jean falls in a heap for a moment, but straightens
up immediately.] It is horrible!

But there is no other way. Go!

[Countess Julie goes out resolutely.]
CURTAIN.

THE OUTLAW 

CHARACTERS
THORFINN, Erl of Iceland VALGERD, his wife GUNLÖD, their daughter
GUNNAR, a Crusader ORM, a minstrel, foster brother to Thorfinn A
THRALL A MESSENGER 
Action takes place in Iceland.
THE OUTLAW
[SCENE--A hut, door at back, window-holes, right and, left, closed
by big heavy wooden shutters. Wooden benches against walls, the
high bench, a sort of rude throne, at left. The uprights of this
high beach are carved with images of the gods Odin and Thor. From
the wall beams hang swords, battle axes and shields. Near the high
bench stands a harp. Gunlöd stands at an open window-hole peering
out; through the opening one gets a glimpse of the sea lighted by
the aurora borealis. Valgerd sits by the fire, which is in the
middle of the room, spinning.] 
VALGERD. Close the window-hole.
[Gunlöd is silent.] 
VALGERD. Gunlöd!
GUNLÖD. Did you speak, mother?

VALGERD. What are you doing?
GUNLÖD. I am watching the sea.
VALGERD. When will you learn to forget?
GUNLÖD. Take everything away from me but memories!
VALGERD. Look forward--not back.
GUNLÖD. Who reproaches the strong viking who looks back when he is
quitting his native strand?
VALGERD. You have had three winters to make your farewell.
GUNLÖD. You speak truly--three winters! For here never came a
summer!
VALGERD. When the floating ice melts, then shall spring be
here.

GUNLÖD. The Northern Lights melt no ice.
VALGERD. Nor your tears.

GUNLÖD. You never saw me weep.
VALGERD. But I have heard you. As long as you do that, you are a
child.

GUNLÖD. I am not a child.
VALGERD. If you would be a woman, suffer in silence.
GUNLÖD. I'll cast sorrow from me, mother.
VALGERD. No, no--bury it, as your deepest treasure. The seed must
not lie on top of the earth if it would sprout and ripen. You have
a deep sorrow. It should bear great gladness--and great peace.
GUNLÖD [After a pause]. I shall forget.

VALGERD. Everything?
GUNLÖD. I shall try.
VALGERD. Can you forget your father's hardness?
GUNLÖD. That I have forgotten.
VALGERD. Can you forget that there was a time when your fore-fathers'
dwelling stood on Brövikens' strand? Where the south wind sang in
the oak wood when the ice-bound seas ran free--where the hemlocks
gave forth their fragrance and the finches twittered among the
linden trees--and Balder, the God of spring and joy, lulled you to
sleep on the green meadows? Can you forget all this, while you
listen to the sea gulls' plaints on these bare rocks and cliffs,
and the cold storms out of the north howl through the stunted
birches?

GUNLÖD. Yes!
VALGERD. Can you forget the friend of your childhood from whom your
father tore you to save you from the white Christ?
GUNLÖD [in desperation]. Yes, yes!

VALGERD. You are weeping.
GUNLÖD [Disturbed]. Some one is walking out there. Perhaps father
is coming home.
VALGERD. Will you bear in mind every day without tears that we now
dwell in the land of ice--fugitives from the kingdom of Svea and
hated here by the Christ-men? But we have suffered no loss of
greatness, although we have not been baptized and kissed the bishop's
hand. Have you ever spoken to any of the Christians since we have
been here?
GUNLÖD [After a pause]. No. Tell me, mother, is it true that father
is to be Erl here in Iceland, too?
VALGERD. Don't let that trouble you, child.
GUNLÖD. Then I'm afraid he will fare badly with the Christians.
VALGERD. You fear that?

GUNLÖD. Some one is out there.
VALGERD [Anxiously]. Did you see the ship lying in the inlet this
morning?

GUNLÖD. With heart-felt gladness!
VALGERD. Bore it the figure-head of Thorfinn?
GUNLÖD. That I could not make out.

VALGERD. Have a care, girl.
GUNLÖD. Is it tonight that I may go out?
VALGERD. Tomorrow--that you know well.

GUNLÖD Mother!
VALGERD [Going]. Mind the fire. [Valgerd goes.]
[Gunlöd looks after her mother, then cautiously takes from her
breast a crucifix, puts it on the high bench and falls on her knees.]

GUNLÖD. Christ, Christ, forgive me the lie I told. [Springs up
noticing the images of the gods on the high bench.] No, I cannot
pray before these wicked images. [She looks for another place.]
Holy St. Olof, holy--oh, I can't remember how the bishop named
her!
God! God! Cast me not into purgatory for this sin! I will repeat
the whole long prayer of the monks--credo, credo--in patrem--oh, I
have forgotten that too. I shall give five tall candles for the
altar of the mother of God the next time I go to the chapel--Credo,
in patrem omnipotentem--[Kissing the crucifix eagerly.]
[A song is heard outside the hut accompanied by a lyre.]
A crusader went out to the Holy Land, O, Christ, take the maiden's
soul in hand, And to your kingdom bring her!
I'll return, mayhap, when the spruce trees bloom.
Summers three he wanders far from thee, Where nightingales sing
their delight, And masses he holds both day and night, At the holy
sepulchre's chapel.
I'll return, mayhap, when the spruce trees bloom.
When the palm trees bud on Jordan's strand, Then makes he a prayer
to God, That he may return to his native land, And press to his
heart his love.
I'll return, my love, when the spruce trees bloom.
GUNLÖD [At beginning of song springs up and then listens with more
and more agitation and eagerness. When the song is over she goes
toward door to bolt it, but so slowly that Gunnar is able to enter
before she slips the bolt. Gunnar is clad in the costume of a
crusader with a lyre swung across his shoulder.]
GUNNAR. Gunlöd! [They embrace. Gunlöd pulls away and goes toward
door.] You are afraid of me? What is it, Gunlöd?
GUNLÖD. You never took me in your arms before!
GUNNAR. We were children then!
GUNLÖD You are right--we were children then. What means that silver
falcon on your shield? I saw it on your ship's bow this morning,
too.
GUNNAR. You saw my ship--you knew my song, and you would have barred
the door against me! What am I to understand, Gunlöd?
GUNLÖD. Oh, ask me nothing! I am so unquiet of spirit but sit and
let me talk to you.

GUNNAR [Sits]. You are silent.
GUNLÖD. You are silent, too.
GUNNAR [Pulls her to his side]. Gunlöd, Gunlöd--has the snow fallen
so heavily that memories have been chilled even the mountains here
burst forth with fire--and you are cold as a snow wind--but speak--
speak! Why are you here in Iceland--and what has happened?
GUNLÖD. Terrible things--and more may follow if you stay here
longer.--[Springs up]. Go, before my father comes.
GUNNAR. Do you think I would leave you now--I, who have sought you
for long years? When I could not find you in the home land I went
to the wars against the Saracens to seek you the other side of the
grave. But my time had not yet come; when the fourth spring came,
I heard through wandering merchants that you were to be found
here.
Now I have found you--and you wish me to leave you in this heathen
darkness.

GUNLÖD. I am not alone!
GUNNAR. Your father does not love you--your mother does not understand
you, and they are both heathen.
GUNLÖD. I have friends among the Christians.
GUNNAR. Then you have become a Christian, Gunlöd!--the holy virgin
has heard my prayer.
GUNLÖD. Yes, yes! Oh, let me kiss the cross you bear on your
shoulder--that you got at the holy sepulchre!
GUNNAR. Now I give you a brother Christian's kiss--the first, Gunlöd,
you have from me.

GUNLÖD. You must never kiss me again.
GUNNAR. But tell me, how did you become a Christian?

GUNLÖD.She communicated this circumstance
(reproachfully, of course) to the housemaid, who answered (indignantly,
as was only natural) by reiterating her assertion of the past night,
that she had secured the door properly at six o'clock in the evening.
Polly, appealing to contradictory visible fact, rejoined that the thing
was impossible. Patty, holding fast to affirmatory personal knowledge,
retorted that the thing had been done. Upon this, the two had a violent
quarrel--followed by a sulky silence--succeeded by an affectionate
reconciliation--terminated by a politic resolution to say nothing more
about the matter, and especially to abstain from breathing a word in
connection with it to the ruling authorities above stairs. Thus it
happened that neither Valentine nor his wife knew anything of the
suspicious appearance presented that morning by the garden door.

But, though Mrs. Blyth was ignorant on this point, she was well enough
informed on another of equal, if not greater, domestic importance.
While her husband was down-stairs taking his early breakfast, Madonna
came into her room; and communicated confidentially all the particulars
of the terrible fright that she had suffered, while looking for her
bodkin-case in the studio, on the night before. How her candle could
possibly have gone out, as it did in an instant, she could not say. She
was quite sure that nobody was in the room when she entered it; and
quite sure that she felt no draught of wind in any direction--in short,
she knew nothing of her own experience, but that her candle suddenly
went out; that she remained for a little time, half dead with fright,
in the darkness; and that she then managed to grope her way back to her
bedroom, in which a night-light was always burning.

Mrs. Blyth followed the progress of this strange story on Madonna's
fingers with great interest to the end; and then--after suggesting that
the candle might have gone out through some defect in the make of it,
or might really have been extinguished by a puff of air which the girl
was too much occupied in looking for her bodkin-case to attend
to--earnestly charged her not to say a word on the subject of her
adventure to Valentine, when she went to help him in packing up his
painting materials. "He is nervous and uncomfortable enough already,
poor fellow, at the idea of leaving home," thought Mrs. Blyth; "and if
he heard the story about the candle going out, it would only make him
more uneasy still." To explain this consideration to Madonna was to
ensure her discretion. She accordingly kept her adventure in the studio
so profound a secret from Mr. Blyth, that he no more suspected what had
happened to her, than he suspected what had happened to the Hair
Bracelet, when he hastily assured himself that he was leaving his
bureau properly locked, by trying the lid of it the last thing before
going away.

Such were the circumstances under which Valentine left home. He was
not, however, the only traveler of the reader's acquaintance, whose
departure from London took place on the morning after the mysterious
extinguishing of Madonna's light in the painting-room. By a whimsical
coincidence, it so happened that, at the very same hour when Mr. Blyth
was journeying in one direction, to paint portraits, Mr. Matthew
Marksman (now, perhaps, also recognizable as Mr. Matthew Grice) was
journeying in another, to pay a second visit to Dibbledean.

Not a visit of pleasure by any means, but a visit of
business--business, which, in every particular, Mat had especially
intended to keep secret from Zack; but some inkling of which he had
nevertheless allowed to escape him, during his past night's
conversation with the lad in Kirk Street.

When young Thorpe and he met on the morning after that conversation, he
was sufficiently aware of the fact that his overdose of brandy had set
him talking in a very unguarded manner; and desired Zack, as bluntly as
usual, to repeat to him all that he had let out while the liquor was in
his head. After this request had been complied with, he volunteered no
additional confidences. He simply said that what had slipped from his
tongue was no more than the truth; but that he could add nothing to it,
and explain nothing about it, until he had first discovered whether
"Arthur Carr" were alive or dead. On being asked how, and when, he
intended to discover this, he answered that he was going into the
country to make the attempt that very morning; and that, if he
succeeded, he would, on his return, tell his fellow-lodger unreservedly
all that the latter might wish to know. Favored with this additional
promise, Zack was left alone in Kirk Street, to quiet his curiosity as
well as he could, with the reflection that he might hear something more
about his friend's secrets, when Mat returned from his trip to the
country.

In order to collect a little more information on the subject of these
secrets than was at present possessed by Zack, it will be necessary to
return for a moment to the lodgings in Kirk Street, at that particular
period of the night when Mr. Marksman was sitting alone in the front
room, and was holding the Hair Bracelet crumpled up tight in one of his
hands.

His first glance at the letters engraved on the clasp not only showed
him to whom the Bracelet had once belonged, but set at rest in his mind
all further doubt as to the identity of the young woman, whose face had
so startled and impressed him in Mr. Blyth's studio. He was neither
logical enough nor legal enough in his mode of reasoning, to see, that,
although he had found his sister's bracelet in Valentine's bureau, it
did not actually follow as a matter of proof--though it might as a
matter of suspicion--that he had also found his sister's child in
Valentine's house. No such objection as this occurred to him. He was
now perfectly satisfied that Madonna was what he had suspected her to
be from the first--Mary's child.

But to the next questions that he asked himself, concerning the girl's
unknown father, the answers were not so easy to be found:--Who was
Arthur Carr? Where was he? Was he still alive?

His first hasty suspicion that Valentine might have assumed the name of
Arthur Carr, and might therefore be the man himself, was set at rest
immediately by another look at the Bracelet. He knew that the lightest
in color, of the two kinds of hair of which it was made, was Carr's
hair, because it exactly resembled the surplus lock sent back by the
jeweler, and enclosed in Jane Holdsworth's letter. He made the
comparison and discovered the resemblance at a glance. The evidence of
his own eyesight, which was enough for this, was also enough to satisfy
him immediately that Arthur Carr's hair was, in color, as nearly as
possible the exact opposite of Mr. Blyth's hair.

Still, though the painter was assuredly not the father, might he not
know who the father was, or had been? How could he otherwise have got
possession of Mary Grice's bracelet and Mary Grice's child?

These two questions suggested a third in Mat's mind. Should he discover
himself at once to Mr. Blyth; and compel him, by fair means or foul, to
solve all doubts, and disclose what he knew?

No: not at once. That would be playing, at the outset, a desperate and
dangerous move in the game, which had best be reserved to the last.
Besides, it was useless to think of questioning Mr. Blyth just
now--except by the uncertain and indiscreet process of following him
into the country--for he had settled to take his departure from London,
early the next morning.

But it was now impossible to rest, after what had been already
discovered, without beginning, in one direction or another, the attempt
to find out Arthur Carr. Mat's purpose of doing this sprang from the
strongest of all resolutions--a vindictive resolution. That dangerous
part of the man's nature which his life among the savages and his
wanderings in the wild places of the earth had been stealthily
nurturing for many a long year past, was beginning to assert itself,
now that he had succeeded in penetrating the mystery of Madonna's
parentage by the mother's side. Placed in his position, the tender
thought of their sister's child would, at this particular crisis, have
been uppermost in many men's hearts. The one deadly thought of the
villain who had been Mary's ruin was uppermost in Mat's.

He pondered but a little while on the course that he should pursue,
before the idea of returning to Dibbledean, and compelling Joanna Grice
to tell more than she had told at their last interview, occurred to
him. He disbelieved the passage in her narrative which stated that she
had seen and heard nothing of Arthur Carr in all the years that had
elapsed since the flight and death of her niece: he had his own
conviction, or rather his own presentiment (which he had mentioned to
Zack), that the man was still alive somewhere; and he felt confident
that he had it in his power, as a last resource, to awe the old woman
into confessing everything that she knew. To Dibbledean, therefore, in
the first instance, he resolved to go.

If he failed there in finding any clue to the object of his inquiry, he
determined to repair next to Rubbleford, and to address himself boldly
to Mrs. Peckover. He remembered that, when Zack had first mentioned her
extraordinary behavior about the Hair Bracelet in Mr. Blyth's hall, he
had prefaced his words by saying, that she knew apparently as much of
Madonna's history as the painter did himself; and that she kept that
knowledge just as close and secret. This woman, therefore, doubtless
possessed information which she might be either entrapped or forced
into communicating. There would be no difficulty about finding out
where she lived; for, on the evening when he had mimicked her, young
Thorpe had said that she kept a dairy and muffin-shop at Rubbleford. To
that town, then, he proposed to journey, in the event of failing in his
purpose at Dibbledean.

And if, by any evil chance, he should end in ascertaining no more from
Mrs. Peckover than from Joanna Grice, what course should he take next?
There would be nothing to be done then, but to return to London--to try
the last great hazard--to discover himself to Mr. Blyth, come what
might, with the Hair Bracelet to vouch for him in his hand.

These were his thoughts, as he sat alone in the lodging in Kirk Street.
At night, they had ended in the fatal consolation of the brandy
bottle--in the desperate and solitary excess, which had so cheated him
of his self-control, that the lurking taint which his life among the
savages had left in his disposition, and the deadly rancor which his
recent discovery of his sister's fate had stored up in his heart,
escaped from concealment, and betrayed themselves in that half-drunken,
half-sober occupation of scouring the rifle-barrel, which it had so
greatly amazed Zack to witness, and which the lad had so suddenly and
strangely suspended by his few chance words of sympathizing reference
to Mary's death.

But, in the morning, Mat's head was clear, and his dangerous instincts
were held once more under cunning control. In the morning, therefore,
he declined explaining himself to young Thorpe, and started quietly for
the country by the first train.

On being set down at the Dibbledean Station, Mat lingered a little and
looked about him, just as he had lingered and looked on the occasion of
his first visit. He subsequently took the same road to the town which
he had then taken; and, on gaining the church, stopped, as he had
formerly stopped, at the churchyard-gate.

This time, however, he seemed to have no intention of passing the
entrance--no intention, indeed, of doing anything, unless standing
vacantly by the gate, and mechanically swinging it backwards and
forwards with both his hands, can be considered in the light of an
occupation. As for the churchyard, he hardly looked at it now. There
were two or three people, at a little distance, walking about among the
graves, who it might have been thought would have attracted his
attention; but he never took the smallest notice of them. He was
evidently meditating about something, for he soon began to talk to
himself--being, like most men who have passed much of their time in
solitude, unconsciously in the habit of thinking aloud.

"I wonder how many year ago it is, since she and me used to swing
back'ards and for'ards on this," he said, still pushing the gate slowly
to and fro. "The hinges used to creak then. They go smooth enough now.
Oiled, I suppose." As he said this, he moved his hands from the bar on
which they rested, and turned away to go on to the town; but stopped,
and walking back to the gate, looked attentively at its hinges--"Ah,"
he said, "not oiled. New."

"New," he repeated, walking slowly towards the High Street--"new since
my time, like everything else here. I wish I'd never come back--I wish
to God I'd never come back!"

On getting into the town, he stopped at the same place where he had
halted on his first visit to Dibbledean, to look up again, as he had
looked then, at the hosier's shop which had once belonged to Joshua
Grice. Here, those visible and tangible signs and tokens which he
required to stimulate his sluggish memory, were not very easy to
recognize. Though the general form of his father's old house was still
preserved, the re-painting and renovating of the whole front had
somewhat altered it, in its individual parts, to his eyes. He looked up
and down at the gables, and all along from window to window; and shook
his head discontentedly.

"New again here," he said. "I can't make out for certain which winder
it was Mary and me broke between us, when I come away from school, the
year afore I went to sea. Whether it was Mary that broke the winder,
and me that took the blame," he continued, slowly pursuing his way--"or
whether it was her that took the blame, and me that broke the winder, I
can't rightly call to mind. And no great wonder neither, if I've forgot
such a thing as that, when I can't even fix it for certain, yet,
whether she used to wear her Hair Bracelet or not, while I was at
home."

Communing with himself in this way, he reached the turning that led to
Joanna Grice's cottage.

His thoughts had thus far been straying away idly and uninterruptedly
to the past. They were now recalled abruptly to present emergencies by
certain unexpected appearances which met his eye, the moment he looked
down the lane along which he was walking.

He remembered this place as having struck him by its silence and its
loneliness, on the occasion of his first visit to Dibbledean. He now
observed with some surprise that it was astir with human beings, and
noisy with the clamor of gossiping tongues. All the inhabitants of the
cottages on either side of the road were out in their front gardens.
All the townspeople who ought to have been walking about the principal
streets, seemed to be incomprehensibly congregated in this one narrow
little lane. What were they assembled here to do? What subject was it
that men and women--and even children as well--were all eagerly talking
about?

Without waiting to hear, without questioning anybody, without appearing
to notice that he was stared at (as indeed all strangers are in rural
England), as if he were walking about among a breeched and petticoated
people in the character of a savage with nothing but war paint on him,
Mat steadily and rapidly pursued his way down the lane to Joanna
Grice's cottage. "Time enough," thought he, "to find out what all this
means, when I've got quietly into the house I'm bound for." As he
approached the cottage, he saw, standing at the gate, what looked, to
his eyes, like two coaches--one, very strange in form: both very
remarkable in color. All about the coaches stood solemn-looking
gentlemen; and all about the solemn-looking gentlemen, circled
inquisitively and excitably, the whole vagabond boy-and-girl population
of Dibbledean.

Amazed, and even bewildered (though he hardly knew why) by what he saw,
Mat hastened on to the cottage. Just as he arrived at the garden
paling, the door opened, and from the inside of the dwelling there
protruded slowly into the open air a coffin carried on four men's
shoulders, and covered with a magnificent black velvet pall.

Mat stopped the moment he saw the coffin, and struck his hand violently
on the paling by his side. "Dead!" he exclaimed under his breath.

"A friend of the late Miss Grice's?" asked a gently inquisitive voice
near him.

He did not hear. All his attention was fixed on the coffin, as it was
borne slowly over the garden path. Behind it walked two gentlemen,
mournfully arrayed in black cloaks and hat-bands. They carried white
handkerchiefs in their hands, and used them to wipe--not their
eyes--but their lips, on which the balmy dews of recent wine-drinking
glistened gently.

"Dix, and Nawby--the medical attendant of the deceased, and the
solicitor who is her sole executor," said the voice near Mat, in tones
which had ceased to be gently inquisitive, and had become complacently
explanatory instead. MUZA. We shall confound him yet.
Say, and speak quickly, whither went the king?
Thou knewest where was Julian.

ABD. I will tell Without his answer: yes, my friends; yes, Tarik,
Now will I speak, nor thou, for once, reply.
There is, I hear, a poor half-ruined cell In Xeres, whither few
indeed resort; Green are the walls within, green is the floor And
slippery from disuse; for Christian feet Avoid it, as half-holy,
half accursed.

Still in its dark recess fanatic sin Abases to the ground his tangled
hair, And servile scourges and reluctant groans Roll o'er the vault
uninterruptedly, Till, such the natural stillness of the place The
very tear upon the damps below Drops audible, and the heart's throb
replies.

There is the idol maid of Christian creed, And taller images, whose
history I know not, nor inquired--a scene of blood, Of resignation
amid mortal pangs, And other things, exceeding all belief.
Hither the aged Opas of Seville Walked slowly, and behind him was a man
Barefooted, bruised, dejected, comfortless, In sackcloth; the
white ashes on his head Dropped as he smote his breast; he gathered up,
Replaced them all, groaned deeply, looked to heaven, And held them,
like a treasure, with clasped hands.

EGI. Oh! was Roderigo so abased?

MUZA. 'Twas he.
Now, Egilona, judge between your friends And enemies; behold what wretches
brought The king, thy lord, Roderigo, to disgrace.

EGI. He merited--but not from them--from me This, and much worse: had I
inflicted it, I had rejoiced--at what I ill endure.

MUZA. For thee, for thee alone, we wished him here, But other hands
released him -
ABD. With what aim Will soon appear to those discerning eyes.
EGI. I pray thee, tell what passed until that hour.
ABD. Few words, and indistinct; repentant sobs Filled the whole
space, the taper in his hand, Lighting two small dim lamps before
the altar, He gave to Opas; at the idol's feet He laid his crown,
and wiped his tears away:
The crown reverts not, but the tears return.No: not a step. The hearse rolled on slowly towards the churchyard, and
the sight-seers in the lane followed it; but Matthew Grice stood by the
garden paling, at the place where he had halted from the first. What
was her death to him? Nothing but the loss of his first chance of
tracing Arthur Carr. Tearlessly and pitilessly she had left it to
strangers to bury her brother's daughter; and now, tearlessly and
pitilessly, there stood her brother's son, leaving it to strangers to
bury _her._

"Don't you mean to follow to the churchyard, and see the last of it?"
inquired the same inquisitive voice, which had twice already endeavored
to attract Mat's attention.

He turned round this time to look at the speaker, and confronted a
wizen, flaxen-haired, sharp-faced man, dressed in a jaunty
shooting-jacket, carrying a riding-cane in his hand, and having a
thorough-bred black-and-tan terrier in attendance at his heels.

"Excuse me asking the question," said the wizen man; "but I noticed how
dumbfoundered you were when you saw the coffin come out. 'A friend of
the deceased,' I thought to myself directly--"

"Well," interrupted Mat, gruffly, "suppose I am; what then?"

"Will you oblige me by putting this in your pocket?" asked the wizen
man, giving Mat a card. "My name's Tatt, and I've recently started in
practice here as a solicitor. I don't want to ask any improper
questions, but, being a friend of the deceased, you may perhaps have
some claim on the estate; in which case, I should feel proud to take
care of your interests. It isn't strictly professional, I know, to be
touting for the chance of a client in this way; but I'm obliged to do
it in self-defense. Dix, Nawby, Millbury, and Gutteridge, all play into
one another's hands, and want to monopolize among 'em the whole
Doctoring, Lawyering, Undertaking, and Licensed Victualling business of
Dibbledean. I've made up my mind to break down Nawby's monopoly, and
keep as much business out of his office as I can. That's why I take
time by the forelock, and give you my card." Here Mr. Tatt left off
explaining, and began to play with his terrier.

Mat looked up thoughtfully at Joanna Grice's cottage. Might she not, in
all probability, have left some important letters behind her? And, if
he mentioned who he was, could not the wizen man by his side help him
to get at them?

"A good deal of mystery about the late Miss Grice," resumed Mr. Tatt,
still playing with the terrier. "Nobody but Dix and Nawby can tell
exactly when she died, or how she's left her money. Queer family
altogether. (Rats, Pincher! where are the rats?) There's a son of old
Grice's, who has never, they say, been properly accounted for. (Hie,
boy! there's a cat! hie after her, Pincher!) If he was only to turn up
now, I believe, between ourselves, it would put such a spoke in Nawby's
wheel--"

"I may have a question or two to ask you one of these days," interposed
Mat, turning away from the garden paling at last. While his new
acquaintance had been speaking, he had been making up his mind that he
should best serve his purpose of tracing Arthur Carr, by endeavoring
forthwith to get all the information that Mrs. Peckover might be able
to afford him. In the event of this resource proving useless, there
would be plenty of time to return to Dibbledean, discover himself to
Mr. Tatt, and ascertain whether the law would not give to Joshua
Grice's son the right of examining Joanna Grice's papers.

"Come to my office," cried Mr. Tatt, enthusiastically. "I can give you
a prime bit of Stilton, and as good a glass of bitter beer as ever you
drank in your life."

Mat declined this hospitable invitation peremptorily, and set forth at
once on his return to the station. All Mr. Tatt's efforts to engage him
for an "early day," and an "appointed hour," failed. He would only
repeat, doggedly, that at some future time he might have a question or
two to ask about a matter of law, and that his new acquaintance should
then be the man to whom he would apply for information.

They wished each other "good morning" at the entrance of the lane,--Mr.
Tatt lounging slowly up the High Street, with his terrier at his heels;
and Mat walking rapidly in the contrary direction, on his way back to
the railway station.

As he passed the churchyard, the funeral procession had just arrived at
its destination, and the bearers were carrying the coffin from the
hearse to the church door. He stopped a little by the road-side to see
it go in. "She was no good to anybody about her, all her lifetime," he
thought bitterly, as the last heavy fold of the velvet pall was lost to
view in the darkness of the church entrance. "But if she'd only lived a
day or two longer, she might have been of some good to me. There's more
of what I wanted to know nailed down along with her in that coffin,
than ever I'm likely to find out anywhere else. It's a long hunt of
mine, this is--a long hunt on a dull scent; and her death has made it
duller." With this farewell thought, he turned from the church.

As he pursued his way back to the railroad, he took Jane Holdsworth's
letter out of his pocket, and looked at the hair enclosed in it. It was
the fourth or fifth time he had done this during the few hours that had
passed since he had possessed himself of Mary's Bracelet. From that
period there had grown within him a vague conviction, that the
possession of Carr's hair might in some way lead to the discovery of
Carr himself. He knew perfectly well that there was not the slightest
present or practical use in examining this hair, and yet, there was
something that seemed to strengthen him afresh in his purpose, to
encourage him anew after his unexpected check at Dibbledean, merely in
the act of looking at it. "If I can't track him no other way," he
muttered, replacing the hair in his pocket, "I've got the notion into
my head, somehow, that I shall track him by this."

Mat found it no very easy business to reach Rubbleford. He had to go
back a little way on the Dibbledean line, then to diverge by a branch
line, and then to get upon another main line, and travel along it some
distance before he reached his destination. It was dark by the time he
reached Rubbleford. However, by inquiring of one or two people, he
easily found the dairy and muffin-shop when he was once in the town;
and saw, to his great delight, that it was not shut up for the night.
He looked in at the window, under a plaster cast of a cow, and observed
by the light of one tallow candle burning inside, a chubby, buxom girl
sitting at the counter, and either drawing or writing something on a
slate. Entering the shop, after a moment or two of hesitation, he asked
if he could see Mrs. Peckover.

"Mother went away, sir, three days ago, to nurse uncle Bob at
Bangbury," answered the girl.

(Here was a second check--a second obstacle to defer the tracing of
Arthur Carr! It seemed like a fatality!)

"When do you expect her back?" asked Mat.

"Not for a week or ten days, sir," answered the girl. "Mother said she
wouldn't have gone, but for uncle Bob being her only brother, and not
having wife or child to look after him at Bangbury."

_(Bangbury!_--Where had he heard that name before?)

"Father's up at the rectory, sir," continued the girl, observing that
the stranger looked both disappointed and puzzled. "If it's dairy
business you come upon, I can attend to it; but it's anything about
accounts to settle, mother said they were to be sent on to her."

"Maybe I shall have a letter to send your mother," said Mat, after a
moment's consideration. "Can you write me down on a bit of paper where
she is?"

"Oh, yes, sir." And the girl very civilly and readily wrote in her best
round hand, on a slip of bill-paper, this address:--"Martha Peckover,
at Rob: Randle, 2 Dawson's Buildings, Bangbury."

Mat absently took the slip of paper from her, and put it into his
pocket; then thanked the girl, and went out. While he was inside the
shop, he had been trying in vain to call to mind where he had heard the
name of Bangbury before: the moment he was in the street, the lost
remembrance came back to him. Surely, Bangbury was the place where
Joanna Grice had told him that Mary was buried!

After walking a few paces, he came to a large linen-draper's shop, with
plenty of light in the window. Stopping here, he hastily drew from his
pocket the manuscript containing the old woman's "Justification" of her
conduct; for he wished to be certain about the accuracy of his
recollection, and he had an idea that the part of the Narrative which
mentioned Mary's death would help to decide him in his present doubt.

Yes! on turning to the last page, there it was written in so many
words: "I sent, by a person I could depend on, money enough to bury her
decently in Bangbury churchyard."

"I'll go there to-night," said Mat to himself, thrusting the letter
into his pocket, and taking the way back to the railway station
immediately.


CHAPTER XIV.

MARY'S GRAVE.

Matthew Grice was a resolute traveler; but no resolution is powerful
enough to alter the laws of inexorable Time-Tables to suit the
convenience of individual passengers. Although Mat left Rubbleford in
less than an hour after he had arrived there, he only succeeded in
getting half way to Bangbury, before he had to stop for the night, and
wait at an intermediate station for the first morning train on what was
termed the Trunk Line. By this main railroad he reached his destination
early in the forenoon, and went at once to Dawson's Buildings.

"Mrs. Peckover has just stepped out, sir--Mr. Randle being a little
better this morning--for a mouthful of fresh air. She'll be in again in
half-an-hour," said the maid-of-all-work who opened Mr. Randle's door.

Mat began to suspect that something more than mere accident was
concerned in keeping Mrs. Peckover and himself asunder. "I'll come
again in half-an-hour," he said--then added, just as the servant was
about to shut the door:--"Which is my way to the church?"

Bangbury church was close at hand, and the directions he received for
finding it were easy to follow. But when he entered the churchyard, and
looked about him anxiously to see where he should begin searching for
his sister's grave, his head grew confused, and his heart began to fail
him. Bangbury was a large town, and rows and rows of tombstones seemed
to fill the churchyard bewilderingly in every visible direction.

At a little distance a man was at work opening a grave, and to him Mat
applied for help; describing his sister as a stranger who had been
buried somewhere in the churchyard better than twenty years ago. The
man was both stupid and surly, and would give no advice, except that it
was useless to look near where he was digging, for they were all
respectable townspeople buried about there.

Mat walked round to the other side of the church. Here the graves were
thicker than ever; for here the poor were buried. He went on slowly
through them, with his eyes fixed on the ground, towards some trees
which marked the limits of the churchyard; looking out for a place to
begin his search in, where the graves might be comparatively few, and
where his head might not get confused at the outset. Such a place he
found at last, in a damp corner under the trees. About this spot the
thin grass languished; the mud distilled into tiny water-pools; and the
brambles, briars, and dead leaves lay thickly and foully between a few
ragged turf-mounds. Could they have laid her here? Could this be the
last refuge to which Mary ran after she fled from home?

A few of the mounds had stained moldering tomb-stones at their heads.
He looked at these first; and finding only strange names on them,
turned next to the mounds marked out by cross-boards of wood. At one of
the graves the cross-board had been torn, or had rotted away, from its
upright supports, and lay on the ground weather-stained and split, but
still faintly showing that it had once had a few letters cut in it. He
examined this board to begin with, and was trying to make out what the
letters were, when the sound of some one approaching disturbed him. He
looked up, and saw a woman walking slowly towards the place where he
was standing.

It was Mrs. Peckover herself! She had taken a prescription for her sick
brother to the chemist's--had bought him one or two little things he
wanted in the High Street--and had now, before resuming her place at
his bedside, stolen a few minutes to go and look at the grave of
Madonna's mother. It was many, many years since Mrs. Peckover had last
paid a visit to Bangbury churchyard.

She stopped and hesitated when she first caught sight of Mat; but,
after a moment or two, not being a woman easily baulked in anything
when she had once undertaken to do it, continued to advance, and never
paused for the second time until she had come close to the grave by
which Mat stood, and was looking him steadily in the face, exactly
across it.

He was the first to speak. "Do you know whose grave this is?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," answered Mrs. Peckover, glancing indignantly at the broken
board and the mud and brambles all about it. "Yes, sir, I _do_ know;
and, what's more, I know that it's a disgrace to the parish. Some weeks
or months after the injury, the patient complains of increasing hyperæsthesia
and of neuralgic pains in the course of the nerve.

The nerve is very sensitive to pressure, and, if superficial, may
be felt to be swollen.

The associated muscles are wasted and weak, and are subject to twitchings.
There are also trophic disturbances. It is rare to have complete sensory
and motor paralysis.

The disease is commonest in the nerves of the upper extremity,
and the hand may become crippled and useless.

_Treatment._--Any constitutional condition which predisposes to neuritis,
such as gout, diabetes, or syphilis, must receive appropriate
treatment.

The symptoms may be relieved by rest and by soothing applications,
such as belladonna, ichthyol, or menthol, by the use of hot-air and
electric baths, and in obstinate cases by blistering or by the
application of Corrigan's button.

When such treatment fails the nerve may be stretched, or, in the case
of a purely sensory trunk, a portion may be excised.

Local causes, such as involvement of the nerve in a scar or in
adhesions, may afford indications for operative treatment.

#Multiple Peripheral Neuritis.#--Although this disease mainly comes under
the cognizance of the physician, it may be attended with phenomena
which call for surgical interference. In this country it is commonly
due to alcoholism, but it may result from diabetes or from chronic
poisoning with lead or arsenic, or from bacterial infections and
intoxications such as occur in diphtheria, gonorrhoea, syphilis,
leprosy, typhoid, influenza, beri-beri, and many other diseases.

It is, as a rule, widely distributed throughout the peripheral
nerves, but the distribution frequently varies with the cause--the
alcoholic form, for example, mainly affecting the legs, the diphtheritic
form the soft palate and pharynx, and that associated with lead
poisoning the forearms.

The essential lesion is a degeneration of the conducting fibres of
the affected nerves, and the prominent symptoms are the result
of this. In alcoholic neuritis there is great tenderness of the
muscles.
When the legs are affected the patient may be unable to walk, and the
toes may droop and the heel be drawn up, resulting in one variety of
pes equino-varus.

Pressure sores and perforating ulcer of the foot are the most important
trophic phenomena.

Apart from the medical _treatment_, measures must be taken to prevent
deformity, especially when the legs are affected. The bedclothes are
supported by a cage, and the foot maintained at right angles to
the leg by sand-bags or splints.

When the disease is subsiding, the nutrition of the damaged nerves and
muscles should be maintained by massage, baths, passive movements,
and the use of the galvanic current.

When deformity has been allowed to take place, operative measures may
be required for its correction.

NEUROMA[5]
[5] We have followed the classification adopted by Alexis Thomson in
his work _On Neuroma, and Neuro-fibromatosis_ (Edinburgh: 1900).

Neuroma is a clinical term applied to all tumours, irrespective of their
structure, which have their seat in nerves.

A tumour composed of newly formed nerve tissue is spoken of as a #true
neuroma#; when ganglionic cells are present in addition to nerve
fibres, the name _ganglionic neuroma_ is applied.

These tumours are rare, and are chiefly met with in the main
cords or abdominal plexuses of the sympathetic system of children
or young adults. They are quite insensitive, and their removal is only
called for if they cause pain or show signs of malignancy.

A #false neuroma# is an overgrowth of the sheath of a nerve. This overgrowth
may result in the formation of a circumscribed tumour, or may take the
form of a diffuse fibromatosis.

_The circumscribed or solitary tumour_ grows from the sheath of a nerve
which is otherwise healthy, and it may be innocent or malignant.

_The innocent_ form is usually fibrous or myxomatous, and is
definitely encapsulated. It may become cystic as a result of
hæmorrhage or of myxomatous degeneration.

It grows very slowly, is usually elliptical in shape, and the solid form
is rarely larger than a hazel-nut. The nerve fibres may be spread out
all round the tumour, or may run only on one side of it. When subcutaneous
and related to the smaller unnamed cutaneous nerves, it is known as
a _painful subcutaneous nodule_ or _tubercle_. It is chiefly met with
about the ankle, and most often in women. It is remarkably sensitive,
even gentle handling causing intense pain, which usually radiates to
the periphery of the nerve affected.
When related to a deeper, named nerve-trunk, it is known as a
_trunk-neuroma_.

It is usually less sensitive than the "subcutaneous nodule," and rarely
gives rise to motor symptoms unless it involves the nerve roots where
they pass through bony canals.

A trunk-neuroma is recognised clinically by its position in the line
of a nerve, by the fact that it is movable in the transverse axis of
the nerve but not in its long axis, and by being unduly painful
and sensitive.

[Illustration: FIG. 85.--Amputation Stump of Upper Arm, showing bulbous
thickening of the ends of the nerves, embedded in scar tissue at
the apex of the stamp.]

_Treatment.

_--If the tumour causes suffering it should be removed, preferably by
shelling it out from the investing nerve sheath or capsule. In the
subcutaneous nodule the nerve is rarely recognisable, and is usually
sacrificed.

When removal of the tumour is incomplete, a tube of radium should be
inserted into the cavity, to prevent recurrence of the tumour in a
malignant form.

_The malignant neuroma_ is a sarcoma growing from the sheath of a
nerve.

It has the same characters and clinical features as the innocent variety,
only it grows more rapidly, and by destroying the nerve fibres causes
motor symptoms--jerkings followed by paralysis.

The sarcoma tends to spread along the lymph spaces in the long axis
of the nerve, as well as to implicate the surrounding tissues, and it
is liable to give rise to secondary growths. The malignant neuroma is
met with chiefly in the sciatic and other large nerves of the limbs.

The _treatment_ is conducted on the same lines as sarcoma in other
situations; the insertion of a tube of radium after removal of the
tumour diminishes the tendency to recurrence; a portion of the
nerve-trunk being sacrificed, means must be taken to bridge the gap.
In inoperable cases it may be possible to relieve pain by excising a
portion of the nerve above the tumour, or, when this is impracticable,
by resecting the posterior nerve roots and their ganglia within
the vertebral canal.

The so-called _amputation neuroma_ has already been referred to (p.
344).

_Diffuse or Generalised Neuro-Fibromatosis--Recklinghausen's
Disease._--These terms are now used to include what were formerly known
as "multiple neuromata," as well as certain other overgrowths related
to nerves.

The essential lesion is an overgrowth of the endoneural connective
tissue throughout the nerves of both the cerebro-spinal and sympathetic
systems. The nerves are diffusely and unequally thickened, so that small
twigs may become enlarged to the size of the median, while at irregular
intervals along their course the connective-tissue overgrowth is
exaggerated so as to form tumour-like swellings similar to the
trunk-neuroma already described.

The tumours, which vary greatly in size and number--as many as a thousand
have been counted in one case--are enclosed in a capsule derived from
the perineurium.

The fibromatosis may also affect the cranial nerves, the ganglia
on the posterior nerve roots, the nerves within the vertebral canal,
and the sympathetic nerves and ganglia, as well as the continuations
of the motor nerves within the muscles.

The nerve fibres, although mechanically displaced and dissociated by the
overgrown endoneurium, undergo no structural change except when
compressed in passing through a bony canal.

The disease probably originates before birth, although it may not make
its appearance till adolescence or even till adult life.

It is sometimes met with in several members of one family. It is recognised
clinically by the presence of multiple tumours in the course of
the nerves, and sometimes by palpable enlargement of the superficial
nerve-trunks (Fig. 86).

The tumours resemble the solitary trunk-neuroma, are usually quite
insensitive, and many of them are unknown to the patient.

As a result of injury or other exciting cause, however, one or other
tumour may increase in size and become extremely sensitive; the pain is
then agonising; it is increased by handling, and interferes with
sleep.

In these conditions, a malignant transformation of the fibroma into
sarcoma is to be suspected.

Motor disturbances are exceptional, unless in the case of tumours within
the vertebral canal, which press on the spinal medulla and cause
paraplegia.

[Illustration: FIG. 86.--Diffuse enlargement of Nerves in generalised
Neuro-fibromatosis.

(After R. W. Smith.)]
Neuro-fibromatosis is frequently accompanied by _pigmentation of the
skin_ in the form of brown spots or patches scattered over the
trunk.

The disease is often stationary for long periods. In progressive cases
the patient becomes exhausted, and usually dies of some intercurrent
affection, particularly phthisis. The treatment is restricted to
relieving symptoms and complications; removal of one of the tumours
is to be strongly deprecated.

In a considerable proportion of cases one of the multiple tumours
takes on the characters of a malignant growth ("secondary malignant
neuroma," Garrè).

This malignant transformation may follow upon injury, or on an
unsuccessful attempt to remove the tumour. The features are those of
a rapidly growing sarcoma involving a nerve-trunk, with agonising pain
and muscular cramps, followed by paralysis from destruction of the
nerve fibres.

The removal of the tumour is usually followed by recurrence, so that high
amputation is the only treatment to be recommended. Metastasis to
internal organs is exceptional.

[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Plexiform Neuroma of small Sciatic Nerve,
from a girl æt. 16.

(Mr. Annandale's case.)]
There are other types of neuro-fibromatosis which require brief
mention.

_The plexiform neuroma_ (Fig. 87) is a fibromatosis confined to the
distribution of one or more contiguous nerves or of a plexus of nerves,
and it may occur either by itself or along with multiple
tumours of the nerve-trunks and with pigmentation of the skin. The
clinical features are those of an ill-defined swelling composed of
a number of tortuous, convoluted cords, lying in a loose areolar
tissue and freely movable on one another.

It is rarely the seat of pain or tenderness. It most often appears in
the early years of life, sometimes in relation to a pigmented or hairy
mole.

It is of slow growth, may remain stationary for long periods, and has
little or no tendency to become malignant.

It is usually subcutaneous, and is frequently situated on the head or
neck in the distribution of the trigeminal or superficial cervical
nerves. There is no necessity for its removal, but this may be indicated
because of disfigurement, especially on the face or scalp or because
its bulk interferes with function. When involving the ophthalmic
division of the trigeminus, for example, it may cause enlargement of the
upper lid and proptosis, with danger to the function of the globe. The
results of excision are usually satisfactory, even if the removal is
not complete.

[Illustration: FIG. 88.--Multiple Neuro-fibromas of Skin (Molluscum
fibrosum, or Recklinghausen's disease).]
_The cutaneous neuro-fibroma_ or _molluscum fibrosum_ has been shown
by Recklinghausen to be a soft fibroma related to the terminal
filaments of one of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 88).

The disease appears in the form of multiple, soft, projecting tumours,
scattered all over the body, except the palms of the hands and soles
of the feet. The tumours are of all sizes, some being no larger than a
pin's head, whilst many are as big as a filbert and a few even larger.
Many are sessile and others are distinctly pedunculated, but all are
covered with skin. They are mobile, soft to the touch, and of the
consistence of firm fat. In exceptional cases one of the skin tumours
may attain an enormous size and cause a hideous deformity, hanging
down by its own weight in lobulated or folded masses (pachy-dermatocele).
The treatment consists in removing the larger swellings.

In some cases molluscum fibrosum is associated with pigmentation
of the skin and with multiple tumours of the nerve-trunks.

The small multiple tumours rarely call for interference.

[Illustration: FIG. 89.--Elephantiasis Neuromatosa in a woman æt. 28]

_Elephantiasis neuromatosa_ is the name applied by Virchow to a
condition in which a limb is swollen and misshapen as a result of
the extension of a neuro-fibromatosis to the skin and subcutaneous
cellular tissue of the extremity as a whole (Fig. 89).

It usually begins in early life without apparent cause, and it may be
associated with multiple tumours of the nerve-trunks. The inconvenience
caused by the bulk and weight of the limb may justify its removal.

SURGERY OF THE INDIVIDUAL NERVES[6]
[6] We desire here to acknowledge our indebtedness to Mr.

James Sherren's work on _Injuries of Nerves and their Treatment_.

#The Brachial Plexus.#--Lesions of the brachial plexus may be divided
into those above the clavicle and those below that bone.

In the #supra-clavicular injuries#, the violence applied to the head
or shoulder causes over-stretching of the anterior branches (primary
divisions) of the cervical nerves, the fifth, or the fifth and sixth
being those most liable to suffer.

Sometimes the traction is exerted upon the plexus from below, as when a
man in falling from a height endeavours to save himself by clutching
at some projection, and the lesion then mainly affects the first
dorsal nerve.

There is tearing of the nerve sheaths, with hæmorrhage, but in
severe cases partial or complete severance of nerve fibres may occur
and these give way at different levels.

During the healing process an excess of fibrous tissue is formed,
which may interfere with regeneration.

_Post-anæsthetic paralysis_ occurs in patients in whom, during the course
of an operation, the arm is abducted and rotated laterally or
extended above the head, causing over-stretching of the plexus,
especially of the fifth, or fifth and sixth, anterior branches.

A _cervical rib_ may damage the plexus by direct pressure, the part
usually affected being the medial cord, which is made up of fibres
from the eighth cervical and first dorsal nerves.

When a lesion of the plexus complicates a _fracture of the clavicle_,
the nerve injury is due, not to pressure on or laceration of the nerves
by fragments of bone, but to the violence causing the fracture,
and this is usually applied to the point of the shoulder.

Penetrating _wounds_, apart from those met with in military practice,
are rare.

In the #infra-clavicular injuries#, the lesion most often results
from the pressure of the dislocated head of the humerus; occasionally
from attempts made to reduce the dislocation by the heel-in-the-axilla
method, or from fracture of the upper end of the humerus or of the neck
of the scapula. The whole plexus may suffer, but more frequently
the medial cord is alone implicated.

_Clinical Features._--Three types of lesion result from indirect violence:
the whole plexus; the upper-arm type; and the lower-arm type.

_When the whole plexus is involved_, sensibility is lost over the
entire forearm and hand and over the lateral surface of the arm in
its distal two-thirds. All the muscles of the arm, forearm, and hand
are paralysed, and, as a rule, also the pectorals and spinati, but
the rhomboids and serratus anterior escape.

There is paralysis of the sympathetic fibres to the eye and orbit,
with narrowing of the palpebral fissure, recession of the globe, and
the pupil is slow to dilate when shaded from the light.

retorted Mat, fiercely; "and you're not dead; and you
and me are as old as him. Don't tell me he's dead again! I say he's
alive; and, by God, I'll be even with him!"

"Oh, don't talk so, don't! It's shocking to hear you and see you," said
Mrs. Peckover, recoiling from the expression of his eye at that moment,
just as she had recoiled from it already over Mary's grave. "Suppose he
is alive, why should you go taking vengeance into your own hands after
all these years? Your poor sister's happy in heaven; and her child's
took care of by the kindest people, I do believe, that ever drew breath
in this world. Why should you want to be even with him now? If he
hasn't been punished already, I'll answer for it he will be--in the
next world, if not in this. Don't talk about it, or think about it any
more, that's a good man! Let's be friendly and pleasant together
again--like we were just now--for Mary's sake. Tell me where you've
been to all these years. How is it you've never turned up before? Come!
tell me, do."

She ended by speaking to him in much the same tone which she would have
made use of to soothe a fractious child. But her instinct as a woman
guided her truly: in venturing on that little reference to "Mary," she
had not ventured in vain. It quieted him, and turned aside the current
of his thoughts into the better and smoother direction. "Didn't she
never talk to you about having a brother as was away aboard ship?" he
asked, anxiously.

"No. She wouldn't say a word about any of her friends, and she didn't
say a word about you. But how did you come to be so long away?--that's
what I want to know," said Mrs. Peckover, pertinaciously repeating her
question, partly out of curiosity, partly out of the desire to keep him
from returning to the dangerous subject of Arthur Carr.

"I was alway a bitter bad 'un, _I_ was," said Matthew, meditatively.
"There was no keeping of me straight, try it anyhow you like. I bolted
from home, I bolted from school, I bolted from aboard ship--"

"Why? What for?"

"Partly because I was a bitter bad 'un, and partly because of a letter
I picked up in port, at the Brazils, at the end of a long cruise.
Here's the letter--but it's no good showing it to you: the paper's so
grimed and tore about, you can't read it."

"Who wrote it? Mary?"

"No: father--saying what had happened to Mary, and telling me not to
come back home till things was pulled straight again. Here--here's what
he said--under the big grease-spot. 'If you can get continued
employment anywhere abroad, accept it instead of coming back. Better
for you, at your age, to be spared the sight of such sorrow as we are
now suffering.' Do you see that?"

"Yes, yes, I see. Ah! poor man! he couldn't give no kinder better
advice; and you--"

"Deserted from my ship. The devil was in me to be off on the tramp, and
father's letter did the rest. I got wild and desperate with the thought
of what had happened to Mary, and with knowing they were ashamed to see
me back again at home. So the night afore the ship sailed for England I
slipped into a shore-boat, and turned my back on salt-junk and the
boatswain's mate for the rest of my life."

"You don't mean to say you've done nothing but wander about in foreign
parts from that time to this?"

"I do, though! I'd a notion I should be shot for a deserter if I turned
up too soon in my own country. That kep' me away for ever so long, to
begin with. Then tramps' fever got into my head; and there was an end
of it."

"Tramps' fever! Mercy on me! what do you mean?"

"I mean this: when a man turns gypsy on his own account, as I did, and
tramps about through cold and hot, and winter and summer, not caring
where he goes or what becomes of him, that sort of life ends by getting
into his head, just like liquor does--except that it don't get out
again. It got into my head. It's in it new. Tramps' fever kep' me away
in the wild country. Tramps' fever will take me back there afore long.
Tramps' fever will lay me down, some day, in the lonesome places, with
my hand on my rifle and my face to the sky; and I shan't get up again
till the crows and vultures come and carry me off piecemeal."

"Lord bless us! how can you talk about yourself in that way?" cried Mrs.
Peckover, shuddering at the grim image which Mat's last words suggested.
"You're trying to make yourself out worse than you are. Surely you must
have thought of your father and sister sometimes--didn't you?"

"Think of them? Of course I did! But, mind ye, there come a time when I
as good as forgot them altogether. They seemed to get smeared out of my
head--like we used to smear old sums off our slates at school."

"More shame for you! Whatever else you forgot, you oughtn't to have
forgotten--"

"Wait a bit. Father's letter told me--I'd show you the place, only I
know you couldn't read it--that he was a going to look after Mary, and
bring her back home, and forgive her. He'd done that twice for _me,_
when _I_ run away; so I didn't doubt but what he'd do it just the same
for _her._ She'll pull through her scrape with father just as I used to
pull through mine--was what I thought. And so she would, if her own kin
hadn't turned against her; if father's own sister hadn't--" He
stopped; the frown gathered on his brow, and the oath burst from his
lips, as he thought of Joanna Grice's share in preventing Mary's
restoration to her home.

"There! there!" interposed Mrs. Peckover, soothingly. "Talk about
something pleasanter. Let's hear how you come back to England."

"I can't rightly fix it when Mary first begun to drop out of my head
like," Mat continued, abstractedly pursuing his previous train of
recollections. "I used to think of her often enough, when I started for
my run in the wild country. That was the time, mind ye, when I had
clear notions about coming back home. I got her a scarlet ponch and
another feather plaything then, knowing she was fond of knick-knacks,
and making it out in my own mind that we two was sure to meet together
again. It must have been a longish while after that, afore I got
ashamed to go home. But I did get ashamed. Thinks I, 'I haven't a rap
in my pocket to show father, after being away all this time. I'm
getting summut of a savage to look at already; and Mary would be more
frighted than pleased to see me as I am now. I'll wait a bit,' says I,
'and see if I can't keep from tramping about, and try and get a little
money, by doing some decent sort of work, afore I go home.' I was nigh
about a good ten days' march then from any seaport where honest work
could be got for such as me; but I'd fixed to try, and I did try, and
got work in a ship-builder's yard. It wasn't no good. Tramps' fever was
in my head; and in two days more I was off again to the wild country,
with my gun over my shoulder, just as damned a vagabond as ever."

Mrs. Peckover held up her hands in mute amazement. Matthew, without
taking notice of the action, went on, speaking partly to her and partly
to himself.

"It must have been about that time when Mary and father, and all what
had to do with them, begun to drop out of my head. But I kep' them two
knick-knacks, which was once meant for presents for her--long after I'd
lost all clear notion of ever going back home again, I kep' 'em--from
first to last I kep' 'em--I can't hardly say why; unless it was that
I'd got so used to keeping of them that I hadn't the heart to let 'em
go. Not, mind ye, but what they mightn't now and then have set me
thinking of father and Mary at home--at times, you know, when I changed
'em from one bag to another, or took and blew the dust off of 'em, for
to keep 'em as nice as I could. But the older I got, the worse I got at
calling anything to mind in a clear way about Mary and the old country.
There seemed to be a sort of fog rolling up betwixt us now. I couldn't
see her face clear, in my own mind, no longer. It come upon me once or
twice in dreams, when I nodded alone over my fire after a tough day's
march--it come upon me at such times so clear, that it startled me up,
all in a cold sweat, wild and puzzled with not knowing at first whether
the stars was shimmering down at me in father's paddock at Dibbledean,
or in the lonesome places over the sea, hundreds of miles away from any
living soul. But that was only dreams, you know. Waking, I was all
astray now, whenever I fell a-thinking about father or her. The longer
I tramped it over the lonesome places, the thicker that fog got which
seemed to have rose up in my mind between me and them I'd left at home.
At last, it come to darken in altogether, and never lifted no more,
that I can remember, till I crossed the seas again and got back to my
own country."

"But how did you ever think of coming back, after all those years?"
asked Mrs. Peckover.

"Well, I got a good heap of money, for once in a way, with digging for
gold in California," he answered; "and my mate that I worked with, he
says to me one day:--'I don't see my way to how we are to spend our
money, now we've got it, if we stop here. What can we treat ourselves
to in this place, excepting bad brandy and cards? Let's go over to the
old country, where there ain't nothing we want that we can't get for
our money; and, when it's all gone, let's turn tail again, and work for
more.' He wrought upon me, like that, till I went back with him. We
quarreled aboard ship; and when we got into port, he went his way and I
went mine. Not, mind ye, that I started off at once for the old place
as soon as I was ashore. That fog in my mind, I told you of, seemed to
lift a little when I heard my own language, and saw my own
country-people's faces about me again. And then there come a sort of
fear over me--a fear of going back home at all, after the time I'd been
away. I got over it, though, and went in a day or two. When I first
laid my hand on the churchyard gate that Mary and me used to swing on,
and when I looked up at the old house, with the gable ends just what
they used to be (though the front was new painted, and strange names
was over the shop-door)--then all my time in the wild country seem to
shrivel up somehow, and better than twenty year ago begun to be a'most
like yesterday. I'd seen father's name in the churchyard--which was no
more than I looked for; but when they told me Mary had never been
brought back, when they said she'd died many a year ago among strange
people, they cut me to the quick."

"Ah! no wonder, no wonder!"

"It was a wonder to _me,_ though. I should have laughed at any man, if
he'd told me I should be took so at hearing what I heard about her,
after all the time I'd been away. I couldn't make it out then, and I
can't now. I didn't feel like my own man, when I first set eyes on the
old place. And then to hear she was dead--it cut me, as I told you. It
cut me deeper still, when I come to tumble over the things she'd left
behind her in her box. Twenty years ago got nigher and nigher to
yesterday, with every fresh thing belonging to her that I laid a hand
on. There was a arbor in father's garden she used to be fond of working
in of evenings. I'd lost all thought of that place for more years than
I can reckon up. I called it to mind again--and called _her_ to mind
again, too, sitting and working and singing in the arbor--only with
laying holt of a bit of patchwork stuff in the bottom of her box, with
her needle and thread left sticking in it."

"Ah, dear, dear!" sighed Mrs. Peckover, "I wish I'd seen her then! She
was as happy, I dare say, as the bird on the tree. But there's one
thing I can't exactly make out yet," she added--"how did you first come
to know all about Mary's child?"

"All? There wasn't no _all_ in it, till I see the child herself. Except
knowing that the poor creeter's baby had been born alive, I knowed
nothing when I first come away from the old place in the country.
Child! I hadn't nothing of the sort in my mind, when I got back to
London. It was how to track the man as was Mary's death, that I puzzled
and worrited about in my head, at that time--"

"Yes, yes," said Mrs. Peckover, interposing to keep him away from the
dangerous subject, as she heard his voice change, and saw his eyes
begin to brighten again. "Yes, yes--but how did you come to see the
child? Tell me that."

"Zack took me into the Painter-man's big room--"

"Zack! Why, good gracious Heavens! do you mean Master Zachary Thorpe?"

"I see a young woman standing among a lot of people as was all a
staring at her," continued Mat, without noticing the interruption. "I
see her just as close to, and as plain, as I see you. I see her look
up, all of a sudden, front face to front face with me. A creeping and a
crawling went through me; and I says to myself, 'Mary's child has lived
to grow up, and that's her.'"

"But, do pray tell me, how ever you come to know Master Zack?"

"I says to myself 'That's her,'" repeated Mat, his rough voice sinking
lower and lower, his attention wandering farther and farther away from
Mrs. Peckover's interruptions. "Twenty year ago had got to be like
yesterday, when I was down at the old place; and things I hadn't called
to mind for long times past, I called to mind when I come to the
churchyard-gate, and see father's house. But there was looks Mary had
with her eyes, turns Mary had with her head, bits of twitches Mary had
with her eyebrows when she looked up at you, that I'd clean forgot.
They all come back to me together, as soon as ever I see that young
woman's face."

"And do you really never mean to let your sister's child know who you
are? You may tell me that, surely--though you won't speak a word about
Master Zack."

"Let her know who I am? Mayhap I'll let her know that much, before
long. When I'm going back to the wild country, I may say to her: 'Rough
as I am to look at, I'm your mother's brother, and you're the only bit
of my own flesh and blood I've got left to cotton to in all the world.
Give us a shake of your hand, and a kiss for mother's sake; and I won't
trouble you no more.' I _may_ say that, afore I go back, and lose sight
of her for good and all."

"Oh, but you won't go back. Only you tell Mr. Blyth you don't want to
take her away, and then say to him, 'I'm Mr. Grice, and--'"

"Stop! Don't you get a-talking about Mr. Grice."

"Why not? It's your lawful name, isn't it?"

"Lawful enough, I dare say. But I don't like the sound of it, though it
is mine. Father as good as said he was ashamed to own it, when he wrote
me that letter: and I was afraid to own it, when I deserted from my
ship. Bad luck has followed the name from first to last. I ended with
it years ago, and I won't take up with it again now. Call me 'Mat.'
Take it as easy with me as if I was kin to you."

"Well, then--Mat," said Mrs. Peckover with a smile. "I've got such a
many things to ask you still--"

"I wish you could make it out to ask them to-morrow," rejoined Matthew.
"I've overdone myself already, with more talking than I'm used to. I
want to be quiet with my tongue, and get to work with my hands for the
rest of the day. You don't happen to have a foot-rule in the house, do
you?"

On being asked to explain what motive could induce him to make this
extraordinary demand for a foot-rule, Mat answered that he was anxious
to proceed at once to the renewal of the cross-board at the head of his
sister's grave. He wanted the rule to measure the dimensions of the old
board: he desired to be directed to a timber-merchant's, where he could
buy a new piece of wood; and, after that, he would worry Mrs. Peckover
about nothing more. Extraordinary as his present caprice appeared to
her, the good woman saw that it had taken complete possession of him,
and wisely and willingly set herself to humor it. She procured for him
the rule, and the address of a timber-merchant; and then they parted,
Mat promising to call again in the evening at Dawson's Buildings.

When he presented himself at the timber-merchant's, after having
carefully measured the old board in the churchyard, he came in no humor
to be easily satisfied. Never was any fine lady more difficult to
decide about the texture, pattern, and color to be chosen for a new
dress, than Mat, was when he arrived at the timber-merchant's, about
the grain, thickness, and kind of wood to be chosen for the cross-board
at the head of Mary's grave. At last, he selected a piece of
walnut-wood; and, having paid the price demanded for it, without any
haggling, inquired next for a carpenter, of whom he might hire a set of
tools. A man who has money to spare, has all things at his command.
Before evening, Mat had a complete set of tools, a dry shed to use them
in, and a comfortable living-room at a public-house near, all at his
own sole disposal.

Being skillful enough at all carpenter's work of an ordinary kind, he
would, under most circumstances, have completed in a day or two such an
employment as he had now undertaken. But a strange fastidiousness, a
most uncharacteristic anxiety about the smallest matters, delayed him
through every stage of his present undertaking. Mrs. Peckover, who came
every morning to see how he was getting on, was amazed at the slowness
of his progress. He was, from the first, morbidly scrupulous in keeping
the board smooth and clean. After he had shaped it, and fitted it to
its upright supports; after he had cut in it (by Mrs. Peckover's
advice) the same inscription which had been placed on the old
board--the simple initials "M. G.," with the year of Mary's death,
"1828"--after he had done these things, he was seized with an
unreasonable, obstinate fancy for decorating the board at the sides. In
spite of all that Mrs. Peckover could say to prevent him, he carved an
anchor at one side, and a tomahawk at the other--these being the
objects with which he was most familiar, and therefore the objects
which he chose to represent. But even when the carving of his
extraordinary ornaments had been completed, he could not be prevailed
on to set the new cross-board up in its proper place. Fondly as artists
or authors linger over their last loving touches to the picture or the
book, did Mat now linger, day after day, over the poor monument to his
sister's memory, which his own rough hands had made. He promised to
do so, and they separated. As Strindberg's friend went into a shop,
he turned to look down the street; noting the beautiful lines of
the disappearing figure of the Baroness, noting, too, a stray lock
of her golden hair, that had escaped from her veil, and played against
the white ruching at her throat. He gazed after her long, in
fact, until she disappeared in the crowded street. From that moment he
was not a free man. The friendship which followed resulted in the divorce
of the Baroness from her husband and her marriage to Strindberg,
December 30, 1877, when he was twenty-eight years old.

At last Strindberg had someone to love, to take care of, to worship. This
experience of happiness, so strange to him, revived the creative
impulse.

The following year, 1878, "Master Olof" was finally accepted for
publication, and won immediate praise and appreciation.

This, to his mind, belated success, roused in Strindberg a smoldering
resentment, which lack of confidence and authority of position had
heretofore caused him to repress. He broke out with a burning satire,
in novel form, called "The Red Room," the motto of which he made
Voltaire's words "Rien n'est si désagréable que s'etre pendu obscurément."

Hardly more than mention can be made of the important work of this
dramatist, poet, novelist, historian, scientist and philosopher.
In 1888 he left Sweden, as the atmosphere there had become too
disagreeable for him through controversy after controversy in which
lie became involved.

He joined a group of painters and writers of all nationalities
in it little village in France. There he wrote "La France," setting
forth the relations between France and Sweden in olden times. This
was published in Paris and the French government, tendered him the
decoration of the legion of honor which, however, he refused very
politely, explaining that he never wore a frock coat! The episode ends
amusingly with the publisher, a Swede, receiving the decoration instead.
In 1884 the first volume of his famous short stories, called "Marriages"
appeared. It was aimed at the cult that had sprung up from Ibsen's
"A Doll's House," which was threatening the peace of all households.
A few days after the publication of "Marriages" the first edition was
literally swallowed up. As the book dealt frankly with the physical facts
of sex relations, it was confiscated by the Swedish government a month
after its publication, and Strindberg was obliged to go to Stockholm
to defend his cause in the courts, which he won, and in another
month "Marriages" was again on the market.

The next year, 1885, his "Real Utopias" was written in Switzerland, an
attack, in the form of four short stories, on over-civilization, which
won him much applause in Germany. He went to Italy as a special
correspondent for the "Daily News" of Stockholm.

In 1886 the much anticipated second volume of "Marriages" appeared.
These were the short stories, satisfying to the simplest as well as to
the most discriminating minds, that attracted Nietzsche's attention
to Strindberg. A correspondence sprung up between the two men, referring
to which in a letter to Peter Gast, Nietzsche said, "Strindberg has
written to me, and for the first time I sense an answering note of
universality." The mutual admiration and intellectual sympathies of these
two conspicuous creative geniuses has led a number of critics, including
Edmund Gosse, into the error of attributing to Nietzsche a dominating
influence over Strindberg.
It should be remembered, however, the "Countess Julie" and "The Father,"
which are cited its the most obvious examples of that supposed
influence, were completed before Strindberg's acquaintance with
Nietzsche's philosophy, and that among others, the late John Davidson,
is also charged with having drawn largely from Nietzsche.
The fact is, that, during the last quarter of the nineteenth century,
the most original thinkers of many countries were quite independently,
though less clearly, evolving the same philosophic principals that
the master mind of Nietzsche was radiating in the almost blinding
flashes of his genius.

Then came the period during which Strindberg attained the highest peaks
of his work, the years 1886-90, with his autobiography, "The Servant
Woman's Son," the tragedies, "The Father," and "Countess Julie," the
comedies, "Comrades," and "The Stronger," and the tragi-comedies, "The
Creditors" and "Simoon." Of these, "The Father" and "Countess Julie"
soon made Strindberg's name known and honored throughout Europe, except
in his home country.

In "The Father" perhaps his biggest vision is felt. It was published
in French soon after it appeared in Sweden, with an introduction
by Zola in which he says, "To be brief, you have written a mighty and
capitvating work. It is one of the few dramas that have had the power
to stir me to the depths."
Of his choice of theme in "Countess Julie," Strindberg says: "When I
took this motive from life, as it was related to me a few years ago,
it made a strong impression on me. I found it suitable for tragedy, and
it still makes a sorrowful impression on me to see an individual
to whom happiness has been allotted go under, much more, to see
a line become extinct." And in defence of his realism he has
said further in his preface to "Countess Julie": "The theatre has
for a long time seemed to me the Biblia pauperum in the fine arts,
a bible with pictures for those who can neither read nor write, and
the dramatist is the revivalist, and the revivalist dishes tap the
ideas of the day in popular form, so popular that the middle class,
of whom the bulk of theatre-goers is comprised, can without burdening
their brains understand what it is all about.

The theatre therefore has always been a grammar school for the young,
the half-educated, and women, who still possess the primitive power
of being able to delude themselves and of allowing themselves to be
deluded, that is to say, receive illusions and accept suggestions from
the dramatist. *** Some people have accused my tragedy, 'The
Father' of being too sad, as though one desired a merry tragedy.
People call authoritatively for the 'Joy of Life' and theatrical
managers call for farces, as though the Joy of Life lay in being foolish,
and in describing people who each and every one are suffering from
St.

Vitus' dance or idiocy. I find the joy of life in the powerful, terrible
struggles of life; and the capability of experiencing something, of
learning something, is a pleasure to me.
And therefore I have chosen an unusual but instructive subject; in other
words, an exception, but a great exception, that will strengthen the
rules which offend the apostle of the commonplace.
What will further create antipathy in some, is the fact that my plan of
action is not simple, and that there is not one view alone to be
taken of it.

An event in life--and that is rather a new discovery--is usually
occasioned by a series of more or less deep-seated motifs, but the
spectator generally chooses that one which his power of judgment
finds simplest to grasp, or that his gift of judgment considers the
most honorable.

For example, someone commits suicide: 'Bad business!' says the
citizen; 'Unhappy love!' says the woman; 'Sickness!' says the sick man;
'Disappointed hopes?' the bankrupt. But it may be that none of these
reasons is the real one, and that the dead man hid the real one by
pretending another that would throw the most favorable light on his
memory.
*** In the following drama ('Julie') I have not sought to do anything
new, because that cannot be done, but only to modernize the form according
to the requirements I have considered present-day people require."
Following the mighty output, of those years, in 1891 Strindberg
went out: to the islands where he had lived years before, and led
a hermit's life.

Many of his romantic plays were written there, and much of his time was
spent at painting.

In 1892 he was divorced from his wife.

After a few months Strindberg went to Berlin, where he was received with
all honors by literary Germany.

Richard Dehmel, one of their foremost minstrels, celebrated the event
by a poem called "An Immortal,--To Germany's Guest." In the shop
windows his picture hung alongside that of Bismarck, and at the
theatres his plays were being produced. About this time he heard of
the commotion that "Countess Julie" had created in Paris, where it
had been produced by Antoine. During these victorious times Strindberg
met a young Austrian writer, Frida Uhl, to whom he was married in
April 1898.

Although the literary giant of the hour, he was nevertheless in very
straightened pecuniary circumstances, which led to his allowing the
publication of "A Fool's Confession," written in French, and later,
with out his permission or knowledge, issued in German and Swedish,
which entangled him in a lawsuit, as the subject matter contained much
of his marital miseries. Interest in chemistry had long been stirring
in Strindberg's mind; it now began to deepen. About this time also
he passed through that religious crisis which swept artistic
Europe, awakened nearly a century after his death by that Swedenborgian
poet and artist, William Blake. To this period belongs "To Damascus,"
a play of deepest soul probing, which was not finished however until
1904.

Going to Paris in the fall of 1894, to pursue chemical research most
seriously, he ran into his own success at the theatres there.
"The Creditors" had been produced and Strindberg was induced to
undertake the direction of "The Father" at the Theatre de l'Oeuvre,
where it was a tremendous success. A Norwegian correspondent was forced
to send word home that with "The Father" Strindberg had overreached Ibsen
in Paris, because what it had never been possible to do with an
Ibsen play, have a run in Paris, they were now doing with Strindberg.

At the same time the Theâtre des Ecaliers put on "The Link," the Odean
produced "The Secret of the Guild," and the Chat Noir "The Kings of
Heaven," and translations of his novels were running in French
periodicals. But Strindberg turned his back on all this success
and shut himself up in his laboratory to delve into chemistry. This he
did with such earnestness that with his discovery of Swedenborg his
experimentations and speculations reduced him to a condition of mind
that unfitted him for any kind of companionship, so that when his
wife left him to go to their child who was ill and far away, he welcomed
the complete freedom.

Strindberg says of their parting at the railway station that although
they smiled and waved to each other as they called out "Auf
wiedersehen" they both knew that they were saying good bye forever,
which proved to be true, as they were divorced a year later.

In 1896 he returned to Sweden so broken in health through his
tremendous wrestling with the riddle of life that he went into the
sanitorium of his friend, Dr.

Aliasson at Wstad. After two months he was sufficiently restored to go
to Austria, at the invitation of his divorced wife's family, to see his
child. Then back to Sweden, to Lund, a university town, where he
lived solely to absorb Swedenborg. By May of that year he was able to
go to work on "The Inferno," that record of a soul's nightmare,
which in all probability will remain unique in the history of
literature.

Then came the writing of the great historical dramas, then the realistically
symbolic plays of Swedenborgian spirit, of which "Easter" is representative,
and the most popular.

When "Easter" was produced in Stockholm a young Norwegian, Harriet
Bosse, played Eleanora, the psychic, and in 1901 this young actress
became Strindberg's wife. This third marriage ended in
divorce three years later. In 1906, the actor manager, August Folk,
produced "Countess Julie" in Stockholm, seventeen years after it
had been written.

To Strindberg's amazement, it won such tremendous attention that the
other theatres became deserted. In consequence of this success an
intimate theatre was founded for the production of none but Strindberg's
plays.

How he is estimated today in his own country may be judged by the
following extract from an article which appeared in a recent issue
of the leading periodical of Stockholm:

"For over thirty years he has dissected us from every point of view;
during that time his name has always been conspicuous in every
book-shop window and his books gradually push out the others from
our shelves; every night his plays are produced at the theatres;
every conversation turns on him, and his is the name the pigmies
quarrel over daily; the cry is heard that he has become hysterical,
sentimental, out of his mind, but the next one knows, he is robustness
itself, and enduring beyond belief, despite great need, enmity,
sorrow.

One hour one is angry over some extravagance which he has allowed himself,
the next captivated by one of his plays, stirred, melted, strengthened
and uplifted by his sublime genius."

THE FATHER

CHARACTERS
A CAPTAIN OF CAVALRY LAURA, his wife BERTHA, their daughter DOCTOR OSTERMARK
THE PASTOR THE NURSE NÖJD AN ORDERLY

THE FATHER
ACT I.

[The sitting room at the Captain's. There is a door a little to the right
at the back. In the middle of the room, a large, round table strewn
with newspapers and magazines. To right a leather-covered sofa and
table. In the right-hand corner a private door. At left there is a door
leading to the inner room and a desk with a clock on it. Gamebags,
guns and other arms hang on the walls. Army coats hang near door at
back. On the large table stands a lighted lamp.]
CAPTAIN [rings, an orderly comes in.]
ORDERLY. Yes, Captain.

CAPTAIN. Is Nöjd out there?

ORDERLY. He is waiting for orders in the kitchen.

CAPTAIN. In the kitchen again, is he? Send him in at once.

ORDERLY. Yes, Captain. [Goes.]
PASTOR. What's the matter now?

CAPTAIN. Oh the rascal has been cutting up with the servant-girl again;
he's certainly a bad lot.

PASTOR. Why, Nöjd got into the same trouble year before last, didn't
he?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you remember? Won't you be good enough to give him a friendly
talking to and perhaps you can make some impression on him. I've sworn
at him and flogged him, too, but it hasn't had the least effect.

PASTOR. And so you want me to preach to him?

What effect do you suppose the word of God will have on a rough
trooper?

CAPTAIN. Well, it certainly has no effect on me.

PASTOR. I know that well enough.

CAPTAIN. Try it on him, anyway.

[Nöjd comes in.]
CAPTAIN. What have you been up to now, Nöjd?

NÖJD. God save you, Captain, but I couldn't talk about it with the
Pastor here.

PASTOR. Don't be afraid of me, my boy.

CAPTAIN. You had better confess or you know what will happen.

NÖJD. Well, you see it was like this; we were at a dance at Gabriel's,
and then--then Ludwig said-- 
CAPTAIN.

What has Ludwig got to do with it? Stick to the truth.

NÖJD. Yes, and Emma said "Let's go into the barn--"
CAPTAIN. --Oh, so it was Emma who led you astray, was it?

NÖJD. Well, not far from it. You know that unless the girl is willing
nothing ever happens.

                            CAPTAIN.

Never mind all that: Are you the father of the child or not?

NÖJD. Who knows?

CAPTAIN. What's that? Don't you know?

NÖJD. Why no--that is, you can never be sure.

CAPTAIN. Weren't you the only one?

NÖJD. Yes, that time, but you can't be sure for all that.

CAPTAIN. Are you trying to put the blame on Ludwig? Is that what you
are up to?

NÖJD. Well, you see it isn't easy to know who is to blame.

CAPTAIN. Yes, but you told Emma you would marry her.

NÖJD. Oh, a fellow's always got to say that--
CAPTAIN [to Pastor.] This is terrible, isn't it?

PASTOR. It's the old story over again.

See here, Nöjd, you surely ought to know whether you are the father
or not?

NÖJD.

Well, of course I was mixed up with the girl--but you know yourself,
Pastor, that it needn't amount to anything for all that.

PASTOR. Look here, my lad, we are talking about you now. Surely you won't
leave the girl alone with the child. I suppose we can't compel you
to marry her, but you should provide for the child--that you shall
do!

NÖJD. Well, then, so must Ludwig, too.
CAPTAIN. Then the case must go to the courts. I cannot ferret out
the truth of all this, nor is it to my liking. So now be off.
PASTOR. One moment, Nöjd. H'm--don't you think it dishonorable to
leave a girl destitute like that with her child? Don't you think
so? Don't you see that such conduct-- -- --h'm-- --h'm-- -- --

NÖJD. Yes, if I only knew for sure that I was father of the child,
but you can't be sure of that, Pastor, and I don't see much fun
slaving all your life for another man's child. Surely you, Pastor,
and the Captain can understand for yourselves.

CAPTAIN. Be off.
NÖJD. God save you, Captain. [Goes.]
CAPTAIN. But keep out of the kitchen, you rascal! [To Pastor.] Now,
why didn't you get after him?

PASTOR. What do you mean?
CAPTAIN. Why, you only sat and mumbled something or other.
PASTOR. To tell the truth I really don't know what to say. It is a
pity about the girl, yes, and a pity about the lad, too. For think
if he were not the father. The girl can nurse the child for four
months at the orphanage, and then it will be permanently provided
for, but it will be different for him. The girl can get a good place
afterwards in some respectable family, but the lad's future may be
ruined if he is dismissed from the regiment.
CAPTAIN. Upon my soul I should like to be in the magistrate's shoes
and judge this case. The lad is probably not innocent, one can't
be sure, but we do know that the girl is guilty, if there is any
guilt in the matter.
PASTOR. Well, well, I judge no one. But what were we talking about
when this stupid business interrupted us? It was about Bertha and
her confirmation, wasn't it?
CAPTAIN. Yes, but it was certainly not in particular about her
confirmation but about her whole welfare. This house is full of
women who all want to have their say about my child. My mother-in-law
wants to make a Spiritualist of her. Laura wants her to be an artist;
the governess wants her to be a Methodist, old Margret a Baptist,
and the servant-girls want her to join the Salvation Army!
It won't do to try to make a soul in patches like that. I, who have
the chief right to try to form her character, am constantly opposed
in my efforts. And that's why I have decided to send her away from
home.
PASTOR. You have too many women trying to run this house.
CAPTAIN. You're right!"My landlady is very good and kind to me; but, as for that old
vagabond, Mat, he has been away in the country, I don't know how long,
and has never written to me. Please, please do come! and don't blow me
up much if you can help it, for I am so weak I can hardly keep from
crying when I think of what has happened. Ever yours,

                            "Z. THORPE, jun.

"P. S. If you have got any of my money left by you, I should be very
glad if you would bring it. I haven't a farthing, and there are several
little things I ought to pay for."


This letter, and the letter to Mr. Thorpe, after being duly sealed and
directed, were confided for delivery to a private messenger. They were
written on the same day which had been occupied by Matthew Grice in
visiting Mr. Tatt and Mr. Nawby, at Dibbledean. And the coincidences of
time so ordered it, that while Zack's letters were proceeding to their
destinations, in the hand of the messenger, Zack's fellow-lodger was
also proceeding to his destination in Kirk Street, by the fast London
train.

Baregrove Square was nearer to the messenger than Valentine's house, so
the first letter that he delivered was that all-important petition for
the paternal pardon, on the favorable reception of which depended
Zack's last chance of reconciliation with home.


Mr. Thorpe sat alone in his dining-parlor--the same dining-parlor in
which, so many weary years ago, he had argued with old Mr. Goodworth,
about his son's education. Mrs. Thorpe, being confined to her room by a
severe cold, was unable to keep him company--the doctor had just taken
leave of him--friends in general were forbidden, on medical authority,
to excite him by visits--he was left lonely, and he had the prospect of
remaining lonely for the rest of the day. That total prostration of the
nervous system, from which the doctor had declared him to be now
suffering, showed itself painfully, from time to time, in his actions
as well as his looks--in his sudden startings when an unexpected noise
occurred in the house, in the trembling of his wan yellowish-white hand
whenever he lifted it from the table, in the transparent paleness of
his cheeks, in the anxious uncertainty of his ever-wandering eves.

His attention was just now directed on an open letter lying near him--a
letter fitted to encourage and console him, if any earthly hopes could
still speak of happiness to his heart, or any earthly solace still
administer repose to his mind.

But a few days back, his wife's entreaties and the doctor's advice had
at length prevailed on him to increase his chances of recovery, by
resigning the post of secretary to one of the Religious Societies to
which he belonged. The letter he was now looking at, had been written
officially to inform him that the members of the Society accepted his
resignation with the deepest regret; and to prepare him for a visit on
the morrow from a deputation charged to present him with an address and
testimonial--both of which had been unanimously voted by the Society
"in grateful and affectionate recognition of his high character and
eminent services, while acting as their secretary." He had not been
able to resist the temptation of showing this letter to the doctor; and
he could not refrain from reading it once again now, before he put it
back in his desk. It was, in his eyes, the great reward and the great
distinction of his life.

He was still lingering thoughtfully over the last sentence, when Zack's
letter was brought in to him. It was only for a moment that he had
dared to taste again the sweetness of a well-won triumph--but even in
that moment, there mingled with it the poisoning bitter of every past
association that could pain him most!--With a heavy sigh, he put away
the letter from the friends who honored him, and prepared to answer the
letter from the son who had deserted him.

There was grief, but no anger in his face, as he read it over for the
second time. He sat thinking for a little while--then drew towards him
his inkstand and paper--hesitated--wrote a few lines--and paused again,
putting down the pen this time, and covering his eyes with his thin
trembling hand. After sitting thus for some minutes, he seemed to
despair of being able to collect his thoughts immediately, and to
resolve on giving his mind full time to compose itself. He shut up his
son's letter and his own unfinished reply together in the paper-case.
But there was some re-assuring promise for Zack's future prospects
contained even in the little that he had already written; and the
letter suggested forgiveness at the very outset; for it began with, "My
dear Zachary."


On delivering Zack's second note at Valentine's house, the messenger
was informed that Mr. Blyth was expected back on the next day, or on
the day after that, at the latest. Having a discretionary power to deal
as she pleased with her husband's correspondence, when he was away from
home, Mrs. Blyth opened the letter as soon as it was taken up to her.
Madonna was in the room at the time, with her bonnet and shawl on, just
ready to go out for her usual daily walk, with Patty the housemaid for
a companion, in Valentine's absence.

"Oh, that wretched, wretched Zack!" exclaimed Mrs. Blyth, looking
seriously distressed and alarmed, the moment her eyes fell on the first
lines of the letter. "He must be ill indeed," she added, looking
closely at the handwriting; "for he has evidently not written this
himself."

Madonna could not hear these words, but she could see the expression
which accompanied their utterance, and could indicate by a sign her
anxiety to know what had happened. Mrs. Blyth ran her eye quickly over
the letter, and ascertaining that there was nothing in it which Madonna
might not be allowed to read, beckoned to the girl to look over her
shoulder, as the easiest and shortest way of explaining what was the
matter.

"How distressed Valentine will be to hear of this!" thought Mrs. Blyth,
summoning Patty up-stairs by a pull at her bell-rope, while Madonna was
eagerly reading the letter. The housemaid appeared immediately, and was
charged by her mistress to go to Kirk Street at once; and after
inquiring of the landlady about Zack's health, to get a written list of
any comforts he might want, and bring it back as soon as possible. "And
mind you leave a message," pursued Mrs. Blyth, in conclusion, "to say
that he need not trouble himself about money matters, for your master
will come back from the country, either to-morrow or next day."

Here her attention was suddenly arrested by Madonna, who was eagerly
and even impatiently signing on her fingers: "What are you saying to
Patty? Oh! do let me know what you are saying to Patty?"

Mrs. Blyth repeated, by means of the deaf-and-dumb alphabet, the
instructions which she had just given to the servant; and
added--observing the paleness and agitation of Madonna's face--"Let us
not frighten ourselves unnecessarily, my dear, about Zack; he may turn
out to be much better than we think him from reading his letter."

"May I go with Patty?" rejoined Madonna, her eyes sparkling with
anxiety, her fingers trembling as they rapidly formed these words. "Let
me take my walk with Patty, just as if nothing had happened. Let me go!
pray, let me go!"

"She can't be of any use, poor child," thought Mrs. Blyth; "but if I
keep her here, she will only be fretting herself into one of her
violent headaches. Besides, she may as well have her walk now, for I
shan't be able to spare Patty later in the day." Influenced by these
considerations, Mrs. Blyth, by a nod, intimated to her adopted child
that she might accompany the housemaid to Kirk Street. Madonna, the
moment this permission was granted, led the way out of the room; but
stopped as soon as she and Patty were alone on the staircase, and,
making a sign that she would be back directly, ran up to her own
bed-chamber.

When she entered the room, she unlocked a little dressing-case that
Valentine had given to her; and, emptying out of one of the trays four
sovereigns and some silver, all her savings from her own pocket-money,
wrapped them up hastily in a piece of paper, and ran down stairs again
to Patty. Zack was ill, and lonely, and miserable; longing for a friend
to sit by his bedside and comfort him--and she could not be that
friend! But Zack was also poor; she had read it in his letter; there
were many little things he wanted to pay for; he needed money--and in
that need she might secretly be a friend to him, for she had money of
her own to give away.

"My four golden sovereigns shall be the first he has," thought Madonna,
nervously taking the housemaid's offered arm at the house-door. "I will
put them in some place where he is sure to find them, and never to know
who they come from. And Zack shall be rich again--rich with all the
money I have got to give him." Four sovereigns represented quite a
little fortune in Madonna's eyes. It had taken her a long, long time to
save them out of her small allowance of pocket-money.

When they knocked at the private door of the tobacco-shop, it was
opened by the landlady, who, after hearing what their errand was from
Patty, and answering some preliminary inquiries after Zack, politely
invited them to walk into her back parlor. But Madonna seemed--quite
incomprehensibly to the servant--to be bent on remaining in the passage
till she had finished writing some lines which she had just then begun
to trace on her slate. When they were completed, she showed them to
Patty, who read with considerable astonishment these words: "Ask where
his sitting-room is, and if I can go into it. I want to leave something
for him there with my own hands, if the room is empty."

After looking at her young mistress's eager face in great amazement for
a moment or two, Patty asked the required questions; prefacing them
with some words of explanation which drew from the tobacconist's wife
many voluble expressions of sympathy and admiration for Madonna. At
last, there came to an end; and the desired answers to the questions on
the slate were readily given enough, and duly, though rather slowly,
written down by Patty, for her young lady's benefit. The sitting-room
belonging to Mr. Thorpe and the other gentleman, was the front room on
the first floor. Nobody was in it now. Would the lady like to be
shown--

Here Madonna arrested the servant's further progress with the slate
pencil--nodded to indicate that she understood what had been
written--and then, with her little packet of money ready in her hand,
lightly ran up the first flight of stairs; ascending them so quickly
that she was on the landing before Patty and the landlady had settled
which of the two ought to have officially preceded her.

The front room was indeed empty when she entered it, but one of the
folding doors leading into the back room had been left ajar; and when
she looked towards the opening thus made, she also looked, from the
particular point of view she then occupied, towards the head of the bed
on which Zack lay, and saw his face turned towards her, hushed in deep,
still, breathless sleep.

She started violently--trembled a little--then stood motionless,
looking towards him through the door; the tears standing thick in her
eyes, the color gone from her cheeks, the yearning pulses of grief and
pity beating faster and faster in her heart. Ah! how pale and wan and
piteously still he lay there, with the ghastly white bandages round his
head, and one helpless, languid hand hanging over the bedside! How
changed from that glorious creature, all youth, health, strength, and
exulting activity, whom it had so long been her innocent idolatry to
worship in secret! How fearfully like what might be the image of him in
death, was the present image of him as he lay in his hushed and awful
sleep! She shuddered as the thought crossed her mind, and drying the
tears that obscured her sight, turned a little away from him, and
looked round the room. Her quick feminine eyes detected at a glance all
its squalid disorder, all its deplorable defects of comfort, all its
repulsive unfitness as a habitation for the suffering and the sick.
Surely a little money might help Zack to a better place to recover in!
Surely _her_ money might be made to minister in this way to his
comfort, his happiness, and even his restoration to health!

Full of this idea, she advanced a step or two, and sought for a proper
place on the one table in the room, in which she might put her packet
of money.

While she was thus engaged, an old newspaper, with some hair lying in
it, caught her eye. The hair was Zack's and was left to be thrown away;
having been cut off that very morning by the doctor, who thought that
enough had not been removed from the neighborhood of the wound by the
barber originally employed to clear the hair from the injured side of
the patient's head. Madonna had hardly looked at the newspaper before
she recognized the hair in it as Zack's by its light-brown color, and
by the faint golden tinge running through it. One little curly lock,
lying rather apart from the rest, especially allured her eyes; she
longed to take it as a keepsake--a keepsake which Zack would never know
that she possessed! For a moment she hesitated, and in that moment the
longing became an irresistible temptation. After glancing over her
shoulder to assure herself that no one had followed her upstairs, she
took the lock of hair, and quickly hid it away in her bosom.

Her eyes had assured her that there was no one in the room; but, if she
had not been deprived of the sense of hearing, she would have known
that persons were approaching it, by the sound of voices on the
stairs--a man's voice being among them. Necessarily ignorant, however,
of this, she advanced unconcernedly, after taking the lock of hair,
from the table to the chimney-piece, which it struck her might be the
safest place to leave the money on. She had just put it down there,
when she felt the slight concussion caused by the opening and closing
of the door behind her; and turning round instantly, confronted Patty,
the landlady, and the strange swarthy-faced friend of Zack's, who had
made her a present of the scarlet tobacco-pouch.

Terror and confusion almost overpowered her, as she saw him advance to
the chimney-piece and take up the packet she had just placed there. He
had evidently opened the room-door in time to see her put it down; and
he was now deliberately unfolding the paper and examining the money
inside.

While he was thus occupied, Patty came close up to her, and, with
rather a confused and agitated face, began writing on her slate, much
faster and much less correctly than usual. She gathered, however, from
the few crooked lines scrawled by the servant, that Patty had been very
much startled by the sudden entrance of the landlady's rough lodger,
who had let himself in from the street, just as she was about to follow
her young mistress up to the sitting-room, and had uncivilly stood in
her way on the stairs, while he listened to what the good woman of the
house had to tell him about young Mr. Thorpe's illness. Confused as the
writing was on the slate, Madonna contrived to interpret it thus far,
and would have gone on interpreting more, if she had not felt a heavy
hand laid on her arm, and had not, on looking round, seen Zack's friend
making signs to her, with her money loose in his hand.

She felt confused, but not frightened now; for his eyes, as she looked
into them, expressed neither suspicion nor anger. They rested on her
face kindly and sadly, while he first pointed to the money in his hand,
and then to her. She felt that her color was rising, and that it was a
hard matter to acknowledge the gold and silver as being her own
property; but she did so acknowledge it. He then pointed to himself;
and when she shook her head, pointed through the folding doors into
Zack's room. Her cheeks began to burn, and she grew suddenly afraid to
look at him; but it was no harder trial to confess the truth than
shamelessly to deny it by making a false sign. So she looked up at him
again, and bravely nodded her head.

His eyes seemed to grow clearer and softer as they still rested kindly
on her; but he made her take back the money immediately, and, holding
her hand as he did so, detained it for a moment with a curious awkward
gentleness. Then, after first pointing again to Zack's room, he began
to search in the breast-pocket of his coat, took from it at one rough
grasp some letters tied together loosely, and a clumsy-looking
rolled-up strip of fur, put the letters aside on the table behind him,
and, unrolling the fur, showed her that there were bank-notes in it.
She understood him directly--he had money of his own for Zack's
service, and wanted none from her.

After he had replaced the strip of fur in his pocket, he took up the
letters from the table to be put back also. As he reached them towards
him, a lock of hair, which seemed to have accidentally got between
them, fell out on the floor just at her feet. She stooped to pick it up
for him; and was surprised, as she did so, to see that it exactly
resembled in color the lock of Zack's hair which she had taken from the
old newspaper, and had hidden in her bosom.

She was surprised at this; and she was more than surprised, when he
angrily and abruptly snatched up the lock of hair, just as she touched
it. Did he think that she wanted to take it away from him? If he did,
it was easy to show him that a lock of Zack's hair was just now no such
rarity that people need quarrel about the possession of it. She reached
her hand to the table behind, and, taking some of the hair from the old
newspaper, held it up to him with a smile, just as he was on the point
of putting his own lock of hair back in his pocket.

For a moment he did not seem to comprehend what her action meant; then
the resemblance between the hair in her hand and the hair in his own,
struck him suddenly.

The whole expression of his face changed in an instant--changed so
darkly that she recoiled from him in terror, and put back the hair into
the newspaper. He pounced on it directly; and, crunching it up in his
hand, turned his grim threatening face and fiercely-questioning eyes on
the landlady. While she was answering his inquiry, Madonna saw him look
towards Zack's bed; and, as he looked, another change passed over his
face--the darkness faded from it, and the red scars on his cheek
deepened in color. He moved back slowly to the further corner of the
room from the folding-doors; his restless eyes fixed in a vacant stare,
one of his hands clutched round the old newspaper, the other motioning
clumsily and impatiently to the astonished and alarmed women to leave
him.

Madonna had felt Patty's hand pulling at her arm more than once during
the last minute or two. She was now quite as anxious as her companion
to quit the house. They went out quickly, not venturing to look at Mat
again; and the landlady followed them. She and Patty had a long talk
together at the street door--evidently, judging by the expression of
their faces, about the conduct of the rough lodger up-stairs. But
Madonna felt no desire to be informed particularly of what they were
saying to each other. Much as Matthew's strange behavior had surprised
and startled her, he was not the uppermost subject in her mind just
then. It was the discovery of her secret, the failure of her little
plan for helping Zack with her own money, that she was now thinking of
with equal confusion and dismay. She had not been in the front room at
Kirk Street much more than five minutes altogether--yet what a
succession of untoward events had passed in that short space of time!


For a long while after the women had left him, Mat stood motionless in
the furthest corner of the room from the folding-doors, looking
vacantly towards Zack's bedchamber. His first surprise on finding a
stranger talking in the passage, when he let himself in from the
street; his first vexation on hearing of Zack's accident from the
landlady; his momentary impulse to discover himself to Mary's child,
when he saw Madonna standing in his room, and again when he knew that
she had come there with her little offering, for the one kind purpose
of helping the sick lad in his distress--all these sensations were now
gone from his memory as well as from his heart; absorbed in the one
predominant emotion with which the discovery of the resemblance between
Zack's hair and the hair from Jane Holdworth's letter now filled him.
No ordinary shocks could strike Mat's mind hard enough to make it lose
its balance--_this_ shock prostrated it in an instant.

In proportion as he gradually recovered his self-possession so did the
desire strengthen in him to ascertain the resemblance between the two
kinds of hair once more--but in such a manner as it had not been
ascertained yet. He stole gently to the folding-doors and looked into
young Thorpe's room. Zack was still asleep.

After pausing for a moment, and shaking his head sorrowfully, as he
noticed how pale and wasted the lad's face looked, he approached the
pillow, and laid the lock of Arthur Carr's hair upon it, close to the
uninjured side of Zack's head. It was then late in the afternoon, but
not dusk yet. No blind hung over the bedroom window, and all the light
in the sky streamed full on to the pillow as Mat's eyes fastened on it.

The similarity between the sleeper's hair and the hair of Arthur Carr
was perfect! Both were of the same light brown color, and both had
running through that color the same delicate golden tinge, brightly
visible in the light, hardly to be detected at all in the shade.

Why had this extraordinary resemblance never struck him before? Perhaps
because he had never examined Arthur Carr's hair with attention until
he had possessed himself of Mary's bracelet, and had gone away to the
country. Perhaps also because he had never yet taken notice enough of
Zack's hair to care to look close at it. And now the resemblance was
traced, to what conclusion did it point? Plainly, from Zack's youth, to
none in connection with _him._ But what elder relatives had he? and
which of them was he most like?

Did he take after his father?

Mat was looking down at the sleeper, just then; something in the lad's
face troubled him, and kept his mind from pursuing that last thought.
He took the lock of hair from the pillow, and went into the front room.
There was anxiety and almost dread in his face, as he thought of the
fatally decisive question in relation to the momentous discovery he had
just made, which must be addressed to Zack when he awoke. He had never
really known how fond he was of his fellow lodger until now, when he
was conscious of a dull, numbing sensation of dismay at the prospect of
addressing that question to the friend who had lived as a brother with
him, since the day when they first met.

As the evening closed in, Zack woke. It was a relief to Mat, as he went
to the bedside, to know that his face could not now be clearly seen.
The burden of that terrible question pressed heavily on his heart,
while he held his comrade's feeble hand; while he answered as
considerately, yet as briefly as he could, the many inquiries addressed
to him; and while he listened patiently and silently to the sufferer's
long, wandering, faintly-uttered narrative of the accident that had
befallen him. Towards the close of that narrative, Zack himself
unconsciously led the way to the fatal question which Mat longed, yet
dreaded to ask him.

"Well, old fellow," he said, turning feebly on his pillow, so as to
face Matthew, "something like what you call the 'horrors' has been
taking hold of me. And this morning, in particular, I was so wretched
and lonely, that I asked the landlady to write for me to my father,
begging his pardon, and all that. I haven't behaved as well as I ought;
and, somehow, when a fellow's ill and lonely he gets homesick--"

His voice began to grow faint, and he left the sentence unfinished.

"Zack," said Mat, turning his face away from the bed while he spoke,
though it was now quite dark. "Zack, what sort of a man is your
father?"

"What sort of a man! How do you mean?"

"To look at. Are you like him in the face?"

"Lord help you, Mat! as little like as possible. My father's face is
all wrinkled and marked."

"Aye, aye, like other old men's faces. His hair's grey, I suppose?"

"Quite white. By-the-by--talking of that--there _is_ one point I'm like
him in--at least, like what he _was,_ when he was a young man."

"What's that?"

"What we've been speaking of--his hair. I've heard my mother say, when
she first married him--just shake up my pillow a bit, will you, Mat?"

"Yes, yes. And what did you hear your mother say?"

"Oh, nothing particular. Only that when he was a young man, his hair
was exactly like what mine is now."


As those momentous words were spoken, the landlady knocked at the door,
and announced that she was waiting outside with candles, and a nice cup
of tea for the invalid. Mat let her into the bedchamber--then
immediately walked out of it into the front room, and closed the
folding-doors behind him. Brave as he was, he was afraid, at that
moment, to let Zack see his face.

_dent de lion_) may be suspected of being mere translations. I
give the names in most general use, but the provincial variants
are numerous, though usually of the same type. The French names of the
flowers mentioned are still more like the English.
The more learned words which sometimes replace the above are, though
now felt as mere symbols, of similar origin, e.g., _geranium_ and
_pelargonium_, used for the cultivated _crane's bill_, are derived
from the Greek for crane and stork respectively.

So also in _chelidonium_, whence our _celandine_ or _swallow-wort_, we
have the Greek for swallow.

In the English names of plants we observe various tendencies of the
popular imagination.

We have the crudeness of _cowslip_ for earlier _cowslop_, cow-dung,
and many old names of unquotable coarseness, the quaintness of
_Sweet William_, _lords and ladies_, _bachelors' buttons_, _dead
men's fingers_, and the exquisite poetry of _forget-me-not_, _heart's
ease_, _love in a mist_, _traveller's joy_.

There is also a special group named from medicinal properties, such
as _feverfew_, a doublet of _febrifuge_, and _tansy_, Fr.

_tanaisie_, from Greco-Lat.

_athanasia_, immortality. We may compare the learned _saxifrage_,
stone-breaker, of which the Spanish doublet is _sassafras_. The
German name is _Steinbrech_.

There must have been a time when a simple instinct for poetry was
possessed by all nations, as it still is by uncivilised races and
children. Among European nations this instinct appears to be dead for
ever. We can name neither a mountain nor a flower. Our Mount Costigan,
Mount Perry, Mount William cut a sorry figure beside the peaks of the
Bernese Oberland, the Monk, the Maiden, the Storm Pike, the Dark
Eagle Pike.[24] Occasionally a race which is accidentally brought into
closer contact with nature may have a happy inspiration, such as
the _Drakensberg_ (dragon's mountain) or _Weenen_[25] (weeping)
of the old _voortrekkers_. But the Cliff of the Falling Flowers, the
name of a precipice over which the Korean queens cast themselves
to escape dishonour, represents an imaginative realm which is
closed to us.[26] The botanist who describes a new flower hastens
to join the company of Messrs _Dahl_, _Fuchs_, _Lobel_, _Magnol_
and _Wistar_, while fresh varieties are used to immortalise a florist
and his family.

[Page Heading: NAMES OF FRUITS]
The names of fruits, perhaps because they lend themselves less easily
to imaginative treatment, are even duller than modern names of flowers.
The only English names are the _apple_ and the _berry_. New fruits either
retained their foreign names (_cherry_, _peach_, _pear_, _quince_) or
were violently converted into _apples_ or _berries_, usually
the former.
One of the most attentive of these listeners was a swarthy-complexioned
man with bristling whiskers and a scarred face, who had made one of the
assembly on the pavement from the moment of its first congregating. He
had been almost as much stared at by the people about him as the
Deputation itself; and had been set down among them generally as a
foreigner of the most outlandish kind: but, in plain truth, he was
English to the back-bone, being no other than Matthew Grice.

Mat's look, as he stood listening among his neighbors, was now just as
quietly vigilant, his manner just as gruffly self-possessed, as usual.
[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Copy from Plates 18 and 19, Codex Peresianus.]

Not this only, for this table of the Codex Peresianus furnishes us
also the explanation of the red numerals found over the day columns
in the Manuscript Troano.

Take, for example, Plate XIX, first or upper division, given also in
my Study of The Manuscript Troano, p. 176, here the number is IV,
corresponding with column 4 of the above table (V), where the days
are the same and the numeral prefixed to each day is 4.
Though he stood now, amid the
casual street spectators, apparently as indolently curious as the most
careless among them--looking at what they looked at, listening to what
they listened to, and leaving the square when they left it--he was
resolved all the time to watch his first opportunity of entering Mr.
Thorpe's house that very day; resolved to investigate through all its
ramifications the secret which he had first discovered when the
fragments of Zack's hair were playfully held up for him to look at in
the deaf and dumb girl's hand.

The dispersion of the idlers on the pavement was accelerated, and the
footman's imaginary description of the proceedings then in progress at
Mr. Thorpe's was cut short, by the falling of a heavy shower. The
frost, after breaking up, had been succeeded that year by prematurely
mild spring weather--April seemed to have come a month before its time.

Regardless of the rain, Mat walked slowly up and down the streets round
Baregrove Square, peering every now and then, from afar off, through
the misty shower, to see if the carriages were still drawn up at Mr.
Thorpe's door. The ceremony of presenting the Testimonial was evidently
a protracted one; for the vehicles were long kept waiting for their
owners. The rain had passed away--the sun had reappeared--fresh clouds
had gathered, and it was threatening a second shower, before the
Deputation from the great Religious Society re-entered their vehicles
and drove out of the square.

When they had quitted it, Mat advanced and knocked at Mr. Thorpe's
door. The clouds rolled up darkly over the sun, and the first warning
drops of the new shower began to fall, as the door opened.

The servant hesitated about admitting him. He had anticipated that this
sort of obstacle would be thrown in his way at the outset, and had
provided against it in his own mind beforehand. "Tell your master," he
said, "that his son is ill, and I've come to speak to him about it."

This message was delivered, and had the desired effect. Mat was
admitted into the drawing-room immediately.

The chairs occupied by the members of the Deputation had not been moved
away--the handsome silver inkstand was on the table--the Address,
beautifully written on the fairest white paper, lay by it. Mr. Thorpe
stood before the fireplace, and bending over towards the table,
mechanically examined, for the second time, the signatures attached to
the Address, while his strange visitor was being ushered up stairs.

Mat's arrival had interrupted him just at the moment when he was going
to Mrs. Thorpe's room, to describe to her the Presentation ceremony
which she had not been well enough to attend. He had stopped
immediately, and the faint smile that was on his face had vanished from
it, when the news of his son's illness reached him through the servant.
But the hectic flush of triumph and pleasure which his interview with
the Deputation had called into his cheeks, still colored them as
brightly as ever, when Matthew Grice entered the room.

"You have come, sir," Mr. Thorpe began, "to tell me--"

He hesitated, stammered out another word or two, then stopped.
Something in the expression of the dark and strange face that he saw
lowering at him under the black velvet skull-cap, suspended the words
on his lips. In his present nervous, enfeebled state, any sudden
emotions of doubt or surprise, no matter how slight and temporary in
their nature, always proved too powerful for his self-control, and
betrayed themselves in his speech and manner painfully.

Mat said not a word to break the ominous silence. Was he at that
moment, in very truth, standing face to face with Arthur Carr? Could
this man--so frail and meager, with the narrow chest, the drooping
figure, the effeminate pink tinge on his wan wrinkled cheeks--be indeed
the man who had driven Mary to that last refuge, where the brambles and
weeds grew thick, and the foul mud-pools stagnated in the forgotten
corner of the churchyard?

"You have come, sir," resumed Mr. Thorpe, controlling himself by an
effort which deepened the flush on his face, "to tell me news of my
son, which I am not entirely unprepared for. I heard from him
yesterday; and, though it did not strike me at first, I noticed on
referring to his letter afterwards, that it was not in his own
handwriting. My nerves are not very strong, and they have been
tried--pleasurably, most pleasurably tried--already this morning, by
such testimonies of kindness and sympathy as it does not fall to the
lot of many men to earn. May I beg you, if your news should be of an
alarming nature (which God forbid!) to communicate it as gently--"

"My news is this," Mat broke in: "Your son's been hurt in the head, but
he's got over the worst of it now. He lives with me; I like him; and I
mean to take care of him till he gets on his legs again. That's my news
about your son. But that's not all I've got to say. I bring you news of
somebody else."

"Will you take a seat, and be good enough to explain yourself?"

And they consulted together that by subtilty they might apprehend Jesus
and put him to death.

26:5. But they said: Not on the festival day, lest perhaps there should
be a tumult among the people.

26:6.

And when Jesus was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper,

26:7. There came to him a woman having an alabaster box of precious
ointment and poured it on his head as he was at table.

26:8.

And the disciples seeing it had indignation, saying: To what purpose is
this waste?

26:9. For this might have been sold for much and given to the
poor.

26:10.

And Jesus knowing it, said to them: Why do you trouble this woman? For
she hath wrought a good work upon me.

26:11. For the poor you have always with you: but me you have not
always.

Me you have not always. . .Viz., in a visible manner, as when conversant
here on earth; and as we have the poor, whom we may daily assist and
relieve.

26:12. For she in pouring this ointment on my body hath done it for my
burial.

26:13.

Amen I say to you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, that also which she hath done shall be told for a memory
of her.

26:14.

Then went one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, to the chief
priests.

26:15. And said to them: What will you give me, and I will deliver him
unto you? But they appointed him thirty pieces of silver.

26:16. And from thenceforth he sought opportunity to betray him.

26:17. And on the first day of the Azymes, the disciples came to Jesus,
saying: Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the pasch?

Azymes. . .Feast of the unleavened bread.

Pasch. . .The paschal lamb.

26:18.

But Jesus said: Go ye into the city to a certain man and say to
him: The master saith, My time is near at hand.

With thee I make the pasch with my disciples.

26:19.

And the disciples did as Jesus appointed to them: and they prepared
the pasch.

26:20.

But when it was evening, he sat down with his twelve disciples.

26:21. And whilst they were eating, he said: Amen I say to you that
one of you is about to betray me.

26:22. And they being very much troubled began every one to say: Is it
I, Lord?

26:23. But he answering said: He that dippeth his hand with me in the
dish, he shall betray me.
26:24. The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him. But
woe to that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed. It were
better for him, if that man had not been born.
26:25. And Judas that betrayed him answering, said: Is it I, Rabbi?
He saith to him: Thou hast said it.
26:26. And whilst they were at supper, Jesus took bread and blessed
and broke and gave to his disciples and said: Take ye and eat. This
is my body.
This is my body. . .He does not say, This is the figure of my
body--but This is my body. (2 Council of Nice, Act. 6.) Neither
does he say in this, or with this is my body; but absolutely, This
is my body: which plainly implies transubstantiation.
26:27. And taking the chalice, he gave thanks and gave to them,
saying:
Drink ye all of this.
Drink ye all of this. . .This was spoken to the twelve apostles;
who were the all then present; and they all drank of it, says St.
Mark 14.
23. But it no ways follows from these words spoken to the apostles,
that all the faithful are here commanded to drink of the chalice;
any more than that all the faithful are commanded to consecrate,
offer and administer this sacrament; because Christ upon this same
occasion, and at the same time, bid the apostles do so; in these
words, St. Luke 22.
19, Do this for a commemoration of me.
26:28. For this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be
shed for many unto remission of sins.
Blood of the new testament. . .As the old testament was dedicated
with the blood of victims, by Moses, in these words: This is the
blood of the testament, etc., Heb. 9. 20; so here is the dedication
and institution of the new testament, in the blood of Christ, here
mystically shed by these words: This is the blood of the new
testament, etc.

26:29.I'm her brother, Matthew Grice!"

The hands of the shuddering figure beneath him suddenly dropped--the
ghastly uncovered face looked up at him, with such a panic stare in the
eyes, such a fearful quivering and distortion of all the features, that
it tried even his firmness of nerve to look at it steadily. In spite of
himself; he went back to his chair, and sat down doggedly by the table,
and was silent.

A low murmuring and moaning, amid which a few disconnected words made
themselves faintly distinguishable, caused him to look round again. He
saw that the ghastly face was once more hidden. He heard the
disconnected words reiterated, always in the same stifled wailing
tones. Now and then, a half finished phrase was audible from behind the
withered hands, still clasped over the face, He heard such fragments of
sentences as these:--"Have pity on my wife"--"accept the remorse of
many years"--"spare me the disgrace--"

After those four last words, he listened for no more. The merciless
spirit was roused in him again the moment he heard them.

"Spare you the disgrace?" he repeated, starting to his feet. "Did you
spare _her?_--Not you!"

Once more the hands dropped; once more the ghastly face slowly and
horribly confronted him. But this time he never recoiled from it. There
was no mercy in him--none in his looks, none in his tones--as he went
on.

"What! it would disgrace you, would it? Then disgraced you shall be!
You've kep' it a secret, have you? You shall tell that secret to every
soul that comes about the house! You shall own Mary's disgrace, Mary's
death, and Mary's child before every man who's put his name down on
that bit of paper!--You shall, as soon as to-morrow if I like! You
shall, if I have to bring your child with me to make you; if I have to
stand up, hand in hand along with her, here on your own hearthstone."

He stopped. The cowering figure was struggling upward from the chair:
one of the withered hands, slowly raised, was stretching itself out
towards him; the panic-stricken eyes were growing less vacant, and were
staring straight into his with a fearful meaning in their look; the
pale lips were muttering rapidly--at first he could not tell what; then
he succeeded in catching the two words, "Mary's child?" quickly,
faintly, incessantly reiterated, until he spoke again,

"Yes," he said, pitiless as ever. "Yes: Mary's child. Your child.
Haven't you seen her? Is it _that_ you're staring and trembling about?
Go and look at her: she lives within gunshot of you. Ask Zack's friend,
the Painter-Man, to show you the deaf and dumb girl he picked up among
the horse-riders. Look here--look at this bracelet! Do you remember
your own hair in it? The hands that brought up Mary's child, took that
bracelet from Mary's pocket. Look at it again! Look at it as close as
you like--"

Once more he stopped. The frail figure which had been feebly rising out
of the chair, while he held up the Hair Bracelet, suddenly and heavily
sank back in it--he saw the eyelids half close, and a great stillness
pass over the face--he heard one deep-drawn breath: but no cry now, no
moaning, no murmuring--no sound whatever, except the steady splash of
the fast-falling rain on the pavement outside.


Dead?


A thought of Zack welled up into his heart, and troubled it.

He hesitated for a moment, then bent over the chair, and put his hand
on the bosom of the deathly figure reclining in it. A faint fluttering
was still to be felt; and the pulse, when he tried that next, was
beating feebly. It was not death he looked on now, but the swoon that
is near neighbor to it.

For a minute or two, he stood with his eyes fixed on the white calm
face beneath him, thinking. Then he began to curse and to swear that he
knew not the man.
And immediately the cock crew.

26:75.

And Peter remembered the word of Jesus which he had said: Before the cock
crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.

And going forth, he wept bitterly.

Matthew Chapter 27

The continuation of the history of the passion of Christ. His death and
burial.

27:1. And when morning was come, all the chief priests and ancients of
the people took counsel against Jesus, that they might put him to
death.

27:2. And they brought him bound and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the
governor.

27:3. Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that he was condemned,
repenting himself, brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief priests and ancients,
27:4.

Saying: I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. But they said:

What is that to us? Look thou to it.

27:5. And casting down the pieces of silver in the temple, he departed
and went and hanged himself with an halter.

27:6.

But the chief priests having taken the pieces of silver, said: It
is not lawful to put them into the corbona, because it is the price
of blood.

Corbona. . .A place in the temple where the people put in their gifts
or offerings.

27:7. And after they had consulted together, they bought with them
the potter's field, to be a burying place for strangers.

27:8. For this cause that field was called Haceldama, that is, the field
of blood, even to this day.

27:9.

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
saying: And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of
him that was prized, whom they prized of the children of Israel.

27:10. And they gave them unto the potter's field, as the Lord appointed
to me.

27:11. And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked
him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus saith to him:
Thou sayest it.
27:12. And when he was accused by the chief priests and ancients,
he answered nothing.
27:13. Then Pilate saith to him: Dost not thou hear how great
testimonies they allege against thee?
27:14. And he answered him to never a word, so that the governor
wondered exceedingly.
27:15. Now upon the solemn day the governor was accustomed to release
to the people one prisoner, whom they would.
27:16. And he had then a notorious prisoner that was called
Barabbas.
27:17. They therefore being gathered together, Pilate said: Whom
will you that I release to You: Barabbas, or Jesus that is called
Christ?
27:18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.
27:19. And as he was sitting in the place of judgment, his wife
sent to him, saying: Have thou nothing to do with that just man;
for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of
him.
27:20. But the chief priests and ancients persuaded the people that
they should ask Barabbas and make Jesus away.
27:21. And the governor answering, said to them: Whether will you
of the two to be released unto you? But they said: Barabbas.

27:22.I do not cavil about that right--I admit that you possess it, without
desiring further proof than your actions, your merciless words, and the
Bracelet in your possession, have afforded me.

"It is fit you should first be told that the assumed name by which I
was known at Dibbledean, merely originated in a foolish jest--in a
wager that certain companions of my own age, who were accustomed to
ridicule my fondness for botanical pursuits, and often to follow and
disturb me when I went in search of botanical specimens, would not be
able to trace and discover me in my country retreat. I went to
Dibbledean, because the neighborhood was famous for specimens of rare
Ferns, which I desired to possess; and I took my assumed name before I
went, to help in keeping me from being traced and disturbed by my
companions. My father alone was in the secret, and came to see me once
or twice in my retirement. I have no excuse to offer for continuing to
preserve my false name, at a time when I was bound to be candid about
myself and my station in life. My conduct was as unpardonably criminal
in this, as it was in greater things.

"My stay at the cottage I had taken, lasted much longer than my father
would have remitted, if I had not deceived him, and if he had not been
much harassed at that time by unforeseen difficulties in his business
as a foreign merchant. These difficulties arrived at last at a climax,
and his health broke down under them. His presence, or the presence of
a properly qualified person to represent him, was absolutely required
in Germany, where one of his business houses, conducted by an agent,
was established. I was his only son; he had taken me as a partner into
his London house; and had allowed me, on the plea of delicate health,
to absent myself from my duties for months and months together, and to
follow my favorite botanical pursuits just as I pleased. When,
therefore, he wrote me word that great part of his property, and great
part, consequently, of my sisters' fortunes, depended on my going to
Germany (his own health not permitting him to take the journey), I had
no choice but to place myself at his disposal immediately.

"I went away, being assured beforehand that my absence would not last
more than three or four months at the most.

"While I was abroad, I wrote to your sister constantly. On the plate
we see the character for _Chicchan_ (No. 35) immediately above that
of _Kan_ (No.
34), with a single small dot touching it above. Running from this upward
along the row of large dots toward the outer corner we next reach the
character for _Caban_ (No. 36), adjoining which we see the numeral
character for 13.

[Illustration: PL. II 
THE TABLEAU DES BACAB RESTORED.]
Running our eye down the second column of the table, from 1 opposite
_Chicchan_ to 13, we find it is opposite _Caban_, thus agreeing
with what we find in the plate.My
messenger was turned from your doors, with the fearful news of your
sister's flight from home and of her death.

"It was then I first suspected that my letters had been tampered with.
It was then, too, when the violence of my grief and despair had a
little abated, that the news of your sister's flight inspired me, for
the first time, with a suspicion of the consequence which had followed
the commission of my sin. You may think it strange that this suspicion
should not have occurred to me before. It would seem so no longer,
perhaps, if I detailed to you the peculiar system of home education, by
which my father, strictly and conscientiously, endeavored to preserve
me--as other young men are not usually preserved--from the moral
contaminations of the world. But it would be useless to dwell on this
now. No explanations can alter the events of the guilty and miserable
past.

"Anxiously--though privately, and in fear and trembling--I caused such
inquiries to be made as I hoped might decide the question whether the
child existed or not. They were long persevered in, but they were
useless--useless, perhaps, as I now think with bitter sorrow, because I
trusted them to others, and had not the courage to make them openly
myself.

"Two years after that time I married, under circumstances not of an
ordinary kind--what circumstances you have no claim to know. _That_
part of my life is my secret and my wife's, and belongs to us alone.

"I have now dwelt long enough for your information on my own guilty
share in the events of the Past. As to the Present and the Future, I
have still a word or two left to say.

"You have declared that I shall expiate, by the exposure of my shameful
secret before all my friends, the wrong your sister suffered at my
hands. My life has been one long expiation for that wrong. My broken
health, my altered character, my weary secret sorrows, unpartaken and
unconsoled, have punished me for many years past more heavily than you
think. Do you desire to see me visited by more poignant sufferings than
these? If it be so, you may enjoy the vindictive triumph of having
already inflicted them. Your threats will force me, in a few hours,
from the friends I have lived with, at the very time when the affection
shown to me, and the honor conferred on me by those friends, have made
their society most precious to my heart. You force me from this, and
from more--for you force me from my home, at the moment when my son has
affectionately entreated me to take him back to my fireside.

"These trials, heavy as they are, I am ready to endure, if, by
accepting them humbly, I may be deemed to have made some atonement for
my sin. The child can hardly have any well-grounded opinion about what
a young girl's life is likely to be, while we, on the
contrary, can more easily estimate what it may be, as we have seen so
many young girls grow up.

LAURA. But as we are of different opinions Bertha must be the one to
decide.

CAPTAIN. No, I let no one usurp my rights, neither women nor children.
Bertha, leave us.

[Bertha goes out.]
LAURA. You were afraid of hearing her opinion, because you thought it
would be to my advantage.

CAPTAIN.

I know that she wishes to go away from home, but I know also that you
possess the power of changing her mind to suit your pleasure.

LAURA. Oh, am I really so powerful?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you have a fiendish power of getting your own way; but so
has anyone who does not scruple about, the way it is accomplished. How
did you get Doctor Norling away, for instance, and how did you get
this new doctor here?

LAURA. Yes, how did I manage that?

CAPTAIN. You insulted the other one so much that he left, and made
your brother recommend this fellow.
LAURA. Well, that was quite simple and legitimate. Is Bertha to
leave home now?

CAPTAIN. Yes, she is to start in a fortnight.
LAURA. That is your decision?

CAPTAIN. Yes.
LAURA. Then I must try to prevent it.

CAPTAIN. You cannot.
LAURA. Can't I? Do you really think I would trust my daughter to
wicked people to have her taught that everything her mother has
implanted in her child is mere foolishness? Why, afterward, she
would despise me all the rest of her life!
CAPTAIN. Do you think that a father should allow ignorant and
conceited women to teach his daughter that he is a charlatan?
LAURA. It means less to the father.

CAPTAIN. Why so?

LAURA.Now
also I know, that, unless you have spoken falsely, I have been guilty
of casting the shame of my own deserted child in the teeth of the very
man who had nobly and tenderly given her an asylum in his own home. The
unutterable anguish which only the bare suspicion of this has inflicted
on me might well have been my death. I marvel even now at my own
recovery from it.

"You are free to look at the letter to Mr. Blyth which I now entrust to
you. Besides the expression of my shame, my sorrow, and my sincere
repentance, it contains some questions, to which Mr. Blyth, in his
Christian kindness, will, I doubt not, readily write answers. The
questions only refer to the matter of the child's identity; and the
address I have written down at the end, is that of the house of
business of my lawyer and agent in London. He will forward the document
to me, and will then arrange with Mr. Blyth the manner in which a fit
provision from my property may be best secured to his adopted child. He
has deserved her love, and to him I gratefully and humbly leave her.
For myself, I am not worthy even to look upon her face.

"The second enclosure is meant for my son; and is to be delivered in
the event of your having already disclosed to him the secret of his
father's guilt. But, if you have not done this--if any mercy towards me
has entered into your heart, and pleads with it for pardon and for
silence--then destroy the letter, and tell him that he will find a
communication waiting for him at the house of my agent. He wrote to ask
my pardon--he has it freely. Freely, in my turn, I hope to have his
forgiveness for severities exercised towards him, which were honestly
meant to preserve him betimes from ever falling as his father fell, but
which I now fear were persevered in too hardly and too long. I have
suffered for this error, as for others, heavily--more heavily, when he
abandoned his home, than I should ever wish him to know. You said he
lived with you and that you were fond of him. Be gentle with him, now
that he is ill, for his mother's sake.

"My hand grows weaker and weaker: I can write no more. Let me close
this letter by entreating your pardon. If you ever grant it me, then I
also ask your prayers."


With this the letter ended.

Matthew sat holding it open in his hand for a little while. He looked
round once or twice at the enclosed letter from Mr. Thorpe to his son,
which lay close by on the table--but did not destroy it; did not so
much as touch it even.

Zack spoke to him before long from the inner room.

"I'm sure you must have done reading your letter by this time, Mat.
_corral_, a pen, enclosure). Both _assegai_ and _kraal_ were taken
to South East Africa by the Portuguese and then adopted by the Boers and
Kafirs.[22] _Sjambok_ occurs in 17th-century accounts of India in the
form _chawbuck_. It is a Persian word, spelt _chabouk_ by Moore, in
_Lalla Rookh_. It was adopted by the Portuguese as _chabuco_, "in the
Portuguese India, a whip or scourge"[23] (Vieyra, _Port. Dict._,
1794).
_Fetish_, an African idol, first occurs in the records of the early
navigators, collected and published by Hakluyt and Purchas.

It is the Port. _feitiço_, Lat.

_factitius_, artificial, applied by the Portuguese explorers to the
graven images of the heathen.

The corresponding Old Fr.
_faitis_ is rather a complimentary adjective, and everyone remembers
the lady in Chaucer who spoke French fairly and _fetousli_. _Palaver_,
also a travellers' word from the African coast, is Port.

_palavra_, word, speech, Greco-Lat. _parabola_. It is thus a doublet
of _parole_ and _parable_, and is related to _parley_.

_Ayah_, an Indian nurse, is Port.
_aia_, nurse, of unknown origin. _Caste_ is Port. _casta_, pure, and a
doublet of _chaste_.

_Tank_, an Anglo-Indian word of which the meaning has narrowed in
this country, is Port.

_tanque_, a pool or cistern, Lat.
_stagnum_, whence Old Fr. _estang_ (_étang_) and provincial Eng.
_stank_, a dam, or a pond banked round. _Cobra_ is the Portuguese for
snake, cognate with Fr. _couleuvre_, Lat.

_coluber_ (see p. 7).

We use it as an abbreviation for _cobra de capello_, hooded snake,
the second part of which is identical with Fr.

_chapeau_ and cognate with _cape_, _chapel_ (p. 152), _chaplet_, a
garland, and _chaperon_, a "protecting" hood. From still further afield
than India comes _joss_, a Chinese god, a corruption of Port.
_deos_, Lat. _deus_.

Even _mandarin_ comes from Portuguese, and not Chinese, but it is
an Eastern word, ultimately of Sanskrit origin.

[Page Heading: GORILLA--SILK]
The word _gorilla_ is perhaps African, but more than two thousand
years separate its first appearance from its present use.

In the 5th or 6th century, B.C., a Carthaginian navigator named Hanno
sailed beyond the Pillars of Hercules along the west coast of Africa.
He probably followed very much the same route as Sir Richard Dalyngridge
and Saxon Hugh when they voyaged with Witta the Viking. He wrote in
Punic a record of his adventures, which was received with the
incredulity usually accorded to travellers' tales. Among the wonders
he encountered were some hairy savages called _gorillas_. His work was
translated into Greek and later on into several European languages,
so that the word became familiar to naturalists. In 1847 it was applied
to the giant ape, which had recently been described by explorers.

The origin of the word _silk_ is a curious problem. It is usually explained
as from Greco-Lat.

_sericum_, a name derived from an Eastern people called the _Seres_,
presumably the Chinese. It appears in Anglo-Saxon as _seolc_. Now, at
that early period, words of Latin origin came to us by the overland
route and left traces of their passage. But all the Romance languages
use for silk a name derived from Lat. _sæta_, bristle, and this
name has penetrated even into German (_Seide_) and Dutch (_zijde_). The
derivatives of _sericum_ stand for another material, _serge_. Nor
can it be assumed that the _r_ of the Latin word would have become
in English always _l_ and never _r_. There are races which cannot sound
the letter _r_, but we are not one of them. As the word _silk_ is found
also in Old Norse, Swedish, Danish, and Old Slavonian, the natural
inference is that it must have reached us along the north of Europe,
and, if derived from _sericum_, it must, in the course of its travels,
have passed through a dialect which had no _r_.

FOOTNOTES:
[16] This includes Flemish, spoken in a large part of Belgium and
in the North East of France

.
[17] _Haversack_, oat-sack, comes through French from German.
[18] This applies also to some of the clan names, e.g., _Macpherson_,
son of the parson, _Macnab_, son of the abbot.
[19] My own conviction is that it is identical with Dan. _dirik_,
_dirk_, a pick-lock. See _Dietrich_ (p. 42)."No," said Mat; "and don't _you!_ When Zack's on his legs again, he's
going to take a voyage, and get a season's hunting along with me in the
wild country over the water. I'm as fond of the lad as if he was a bit
of my own flesh and blood. I cottoned to him when he hit out so hearty
for me at the singing-shop--and we've been brothers together ever
since. You mightn't think it, to look at me; but I've spared Zack's
father for Zack's sake; and I don't ask no more reward for it than to
take the lad a hunting for a season or two along with me. When he comes
back home again, and we say Good-bye, I'll tell him all what's
happened; but I won't risk bringing so much as a cross look into his
eyes now, by dropping a word to him of what's passed betwixt his father
and me."

Although this speech excited no little surprise and interest in
Valentine's mind, it did not succeed in suspending the anxieties which
had been awakened in him by Matthew's preceding question, and which he
now began to feel the necessity of confiding to Mrs. Blyth--his grand
counselor in all difficulties, and unfailing comforter in all troubles.

"Do you mind waiting here," he said, "while I go upstairs, and break
the news to my wife? Without her advice I don't know what to do about
communicating our discovery to the poor dear child. Do you mind
waiting?"

No: Matthew would willingly wait. Hearing this, Mr. Blyth left the room
directly.

He remained away a long time. When he came back, his face did not seem
to have gained in composure during his absence.

"My wife has told me of another discovery," he said, "which her
motherly love for our adopted daughter enabled her to make some time
since. I have been sadly surprised and distressed at hearing of it. But
I need say no more on the subject to you, than that Mrs. Blyth has at
once decided me to confide nothing to Madonna--to Mary, I ought to
say--until Zack has got well again and has left England. When I heard
just now, from you, of his projected voyage, I must confess I saw many
objections to it. They have all been removed by what my wife has told
me. I heartily agree with her that the best thing Zack can do is to
make the trip he proposes. You are willing to take care of him; and I
honestly believe that we may safely trust him with you."

A serious difficulty being thus disposed of, Valentine found leisure to
pay some attention to minor things. Among other questions which he now
asked, was one relating to the Hair Bracelet, and to the manner in
which Matthew had become possessed of it. He was answered by the
frankest confession, a confession which tried even _his_ kindly and
forbearing disposition to the utmost, as he listened to it; and which
drew from him, when it was ended, some of the strongest terms of
reproach that had ever passed his lips.

Mat listened till he had done; then, taking his hat to go, muttered a
few words of rough apology, which Valentine's good-nature induced him
to accept, almost as soon as they were spoken. "We must let bygones be
bygones," said the painter. "You have been candid with me, at last, at
any-rate; and, in recognition of that candor, I say 'Good-night, Mr.
Grice,' as a friend of yours still."

When Mat returned to Kirk Street, the landlady came out of her little
parlor to tell him of a visitor who had been to the lodgings in his
absence. An elderly lady, looking very pale and ill, had asked to see
young Mr. Thorpe, and had prefaced the request by saying that she was
his mother. Zack was then asleep, but the lady had been taken up stairs
to see him in bed--had stooped over him, and kissed him--and had then
gone away again, hastily, and in tears. Matthew's face grew grave as he
listened, but he said nothing when the landlady had done, except a word
or two charging her not to mention to Zack what had happened when he
woke. It was plain that Mrs. Thorpe had been told her husband's secret,
and that she had lovingly devoted herself to him, as comforter and
companion to the last.

When the doctor paid his regular visit to the invalid, the next
morning, he was called on immediately for an answer to the important
question of when Zack would be fit to travel. After due consideration
and careful inspection of the injured side of the patient's head, he
replied that in a month's time the lad might safely go on board ship;
and that the sea-voyage proposed would do more towards restoring him to
perfect health and strength, than all the tonic medicines that all the
doctors in England could prescribe.

Matthew might have found the month's inaction to which he was now
obliged to submit for Zack's sake, rather tedious, but for the
opportune arrival in Kirk Street of a professional visitor from
Dibbledean.

Though his client had ungratefully and entirely forgotten him, Mr. Tatt
had not by any means forgotten his client, but had, on the contrary,
attended to his interests with unremitting resolution and assiduity. He
had discovered that Mat was entitled, under his father's will, to no
less a sum than two thousand pounds, if his identity could be properly
established. To effect this result was now, therefore, the grand object
of Mr. Tatt's ambition. He had the prospect, not only of making a
little money, but of establishing a reputation in Dibbledean, if he
succeeded--and, by dint of perseverance, he ultimately did succeed. He
carried Mat about to all sorts of places, insisted on his signing all
sorts of papers and making all sorts of declarations, and ended by
accumulating such a mass of evidence before the month was out, that Mr.
Nawby, as executor to "the late Joshua Grice," declared himself
convinced of the claimant's identity.

On being informed of this result, Mat ordered the lawyer, after first
deducting the amount of his bill from the forthcoming legacy, to draw
him out such a legal form as might enable him to settle his property
forthwith on another person. When Mr. Tatt asked to be furnished with
the name of this person, he was told to write "Martha Peckover."

"Mary's child has got you to look after her, and money enough from her
father to keep her," said Mat, as he put the signed instrument into
Valentine's hands. "When Martha Peckover's old and past her work, she
may want a bank-note or two to fall back on. Give her this, when I'm
gone--and say she earned it from Mary's brother, the day she stopped
and suckled Mary's child by the road-side."

The day of departure drew near. Zack rallied so rapidly, that he was
able, a week before it arrived, to go himself and fetch the letter from
his father which was waiting for him at the Agent's office. It assured
him, briefly, but very kindly, of the forgiveness which he had written
to ask--referred him to the man of business for particulars of the
allowance granted to him, while he pursued his studies in the Art, or
otherwise occupied himself--urged him always to look on Mr. Blyth as
the best friend and counselor that he could ever have--and ended by
engaging him to write often about himself and his employments, to his
mother; sending his letters to be forwarded through the Agent. When
Zack, hearing from this gentleman that his father had left the house in
Baregrove Square, desired to know what had occasioned the change of
residence, he was only informed that the state of Mr. Thorpe's health
had obliged him to seek perfect retirement and repose: and that there
were reasons at present for not mentioning the place of his retreat to
any one, which it was not deemed expedient for his son to become
acquainted with.

The day of departure arrived.

_pomme de pin_ still does.[27] The fruit was named from its shape, which
closely resembles that of a fir-cone. _Pomegranate_ means "apple with
seeds." We also find the apricot, lemon (_pomcitron_), peach, and
quince all described as apples.

At least one fruit, the _greengage_, is named from a person, Sir William
Gage, a gentleman of Suffolk, who popularised its cultivation early in
the 18th century. It happens that the French name of the fruit,
_reine-claude_ (pronounced _glaude_), is also personal, from the
wife of Francis I.

Animal nomenclature shows some strange vagaries. The resemblance
of the _hippopotamus_, lit. river-horse, to the horse, hardly extends
beyond their common possession of four legs.[28] The lion would hardly
recognise himself in the _ant-lion_ or the _sea-lion_, still less in
the _chameleon_, lit. earth-lion, the first element of which occurs
also in _camomile_, earth-apple. The _guinea-pig_ is not a pig, nor
does it come from Guinea (see p. 51). _Porcupine_ means "spiny pig." It
has an extraordinary number of early variants, and Shakespeare wrote
it _porpentine_. One Mid. English form was _porkpoint_. The French
name has hesitated between _spine_ and _spike_. The modern form is
_porc-épic_, but Palsgrave has "_porkepyn_ a beest, _porc espin_."

_Porpoise_ is from Old Fr. _porpeis_, for _porc peis_ (Lat. _porcus
piscis_), pig-fish. The modern French name is _marsouin_, from Ger.
_Meerschwein_, sea-pig; _cf._ the name _sea-hog_, formerly used in
English. Old Fr. _peis_ survives also in _grampus_, Anglo-Fr. _grampais_
for _grand peis_, big fish, but the usual Old French word is
_craspeis_ or _graspeis_, fat fish.

The _caterpillar_ seems to have suggested in turn a cat and a dog. Our
word is corrupted by folk-etymology from Old Fr. _chatepeleuse_, "a
corne-devouring mite, or weevell" (Cotgrave).

This probably means "woolly cat," just as a common species is
popularly called _woolly bear_, but it was understood as being
connected with the French verb _peler_, "to _pill_, pare, barke,
unrinde, unskin" (Cotgrave).

The modern French name for the caterpillar is _chenille_, a derivative
of _chien_, dog. It has also been applied to a fabric of a woolly
nature; _cf._ the botanical _catkin_, which is in French _chaton_,
kitten.

[Page Heading: NICKNAMES OF ANIMALS]

              Some animals bear nicknames.

_Dotterel_ means "dotard," and _dodo_ is from the Port. _doudo_, mad.
_Ferret_ is from Fr.

_furet_, a diminutive from Lat. _fur_, thief. _Shark_ was used of
a sharper or greedy parasite before it was applied to the fish. This,
in the records of the Elizabethan voyagers, is more often called by
its Spanish name _tiburon_, whence Cape Tiburon, in Haiti.

The origin of _shark_ is unknown, but it appears to be identical
with _shirk_, for which we find earlier _sherk_.

We find Ital. _scrocco_ (whence Fr. _escroc_), Ger.
_Schurke_, Du.

_schurk_, rascal, all rendered "shark" in early dictionaries, but the
relationship of these words is not clear.

Blyth is enjoying the
evening breeze in the invalid room.

Besides the painter and his wife, and Madonna, two visitors are
present, who occupy both the spare beds in the house. One is Mrs.
Thorpe, the other Mrs. Peckover; and they have been asked to become
Valentine's guests, to assist at the joyful ceremony of welcoming Zack
to England on his return from the wilds of America. He has outstayed
his year's leave of absence by nearly six months; and his appearance at
Mr. Blyth's has become an event of daily, or more properly, of hourly
expectation.

There is a sad and significant change in Mrs. Thorpe's dress. She wears
the widow's cap and weeds. It is nearly seven months since her husband
died, in the remote Welsh village to which he retired on leaving
London. With him, as with many other confirmed invalids, Nature drooped
to her final decay gradually and wearily; but his death was painless,
and his mental powers remained unimpaired to the end. One of the last
names that lingered lovingly on his lips--after he had bade his wife
farewell--was the name of his absent son.

Mrs. Thorpe sits close to Mrs. Blyth, and talks to her in low, gentle
tones. The kind black eyes of the painter's wife are brighter than they
have been for many a long year past, and the clear tones of her
voice--cheerful always--have a joyous sound in them now. Ever since the
first days of the Spring season, she has been gaining so greatly in
health and strength, that the "favorable turn" has taken place in her
malady, which was spoken of as "possible" by the doctors long ago, at
the time of her first sufferings. She has several times, for the last
fortnight, been moved from her couch for a few hours to a comfortable
seat near the window; and if the fine weather still continues, she is
to be taken out, in a day or two, for an airing in an invalid chair.

The prospect of this happy event, and the pleasant expectation of
Zack's return, have made Valentine more gaily talkative and more nimbly
restless than ever. As he skips discursively about the room at this
moment, talking of all sorts of subjects, and managing to mix Art up
with every one of them; dressed in the old jaunty frock-coat with the
short tails, he looks, if possible, younger, plumper, rosier, and
brisker than when he was first introduced to the reader. CAPTAIN.
I do not know?

LAURA. No; what no one knows, you surely cannot know.

CAPTAIN. Are you joking?

LAURA. No; I am only making use of your own teaching. For that matter,
how do you know that I have not been unfaithful to you?

CAPTAIN. I believe you capable of almost anything, but not that, nor
that you would talk about it if it were true.

LAURA. Suppose that I was prepared to bear anything, even to being
despised and driven out, everything for the sake of being able to
keep and control my child, and that I am truthful now when I declare
that Bertha is my child, but not yours. Suppose--
CAPTAIN. Stop now!
LAURA. Just suppose this. In that case your power would be at an
end.

CAPTAIN. When you had proved that I was not the father.Madonna sits opposite to her at the window--as cool and pretty a
contrast as can be imagined, in her white muslin dress, and light
rose-coloured ribbons. She is looking at Mrs. Peckover, and smiling
every now and then at the comically languishing faces made by that
excellent woman, to express to "little Mary" the extremity of her
sufferings from the heat. The whole length of the window-sill is
occupied by an AEolian harp--one of the many presents which Valentine's
portrait painting expeditions have enabled him to offer to his wife.
Madonna's hand is resting lightly on the box of the harp; for by
touching it in this way, she becomes sensible to the influence of its
louder and higher notes when the rising breeze draws them out. This is
the only pleasure she can derive from music; and it is always, during
the summer and autumn evenings, one of the amusements that she enjoys
in Mrs. Blyth's room.

Mrs. Thorpe, in the course of her conversation with Mrs. Blyth, has
been reminded of a letter to one of her sisters, which she has not yet
completed, and goes to her own room to finish it--Valentine running to
open the door for her, with the nimblest juvenile gallantry, then
returning to the window and addressing Mrs. Peckover.

"Hot as ever, eh? Shall I get you one of Lavvie's fans?" says Mr.
Blyth.

"No, thank'ee, sir; I ain't quite melted yet," answers Mrs. Peckover.
"But I'll tell you what I wish you would do for me. I wish you would
read me Master Zack's last letter. You promised, you know, sir."

"And I would have performed my promise before, Mrs. Peckover, if Mrs.
Thorpe had not been in the room. There are passages in the letter,
which it might revive very painful remembrances in her to hear. Now she
has left us, I have not the least objection to read, if you are ready
to listen."

Saying this, Valentine takes a letter from his pocket. Woe to
you who build, etc. . .Not that the building of the monuments of the
prophets was in itself blameworthy, but only the intention of these
unhappy men, who made use of this outward shew of religion and
piety, as a means to carry on their wicked designs against the
prince of prophets.

11:48.

Truly you bear witness that you consent to the doings of your
fathers. For they indeed killed them: and you build their sepulchres.

11:49. For this cause also the wisdom of God said: I will send to them
prophets and apostles: and some of them they will kill and persecute.

11:50. That the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the
foundation of the world may be required of this generation,
11:51. From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, who was slain
between the altar and the temple.

Yea I say to you: It shall be required of this generation.

11:52. Woe to you lawyers, for you have taken away the key of knowledge.
You yourselves have not entered in: and those that were entering in,
you have hindered.

11:53. And as he was saying these things to them, the Pharisees and the
lawyers began violently to urge him and to oppress his mouth about
many things,
11:54. Lying in wait for him and seeking to catch something from his
mouth, that they might accuse him.

Luke Chapter 12
Christ warns us against hypocrisy, the fear of the world and
covetousness. He admonishes all to watch.
12:1. And when great multitudes stood about him, so that they trod
one upon another, he began to say to his disciples: Beware ye of
the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
12:2. For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed: nor
hidden that shall not be known.

12:3.I was at first so
shocked and amazed by what I heard, and then had so much to say to him
about it, that our half day's march, by the time we had got to the end
of it, seemed to me to have hardly lasted as long as an hour.

"He stopped, though, at the place he had fixed on; and held out his
hand to me, and said these words: 'I've done my duty by you, Zack, as
brother should by brother. The time's come at last for us two to say
Good-bye. You're going back over the sea to your friends, and I'm going
inland by myself on the tramp.' I had heard him talk of our parting in
this way before, but had never thought it would really take place; and
I tried hard, as you may imagine, to make him change his mind, and sail
for England with me. But it was useless.

"'No, Zack,' he said, 'I doubt if I'm fit for the life you're going
back to lead. I've given it a trial, and a hard and bitter one it's
been to me. I began life on the tramp; and on the tramp I shall end it.
Good-bye, Zack. I shall think of you, when I light my fire and cook my
bit of victuals without you, in the lonesome places to-night.'

"I tried to control myself, Valentine; but my eyes got dim, and I
caught fast hold of him by the arm. 'Mat,' I said, 'I can't part with
you in this dreary, hopeless way. Don't shut the future up from both of
us for ever. We have been eighteen months together, let another year
and-a-half pass if you like; and then give yourself; and give me,
another chance. Look at this! This is for Lisa, ha! Do you see how
she can roll her eyes and turn her head, eh? And here is Maja's
popgun.
[Loads it and shoots at Mlle. Y.]
MLLE. Y. [Makes a startled gesture.]
MME. X. Did I frighten you? Do you think I would like to shoot you, eh?
On my soul, if I don't think you did! If you wanted to shoot _me_ it
wouldn't be so surprising, because I stood in your way--and I know
you can never forget that--although I was absolutely innocent. You
still believe I intrigued and got you out of the Stora theatre,
but I didn't.

I didn't do that, although you think so. Well, it doesn't make any
difference what I say to you. You still believe I did it.
[Takes up a pair of embroidered slippers.] And these are for my
better half. I embroidered them myself--I can't bear tulips, but he
wants tulips on everything.

MLLE. Y. [Looks up ironically and curiously.]
MME. X. [Putting a hand in each slipper.] What little feet Bob has!
What?

And you should see what a splendid stride he has! You've never seen him
in slippers! [Mlle. Y. laughs aloud.] Look! [She makes the slippers
walk on the table. Mlle. Y. laughs loudly.] And when he is grumpy he
stamps like this with his foot. "What! damn those servants who can
never learn to make coffee. Oh, now those creatures haven't trimmed the
lamp wick properly!" And then there are draughts on the floor and his
feet are cold. "Ugh, how cold it is; the stupid idiots can never
keep the fire going." [She rubs the slippers together, one sole
over the other.]

MLLE. Y. [Shrieks with laughter.]
MME. X. And then he comes home and has to hunt for his slippers which
Marie has stuck under the chiffonier--oh, but it's sinful to sit here
and make fun of one's husband this way when he is kind and a good
little man. You ought to have had such a husband, Amelie.
What are you laughing at? What? What? And you see he's true to me.
Yes, I'm sure of that, because he told me himself--what are you
laughing at?

--that when I was touring in Norway that that brazen Frêdêrique came and
wanted to seduce him! Can you fancy anything so infamous? [Pause.]
I'd have torn her eyes out if she had come to see him when I was
at home. [Pause.] It was lucky that Bob told me about it himself and
that it didn't reach me through gossip.

[Pause.] But would you believe it, Frêdêrique wasn't the only one!
I don't know why, but the women are crazy about my husband. They
must think he has influence about getting them theatrical engagements,
because he is connected with the government. Perhaps you were after
him yourself. I didn't use to trust you any too much. But now I know
he never bothered his head about you, and you always seemed to have a
grudge against him someway.

[Pause. They look at each other in a puzzled way.]
MME. X. Come and see us this evening, Amelie, and show us that you're
not put out with us,--not put out with me at any rate. I don't know,
but I think it would be uncomfortable to have you for an enemy. Perhaps
it's because I stood in your way [rallentando] or--I really--don't
know why--in particular.
[Pause. Mlle. Y. stares at Mme. X curiously.]
MME. X [Thoughtfully]. Our acquaintance has been so queer.hooray!" Here Mrs. Peckover forgets
her company-manners, and waves the red cotton handkerchief out of the
window in an irrepressible burst of triumph.

Zack's hearty laugh is heard outside--then his quick step on the
stairs--then the door opens, and he comes in with his beaming sunburnt
face healthier and heartier than ever. His first embrace is for his
mother, his second for Madonna; and, after he has greeted every one
else cordially, he goes back to those two, and Mr. Blyth is glad to see
that he sits down between them and takes their hands gently and
affectionately in his.

Matthew Grice is in all their memories, when the first greetings are
over. Valentine and Madonna look at each other--and the girl's fingers
sign hesitatingly the letters of Matthew's name.

"She is thinking of the comrade you have lost," says the painter,
addressing himself, a little sadly, to Zack.

"The only living soul that's kin to her now by her mother's side," adds
Mrs. Peckover. "It's like her pretty ways to be thinking of him kindly,
for her mother's sake."

"Are you really determined, Zack, to take that second voyage?" asks
Valentine. "Are you determined to go back to America, on the one faint
chance of seeing Mat once more?"

"If I am a living man, eighteen months hence," Zack answers resolutely,
"nothing shall prevent my taking the voyage. Matthew Grice loved me
like a brother. And, like a brother, I will yet bring him back--if he
lives to keep his promise and meet me, when the time comes."

              -------

The time came; and on either side, the two comrades of former days--in
years so far apart, in sympathies so close together--lived to look each
other in the face again. The solitude which had once hardened Matthew
Grice, had wrought on him, in his riper age, to better and higher ends.
In all his later roamings, the tie which had bound him to those sacred
human interests in which we live and move and have our being--the tie
which he himself believed that he had broken--held fast to him still.
His grim, scarred face softened, his heavy hand trembled in the
friendly grasp that held it, as Zack pleaded with him once more; and,
this time, pleaded not in vain.

"I've never been my own man again" said Mat, "since you and me wished
each other good-bye on the sandhills. The lonesome places have got
strange to me--and my rifle's heavier in hand than ever I knew it
before. There's some part of myself that seems left behind like,
between Mary's grave and Mary's child. Must I cross the seas again to
find it? Give us hold of your hand, Zack--and take the leavings of me
back, along with you."

So the noble nature of the man unconsciously asserted itself in his
simple words. So the two returned to the old land together. The first
kiss with which his dead sister's child welcomed him back, cooled the
Tramp's Fever for ever; and the Man of many Wanderings rested at last
among the friends who loved him, to wander no more.




NOTE TO CHAPTER VII.

I DO not know that any attempt has yet been made in English fiction to
draw the character of a "Deaf Mute," simply and exactly after
nature--or, in other words, to exhibit the peculiar effects produced by
the loss of the senses of hearing and speaking on the disposition of
the person so afflicted. The famous Fenella, in Scott's "Peveril of the
Peak," only assumes deafness and dumbness; and the whole family of dumb
people on the stage have the remarkable faculty--so far as my
experience goes--of always being able to hear what is said to them.
When the idea first occurred to me of representing the character of a
"Deaf Mute" as literally as possible according to nature, I found the
difficulty of getting at tangible and reliable materials to work from,
much greater than I had anticipated; so much greater, indeed, that I
believe my design must have been abandoned, if a lucky chance had not
thrown in my way Dr. Kitto's delightful little book, "The Lost Senses."
In the first division of that work, which contains the author's
interesting and touching narrative of his own sensations under the
total loss of the sense of hearing, and its consequent effect on the
faculties of speech, will be found my authority for most of those
traits in Madonna's character which are especially and immediately
connected with the deprivation from which she is represented as
suffering. He hath laid my vineyard waste, and hath pilled off the bark
of my fig tree: he hath stripped it bare, and cast it away; the
branches thereof are made white.

1:8. Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of
her youth.

1:9.ERYSIPELAS
Erysipelas, popularly known as "rose," is an acute spreading infective
disease of the skin or of a mucous membrane due to the action of a
streptococcus. Infection invariably takes place through an abrasion of
the surface, although this may be so slight that it escapes observation
even when sought for. The streptococci are found most abundantly in
the lymph spaces just beyond the swollen margin of the inflammatory
area, and in the serous blebs which sometimes form on the surface.Here is the ever bright side, the ever noble
and consoling aspect of all human calamity and the object of presenting
this to the view of others, as truly and as tenderly as in him lies,
seems to me to be a fit object for any writer who desires to address
himself to the best sympathies of his readers.