"Well, you might knit, I should think," said her visitor, "it's dreadful
for a girl as big as you are to sit all day idle; I had sore eyes once
when I was a little girl--how old are you?" she asked, abruptly.

"Eleven last month," said Polly.

"Well, I wasn't only nine when I knit a stocking; and I had sore eyes,
too; you see I was a very little girl, and--"

"Was you ever little?" interrupted Joel, in extreme incredulity, drawing
near, and looking over the big square figure.

"Hey?" said Miss Jerusha; so Joel repeated his question before Polly
could stop him.

"Of course," answered Miss Jerusha; and then she added, tartly, "little
boys shouldn't speak unless they're spoken to. Now," and she turned back
to Polly again, "didn't you ever knit a stocking?"

"No, ma'am," said Polly, "not a whole one."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Miss Jerusha; "did I ever!" And she raised her
black mitts in intense disdain. "A big girl like you never to knit a
stocking! to think your mother should bring you up so! and--"

"She didn't bring us up," screamed Joel, in indignation, facing her with
blazing eyes.

"Joel," said Polly, "be still."

"And you're very impertinent, too," said Miss Jerusha; "a good child
never is impertinent."

Polly sat quite still; and Miss Jerusha continued:

"Now, I hope you will learn to be industrious; and when I come again, I
will see what you have done."

"You aren't ever coming again," said Joel, defiantly; "no, never!"

"Joel!" implored Polly, and in her distress she pulled up her bandage
as she looked at him; "you know mammy'll be so sorry at you! Oh, ma'am,
and" she turned to Miss Jerusha, who was now thoroughly aroused to the
duty she saw before her of doing these children good, "I don't know what
is the reason, ma'am; Joel never talks so; he's real good; and--"

"It only shows," said the lady, seeing her way quite clear for a little
exhortation, "that you've all had your own way from infancy; and that
you don't do what you might to make your mother's life a happy one."

"Oh, ma'am," cried Polly, and she burst into a flood of tears, "please,
please don't say that!"

Who can help thinking of his lawyer, when he makes acquaintance with those
immortal firms Dodson and Fogg, or Quirk, Snap, and Gammon? Is not
Wrexhill libellous, and Dr. Hookwell personal? Arise!
avenge them both, ye zealous congregations!And Miss Jerusha, seeing no way to make herself heard,
disappeared feeling pity for children who would turn away from good
advice.

But still Polly cried on; all the pent-up feelings that had been so long
controlled had free vent now. She really couldn't stop! Joel, frightened
to death, at last said, "I'm going to wake up Ben."

That brought Polly to; and she sobbed out, "Oh, no, Jo--ey--I'll stop."

"I will," said Joel, seeing his advantage; "I'm going, Polly," and he
started to the foot of the stairs.

"No, I'm done now, Joe," said Polly, wiping her eyes, and choking back
her thoughts--"oh, Joe! I must scream! my eyes aches so!" and poor Polly
fairly writhed all over the chair.

"What'll I do?" said Joel, at his wits' end, running back, "do you want
some water?"

"Oh, no," gasped Polly; "doctor wouldn't let me; oh! I wish mammy'd
come!"

"I'll go and look for her," suggested Joel, feeling as if he must do
something; and he'd rather be out at the gate, than to see Polly suffer.

"That won't bring her," said Polly; trying to keep still; "I'll try to
wait."

"Here she is now!" cried Joel, peeping out of the window; "oh! goody!"


JOEL'S TURN


"Well," Mrs. Pepper's tone was unusually blithe as she stepped into the
kitchen--"you've had a nice time, I suppose--what in the world!" and she
stopped at the bedroom door.

"Oh, mammy, if you'd been here!" said Joel, while Polly sat still, only
holding on to her eyes as if they were going to fly out; "there's been
a big woman here; she came right in--and she talked awfully! and Polly's
been a-cryin', and her eyes ache dreadfully--and--"

"Been crying!" repeated Mrs. Pepper, coming up to poor Polly. "Polly
been crying!" she still repeated.

"Oh, mammy, I couldn't help it," said Polly; "she said--" and in spite
of all she could do, the rain of tears began again, which bade fair to
be as uncontrolled as before. But Mrs. Pepper took her up firmly in her
arms, as if she were Phronsie, and sat down in the old rocking-chair and
just patted her back.

"There, there," she whispered, soothingly, "don't think of it, Polly;
mother's got home."

"Oh, mammy," said Polly, crawling up to the comfortable neck for
protection, "I ought not to mind; but 'twas Miss Jerusha Henderson; and
she said--"

"What did she say?" asked Mrs. Pepper, thinking perhaps it to be the
wiser thing to let Polly free her mind.

"Oh, she said that we ought to be doing something; and I ought to knit,
and--"

"Go on," said her mother.

"And then Joel got naughty; oh, mammy, he never did so before; and I
couldn't stop him," cried Polly, in great distress; "I really couldn't,
mammy--and he talked to her; and he told her she wasn't ever coming here
again."

"Joel shouldn't have said that," said Mrs. Pepper, and under her breath
something was added that Polly even failed to hear--"but no more she
isn't!"

"And, mammy," cried Polly--and she flung her arms around her mother's
neck and gave her a grasp that nearly choked Mrs. Pepper, "ain't I
helpin' you some, mammy? Oh! I wish I could do something big for you?
Ain't you happy, mammy?"

"For the land's sakes!" cried Mrs. Pepper, straining Polly to her heart,
"whatever has that woman--whatever could she have said to you? Such a
girl as you are, too!" cried Mrs. Pepper, hugging Polly, and covering
her with kisses so tender, that Polly, warmed and cuddled up to her
heart's content, was comforted to the full.

"Well," said Mrs. Pepper, when at last she thought she had formed
between Polly and Joel about the right idea of the visit, "well, now we
won't think of it, ever any more; 'tisn't worth it, Polly, you know."

But poor Polly! and poor mother! They both were obliged to think of it.
Nothing could avert the suffering of the next few days, caused by that
long flow of burning tears.

"Nothing feels good on 'em, mammy," said Polly, at last, twisting her
hands in the vain attempt to keep from rubbing the aching, inflamed eyes
that drove her nearly wild with their itching, "there isn't any use in
trying anything."

"There will be use," energetically protested Mrs. Pepper, bringing
another cool bandage, "as long as you've got an eye in your head, Polly
Pepper!"

Dr. Fisher's face, when he first saw the change that the fateful visit
had wrought, and heard the accounts, was very grave indeed. Everything
had been so encouraging on his last visit, that he had come very near
promising Polly speedy freedom from the hateful bandage.

But the little Pepper household soon had something else to think of more
important even than Polly's eyes, for now the heartiest, the jolliest
of all the little group was down--Joel. How he fell sick, they scarcely
knew, it all came so suddenly. The poor, bewildered family had hardly
time to think, before delirium and, perhaps, death stared them in the
face.

When Polly first heard it, by Phronsie's pattering downstairs and
screaming: "Oh, Polly, Joey's dre-ad-ful sick, he is!" she jumped right
up, and tore off the bandage.

"Now, I will help mother! I will, so there!" and in another minute she
would have been up in the sick room. But the first thing she knew, a
gentle but firm hand was laid upon hers; and she found herself back
again in the old rocking-chair, and listening to the Doctor's words
which were quite stern and decisive.

"Now, I tell you," he said, "you must not take off that bandage again;
do you know the consequences? You will be blind! and then you will be a
care to your mother all your life!"

"I shall be blind, anyway," said Polly, despairingly; "so 'twon't make
any difference."

"No; your eyes will come out of it all right, only I did hope," and the
good doctor's face fell--"that the other two boys would escape; but,"
and he brightened up at sight of Polly's forlorn visage--"see you do
your part by keeping still."

But there came a day soon when everything was still around the once
happy little brown house--when only whispers were heard from white lips;
and thoughts were fearfully left unuttered.

On the morning of one of these days, when Mrs. Pepper felt she could not
exist an hour longer without sleep, kind Mrs. Beebe came to stay until
things were either better or worse.

Still the cloud hovered, dark and forbidding. At last, one afternoon,
when Polly was all alone, she could endure it no longer. She flung
herself down by the side of the old bed, and buried her face in the gay
patched bed-quilt.

"Dear God," she said, "make me willing to have anything," she
hesitated--"yes, anything happen; to be blind forever, and to have Joey
sick, only make me good."

How long she staid there she never knew; for she fell asleep--the first
sleep she had had since Joey was taken sick. And little Mrs. Beebe
coming in found her thus.

"Polly," the good woman said, leaning over her, "you poor, pretty
creeter, you; I'm goin' to tell you somethin'--there, there, just to
think! Joel's goin' to get well!"

"Oh, Mrs. Beebe!" cried Polly, tumbling over in a heap on the floor, her
face, as much as could be seen under the bandage, in a perfect glow, "Is
he, really?"

"Yes, to be sure; the danger's all over now," said the little old lady,
inwardly thinking--"If I hadn't a-come!"

"Well, then, the Lord wants him to," cried Polly, in rapture; "don't he,
Mrs. Beebe?"

"To be sure--to be sure," repeated the kind friend, only half
understanding.

"Well, I don't care about my eyes, then," cried Polly; and to Mrs.
Beebe's intense astonishment and dismay, she spun round and round in the
middle of the floor.

"Oh, Polly, Polly!" the little old lady cried, running up to her, "do
stop! the doctor wouldn't let you! he wouldn't really, you know! it'll
all go to your eyes."

"I don't care," repeated Polly, in the middle of a spin; but she
stopped obediently; "seems as if I just as soon be blind as not; it's so
beautiful Joey's going to get well!"


SUNSHINE AGAIN


But as Joel was smitten down suddenly, so he came up quickly, and his
hearty nature asserted itself by rapid strides toward returning health;
and one morning he astonished them all by turning over suddenly and
exclaiming:

"I want something to eat!"

"Bless the Lord!" cried Mrs. Pepper, "now he's going to live!"

"But he mustn't eat," protested Mrs. Beebe, in great alarm, trotting for
the cup of gruel. "Here, you pretty creeter you, here's something nice."
And she temptingly held the spoon over Joel's mouth; but with a grimace
he turned away.

"Oh, I want something to eat! some gingerbread or some bread and
butter."

"Dear me!" ejaculated Mrs. Beebe. "Gingerbread!" Poor Mrs. Pepper saw
the hardest part of her trouble now before her, as she realized that the
returning appetite must be fed only on strengthening food; for where it
was to come from she couldn't tell.

"The Lord only knows where we'll get it," she groaned within herself.

Yes, He knew. A rap at the door, and little David ran down to find the
cause.

"Oh, mammy," he said, "Mrs. Henderson sent it--see! see!" And in the
greatest excitement he placed in her lap a basket that smelt savory and
nice even before it was opened. When it was opened, there lay a little
bird delicately roasted, and folded in a clean napkin; also a glass of
jelly, crimson and clear.

"Oh, Joey," cried Mrs. Pepper, almost overwhelmed with joy, "see what
Mrs. Henderson sent you! now you can eat fit for a king!"

That little bird certainly performed its mission in life; for as Mrs.
Beebe said, "It just touched the spot!" and from that very moment Joel
improved so rapidly they could hardly believe their eyes.

"Hoh! I haven't been sick!" he cried on the third day, true to his
nature. "Mammy, I want to get up."

"Oh, dear, no! you mustn't, Joel," cried Mrs. Pepper in a fright,
running up to him as he was preparing to give the bedclothes a lusty
kick; "you'll send 'em in."

"Send what in?" asked Joel, looking up at his mother in terror, as the
dreadful thought made him pause.

"Why, the measles, Joey; they'll all go in if you get out."

"How they goin' to get in again, I'd like to know?" asked Joel, looking
at the little red spots on his hands in incredulity; say, ma!

"Well, they will," said his mother, "as you'll find to your sorrow if
you get out of bed."

"Oh, dear," said Joel, beginning to whimper, as he drew into bed again,
"when can I get up, mammy!"

"Oh, in a day or two," responded Mrs. Pepper, cheerfully; "you're
getting on so finely you'll be as smart as a cricket! Shouldn't you
say he might get up in a day or two, Mrs. Beebe?" she appealed to that
individual who was knitting away cheerily in the corner.

"Well, if he keeps on as he's begun, I shouldn't know what to think,"
replied Mrs. Beebe. "It beats all how quick he's picked up. I never see
anything like it, I'm sure!"

And as Mrs. Beebe was a great authority in sickness, the old, sunny
cheeriness began to creep into the brown house once more, and to bubble
over as of yore.

"Seems as if 'twas just good to live," said Mrs. Pepper, thankfully
once, when her thoughts were too much for her. "I don't believe I shall
ever care how poor we are," she continued, "as long as we're together."

"And that's just what the Lord meant, maybe," replied good Mrs. Beebe,
who was preparing to go home.

Joel kept the house in a perfect uproar all through his getting well.
Mrs. Pepper observed one day, when he had been more turbulent than
usual, that she was "almost worn to a thread."

"Twasn't anything to take care of you, Joe," she added, "when you were
real sick, because then I knew where you were; but--well, you won't ever
have the measles again, I s'pose, and that's some comfort!"

Little David, who had been nearly stunned by the sickness that had laid
aside his almost constant companion, could express his satisfaction and
joy in no other way than by running every third minute and begging to do
something for him. And Joel, who loved dearly to be waited on, improved
every opportunity that offered; which Mrs. Pepper observing, soon put a
stop to.

"You'll run his legs off, Joel," at last she said, when he sent David
the third time down to the wood-pile for a stick of just the exact
thickness, and which the little messenger declared wasn't to be found.
"Haven't you any mercy? You've kept him going all day, too," she added,
glancing at David's pale face.

"Oh, mammy," panted David, "don't; I love to go. Here Joe, is the best I
could find," handing him a nice smooth stick.

"I know you do," said his mother; "but Joe's getting better now, and he
must learn to spare you."

"I don't want to spare folks," grumbled Joel, whittling away with
energy; "I've been sick--real sick," he added, lifting his chubby face
to his mother to impress the fact.

"I know you have," she cried, running to kiss her boy; "but now, Joe,
you're most well. To-morrow I'm going to let you go down-stairs; what do
you think of that!"

"Hooray!" screamed Joel, throwing away the stick and clapping his hands,
forgetting all about his serious illness, "that'll be prime!"

"Aren't you too sick to go, Joey?" asked Mrs. Pepper, mischievously.

"No, I'm not sick," cried Joel, in the greatest alarm, fearful his
mother meant to take back the promise; "I've never been sick. Oh, mammy!
you know you'll let me go, won't your?"

"I guess so," laughed his mother.

"Come on, Phron," cried Joel, giving her a whirl.

David, who was too tired for active sport, sat on the floor and watched
them frolic in great delight.

"Mammy," said he, edging up to her side as the sport went on, "do you
know, I think it's just good--it's--oh, it's so frisky since Joe got
well, isn't it, mammy?"

"Yes, indeed," said Mrs. Pepper, giving him a radiant look in return for
his; "and when Polly's around again with her two eyes all right--well, I
don't know what we shall do, I declare!"

"Boo!" cried a voice, next morning, close to Polly's elbow, unmistakably
Joel's.

"Oh, Joel Pepper!" she cried, whirling around, "is that really you!"

"Yes," cried that individual, confidently, "it's I; oh, I say, Polly,
I've had fun up-stairs, I tell you what!"

"Poor boy!" said Polly, compassionately.

"I wasn't a poor boy," cried Joel, indignantly; "I had splendid things
to eat; oh, my!" and he closed one eye and smacked his lips in the
delightful memory.

"I know it," said Polly, "and I'm so glad, Joel."

"I don't suppose I'll ever get so many again," observed Joel,
reflectively, after a minute's pause, as one and another of the wondrous
delicacies rose before his mind's eye; "not unless I have the measles
again--say, Polly, can't I have 'em again?"

"Mercy, no!" cried Polly, in intense alarm, "I hope not."

"Well, I don't," said Joel, "I wish I could have 'em sixty--no--two
hundred times, so there!"

"Well, mammy couldn't take care of you," said Ben; "you don't know what
you're sayin', Joe."

"Well, then, I wish I could have the things without the measles," said
Joel, willing to accommodate; "only folks won't send 'em," he added, in
an injured tone.

"Polly's had the hardest time of all," said her mother, affectionately
patting the bandage.

"I think so too," put in Ben; "if my eyes were hurt I'd give up."

"So would I," said David; and Joel, to be in the fashion, cried also, "I
know I would;" while little Phronsie squeezed up to Polly's side, "And
I, too."

"Would what, Puss?" asked Ben, tossing her up high. "Have good things,"
cried the child, in delight at understanding the others, "I would
really, Ben," she cried, gravely, when they all screamed.

"Well, I hope so," said Ben, tossing her higher yet. "Don't laugh at
her, boys," put in Polly; "we're all going to have good times now,
Phronsie, now we've got well."

"Yes," laughed the child from her high perch; "we aren't ever goin' to
be sick again, ever--any more," she added impressively.

The good times were coming for Polly--coming pretty near, and she
didn't know it! All the children were in the secret; for as Mrs. Pepper
declared, "They'd have to know it; and if they were let into the secret
they'd keep it better."

So they had individually and collectively been intrusted with the
precious secret, and charged with the extreme importance of "never
letting any one know," and they had been nearly bursting ever since with
the wild desire to impart their knowledge.

"I'm afraid I shall tell," said David, running to his mother at last;
"oh, mammy, I don't dare stay near Polly, I do want to tell so bad."

"Oh, no, you won't, David," said his mother encouragingly, "when you
know mother don't want you to; and besides, think how Polly'll look when
she sees it."

"I know," cried David in the greatest rapture, "I wouldn't tell for all
the world! I guess she'll look nice, don't you mother?" and he laughed
in glee at the thought.

"Poor child! I guess she will!" and then Mrs. Pepper laughed too, till
the little old kitchen rang with delight at the accustomed sound.

The children all had to play "clap in and clap out" in the bedroom while
it came; and "stage coach," too--"anything to make a noise," Ben said.
And then after they got nicely started in the game, he would be missing
to help about the mysterious thing in the kitchen, which was safe since
Polly couldn't see him go on account of her bandage. So she didn't
suspect in the least. And although the rest were almost dying to be
out in the kitchen, they conscientiously stuck to their bargain to keep
Polly occupied. Only Joel would open the door and peep once; and then
Phronsie behind him began. "Oh, I see the sto----" but David swooped
down on her in a twinkling, and smothered the rest by tickling her.

Once they came very near having the whole thing pop out. "Whatever is
that noise in the kitchen?" asked Polly, as they all stopped to
take breath after the scuffle of "stage coach." "It sounds just like
grating."

"I'll go and see," cried Joel, promptly; and then he flew out where his
mother and Ben and two men were at work on a big, black thing in the
corner. The old stove, strange to say, was nowhere to be seen! Something
else stood in its place, a shiny, black affair, with a generous supply
of oven doors, and altogether such a comfortable, home-like look about
it, as if it would say--"I'm going to make sunshine in this house!"

"Oh, Joel," cried his mother, turning around on him with very black
hands, "you haven't told!"

"No," said Joel, "but she's hearin' the noise, Polly is."

"Hush!" said Ben, to one of the men.

"We can't put it up without some noise," the man replied, "but we'll be
as still as we can."

"Isn't it a big one, ma?" asked Joel, in the loudest of stage whispers,
that Polly on the other side of the door couldn't have failed to hear if
Phronsie hadn't laughed just then.

"Go back, Joe, do," said Ben, "play tag--anything," he implored, "we'll
be through in a few minutes."

"It takes forever!" said Joel, disappearing within the bedroom door.
Luckily for the secret, Phronsie just then ran a pin sticking up on the
arm of the old chair, into her finger; and Polly, while comforting her,
forgot to question Joel. And then the mother came in, and though she had
ill-concealed hilarity in her voice, she kept chattering and bustling
around with Polly's supper to such an extent that there was no chance
for a word to be got in.

Next morning it seemed as if the "little brown house," would turn inside
out with joy.

"Oh, mammy!" cried Polly, jumping into her arms the first thing, as Dr.
Fisher untied the bandage, "my eyes are new! just the same as if I'd
just got 'em! Don't they look different?" she asked, earnestly, running
to the cracked glass to see for herself.

"No," said Ben, "I hope not; the same brown ones, Polly."

"Well," said Polly, hugging first one and then another, "everybody looks
different through them, anyway."

"Oh," cried Joel, "come out into the kitchen, Polly; it's a great deal
better out there."

"May I?" asked Polly, who was in such a twitter looking at everything
that she didn't know which way to turn.

"Yes," said the doctor, smiling at her.

"Well, then," sang Polly, "come mammy, we'll go first; isn't it just
lovely--oh, MAMMY!" and Polly turned so very pale, and looked as if she
were going to tumble right over, that Mrs. Pepper grasped her arm in
dismay.

"What is it?" she asked, pointing to the corner, while all the children
stood round in the greatest excitement.

"Why," cried Phronsie, "it's a stove--don't you know, Polly?" But Polly
gave one plunge across the room, and before anybody could think, she was
down on her knees with her arms flung right around the big, black thing,
and laughing and crying over it, all in the same breath!

And then they all took hold of hands and danced around it like wild
little things; while Dr. Fisher stole out silently--and Mrs. Pepper
laughed till she wiped her eyes to see them go.

"We aren't ever goin' to have any more burnt bread," sang Polly, all out
of breath.

"Nor your back isn't goin' to break any more," panted Ben, with a very
red face.

"Hooray!" screamed Joel and David, to fill any pause that might occur,
while Phronsie gurgled and laughed at everything just as it came along.
And then they all danced and capered again; all but Polly, who was
down before the precious stove examining and exploring into ovens and
everything that belonged to it.

"Oh, ma," she announced, coming up to Mrs. Pepper, who had been obliged
to fly to her sewing again, and exhibiting a very crocky face and a
pair of extremely smutty hands, "it's most all ovens, and it's just
splendid!"

"I know it," answered her mother, delighted in the joy of her child.
"My! how black you are, Polly!"

"Oh, I wish," cried Polly, as the thought struck her, "that Dr. Fisher
could see it! Where did he go to, ma?"

"I guess Dr. Fisher has seen it before," said Mrs. Pepper, and then
she began to laugh. "You haven't ever asked where the stove came from,
Polly."

And to be sure, Polly had been so overwhelmed that if the stove had
really dropped from the clouds it would have been small matter of
astonishment to her, as long as it had come; that was the main thing!

"Mammy," said Polly, turning around slowly, with the stove-lifter in her
hand, "did Dr. Fisher bring that stove?"

"He didn't exactly bring it," answered her mother, "but I guess he knew
something about it."

"Oh, he's the splendidest, goodest man!" cried Polly, "that ever
breathed! Did he really get us that stove?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Pepper, "he would; I couldn't stop him. I don't know
how he found out you wanted one so bad; but he said it must be kept as a
surprise when your eyes got well."

"And he saved my eyes!" cried Polly, full of gratitude. "I've got a
stove and two new eyes, mammy, just to think!"

"We ought to be good after all our mercies," said Mrs. Pepper
thankfully, looking around on her little group. Joel was engaged in the
pleasing occupation of seeing how far he could run his head into the
biggest oven, and then pulling it out to exhibit its blackness, thus
engrossing the others in a perfect hubbub.

"I'm going to bake my doctor some little cakes," declared Polly, when
there was comparative quiet.

"Do, Polly," cried Joel, "and then leave one or two over."

"No," said Polly; "we can't have any, because these must be very nice.
Mammy, can't I have some white on top, just once?" she pleaded.

"I don't know," dubiously replied Mrs. Pepper; "eggs are dreadful dear,
and--"

"I don't care," said Polly, recklessly; "I must just once for Dr.
Fisher."

"I tell you, Polly," said Mrs. Pepper, "what you might do; you might
make him some little apple tarts--most every one likes them, you know."

"Well," said Polly, with a sigh, "I s'pose they'll have to do; but some
time, mammy, I'm going to bake him a big cake, so there!"


A THREATENED BLOW


One day, a few weeks after, Mrs. Pepper and Polly were busy in
the kitchen. Phronsie was out in the "orchard," as the one scraggy
apple-tree was called by courtesy, singing her rag doll to sleep under
its sheltering branches. But "Baby" was cross and wouldn't go to sleep,
and Phronsie was on the point of giving up, and returning to the house,
when a strain of music made her pause with dolly in her apron. There
she stood with her finger in her mouth, in utter astonishment, wondering
where the sweet sounds came from.

"Oh, Phronsie!" screamed Polly, from the back door, "where are--oh,
here, come quick! it's the beau-ti-fullest!"

"What is it?" eagerly asked the little one, hopping over the stubby
grass, leaving poor, discarded "Baby" on its snubby nose where it
dropped in her hurry.

"Oh, a monkey!" cried Polly; "do hurry! the sweetest little monkey you
ever saw!"

"What is a monkey?" asked Phronsie, skurrying after Polly to the gate
where her mother was waiting for them.

"Why, a monkey's--a--monkey," explained Polly, "I don't know any
better'n that. Here he is! Isn't he splendid!" and she lifted Phronsie
up to the big post where she could see finely.

"O-oh! ow!" screamed little Phronsie, "see him, Polly! just see him!"

A man with an organ was standing in the middle of the road playing away
with all his might, and at the end of a long rope was a lively little
monkey in a bright red coat and a smart cocked hat. The little creature
pulled off his hat, and with one long jump coming on the fence, he made
Phronsie a most magnificent bow. Strange to say, the child wasn't in the
least frightened, but put out her little fat hand, speaking in gentle
tones, "Poor little monkey! come here, poor little monkey!"

Turning up his little wrinkled face, and glancing fearfully at his
master, Jocko began to grimace and beg for something to eat. The man
pulled the string and struck up a merry tune, and in a minute the monkey
spun around and around at such a lively pace, and put in so many queer
antics that the little audience were fairly convulsed with laughter.

"I can't pay you," said Mrs. Pepper, wiping her eyes, when at last the
man pulled up the strap whistling to Jocko to jump up, "but I'll give
you something to eat; and the monkey, too, he shall have something for
his pains in amusing my children."

The man looked very cross when she brought him out only brown bread and
two cold potatoes.

"Haven't you got nothin' better'n that?"

"It's as good as we have," answered Mrs. Pepper.

The man threw down the bread in the road. But Jocko thankfully ate his
share, Polly and Phronsie busily feeding him; and then he turned and
snapped up the portion his master had left in the dusty road.

Then they moved on, Mrs. Pepper and Polly going back to their work in
the kitchen. A little down the road the man struck up another tune.
Phronsie who had started merrily to tell "Baby" all about it, stopped a
minute to hear, and--she didn't go back to the orchard!

About two hours after, Polly said merrily:

"I'm going to call Phronsie in, mammy; she must be awfully tired and
hungry by this time."

She sang gayly on the way, "I'm coming, Phronsie, coming--why, where!--"
peeping under the tree.

"Baby" lay on its face disconsolately on the ground--and the orchard was
empty! Phronsie was gone!

"It's no use," said Ben, to the distracted household and such of the
neighbors as the news had brought hurriedly to the scene, "to look any
more around here--but somebody must go toward Hingham; he'd be likely to
go that way."

"No one could tell where he would go," cried Polly, wringing her hands.

"But he'd change, Ben, if he thought folks would think he'd gone there,"
said Mrs. Pepper.

"We must go all roads," said Ben, firmly; "one must take the stage to
Boxville, and I'll take Deacon Brown's wagon on the Hingham road, and
somebody else must go to Toad Hollow."

"I'll go in the stage," screamed Joel, who could scarcely see out of his
eyes, he had cried so; "I'll find--find her--I know.

"Be spry, then, Joe, and catch it at the corner!"

Everybody soon knew that little Phronsie Pepper had gone off with "a
cross organ man and an awful monkey!" and in the course of an hour
dozens of people were out on the hot, dusty roads in search.

"What's the matter?" asked a testy old gentleman in the stage, of Joel
who, in his anxiety to see both sides of the road at once, bobbed the
old gentleman in the face so often as the stage lurched, that at last he
knocked his hat over his eyes.

"My sister's gone off with a monkey," explained Joel, bobbing over to
the other side, as he thought he caught sight of something pink that
he felt sure must be Phronsie's apron. "Stop! stop! there she is!"
he roared, and the driver, who had his instructions and was fully in
sympathy, pulled up so suddenly that the old gentleman flew over into
the opposite seat.

"Where?"

But when they got up to it Joel saw that it was only a bit of pink
calico flapping on a clothes-line; so he climbed back and away they
rumbled again.

The others were having the same luck. No trace could be found of the
child. To Ben, who took the Hingham road, the minutes seemed like hours.

"I won't go back," he muttered, "until I take her. I can't see mother's
face!"

But the ten miles were nearly traversed; almost the last hope was gone.
TO
THE MOTHER AND SISTERS

OF

EDOUARD STOLTERFOHT,
This Christmas book is offered, to keep in memory sunny winter days, spent
in Rostock, Hohen Niendorf bei Kroepelin, and Gross Kussewitz, and with
the added hope that Poppendorf bei Bentwish will not forget that I wrote
in the house-book--

You have a gentle cure for parting's pain; It is your German word
Aufwiederseh'n.

These are just old-fashioned Christmas tales, to be read before an
open fire, with a heart full of charity for me.

There is no modern realism in them, for every word is a lie, the
telling of which has given me the greatest pleasure.

I have also stolen a quotation from Hawthorne, which is the best thing
in the book, and last I have had the exquisite joy of bloodless murder
in killing one of my people.

Thus, you see, I need your charity truly, for I have broken
deliberately, for your entertainment, Three out of a possible Ten.

CHARLES A. GUNNISON, In the Embarcadero Rd.
Palo Alto, Santa Clara.
_Christmas, 1896._

[Illustration: Scroll] 

A Napa Christchild.

I.

An evening sky, broken by wandering clouds, which hastening onward toward
the north, bear their rich gifts of longed-for rain to the brown meadows,
filling the heavens from east to west with graceful lines and swelling
bosoms, save, just at the horizon where the sun descended paints a
broad, lurid streak of crimson, glowing amid the deepening shadows,
a coal in dead, gray ashes.

Darker grows the streak, as a stain of blood, while the clouds about it
now assume a purple tinge with gloomier shadings; suddenly in the centre
of the lurid field starts out as if that moment born to Earth, with
clear, silver light, the Evening Star. The colour slowly fades till
all is dead and ashy, and the silver star drops down below the purpled
hills, leaving for a moment a soft, trembling twilight; the dense
clouds then rolling in between, blot out the last sign of departed
day and night is come.

It was Christmas Eve.

The winter was late, and rain had fallen during the last few weeks
only, so that the fields were just assuming the fresh pea-green
colour of their new life, and the long, dead grass still standing
above the recent growth gave that odd smokey appearance to the hills
and mesas, so familiar to all us Californians also in our olive
groves.

The night, however, was dark and nothing of hills, or mesas, or
gray fields, could be seen as the hurrying bands of clouds joined
together in one great company, overspreading the whole sky and
clothing all in a dreary shroud of blackness.

The little arroyo, which was dry in the summertime, had now risen,
increased by last week's tribute to be quite a large stream, tearing
noisely among the rocks and over its old courses, giving friendly
greetings of recognition to the old water-marks and dashing a
playful wave now and then about the worn roots of the enormous
laurel tree whose branches reached high above and far around.

Beneath the tree's protecting limbs, a little cabin, of roughest
workmanship, found shelter from the wind, or shade from the intense heat
of summer; the house was built almost entirely of logs, excepting
the upper part where boards had been used and through which were
cut the three windows which served to light the single room it
contained.

This Christmas Eve, only the dark form of the cabin was to be seen
with the tall adobe chimney built up the outside; the smoke blew,
beaten here and there, about the roof till it finally disappeared,
a cloud of ghosts, among the swaying branches of the laurel tree.

By day in the sunshine, no pleasanter spot could be found than
the little cabin and broad fields of Crescimir the Illyrian, no
lovelier view of the rich Napa Valley could be had than from the
hill where Crescimir's cattle grazed and no happier home could have
been found in all the Californias than his, had he not been so
alone, without a friend and far from his native country.

On the very day which opens this story, one might have stood upon the
bridge and watched the lazy flowing of the river on whose dull green
surface all the spans and bars were shadowed, and on the buttress
seen the sunshine in ever changing, trembling glints of gold.

The testy old gentleman in the
seat opposite had relented and ordered the coach about and brought
him home in an outburst of grief when all hope was gone. And one after
another they all had come back, disheartened, to the distracted mother.
Polly alone, clung to hope!

"Ben will bring her, mammy; I know God will let him," she whispered.

But when Ben did bring her, Polly, for the second time in her life,
tumbled over with a gasp, into old Mrs. Bascom's lap.

Home and mother! Little Phronsie slept all that night straight through.
The neighbors came in softly, and with awestruck visages stole into the
bedroom to look at the child; and as they crept out again, thoughts
of their own little ones tugging at their hearts, the tears would drop
unheeded.


NEW FRIENDS


Up the stairs of the hotel, two steps at a time, ran a boy with a big,
black dog at his heels. "Come on, Prince; soft, now," as they neared a
door at the end of the corridors.

It opened into a corner room overlooking "the Park," as the small
open space in front of the hotel was called. Within the room there was
sunshine and comfort, it being the most luxurious one in the house,
which the proprietor had placed at the disposal of this most exacting
guest. He didn't look very happy, however--the gentleman who sat in an
easy chair by the window; a large, handsome old gentleman, whose whole
bearing showed plainly that personal comfort had always been his, and
was, therefore, neither a matter of surprise nor thankfulness.

"Where have you been?" he asked, turning around to greet the boy who
came in, followed by Prince.

"Oh, such a long story, father!" he cried, flushed; his eyes sparkling
as he flung back the dark hair from his forehead. "You can't even
guess!"

"Never mind now," said the old gentleman, testily; "your stories are
always long; the paper hasn't come--strange, indeed, that one must needs
be so annoyed! do ring that bell again."

So the bell was pulled; and a porter popped in his head.

"What is it, sir?"

"The paper," said the old gentleman, irritably; "hasn't it come yet?"

"No, sir," said the man; and then he repeated, "taint in yet, please,
sir."

"Very well--you said so once; that's all," waving his hand; then as the
door closed, he said to his son, "That pays one for coming to such an
out-of-the-way country place as this, away from papers--I never will do
it again."

As the old gentleman, against the advice of many friends who knew his
dependence on externals, had determined to come to this very place, the
boy was not much startled at the decisive words. He stood very quietly,
however, until his father finished. Then he said:

"It's too bad, father! supposing I tell you my story? Perhaps you'll
enjoy hearing it while you wait--it's really quite newspaperish."

"Well, you might as well tell it now, I suppose," said the old
gentleman; "but it is a great shame about that paper! to advertise that
morning papers are to be obtained--it's a swindle, Jasper! a complete
swindle!" and the old gentleman looked so very irate that the boy
exerted himself to soothe him.

"I know," he said; "but they can't help the trains being late."

"They shouldn't have the trains late," said his father, unreasonably.
"There's no necessity for all this prating about 'trains late.' I'm
convinced it's because they forgot to send down for the papers till they
were all sold."

"I don't believe that's it, father," said the boy, trying to change the
subject; "but you don't know how splendid Prince has been, nor--" "And
then such a breakfast!" continued the old gentleman.

"My liver certainly will be in a dreadful state if these things
continue!" And he got up, and going to the corner of the room, opened
his medicine chest, and taking a box of pills therefrom, he swallowed
two, which done, he came back with a somewhat easier expression to his
favorite chair.

"He was just splendid, father," began the boy; "he went for him, I tell
you!"

"I hope, Jasper, your dog has not been doing anything violent," said the
old gentleman. "I must caution you; he'll get you into trouble some day;
and then there'll be a heavy bill to pay; he grows more irritable every
day."

"Irritable!" cried the boy, flinging his arms around the dog's neck, who
was looking up at the old gentleman in high disdain. "He's done the most
splendid thing you ever saw! Why, he saved a little girl, father, from
a cross old organ-man, and he drove that man--oh! you ought to have seen
him run!"

And now that it was over, Jasper put back his head and laughed long and
loud as he remembered the rapid transit of the musical pair.

"Well, how do you know she wasn't the man's daughter?" asked his father,
determined to find fault someway. "You haven't any business to go around
the country setting your dog on people. I shall have an awful bill
to pay some day, Jasper--an awful bill!" he continued, getting up and
commencing to pace up and down the floor in extreme irritation.

"Father," cried the boy, half laughing, half vexed, springing to his
side, and keeping step with him, "we found her brother; he came along
when we were by the side of the road. We couldn't go any further, for
the poor little thing was all tired out. And don't you think they live
over in Badgertown, and--"

"Well," said the old gentleman, pausing in his walk, and taking out
his watch to wonder if that paper would ever come, "she had probably
followed the organ-man; so it served her right after all."

"Well, but father," and the boy's dark eyes glowed, "she was such a
cunning little thing! she wasn't more than four years old; and she had
such a pretty little yellow head; and she said so funny--'I want Polly."

"Did she?" said the old gentleman, getting interested in spite of
himself; "what then?"

"Why, then, sir," said Jasper, delighted at his success in diverting
his thoughts, "Prince and I waited--and waited; and I was just going to
bring her here to ask you what we should do, when--" "Dear me!" said
the old gentleman, instinctively starting back as if he actually saw the
forlorn little damsel, "you needn't ever bring such people here, Jasper!
I don't know what to do with them, I'm sure!"

"Well," said the boy, laughing, "we didn't have to, did we, Prince?"
stroking the big head of the dog who was slowly following the two as
they paced up and down, but keeping carefully on the side of his master;
"for just as we really didn't know what to do, don't you think there was
a big wagon came along, drawn by the ricketiest old horse, and a boy in
the wagon looking both sides of the road, and into every bush, just as
wild as he could be, and before I could think, hardly, he spied us, and
if he didn't jump! I thought he'd broken his leg--"

"And I suppose he just abused you for what you had done," observed the
old gentleman, petulantly; "that's about all the gratitude there is in
this world."

"He didn't seem to see me at all," said the boy. "I thought he'd eat the
little girl up."

"Ought to have looked out for her better then," grumbled the old
gentleman, determined to find fault with somebody.

"And he's a splendid fellow, I just know," cried Jasper, waxing
enthusiastic; "and his name is Pepper."

"Pepper!" repeated his father; "no nice family ever had the name of
Pepper!"

"Well, I don't care," and Jasper's laugh was loud and merry; "he's
nice anyway,--I know; and the little thing's nice; and I'm going to see
them--can't I, father?"

"Dear me!" said his father; "how can you, Jasper? You do have the
strangest tastes I ever saw!"

"It's dreadful dull here," pleaded the boy, touching the right string;
"you know that yourself, father, and I don't know any boys around here;
and Prince and I are so lonely on our walks--do permit me, father!"

The old gentleman, who really cared very little about it, turned away,
muttering, "Well, I'm sure I don't care; go where you like," when a
knock was heard at the door, and the paper was handed in, which broke up
the conversation, and restored good humor.

The next day but one, Ben was out by the wood-pile, trying to break up
some kindlings for Polly who was washing up the dishes, and otherwise
preparing for the delights of baking day.

"Hulloa!" said a voice bethought he knew.

He turned around to see the merry-faced boy, and the big, black dog who
immediately began to wag his tail as if willing to recognize him.

"You see I thought you'd never look round," said the boy with a laugh.
"How's the little girl?"

"Oh! you have come, really," cried Ben, springing over the wood-pile
with a beaming face. "Polly!"

But Polly was already by the door, with dish-cloth in hand. "This is my
sister, Polly," began Ben--and then stopped, not knowing the boy's name.

"I'm Jasper King," said the boy, stepping upon the flat stone by Polly's
side; and taking off his cap, he put out his hand. "And this is Prince,"
he added.

Polly put her hand in his, and received a hearty shake; and then she
sprang over the big stove, dish-cloth and all, and just flung her arms
around the dog's neck.

"Oh, you splendid fellow, you!" said she. "Don't you know we all think
you're as good as gold?"

The dog submitted to the astonishing proceeding as if he liked it, while
Jasper, delighted with Polly's appreciation, beamed down on them, and
struck up friendship with her on the instant.

"Now, I must call Phronsie," said Polly, getting up, her face as red as
a rose.

"Is her name Phronsie?" asked the boy with interest.

"No, it's Sophronia," said Polly, "but we call her Phronsie."

"What a very funny name," said Jasper, "Sophronia is, for such a little
thing--and yours is Polly, is it not?" he asked, turning around suddenly
on her.

"Yes," said Polly; "no, not truly Polly; it's Mary, my real name is--but
I've always been Polly."

"I like Polly best, too," declared Jasper, "it sounds so nice."

"And his name is Ben," said Polly.

"Ebenezer, you mean," said Ben, correcting her.

"Well, we call him Ben," said Polly; "it don't ever seem as if there was
any Ebenezer about it."

"I should think not," laughed Jasper.

"Well, I must get Phronsie," again said Polly, running back into the
bedroom, where that small damsel was busily engaged in washing "Baby"
in the basin of water that she had with extreme difficulty succeeded in
getting down on the floor. She had then, by means of a handful of soft
soap, taken from Polly's soap-bowl during the dish-washing, and a bit of
old cotton, plastered both herself and "Baby" to a comfortable degree of
stickiness.

"Phronsie," said Polly--"dear me! what you doing? the big dog's out
there, you know, that scared the naughty organ-man; and the boy--" but
before the words were half out, Phronsie had slipped from under her
hands, and to Polly's extreme dismay, clattered out into the kitchen.

"Here she is!" cried Jasper, meeting her at the door. The little soapy
hands were grasped, and kissing her--"Ugh!" he said, as the soft soap
plentifully spread on her face met his mouth.

"Oh, Phronsie! you shouldn't," cried Polly, and then they all burst out
into a peal of laughter at Jasper's funny grimaces.

"She's been washing 'Baby," explained Polly, wiping her eyes, and
looking at Phronsie who was hanging over Prince in extreme affection.
Evidently Prince still regarded her as his especial property.

"Have you got a baby?" asked Jasper. "I thought she was the baby,"
pointing to Phronsie.

"Oh, I mean her littlest dolly; she always calls her 'Baby," said Polly.
"Come, Phronsie, and have your face washed, and a clean apron on."

When Phronsie could be fairly persuaded that Prince would not run
away during her absence, she allowed herself to be taken off; and soon
re-appeared, her own, dainty little self. Ben, in the meantime, had
been initiating Jasper into the mysteries of cutting the wood, the
tool-house, and all the surroundings of the "little brown house." They
had received a re-inforcement in the advent of Joel and David, who
stared delightedly at Phronsie's protector, made friends with the dog,
and altogether had had such a thoroughly good time, that Phronsie,
coming back, clapped her hands in glee to hear them.

"I wish mammy was home," said Polly, polishing up the last cup
carefully.

"Let me put it up," said Jasper, taking it from her, "it goes up here,
don't it, with the rest?" reaching up to the upper-shelf of the old
cupboard.

"Yes," said Polly.

"Oh, I should think you'd have real good times!" said the boy,
enviously. "I haven't a single sister or brother."

"Haven't you?" said Polly, looking at him in extreme pity. "Yes, we do
have real fun," she added, answering his questioning look; "the house is
just brimful sometimes, even if we are poor."

"We aren't poor," said Joel, who never could bear to be pitied. Then,
with a very proud air, he said in a grand way, "At any rate, we aren't
going to be, long, for something's coming!"

"What do you mean, Joey?" asked Ben, while the rest looked equally
amazed.

"Our ships," said Joel confidently, as if they were right before their
eyes; at which they all screamed!

"See Polly's stove!" cried Phronsie, wishing to entertain in her turn.
"Here 'tis," running up to it, and pointing with her fat little finger.

"Yes, I see," cried Jasper, pretending to be greatly surprised; "it's
new, isn't it?"

"Yes," said the child; "it's very all new; four yesterdays ago!"

And then Polly stopped in sweeping up and related, with many additions
and explanations from the others, the history of the stove, and good Dr.
Fisher (upon whom they all dilated at great length), and the dreadful
measles, and everything. And Jasper sympathized, and rejoiced with them
to their hearts content, and altogether got so very home-like, that they
all felt as if they had known him for a year. Ben neglected his work a
little, but then visitors didn't come every day to the Peppers; so
while Polly worked away at her bread, which she was "going to make like
biscuits," she said, the audience gathered in the little old kitchen was
in the merriest mood, and enjoyed everything to the fullest extent.

"Do put in another stick, Bensie dear," said Polly; "this bread won't be
fit for anything!"

"Isn't this fun, though!" cried Jasper, running up to try the oven; "I
wish I could ever bake," and he looked longingly at the little brown
biscuits waiting their turn out on the table.

"You come out some day," said Polly, sociably, "and we'll all try
baking--mammy'd like to have you, I know," feeling sure that nothing
would be too much for Mrs. Pepper to do for the protector of little
Phronsie.

"I will!" cried Jasper, perfectly delighted. "You can't think how
awfully dull it is out in Hingham!"

"Don't you live there?" asked Polly, with a gasp, almost dropping a tin
full of little brown lumps of dough she was carrying to the oven.

"Live there!" cried Jasper; and then he burst out into a merry laugh.
"No, indeed! I hope not! Why, we're only spending the summer there,
father and I, in the hotel."

"Where's your mother?" asked Joel, squeezing in between Jasper and
his audience. And then they all felt instinctively that a very wrong
question had been asked.

"I haven't any mother," said the boy, in a low voice.

They all stood quite still for a moment; then Polly said, "I wish you'd
come out sometime; and you may bake--or anything else," she added; and
there was a kinder ring to her voice than ever.

No mother! Polly for her life, couldn't imagine how anybody could feel
without a mother, but the very words alone smote her heart; and there
was nothing she wouldn't have done to give pleasure to one who had done
so much for them.

"I wish you could see our mother," she said, gently. "Why, here she
comes now! oh, mamsie, dear," she cried. "Do, Joe, run and take her
bundle."

Mrs. Pepper stopped a minute to kiss Phronsie--her baby was dearer than
ever to her now. Then her eye fell on Jasper, who stood respectfully
waiting and watching her with great interest.

"Is this," she asked, taking it all in at the first glance--the boy with
the honest eyes as Ben had described him--and the big, black dog--"is
this the boy who saved my little girl?"

"Oh, ma'am," cried Jasper, "I didn't do much; 'twas Prince."

"I guess you never'll know how much you did do," said Mrs. Pepper. Then
looking with a long, keen gaze into the boy's eyes that met her own so
frankly and kindly: "I'll trust him," she said to herself; "a boy with
those eyes can't help but be good."

"Her eyes are just the same as Polly's," thought Jasper, "just such
laughing ones, only Polly's are brown," and he liked her on the spot.

And then, somehow, the hubbub ceased. Polly went on with her work, and
the others separated, and Mrs. Pepper and Jasper had a long talk. When
the mother's eyes fell on Phronsie playing around on the floor, she gave
the boy a grateful smile that he thought was beautiful.

"Well, I declare," said Jasper, at last, looking up at the old clock in
the corner by the side of the cupboard, "I'm afraid I'll miss the stage,
and then father never'll let me come again. Come, Prince."

"Oh, don't go," cried Phronsie, wailing. "Let doggie stay! Oh, make him
stay, mammy!"

"I can't, Phronsie," said Mrs. Pepper, smiling, "if he thinks he ought
to go."

"I'll come again," said Jasper, eagerly, "if I may, ma'am."

He looked up at Mrs. Pepper as he stood cap in hand, waiting for the
answer.

"I'm sure we should be glad if your father'll be willing," she added;
thinking, proudly, "My children are an honor to anybody, I'm sure," as
she glanced around on the bright little group she could call her own.
"But be sure, Jasper," and she laid her hand on his arm as she looked
down into his eyes, "that you father is willing, that's all."

"Oh, yes, ma'am," said the boy; "but he will be, I guess, if he feels
well."

"Then come on Thursday," said Polly; "and can't we bake something then,
mammy?"

"I'm sure I don't care," laughed Mrs. Pepper; "but you won't find much
but brown flour and meal to bake with."

"Well, we can pretend," said Polly; "and we can cut the cakes with the
heart-shape, and they'll do for anything.

"Oh, I'll come," laughed Jasper, ready for such lovely fun in the old
kitchen; "look out for me on Thursday, Ben!"

So Jasper and Prince took their leave, all the children accompanying
them to the gate; and then after seeing him fairly started on a smart
run to catch the stage, Prince scampering at his heels, they all began
to sing his praises and to wish for Thursday to come.

But Jasper didn't come! Thursday came and went; a beautiful, bright,
sunny day, but with no signs of the merry boy whom all had begun to
love, nor of the big black dog. The children had made all the needful
preparations with much ostentation and bustle, and were in a state of
excited happiness, ready for any gale. But the last hope had to be given
up, as the old clock ticked away hour after hour. And at last Polly
had to put Phronsie to bed, who wouldn't stop crying enough to eat her
supper at the dreadful disappointment.

"He couldn't come, I know," said both Ben and Polly, standing staunchly
up for their new friend; but Joel and David felt that he had broken his
word.

"He promised," said Joel, vindictively.

"I don't believe his father'd let him," said Polly, wiping away a sly
tear; "I know Jasper'd come, if he could."

Mrs. Pepper wisely kept her own counsel, simply giving them a kindly
caution:

"Don't you go to judging him, children, till you know."

"Well, he promised," said Joel, as a settler.

"Aren't you ashamed, Joel," said his mother, "to talk about any one
whose back is turned? Wait till he tells you the reason himself."

Joel hung his head, and then began to tease David in the corner, to make
up for his disappointment.

The next morning Ben had to go to the store after some more meal. As he
was going out rather dismally, the storekeeper, who was also postmaster,
called out, "Oh, halloa, there!"

"What is it?" asked Ben, turning back, thinking perhaps Mr. Atkins
hadn't given him the right change.

"Here," said Mr. Atkins, stepping up to the Post-office department,
quite smart with its array of boxes and official notices, where Ben had
always lingered, wishing there might be sometime a letter for him--or
some of them. "You've got a sister Polly, haven't you?"

"Yes," said Ben, wondering what was coming next.

"Well, she's got a letter," said the postmaster, holding up a nice big
envelope, looking just like those that Ben had so many times wished
for. That magic piece of white paper danced before the boy's eyes for a
minute; then he said, "It can't be for her, Mr. Atkins; why, she's never
had one."

"Well, she's got one now, sure enough," said Mr. Atkins; "here 'tis,
plain enough," and he read what he had no need to study much as it had
already passed examination by his own and his wife's faithful eyes:
"Miss Polly Pepper, near the Turnpike, Badgertown'--that's her, isn't
it?" he added, laying it down before Ben's eyes. "Must be a first time
for everything, you know, my boy!" and he laughed long over his own
joke; "so take it and run along home." For Ben still stood looking at
it, and not offering to stir.

"If you say so," said the boy, as if Mr. Atkins had given him something
out of his own pocket; "but I'm afraid 'tisn't for Polly." Then
buttoning up the precious letter in his jacket, he spun along home as
never before.

"Polly! Polly!" he screamed. "Where is she, mother?"

"I don't know," said Mrs. Pepper, coming out of the bedroom. "Dear me!
is anybody hurt, Ben?"

"I don't know," said Ben, in a state to believe anything, "but Polly's
got a letter."

"Polly got a letter!" cried Mrs. Pepper; "what do you mean, Ben?"

"I don't know," repeated the boy, still holding out the precious letter;
"but Mr. Atkins gave it to me; where is Polly?"

"I know where she is," said Joel; "she's up-stairs." And he flew out in
a twinkling, and just as soon reappeared with Polly scampering after him
in the wildest excitement.

And then the kitchen was in an uproar as the precious missive was put
into Polly's hand; and they all gathered around her, wondering and
examining, till Ben thought he would go wild with the delay.

"I wonder where it did come from," said Polly, in the greatest anxiety,
examining again the address.

"Where does the postmark say?" asked Mrs. Pepper, looking over her
shoulder.

"It's all rubbed out," said Polly, peering at it "you can't see
anything."

"Do open it," said Ben, "and then you'll find out."

"But p'raps 'tisn't for me," said Polly, timidly.

"Well, Mr. Atkins says 'tis," said Ben, impatiently; "here, I'll open it
for you, Polly."

"No, let her open it for herself, Ben," protested his mother.

"But she won't," said Ben; "do tear it open, Polly."

"No, I'm goin' to get a knife," she said.

"I'll get one," cried Joel, running up to the table drawer; "here's one,
Polly."

"Oh, dear," groaned Ben; "you never'll get it open at this rate!"

But at last it was cut; and they all holding their breath, gazed
awe-struck, while Polly drew out the mysterious missive.

"What does it say?" gasped Mrs. Pepper.

"Dear Miss Polly," began both Ben and Polly in a breath. "Let Polly
read," said Joel, who couldn't hear in the confusion.

"Well, go on Polly," said Ben; "hurry!"

"Dear Miss Polly, I was so sorry I couldn't come on Thursday--"

"Oh, it's Jasper! it's Jasper!" cried all the children in a breath.

"I told you so!" cried Ben and Polly, perfectly delighted to find their
friend vindicated fully--"there! Joey Pepper!"

"Well, I don't care," cried Joe, nothing daunted, "he didn't come,
anyway--do go on, Polly."

"I was so sorry I couldn't come--" began Polly.

"You read that," said Joel.

"I know it," said Polly, "but it's just lovely; 'on Thursday; but my
father was sick, and I couldn't leave him. If you don't mind I'll come
again--I mean I'll come some other day, if it's just as convenient for
you, for I do so want the baking, and the nice time. I forgot to say
that I had a cold, to,' (here Jasper had evidently had a struggle in his
mind whether there should be two o's or one, and he had at last decided
it, by crossing out one) but my father is willing I should come when I
get well. Give my love to all, and especially remember me respectfully
to your mother. Your friend,

"JASPER ELYOT KING."

"Oh, lovely! lovely!" cried Polly, flying around with the letter in her
hand; "so he is coming!"

Ben was just as wild as she was, for no one knew but Polly just how the
new friend had stepped into his heart. Phronsie went to sleep happy,
hugging "Baby."

"And don't you think, Baby, dear," she whispered sleepily, and Polly
heard her say as she was tucking her in, "that Jasper is really comin';
really--and the big, be-you-ti-ful doggie, too!"


PHRONSIE PAYS A DEBT OF GRATITUDE


"And now I tell you," said Polly, the next day, "let's make Jasper
something; can't we, ma?"

"Oh, do! do!" cried all the other children, "let's; but what'll it be,
Polly?"

"I don't know about this," interrupted Mrs. Pepper; "I don't see how you
could get anything to him if you could make it."

"Oh, we could, mamsie," said Polly, eagerly, running up to her; "for Ben
knows; and he says we can do it."

"Oh, well, if Ben and you have had your heads together, I suppose it's
all right," laughed Mrs. Pepper, "but I don't see how you can do it."

"Well, we can, mother, truly," put in Ben. "I'll tell you how, and
you'll say it'll be splendid. You see Deacon Blodgett's goin' over to
Hingham, to-morrow; I heard him tell Miss Blodgett so; and he goes right
past the hotel; and we can do it up real nice--and it'll please Jasper
so--do, mammy!"

"And it's real dull there, Jasper says," put in Polly, persuasively;
"and just think, mammy, no brothers and sisters!" And Polly looked
around on the others.

After that there was no need to say anything more; her mother would have
consented to almost any plan then.

"Well, go on, children," she said; "you may do it; I don't see but what
you can get 'em there well enough; but I'm sure I don't know what you
can make."

"Can't we," said Polly--and she knelt down by her mother's side and put
her face in between the sewing in Mrs. Pepper's lap, and the eyes bent
kindly down on her--"make some little cakes, real cakes I mean? now
don't say no, mammy!" she said, alarmed, for she saw a "no" slowly
coming in the eyes above her, as Mrs. Pepper began to shake her head.

"But we haven't any white flour, Polly," began her mother. "I know,"
said Polly; "but we'll make 'em of brown, it'll do, if you'll give us
some raisins--you know there's some in the bowl, mammy."

"I was saving them for a nest egg," said Mrs. Pepper; meaning at some
future time to indulge in another plum-pudding that the children so
loved.

"Well, do give 'em to us," cried Polly; "do, ma!"

"I want 'em for a plum-pudding sometime," said Mrs. Pepper.

"Ow!--" and Joel with a howl sprung up from the floor where he had been
trying to make a cart for "Baby" out of an old box, and joined Mrs.
Pepper and Polly. "No, don't give 'em away, ma!" he screamed; "let's
have our plum-pudding--now, Polly Pepper, you're a-goin' to bake up all
our raisins in nasty little cakes--and--"

"Joey!" commanded Mrs. Pepper, "hush! what word did you say!"

"Well," blubbered Joel, wiping his tears away with his grimy little
hand, "Polly's--a-goin'--to give--"

"I should rather you'd never have a plum-pudding than to say such
words," said Mrs. Pepper, sternly, taking up her work again. "And
besides, do you think what Jasper has done for you?" and her face grew
very white around the lips.

"Well, he can have plum-puddings," said Joel, whimpering, "forever an'
ever, if he wants them--and--and--"

"Well, Joey," said Polly, "there, don't feel bad," and she put her arms
around him, and tried to wipe away the tears that still rolled down his
cheeks. "We won't give 'em if you don't want us to; but Jasper's sick,
and there isn't anything for him to do, and--" here she whispered slyly
up into his ear, "don't you remember how you liked folks to send you
things when you had the measles?"

"Yes, I know," said Joel, beginning to smile through his tears; "wasn't
it fun, Polly?"

"I guess 'twas," laughed Polly back again, pleased at the return of
sunshine. "Well, Jasper'll be just as pleased as you were, 'cause we
love him and want to do somethin' for him, he was so good to Phronsie."

"I will, Polly, I will," cried Joel, completely won over; "do let's make
'em for him; and put 'em in thick; oh! thick as you can;" and determined
to do nothing by halves, Joel ran generously for the precious howl of
raisins, and after setting it on the table, began to help Polly in all
needful preparations.

Mrs. Pepper smiled away to herself to see happiness restored to the
little group. And soon a pleasant hum and bustle went on around the
baking table, the centre of attraction.

"Now," said Phronsie, coming up to the table and standing on tip-toe to
see Polly measure out the flour, "I'm a-goin' to bake something for my
sick man, I am."

"Oh, no, Phronsie, you can't," began Polly.

"Hey?" asked Joel, with a daub of flour on the tip of his chubby nose,
gained by too much peering into Polly's flour-bag. "What did she say,
Polly?" watching her shake the clouds of flour in the sieve.

"She said she was goin' to bake something for Jasper," said Polly.
"There," as she whisked in the flour, "now that's done."

"No, I didn't say Jasper," said Phronsie; "I didn't say Jasper," she
repeated, emphatically.

"Why, what did you say, Pet?" asked Polly, astonished, while little
Davie repeated, "What did you say, Phronsie?"

"I said my sick man," said Phronsie, shaking her yellow head; "poor sick
man."

"Who does she mean?" said Polly in despair, stopping a moment her
violent stirring that threatened to overturn the whole cake-bowl.

"I guess she means Prince," said Joel. "Can't I stir, Polly?"

"Oh, no," said Polly; "only one person must stir cake."

"Why?" asked Joel; "why, Polly?"

"Oh, I don't know," said Polly, "cause 'tis so; never mind now, Joel. Do
you mean Prince, Phronsie?"

"No, I don't mean Princey," said the child decisively; "I mean my sick
man."

"It's Jasper's father, I guess she means," said Mrs. Pepper over in the
corner; "but what in the world!"

"Yes, yes," cried Phronsie, perfectly delighted at being at last
understood, and hopping on one toe; "my sick man."

"I shall give up!" said Polly, tumbling over in a chair, with the cake
spoon in her hand, from which a small sticky lump fell on her apron,
which Joel immediately pounced upon and devoured. "What do you want to
bake, Phronsie?" she gasped, holding the spoon sticking up straight, and
staring at the child.

"A gingerbread boy," said the child, promptly; "he'd like that best;
poor, sick man!" and she commenced to climb up to active preparations.


A LETTER TO JASPER


"Mamsie, what shall we do?" implored Polly of her mother.

"I don't know," said her mother; "however did that get into her head, do
you suppose?"

"I am sure I can't tell," said Polly, jumping up and beginning to stir
briskly to make up for lost time. "P'r'aps she heard us talking about
Jasper's having to take care of his sick father, and how hard it must be
to be sick away from home."

"Yes," said Phronsie, "but he'll be glad to see my gingerbread boy, I
guess; poor, sick man."

"Oh, Phronsie," cried Polly, in great distress, "you aren't ever going
to make a 'gingerbread boy' to-day! see, we'll put in a cunning little
cake for Mr. King--full of raisins, Phronsie; won't that be lovely!"
and Polly began to fill a little scalloped tin with some of the cake
mixture.

"N-no," said the child, eying it suspiciously; "that isn't like a
'gingerbread boy,' Polly; he'll like that best."

"Mamsie," said Polly, "we can't let her make a dreadful, horrid
'gingerbread boy' to send Mr. King! he never'll let Jasper come here
again."

"Oh, let her," cried Joel; "she can bake it, and Dave an' I'll eat it,"
and he picked up a raisin that had fallen under the table and began
crunching it with great gusto.

"That wouldn't be fair," said Polly, gloomily. "Do get her off from it,
mammy."

"Phronsie," said Mrs. Pepper, going up back of the child, who sat
patiently in her high chair waiting for Polly to let her begin, "hadn't
you rather wait and give your 'gingerbread boy' to Jasper for his
father, when he comes?"

"Oh, no, no," cried Phronsie, twisting in her chair in great
apprehension, "I want to send it now, I do."

"Well, Polly," said her mother, laughing, "after all it's best, I think,
to let her; it can't do any harm anyway--and instead of Mr. King's
not letting Jasper come, if he's a sensible man that won't make any
difference; and if he isn't, why, then there'd be sure to something come
up sometime to make trouble."

"Well," said Polly, "I suppose she's got to; and perhaps," as a
consoling idea struck her, "perhaps she'll want to eat it up herself
when it's done. Here, Phronsie," giving her a handful of the cake
mixture, which she stiffened with flour to the right thickness, "there,
you can call that a 'gingerbread boy;' see, won't it make a beautiful
one!"

"You needn't think," said Mrs. Pepper, seeing Phronsie's delighted face,
and laughing as she went back to her work, "but what that gingerbread
boy'll go?"

When the little cakes were done, eight of them, and set upon the table
for exhibition, they one and all protested that they never saw so fine a
lot. Polly was delighted with the praise they received, and her mother's
commendation that she was "growing a better cook every day." "How glad
Jasper'll be, won't he, mamsie?" said she.

The children walked around and around the table, admiring and pointing
out the chief points of attraction, as they appeared before their
discriminating eyes.

"I should choose that one," said Joel, pointing at one which was
particularly plummy, with a raisin standing up on one end with a festive
air, as if to say, "there's lots of us inside, you better believe!"

"I wouldn't," said Davie, "I'd have that--that's cracked so pretty."

"So 'tis," said Mrs. Pepper; "they're all as light as a feather, Polly."

"But my 'gingerbread boy," cried Phronsie, running eagerly along with a
particularly ugly looking specimen of a cake figure in her hand, "is the
be-yew-tifullest, isn't it, Polly?"

"Oh, dear," groaned Polly, "it looks just awfully, don't it, Ben!"

"Hoh, hoh!" laughed Joel in derision; "his leg is crooked, see
Phronsie--you better let Davie an' me have it."

"No, no," screamed the child in terror; "that's my sick man's
'gingerbread boy,' it is!"

"Joe, put it down," said Ben. "Yes, Phronsie, you shall have it; there,
it's all safe;" and he put it carefully into Phronsie's apron, when she
breathed easier.

"And he hasn't but one eye," still laughed Joel, while little Davie
giggled too.

"He did have two," said Polly, "but she punched the other in with her
thumb; don't, boys," she said, aside, "you'll make her feel bad; do stop
laughing. Now, how'll we send the things?"

"Put 'em in a basket," said Ben; "that's nicest."

"But we haven't got any basket," said Polly, "except the potato basket,
and they'd be lost in that."

"Can't we take your work-basket, mamsie?" asked Ben; "they'd look so
nice in that."

"Oh," said Mrs. Pepper, "that wouldn't do; I couldn't spare it, and
besides, it's all broken at the side, Ben; that don't look nice."

"Oh, dear," said Polly, sitting down on one of the hard wooden chairs
to think, "I do wish we had things nice to send to sick people." And her
forehead puckered up in a little hard knot.

"We'll have to do 'em up in a paper, Polly," said Ben; "there isn't
any other way; they'll look nice in anything, 'cause they are nice," he
added, comfortingly.

"If we only had some flowers," said Polly, "that would set 'em off."

"You're always a-thinkin' of flowers, Polly," said Ben. "I guess the
cakes'll have to go without 'em."

"I suppose they will," said Polly, stifling a little sigh. "Where's the
paper?"

"I've got a nice piece up-stairs," said Ben, "just right; I'll get it."

"Put my 'gingerbread boy' on top," cried Phronsie, handing him up.

So Polly packed the little cakes neatly in two rows, and laid the
'gingerbread boy' in a fascinating attitude across the top.

"He looks as if he'd been struck by lightning!" said Ben, viewing him
critically as he came in the door with the paper.

"Be still," said Polly, trying not to laugh; "that's because he baked so
funny; it made his feet stick out."

"Children," said Mrs. Pepper, "how'll Jasper know where the cakes come
from?"

"Why, he'll know it's us," said Polly, "of course; 'cause it'll make him
think of the baking we're going to have when he gets well."

"Well, but you don't say so," said Mrs. Pepper, smiling; "tisn't polite
to send it this way."

"Whatever'll we do, mammy!" said all four children in dismay, while
Phronsie simply stared. "Can't we send 'em at all?"

"Why yes," said their mother; "I hope so, I'm sure, after you've got 'em
baked; but you might answer Jasper's letter I should think, and tell him
about 'em, and the 'gingerbread boy'."

"Oh dear," said Polly, ready to fly, "I couldn't mamsie; I never wrote a
letter."

"Well, you never had one before, did you?" said her mother, composedly
biting her thread. "Never say you can't, Polly, 'cause you don't know
what you can do till you've tried."

"You write, Ben," said Polly, imploringly.

"No," said Ben, "I think the nicest way is for all to say somethin',
then 'twon't be hard for any of us."

"Where's the paper," queried Polly, "coming from, I wonder!"

"Joel," said Mrs. Pepper, "run to the bureau in the bedroom, and open
the top drawer, and get a green box there."

So Joel, quite important at the errand, departed, and presently put the
designated box into his mother's hand.

"There, now I'm going to give you this," and she took out a small sheet
of paper slightly yellowed by age; but being gilt-edged, it looked very
magnificent to the five pairs of eyes directed to it.

"Now Ben, you get the ink bottle and the pen, and then go to work."

So Ben reached down from the upper shelf in the cupboard the ink bottle,
and a pen in a black wooden penholder.

"Oh, mamsie," cried Polly, "that's where Phronsie bit it off when she
was a baby, isn't it?" holding up the stubby end where the little ball
had disappeared.

"Yes," said Mrs. Pepper, "and now you're going to write about her
'gingerbread boy' with it--well, time goes, to be sure." And she bent
over her work again, harder than ever. Poor woman! if she could only
scrape together enough money to get her children into school--that was
the earnest wish of her heart. She must do it soon, for Ben was twelve
years old; but with all her strivings and scrimpings she could only
manage to put bread into their mouths, and live from day to day. "I know
I ought to be thankful for that," she said to herself, not taking time
even to cry over her troubles. "But oh, the learning! they must have
that!"

"Now," said Polly, "how'll we do it Ben?" as they ranged themselves
around the table, on which reposed the cakes; "you begin."

"How do folks begin a letter?" asked Ben in despair, of his mother.

"How did Jasper begin his?" asked Mrs. Pepper back again. "Oh," cried
Polly, running into the bedroom to get the precious missive. "Dear Miss
Polly'--that's what it says."

"Well," said Mrs. Pepper, "then you'd better say, 'Dear Mister
Jasper'--or you might say, 'Dear Mr. King.'"

"Oh, dear!" cried Polly, "that would be the father then--s'pose he
should think we wrote to him!" and Polly looked horror-stricken to the
last degree.

"There, there 'tis," said Ben: "'Dear Mister Jasper'--now what'll we
say?"

"Why, say about the cakes," replied Polly.

"And the 'gingerbread boy," cried Phronsie. "Oh, tell about him, Polly,
do."

"Yes, yes, Phronsie," said Polly, "we will--why, tell him how we wish
he could have come, and that we baked him some cakes, and that we do so
want him to come just as soon as he can."

"All right!" said Ben; so he went to work laboriously; only his
hard breathing showing what a hard task it was, as the stiff old pen
scratched up and down the paper.

"There, that's done," he cried at length in great satisfaction, holding
it up for inspection.

"Oh, I do wish," cried Polly in intense admiration, "I could write so
nice and so fast as you can, Ben."

"Read it, Polly," said Mrs. Pepper, in pride.

So Polly began: "Dear Mister Jasper we were all dreadfully sorry
that you didn't come and so we baked you some cakes.'--You didn't say
anything about his being sick, Ben."

"I forgot it," said Ben, "but I put it in farther down--you'll see if
you read on."

"Baked you some cakes--that is, Polly did, for this is Ben that's
writing."

"You needn't said that, Ben," said Polly, dissatisfied; "we all baked
'em, I'm sure. 'And just as soon as you get well we do want you to come
over and have the baking. We're real sorry you're sick--boneset's good
for colds."

"Oh, Ben!" said Mrs. Pepper, "I guess his father knows what to give
him."

"And oh! the bitter stuff!" cried Polly, with a wry face. "Well, it's
hard work to write," said Ben, yawning. "I'd rather chop wood."

"I wish! knew how," exclaimed Joel, longingly.

"Just you try every day; Ben'll teach you, Joe," said his mother,
eagerly, "and then I'll let you write."

"I will!" cried Joe; "then, Dave, you'll see how I'll write--I tell
you!"

"And I'm goin' to--ma, can't I?" said Davie, unwilling to be outdone.

"Yes, you may, be sure," said Mrs. Pepper, delighted; "that'll make a
man of you fast."

"Oh, boys," said Polly, lifting a very red face, "you joggle the table
so I can't do anything."

"I wasn't jogglin'," said Joel; "the old thing tipped. Look!" he
whispered to Davie, "see Polly, she's writing crooked."

So while the others hung around her and looked over her shoulder while
they made their various comments, Polly finished her part, and also held
it up for inspection.

"Let us see," said Ben, taking it up.

"It's after, 'boneset's good for colds,'" said Polly, puckering up her
face again at the thought.

"We most of us knew you were sick--I'm Polly now--because you didn't
come; and we liked your letter telling us so. Oh, Polly! we weren't glad
to hear he was sick!" cried Ben, in horror.

"I didn't say so!" cried Polly, starting up. "Why, Ben Pepper, I never
said so!" and she looked ready to cry.

"It sounds something like it, don't it, mammy?" said Ben, unwilling to
give her pain, but appealing to Mrs. Pepper.

"Polly didn't mean it," said her mother consolingly; "but if I were you,
I'd say something to explain it."

"I can't put anything in now," said poor Polly; "there isn't any room
nor any more paper either--what shall I do! I told you, Ben, I couldn't
write." And Polly looked helplessly from one to the other for comfort.

"Yes, you can," said Ben; "there, now I'll show you: write it fine,
Polly--you write so big--little bits of letters, like these."

So Polly took the pen again with a sigh. "Now he won't think so, I
guess," she said, much relieved, as Ben began to read again.

"I'll begin yours again," Ben said: "We most of us knew you were sick
because you didn't come, and we liked your letter telling us so because
we'd all felt so badly, and Phronsie cried herself to sleep--" (that's
good, I'm sure.) "The 'gingerbread boy' is for your father--please
excuse it, but Phronsie would make it for him because he is sick. There
isn't any more to write, and besides I can't write good, and Ben's
tired. From all of us."

"Why, how's he to know?" cried Ben. "That won't do to sign it."

"Well, let's say from Ben and Polly then," said Polly; "only all the
others want to be in the letter."

"Well, they can't write," said Ben.

"We might sign their names for 'em," suggested Polly.

"Here's mine," said Ben, putting under the "From all of us" a big, bold
"Ben."

"And here's mine," echoed Polly, setting a slightly crooked "Polly" by
its side.

"Now Joe, you better let Ben hold your hand," said Polly, warningly. But
Joel declaring he could write had already begun, so there was no hope
for it; and a big drop of ink falling from the pen, he spattered the "J"
so that no one could tell what it was. The children looked at each other
in despair.

"Can we ever get it out, mammy?" said Polly, running to Mrs. Pepper with
it.

"I don't know," said her mother. "How could you try it, Joe?"

"I didn't mean to," said Joel, looking very downcast and ashamed. "The
ugly old pen did it!"

"Well," said Polly, "it's got to go; we can't help it." But she looked
so sorrowful over it that half the pleasure was gone for Ben; for Polly
wanted everything just right, and was very particular about things.

"Now, Dave." Ben held his hand, and "David" went down next to Joel.

But when it was Phronsie's turn, she protested that Polly, and no one
else, must hold her hand.

"It's a dreadful hard name to write--Phronsie is," said Polly, as she
guided Phronsie's fat little hand that clung faithfully to the stubby
old pen. "There, it's over now," she cried; "and I'm thankful! I
wouldn't write another for anything!"

"Read it all over now, Ben," cried Mrs. Pepper, "and don't speak,
children, till he gets through."

"Don't it sound elegant!" said Polly, clasping her hands, when he had
finished. "I didn't think we ever could do it so nice, did you, Ben?"

"No, indeed, I didn't," replied Ben, in a highly ecstatic frame of mind.
"Now--oh! what'll we do for an envelope?" he asked in dismay.

"You'll have to do without that," said Mrs. Pepper, "for there isn't any
in the house--but see here, children," she added, as she saw the sorry
faces before her--"you just fold up the letter, and put it inside the
parcel; that'll be just as good."

"Oh dear," said Polly; "but it would have been splendid the other way,
mammy--just like other folks!"

"You must make believe this is like other folks," said Mrs. Pepper,
cheerily, "when you can't do any other way."

"Yes," said Ben, "that's so, Polly; tie 'em up quick's you can, and I'll
take 'em over to Deacon Blodgett's, for he's goin' to start early in the
morning."

So after another last look all around, Polly put the cakes in the paper,
and tied it with four or five strong knots, to avoid all danger of its
undoing.

"He never'll untie it, Polly," said Ben; "that's just like a girl's
knots!"

"Why didn't you tie it then?" said Polly; "I'm sure it's as good as
a boy's knots, and they always muss up a parcel so." And she gave a
loving, approving little pat to the top of the package, which, despite
its multitude of knots, was certainly very neat indeed.

Ben, grasping the pen again, "here goes for the direction.

"Deary, yes!" said Polly. "I forgot all about that; I thought 'twas
done."

"How'd you s'pose he'd get it?" asked Ben, coolly beginning the "M."

"I don't know," replied Polly, looking over his shoulder; "s'pose
anybody else had eaten 'em up, Ben!" And she turned pale at the very
thought.

"There," said Ben, at last, after a good many flourishes, "now 'tis
done! you can't think of another thing to do to it, Polly!"

"Mamsie, see!" cried Polly, running with it to Mrs. Pepper, "isn't that
fine! 'Mr. Jasper E. King, at the Hotel Hingham."

"Yes," said Mrs. Pepper, admiringly, to the content of all the children,
"I should think it was!"

"Let me take it in my hand," screamed Joel, reaching eagerly up for the
tempting brown parcel.

"Be careful then, Joe," said Polly, with an important air. So Joel took
a comfortable feel, and then Davie must have the same privilege. At
last it was off, and with intense satisfaction the children watched Ben
disappear with it down the long hill to Deacon Blodgett's.

The next day Ben came running in from his work at the deacon's.

"Oh, Polly, you had 'em!" he screamed, all out of breath. "You had 'em!"

"Had what?" asked Polly in astonishment. "Oh, Bensie, what do you mean?"

"Your flowers," he panted. "You sent some flowers to Jasper."

"Flowers to Jasper!" repeated Polly, afraid Ben had gone out of his
wits.

"Yes," said Ben; "I'll begin at the beginning. You see, Polly, when I
went down this morning, Betsey was to set me to work. Deacon Blodgett
and Mrs. Blodgett had started early, you know; and while I was
a-cleanin' up the woodshed, as she told me, all of a sudden she said,
as she stood in the door looking on, 'Oh, Ben, Mis' Blodgett took some
posies along with your parcel.' 'What?' said I; I didn't know as I'd
heard straight. 'Posies, I said,' says Betsey; 'beautiful ones they
were, too, the best in the garding. I heard her tell Mr. Blodgett it
would be a pity if that sick boy couldn't have some flowers, and she
knew the Pepper children were crazy about 'em, so she twisted 'em in
the string around the parcel, and there they stood up and looked fine, I
tell you, as they drove away.' So, Polly!"

"Bensie Pepper!" cried Polly, taking hold of his jacket, and spinning
him round, "I told you so! I told you so!"

"I know you did," said Ben, as she gave him a parting whirl, "an' I wish
you'd say so about other things, Polly, if you can get 'em so easy."


JOLLY DAYS


"Oh Ben," cried Jasper, overtaking him by a smart run as he was turning
in at the little brown gate one morning three days after, "do wait."

"Halloa!" cried Ben, turning around, and setting down his load--a bag of
salt and a basket of potatoes--and viewing Jasper and Prince with great
satisfaction.

"Yes, here I am," said Jasper. "And how I've run; that fellow on the
stage was awful slow in getting here--oh, you're so good," he said
and his eyes, brimful of gladness, beamed on Ben. "The cakes were just
prime, and 'twas great fun to get your letter."

"Did you like it?" asked Ben, the color up all over his brown
face--"Like it!" cried Jasper. "Why 'twas just splendid; and the cakes
were royal! Isn't Polly smart though, to bake like that!" he added
admiringly.

"I guess she is," said Ben, drawing himself up to his very tallest
dimensions. "She knows how to do everything, Jasper King!"

"I should think she did," responded the boy quickly. "I wish she was my
sister," he finished longingly.

"Well, I don't," quickly replied Ben, "for then she wouldn't be mine;
and I couldn't think of being without Polly! Was your father angry
about--about--'the gingerbread boy'?" he asked timidly, trembling for an
answer.

"Oh dear," cried Jasper, tumbling over on the grass, "don't, don't! I
shan't be good for anything if you make me laugh! oh! wasn't it funny;"
and he rolled over and over, shaking with glee.

"Yes," said Ben, immensely relieved to find that no offence had been
taken. "But she would send it; Polly tried not to have her, and she
most cried when Phronsie was so determined, cause she said your father
never'd let you come again--"

"Twas just lovely in Phronsie," said the boy, sitting up and wiping his
eyes, "but oh it was so funny! you ought to have seen my father, Ben
Pepper."

"Oh, then he was angry," cried Ben.

"No indeed he wasn't!" said Jasper; "don't you think it! do you know it
did him lots of good, for he'd been feeling real badly that morning, he
hadn't eaten any breakfast, and when he saw that gingerbread boy--"
here Jasper rolled over again with a peal of laughter--"and heard the
message, he just put back his head, and he laughed--why, I never heard
him laugh as he did then! the room shook all over; and he ate a big
dinner, and all that afternoon he felt as good as could be. But he says
he's coming to see the little girl that baked it for him before we go
home."

Ben nearly tumbled over by the side of Jasper at these words--"Coming to
see us!" he gasped.

"Yes," said Jasper, who had scarcely got over his own astonishment about
it, for if the roof had suddenly whisked off on to the church steeple,
he couldn't have been more amazed than when he heard his father say
cheerily: "Well, Jasper my boy, I guess I shall have to drive over and
see your little girl, since she's been polite enough to bake me this,"
pointing to the wild-looking "gingerbread boy."

"Come in and tell 'em about it," cried Ben, radiantly, picking up his
potatoes and salt. "It's all right, Polly!" he said in a jubilant voice,
"for here's Jasper, and he'll tell you so himself."

"Hush!" said Jasper warningly, "don't let Phronsie hear; well, here's
my pet now," and after bobbing lovingly to the others, with eyes beaming
over with fun, he caught up the little girl who was screaming--"Oh,
here's Jasper! and my beyew-ti-ful doggie!"

"Now Phronsie," he cried, "give me a kiss; you haven't any soft soap
to-day, have you? no; that's a good, nice one, now; your 'gingerbread
boy' was just splendid!"

"Did he eat it?" asked the child in grave delight.

"Well--no--he hasn't eaten it yet," said Jasper, smiling on the others;
"he's keeping it to look at, Phronsie."

"I should think so!" groaned Polly.

"Never mind, Polly," Ben whispered; "Jasper's been a-tellin' me about
it; his father liked it--he did truly."

"Oh!" said Polly, "I'm so glad!"

"He had eyes," said Phronsie, going back to the charms of the
"gingerbread boy."

"I know it," said Jasper admiringly; "so he did."

"Rather deep sunk, one of 'em was," muttered Ben.

"And I'll bake you one, Jasper," said the child as he put her down; "I
will very truly--some day."

"Will you," smiled Jasper; "well then," and there was a whispered
conference with Phronsie that somehow sent that damsel into a blissful
state of delight. And then while Phronsie monopolized Prince, Jasper
told them all about the reception of the parcel--how very dull and
forlorn he was feeling that morning, Prince and he shut up in-doors--and
how his father had had a miserable night, and had eaten scarcely no
breakfast, and just at this juncture there came a knock at the door,
"and" said Jasper, "your parcel walked in, all dressed up in flowers!"

"They weren't our flowers," said Polly, honestly. "Mrs. Blodgett put 'em
on."

"Well she couldn't have, if you hadn't sent the parcel," said Jasper in
a tone of conviction.

Then he launched out into a description of how they opened the
package--Prince looking on, and begging for one of the cakes.

"Oh, didn't you give him one?" cried Polly at this. "Good old Prince!"

"Yes I did," said Jasper, "the biggest one of all."

"The one I guess," interrupted Joel, "with the big raisin on top."

Polly spoke up quickly to save any more remarks on Joel's part. "Now
tell us about your father--and the 'gingerbread boy.'"

So Jasper broke out with a merry laugh, into this part of the story,
and soon had them all in such a gale of merriment, that Phronsie stopped
playing out on the door-step with Prince, and came in to see what the
matter was.

"Never mind," said Polly, trying to get her breath, just as Jasper was
relating how Mr. King set up the "gingerbread boy" on his writing table
before him, while he leaned back in his chair for a hearty laugh.

"And to make it funnier still," said Jasper "don't you think, a little
pen-wiper he has, made like a cap, hanging on the pen-rack above him,
tumbled off just at this very identical minute right on the head of the
'gingerbread boy,' and there it stuck!"

"Oh!" they all screamed, "if we could only have seen it."

"What was it?" asked Phronsie, pulling Polly's sleeve to make her hear.

So Jasper took her in his lap, and told how funny the "gingerbread boy"
looked with a cap on, and Phronsie clapped her hands, and laughed with
the rest, till the little old kitchen rang and rang again.

And then they had the baking! and Polly tied one of her mother's ample
aprons on Jasper, as Mrs. Pepper had left directions if he should come
while she was away; and he developed such a taste for cookery, and had
so many splendid improvements on the Peppers' simple ideas, that the
children thought it the most fortunate thing in the world that he came;
and one and all voted him a most charming companion.

"You could cook a Thanksgiving dinner in this stove, just as easy as
not," said Jasper, putting into the oven something on a little cracked
plate that would have been a pie if there were any centre; but lacking
that necessary accompaniment, probably was a short-cake. "Just as easy
as not," he repeated with emphasis, slamming the door, to give point to
his remarks.

"No, you couldn't either," said Ben at the table with equal decision;
"not a bit of it, Jasper King!"

"Why, Ben Pepper?" asked Jasper, "that oven's big enough! I should like
to know why not?"

"'Cause there isn't anything to cook," said Ben coolly, cutting out a
piece of dough for a jumble; "we don't keep Thanksgiving."

"Not keep Thanksgiving!" said Jasper, standing quite still; "never had a
Thanksgiving! well, I declare," and then he stopped again.

"Yes," answered Ben; "we had one once; 'twas last year--but that wasn't
much."

"Well then," said Jasper, leaning over the table, "I'll tell you what I
should think you'd do--try Christmas."

"Oh, that's always worse," said Polly, setting down her rolling-pin to
think--which immediately rolled away by itself off from the table.

"We never had a Christmas," said little Davie reflectively; "what are
they like, Jasper?"

Jasper sat quite still, and didn't reply to this question for a moment
or two.

To be among children who didn't like Thanksgiving, and who "never
had seen a Christmas," and "didn't know what it was like," was a new
revelation to him.

"They hang up stockings," said Polly softly.

How many, many times she had begged her mother to try it for the younger
ones; but there was never anything to put in them, and the winters were
cold and hard, and the strictest economy only carried them through.

"Oh!" said little Phronsie in horror, "are their feet in 'em, Polly?"

"No dear," said Polly; while Jasper instead of laughing, only stared.
Something requiring a deal of thought was passing through the boy's mind
just then. "They shall have a Christmas!" he muttered, "I know father'll
let me." But he kept his thoughts to himself; and becoming his own gay,
kindly self, he explained and told to Phronsie and the others, so many
stories of past Christmases he had enjoyed, that the interest over the
baking soon dwindled away, until a horrible smell of something burning
brought them all to their senses.

"Oh! the house is burning!" cried Polly. "Oh get a pail of water!"

"Tisn't either," said Jasper, snuffing wisely; "oh! I know--I forgot all
about it--I do beg your pardon." And running to the stove, he knelt
down and drew out of the oven, a black, odorous mass, which with a
crest-fallen air he brought to Polly.

"I'm no end sorry I made such a mess of it," he said, "I meant it for
you."

"Tisn't any matter," said Polly kindly.

"And now do you go on," cried Joel and David both in the same breath,
"all about the Tree, you know."

"Yes, yes," said the others; "if you're not tired, Jasper."

"Oh, no," cried their accommodating friend, "I love to tell about it;
only wait--let's help Polly clear up first."

So after all traces of the frolic had been tidied up, and made nice for
the mother's return, they took seats in a circle and Jasper regaled
them with story and reminiscence, till they felt as if fairy land were
nothing to it!

"How did you ever live through it, Jasper King," said Polly, drawing the
first long breath she had dared to indulge in. "Such an elegant time!"

Jasper laughed. "I hope I'll live through plenty more of them," he said
merrily. "We're going to sister Marian's again, father and I; we always
spend our Christmas there, you know, and she's to have all the cousins,
and I don't know how many more; and a tree--but the best of all, there's
going to be a German carol sung by choir boys--I shall like that best of
all."

"What are choir boys?" asked Polly who was intensely fond of music.

"In some of the churches," explained Jasper, "the choir is all boys; and
they do chant, and sing anthems perfectly beautifully, Polly!"

"Do you play on the piano, and sing?" asked Polly, looking at him in
awe.

"Yes," said the boy simply; "I've played ever since I was a little
fellow, no bigger'n Phronsie."

"Oh, Jasper!" cried Polly, clasping her hands, her cheeks all
aflame--"do you mean to say you do really and truly play on the piano?"

"Why yes," said the boy, looking into her flashing eyes. "Polly's
always crazy about music," explained Ben; "she'll drum on the table, and
anywhere, to make believe it's a piano."

"There's Dr. Fisher going by," said Joel, who, now that they had gotten
on the subject of music, began to find prickles running up and down his
legs from sitting so still. "I wish he'd stop."

"Is he the one that cured your measles--and Polly's eyes?" asked Jasper
running to the window. "I want to see him."

"Well there he is," cried Ben, as the doctor put his head out of the gig
and bowed and smiled to the little group in the window.

"He's just lovely," cried Polly, "oh! I wish you knew him."

"If father's sick again," said Jasper, "we'll have him--he looks nice,
anyway--for father don't like the doctor over in Hingham--do you know
perhaps we'll come again next summer; wouldn't that be nice!"

"Oh!" cried the children rapturously; "do come, Jasper, do!"

"Well, maybe," said Jasper, "if father likes it and sister Marian and
her family will come with us; they do some summers. You'd like little
Dick, I know," turning to Phronsie. "And I guess all of you'd like all
of them," he added, looking at the group of interested listeners. "They
wanted to come this year awfully; they said--'Oh grandpapa, do let us go
with you and Jappy, and--"

"What!" said the children.

"Oh," said Jasper with a laugh, "they call me Jappy--its easier to say
than Jasper; ever so many people do for short. You may if you want to,"
he said looking around on them all.

"How funny!" laughed Polly, "But I don't know as it is any worse than
Polly or Ben."

"Or Phronsie," said Jappy. "Don't you like Jappy?" he said, bringing
his head down to her level, as she sat on the little stool at his feet,
content in listening to the merry chat.

"Is that the same as Jasper?" she asked gravely.

"Yes, the very same," he said.

When they parted--Jappy and the little Peppers were sworn friends; and
the boy, happy in his good times in the cheery little home, felt the
hours long between the visits that his father, when he saw the change
that they wrought in his son, willingly allowed him to make.

"Oh dear!" said Mrs. Pepper one day in the last of September--as a
carriage drawn by a pair of very handsome horses, stopped at their
door, "here comes Mr. King I do believe; we never looked worse'n we do
to-day!"

"I don't care," said Polly, flying out of the bedroom. "Jappy's with
him, mamma, and it'll be nice I guess. At any rate, Phronsie's clean as
a pink," she thought to herself looking at the little maiden, busy with
"baby" to whom she was teaching deportment in the corner. But there was
no time to "fix up;" for a tall, portly gentleman, leaning on his
heavy gold cane, was walking up from the little brown gate to the big
flat-stone that served as a step. Jasper and Prince followed decorously.

"Is this little Miss Pepper?" he asked pompously of Polly, who answered
his rap on the door. Now whether she was little "Miss Pepper" she never
had stopped to consider.

"I don't know sir; I'm Polly." And then she blushed bright as a rose,
and the laughing brown eyes looked beyond to Jasper, who stood on the
walk, and smiled encouragingly.

"Is your mother in?" asked the old gentleman, who was so tall he could
scarcely enter the low door. And then Mrs. Pepper came forward, and
Jasper introduced her, and the old gentleman bowed, and sat down in
the seat Polly placed for him. And Mrs. Pepper thanked him with a heart
overflowing with gratitude, through lips that would tremble even
then, for all that Jasper had done for them. And the old gentleman
said--"Humph!" but he looked at his son, and something shone in his eye
just for a moment.

Phronsie had retreated with "baby" in her arms behind the door on the
new arrival. But seeing everything progressing finely, and overcome by
her extreme desire to see Jappy and Prince, she began by peeping out
with big eyes to observe how things were going on. Just then the old
gentleman happened to say, "Well, where is my little girl that baked me
a cake so kindly?"

Then Phronsie, forgetting all else but her "poor sick man," who also was
"Jasper's father," rushed out from behind the door, and coming up to the
stately old gentleman in the chair, she looked up pityingly, and said,
shaking her yellow head, "Poor, sick man, was my boy good?"

After that there was no more gravity and ceremony. In a moment, Phronsie
was perched upon old Mr. King's knee, and playing with his watch;
while the others, freed from all restraint, were chatting and laughing
happily, till some of the cheeriness overflowed and warmed the heart of
the old gentleman.

"We go to-morrow," he said, rising, and looking at his watch. "Why, is
it possible that we have been here an hour! there, my little girl,
will you give me a kiss?" and he bent his handsome old head down to the
childish face upturned to his confidingly.

"Don't go," said the child, as she put up her little lips in grave
confidence. "I do like you--I do!"

"Oh, Phronsie," began Mrs. Pepper.

"Don't reprove her, madam," said the old gentleman, who liked it
immensely. "Yes, we go to-morrow," he said, looking around on the group
to whom this was a blow they little expected. They had surely thought
Jasper was to stay a week longer.

"I received a telegram this morning, that I must be in the city on
Thursday. And besides, madam," he said, addressing Mrs. Pepper, "I think
the climate is bad for me now, as it induces rheumatism. The hotel is
also getting unpleasant; there are many annoyances that I cannot put up
with; so that altogether, I do not regret it."

Mrs. Pepper, not knowing exactly what to say to this, wisely said
nothing. Meantime, Jappy and the little Peppers were having a sorry time
over in the corner by themselves.

"Well, I'll write," cried Jasper, not liking to look at Polly just then,
as he was sure he shouldn't want anyone to look at him, if he felt like
crying. "And you must answer 'em all."

"Oh, we will! we will!" they cried. "And Jappy, do come next summer,"
said Joel.

"If father'll only say yes, we will, I tell you!" he responded eagerly.

"Come, my boy," said his father the third time; and Jasper knew by the
tone that there must be no delay.

Mr. King had been nervously putting his hand in his pocket during the
last few moments that the children were together; but when he glanced
at Mrs. Pepper's eyes, something made him draw it out again hastily,
as empty as he put it in. "No, 'twouldn't do," he said to himself; "she
isn't the kind of woman to whom one could offer money."

The children crowded back their tears, and hastily said their last
good-bye, some of them hanging on to Prince till the last moment.

And then the carriage door shut with a bang, Jasper giving them a bright
parting smile, and they were gone.

And the Peppers went into their little brown house, and shut the door.


GETTING A CHRISTMAS FOR THE LITTLE ONES


And so October came and went. The little Peppers were very lonely after
Jasper had gone; even Mrs. Pepper caught herself looking up one day when
the wind blew the door open suddenly, half expecting to see the merry
whole-souled boy, and the faithful dog come scampering in.

But the letters came--and that was a comfort; and it was fun to answer
them. The first one spoke of Jasper's being under a private tutor, with
his cousins; then they were less frequent, and they knew he was studying
hard. Full of anticipations of Christmas himself, he urged the little
Peppers to try for one. And the life and spirit of the letter was so
catching, that Polly and Ben found their souls fired within them to try
at least to get for the little ones a taste of Christmastide.

"Now, mammy," they said at last, one day in the latter part of October,
when the crisp, fresh air filled their little healthy bodies with
springing vitality that must bubble over and rush into something,
"we don't want a Thanksgiving--truly we don't. But may we try for a
Christmas--just a little one," they added, timidly, "for the children?"
Ben and Polly always called the three younger ones of the flock "the
children."

To their utter surprise, Mrs. Pepper looked mildly assenting, and
presently she said, "Well, I don't see why you can't try; 'twon't do any
harm, I'm sure."

You see Mrs. Pepper had received a letter from Jasper, which at present
she didn't feel called upon to say anything about.

"Now," said Polly, drawing a long breath, as she and Ben stole away into
a corner to "talk over" and lay plans, "what does it mean?"

"Never mind," said Ben; "as long as she's given us leave I don't care
what it is."

"I neither," said Polly, with the delicious feeling as if the whole
world were before them where to choose; "it'll be just gorgeous, Ben!"

"What's that?" asked Ben, who was not as much given to long words as
Polly, who dearly loved to be fine in language as well as other things.

"Oh, it's something Jappy said one day; and I asked him, and he says
it's fine, and lovely, and all that," answered Polly, delighted that she
knew something she could really tell Ben.

"Then why not say fine?" commented Ben, practically, with a little
upward lift of his nose.

"Oh, I'd know, I'm sure," laughed Polly. "Let's think what'll we do
for Christmas--how many weeks are there, anyway, Ben?" And she began to
count on her fingers.

"That's no way," said Ben, "I'm going to get the Almanac." So he went to
the old clock where hanging up by its side, was a "Farmer's Almanac."

"Now, we'll know," he said, coming back to their corner. So with heads
together they consulted and counted up till they found that eight weeks
and three days remained in which to get ready.

"Dear me!" said Polly. "It's most a year, isn't it, Ben?"

"'Twon't be much time for us," said Ben, who thought of the many hours
to be devoted to hard work that would run away with the time. "We'd
better begin right away, Polly."

"Well, all right," said Polly, who could scarcely keep her fingers
still, as she thought of the many things she should so love to do if she
could. "But first, Ben, what let's do?"

"Would you rather hang up their stockings?" asked Ben, as if he had
unlimited means at his disposal; "or have a tree?"

"Why," said Polly, with wide open eyes at the two magnificent ideas, "we
haven't got anything to put in the stockings when we hang 'em, Ben."

"That's just it," said Ben. "Now, wouldn't it be better to have a tree,
Polly? I can get that easy in the woods, you know."

"Well," interrupted Polly, eagerly, "we haven't got anything to hang on
that, either, Ben. You know Jappy said folks hang all sorts of presents
on the branches. So I don't see," she continued, impatiently, "as
that's any good. We can't do anything, Ben Pepper, so there! there isn't
anything to do anything with," and with a flounce Polly sat down on
the old wooden stool, and folding her hands looked at Ben in a most
despairing way.

"I know," said Ben, "we haven't got much."

"We haven't got anything," said Polly, still looking at him. "Why, we've
got a tree," replied Ben, hopefully. "Well, what's a tree," retorted
Polly, scornfully. "Anybody can go out and look at a tree outdoors."

"Well, now, I tell you, Polly," said Ben, sitting down on the floor
beside her, and speaking very slowly and decisively, "we've got to do
something 'cause we've begun; and we might make a tree real pretty."

"How?" asked Polly, ashamed of her ill-humor, but not in the least
seeing how anything could be made of a tree. "How, Ben Pepper?"

"Well," said Ben, pleasantly, "we'd set it up in the corner--"

"Oh, no, not in the corner," cried Polly, whose spirits began to rise
a little as she saw Ben so hopeful. "Put it in the middle of the room,
do!"

"I don't care where you put it," said Ben, smiling, happy that Polly's
usual cheerful energy had returned, "but I thought.--'twill be a little
one, you know, and I thought 'twould look better in the corner."

"What else?" asked Polly, eager to see how Ben would dress the tree.

"Well," said Ben, "you know the Henderson boys gave me a lot of corn
last week."

"I don't see as that helps much," said Polly, still incredulous. "Do you
mean hang the cobs on the branches, Ben? That would be just dreadful!"

"I should think likely," laughed Ben. "No, indeed, Polly Pepper! but
if we should pop a lot, oh! a bushel, and then we should string 'em, we
could wind it all in and out among the branches, and--"

"Why, wouldn't that be pretty?" cried Polly, "real pretty--and we can do
that, I'm sure."

"Yes," continued Ben; "and then, don't you know, there's some little
candle ends in that box in the Provision Room, maybe mammy'd give us
them."

"I don't believe but she would," cried Polly; "twould be just like
Jappy's if she would! Let's ask her now--this very same minute!"

And they scampered hurriedly to Mrs. Pepper, who to their extreme
astonishment, after all, said "yes," and smiled encouragingly on the
plan.

"Isn't mammy good?" said Polly, with loving gratitude, as they seated
themselves again.

"Now we're all right," exclaimed Ben, "and I tell you we can make the
tree look perfectly splendid, Polly Pepper!"

"And I'll tell you another thing, Ben," Polly said, "oh! something
elegant! You must get ever so many hickory nuts; and you know those bits
of bright paper I've got in the bureau drawer? Well, we can paste them
on to the nuts and hang 'em on for the balls Jappy tells of."

"Polly," cried Ben, "it'll be such a tree as never was, won't it?"

"Yes; but dear me," cried Polly, springing up, "the children are coming!
Wasn't it good, grandma wanted 'em to come over this afternoon, so's
we could talk! Now hush!" as the door opened to admit the noisy little
troop.

"If you think of any new plan," whispered Ben, behind his hand, while
Mrs. Pepper engaged their attention, "you'll have to come out into the
wood-shed to talk after this."

"I know it," whispered Polly back again; "oh! we've got just heaps of
things to think of, Bensie!"

Such a contriving and racking of brains as Polly and Ben set up after
this! They would bob over at each other, and smile with significant
gesture as a new idea would strike one of them, in the most mysterious
way that, if observed, would drive the others almost wild. And then,
frightened lest in some hilarious moment the secret should pop out,
the two conspirators would betake themselves to the wood-shed as before
agreed on. But Joel, finding this out, followed them one day--or, as
Polly said, tagged--so that was no good.

"Let's go behind the wood-pile," she said to Ben, in desperation; "he
can't hear there, if we whisper real soft."

"Yes, he will," said Ben, who knew Joel's hearing faculties much better.
"We'll have to wait till they're a-bed."

So after that, when nightfall first began to make its appearance, Polly
would hint mildly about bedtime.

"You hustle us so!" said Joel, after he had been sent off to bed for two
or three nights unusually early.

"Oh, Joey, it's good for you to get to bed," said Polly, coaxingly;
"it'll make you grow, you know, real fast."

"Well, I don't grow a-bed," grumbled Joel, who thought something was in
the wind. "You and Ben are going to talk, I know, and wink your eyes, as
soon as we're gone."

"Well, go along, Joe, that's a good boy," said Polly, laughing, "and
you'll know some day."

"What'll you give me?" asked Joel, seeing a bargain, his foot on the
lowest stair leading to the loft, "say, Polly?"

"Oh, I haven't got much to give," she said, cheerily; "but I'll tell you
what, Joey--I'll tell you a story every day that you go to bed."

"Will you?" cried Joe, hopping back into the room. "Begin now, Polly,
begin now!"

"Why, you haven't been to bed yet," said Polly, "so I can't till
to-morrow."

"Yes, I have--you've made us go for three--no, I guess fourteen nights,"
said Joel, indignantly.

"Well, you were made to go," laughed Polly. "I said if you'd go good,
you know; so run along, Joe, and I'll tell you a nice one to-morrow."

"It's got to be long," shouted Joel, when he saw he could get no more,
making good time up to the loft.

To say that Polly, in the following days, was Master Joel's slave, was
stating the case lightly. However, she thought by her story-telling she
got off easily, as each evening saw the boys drag their unwilling
feet to-bedward, and leave Ben and herself in peace to plan and work
undisturbed. There they would sit by the little old table, around the
one tallow candle, while Mrs. Pepper sewed away busily, looking up to
smile or to give some bits of advice; keeping her own secret meanwhile,
which made her blood leap fast, as the happy thoughts nestled in her
heart of her little ones and their coming glee. And Polly made the
loveliest of paper dolls for Phronsie out of the rest of the bits of
bright paper; and Ben made windmills and whistles for the boys; and a
funny little carved basket with a handle, for Phronsie, out of a hickory
nut shell; and a new pink calico dress for Seraphina peered out from
the top drawer of the old bureau in the bedroom, whenever anyone opened
it--for Mrs. Pepper kindly let the children lock up their treasures
there as fast as completed.

"I'll make Seraphina a bonnet," said Mrs. Pepper, "for there's that old
bonnet-string in the bag, you know, Polly, that'll make it beautiful."

"Oh, do, mother," cried Polly, "she's been wanting a new one awfully."

"And I'm going to knit some mittens for Joel and David," continued Mrs.
Pepper; "cause I can get the yarn cheap now. I saw some down at the
store yesterday I could have at half price."

"I don't believe anybody'll have as good a Christmas as we shall," cried
Polly, pasting on a bit of trimming to the gayest doll's dress; "no, not
even Jappy."

An odd little smile played around Mrs. Pepper's mouth, but she said not
a word, and so the fun and the work went on.

The tree was to be set up in the Provision Room; that was finally
decided, as Mrs. Pepper showed the children how utterly useless it would
be to try having it in the kitchen.

"I'll find the key, children," she said, "I think I know where 'tis, and
then we can keep them out."

"Well, but it looks so," said Polly, demurring at the prospect.

"Oh, no, Polly," said her mother; "at any rate it's clean."

"Polly," said Ben, "we can put evergreen around, you know."

"So we can," said Polly, brightly; "oh, Ben, you do think of the best
things; we couldn't have had them in the kitchen."

"And don't let's hang the presents on the tree," continued Ben; "let's
have the children hang up their stockings; they want to, awfully--for I
heard David tell Joel this morning before we got up--they thought I
was asleep, but I wasn't--that he did so wish they could, but, says he,
'Don't tell mammy, 'cause that'll make her feel bad."

"The little dears!" said Mrs. Pepper, impulsively; "they shall have
their stockings, too."

"And we'll make the tree pretty enough," said Polly, enthusiastically;
"we shan't want the presents to hang on; we've got so many things. And
then we'll have hickory nuts to eat; and perhaps mammy'll let us make
some molasses candy the day before," she said, with a sly look at her
mother.

"You may," said Mrs. Pepper, smiling.

"Oh, goody!" they both cried, hugging each other ecstatically.

"And we'll have a frolic in the Provision Room afterwards," finished
Polly; "oh! ooh!"

And so the weeks flew by--one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight! till only the three days remained, and to think the fun that
Polly and Ben had had already!

"It's better'n a Christmas," they told their mother, "to get ready for
it!"

"It's too bad you can't hang up your stockings," said Mrs. Pepper,
looking keenly at their flushed faces and bright eyes; "you've never
hung 'em up."

"That isn't any matter, mamsie," they both said, cheerily; "it's a
great deal better to have the children have a nice time--oh, won't it be
elegant! p'r'aps we'll have ours next year!"

For two days before, the house was turned upside down for Joel to find
the biggest stocking he could; but on Polly telling him it must be his
own, he stopped his search, and bringing down his well-worn one, hung it
by the corner of the chimney to be ready.

"You put yours up the other side, Dave," he advised.

"There isn't any nail," cried David, investigating.

"I'll drive one," said Joel, so he ran out to the tool-house, as one
corner of the wood-shed was called, and brought in the hammer and one or
two nails.

"Phronsie's a-goin' in the middle," he said, with a nail in his mouth.

"Yes, I'm a-goin' to hang up my stockin'," cried the child, hopping from
one toe to the other.

"Run get it, Phronsie," said Joel, "and I'll hang it up for you.

"Why, it's two days before Christmas yet," said Polly, laughing; "how
they'll look hanging there so long."

"I don't care," said Joel, giving a last thump to the nail; "we're
a-goin' to be ready. Oh, dear! I wish 'twas to-night!"

"Can't Seraphina hang up her stocking?" asked Phronsie, coming up to
Polly's side; "and Baby, too?"

"Oh, let her have part of yours," said Polly, "that'll be
best--Seraphina and Baby, and you have one stocking together."

"Oh, yes," cried Phronsie, easily pleased; "that'll be best." So for
the next two days, they were almost distracted; the youngest ones asking
countless questions about Santa Claus, and how he possibly could get
down the chimney, Joel running his head up as far as he dared, to see if
it was big enough.

"I guess he can," he said, coming back in a sooty state, looking very
much excited and delighted.

"Will he be black like Joey?" asked Phronsie, pointing to his grimy
face.

"No," said Polly; "he don't ever get black."

"Why?" they all asked; and then, over and over, they wanted the
delightful mystery explained.

"We never'll get through this day," said Polly in despair, as the last
one arrived. "I wish 'twas to-night, for we're all ready."

"Santy's coming! Santy's coming!" sang Phronsie, as the bright afternoon
sunlight went down over the fresh, crisp snow, "for it's night now."

"Yes, Santa is coming!" sang Polly; and "Santa Claus is coming," rang
back and forth through the old kitchen, till it seemed as if the three
little old stockings would hop down and join in the dance going on so
merrily.

"I'm glad mine is red," said Phronsie, at last, stopping in the wild
jig, and going up to see if it was all safe, "cause then Santy'll know
it's mine, won't he, Polly?"

"Yes, dear," cried Polly, catching her up. "Oh, Phronsie! you are going
to have a Christmas!"

"Well, I wish," said Joel, "I had my name on mine! I know Dave'll get
some of my things."

"Oh, no, Joe," said Mrs. Pepper, "Santa Claus is smart; he'll know yours
is in the left-hand corner."

"Will he?" asked Joel, still a little fearful.

"Oh, yes, indeed," said Mrs. Pepper, confidently. "I never knew him to
make a mistake."

"Now," said Ben, when they had all made a pretence of eating supper,
for there was such an excitement prevailing that no one sat still long
enough to eat much, "you must every one fly off to bed as quick as ever
can be."

"Will Santa Claus come faster then?" asked Joel.

"Yes," said Ben, "just twice as fast."

"I'm going, then," said Joel; "but I ain't going to sleep, 'cause I mean
to hear him come over the roof; then I'm going to get up, for I do so
want a squint at the reindeer!"

"I am, too," cried Davie, excitedly. "Oh, do come, Joe!" and he began to
mount the stairs.

"Good night," said Phronsie, going up to the centre of the
chimney-piece, where the little red stocking dangled limpsily, "lift me
up, Polly, do."

"What you want to do?" asked Polly, running and giving her a jump. "What
you goin' to do, Phronsie?"

"I want to kiss it good night," said the child, with eyes big with
anticipation and happiness, hugging the well worn toe of the little old
stocking affectionately. "I wish I had something to give Santa, Polly, I
do!" she cried, as she held her fast in her arms.

"Never mind, Pet," said Polly, nearly smothering her with kisses; "if
you're a good girl, Phronsie, that pleases Santa the most of anything."

"Does it?" cried Phronsie, delighted beyond measure, as Polly carried
her into the bedroom, "then I'll be good always, I will!"


CHRISTMAS BELLS!


In the middle of the night Polly woke up with a start.

"What in the world!" said she, and she bobbed up her head and looked
over at her mother, who was still peacefully sleeping, and was just
going to lie down again, when a second noise out in the kitchen made her
pause and lean on her elbow to listen. At this moment she thought she
heard a faint whisper, and springing out of bed she ran to Phronsie's
crib--it was empty! As quick as a flash she sped out into the kitchen.
There, in front of the chimney, were two figures. One was Joel, and the
other, unmistakably, was Phronsie!

"What are you doing?" gasped Polly, holding on to a chair.

The two little night-gowns turned around at this.

"Why, I thought it was morning," said Joel, "and I wanted my stocking.
Oh!" as he felt the toe, which was generously stuffed, "give it to me,
Polly Pepper, and I'll run right back to bed again!"

"Dear me!" said Polly; "and you, too, Phronsie! Why, it's the middle of
the night! Did I ever!" and she had to pinch her mouth together tight
to keep from bursting out into a loud laugh. "Oh, dear, I shall laugh!
don't look so scared, Phronsie, there won't anything hurt you." For
Phronsie who, on hearing Joel fumbling around the precious stockings,
had been quite willing to hop out of bed and join him, had now, on
Polly's saying the dire words "in the middle of the night," scuttled
over to her protecting side like a frightened rabbit.

"It never'll be morning," said Joel taking up first one cold toe and
then the other; "you might let us have 'em now, Polly."

"No," said Polly sobering down; "you can't have yours till Davie wakes
up, too. Scamper off to bed, Joey, dear, and forget all about 'em--and
it'll be morning before you know it."

"Oh, I'd rather go to bed," said Phronsie, trying to tuck up her feet in
the little flannel night-gown, which was rather short, "but I don't know
the way back, Polly. Take me, Polly, do," and she put up her arms to be
carried.

"Oh, I ain't a-goin' back alone, either," whimpered Joel, coming up to
Polly, too.

"Why, you came down alone, didn't you?" whispered Polly, with a little
laugh.

"Yes, but I thought 'twas morning," said Joel, his teeth chattering with
something beside the cold.

"Well, you must think of the morning that's coming," said Polly,
cheerily. "I'll tell you--you wait till I put Phronsie into the crib,
and then I'll come back and go half-way up the stairs with you."

"I won't never come down till it's mornin' again," said Joel, bouncing
along the stairs, when Polly was ready to go with him, at a great rate.

"Better not," laughed Polly, softly. "Be careful and not wake Davie nor
Ben."

"I'm in," announced Joel, in a loud whisper; and Polly could hear him
snuggle down among the warm bedclothes. "Call us when 'tis mornin',
Polly."

"Yes," said Polly, "I will; go to sleep."

Phronsie had forgotten stockings and everything else on Polly's return,
and was fast asleep in the old crib. The result of it was that the
children slept over, when morning did really come; and Polly had to
keep her promise, and go to the foot of the stairs and call--"MERRY
CHRISTMAS! oh, Ben! and Joel! and Davie!"

"Oh!--oh!--oo-h!" and then the sounds that answered her, as with
smothered whoops of expectation they one and all flew into their
clothes!

Quick as a flash Joel and Davie were down and dancing around the
chimney.

"Mammy! mammy!" screamed Phronsie, hugging her stocking, which Ben
lifted her up to unhook from the big nail, "Santy did come, he did!" and
then she spun around in the middle of the floor, not stopping to look in
it.

"Well, open it, Phronsie," called Davie, deep in the exploring of his
own; "oh! isn't that a splendid wind-mill, Joe?"

"Yes," said that individual, who, having found a big piece of molasses
candy, was so engaged in enjoying a huge bite that, regardless alike of
his other gifts or of the smearing his face was getting, he gave himself
wholly up to its delights.

"Oh, Joey," cried Polly, laughingly, "molasses candy for breakfast!"

"That's prime!" cried Joel, swallowing the last morsel. "Now I'm going
to see what's this--oh, Dave, see here! see here!" he cried in intense
excitement, pulling out a nice little parcel which, unrolled, proved to
be a bright pair of stout mittens. "See if you've got some--look quick!"

"Yes, I have," said David, picking up a parcel about as big. "No, that's
molasses candy."

"Just the same as I had," said Joel; "do look for the mittens. P'r'aps
Santa Claus thought you had some--oh, dear!"

"Here they are!" screamed Davie. "I have got some, Joe, just exactly
like yours! See, Joe!"

"Goody!" said Joel, immensely relieved; for now he could quite enjoy his
to see a pair on Davie's hands, also. "Look at Phron," he cried, "she
hasn't got only half of her things out!"

To tell the truth, Phronsie was so bewildered by her riches that she
sat on the floor with the little red stocking in her lap, laughing and
cooing to herself amid the few things she had drawn out. When she came
to Seraphina's bonnet she was quite overcome. She turned it over and
over, and smoothed out the little white feather that had once adorned
one of Grandma Bascom's chickens, until the two boys with their
stockings, and the others sitting around in a group on the floor
watching them, laughed in glee to see her enjoyment.

"Oh, dear," said Joel, at last, shaking his stocking; "I've got all
there is. I wish there were forty Christmases coming!"

"I haven't!" screamed Davie; "there's some thing in the toe."

"It's an apple, I guess," said Joel; "turn it up, Dave."

"'Tisn't an apple," exclaimed Davie, "tisn't round--it's long and thin;
here 'tis." And he pulled out a splendid long whistle on which he blew
a blast long and terrible, and Joel immediately following, all quiet was
broken up, and the wildest hilarity reigned.

"I don't know as you'll want any breakfast," at last said Mrs. Pepper,
when she had got Phronsie a little sobered down.

"I do, I do!" cried Joel.

"Dear me! after your candy?" said Polly.

"That's all gone," said Joel, tooting around the table on his whistle.
"What are we going to have for breakfast?"

"Same as ever," said his mother; "it can't be Christmas all the time."

"I wish 'twas," said little Davie; "forever and ever!"

"Forever an' ever," echoed little Phronsie, flying up, her cheeks like
two pinks, and Seraphina in her arms with her bonnet on upside down.

"Dear, dear," said Polly, pinching Ben to keep still as they tumbled
down the little rickety steps to the Provision Room, after breakfast.
The children, content in their treasures, were holding high carnival in
the kitchen. "Suppose they should find it out now--I declare I should
feel most awfully. Isn't it elegant?" she asked, in a subdued whisper,
going all around and around the tree, magnificent in its dress of bright
red and yellow balls, white festoons, and little candle-ends all ready
for lighting. "Oh, Ben, did you lock the door?"

"Yes," he said. "That's a mouse," he added, as a little rustling noise
made Polly stop where she stood back of the tree and prick up her ears
in great distress of mind. "'Tis elegant," he said, turning around
in admiration, and taking in the tree which, as Polly said, was quite
"gorgeous," and the evergreen branches twisted up on the beams and
rafters, and all the other festive arrangements. "Even Jappy's isn't
better, I don't believe!"

"I wish Jappy was here," said Polly with a small sigh.

"Well, he isn't," said Ben; "come, we must go back into the kitchen, or
all the children will be out here. Look your last, Polly; 'twon't do to
come again till it's time to light up."

"Mammy says she'd rather do the lighting up," said Polly. "Had she?"
said Ben, in surprise; "oh, I suppose she's afraid we'll set somethin'
a-fire. Well, then, we shan't come in till we have it."

"I can't bear to go," said Polly, turning reluctantly away; "it's most
beautiful--oh, Ben," and she faced him for the five-hundredth time with
the question, "is your Santa Claus dress all safe?"

"Yes," said Ben, "I'll warrant they won't find that in one hurry! Such a
time as we've had to make it!"

"I know it," laughed Polly; "don't that cotton wool look just like bits
of fur, Ben?"

"Yes," said Ben, "and when the flour's shaken over me it'll be Santa
himself."

"We've got to put back the hair into mamsie's cushion the first thing
to-morrow," whispered Polly anxiously, "and we mustn't forget it,
Bensie."

"I want to keep the wig awfully," said Ben. "You did make that just
magnificent, Polly!"

"If you could see yourself," giggled Polly; "did you put it in the straw
bed? and are you sure you pulled the ticking over it smooth?"

"Yes, sir," replied Ben, "sure's my name's Ben Pepper! if you'll only
keep them from seeing me when I'm in it till we're ready--that's all I
ask."

"Well," said Polly a little relieved, "but I hope Joe won't look."

"Come on! they're a-comin'!" whispered Ben; "quick!"

"Polly!" rang a voice dangerously near; so near that Polly, speeding
over the stairs to intercept it, nearly fell on her nose.

"Where you been?" asked one.

"Let's have a concert," put in Ben; Polly was so out of breath that she
couldn't speak. "Come, now, each take a whistle, and we'll march round
and round and see which can make the biggest noise."

In the rattle and laughter which this procession made all mystery was
forgotten, and the two conspirators began to breathe freer.

Five o'clock! The small ones of the Pepper flock, being pretty well
tired out with noise and excitement, all gathered around Polly and Ben,
and clamored for a story.

"Do, Polly, do," begged Joel. "It's Christmas, and 'twon't come again
for a year."

"I can't," said Polly, in such a twitter that she could hardly stand
still, and for the first time in her life refusing, "I can't think of a
thing."

"I will then," said Ben; "we must do something," he whispered to Polly.

"Tell it good," said Joel, settling himself.

So for an hour the small tyrants kept their entertainers well employed.

"Isn't it growing awful dark?" said Davie, rousing himself at last, as
Ben paused to take breath.

Polly pinched Ben.

"Mammy's a-goin' to let us know," he whispered in reply. "We must keep
on a little longer."

"Don't stop," said Joel, lifting his head where he sat on the floor.
"What you whisperin' for, Polly?"

"I'm not," said Polly, glad to think she hadn't spoken.

"Well, do go on, Ben," said Joel, lying down again.

"Polly'll have to finish it," said Ben; "I've got to go upstairs now."

So Polly launched out into such an extravagant story that they all,
perforce, had to listen.

All this time Mrs. Pepper had been pretty busy in her way. And now she
came into the kitchen and set down her candle on the table. "Children,"
she said. Everybody turned and looked at her--her tone was so strange;
and when they saw her dark eyes shining with such a new light, little
Davie skipped right out into the middle of the room. "What's the matter,
mammy?"

"You may all come into the Provision Room," said she.

"What for?" shouted Joel, in amazement; while the others jumped to their
feet, and stood staring.

Polly flew around like a general, arranging her forces. "Let's march
there," said she; "Phronsie, you take hold of Davie's hand, and go
first."

"I'm goin' first," announced Joel, squeezing up past Polly. "No,
you mustn't, Joe," said Polly decidedly; "Phronsie and David are the
youngest."

"They're always the youngest," said Joel, falling back with Polly to the
rear.

"Forward! MARCH!" sang Polly. "Follow mamsie!"

Down the stairs they went with military step, and into the Provision
Room. And then, with one wild look, the little battalion broke ranks,
and tumbling one over the other in decidedly unmilitary style, presented
a very queer appearance!

And Captain Polly was the queerest of all; for she just gave one gaze at
the tree, and then sat right down on the floor, and said, "Oh! OH!"

Mrs. Pepper was flying around delightedly, and saying, "Please to come
right in," and "How do you do?"

And before anybody knew it, there were the laughing faces of Mrs.
Henderson and the Parson himself, Doctor Fisher and old Grandma Bascom;
while the two Henderson boys, unwilling to be defrauded of any of the
fun, were squeezing themselves in between everybody else, and coming up
to Polly every third minute, and saying, "There--aren't you surprised?"

"It's Fairyland!" cried little Davie, out of his wits with joy; "Oh!
aren't we in Fairyland, ma?"

The whole room was in one buzz of chatter and fun; and everybody beamed
on everybody else; and nobody knew what they said, till Mrs. Pepper
called, "Hush! Santa Claus is coming!"

A rattle at the little old window made everybody look there, just as a
great snow-white head popped up over the sill.

"Oh!" screamed Joel, "'tis Santy!"

"He's a-comin' in!" cried Davie in chorus, which sent Phronsie flying
to Polly. In jumped a little old man, quite spry for his years; with
a jolly, red face and a pack on his back, and flew into their midst,
prepared to do his duty; but what should he do, instead of making his
speech, "this jolly Old Saint--" but first fly up to Mrs. Pepper, and
say--"Oh, mammy how did you do it?"

"It's Ben!" screamed Phronsie; but the little Old Saint didn't hear,
for he and Polly took hold of hands, and pranced around that tree while
everybody laughed till they cried to see them go!

And then it all came out!

"Order!" said Parson Henderson in his deepest tones; and then he put
into Santa Claus' hands a letter, which he requested him to read.
And the jolly Old Saint, although he was very old, didn't need any
spectacles, but piped out in Ben's loudest tones:

"Dear Friends--A Merry Christmas to you all! And that you'll have a good
time, and enjoy it all as much as I've enjoyed my good times at your
house, is the wish of your friend,

"JASPER ELYOT KING"

"Hurrah for Jappy!" cried Santa Claus, pulling his beard; and "Hurrah
for Jasper!" went all around the room; and this ended in three good
cheers--Phronsie coming in too late with her little crow--which was just
as well, however!

"Do your duty now, Santa Claus!" commanded Dr. Fisher as master of
ceremonies; and everything was as still as a mouse!

And the first thing she knew, a lovely brass cage, with a dear little
bird with two astonished black eyes dropped down into Polly's hands. The
card on it said: "For Miss Polly Pepper, to give her music everyday in
the year."

"Mammy," said Polly; and then she did the queerest thing of the whole!
she just burst into tears! "I never thought I should have a bird for my
very own!"

"Hulloa!" said Santa Claus, "I've got something myself!"

"Santa Claus' clothes are too old," laughed Dr. Fisher, holding up a
stout, warm suit that a boy about as big as Ben would delight in.

And then that wonderful tree just rained down all manner of lovely
fruit. Gifts came flying thick and fast, till the air seemed full, and
each one was greeted with a shout of glee, as it was put into the
hands of its owner. A shawl flew down on Mrs. Pepper's shoulders; and
a work-basket tumbled on Polly's head; and tops and balls and fishing
poles, sent Joel and David into a corner with howls of delight!

But the climax was reached when a large wax doll in a very gay pink silk
dress, was put into Phronsie's hands, and Dr. Fisher, stooping down,
read in loud tones: "FOR PHRONSIE, FROM ONE WHO ENJOYED HER GINGERBREAD
BOY."

After that, nobody had anything to say! Books jumped down unnoticed, and
gay boxes of candy. Only Polly peeped into one of her books, and saw
in Jappy's plain hand--"I hope we'll both read this next summer." And
turning over to the title-page, she saw "A Complete Manual of Cookery."

"The best is to come," said Mrs. Henderson in her gentle way. When there
was a lull in the gale, she took Polly's hand, and led her to a
little stand of flowers in the corner concealed by a sheet--pinks and
geraniums, heliotropes and roses, blooming away, and nodding their
pretty heads at the happy sight--Polly had her flowers.

"Why didn't we know?" cried the children at last, when everybody was
tying on their hoods, and getting their hats to leave the festive scene,
"how could you keep it secret, mammy?"

"They all went to Mrs. Henderson's," said Mrs. Pepper; "Jasper wrote me,
and asked where to send 'em, and Mrs. Henderson was so kind as to say
that they might come there. And we brought 'em over last evening, when
you were all abed. I couldn't have done it," she said, bowing to the
Parson and his wife, "if 'twasn't for their kindness--never, in all this
world!"

"And I'm sure," said the minister, looking around on the bright group,
"if we can help along a bit of happiness like this, it is a blessed
thing!"

And here Joel had the last word. "You said 'twan't goin' to be Christmas
always, mammy. I say," looking around on the overflow of treasures and
the happy faces--"it'll be just forever!"


EDUCATION AHEAD


After that they couldn't thank Jasper enough! They tried to, lovingly,
and an elaborate letter of thanks, headed by Mrs. Pepper, was drawn up
and sent with a box of the results of Polly's diligent study of Jasper's
book. Polly stripped off recklessly her choicest buds and blossoms from
the gay little stand of flowers in the corner, that had already begun
to blossom, and tucked them into every little nook in the box that could
possibly hold a posy. But as for thanking him enough!

"We can't do it, mammy," said Polly, looking around on all the happy
faces, and then up at Cherry, who was singing in the window, and who
immediately swelled up his little throat and poured out such a merry
burst of song that she had to wait for him to finish. "No, not if we
tried a thousand years!"

"I'm a-goin'," said Joel, who was busy as a bee with his new tools that
the tree had shaken down for him, "to make Jappy the splendidest box you
ever saw, Polly! I guess that'll thank him!"

"Do," cried Polly; "he'd be so pleased, Joey."

"And I," said Phronsie, over in the corner with her children, "I'm goin'
to see my poor sick man sometime, Polly, I am!"

"Oh, dear!" cried Polly, whirling around, and looking at her mother
in dismay. "She'll be goin' to-morrow! Oh, no, Phronsie, you can't; he
lives miles and miles away--oh, ever so far!"

"Does he live as far as the moon?" asked little Phronsie, carefully
laying Seraphina down, and looking up at Polly, anxiously.

"Oh, I don't know," said Polly, giving Cherry a piece of bread, and
laughing to see how cunning he looked. "Oh, no, of course not, but it's
an awful long ways, Phronsie."

"I don't care," said Phronsie, determinedly, giving the new doll a
loving little pat, "I'm goin' sometime, Polly, to thank my poor sick
man, yes, I am!"

"You'll see him next summer, Phronsie," sang Polly skipping around the
kitchen, "and Jappy's sister Marian, the lovely lady, and all the boys.
Won't that be nice?" and Polly stopped to pat the yellow head bending in
motherly attentions over her array of dolls.

"Ye-es," said Phronsie, slowly; "the whole of 'em, Polly?"

"Yes, indeed!" said Polly, gayly; "the whole of 'em, Phronsie!

"Hooray!" shouted the two boys, while Phronsie only gave a long sigh,
and clasped her hands.

"Better not be looking for summer," said Mrs. Pepper, "until you do
your duty by the winter; then you can enjoy it," and she took a fresh
needleful of thread.

"Mamsie's right," said Ben, smiling over at her. And he threw down
his book and jumped for his cap. "Now for a good chop!" he cried, and
snatching a kiss from Phronsie, he rushed out of the door to his work,
whistling as he went.

"Warn't Mr. Henderson good, ma," asked Polly, watching his retreating
figure, "to give Ben learning?"

"Yes, he was," replied Mrs. Pepper, enthusiastically. "We've got a
parson, if anybody has in this world!"

"And Ben's learning," said Polly, swelling with pride, as she sat down
by her mother, and began to sew rapidly, "so that he'll be a big man
right off! Oh, dear," as a thought made her needle pause a minute in its
quick flying in and out.

"What is it, Polly?" Mrs. Pepper looked keenly at the troubled face and
downcast eyes.

"Why--" began Polly, and then she finished very slowly, "I shan't know
anything, and Ben'll be ashamed of me.

"Yes, you will!" cried Mrs. Pepper, energetically, "you keep on trying,
and the Lord'll send some way; don't you go to bothering your head about
it now, Polly--it'll come when it's time."

"Will it?" asked Polly, doubtfully, taking up her needle again.

"Yes, indeed!" cried Mrs. Pepper, briskly; "come fly at your sewing;
that's your learning now."

"So 'tis," said Polly, with a little laugh. "Now let's see which'll get
their seam done first, mamsie?"

And now letters flew thick and fast from the city to the little brown
house, and back again, warming Jasper's heart, and filling the tedious
months of that winter with more of jollity and fun than the lad ever
enjoyed before; and never was fun and jollity more needed than now;
for Mr. King, having nothing to do, and each year finding himself less
inclined to exercise any thoughtful energy for others, began to look at
life something in the light of a serious bore, and accordingly made it
decidedly disagreeable for all around him, and particularly for Jasper
who was his constant companion. But the boy was looking forward to
summer, and so held on bravely.

"I do verily believe, Polly," he wrote, "that Badgertown'll see the
gayest times it ever knew! Sister Marian wants to go, so that's all
right. Now, hurrah for a good time--it's surely coming!"

But alas! for Jasper! as spring advanced, his father took a decided
aversion to Hingham, Badgertown, and all other places that could be
mentioned in that vicinity.

"It's a wretched climate," he asserted, over and over; "and the
foundation of all my ill feelings this winter was laid, I'm convinced,
in Hingham last summer."

No use to urge the contrary; and all Jasper's pleadings were equally
vain. At last, sister Marian, who was kind-hearted to a fault, sorry to
see her brother's dismay and disappointment said, one day, "Why not have
one of the children come here? I should like it very much--do invite
Ben."

"I don't want Ben," said Jasper gloomily, "I want Polly." He added this
in much the same tone as Phronsie's when she had rushed up to him the
day she was lost, declaring, "I want Polly!"

"Very well, then," said sister Marian, laughing, "I'm sure I didn't mean
to dictate which one; let it be Polly then; yes, I should prefer Polly
myself, I think, as we've enough boys now," smiling to think of her own
brood of wide awake youngsters.

"If you only will, father, I'll try to be ever so good!" said Jasper,
turning suddenly to his father.

"Jasper needs some change," said sister Marian kindly, "he really has
grown very pale and thin."

"Hey!" said Mr. King, sharply, looking at him over his eyeglasses. "The
boy's well enough; well enough!" But he twisted uneasily in his chair,
all the same. At last he flung down his paper, twitched his fingers
through his hair two or three times, and then burst out--"Well, why
don't you send for her? I'm sure I don't care--I'll write myself, and I
had better do it now. Tell Thomas to be ready to take it right down; it
must get into this mail."

When Mr. King had made up his mind to do anything, everybody else must
immediately give up their individual plans, and stand out of the way for
him to execute his at just that particular moment! Accordingly Thomas
was dragged from his work to post the letter, while the old gentleman
occupied the time in pulling out his watch every third second until the
slightly-out-of-breath Thomas reported on his return that the letter
did get in. Then Mr. King settled down satisfied, and everything went on
smoothly as before.

But Polly didn't come! A grateful, appreciative letter, expressed in
Mrs. Pepper's own stiff way, plainly showed the determination of that
good woman not to accept what was such a favor to her child.

In vain Mr. King stormed, and fretted, and begged, offering every
advantage possible--Polly should have the best foundation for a musical
education that the city could afford; also lessons in the schoolroom
under the boys' private tutor--it was all of no avail. In vain sister
Marian sent a gentle appeal, fully showing her heart was in it; nothing
broke down Mrs. Pepper's resolve, until, at last, the old gentleman
wrote one day that Jasper, being in such failing health, really depended
on Polly to cheer him up. That removed the last straw that made it
"putting one's self under an obligation," which to Mrs. Pepper's
independent soul, had seemed insurmountable.

And now, it was decided that Polly was really to go! and pretty soon all
Badgertown knew that Polly Pepper was going to the big city. And there
wasn't a man, woman, or child but what greatly rejoiced that a sunny
time was coming to one of the chicks in the little brown house. With
many warm words, and some substantial gifts, kind friends helped forward
the "outing." Only one person doubted that this delightful chance should
be grasped at once--and that one was Polly herself!

"I can't," she said, and stood quite pale and still, when the Hendersons
advised her mother's approval, and even Grandma Bascom said, "Go." "I
can't go and leave mammy to do all the work."

"But don't you see, Polly," said Mrs. Henderson, drawing her to her
side, "that you will help your mother twice as much as you possibly
could here, by getting a good education? Think what your music will be;
only think, Polly!"

Polly drew a long breath at this and turned away.

"Oh, Polly!" cried Ben, though his voice choked, "if you give this up,
there never'll be another chance," and the boy put his arm around her,
and whispered something in her ear.

"I know," said Polly quietly--and then she burst out, "oh, but I can't!
'tisn't right."

"Polly," said Mrs. Pepper--and never in all their lives had the children
seen such a look in mamsie's eyes as met them then; "it does seem as
if my heart would be broken if you didn't go!" And then she burst out
crying, right before them all!

"Oh mammy," cried Polly, breaking away from everybody, and flinging
herself into her arms. "I'll go--if you think I ought to. But it's too
good! don't cry--don't, mammy dear," and Polly stroked the careworn face
lovingly, and patted the smooth hair that was still so black.

"And, Polly," said Mrs. Pepper, smiling through her tears, "just think
what a comfort you'll be to me, and us all," she added, taking in the
children who were crowding around Polly as the centre of attraction.
"Why, you'll be the making of us," she added hopefully.

"I'll do something," said Polly, her brown eyes kindling, "or I shan't
be worthy of you, mammy."

"O, you'll do it," said Mrs. Pepper, confidently, "now that you're
going."

But when Polly stepped into the stage, with her little hair trunk
strapped on behind, containing her one brown merino that Mrs. Henderson
had made over for her out of one of her own, and her two new ginghams,
her courage failed again, and she astonished everybody, and nearly upset
a mild-faced old lady who was in the corner placidly eating doughnuts,
by springing out and rushing up through the little brown gate, past
all the family, drawn up to see her off. She flew over the old flat
door-stone, and into the bedroom, where she flung herself down between
the old bed and Phronsie's crib, in a sudden torrent of tears. "I can't
go!" she sobbed--"oh I can't!"

"Why, Polly!" cried Mrs. Pepper, hurrying in, followed by Joel and the
rest of the troops at his heels. "What are you thinking of!"

"Think of by-and-by, Polly," put in Ben, patting her on the back with
an unsteady hand, while Joel varied the proceedings by running back
and forth, screaming at the top of his lungs, "The stage's going! your
trunk'll be taken!"

"Dear me!" ejaculated Mrs. Pepper, "do stop it somebody! there, Polly,
come now! Do as mother says!"

"I'll try again," said poor Polly, choking back her sobs, and getting on
her feet.

Then Polly's tears were wiped away, her hat straightened, after which
she was kissed all round again by the whole family, Phronsie waiting
for the last two, and then was helped again into the stage, the bags and
parcels, and a box for Jappy, which, as it wouldn't go into the trunk,
Joel had insisted Polly should carry in her hand, were again piled
around her, and Mr. Tisbett mounted to his seat, and with a crack of the
whip, bore her safely off this time.

The doughnut lady, viewing poor Polly with extreme sympathy, immediately
forced upon her acceptance three of the largest and sugariest.

"Twill do you good," she said, falling to, herself, on another with
good zeal. "I always eat 'em, and then there ain't any room for
homesickness!"

And away, and away, and away they rumbled and jumbled to the cars.

Here Mr. Tisbett put Polly and her numerous bundles under the care of
the conductor, with manifold charges and explicit directions, to see her
safely into Mr. King's own hands. He left her sitting straight up among
her parcels, her sturdy little figure drawn up to its full height, and
the clear brown eyes regaining a little of their dancing light; for
although a dreadful feeling tugged at her heart, as she thought of the
little brown house she was fast flying away from, there was something
else; our Polly had begun to realize that now she was going to "help
mother."

And now they neared the big city, and everybody began to bustle around,
and get ready to jump out, and the minute the train stopped, the crowd
poured out from the cars, making way for the crowd pouring in, for this
was a through train.

"All aboard!" sang the conductor. "Oh my senses!" springing to Polly; "I
forgot you--here!"

But as quick as a flash he was pushed aside, and a bright, boyish figure
dashed up.

"Oh, Polly!" he said in such a ringing voice! and in another second,
Polly and her bag, and the bundle of cakes and apples that Grandma
Bascom had put up for her, and Joel's box, were one and all bundled
out upon the platform, and the train whizzed on, and there Mr. King was
fuming up and down, berating the departing conductor, and speaking
his mind in regard to all the railroad officials he could think of. He
pulled himself up long enough to give Polly a hearty welcome; and then
away again he flew in righteous indignation, while Jasper rushed off
into the baggage room with Polly's check.

However, every now and then, turning to look down into the little rosy
face beside him, the old gentleman would burst forth, "Bless me, child!
I'm glad you're here, Polly!--how could the fellow forget when--"

"Oh well, you know," said Polly, with a happy little wriggle under her
brown coat, "I'm here now."

"So you are! so you are!" laughed the old gentleman suddenly; "where can
Jasper be so long."

"They're all in the carriage," answered the boy skipping back. "Now,
father! now Polly!"

He was fairly bubbling over with joy and Mr. King forgot his dudgeon and
joined in the general glee, which soon became so great that travellers
gave many a glance at the merry trio who bundled away to Thomas and the
waiting grays.

"You're sure you've got the right check?" asked Mr. King, nervously,
getting into a handsome coach lined with dark green satin, and settling
down among its ample cushions with a sigh of relief.

"Oh yes," laughed Jasper; "Polly didn't have any one else's check, I
guess."

Over through the heart of the city, down narrow, noisy business
streets, out into wide avenues, with handsome stately mansions on either
side--they flew along.

"Oh," said Polly; and then she stopped, and blushed very hard.

"What is it, my dear?" asked Mr. King, kindly.

Polly couldn't speak at first, but when Jasper stopped his merry chat
and begged to know what it was, she turned on him, and burst out, "You
live here?"

"Why, yes," laughed the boy; "why not?"

"Oh!" said Polly again, her cheeks as red as two roses, "it's so
lovely!"

And then the carriage turned in at a brown stone gateway, and winding
up among some fine old trees, stopped before a large, stately residence
that in Polly's eyes seemed like one of the castles of Ben's famous
stories. And then Mr. King got out, and gallantly escorted Polly out,
and up the steps, while Jasper followed with Polly's bag which he
couldn't be persuaded to resign to Thomas. A stiff waiter held the door
open--and then, the rest was only a pleasant, confused jumble of kind
welcoming words, smiling faces, with a background of high spacious
walls, bright pictures, and soft elegant hangings, everything and all
inextricably mixed--till Polly herself seemed floating--away--away, fast
to the Fairyland of her dreams; now, Mr. King was handing her around,
like a precious parcel, from one to the other--now Jasper was bobbing
in and out everywhere, introducing her on all sides, and then Prince
was jumping up and trying to lick her face every minute--but best of all
was, when a lovely face looked down into hers, and Jasper's sister bent
to kiss her.

"I am very glad to have you here, little Polly." The words were simple,
but Polly, lifting up her clear brown eyes, looked straight into the
heart of the speaker, and from that moment never ceased to love her.

"It was a good inspiraton," thought Mrs. Whitney to herself; "this
little girl is going to be a comfort, I know." And then she set herself
to conduct successfully her three boys into friendliness and good
fellowship with Polly, for each of them was following his own sweet will
in the capacity of host, and besides staring at her with all his might,
was determined to do the whole of the entertaining, a state of things
which might become unpleasant. However, Polly stood it like a veteran.

"This little girl must be very tired," said Mrs. Whitney, at last with a
bright smile. "Besides I am going to have her to myself now."

"Oh, no, no," cried little Dick in alarm; "why, she's just come; we want
to see her."

"For shame, Dick!" said Percy, the eldest, a boy of ten years, who took
every opportunity to reprove Dick in public; "she's come a great ways,
so she ought to rest, you know."

"You wanted her to come out to the greenhouse yourself, you know you
did," put in Van, the next to Percy, who never would be reproved or
patronized, "only she wouldn't go."

"You'll come down to dinner," said Percy, politely, ignoring Van. "Then
you won't be tired, perhaps."

"Oh, I'm not very tired now," said Polly, brightly, with a merry little
laugh, "only I've never been in the cars before, and--"

"Never been in the cars before!" exclaimed Van, crowding up, while Percy
made a big round O with his mouth, and little Dick's eyes stretched to
their widest extent.

"No," said Polly simply, "never in all my life."

"Come, dear," said sister Marian, rising quickly, and taking Polly's
hand; while Jasper, showing unmistakable symptoms of pitching into all
the three boys, followed with the bag.

Up the broad oak staircase they went, Polly holding by Mrs. Whitney's
soft hand, as if for dear life, and Jasper tripping up two steps at a
time, in front of them. They turned after reaching the top, down a hall
soft to the foot and brightly lighted.

"Now, Polly," said sister Marian, "I'm going to have you here, right
next to my dressing room; this is your nest, little bird, and I hope
you'll be very happy in it."

And here Mrs. Whitney turned up the gas, and then, just because she
couldn't help it, gathered Polly up in her arms without another word.
Jasper set down the bag on a chair, and came and stood by his sister's
side, looking down at her as she stroked the brown wavy hair on her
bosom.

"It's so nice to have Polly here, sister," he said, and he put his hand
on Mrs. Whitney's neck; and then with the other hand took hold of both
of Polly's chubby ones, who looked up and smiled; and in that smile the
little brown house seemed to hop right out, and bring back in a flash
all the nice times those eight happy weeks had brought him.

"Oh, 'twas so perfectly splendid, sister Marian," he cried, flinging
himself down on the floor by her chair. "You don't know what good times
we had--does she, Polly?" and then he launched out into a perfect
shower of "Don't you remember this?" or "Oh, Polly! you surely haven't
forgotten that!" Mrs. Whitney good naturedly entering into it and
enjoying it all with them, until, warned by the lateness of the hour,
she laughingly reminded Jasper of dinner, and dismissed him to prepare
for it.

When the three boys saw Polly coming in again, they welcomed her with
a cordial shout, for one and all, after careful measurement of her,
had succumbed entirely to Polly; and each was unwilling that the others
should get ahead of him in her regard.

"This is your seat, Polly," said sister Marian, touching the chair next
to her own.

Thereupon a small fight ensued between the little Whitneys, while Jasper
looked decidedly discomfited.

"Let Polly sit next to me," said Van, as if a seat next to him was of
all things most to be desired.

"Oh, no, I want her," said little Dick.

"Pshaw, Dick! you're too young," put in Percy. "You'd spill the bread
and butter all over her."

"I wouldn't either," said little Dick, indignantly, and beginning to
crawl into his seat; "I don't spill bread and butter, now Percy, you
know."

"See here," said Jasper, decidedly, "she's coming up here by father
and me; that is, sister Marian," he finished more politely, "if you're
willing."

All this while Polly had stood quietly watching the group, the big,
handsome table, the bright lights, and the well-trained servants with
a curious feeling at her heart--what were the little-brown-house-people
doing?

"Polly shall decide it," said sister Marian, laughing. "Now, where
will you sit, dear?" she added, looking down on the little quiet figure
beside her.

"Oh, by Jappy, please," said Polly, quickly, as if there could be no
doubt; "and kind Mr. King," she added, smiling at him.

"That's right; that's right, my dear," cried the old gentleman, pleased
beyond measure at her honest choice. And he pulled out her chair, and
waited upon her into it so handsomely that Polly was happy at once;
while Jasper, with a proud toss of his dark, wavy hair, marched up
delightedly, and took the chair on her other side.

And now, in two or three minutes it seemed as if Polly had always been
there; it was the most natural thing in the world that sister Marian
should smile down the table at the bright-faced narrator, who answered
all their numerous questions, and entertained them all with accounts of
Ben's skill, of Phronsie's cunning ways, of the boys who made fun for
all, and above everything else of the dear mother whom they all longed
to help, and of all the sayings and doings in the little brown house. No
wonder that the little boys forgot to eat; and for once never thought of
the attractions of the table. And when, as they left the table at last,
little Dick rushed impulsively up to Polly, and flinging himself into
her arms, declared, "I love you!--and you're my sister!" Nothing more
was needed to make Polly feel at home.

"Yes," said Mrs. Whitney, and nodded to herself in the saying, "it was a
good thing; and a comfort, I believe, has come to this house this day!"


BRAVE WORK AND THE REWARD


And on the very first morrow came Polly's music teacher!

The big drawing-room, with its shaded light and draped furniture, with
its thick soft carpet, on which no foot-fall could be heard, with all
its beauty and loveliness on every side was nothing to Polly's eyes,
only the room that contained the piano!

That was all she saw! And when the teacher came he was simply the Fairy
(an ugly little one, it is true, but still a most powerful being) who
was to unlock its mysteries, and conduct her into Fairyland itself. He
was a homely little Frenchman, with a long, curved nose, and an enormous
black moustache, magnificently waxed, who bowed elaborately, and called
her "Mademoiselle Pep-paire;" but he had music in his soul, and Polly
couldn't reverence him too much.

And now the big piano gave out new sounds; sounds that told of a strong
purpose and steady patience. Every note was struck for mother and the
home brood. Monsieur Tourtelotte, after watching her keenly out of his
little black eyes, would nod to himself like a mandarin, and the nod
would be followed by showers of extra politeness, as his appreciation of
her patient energy and attention.

Every chance she could get, Polly would steal away into the drawing-room
from Jappy and the three boys and all the attractions they could offer,
and laboriously work away over and over at the tedious scales and
exercises that were to be stepping-stones to so much that was glorious
beyond. Never had she sat still for so long a time in her active little
life; and now, with her arms at just such an angle, with the stiff,
chubby fingers kept under training and restraint--well, Polly realized,
years after, that only her love of the little brown house could ever
have kept her from flying up and spinning around in perfect despair.

"She likes it!" said Percy, in absolute astonishment, one day, when
Polly had refused to go out driving with all the other children in the
park, and had gone resolutely, instead, into the drawing-room and shut
the door. "She likes those hateful old exercises and she don't like
anything else."

"Much you know about it," said Jappy; "she's perfectly aching to go, now
Percy Whitney!"

"Well, why don't she then?" said Percy, opening his eyes to their widest
extent.

"Cause," said Jasper, stopping on his way to the door to look him full
in the face, "she's commenced to learn to play, and there won't anything
stop her."

"I'm going to try," said Percy, gleefully. "I know lots of ways I can do
to try, anyway."

"See here, now," said Jasper, turning back, "you let her alone! Do
you hear?" he added, and there must have been something in his eye to
command attention, for Percy instantly signified his intention not to
tease this young music student in the least.

"Come on then, old fellow," and Jasper swung his cap on his head,
"Thomas will be like forty bears if we keep him waiting much longer."

And Polly kept at it steadily day after day; getting through with the
lessons in the schoolroom as quickly as possible to rush to her music,
until presently the little Frenchman waxed enthusiastic to that degree
that, as day after day progressed and swelled into weeks, and each
lesson came to an end, he would skip away on the tips of his toes, his
nose in the air, and the waxed ends of his moustache, fairly trembling
with delight, "Ah, such patience as Mademoiselle Pep-paire has! I know
no other such little Americane!"

"I think," said Jasper one evening after dinner, when all the children
were assembled as usual in their favorite place on the big rug in front
of the fire in the library, Prince in the middle of the group, his head
on his paws, watching everything in infinite satisfaction, "that Polly's
getting on in music as I never saw anyone do; and that's a fact!"

"I mean to begin," said Van, ambitiously, sitting up straight and
staring at the glowing coals. "I guess I will to-morrow," which
announcement was received with a perfect shout--Van's taste being
anything rather than of a musical nature.

"If you do," said Jappy, when the merriment had a little subsided, "I
shall go out of the house at every lesson; there won't anyone stay in
it, Van."

"I can bang all I want to, then," said Van, noways disturbed by the
reflection, and pulling one of Prince's long ears, "you think you're so
big, Jappy, just because you're thirteen."

"He's only three ahead of me, Van," bristled Percy, who never could
forgive Jappy for being his uncle, much less the still greater sin of
having been born three years earlier than himself.

"Three's just as bad as four," said Van.

"Let's tell stories," began Polly, who never could remember such goings
on in the little brown house; "we must each tell one," she added with
the greatest enthusiasm, "and see which will be the biggest and the
best."

"Oh, no," said Van, who perfectly revelled in Polly's stories, and who
now forgot his trials in the prospect of one, "You tell, Polly--you tell
alone."

"Yes, do, Polly," said Jasper; "we'd rather."

So Polly launched out into one of her gayest and finest; and soon
they were in such a peal of laughter, and had reached such heights of
enjoyment, that Mr. King popped his head in at the door, and then came
in, and took a seat in a big rocking-chair in the corner to hear the fun
go on.

"Oh, dear," said Van, leaning back with a long sigh, and wiping his
flushed face as Polly wound up with a triumphant flourish, 'how ever do
you think of such things, Polly Pepper?

"That isn't anything," said Jappy, bringing his handsome face out into
the strong light; "why, it's just nothing to what she has told time and
again in the little brown house in Badgertown;" and then he caught
sight of Polly's face, which turned a little pale in the firelight as he
spoke; and the brown eyes had such a pathetic droop in them that it went
to the boy's very heart.

Was Polly homesick? and so soon!


POLLY IS COMFORTED


Yes, it must be confessed. Polly was homesick. All her imaginations of
her mother's hard work, increased by her absence, loomed up before her,
till she was almost ready to fly home without a minute's warning. At
night, when no one knew it, the tears would come racing over the poor,
forlorn little face, and would not be squeezed back. It got to be
noticed finally; and one and all redoubled their exertions to make
everything twice as pleasant as ever!

The only place, except in front of the grand piano, where Polly
approached a state of comparative happiness, was in the greenhouse.

Here she would stay, comforted and soothed among the lovely plants and
rich exotics, rejoicing the heart of Old Turner the gardener, who since
Polly's first rapturous entrance, had taken her into his good graces for
all time.

Every chance she could steal after practice hours were over, and after
the clamorous demands of the boys upon her time were fully satisfied,
was seized to fly on the wings of the wind, to the flowers.

But even with the music and flowers the dancing light in the eyes went
down a little; and Polly, growing more silent and pale, moved around
with a little droop to the small figure that had only been wont to fly
through the wide halls and spacious rooms with gay and springing step.

"Polly don't like us," at last said Van one day in despair. "Then,
dear," said Mrs. Whitney, "you must be kinder to her than ever;
think what it would be for one of you to be away from home even among
friends."

"I'd like it first rate to be away from Percy," said Van, reflectively;
"I wouldn't come back in three, no, six weeks."

"My son," said his mamma, "just stop and think how badly you would feel,
if you really couldn't see Percy."

"Well," said Van, and he showed signs of relenting a little at that;
"but Percy is perfectly awful, mamma, you don't know; and he feels so
smart too," he said vindictively.

"Well," said Mrs. Whitney, softly, "let's think what we can do for
Polly; it makes me feel very badly to see her sad little face."

"I don't know," said Van, running over in his mind all the possible ways
he could think of for entertaining anybody, "unless she'd like my new
book of travels--or my velocipede," he added.

"I'm afraid those wouldn't quite answer the purpose," said his mamma,
smiling--"especially the last; yet we must think of something."

But just here Mr. King thought it about time to take matters into his
hands. So, with a great many chucklings and shruggings when no one was
by, he had departed after breakfast one day, simply saying he shouldn't
be back to lunch.

Polly sat in the drawing-room, near the edge of the twilight, practicing
away bravely. Somehow, of all the days when the home feeling was the
strongest, this day it seemed as if she could bear it no longer. If she
could only see Phronsie for just one moment! "I shall have to give up!"
she moaned. "I can't bear it!" and over went her head on the music rack.

"Where is she?" said a voice over in front of the piano, in the
gathering dusk--unmistakably Mr. King's.

"Oh, she's always at the piano," said Van. "She must be there now,
somewhere," and then somebody laughed. Then came in the loudest of
whispers from little Dick, "Oh, Jappy, what'll she say?"

"Hush!" said one of the other boys; "do be still, Dick!"

Polly sat up very straight, and whisked off the tears quickly. Up came
Mr. King with an enormous bundle in his arms; and he marched up to the
piano, puffing with his exertions.

"Here, Polly, hold your arms," he had only strength to gasp. And then he
broke out into a loud burst of merriment, in which all the troop joined,
until the big room echoed with the sound.

At this, the bundle opened suddenly, and--out popped Phronsie!

"Here I'm! I'm here, Polly!"

But Polly couldn't speak; and if Jasper hadn't caught her just in time,
she would have tumbled over backward from the stool, Phronsie and all!

"Aren't you glad I've come, Polly?" asked Phronsie, with her little face
close to Polly's own.

That brought Polly to. "Oh, Phronsie!" she cried, and strained her to
her heart; while the boys crowded around, and plied her with sudden
questions.

"Now you'll stay," cried Van; "say, Polly, won't you."

"Weren't you awfully surprised?" cried Percy; "say, Polly, awfully?"

"Is her name Phronsie," put in Dick, unwilling to be left out, and not
thinking of anything else to ask.

"Boys," whispered their mother, warningly, "she can't answer you; just
look at her face."

And to be sure, our Polly's face was a study to behold. All its old
sunniness was as nothing to the joy that now transfigured it.

"Oh!" she cried, coming out of her rapture a little, and springing over
to Mr. King with Phronsie still in her arms. "Oh, you are the dearest
and best Mr. King I ever saw! but how did you make mammy let her come?"

"Isn't he splendid!" cried Jasper in intense pride, swelling up. "Father
knew how to do it."

But Polly's arms were around the old gentleman's neck, so she didn't
hear. "There, there," he said soothingly, patting her brown, fuzzy head.
Something was going down the old gentleman's neck, that wet his collar,
and made him whisper very tenderly in her ear, "don't give way now,
Polly; Phronsie'll see you."

"I know," gasped Polly, controlling her sobs; "I won't--only--I can't
thank you!"

"Phronsie," said Jasper quickly, "what do you suppose Prince said the
other day?"

"What?" asked Phronsie in intense interest slipping down out of Polly's
arms, and crowding up close to Jasper's side. "What did he, Jasper?"

"Oh-ho, how funny!" laughed Van, while little Dick burst right out,
"Japser!"

"Be still," said Jappy warningly, while Phronsie stood surveying them
all with grave eyes.

"Well, I asked him, 'Don't you want to see Phronsie Pepper, Prince?' And
do you know, he just stood right upon his hind legs, Phronsie, and said:
'Bark! yes, Bark! Bark!'"

"Did he really, Jasper?" cried Phronsie, delighted beyond measure; and
clasping her hands in rapture, "all alone by himself?"

"Yes, all alone by himself," asserted Jasper, vehemently, and winking
furiously to the others to stop their laughing; "he did now, truly,
Phronsie."

"Then mustn't I go and see him now, Jasper? yes, pretty soon now?"

"So you must," cried Jasper, enchanted at his success in amusing; "and
I'll go with you."

"Oh, no," cried Phronsie, shaking her yellow head. "Oh no, Jasper; I
must go by my very own self."

"There Jap, you've caught it," laughed Percy; while the others screamed
at the sight of Jasper's face.

"Oh Phronsie!" cried Polly, turning around at the last words; "how could
you!"

"Don't mind it, Polly," whispered Jasper; "twasn't her fault."

"Phronsie," said Mrs. Whitney, smilingly, stooping over the child,
"would you like to see a little pussy I have for you?"

But the chubby face didn't look up brightly, as usual: and the next
moment, without a bit of warning, Phronsie sprang past them all, even
Polly, and flung herself into Mr. King's arms, in a perfect torrent of
sobs. "Oh! let's go back!" was all they heard!

"Dear me!" ejaculated the old gentleman, in the utmost amazement; "and
such a time as I've had to get her here too!" he added, staring around
on the astonished group, none of whom had a word to say.

But Polly stood like a statue! All Jasper's frantic efforts at comfort,
utterly failed. To think that Phronsie had left her for any one!--even
good Mr. King! The room seemed to buzz, and everything to turn upside
down--and just then, she heard another cry--"Oh, I want Polly, I do!"

With a bound, Polly was at Mr. King's side, with her face on his coat,
close to the little tear-stained one. The fat, little arms unclasped
their hold, and transferred themselves willingly to Polly's neck; and
Phronsie hugged up comfortingly to Polly's heart, who poured into her
ear all the loving words she had so longed to say.

Just then there was a great rush and a scuffling noise; and something
rushed up to Phronsie "Oh!" And then the next minute, she had her arms
around Prince's neck, too, who was jumping all over her and trying as
hard as he could, to express his overwhelming delight.

"She's the cunningest little thing I ever saw," said Mrs. Whitney,
enthusiastically, afterward, aside to Mr. King. "Such lovely yellow
hair, and such exquisite brown eyes--the combination is very striking.
How did her mother ever let her go?" she asked impulsively, "I didn't
believe you could persuade her, father."

"I didn't have any fears, if I worked it rightly," said the old
gentleman complacently. "I wasn't coming without her, Marian, if it
could possibly be managed. The truth is, that Phronsie had been pining
for Polly to such an extent, that there was no other way but for her
to have Polly; and her mother was just on the point, although it almost
killed her, of sending for Polly--as if we should have let her go!" he
cried in high dudgeon; just as if he owned the whole of the Peppers, and
could dispose of them all to suit his fancy! "So you see, I was just in
time; in the very nick of time, in fact!"

"So her mother was willing?" asked his daughter, curiously. "Oh, she
couldn't help it," cried Mr. King, beginning to walk up and down the
floor, and beaming as he recalled his successful strategy; "there wasn't
the smallest use in thinking of anything else. I told her 'twould just
stop Polly from ever being a musician if she broke off now--and so
'twould, you know yourself, Marian, for we should never get the child
here again, if we let her go now; and I talked--well, I had to talk
some; but, well--the upshot is I did get her, and I did bring her--and
here she is!" And the old gentleman was so delighted with his success,
that he had to burst out into a series of short, happy bits of laughter,
that occupied quite a space of time. At last he came out of them, and
wiped his face vigorously.

"And to think how fond the little girl is of you, father!" said Mrs.
Whitney, who hadn't yet gotten over her extreme surprise at the old
gentleman's complete subjection to the little Peppers: he, whom all
children had by instinct always approached so carefully, and whom every
one found it necessary to conciliate!

"Well, she's a nice child," he said, "a very nice child; and,"
straightening himself up to his fullest height, and looking so very
handsome, that his daughter could not conceal her admiration, "I shall
always take care of Phronsie Pepper, Marian!"

"So I hope," said Mrs. Whitney; "and father, I do believe they'll repay
you; for I do think there's good blood there; these children have a look
about them that shows them worthy to be trusted."

"So they have: so they have," assented Mr. King, and then the
conversation dropped.


PHRONSIE


Phronsie was toiling up and down the long, oak staircase the next
morning; slowly going from one step to the other, drawing each little
fat foot into place laboriously, but with a pleased expression on her
face that only gave some small idea of the rapture within. Up and down
she had been going for a long time, perfectly fascinated; seeming to
care for nothing else in the world but to work her way up to the top of
the long flight, only to turn and come down again. She had been going
on so for some time, till at last, Polly, who was afraid she would tire
herself all out, sat down at the foot and begged and implored the little
girl, who had nearly reached the top, to stop and rest.

"You'll be tired to death, Phronsie!" she said, looking up at the small
figure on its toilsome journey. "Why you must have gone up a million
times! Do sit down, pet; we're all going out riding, Phronsie, this
afternoon; and you can't go if you're all tired out."

I know that horse which you have and have often seen him with a lady on
his back flying over all the fields about here."

"Yes, I am Jovita of the Tulucay, and I know you now; you are called
Crescimir the Illyrian, and I have been often to your cabin and
sat beneath the great laurel while you were in the fields or at
your work.

I have often left flowers there at your door just for the pleasure
of imagining the surprise when you should find them, and I always took
the vegetables I found there, for I knew that they were for me.

However, I never saw your face before this morning. You see I am little
like our Californians, but my mother is from the States and believes
in more freedom; she could not be better or kinder though she were
a real Californian.

If you are able we had better go up to the hacienda now, and after
breakfast we will look about to see if assistance is needed along the
river, for the flood was sudden and unlooked for."
Crescimir was not hurt and was able to walk slowly to the house.

Jovita walked by his side, leading her horse, while the Christchild sat
quietly in the saddle, nodding his head and winking like any sleepy child
of this mortal world.

Both Crescimir and Jovita were silent during the walk, but their eyes often
met, and Jovita would blush as she thought of her strange freak
with the flowers and finding that the receiver was by no means the
old man she had imagined him to be.

Crescimir was happy to think that he had not left his gifts
unappreciated and only regretted that he had not put whole pumpkins
there instead of onions.

"So you have no idea to whom the child belongs?"

asked Jovita, as they neared the house.

"He is strangely dressed and the frock is of an unfamiliar texture;
he does not seem cold either, although he is so lightly clad. We must try
to find his parents who, doubtless, are now anxiously searching for
him or believing him drowned in last night's awful flood."
The strange little creature seemed now entirely to lose his sleepiness
and broke into a merry laugh, sliding down from the saddle he capered
madly around the two astonished spectators like a little elf blown about
by the wind, his golden hair floating around him and the pink, little
feet scarcely seeming to touch the grass.

"There has been a number of campers passing through the valley to settle
north on the Caymus ranchos, this little sprite must be one of
their children who has strayed away," said Jovita.

"Come little one, let us go into the house and have our breakfast."

The Christchild did not seem to understand her, for he continued
his capering and wild antics.

"Stop, stop," exclaimed Crescimir in his native tongue, "stop and listen
to what the beautiful Señorita says to thee.

Come now into the house."

He ceased his play immediately and went before them up to the door,
with tears in his eyes on account of Crescimir's rebuke.

As they reached the veranda Crescimir caught the little elf up in his
arms and kissed his rosy lips; the moment the child's feet touched
the ground when Crescimir put him down, he put his hand over his
mouth as if to keep the kiss warm and running to Jovita, she lifted
him in her arms, as he signed her to do, when suddenly withdrawing
his hand, he kissed her, looking back significantly and laughing.

Both Jovita and Crescimir knew what the child had intended to express
and both blushed consciously, yet could but marvel at the acuteness
of the little creature who so soon was able to read their hearts,
even before they had perfectly known them themselves.

The mother of Jovita now came to the door and inviting them into the
living room, the events of the past night were related and all
that was known of the little waif.

Crescimir spent the day by the river searching for what might have
been left on the banks by the flood.

He learned that his raft had been carried out of the stream through a
break in the bank, and much of the wreckage of his own house with
it.

Returning to the hacienda he discovered in a clump of bushes, over which
the water had run when at its highest mark, the bodies of a man
and woman entangled in the canvas cover of a camp wagon.

It was evident to Crescimir from their dress that they were German
emigrants.

With the help of some of the rancheros the bodies were carried to the
house.

"They may be the parents of the little one," said Jovita's mother. "We
will bring him here and see if he recognizes them; it seems cruel
but it is the only way."

They brought the Christchild to the room where the bodies lay.

When the little fellow saw them, he clung to Crescimir and uttering a
moaning sound, yet seeming half like a laugh, he hid his eyes and would
not look again.

"Are these thy parents little one?" asked Crescimir tenderly; the
Christchild shook his head negatively and broke into hysterical
sobs.

Though the Christchild had denied that these were the bodies of his
parents, both Jovita, her mother and Crescimir felt certain that they
were.

King. And never was she very
long absent from his side, which so pleased the old gentleman that
he could scarcely contain himself, as with a gravity befitting the
importance of her office, she would follow him around in a happy
contented way, that took with him immensely. And now-a-days, no one ever
saw the old gentleman going out of a morning, when Jasper was busy with
his lessons, without Phronsie by his side, and many people turned to see
the portly figure with the handsome head bent to catch the prattle of
a little sunny-haired child, who trotted along, clasping his hand
confidingly. And nearly all of them stopped to gaze the second time
before they could convince themselves that it was really that queer,
stiff old Mr. King of whom they had heard so much.

And now the accumulation of dolls in the house became something
alarming, for Mr. King, observing Phronsie's devotion to her family,
thought there couldn't possibly be too many of them; so he scarcely
ever went out without bringing home one at least to add to them, until
Phronsie had such a remarkable collection as would have driven almost
any other child nearly crazy with delight. She, however, regarded them
something in the light of a grave responsibility, to be taken care of
tenderly, to be watched over carefully as to just the right kind of
bringing up; and to have small morals and manners taught in just the
right way.

Phronsie was playing in the corner of Mrs. Whitney's little boudoir,
engaged in sending out invitations for an elaborate tea-party to be
given by one of the dolls, when Polly rushed in with consternation in
her tones, and dismay written all over her face.

"What is it, dear?" asked Mrs. Whitney, looking up from her embroidery.

"Why," said Polly, "how could I! I don't see--but I've forgotten to
write to mamsie to-day; it's Wednesday, you know, and there's Monsieur
coming." And poor Polly looked out in despair to see the lively little
music teacher advancing towards the house at an alarming rate of speed.

"That is because you were helping Van so long last evening over his
lessons," said Mrs. Whitney; "I am so sorry."

"Oh, no," cried Polly honestly, "I had plenty of time--but I forgot
'twas mamsie's day. What will she do!"

"You will have to let it go now till the afternoon, dear; there's no
other way; it can go in the early morning mail."

"Oh, dear," sighed Polly, "I suppose I must." And she went down to meet
Monsieur with a very distressed little heart.

Phronsie laid down the note of invitation she was scribbling, and
stopped to think; and a moment or two after, at a summons from a caller,
Mrs. Whitney left the room.

"I know I ought to," said Phronsie to herself and the dolls, "yes, I
know I had; mamsie will feel, oh! so bad, when she don't get Polly's
letter; and I know the way, I do, truly."

She got up and went to the window, where she thought a minute; and then,
coming back, she took up her little stubby pencil, and bending over a
small bit of paper, she commenced to trace with laborious efforts and
much hard breathing, some very queer hieroglyphics that to her seemed to
be admirable, as at last she held them up with great satisfaction.

"Good-bye," she said then, getting up and bowing to the dolls who sat
among the interrupted invitations, "I won't be gone but a little bit of
one minute," and she went out determinedly and shut the door.

Nobody saw the little figure going down the carriage drive, so of course
nobody could stop her. When Phronsie got to the gateway she looked up
and down the street carefully, either way.

"Yes," she said, at last, "it was down here, I'm very sure, I went with
grandpa," and immediately turned down the wrong way, and went on and
on, grasping carefully her small, and by this time rather soiled bit of
paper.

At last she reached the business streets; and although she didn't come
to the Post Office, she comforted herself by the thought--"it must be
coming soon. I guess it's round this corner."

She kept turning corner after corner, until, at last, a little anxious
feeling began to tug at her heart; and she began to think--"I wish I
could see Polly--" And now, she had all she could do to get out of
the way of the crowds of people who were pouring up and down the
thoroughfare. Everybody jostled against her, and gave her a push. "Oh
dear!" thought Phronsie, "there's such a many big people!" and then
there was no time for anything else but to stumble in and out, to
keep from being crushed completely beneath their feet. At last, an old
huckster woman, in passing along, knocked off her bonnet with the end
of her big basket, which flew around and struck Phronsie's head. Not
stopping to look into the piteous brown eyes, she strode on without a
word. Phronsie turned in perfect despair to go down a street that looked
as if there might be room enough for her in it. Thoroughly frightened,
she plunged over the crossing, to reach it!

"Look out!" cried a ringing voice. "Stop!"

"The little girl'll be killed!" said others with bated breath, as a
powerful pair of horses whose driver could not pull them up in time,
dashed along just in front of her! With one cry, Phronsie sprang between
their feet, and reached the opposite curbstone in safety!

The plunge brought her up against a knot of gentlemen who were standing
talking on the corner.

"What's this!" asked one, whose back being next to the street, hadn't
seen the commotion, as the small object dashed into their midst, and
fell up against him.

"Didn't you see that narrow escape?" asked a second, whose face had
paled in witnessing it. "This little girl was nearly killed a moment
ago--careless driving enough!" And he put out his hand to catch the
child.

"Bless me!" cried a third, whirling around suddenly, "Bless me! you
don't say so! why--" With a small cry, but gladsome and distinct in its
utterance, Phronsie gave one look--"Oh, grandpa!" was all she could say.

"Oh! where--" Mr. King couldn't possibly have uttered another word, for
then his breath gave out entirely, as he caught the small figure.

"I went to the Post Office," said the child, clinging to him in delight,
her tangled hair waving over the little white face, into which a faint
pink color was quickly coming back. "Only it wouldn't come; and I walked
and walked--where is it, grandpa?" And Phronsie gazed up anxiously into
the old gentleman's face.

"She went to the Post Office!" turning around on the others fiercely,
as if they had contradicted him--"Why, my child, what were you going to
do?"

"Mamsie's letter," said Phronsie, holding up for inspection the precious
bit, which by this time, was decidedly forlorn, "Polly couldn't write;
and Mamsie'd feel so bad not to get one--she would really" said the
child, shaking her head very soberly, "for Polly said so."

"And you've been--oh! I can't think of it," said Mr. King, tenderly
taking her up on his shoulder, "well, we must get home now, or I don't
know what Polly will do!" And without stopping to say a word to his
friends, he hailed a passing carriage, and putting Phronsie in, he
commanded the driver to get them as quickly as possible to their
destination.

In a few moments they were home. Mr. King pushed into the house with his
burden. "Don't anybody know," he burst out, puffing up the stairs, and
scolding furiously at every step, "enough to take better care of this
child, than to have such goings on!"

"What is the matter, father?" asked Mrs. Whitney, coming up the stairs,
after him. "What has happened out of the way?"

"Out of the way!" roared the old gentleman, irascibly, "well, if you
want Phronsie racing off to the Post Office by herself, and nearly
getting killed, poor child! yes, Marian, I say nearly killed!" he
continued.

"What do you mean?" gasped Mrs. Whitney.

"Why, where have you been?" asked the old gentleman, who wouldn't let
Phronsie get down out of his arms, under any circumstances; so there she
lay, poking up her head like a little bird, and trying to say she wasn't
in the least hurt, "where's everybody been not to know she'd gone?" he
exclaimed, "where's Polly--and Jasper--and all of 'em?"

"Polly's taking her music lesson," said Mrs. Whitney. "Oh, Phronsie
darling!" and she bent over the child in her father's arms, and nearly
smothered her with kisses.

"Twas a naughty horse," said Phronsie, sitting up straight and looking
at her, "or I should have found the Post Office; and I lost off my
bonnet, too," she added, for the first time realizing her loss, putting
her hand to her head; "a bad old woman knocked it off with a basket--and
now mamsie won't get her letter!" and she waved the bit, which she still
grasped firmly between her thumb and finger, sadly towards Mrs. Whitney.

"Oh, dear," groaned that lady, "how could we talk before her! But who
would have thought it! Darling," and she took the little girl from her
father's arms, who at last let her go, "don't think of your mamma's
letter; we'll tell her how it was," and she sat down in the first chair
that she could reach; while Phronsie put her tumbled little head down on
the kind shoulder and gave a weary little sigh.

"It was so long," she said, "and my shoes hurt," and she thrust out the
dusty little boots, that spoke pathetically of the long and unaccustomed
tramp.

"Poor little lamb!" said Mr. King, getting down to unbutton them. "What
a shame!" he mumbled pulling off half of the buttons in his frantic
endeavors to get them off quickly.

But Phronsie never heard the last of his observations, for in a minute
she was fast asleep. The tangled hair fell off from the tired little
face; the breathing came peaceful and regular, and with her little hand
fast clasped in Mrs. Whitney's she slept on and on.

Polly came flying up-stairs, two or three at a time, and humming a scrap
of her last piece that she had just conquered.

"Phronsie," she called, with a merry little laugh, "where--"

"Hush!" said Mr. King, warningly, and then just because he couldn't
explain there without waking Phronsie up, he took hold of Polly's two
shoulders and marched her into the next room, where he carefully closed
the door, and told her the whole thing, using his own discretion about
the very narrow escape she had passed through. He told enough, however,
for Polly to see what had been so near them; and she stood there so
quietly, alternately paling and flushing as he proceeded, till at last,
when he finished, Mr. King was frightened almost to death at the sight
of her face.

"Oh, goodness me, Polly!" he said, striding up to her, and then fumbling
around on the table to find a glass of water, "you are not going to
faint, are you? Phronsie's all well now, she isn't hurt in the least, I
assure you; I assure you--where is a glass of water! Marian ought to see
that there's some here--that stupid Jane!" and in utter bewilderment
he was fussing here and there, knocking down so many things in general,
that the noise soon brought Polly to, with a little gasp.

"Oh, don't mind me, dear Mr. King--I'm--all well."

"So you are," said the old gentleman, setting up a toilet bottle that he
had knocked over, "so you are; I didn't think you'd go and tumble over,
Polly, I really didn't," and he beamed admiringly down on her.

And then Polly crept away to Mrs. Whitney's side where she threw herself
down on the floor, to watch the little sleeping figure. Her hand was
gathered up, into the kind one that held Phronsie's; and there they
watched and watched and waited.

"Oh, dear," said Phronsie, suddenly, turning over with a little sigh,
and bobbing up her head to look at Polly; "I'm so hungry! I haven't had
anything to eat in ever an' ever so long, Polly!" and she gazed at her
with a very injured countenance.

"So you must be," said Mrs. Whitney, kissing the flushed little face.
"Polly must ring the bell for Jane to bring this little bird some
crumbs.

"Can I have a great many?" asked Phronsie, lifting her eyes, with the
dewy look of sleep still lingering in them, "as many as two birdies?"

"Yes, dear," said Mrs. Whitney, laughing; "I think as many as three
little birdies could eat, Phronsie."

"Oh," said Phronsie, and leaned back satisfied, while Polly gave the
order, which was presently followed by Jane with a well-filled tray.

"Now," said Jappy, when he heard the account of the adventure, "I say
that letter ought to go to your mother, Polly."

"Oh," said Polly, "it would scare mamsie most to death, Jappy!"

"Don't tell her the whole," said Jasper, quickly, "I didn't mean
that--about the horses and all that--but only enough to let her see how
Phronsie tried to get it to her."

"And I'm going to write to your brother Joel," said Van, drawing up to
the library table; "I'll scare him, Polly, I guess; he won't tell your
mother."

"Your crow-tracks'll scare him enough without anything else," said
Percy, pleasantly, who really could write very nicely, while Polly broke
out in an agony:

"Oh, no, Van, you mustn't! you mustn't!"

"If Van does," said Jasper, decidedly, "it'll be the last time he'll
write to the 'brown house,' I can tell him; and besides, he'll go to
Coventry." This had the desired effect.

"Let's all write," said Polly.

So a space on the table was cleared, and the children gathered around
it, when there was great scratching of pens, and clearing of ideas;
which presently resulted in a respectable budget of letters, into which
Phronsie's was lovingly tucked in the centre; and then they all filed
out to put it into the letterbox in the hall, for Thomas to mail with
the rest in the morning.


GETTING READY FOR MAMSIE AND THE BOYS


"And I'll tell you, Marian, what I am going to do."

Mr. King's voice was pitched on a higher key than usual; and extreme
determination was expressed in every line of his face. He had met Mrs.
Whitney at the foot of the staircase, dressed for paying visits. "Oh,
are you going out?" he said, glancing impatiently at her attire. "And
I'd just started to speak to you on a matter of great importance! Of the
greatest importance indeed!" he repeated irritably, as he stood with one
gloved hand resting on the balustrade.

"Oh, it's no matter, father," she replied pleasantly; "if it's really
important, I can postpone going for another day, and--"

"Really important!" repeated the old gentleman irascibly. "Haven't I
just told you it's of the greatest importance? There's no time to be
lost; and with my state of health too, it's of the utmost consequence
that I shouldn't be troubled. It's very bad for me; I should think you
would realize that, Marian."

"I'll tell Thomas to take the carriage directly back," said Mrs. Whitney
stepping to the door. "Or stay, father; I'll just run up and send the
children out for a little drive. The horses ought to be used too, you
know," she said lightly, preparing to run up to carry out the changed
plan.

"Never mind that now," said Mr. King abruptly. "I want you to give me
your attention directly." And walking towards the library door, getting
a fresh accession of impatience with every step, he beckoned her to
follow.

But his progress was somewhat impeded by little Dick--or rather, little
Dick and Prince, who were standing at the top of the stairs to see Mrs.
Whitney off. When he saw his mother retrace her steps, supposing her
yielding to the urgent entreaties that he was sending after her to stay
at home, the child suddenly changed his "Good-byes" to vociferous howls
of delight, and speedily began to plunge down the stairs to welcome her.

But the staircase was long, and little Dick was in a hurry, and besides,
Prince was in the way. The consequence was, nobody knew just how, that
a bumping noise struck into the conversation that made the two below in
the hall look up quickly, to see the child and dog come rolling over the
stairs at a rapid rate.

"Zounds!" cried the old gentleman. "Here, Thomas, Thomas!" But as that
individual was waiting patiently outside the door on the carriage box,
there was small hope of his being in time to catch the boy, who was
already in his mother's arms, not quite clear by the suddenness of the
whole thing, as to how he came there.

"Oh! oh! Dicky's hurt!" cried somebody up above--followed by every
one within hearing distance, and all came rushing to the spot to ask a
thousand questions all in the same minute.

There sat Mrs. Whitney in one of the big carved chairs, with little Dick
in her lap, and Prince walking gravely around and around him with the
greatest expression of concern on his noble face. Mr. King was storming
up and down, and calling on everybody to bring a "bowl of water, and
some brown paper; and be quick!" interpolated with showers of blame on
Prince for sitting on the stairs, and tripping people up! while Dick
meanwhile was laughing and chatting, and enjoying the distinction of
making so many people run, and of otherwise being the object of so much
attention!

"I don't think he was sitting on the stairs, father," said Jasper, who,
when he saw that Dicky was really unhurt, began to vindicate his dog.
"He never does that; do you Sir?" he said patting the head that was
lifted up to him, as if to be defended.

"And I expect we shall all be killed some day, Jasper," said Mr. King,
warming with his subject; and forgetting all about the brown paper and
water which he had ordered, and which was now waiting for him at his
elbow, "just by that creature."

"He's the noblest--" began Jasper, throwing his arms around his neck; an
example which was immediately followed by the Whitney boys, and the two
little Peppers. When Dick saw this, he began to struggle to get down to
add himself to the number.

"Where's the brown paper?" began Mr. King, seeing this and whirling
around suddenly. "Hasn't any body brought it yet?"

"Here 'tis sir," said Jane, handing him a generous supply. "Oh, I don't
want to," cried little Dick in dismay, seeing his grandfather advance
with an enormous piece of paper, which previously wet in the bowl of
water, was now unpleasantly clammy and wet--"oh, no, I don't want to be
all stuck up with old horrid wet paper!"

"Hush, dear!" said his mamma, soothingly. "Grandpapa wants to put it
on--there--" as Mr. King dropped it scientifically on his head, and then
proceeded to paste another one over his left eye.

"And I hope they'll all drop off," cried Dick, savagely, shaking his
head to facilitate matters. Its charm lies in its harmony, and the
_ensemble_ is as nearly perfect as can be imagined. Immediately in
front are the knolls and dales above and below Good Ground, and
extending down to where the Ponquogue lighthouse stands out in clear
outline against the sky.

"No," said little Dick, crossly, and giving his head another shake.
"He was up in the hall--oh, dear, I want to get down," and he began to
stretch his legs and to struggle with so much energy, that two or three
pieces fell off, and landed on the floor to his intense delight.

"And how did you fall then?" said Jasper, perseveringly. "Can't you
remember, Dicky, boy?"

"I pushed Princey," said Dick, feeling, with freedom from some of
his encumbrances, more disposed for conversation, "and made him go
ahead--and then I fell on top of him--that's all."

"I guess Prince has saved him, father," cried Jasper, turning around
with eyes full of pride and love on the dog, who was trying as hard as
he could to tell all the children how much he enjoyed their caresses.

And so it all came about that the consultation so summarily interrupted
was never held. For, as Mrs. Whitney was about retiring that evening,
Mr. King rapped at her door, on his way to bed.

"Oh," he said popping in his head, in response to her invitation to come
in, "it's nothing--only I thought I'd just tell you a word or two about
what I've decided to do."

"Do you mean what you wanted to see me about this afternoon?" asked Mrs.
Whitney, who hadn't thought of it since. "Do come in, father."

"It's no consequence," said the old gentleman; "no consequence at all,"
he repeated, waving his hand emphatically, "because I've made up my mind
and arranged all my plans--it's only about the Peppers--"

"The Peppers?" repeated Mrs. Whitney.

"Yes. Well, the fact of it is, I'm going to have them here for a
visit--the whole of them, you understand; that's all there is to it.
And I shall go down to see about all the arrangements--Jasper and I--day
after to-morrow," said the old gentleman, as if he owned the whole
Pepper family inclusive, and was the only responsible person to be
consulted about their movements.

"Will they come?" asked Mrs. Whitney, doubtfully.

"Come? of course," said Mr. King, sharply, "there isn't any other way;
or else Mrs. Pepper will be sending for her children--and of course you
know, Marian, we couldn't allow that--well, that's all; so good night,"
and the door closed on his retreating footsteps.

And so Polly and Phronsie soon knew that mamsie and the boys were to
be invited! And then the grand house, big as it was, didn't seem large
enough to contain them.

"I declare," said Jasper, next day, when they had been laughing and
planning till they were all as merry as grigs, "if this old dungeon
don't begin to seem a little like 'the little brown house,' Polly."

"Twon't," answered Polly, hopping around on one toe, followed by
Phronsie, "till mamsie and the boys get here, Jasper King!"

"Well, they'll be here soon," said Jappy, pleased at Polly's exultation
over it, "for we're going to-morrow to do the inviting."

"And Polly's to write a note to slip into Marian's," said Mr. King,
putting his head in at the door. "And if you want your mother to come,
child, why, you'd better mention it as strong as you can."

"I'm going to write," said Phronsie, pulling up after a prolonged skip,
all out of breath. "I'm going to write, and beg mamsie dear. Then she'll
come, I guess."

"I guess she will," said Mr. King, looking at her. "You go on, Phronsie,
and write; and that letter shall go straight in my coat pocket alone by
itself."

"Shall it?" asked Phronsie, coming up to him, "and nobody will take it
out till you give it to mamsie?"

"No, nobody shall touch it," said the old gentleman, stooping to kiss
the upturned face, "till I put it into her own hand."

"Then," said Phronsie, in the greatest satisfaction, "I'm going to write
this very one minute!" and she marched away to carry her resolve into
immediate execution.

Before they got through they had quite a bundle of invitations and
pleadings; for each of the three boys insisted on doing his part, so
that when they were finally done up in an enormous envelope and put into
Mr. King's hands, he told them with a laugh that there was no use for
Jappy and himself to go, as those were strong enough to win almost
anybody's consent.

However, the next morning they set off, happy in their hopes, and
bearing the countless messages, which the children would come up every
now and then to intrust to them, declaring that they had forgotten to
put them in the letters.

"You'd had to have had an express wagon to carry the letters if you had
put them all in," at last cried Jasper. "You've given us a bushel of
things to remember."

"And oh! don't forget to ask Ben to bring Cherry," cried Polly, the last
minute as they were driving off although she had put it in her letter at
least a dozen times; "and oh, dear! of course the flowers can't come."

"We've got plenty here," said Jasper. "You would not know what to do
with them, Polly."

"Well, I do wish mamsie would give some to kind Mrs. Henderson, then,"
said Polly, on the steps, clasping her hands anxiously, while Jasper
told Thomas to wait till he heard the rest of the message, "and to
grandma--you know Grandma Bascom; she was so good to us," she said
impulsively. "And, oh! don't let her forget to carry some to dear, dear
Dr. Fisher; and don't forget to give him our love, Jappy; don't forget
that!" and Polly ran down the steps to the carriage door, where she
gazed up imploringly to the boy's face.

"I guess I won't," cried Jasper, "when I think how he saved your eyes,
Polly! He's the best fellow I know!" he finished in an impulsive burst.

"And don't let mamsie forget to carry some in to good old Mr. and Mrs.
Beebe in town--where Phronsie got her shoes, you know; that is, if
mamsie can," she added, remembering how very busy her mother would be.

"I'll carry them myself," said Jasper; "we're going to stay over till
the next day, you know."

"O!" cried Polly, radiant as a rose, "will you, really, Jappy? you're so
good!"

"Yes, I will," said Jasper, "everything you want done, Polly; anything
else?" he asked, quickly, as Mr. King, impatient to be off, showed
unmistakable symptoms of hurrying up Thomas.

"Oh, no," said Polly, "only do look at the little brown house, Jasper,
as much as you can," and Polly left the rest unfinished. Jasper seemed
to understand, however, for he smiled brightly as he said, looking into
the brown eyes, "I'll do it all, Polly; every single thing." And then
they were off.

Mamsie and the boys! could Polly ever wait till the next afternoon that
would bring the decision?

Long before it was possibly time for the carriage to come back from the
depot, Polly, with Phronsie and the three boys, who, improving Jasper's
absence, had waited upon her with the grace and persistence of cavaliers
of the olden time, were drawn up at the old stone gateway.

"Oh, dear," said Van with an impatient fling; "they never will come!"

"Won't they, Polly?" asked Phronsie, anxiously, and standing quite
still.

The low chanting of the Monks ceased, and as I opened my window wider I
could hear, like the higher notes of an organ, voices rising from
the river and mingling in heavenly harmony; I could not at first
catch the words, but the sweet, divinely sweet strains came nearer
and nearer, and then with the same inexpressible gentleness, softly
as if wafted from the angelic chorus came the rich, low notes from
the forest, like the humming of bees, the sighing of hemlocks, or
that sweet, strange sound we ever hear in the ocean shell.

The voices came nearer and I could hear the wild, free words long
before the singers were in the court.

"We are coming from the forest, All laden with flowers, With bright,
crimson flowers All sparkling with dew."

"All right," cried the boys.

"Turn round, Dick," said Percy, with a little shove, for Dick was
staring with all his might right down the road. And so they all flew
around till they looked like five statues set up to grace the sidewalk.

"Suppose a big dog should come," suggested Van, pleasantly, "and snap at
our backs!"

At this little Dick gave a small howl, and turned around in a fright.

"There isn't any dog coming," said Polly. "What does make you say such
awful things, Van?"

"I hear a noise," said Phronsie; and so they all whirled around in
expectation. But it proved to be only a market wagon coming at a furious
pace down the road, with somebody's belated dinner. So they all had to
whirl back again as before. The consequence was that when the carriage
did come, nobody heard it.

Jasper, looking out, was considerably astonished to see, drawn up in
solemn array with their backs to the road, five children, who stood as
if completely petrified.

"What in the world!" he began, and called to Thomas to stop, whose
energetic "Whoa!" reaching the ears of the frozen line, caused it to
break ranks, and spring into life at an alarming rate.

"Oh, is she coming Jappy? Is she? Is she?" they all screamed together,
swarming up to the carriage door, and over the wheels.

"Yes," said Jasper looking at Polly.

At that, Phronsie made a little cheese and sat right down on the
pavement in an ecstasy.

"Get in here, all of you;" said Jasper merrily; "help Polly in first.
For shame Dick! don't scramble so."

"Dick always shoves," said Percy, escorting Polly up with quite an air.

"I don't either," said Dick; "you pushed me awful, just a little while
ago," he added indignantly.

"Do say awfully," corrected Van, crowding up to get in. "You leave off
your lys so," he finished critically.

"I don't know anything about any lees," said little Dick, who, usually
so good natured, was now thoroughly out of temper; "I want to get in
and go home," and he showed evident symptoms of breaking into a perfect
roar.

"There," said Polly, lilting him up, "there he goes! now--one, two,
three!" and little Dick was spun in so merrily that the tears changed
into a happy laugh.

"Now then, bundle in, all the rest of you," put in Mr. King, who seemed
to be in the best of spirits. "That's it; go on, Thomas!"

"When are they coming?" Polly found time to ask in the general jumble.

"In three weeks from to-morrow," said Jasper. "And everything's all
right, Polly! and the whole of them, Cherry and all, will be here then!"

"Oh!" said Polly.

"Here we are!" cried Van, jumping out almost before the carriage door
was open. "Mamma; mamma," he shouted to Mrs. Whitney in the doorway,
"the Peppers are coming, and the little brown house too!--everything and
everybody!"

"They are!" said Percy, as wild as his brother; "and everything's just
splendid! Jappy said so."

"Everything's coming," said little Dick, tumbling up the steps--"and the
bird--and--and--"

"And mamsie!" finished Phronsie, impatient to add her part--while Polly
didn't say anything--only looked.

Three weeks! "I can't wait!" thought Polly at first, in counting
over the many hours before the happy day would come. But on Jasper's
suggesting that they should all do something to get ready for the
visitors, and have a general trimming up with vines and flowers
beside--the time passed away much more rapidly than was feared.

Polly chose a new and more difficult piece of music to learn to surprise
mamsie. Phronsie had aspired to an elaborate pin-cushion, that was
nearly done, made of bits of worsted and canvas, over whose surface
she had wandered according to her own sweet will, in a way charming to
behold.

"I don't know what to do," said Van in despair, "cause I don't know what
she'd like."

"Can't you draw her a little picture?" asked Polly. "She'd like that."

"Does she like pictures?" asked Van with the greatest interest.

"Yes indeed!" said Polly, "I guess you'd think so if you could see her!"

"I know what I shall do," with a dignified air said Percy, who couldn't
draw, and therefore looked down on all Van's attempts with the greatest
scorn. "And it won't be any old pictures either," he added.

"What is it, old fellow?" asked Jasper, "tell on, now, your grand plan."

"No, I'm not going to tell," said Percy, with the greatest secrecy,
"until the very day."

"What will you do, sir?" asked Jasper, pulling one of Dick's ears, who
stood waiting to speak, as if his mind was made up, and wouldn't be
changed for anyone!

"I shall give Ben one of my kitties--the littlest and the best!" he
said, with heroic self-sacrifice.

A perfect shout greeted this announcement.

"Fancy Ben going round with one of those awful little things," whispered
Jappy to Polly, who shook at the very thought.

"Don't laugh! oh, it's dreadful to laugh at him, Jappy," she said, when
she could get voice enough.

"No, I sha'n't tell," said Percy, when the fun had subsided; who,
finding that no one teased him to divulge his wonderful plan, kept
trying to harrow up their feelings by parading it.

"You needn't then," screamed Van, who was nearly dying to know. "I don't
believe it's so very dreadful much, anyway."

"What's yours, Jappy?" asked Polly, "I know yours will be just
splendid."

"Oh, no, it isn't," said Jasper, smiling brightly, "but as I didn't know
what better I could do, I'm going to get a little stand, and then beg
some flowers of Turner to fill it, and--"

"Why, that's mine!" screamed Percy, in the greatest disappointment.
"That's just what I was going to do!"

"Hoh, hoh!" shouted Van; "I thought you wouldn't tell, Mr. Percy! hoh,
hoh!"

"Hoh, hoh!" echoed Dick.

"Hush," said Jappy. "Why, Percy, I didn't know as you had thought of
that," he said kindly. "Well, then, you do it, and I'll take something
else. I don't care as long as Mrs. Pepper gets 'em."

"I didn't exactly mean that," began Percy; "mine was roots and little
flowers growing."

"He means what he gets in the woods," said Polly, explaining; "don't
you, Percy?"

"Yes," said the boy. "And then I was going to put stones and things in
among them to make them look pretty."

"And they will," cried Jasper. "Go ahead, Percy, they'll look real
pretty, and then Turner will give you some flowers for the stand, I
know; I'll ask him to-morrow."

"Will you?" cried Percy, "that'll be fine!"

"Mine is the best," said Van, just at this juncture; but it was said a
little anxiously, as he saw how things were prospering with Percy; "for
my flowers in the picture will always be there, and your old roots and
things will die."

"What will yours be, then, Jappy?" asked Polly very soberly. "The stand
of flowers would have been just lovely! and you do fix them so nice,"
she added sorrowfully.

"Oh, I'll find something else," said Jappy, cheerfully, who had quite
set his heart on giving the flowers. "Let me see--I might carve her a
bracket."

"Do," cried Polly, clapping her hands enthusiastically. "And do carve a
little bird, like the one you did on your father's."

"I will," said Jasper, "just exactly like it. Now, we've got something
to do, before we welcome the 'little brown house' people--so let's fly
at it, and the time won't seem so long."

And at last the day came when they could all say--To-morrow they'll be
here!

Well, the vines were all up; and pots of lovely climbing ferns, and all
manner of pretty green things had been arranged and re-arranged a dozen
times till everything was pronounced perfect; and a big green "Welcome"
over the library door, made of laurel leaves, by the patient fingers
of all the children, stared down into their admiring eyes as much as to
say, "I'll do my part!"

"Oh, dear," said Phronsie, when evening came, and the children were, as
usual, assembled on the rug before the fire, their tongues running wild
with anticipation and excitement, "I don't mean to go to bed at all,
Polly; I don't truly."

"Oh, yes, you do," said Polly laughing; "then you'll be all fresh and
rested to see mammy when she does come."

"Oh, no," said Phronsie, shaking her head soberly, and speaking in an
injured tone. "I'm not one bit tired, Polly; not one bit."

"You needn't go yet, Phronsie," said Polly. "You can sit up half an hour
yet, if you want to."

"But I don't want to go to bed at all," said the child anxiously, "for
then I may be asleep when mamsie comes, Polly."

"She's afraid she won't wake up," said Percy, laughing. "Oh, there'll be
oceans of time before they come, Phronsie."

"What is oceans," asked Phronsie, coming up and looking at him,
doubtfully.

