"This was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was anointed,
by the princes of Israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve silver
bowls, twelve spoons of gold. Each charger of silver weighing a hundred
and thirty shekels, each bowl seventy: all the silver vessels weighed
two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the shekel of the
Sanctuary. The golden spoons were twelve, full of incense, weighing
twelve shekels apiece, after the shekel of the Sanctuary; all the gold
of the spoons was a hundred and twenty shekels.

"All the oxen for the burnt-offering were twelve bullocks, the rams
twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat-offering;
and the kids of the goats for sin-offering twelve. And all the oxen for
the sacrifice of the peace-offerings were twenty and four bullocks, the
rams sixty, the he-goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty.

"This"--_all this_--"was the dedication of the altar, after that it was
anointed."


THE IMPORTANCE OF THE ALTAR.

In this glad summing up of the great aggregate value of the offerings,
we not only get a further view of the Divine complacency in the
love-gifts of His people, and in the persons of the offerers, but the
object of the offerings is also brought into special prominence. As the
list of each prince's offerings was preceded and followed by reference
to the _person_ of the offerer, so the list of totals is preceded and
followed by the thought, This was the dedication of the altar in the day
when it was anointed.

The importance of the brazen altar can scarcely be exaggerated. Thus,
in the account of the creation, the two deities are said to have equal
though opposite share in the work. This is indicated by the following
passage--
The third of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda (Ormuzd)
created, was the strong, holy Môuru (Merv).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu (Ahriman), who is all death, and he
counter-created plunder and sin.
This constant struggle of the two divinities with their armies of
good and bad spirits formed the background of Zoroastrian
supernaturalism.Hence the recognition by the princes
of the importance of the altar; and hence the Divine emphasis placed
upon those gifts--an emphasis wholly without parallel in the sacred
Records. To the godly Israelite the brazen altar typified that which was
fulfilled at the Cross, and well may we exclaim: "GOD forbid that I
should glory, save in the Cross of our LORD JESUS CHRIST" (Gal. vi. 14).

       *       *       *       *       *

Looking back over the two chapters on which we have been dwelling we see
in them a marvellous revelation of Divine love--even in Mosaic times.
First, an unrestricted invitation to draw near to GOD; woman or man, of
any tribe--whosoever will--may come and be wholly separated unto the
LORD--but only in GOD'S way. We learn, too, that in such consecration
there is no merit on which man may rest, or in which he may boast; we
are at best unprofitable servants, accepted only in the BELOVED,
complete only in Him. Yet such consecration gives joy to GOD, and opens
the way to wonderful revelations of blessing; blessing which when
enjoyed constrains to service, to gift, to recognition of the
preciousness of the Altar, of the Cross--a service in which GOD Himself
finds delight, and on which He never wearies to dwell.

May GOD make our meditations very practical; and may we "thus judge,
that if ONE died for all, then were all dead; and that He died for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto Him which died for them and rose again,"--or, as we may better
read it, "unto Him which died and rose again for them."

Are we really thus living? GOD knows: eternity will show: what answer
does conscience give now? What conclusions do our brothers, sisters,
children, friends draw from our lives? Our true self-denial,
self-emptying, and giving for CHRIST'S cause practically show _our_ real
estimate of the value of the Cross of CHRIST, our real love for the
CHRIST who was crucified for us.


THE END.


    +------------------------------------------------+
    |Transcriber's Note:                             |
    |                                                |
    |Mismatched and inconsistent punctuation has been|
    |retained as it appears in the original book.    |
    +------------------------------------------------+