Her public was very dear to her. She was delighted to meet it here,
face to face, heart to heart. She clasped her own slender hands over
her own heart as she said this, and there was a pathetic little
catch in her voice as she waved farewell kisses to the throng. Many
a heart besides Merton's beat more quickly at knowing that she must
rush out to the high-powered roadster and be off at eighty miles an
hour to St. Louis, where another vast audience would the next day be
breathlessly awaiting her personal appearance.

Merton had felt abundantly repaid for his journey. There had been
inspiration in this contact. Little he minded the acid greeting, on
his return, of a mere Gashwiler, spawning in his low mind a
monstrous suspicion that the dying aunt had never lived.

Now he read in his magazines other intimate interviews by other
talented young women who had braved the presence of other screen
idols of both sexes. The interviewers approached them with
trepidation, and invariably found that success had not spoiled them.
Fine artists though they were, applauded and richly rewarded, yet
they remained simple, unaffected, and cordial to these daring
reporters. They spoke with quiet dignity of their work, their
earnest efforts to give the public something better and finer. They
wished the countless readers of the interviews to comprehend that
their triumphs had come only with infinite work and struggle, that
the beautiful comes only through suffering and sacrifice. At lighter
moments they spoke gayly of their palatial homes, their domestic
pets, their wives or husbands and their charming children. They all
loved the great out-of-doors, but their chief solace from toil was
in this unruffled domesticity where they could forget the worries of
an exacting profession and lead a simple home life. All the husbands
and wives were more than that--they were good pals; and of course
they read and studied a great deal. Many of them were wild about
books.

He was especially interested in the interview printed by Camera with
that world favourite, Harold Parmalee. For this was the screen
artist whom Merton most envied, and whom he conceived himself most
to resemble in feature. The lady interviewer, Miss Augusta Blivens,
had gone trembling into the presence of Harold Parmalee, to be
instantly put at her ease by the young artist's simple, unaffected
manner. He chatted of his early struggles when he was only too glad
to accept the few paltry hundreds of dollars a week that were
offered him in minor parts; of his quick rise to eminence; of his
unceasing effort to give the public something better and finer; of
his love for the great out-of-doors; and of his daily flight to the
little nest that sheltered his pal wife and the kiddies. Here he
could be truly himself, a man's man, loving the simple things of
life. Here, in his library, surrounded by his books, or in the music
room playing over some little Chopin prelude, or on the lawn romping
with the giant police dog, he could forget the public that would not
let him rest. Nor had he been spoiled in the least, said the
interviewer, by the adulation poured out upon him by admiring women
and girls in volume sufficient to turn the head of a less sane young
man.

"There are many beautiful women in the world." pursued the writer,
"and I dare say there is not one who meets Harold Parmalee who does
not love him in one way or another. He has mental brilliancy for the
intellectuals, good looks for the empty-headed, a strong vital
appeal, a magnetism almost overwhelming to the susceptible, and an
easy and supremely appealing courtesy for every woman he
encounters."

Merton drew a long breath after reading these earnest words. Would
an interviewer some day be writing as much about him? He studied the
pictures of Harold Parmalee that abundantly spotted the article. The
full face, the profile, the symmetrical shoulders, the jaunty
bearing, the easy, masterful smile. From each of these he would
raise his eyes to his own pictured face on the wall above him.
Undoubtedly he was not unlike Harold Parmalee. He noted little
similarities. He had the nose, perhaps a bit more jutting than
Harold's, and the chin, even more prominent.

Possibly a director would have told him that his Harold Parmalee
beauty was just a trifle overdone; that his face went just a bit
past the line of pleasing resemblance and into something else. But
at this moment the aspirant was reassured. His eyes were pale, under
pale brows, yet they showed well in the prints. And he was slightly
built, perhaps even thin, but a diet rich in fats would remedy that.
And even if he were quite a little less comely than Parmalee, he
would still be impressive. After all, a great deal depended upon the
acting, and he was learning to act.

Months ago, the resolution big in his heart, he had answered the
advertisement in Silver Screenings, urging him to "Learn Movie
Acting, a fascinating profession that pays big. Would you like to
know," it demanded, "if you are adapted to this work? If so, send
ten cents for our Ten-Hour Talent-Prover, or Key to Movie-Acting
Aptitude, and find whether you are suited to take it up."

Merton had earnestly wished to know this, and had sent ten cents to
the Film Incorporation Bureau, Station N, Stebbinsville, Arkansas.
The Talent-Prover, or Key to Movie-Acting Aptitude, had come; he had
mailed his answers to the questions and waited an anguished ten
days, fearing that he would prove to lack the required aptitude for
this great art. But at last the cheering news had come. He had every
aptitude in full measure, and all that remained was to subscribe to
the correspondence course.

He had felt weak in the moment of his relief from this torturing
anxiety. Suppose they had told him that he wouldn't do? And he had
studied the lessons with unswerving determination. Night and day he
had held to his ideal. He knew that when you did this your hour was
bound to come.

He yawned now, thinking, instead of the anger expressions he should
have been practising, of the sordid things he must do to-morrow. He
must be up at five, sprinkle the floor, sweep it, take down the dust
curtains from the shelves of dry goods, clean and fill the lamps,
then station outside the dummies in their raiment. All day he would
serve customers, snatching a hasty lunch of crackers and cheese
behind the grocery counter. And at night, instead of twice watching
The Hazards of Hortense, he must still unreasonably serve late
customers until the second unwinding of those delectable reels.

He suddenly sickened of it all. Was he not sufficiently versed in
the art he had chosen to practise? And old Gashwiler every day
getting harder to bear! His resolve stiffened. He would not wait
much longer--only until the savings hidden out under the grocery
counter had grown a bit. He made ready for bed, taking, after he had
undressed, some dumb-bell exercises that would make his shoulders a
trifle ire like Harold Parmalee's. This rite concluded, he knelt by
his narrow cot and prayed briefly.

"Oh, God, make me a good movie actor! Make me one of the best! For
Jesus'sake, amen!"


CHAPTER III

WESTERN STUFF


Saturday proved all that his black forebodings had pictured it--a
day of sordid, harassing toil; toil, moreover, for which Gashwiler,
the beneficiary, showed but the scantest appreciation. Indeed, the
day opened with a disagreement between the forward-looking clerk and
his hide-bound reactionary. Gashwiler had reached the store at his
accustomed hour of 8:30 to find Merton embellishing the bulletin
board in front with legends setting forth especial bargains of the
day to be had within.

Chalk in hand, he had neatly written, "See our new importation of
taffetas, $2.59 the yard." Below this he was in the act of putting
down, "Try our choice Honey-dew spinach, 20 cts. the can." "Try our
Preferred Chipped Beef, 58 cts. the pound."

He was especially liking that use of "the." It sounded modern. Yet
along came Gashwiler, as if seeking an early excuse to nag, and
criticized this.

"Why don't you say 'a yard,' 'a can,' 'a pound'?" he demanded
harshly. "What's the sense of that there 'the' stuff? Looks to me
like just putting on a few airs. You keep to plain language and our
patrons'll like it a lot better." Viciously Merton Gill rubbed out
the modern "the" and substituted the desired "a."

"Very well," he assented, "if you'd rather stick to the old-
fashioned way; but I can tell you that's the way city stores do it.
I thought you might want to be up to date, but I see I made a great
mistake."

"Humph!" said Gashwiler, unbitten by this irony. "I guess the old
way's good enough, long's our prices are always right. Don't forget
to put on that canned salmon. I had that in stock for nearly a year
now--and say it's twenty cents 'a' can, not 'the' can. Also say it's
a grand reduction from thirty-five cents."

That was always the way. You never could please the old grouch. And
so began the labour that lasted until nine that night. Merton must
count out eggs and weigh butter that was brought in. He must do up
sugar and grind coffee and measure dress goods and match silks; he
must with the suavest gentility ask if there would not be something
else to-day; and he must see that babies hazardously left on
counters did not roll off.

He lived in a vortex of mental confusion, performing his tasks
mechanically. When drawing a gallon of kerosene or refolding the
shown dress goods, or at any task not requiring him to be genially
talkative, he would be saying to Miss Augusta Blivens in far-off
Hollywood, "Yes, my wife is more than a wife. She is my best pal,
and, I may also add, my severest critic."

There was but one break in the dreary monotony, and that was when
Lowell Hardy, Simsbury's highly artistic photographer, came in to
leave an order for groceries. Lowell wore a soft hat with rakish
brim, and affected low collars and flowing cravats, the artistic
effect of these being heightened in his studio work by a purple
velvet jacket. Even in Gashwiler's he stood out as an artist. Merton
received his order, and noting that Gashwiler was beyond earshot
bespoke his services for the following afternoon.

"Say, Lowell, be on the lot at two sharp to-morrow, will you? I want
to shoot some Western stuff--some stills."

Merton thrilled as he used these highly technical phrases. He had
not read his magazines for nothing.

Lowell Hardy considered, then consented. He believed that he, too,
might some day be called to Hollywood after they had seen the sort
of work he could turn out. He always finished his art studies of
Merton with great care, and took pains to have the artist's
signature entirely legible. "All right, Mert, I'll be there. I got
some new patent paper I'll try out on these."

"On the lot at two sharp to shoot Western stuff," repeated Merton
with relish.

"Right--o!" assented Lowell, and returned to more prosaic studio
art.

The day wore itself to a glad end. The last exigent customer had
gone, the curtains were up, the lights were out, and at five minutes
past nine the released slave, meeting Tessie Kearns at her front
door, escorted her with a high heart to the second show at the Bijou
Palace. They debated staying out until after the wretched comedy had
been run, but later agreed that they should see this, as Tessie
keenly wished to know why people laughed at such things. The antics
of the painfully cross-eyed man distressed them both, though the
mental inferiors by whom they were surrounded laughed noisily.
Merton wondered how any producer could bring himself to debase so
great an art, and Tessie wondered if she hadn't, in a way, been
aiming over the public's head with her scenarios. After all, you had
to give the public what it wanted. She began to devise comedy
elements for her next drama.

But The Hazards of Hortense came mercifully to soothe their
annoyance. The slim little girl with a wistful smile underwent a
rich variety of hazards, each threatening a terrible death. Through
them all she came unscathed, leaving behind her a trail of
infuriated scoundrels whom she had thwarted. She escaped from an
underworld den in a Chicago slum just in the nick of time, cleverly
concealing herself in the branches of the great eucalyptus tree that
grew hard by, while her maddened pursuers scattered in their search
for the prize. Again she was captured, this time to be conveyed by
aeroplane, a helpless prisoner and subject to the most fiendish
insults by Black Steve, to the frozen North. But in the far Alaskan
wilds she eluded the fiends and drove swiftly over the frozen wastes
with their only dog team. Having left her pursuers far behind, she
decided to rest for the night in a deserted cabin along the way.
Here a blizzard drove snow through the chinks between the logs, and
a pack of fierce wolves besieged her. She tried to bar the door, but
the bar was gone. At that moment she heard a call. Could it be Black
Steve again? No, thank heaven! The door was pushed open and there
stood Ralph Murdock, her fiance. There was a quick embrace and words
of cheer from Ralph. They must go on.

But no, the wind cut like a knife, and the wolves still prowled. The
film here showed a running insert of cruel wolves exposing all their
fangs. Ralph had lost his rifle. He went now to put his arm through
the iron loops in place of the missing bar. The wolves sought to
push open the door, but Ralph's arm foiled them.

Then the outside of the cabin was shown, with Black Steve and his
three ugly companions furtively approaching. The wolves had gone,
but human wolves, ten thousand times more cruel, had come in their
place. Back in the cabin Ralph and Hortense discovered that the
wolves had gone. It had an ugly look. Why should the wolves go?
Ralph opened the door and they both peered out. There in the shadow
of a eucalyptus tree stood Black Steve and his dastardly crew. They
were about to storm the cabin. All was undoubtedly lost.

Not until the following week would the world learn how Hortense and
her manly fiance had escaped this trap. Again had Beulah Baxter
striven and suffered to give the public something better and finer.

"A wonder girl," declared Merton when they were again in the open.
"That's what I call her--a wonder girl. And she owes it all to hard,
unceasing struggle and work and pains and being careful. You ought
to read that new interview with her in this month's Silver
Screenings."

"Yes, yes, she's wonderful," assented Tessie as they strolled to the
door of her shop. "But I've been thinking about comedy. You know my
new one I'm writing--of course it's a big, vital theme, all about a
heartless wife with her mind wholly on society and bridge clubs and
dancing and that sort of dissipation, and her husband is Hubert
Glendenning, a studious young lawyer who doesn't like to go out
evenings but would rather play with the kiddies a bit after their
mother has gone to a party, or read over some legal documents in the
library, which is very beautifully furnished; and her old school
friend, Corona Bartlett, comes to stay at the house, a very
voluptuous type, high coloured, with black hair and lots of
turquoise jewellery, and she's a bad woman through and through, and
been divorced and everything by a man whose heart she broke, and
she's become a mere adventuress with a secret vice--she takes
perfume in her tea, like I saw that one did--and all her evil
instincts are aroused at once by Hubert, who doesn't really care
deeply for her, as she has only a surface appeal of mere sensuous
beauty; but he sees that his wife is neglecting him and having an
affair with an Italian count--I found such a good name for him,
Count Ravioli--and staying out with him until all hours; so in a
moment of weakness he gives himself to Corona Bartlett, and then
sees that he must break up his home and get a divorce and marry
Corona to make an honest woman of her; but of course his wife is
brought to her senses, so she sees that she has been in the wrong
and has a big scene with Corona in which she scorns her and Corona
slinks away, and she forgives Hubert his one false step because it
was her fault. It's full of big situations, but what I'm wondering--
I'm wondering if I couldn't risk some comedy in it by having the
faithful old butler a cross-eyed man. Nothing so outrageous as that
creature we just saw, but still noticeably cross-eyed. Do you think
it would lighten some of the grimmer scenes, perhaps, and wouldn't
it be good pathos to have the butler aware of his infirmity and
knowing the greatest surgeons in the world can't help him?"

"Well," Merton considered, "if I were you I shouldn't chance it. It
would be mere acrobatic humour. And why do you want any one to be
funny when you have a big gripping thing of love and hate like that?
I don't believe I'd have him cross-eyed. I'd have him elderly and
simple and dignified. And you don't want your audience to laugh, do
you, when he holds up both hands to show how shocked he is at the
way things are going on in that house?"

"Well, maybe I won't then. It was just a thought. I believe you have
the right instinct in those matters, Merton. I'll leave him as he
is."

"Good-night, then," said Merton. "I got to be on the lot to-morrow.
My camera man's coming at two. Shooting some Western stuff."

"Oh, my! Really?"

Tessie gazed after him admiringly. He let himself into the dark
store, so lately the scene of his torment, and on the way to his
little room stopped to reach under the grocery counter for those
hidden savings. To-night he would add to them the fifteen dollars
lavished upon him by Gashwiler at the close of a week's toil. The
money was in a tobacco pouch. He lighted the lamp on his table,
placed the three new bills beside it and drew out the hoard. He
would count it to confirm his memory of the grand total.

The bills were frayed, lacking the fresh green of new ones; weary
looking, with an air of being glad to rest at last after much
passing from hand to hand as symbols of wealth. Their exalted
present owner tenderly smoothed cut several that had become
crumpled, secured them in a neat pile, adding the three recently
acquired five-dollar bills, and proceeded to count, moistening the
ends of a thumb and finger in defiance of the best sanitary
teaching. It was no time to think of malignant bacteria.

By his remembered count he should now be possessed of two hundred
and twelve dollars. And there was the two-dollar bill, a limp, gray
thing, abraded almost beyond identification. He placed this down
first, knowing that the remaining bills should amount to two hundred
and ten dollars. Slowly he counted, to finish with a look of blank,
hesitating wonder. He made another count, hastily, but taking
greater care. The wonder grew. Again he counted, slowly this time,
so that there could be no doubt. And now he knew! He possessed
thirty-three dollars more than he had thought. Knowing this was
right, he counted again for the luxury of it. Two hundred and forty-
five obvious dollars!

How had he lost count? He tried to recall. He could remember taking
out the money he had paid Lowell Hardy for the last batch of
Clifford Armytage stills--for Lowell, although making professional
rates to Merton, still believed the artist to be worth his hire--and
he could remember taking some more out to send to the mail-order
house in Chicago for the cowboy things; but it was plain that he had
twice, at least, crowded a week's salary into the pouch and
forgotten it.

It was a pleasurable experience; it was like finding thirty-three
dollars. And he was by that much nearer to his goal; that much
sooner would he be released from bondage; thirty-three dollars
sooner could he look Gashwiler in the eye and say what he thought of
him and his emporium. In his nightly prayer he did not neglect to
render thanks for this.

He dressed the next morning with a new elation. He must be more
careful about keeping tab on his money, but also it was wonderful to
find more than you expected. He left the storeroom that reeked of
kerosene and passed into the emporium to replace his treasure in its
hiding place. The big room was dusky behind the drawn front
curtains, but all the smells were there--the smell of ground coffee
and spices at the grocery counter, farther on, the smothering smell
of prints and woolens and new leather.

The dummies, waiting down by the door to be put outside, regarded
each other in blank solemnity. A few big flies droned lazily about
their still forms. Merton eyed the dusty floor, the gleaming
counters, the curtains that shielded the shelves, with a new
disdain. Sooner than he had thought he would bid them a last
farewell. And to-day, at least, he was free of them--free to be on
the lot at two, to shoot Western stuff. Let to-morrow, with its old
round of degrading tasks, take care of itself.

At 10:30 he was in church. He was not as attentive to the sermon as
he should have been, for it now occurred to him that he had no
stills of himself in the garb of a clergyman. This was worth
considering, because he was not going to be one of those one-part
actors. He would have a wide range of roles. He would be able to
play anything. He wondered how the Rev. Otto Carmichael would take
the request for a brief loan of one of his pulpit suits. Perhaps he
was not so old as he looked; perhaps he might remember that he, too,
had once been young and fired with high ideals. It would be worth
trying. And the things could be returned after a brief studio
session with Lowell Hardy. He saw himself cast in such a part, the
handsome young clergyman, exponent of a muscular Christianity. He
comes to the toughest cattle town in all the great Southwest,
determined to make honest men and good women of its sinning
derelicts. He wins the hearts of these rugged but misguided souls.
Though at first they treat him rough, they learn to respect him, and
they call him the fighting parson. Eventually he wins the hand in
marriage of the youngest of the dance-hall denizens, a sweet young
girl who despite her evil surroundings has remained as pure and good
as she is beautiful.

Anyway, if he had those clothes for an hour or two while the artist
made a few studies of him he would have something else to show
directors in search of fresh talent.

After church he ate a lonely meal served by Metta Judson at the
Gashwiler residence. The Gashwilers were on their accustomed Sabbath
visit to the distant farm of Mrs. Gashwiler's father. But as he ate
he became conscious that the Gashwiler influence was not wholly
withdrawn. From above the mantel he was sternly regarded by a tinted
enlargement of his employer's face entitled Photographic Study by
Lowell Hardy. Lowell never took photographs merely. He made
photographic studies, and the specimen at hand was one of his most
daring efforts. Merton glared at it in free hostility--a clod, with
ideals as false as the artist's pink on his leathery cheeks! He
hurried his meal, glad to be relieved from the inimical scrutiny.

He was glad to be free from this and from the determined recital by
Metta Judson of small-town happenings. What cared he that Gus
Giddings had been fined ten dollars and costs by Squire Belcher for
his low escapade, or that Gus's father had sworn to lick him within
an inch of his life if he ever ketched him touching stimmilints
again?

He went to the barn, climbed to the hayloft, and undid the bundle
containing his Buck Benson outfit. This was fresh from the mail-
order house in Chicago. He took out almost reverently a pair of
high-heeled boots with purple tops, a pair of spurs, a gay shirt, a
gayer neckerchief, a broad-brimmed hat, a leather holster, and--most
impressive of all--a pair of goatskin chaps dyed a violent maroon.
All these he excitedly donned, the spurs last. Then he clambered
down the ladder from the loft, somewhat impeded by the spurs, and
went into the kitchen. Metta Judson, washing dishes, gave a little
cry of alarm. Nothing like this had ever before invaded the
Gashwiler home by front door or back.

"Why, Mert' Gill, whatever you dressed up like that for? My stars,
you look like a cowboy or something! Well, I must say!"

"Say, Metta, do me a favour. I want to see how these things look in
a glass. It's a cowboy outfit for when I play regular Buck Benson
parts, and everything's got to be just so or the audience writes to
the magazines about it and makes fun of you."

"Go ahead," said Metta. "You can git a fine look at yourself in the
tall glass in the old lady's bedroom."

Forthwith he went, profaning a sanctuary, to survey himself in a
glass that had never reflected anything but the discreet arraying of
his employer's lady. He looked long and earnestly. The effect was
quite all he had hoped. He lowered the front of the broad-brimmed
hat the least bit, tightened his belt another notch and moved the
holster to a better line. He looked again. From feet to head he was
perfect.

Then, slightly crouching, he drew his revolver from the holster and
held it forward from the hip, wrist and forearm rigidly straight.

"Throw up your hands!"

He uttered the grim words in a low tone, but one facing him would
not have been deceived by low tones. Steely-eyed, grim of face,
relentless in all his bearing, the most desperate adversary would
have quailed. Probably even Gashwiler himself would have quailed.
When Buck Benson looked and spoke thus he meant it.

He held it a long, breathless moment before relaxing. Then he
tiptoed softly from the hallowed confines of a good woman's boudoir
and clattered down the back stairs to the kitchen. He was thinking:
"I certainly got to get me another gun if I'm ever going to do Two-
Gun Benson parts, and I got to get the draw down better. I ain't
quick enough yet."

"Well, did you like your rig?" inquired Metta genially.

"Oh, it'll do for the stills we're shooting to-day," replied the
actor. "Of course I ought to have a rattlesnake-skin band on my hat,
and the things look too new yet. And say, Metta, where's the
clothesline? I want to practise roping a little before my camera man
gets here."

"My stars! You're certainly goin' to be a real one, ain't you?"

She brought him the clothesline, in use only on Mondays. He re-
coiled it carefully and made a running noose in one end.

At two Lowell Hardy found his subject casting the rope at an
inattentive Dexter. The old horse stood in the yard, head down, one
foot crossed nonchalantly before the other. A slight tremor, a
nervous flickering of his skin, was all that ensued when the rope
grazed him. When it merely fell in his general neighbourhood, as it
oftener did, Dexter did not even glance up.

"Good stuff!" applauded the artist. "Now just stand that way,
holding the noose out. I want to make a study of that."

He rapidly mounted his camera on a tripod and put in a plate. The
study was made. Followed several studies of the fighting face of
Two-Gun Benson, grim and rigid, about to shoot from the hip. But
these were minor bits. More important would be Buck Benson and his
old pal, Pinto. From the barn Merton dragged the saddle, blanket,
and bridle he had borrowed from the Giddings House livery stable. He
had never saddled a horse before, but he had not studied in vain. He
seized Dexter by a wisp of his surviving mane and simultaneously
planted a hearty kick in the beast's side, with a command, "Get
around there, you old skate!" Dexter sighed miserably and got around
as ordered. He was both pained and astonished. He knew that this was
Sunday. Never had he been forced to work on this day. But he meekly
suffered the protrusion of a bit between his yellow teeth, and
shuddered but slightly when a blanket and then a heavy saddle were
flung across his back. True, he looked up in some dismay when the
girth was tightened. Not once in all his years had he been saddled.
He was used to having things loose around his waist.

The girth went still tighter. Dexter glanced about with genuine
concern. Someone was intending to harm him. He curved his swanlike
neck and snapped savagely at the shoulder of his aggressor, who
kicked him again in the aide and yelled, "Whoa, there, dang you!"

Dexter subsided. He saw it was no use. Whatever queer thing they
meant to do to him would be done despite all his resistance. Still
his alarm had caused him to hold up his head now. He was looking
much more like a horse.

"There!" said Merton Gill, and as a finishing touch he lashed the
coiled clothesline to the front of the saddle. "Now, here! Get me
this way. This is one of the best things I do--that is, so far."
Fondly he twined his arms about the long, thin neck of Dexter, who
tossed his head and knocked off the cowboy hat. "Never mind that--
it's out," said Merton. "Can't use it in this scene." He laid his
cheek to the cheek of his pet. "Well, old pal, they're takin' yuh
from me, but we got to keep a stiff upper lip. You an' me has been
through some purty lively times together, but we got to face the
music at last--there, Lowell, did you get that?"

The artist had made his study. He made three others of the same
affecting scene at different angles. Dexter was overwhelmed with
endearments. Doubtless he was puzzled--to be kicked in the ribs at
one moment, the next to be fondled. But Lowell Hardy was
enthusiastic. He said he would have some corking studies. He made
another of Buck Benson preparing to mount good old Pinto; though, as
a matter of fact, Buck, it appeared, was not even half prepared to
mount.

"Go on, jump on him now," suggested the artist. "I'll get a few more
that way."

"Well, I don't know," Merton hesitated. He was twenty-two years old,
and he had never yet been aboard a horse. Perhaps he shouldn't try
to go too far in one lesson. "You see, the old boy's pretty tired
from his week's work. Maybe I better not mount him. Say, I'll tell
you, take me rolling a cigarette, just standing by him. I darned
near forgot the cigarettes."

From the barn he brought a sack of tobacco and some brown papers. He
had no intention of smoking, but this kind of cigarette was too
completely identified with Buck Benson to be left out. Lolling
against the side of Dexter, he poured tobacco from the sack into one
of the papers. "Get me this way," he directed, "just pouring it
out."

He had not yet learned to roll a cigarette, but Gus Giddings, the
Simsbury outlaw, had promised to teach him. Anyway, it was enough
now to be looking keenly out from under his hat while he poured
tobacco into the creased paper against the background of good old
Pinto. An art study of this pose was completed. But Lowell Hardy
craved more action, more variety.

"Go on. Get up on him," he urged. "I want to make a study of that."

"Well--"again Merton faltered--"the old skate's tired out from a
hard week, and I'm not feeling any too lively myself."

"Shucks! It won't kill him if you get on his back for a minute, will
it? And you'll want one on him to show, won't you? Hurry up, while
the light's right."

Yes, he would need a mounted study to show. Many times he had
enacted a scene in which a director had looked over the art studies
of Clifford Armytage and handed them back with the remark, "But you
seem to play only society parts, Mr. Armytage. All very interesting,
and I've no doubt we can place you very soon; but just at present
we're needing a lead for a Western, a man who can look the part and
ride."

Thereupon he handed these Buck Benson stills to the man, whose face
would instantly relax into an expression of pleased surprise.

"The very thing," he would say. And among those stills, certainly,
should be one of Clifford Armytage actually on the back of his
horse. He'd chance it.

"All right; just a minute."

He clutched the bridle reins of Dexter under his drooping chin. and
overcoming a feeble resistance dragged him alongside the watering
trough. Dexter at first thought he was wished to drink, but a kick
took that nonsense out of him. With extreme care Merton stood upon
the edge of the trough and thrust a leg blindly over the saddle.
With some determined clambering he was at last seated. His feet were
in the stirrups. There was a strange light in his eyes. There was a
strange light in Dexter's eyes. To each of them the experience was
not only without precedent but rather unpleasant.

"Ride him out in the middle here, away from that well," directed the
camera man.

"You--you better lead him out," suggested the rider. "I can feel him
tremble already. He--he might break down under me."

Metta Judson, from the back porch, here came into the piece with
lines that the author had assuredly not written for her.

"Giddap, there, you Dexter Gashwiler," called Metta loudly and with
the best intentions.

"You keep still," commanded the rider severely, not turning his
head. What a long way it seemed to the ground! He had never dreamed
that horses were so lofty. "Better lead him," he repeated to his
camera man.

Lowell Hardy grasped the bridle reins, and after many vain efforts
persuaded Dexter to stumble away from the well. His rider grasped
the horn of his saddle.

"Look out, don't let him buck," he called.

But Dexter had again become motionless, except for a recurrent
trembling under this monstrous infliction.

"Now, there," began the artist. "Hold that. You're looking off over
the Western hills. Atta boy! Wait till I get a side view."

"Move your camera," said the rider. "Seems to me he doesn't want to
turn around."

But again the artist turned Dexter half around. That wasn't so bad.
Merton began to feel the thrill of it. He even lounged in the saddle
presently, one leg over the pommel, and seemed about to roll another
cigarette while another art study was made. He continued to lounge
there while the artist packed his camera. What had he been afraid
of? He could sit a horse as well as the next man; probably a few
little tricks about it he hadn't learned yet, but he'd get these,
too.

"I bet they'll come out fine," he called to the departing artist.
"Leave that to me. I dare say I'll be able to do something good with
them. So long."

"So long," returned Merton, and was left alone on the back of a
horse higher than people would think until they got on him. Indeed
he was beginning to like it. If you just had a little nerve you
needn't be afraid of anything. Very carefully he clambered from the
saddle. His old pal shook himself with relief and stood once more
with bowed head and crossed forelegs.

His late burden observed him approvingly. There was good old Pinto
after a hard day's run over the mesa. He had borne his beloved owner
far ahead of the sheriff's posse, and was now securing a moment's
much-needed rest. Merton undid the riata and for half an hour
practised casting it at his immobile pet. Once the noose settled
unerringly over the head of Dexter, who still remained immobile.

Then there was the lightning draw to be practised. Again and again
the trusty weapon of Buck Benson flashed from its holster to the
damage of a slower adversary. He was getting that draw down pretty
good. From the hip with straight wrist and forearm Buck was ready to
shoot in no time at all. Throughout that villain-infested terrain
along the border he was known for his quick draw. The most desperate
of them would never molest him except they could shoot him from
behind. With his back to a wall, they slunk from the encounter.

Elated from this practice and from the memory of that one successful
rope cast, Merton became daring in the extreme. He considered
nothing less than remounting his old pal and riding, in the cool of
early evening, up and down the alley upon which the barnyard gave.
He coiled the rope and again lashed it to the left front of the
saddle. Then he curved an affectionate arm over the arched neck of
Pinto, who sighed deeply.

"Well, old pal, you and me has still got some mighty long miles to
git over between now and sunup to-morrow. I reckon we got to put a
right smart of distance between us and that pesky sheriff's posse,
but I know yuh ain't lost heart, old pal."

Dexter here tossed his head, being cloyed with these embraces, and
Two-Gun Benson caught a look in the desperate eyes of his pet which
he did not wholly like. Perhaps it would be better not to ride him
any more to-day. Perhaps it would be better not to ride him again
until next Sunday. After all, wasn't Dexter practically a wild
horse, caught up from the range and broken to saddle only that
afternoon? No use overdoing it. At this moment the beast's back
looked higher than ever.

It was the cutting remark of a thoughtless, empty-headed girl that
confirmed Merton in his rash resolve. Metta Judson, again on the
back steps, surveyed the scene with kindling eyes.

"I bet you daresn't get on him again," said Metta.

These were strong words; not words to be flung lightly at Two-Gun
Benson.

"You know a lot about it, don't you?" parried Merton Gill.

"Afraid of that old skate!" murmured Metta, counterfeiting the
inflections of pity.

Her target shot her a glance of equal pity for her lack of
understanding and empty-headed banter. He stalked to the barnyard
gate and opened it. The way to his haven over the border was no
longer barred. He returned to Dexter, firmly grasped the bridle
reins under his weak chin and cajoled him again to the watering
trough. Metta Judson was about to be overwhelmed with confusion.
From the edge of the trough he again clambered into the saddle, the
new boots groping a way to the stirrups. The reins in his left hand,
he swept off his ideal hat with a careless gesture--he wished he had
had an art study made of this, but you can't think of everything at
one time. He turned loftily to Metta as one who had not even heard
her tasteless taunts.

"Well, so long! I won't be out late." Metta was now convinced that
she had in her heart done this hero a wrong.

"You better be here before the folks get back!" she warned.

Merton knew this as well as she did, but the folks wouldn't be back
for a couple of hours yet, and all he meant to venture was a ride at
sober pace the length of the alley.

"Oh, I'll take care of that!" he said. "A few miles' stiff gallop'll
be all I want." He jerked Dexter's head up, snapped the reins on his
neck, and addressed him in genial, comradely but authoritative
tones.

"Git up there, old hoss!"

Dexter lowered his head again and remained as if posing
conscientiously for the statue of a tired horse.

"Giddap, there, you old skate!" again ordered the rider.

The comradely unction was gone from his voice and the bony neck
received a smarter wallop with the reins. Dexter stood unmoved. He
seemed to be fearing that the worst was now coming, and that he
might as well face it on that spot as elsewhere. He remained deaf to
threats and entreaties alike. No hoof moved from its resting place.

"Giddap, there, you old Dexter Gashwiler!" ordered Metta, and was
not rebuked. But neither would Dexter yield to a woman's whim.

"I'll tell you!" said Merton, now contemptuous of his mount. "Get
the buggy whip and tickle his ribs."

Metta sped on his errand, her eyes shining with the lust for
torture. With the frayed end of the whip from the delivery wagon she
lightly scored the exposed ribs of Dexter, tormenting him with
devilish cunning. Dexter's hide shuttled back and forth. He whinnied
protestingly, but did not stir even one hoof.

"That's the idea," said Merton, feeling scornfully secure on the
back of this spiritless animal. "Keep it up! I can feel him coming
to life."

Metta kept it up. Her woman's ingenuity contrived new little tricks
with the instrument of torture. She would doubtless have had a
responsible post with the Spanish Inquisition. Face set, absorbed in
her evil work, she tickled the ribs crosswise and tickled between
them, up and down, always with the artist's light touch.

Dexter's frame grew tense, his head came up. Once more he looked
like a horse. He had been brave to face destruction, but he found
himself unable to face being tickled to death. If only they had
chosen some other method for his execution he would have perished
gamely, but this was exquisitely poignant--beyond endurance. He
tossed his head and stepped into a trot toward the open gate.

Metta yelled in triumph. The rider tossed his own head in rhythm to
Dexter's trot. His whole body tossed in the saddle; it was a
fearsome pace; the sensations were like nothing he had ever dreamed
of. And he was so high above the good firm ground! Dexter continued
his jolting progress to the applause of Metta. The rider tried to
command Metta to keep still, and merely bit his tongue.

Stirred to life by the tickling, Dexter now became more acutely
aware of that strange, restless burden on his back, and was inspired
to free himself from it. He increased his pace as he came to the
gate, and managed a backward kick with both heels. This lost the
rider his stirrups and left him less securely seated than he wished
to be. He dropped the reins and grasped the saddle's pommel with
both hands.

He strangely seemed to consider the pommel the steering wheel of a
motor car. He seemed to be twisting it with the notion of guiding
Dexter. All might have been well, but on losing his stirrups the
rider had firmly clasped his legs about the waist of the animal.
Again and again he tightened them, and now Dexter not only looked
every inch a horse but very painfully to his rider felt like one,
for the spurs were goring him to a most seditious behavior. The mere
pace was slackened only that he might alarmingly kick and shake
himself in a manner as terrifying to the rider as it was unseemly in
one of Dexter's years.

But the thing was inevitable, because once in his remote, hot youth
Dexter, cavorting innocently in an orchard, had kicked over a hive
of busy bees which had been attending strictly to their own affairs
until that moment. After that they had attended to Dexter with a
thoroughness that had seared itself to this day across his memory.
He now sincerely believed that he had overturned another hive of
bees, and that not but by the most strenuous exertion could he
escape from their harrying. They were stinging him venomously along
his sides, biting deeper with every jump. At last he would bear his
rider safely over the border.

The rider clasped his mount ever more tightly. The deep dust of the
alley road mounted high over the spirited scene, and through it came
not only the hearty delight of Metta Judson in peals of womanly
laughter, but the shrill cries of the three Ransom children whom
Merton had not before noticed. These were Calvin Ransom, aged eight;
Elsie Ransom, aged six; and little Woodrow Ransom, aged four. Their
mother had lain down with a headache, having first ordered them to
take their picture books and sit quietly in the parlour as good
children should on a Sabbath afternoon. So they had noisily
pretended to obtain the picture books and then quietly tiptoed out
into the backyard, which was not so stuffy as the parlour.

Detecting the meritorious doings in the Gashwiler barnyard, they
perched in a row on the alley fence and had been excited spectators
from the moment that Merton had mounted his horse.

In shrill but friendly voices they had piped, "Oh, Merton Gill's a
cowboy, Merton Gill's a cowboy! Oh, looka the cowboy on the big
horse!"

For of course they were motion-picture experts and would know a
cowboy when they saw one. Wide-eyed, they followed the perilous
antics of Dexter as he issued from the alley gate, and they screamed
with childish delight when the spurs had recalled to his memory that
far-off dreadful day with the busy bees. They now balanced
precariously on the alley fence, the better to trace Merton's flight
through the dust cloud. "Merton's in a runaway, Merton's in a
runaway, Merton's in a runaway!" they shrieked, but with none of the
sympathy that would have become them. They appeared to rejoice in
Merton's plight. "Merton's in a runaway," they joyously chanted.

Suddenly they ceased, frozen with a new and splendid wonder, for
their descriptive phrase was now inexact. Merton was no longer in a
runaway. But only for a moment did they hesitate before taking up
the new chant.

"Looky, looky. He's throwed Merton right off into the dirt. He's
throwed Merton right off into the dirt. Oh, looky Merton Gill right
down there in the dirt!"

Again they had become exact. Merton was right down there in the
dirt, and a frantic, flashing-heeled Dexter was vanishing up the
alley at the head of a cloud of dust. The friendly Ransom tots
leaped from the fence to the alley, forgetting on her bed of pain
the mother who supposed them to be engrossed with picture books in
the library. With one accord they ran toward the prostrate horseman,
Calvin ahead and Elsie a close second, holding the hand of little
Woodrow.

They were presently able to observe that the fleeing Dexter had
narrowly escaped running down a motor car inopportunely turning at
that moment into the alley. The gallant animal swerved in time,
leaving the car's driver and his wife aghast at their slight margin
of safety. Dexter vanished to the right up shaded Spruce Street on a
Sabbath evening as the first call to evening worship pealed from a
neighbouring church tower.

His late rider had erected himself and was beating dust from the new
chaps and the front of the new shirt. He picked up the ideal hat and
dusted that. Underneath all the flurry of this adventure he was
still the artist. He had been set afoot in the desert by a
treacherous horse; he must find a water hole or perish with thirst.
He replaced the hat, and it was then he observed the motor car
bearing down the alley upon him.

"My good gosh!" he muttered.

The Gashwilers had returned a full two hours before their accustomed
time. The car halted beside him and his employer leaned out a warmly
hostile face.

"What's this mean?" he demanded.

The time was not one to tell Gashwiler what he thought of him. Not
only was there a lady present, but he felt himself at a
disadvantage. The lady saved him from an instant necessity for
words.

"That was our new clothesline; I recognized it at once." The woman
seemed to pride herself on this paltry feat.

"What's this mean?" again demanded Gashwiler. He was now a man of
one idea.

Again was Merton Gill saved from the need of instant speech, though
not in a way he would have chosen to be saved. The three Ransom
children ran up, breathless, shouting.

"Oh, Merton, here's your pistol. I found it right in the road
there." "We found your pistol right in the dirt there. I saw it
first." "You did not; I saw it first. Merton, will you let me shoot
it off, Merton? I found your pistol, didn't I, Merton? Didn't I find
it right in the road there?" The friendly tots did little step
dances while they were thus vocal.

"Be quiet, children," commanded Merton, finding a voice. But they
were not to be quelled by mere tones.

"He throwed Merton right off into the dirt, didn't he, Merton?
Merton, didn't he throw you right off into the dirt, Merton? Did he
hurt you, Merton?" "Merton, will you let me shoot it off just once--
just once, and I'll never ask again?" "He didn't either find it
first, Merton." "He throwed you off right into the dirt--didn't he
throw you right off into the dirt, Merton?"

With a harsher show of authority, or perhaps merely because he was
bearded--so unreasoning are the inhibitions of the young--Gashwiler
stilled the tumult. The dancing died. "What's this mean?" he
repeated.

"We nearly had an accident," said the lady.

"What's this mean?"

An answer of sorts could no longer be delayed.

"Well, I thought I'd give Dexter a little exercise, so I saddled him
up and was going to ride him around the block, when--when these kids
here yelled and scared him so he ran away."

"Oh, what a story!" shouted the tots in unison. "What a bad story!
You'll go to the bad place," intoned little Elsie.

"I swear, I don't know what's gettin' into you," declared Gashwiler.
"Don't that horse get exercise enough during the week? Don't he like
his day of rest? How'd you like me to saddle you up and ride you
round the block? I guess you'd like that pretty well, wouldn't you?"
Gashwiler fancied himself in this bit of sarcasm, brutal though it
was. He toyed with it. "Next Sunday I'll saddle you up and ride you
round the block--see how you like that, young man."

"It was our clothesline," said the lady. "I could tell it right
off."

With a womanish tenacity she had fastened to a minor inconsequence
of the outrage. Gashwiler became practical.

"Well, I must say, it's a pretty how-de-do, That horse'll make
straight back for the farm; we won't have any delivery horse to-
morrow. Sue, you get out; I'll go down the road a piece and see if I
can head him off."

"He turned the other way," said Merton.

"Well, he's bound to head around for the farm. I'll go up the road
and you hurry out the way he went. Mebbe you can catch him before he
gets out of town."

Mrs. Gashwiler descended from the car.

"You better have that clothesline back by seven o'clock to-morrow
morning," she warned the offender.

"Yes, ma'am, I will."

This was not spoken in a Buck Benson manner.

"And say"--Gashwiler paused in turning the car--"what you doing in
that outlandish rig, anyhow? Must think you're one o' them Wild West
cowboys or something. Huh!" This last carried a sneer that stung.

"Well, I guess I can pick out my own clothes if I want to."

"Fine things to call clothes, I must say. Well, go see if you can
pick out that horse if you're such a good picker-out."

Again Gashwiler was pleased with himself. He could play venomously
with words.

"Yes, sir," said Merton, and plodded on up the alley, followed at a
respectful distance by the Ransom kiddies, who at once resumed their
vocal exercises.

"He throwed you off right into the dirt, didn't he, Merton? Mer-tun,
didn't he throw you off right into the dirt?"

If it were inevitable he wished that they would come closer. He
would even have taken little Woodrow by the hand. But they kept far
enough back of him to require that their voices should be raised.
Incessantly the pitiless rain fell upon him--"Mer-tun, he throwed
you off right into the dirt, didn't he, Merton?"

He turned out of the alley up Spruce Street. The Ransom children
lawlessly followed, forgetting their good home, their poor, sick
mother and the rules she had laid down for their Sabbath recreation.
At every moment the shrill cry reached his burning ears, "Mer-tun,
didn't he throw you off?" The kiddies appeared to believe that
Merton had not heard them, but they were patient. Presently he would
hear and reassure them that he had, indeed, been thrown off right
into the dirt.

Now he began to meet or pass early churchgoers who would gaze at him
in wonder or in frank criticism. He left the sidewalk and sought the
centre of the road, pretending that out there he could better search
for a valuable lost horse. The Ransom children were at first in two
minds about following him, but they soon found it more interesting
to stay on the sidewalk. They could pause to acquaint the
churchgoers with a matter of common interest. "He throwed Merton off
right into the dirt."

If the people they addressed appeared to be doubting this, or to
find it not specific enough, they would call ahead to Merton to
confirm their simple tale. With rapt, shining faces, they spread the
glad news, though hurrying always to keep pace with the figure in
the road.

Spruce Street was vacant of Dexter, but up Elm Street, slowly
cropping the wayside herbage as he went, was undoubtedly Merton's
good old pal. He quickened his pace. Dexter seemed to divine his
coming and broke into a kittenish gallop until he reached the
Methodist Church. Here, appearing to believe that he had again
eluded pursuit, he stopped to graze on a carefully tended square of
grass before the sacred edifice. He was at once shooed by two
scandalized old ladies, but paid them no attention. They might
perhaps even have tickled him, for this was the best grass he had
found since leaving home. Other churchgoers paused in consternation,
looking expectantly at the approaching Merton Gill. The three happy
children who came up with him left no one in doubt of the late
happening.

Merton was still the artist. He saw himself approach Dexter, vault
into the saddle, put spurs to the beast, and swiftly disappear down
the street. People would be saying that he should not be let to ride
so fast through a city street. He was worse than Gus Giddings. But
he saw this only with his artist's eye. In sordid fact he went up to
Dexter, seized the trailing bridle reins and jerked savagely upon
them. Back over the trail he led his good old pal. And for other
later churchgoers there were the shrill voices of friendly children
to tell what had happened--to appeal confidently to Merton, vaguely
ahead in the twilight, to confirm their interesting story.

Dexter, the anarchist, was put to bed without his goodnight kiss.
Good old Pinto had done his pal dirt. Never again would he be given
a part in Buck Benson's company. Across the alley came the voices of
tired, happy children, in the appeal for an encore. "Mer-tun, please
let him do it to you again." "Mer-tun, please let him do it to you
again."

And to the back porch came Mrs. Gashwiler to say it was a good thing
he'd got that clothesline back, and came her husband wishing to be
told what outlandish notion Merton Gill would next get into the
thing he called his head. It was the beginning of the end.

Followed a week of strained relations with the Gashwiler household,
including Dexter, and another week of relations hardly more cordial.
But thirty dollars was added to the hoard which was now counted
almost nightly. And the cruder wits of the village had made rather a
joke of Merton's adventure. Some were tasteless enough to rally him
coarsely upon the crowded street or at the post office while he
awaited his magazines.

And now there were two hundred and seventy-five dollars to put him
forever beyond their jibes. He carefully rehearsed a scathing speech
for Gashwiler. He would tell him what he thought of him. That
merchant would learn from it some things that would do him good if
he believed them, but probably he wouldn't believe them. He would
also see that he had done his faithful employee grave injustices.
And he would be left, in some humiliation, having found, as Merton
Gill took himself forever out of retail trade, that two could play
on words as well as one. It was a good warm speech, and its author
knew every word of it from mumbled rehearsal during the two weeks,
at times when Gashwiler merely thought he was being queer again.

At last came the day when he decided to recite it in full to the man
for whom it had been composed. He confronted him, accordingly, at a
dull moment on the third Monday morning, burning with his message.

He looked Gashwiler firmly in the eye and said in halting tones,
"Mr. Gashwiler, now, I've been thinking I'd like to go West for a
while--to California, if you could arrange to let me off, please."
And Mr. Gashwiler had replied, "Well, now, that is a surprise. When
was you wishing to go, Merton?"

"Why, I would be much obliged if you'd let me get off to-night on
No. 4, Mr. Gashwiler, and I know you can get Spencer Grant to take
my place, because I asked him yester-day."

"Very well, Merton. Send Spencer Grant in to see me, and you can get
off to-night. I hope you'll have a good time."

"Of course, I don't know how long I'll be gone. I may locate out
there. But then again--"

"That's all right, Merton. Any time you come back you can have your
same old job. You've been a good man, and they ain't so plenty these
days."

"Thank you, Mr. Gashwiler."

No. 4 was made to stop at Simsbury for a young man who was presently
commanding a meal in the palatial diner, and who had, before this
meal was eaten, looked out with compassion upon two Simsbury-like
hamlets that the train rushed by, a blur of small-towners standing
on their depot platforms to envy the inmates of that splendid
structure.

At last it was Western Stuff and no fooling.


CHAPTER IV

THE WATCHER AT THE GATE


The street leading to the Holden motion-picture studio, considered
by itself, lacks beauty. Flanking it for most of the way from the
boulevard to the studio gate are vacant lots labelled with their
prices and appeals to the passer to buy them. Still their prices are
high enough to mark the thoroughfare as one out of the common, and
it is further distinguished by two rows of lofty eucalyptus trees.
These have a real feathery beauty, and are perhaps a factor in the
seemingly exorbitant prices demanded for the choice bungalow and
home sites they shade. Save for a casual pioneer bungalow or two,
there are no buildings to attract the notice until one reaches a
high fence that marks the beginning of the Holden lot. Back of this
fence is secreted a microcosmos, a world in little, where one may
encounter strange races of people in their native dress and behold,
by walking a block, cities actually apart by league upon league of
the earth's surface and separated by centuries of time.

To penetrate this city of many cities, and this actual present of
the remote past, one must be of a certain inner elect. Hardly may
one enter by assuming the disguise of a native, as daring explorers
have sometimes overcome the difficulty of entering other strange
cities. Its gate, reached after passing along an impressive expanse
of the reticent fence, is watched by a guardian. He is a stoatish
man of middle age, not neatly dressed, and of forbidding aspect. His
face is ruthless, with a very knowing cynicism. He is there, it
would seem, chiefly to keep people out of the delightful city,
though from time to time he will bow an assent or wave it with the
hand clutching his evening newspaper to one of the favoured lawful
inmates, who will then carelessly saunter or drive an expensive
motor car through the difficult portal.

Standing across the street, one may peer through this portal into an
avenue of the forbidden city. There is an exciting glimpse of
greensward, flowering shrubbery, roses, vines, and a vista of the
ends of enormous structures painted yellow. And this avenue is
sprightly with the passing of enviable persons who are rightly
there, some in alien garb, some in the duller uniform of the humble
artisan, some in the pressed and garnished trappings of rich
overlords.

It is really best to stand across the street for this clandestine
view of heart-shaking delights. If you stand close to the gate to
peer past the bulky shape of the warder he is likely to turn and
give you a cold look. Further, he is averse to light conversation,
being always morosely absorbed--yet with an eye ever alert for
intrusive outlanders--in his evening paper. He never reads a morning
paper, but has some means of obtaining at an early hour each morning
a pink or green evening paper that shrieks with crimson headlines.
Such has been his reading through all time, and this may have been
an element in shaping his now inveterate hostility toward those who
would engage him in meaningless talk. Even in accepting the gift of
an excellent cigar he betrays only a bored condescension. There is
no relenting of countenance, no genial relaxing of an ingrained
suspicion toward all who approach him, no cordiality, in short, such
as would lead you to believe that he might be glad to look over a
bunch of stills taken by the most artistic photographer in all
Simsbury, Illinois. So you let him severely alone after a bit, and
go to stand across the street, your neatly wrapped art studies under
your arm, and leaning against the trunk of a eucalyptus tree, you
stare brazenly past him into the city of wonders.

It is thus we first observe that rising young screen actor, Clifford
Armytage, beginning the tenth day of his determined effort to become
much more closely identified with screen activities than hitherto.
Ten days of waiting outside the guarded gate had been his, but no
other ten days of his life had seemed so eventful or passed so
swiftly. For at last he stood before his goal, had actually fastened
his eyes upon so much of it as might be seen through its gate. Never
had he achieved so much downright actuality.

Back in Simsbury on a Sunday morning he had often strolled over to
the depot at early train time for a sight of the two metal
containers housing the films shown at the Bijou Palace the day
before. They would be on the platform, pasted over with express
labels. He would stand by them, even touch them, examine the
padlocks, turn them over, heft them; actually hold within his grasp
the film wraith of Beulah Baxter in a terrific installment of The
Hazards of Hortense. Those metal containers imprisoned so much of
beauty, of daring, of young love striving against adverse currents--
held the triumphant fruiting of Miss Baxter's toil and struggle and
sacrifice to give the public something better and finer. Often he
had caressed the crude metal with a reverent hand, as if his wonder
woman herself stood there to receive his homage.

That was actuality, in a way. But here it was in full measure,
without mental subterfuge or vain imaginings. Had he not beheld from
this post--he was pretty sure he had--Miss Baxter herself, swathed
in costly furs, drive a robin's-egg-blue roadster through the gate
without even a nod to the warder? Indeed, that one glimpse of
reality had been worth his ten days of waiting--worth all his
watching of the gate and its keeper until he knew every dent in the
keeper's derby hat, every bristle in his unkempt mustache, every
wrinkle of his inferior raiment, and every pocket from which
throughout the day he would vainly draw matches to relight an
apparently fireproof cigar. Surely waiting thus rewarded could not
be called barren. When he grew tired of standing he could cross the
street and rest on a low bench that encircled one of the eucalyptus
trees. Here were other waiters without the pale, usually men of
strongly marked features, with a tendency to extremes in stature or
hair or beards or noses, and not conspicuously neat in attire.
These, he discovered, were extras awaiting employment, many of them
Mexicans or strange-appearing mongrels, with a sprinkling of
Negroes. Often he could have recruited there a band of outlaws for
desperate deeds over the border. He did not fraternize with these
waifs, feeling that his was another plane.

He had spent three days thus about the studio gate when he learned
of the existence of another entrance. This was a door almost
opposite the bench. He ventured through it and discovered a bare
room with a wooden seat running about its sides. In a partition
opposite the entrance was a small window and over it the words
"Casting Director." One of the two other doors led to the interior,
and through this he observed pass many of the chosen. Another door
led to the office of the casting director, glimpses of which could
be obtained through the little window.

The waiting room itself was not only bare as to floor and walls, but
was bleak and inhospitable in its general effect. The wooden seat
was uncomfortable, and those who sat upon it along the dull-toned
walls appeared depressed and unhopeful, especially after they had
braved a talk through the little window with someone who seemed
always to be saying, "No, nothing to-day. Yes, perhaps next week. I
have your address." When the aspirants were women, as they mostly
were, the someone back of the window would add "dear" to the speech:
"No, nothing to-day, dear."

There seemed never to be anything to-day, and Clifford Armytage
spent very little of his waiting time in this room. It made him
uncomfortable to be stared at by other applicants, whether they
stared casually, incuriously, or whether they seemed to appraise him
disparagingly, as if telling him frankly that for him there would
never be anything to-day.

Then he saw that he, too, must undergo that encounter at the little
window. Too apparently he was not getting anywhere by loitering
about outside. It was exciting, but the producers would hardly look
there for new talent.

He chose a moment for this encounter when the waiting room was
vacant, not caring to be stared at when he took this first step in
forming a connection that was to be notable in screen annals. He
approached the window, bent his head, and encountered the gaze of a
small, comely woman with warm brown eyes, neat reddish hair, and a
quick manner. The gaze was shrewd; it seemed to read all that was
needed to be known of this new candidate.

"Yes?" said the woman.

She looked tired and very businesslike, but her manner was not
unkind. The novice was at once reassured. He was presently
explaining to her that he wished to act in the pictures at this
particular studio. No, he had not had much experience; that is, you
could hardly call it experience in actual acting, but he had
finished a course of study and had a diploma from the General Film
Production Company of Stebbinsville, Arkansas, certifying him to be
a competent screen actor. And of course he would not at first expect
a big part. He would be glad to take a small part to begin with--
almost any small part until he could familiarize himself with studio
conditions. And here was a bunch of stills that would give any one
an idea of the range of parts he was prepared to play, society parts
in a full-dress suit, or soldier parts in a trench coat and
lieutenant's cap, or juveniles in the natty suit with the belted
coat, and in the storm-king model belted overcoat. And of course
Western stuff--these would give an idea of what he could do--cowboy
outfit and all that sort of thing, chaps and spurs and guns and so
forth. And he was prepared to work hard and struggle and sacrifice
in order to give the public something better and finer, and would it
be possible to secure some small part at once? Was a good all-round
actor by any chance at that moment needed in the company of Miss
Beulah Baxter, because he would especially like such a part, and he
would be ready to start to work at any time--to-morrow, or even to-
day.

The tired little woman beyond the opening listened patiently to
this, interrupting several times to say over an insistent telephone,
"No, nothing to-day, dear." She looked at the stills with evident
interest and curiously studied the face of the speaker as she
listened. She smiled wearily when he was through and spoke briskly.

"Now, I'll tell you, son; all that is very nice, but you haven't had
a lick of real experience yet, have you?--and things are pretty
quiet on the lot just now. To-day there are only two companies
shooting. So you couldn't get anything to-day or to-morrow or
probably for a good many days after that, and it won't be much when
you get it. You may get on as an extra after a while when some of
the other companies start shooting, but I can't promise anything,
you understand. What you do now--leave me your name and address and
telephone number."

"Yes, ma'am," said the applicant, and supplied these data.

"Clifford Armytage!" exclaimed the woman. "I'll say that's some warm
name!"

"Well, you see"--he paused, but resolved to confide freely in this
friendly seeming person--"you see, I picked that out for a good name
to act under. It sounds good, doesn't it? And my own right name is
only Merton Gill, so I thought I'd better have something that
sounded a little more--well, you know."

"Sure!" said the woman. "All right, have any name you want; but I
think I'll call you Merton when you come again. You needn't act with
me, you know. Now, let's see--name, age, height, good general
wardrobe, house address, telephone number--oh, yes, tell me where I
can find you during the day."

"Right out here," he replied firmly. "I'm going to stick to this
studio and not go near any of the others. If I'm not in this room
I'll be just outside there, on that bench around the tree, or just
across the street where you can see through the gate and watch the
people go through."

"Say!" Again the woman searched his face and broke into her friendly
smile. "Say, you're a real nut, aren't you? How'd you ever get this
way?"

And again he was talking, telling now of his past and his struggles
to educate himself as a screen actor--one of the best. He spoke of
Simsbury and Gashwiler and of Lowell Hardy who took his stills, and
of Tessie Kearns, whose sympathy and advice had done so much to
encourage him. The woman was joyously attentive. Now she did more
than smile. She laughed at intervals throughout the narrative,
though her laughter seemed entirely sympathetic and in no way
daunted the speaker.

"Well, Merton, you're a funny one--I'll say that. You're so kind of
ignorant and appealing. And you say this Bughalter or Gigwater or
whatever his name is will take you back into the store any time?
Well, that's a good thing to remember, because the picture game is a
hard game. I wouldn't discourage a nice clean boy like you for the
world, but there are a lot of people in pictures right now that
would prefer a steady job like that one you left."

"It's Gashwiler--that name."

"Oh, all right, just so you don't forget it and forget the address."

The new applicant warmly reassured her.

"I wouldn't be likely to forget that, after living there all those
years."

When he left the window the woman was again saying into the
telephone, "No, dear, nothing to-day. I'm sorry."

It was that night he wrote to Tessie Kearns:

Dear Friend Tessie:

Well, Tessie, here I am safe and sound in Hollywood after a long
ride on the cars that went through many strange and interesting
cities and different parts of the country, and I guess by this time
you must have thought I was forgetting my old friends back in
Simsbury; but not so, I can assure you, for I will never forget our
long talks together and how you cheered me up often when the
sacrifice and struggle seemed more than any man could bear. But now
I feel repaid for all that sacrifice and struggle, for I am here
where the pictures are made, and soon I will be acting different
parts in them, though things are quiet on the lot now with only two
companies shooting to-day; but more companies will be shooting in a
few days more and then will come the great opportunity for me as
soon as I get known, and my different capabilities, and what I can
do and everything.

I had a long talk to-day with the lady out in front that hires the
actors, and she was very friendly, but said it might be quite some
time, because only two companies on the lot were shooting to-day,
and she said if Gashwiler had promised to keep my old job for me to
be sure and not forget his address, and it was laughable that she
should say such a thing, because I would not be liable to forget his
address when I lived there so long. She must have thought I was very
forgetful, to forget that address.

There is some great scenery around this place, including many of the
Rocky Mtns. etc. that make it look beautiful, and the city of Los
Angeles is bigger than Peoria. I am quite some distance out of the
centre of town, and I have a nice furnished room about a mile from
the Holden studios, where I will be hired after a few more companies
get to shooting on the lot. There is an electric iron in the kitchen
where one can press their clothes. And my furnished room is in the
house of a Los Angeles society woman and her husband who came here
from Iowa. Their little house with flowers in front of it is called
a bungalow. The husband, Mr. Patterson, had a farm in Iowa, six
miles out from Cedar Falls, and he cares little for society; but the
wife goes into society all the time, as there is hardly a day just
now that some society does not have its picnic, and one day it will
be the Kansas Society picnic and the next day it will be the
Michigan Society having a picnic, or some other state, and of course
the Iowa Society that has the biggest picnic of all, and Mr.
Patterson says his wife can go to all these society functions if she
wants, but he does not care much for society, and he is thinking of
buying a half interest in a good soft-drink place just to pass the
time away, as he says after the busy life he has led he needs
something to keep him busy, but his wife thinks only of society.

I take my meals out at different places, especially at drug stores.
I guess you would be surprised to see these drug stores where you
can go in and sit at the soda counter and order your coffee and
sandwiches and custard pie and eat them right there in the drug
store, but there are other places, too, like cafeterias, where you
put your dishes on a tray and carry it to your own table. It is all
quite different from Simsbury, and I have seen oranges growing on
the trees, and there are palm trees, and it does not snow here; but
the grass is green and the flowers bloom right through the winter,
which makes it very attractive with the Rocky Mtns. standing up in
the distance, etc.

Well, Tessie, you must excuse this long letter from your old friend,
and write me if any company has accepted Passion's Perils and I
might have a chance to act in that some day, and I will let you know
when my first picture is released and the title of it so you can
watch out for it when it comes to the Bijou Palace. I often think of
the old town, and would like to have a chat with you and my other
old friends, but I am not homesick, only sometimes I would like to
be back there, as there are not many people to chat with here and
one would almost be lonesome sometimes if they could not be at the
studio. But I must remember that work and struggle and sacrifice are
necessary to give the public something better and finer and become a
good screen actor. So no more at present, from your old friend, and
address Clifford Armytage at above number, as I am going by my stage
name, though the lady at the Holden lot said she liked my old name
better and called me that, and it sounded pretty good, as I have not
got used to the stage name yet.

He felt better after this chat with his old friend, and the
following morning he pressed a suit in the Patterson kitchen and
resumed his vigil outside the gate. But now from time to time, at
least twice a day, he could break the monotony of this by a call at
the little window.

Sometimes the woman beyond it would be engrossed with the telephone
and would merely look at him to shake her head. At others, the
telephone being still, she would engage him in friendly talk. She
seemed to like him as an occasional caller, but she remained
smilingly skeptical about his immediate success in the pictures.
Again and again she urged him not to forget the address of
Giggenholder or Gooshswamp or whoever it might be that was holding a
good job for him. He never failed to remind her that the name was
Gashwiler, and that he could not possibly forget the address because
he had lived at Simsbury a long time. This always seemed to brighten
the woman's day. It puzzled him to note that for some reason his
earnest assurance pleased her.

As the days of waiting passed he began to distinguish individuals
among the people who went through the little outer room or sat
patiently around its walls on the hard bench, waiting like himself
for more companies to start shooting. Among the important-looking
men that passed through would be actors that were now reaping the
reward of their struggle and sacrifice; actors whom he thrilled to
recognize as old screen friends. These would saunter in with an air
of fine leisure, and their manner of careless but elegant dress
would be keenly noted by Merton. Then there were directors. These
were often less scrupulously attired and seemed always to be solving
knotty problems. They passed hurriedly on, brows drawn in
perplexity. They were very busy persons. Those on the bench regarded
them with deep respect and stiffened to attention as they passed,
but they were never observed by these great ones.

The waiting ones were of all ages; mostly women, with but a
sprinkling of men. Many of the women were young or youngish, and of
rare beauty, so Merton Gill thought. Others were elderly or old, and
a few would be accompanied by children, often so young that they
must be held on laps. They, too, waited with round eyes and in
perfect decorum for a chance to act. Sometimes the little window
would be pushed open and a woman beckoned from the bench. Some of
them greeted the casting director as an old friend and were still
gay when told that there was nothing to-day. Others seemed to dread
being told this, and would wait on without daring an inquiry.
Sometimes there would be a little flurry of actual business. Four
society women would be needed for a bridge table at 8:30 the next
morning on Stage Number Five. The casting director seemed to know
the wardrobe of each of the waiters, and would select the four
quickly. The gowns must be smart--it was at the country house of a
rich New Yorker--and jewels and furs were not to be forgotten. There
might be two days' work. The four fortunate ladies would depart with
cheerful smiles. The remaining waiters settled on the bench, hoping
against hope for another call.

Among the waiting-room hopefuls Merton had come to know by sight the
Montague family. This consisted of a handsome elderly gentleman of
most impressive manner, his wife, a portly woman of middle age, also
possessing an impressive manner, and a daughter. Mr. Montague always
removed his hat in the waiting room, uncovering an abundant cluster
of iron-gray curls above a noble brow. About him there seemed ever
to linger a faint spicy aroma of strong drink, and he would talk
freely to those sharing the bench with him. His voice was full and
rich in tone, and his speech, deliberate and precise, more than
hinted that he had once been an ornament of the speaking stage. His
wife, also, was friendly of manner, and spoke in a deep contralto
somewhat roughened by wear but still notable.

The daughter Merton did not like. She was not unattractive in
appearance, though her features were far off the screen-heroine
model, her nose being too short, her mouth too large, her cheekbones
too prominent, and her chin too square. Indeed, she resembled too
closely her father, who, as a man, could carry such things more
becomingly. She was a slangy chit, much too free and easy in her
ways, Merton considered, and revealing a self-confidence that
amounted almost to impudence. Further, her cheeks were brown, her
brief nose freckled, and she did not take the pains with her face
that most of the beautiful young women who waited there had so
obviously taken. She was a harum-scarum baggage with no proper
respect for any one, he decided, especially after the day she had so
rudely accosted one of the passing directors. He was a more than
usually absorbed director, and with drawn brows would have gone
unseeing through the waiting room when the girl hailed him.

"Oh, Mr. Henshaw, one moment please!"

He glanced up in some annoyance, pausing with his hand to the door
that led on to his proper realm.

"Oh, it's you, Miss Montague! Well, what is it? I'm very, very
busy."

"Well, it's something I wanted to ask you." She quickly crossed the
room to stand by him, tenderly flecking a bit of dust from his coat
sleeve as she began, "Say, listen, Mr. Henshaw: Do you think beauty
is a curse to a poor girl?"

Mr. Henshaw scowled down into the eyes so confidingly lifted to his.

"That's something you won't ever have to worry about," he snapped,
and was gone, his brows again drawn in perplexity over his work.

"You're not angry with poor little me, are you, Mr. Henshaw?"

The girl called this after him and listened, but no reply came from
back of the partition.

Mrs. Montague, from the bench, rebuked her daughter.

"Say, what do you think that kidding stuff will get you? Don't you
want to work for him any more?"

The girl turned pleading eyes upon her mother.

"I think he might have answered a simple question," said she.

This was all distasteful to Merton Gill. The girl might, indeed,
have deserved an answer to her simple question, but why need she ask
it of so busy a man? He felt that Mr. Henshaw's rebuke was well
merited, for her own beauty was surely not excessive.

Her father, from the bench, likewise admonished her.

"You are sadly prone to a spirit of banter," he declared, "though I
admit that the so-called art of the motion picture is not to be
regarded too seriously. It was not like that in my day. Then an
actor had to be an artist; there was no position for the little he-
doll whippersnapper who draws the big money to-day and is ignorant
of even the rudiments of the actor's profession."

He allowed his glance to rest perceptibly upon Merton Gill, who felt
uncomfortable.

"We were with Looey James five years," confided Mrs. Montague to her
neighbours. "A hall show, of course--hadn't heard of movies then--
doing Virginius and Julius Csesar and such classics, and then
starting out with The Two Orphans for a short season. We were a
knock-out, I'll say that. I'll never forget the night we opened the
new opera house at Akron. They had to put the orchestra under the
stage."

"And the so-called art of the moving picture robs us of our little
meed of applause," broke in her husband. "I shall never forget a
remark of the late Lawrence Barrett to me after a performance of
Richelieu in which he had fairly outdone himself. 'Montague, my
lad,' said he 'we may work for the money, but we play for the
applause.' But now our finest bits must go in silence, or perhaps be
interrupted by a so-called director who arrogates to himself the
right to instill into us the rudiments of a profession in which we
had grounded ourselves ere yet he was out of leading strings. Too
often, naturally, the results are discouraging."

The unabashed girl was meantime having sprightly talk with the
casting director, whom she had hailed through the window as
Countess. Merton, somewhat startled, wondered if the little woman
could indeed be of the nobility.

"Hello, Countess! Say, listen, can you give the camera a little peek
at me to-day, or at pa or ma? 'No, nothing to-day, dear.'" She had
imitated the little woman's voice in her accustomed reply. "Well, I
didn't think there would be. I just thought I'd ask. You ain't mad,
are you? I could have gone on in a harem tank scene over at the
Bigart place, but they wanted me to dress the same as a fish, and a
young girl's got to draw the line somewhere. Besides, I don't like
that Hugo over there so much. He hates to part with anything like
money, and he'll gyp you if he can. Say, I'll bet he couldn't play
an honest game of solitaire. How'd you like my hair this way? Like
it, eh? That's good. And me having the only freckles left in all
Hollywood. Ain't I the little prairie flower, growing wilder every
hour?

"Say, on the level, pa needs work. These days when he's idle he
mostly sticks home and tries out new ways to make prime old Kentucky
sour mash in eight hours. If he don't quit he is going to find
himself seeing some moving pictures that no one else can. And he's
all worried up about his hair going off on top, and trying new hair
restorers. You know his latest? Well, he goes over to the Selig
place one day and watches horse meat fed to the lions and says to
himself that horses have plenty of hair, and it must be the fat
under the skin that makes it grow, so he begs for a hunk of horse
from just under the mane and he's rubbing that on. You can't tell
what he'll bring home next. The old boy still believes you can raise
hair from the dead. Do you want some new stills of me? I got a new
one yesterday that shows my other expression. Well, so long,
Countess."

The creature turned to her parents.

"Let's be on our way, old dears. This place is dead, but the
Countess says they'll soon be shooting some tenement-house stuff up
at the Consolidated. Maybe there'll be something in it for someone.
We might as well have a look-in."

Merton felt relieved when the Montague family went out, the girl in
the lead. He approved of the fine old father, but the daughter
lacked dignity in speech and manner. You couldn't tell what she
might say next.

The Montagues were often there, sometimes in full, sometimes
represented by but one of their number. Once Mrs. Montague was told
to be on Stage Six the next morning at 8:30 to attend a swell
reception.

"Wear the gray georgette, dearie," said the casting director, "and
your big pearls and the lorgnon."

"Not forgetting the gold cigarette case and the chinchilla neck
piece," said Mrs. Montague. "The spare parts will all be there,
Countess, and thanks for the word."

The elder Montague on the occasion of his calls often found time to
regale those present with anecdotes of Lawrence Barrett.

"A fine artist in his day, sir; none finer ever appeared in a hall
show."

And always about his once superb frock coat clung the scent of
forbidden beverages. On one such day he appeared with an untidy
sprouting of beard, accompanied by the talkative daughter.

"Pa's landed a part," she explained through the little window. "It's
one of those we-uns mountaineer plays with revenooers and feuds; one
of those plays where the city chap don't treat our Nell right--you
know. And they won't stand for the crepe hair, so pop has got to
raise a brush and he's mad. But it ought to give him a month or so,
and after that he may be able to peddle the brush again; you can
never tell in this business, can you, Countess?"

"It's most annoying," the old gentleman explained to the bench
occupants. "In the true art of the speaking stage an artificial
beard was considered above reproach. Nowadays one must descend to
mere physical means if one is to be thought worthy."


CHAPTER V

A BREACH IN THE CITY WALLS


During these weeks of waiting outside the gate the little woman
beyond the window had continued to be friendly but not encouraging
to the aspirant for screen honours late of Simsbury, Illinois. For
three weeks had he waited faithfully, always within call, struggling
and sacrificing to give the public something better and finer, and
not once had he so much as crossed the line that led to his goal.

Then on a Monday morning he found the waiting-room empty and his
friend beyond the window suffering the pangs of headache. "It gets
me something fierce right through here," she confided to him,
placing her finger-tips to her temples.

"Ever use Eezo Pain Wafers?" he demanded in quick sympathy. She
looked at him hopefully.

"Never heard of 'em."

"Let me get you some."

"You dear thing, fly to it!"

He was gone while she reached for her purse, hurrying along the
eucalyptus-lined street of choice home sites to the nearest drug
store. He was fearing someone else might bring the little woman
another remedy; even that her headache might go before he returned
with his. But he found her still suffering.

"Here they are." He was breathless. "You take a couple now and a
couple more in half an hour if the ache hasn't stopped." "Bless your
heart! Come around inside." He was through the door and in the dimly
lit little office behind that secretive partition. "And here's
something else," he continued. "It's a menthol pencil and you take
this cap off--see?--and rub your forehead with it. It'll be a help."
She swallowed two of the magic wafers with the aid of water from the
cooler, and applied the menthol.

"You're a dear," she said, patting his sleeve. "I feel better
already. Sometimes these things come on me and stay all day." She
was still applying the menthol to throbbing temples. "Say, don't you
get tired hanging around outside there? How'd you like to go in and
look around the lot? Would you like that?"

Would he! "Thanks!" He managed it without choking, "If I wouldn't be
in the way."

"You won't. Go on--amuse yourself." The telephone rang. Still
applying the menthol she held the receiver to her ear. "No, nothing
to-day, dear. Say, Marie, did you ever take Eezo Pain Wafers for a
headache? Keep 'em in mind--they're great. Yes, I'll let you know if
anything breaks. Goo'-by, dear."

Merton Gill hurried through a narrow corridor past offices where
typewriters clicked and burst from gloom into the dazzling light of
the Holden lot. He paused on the steps to reassure himself that the
great adventure was genuine. There was the full stretch of
greensward of which only an edge had shown as he looked through the
gate. There were the vast yellow-brick, glass-topped structures of
which he had seen but the ends. And there was the street up which he
had looked for so many weeks, flanked by rows of offices and
dressing rooms, and lively with the passing of many people. He drew
a long breath and became calculating. He must see everything and see
it methodically. He even went now along the asphalt walk to the
corner of the office building from which he had issued for the
privilege of looking back at the gate through which he had so often
yearningly stared from across the street.

Now he was securely inside looking out. The watchman sat at the
gate, bent low over his paper. There was, it seemed, more than one
way to get by him. People might have headaches almost any time. He
wondered if his friend the casting director were subject to them. He
must carry a box of the Eezo wafers.

He strolled down the street between the rows of offices and the
immense covered stages. Actors in costume entered two of these and
through their open doors he could see into their shadowy interiors.
He would venture there later. Just now he wished to see the outside
of things. He contrived a pace not too swift but business-like
enough to convey the impression that he was rightfully walking this
forbidden street. He seemed to be going some place where it was of
the utmost importance that he should be, and yet to have started so
early that there was no need for haste.

He sounded the far end of that long street visible from outside the
gate, discovering its excitements to wane gently into mere
blacksmith and carpenter shops. He retraced his steps, this time
ignoring the long row of offices for the opposite line of stages.
From one dark interior came the slow, dulled strains of an orchestra
and from another shots rang out. He met or passed strangely attired
people, bandits, priests, choir boys, gentlemen in evening dress
with blue-black eyebrows and careful hair. And he observed many
beautiful young women, variously attired, hurrying to or from the
stages. One lovely thing was in bridal dress of dazzling white, a
veil of lace floating from her blonde head, her long train held up
by a coloured maid. She chatted amiably, as she crossed the street,
with an evil-looking Mexican in a silver-corded hat--a veritable
Snake de Vasquez.

But the stages could wait. He must see more streets. Again reaching
the office that had been his secret gateway to these delights, he
turned to the right, still with the air of having business at a
certain spot to which there was really no need for him to hurry.
There were fewer people this way, and presently, as if by magic
carpet, he had left all that sunlight and glitter and cheerful noise
and stood alone in the shadowy, narrow street of a frontier town.
There was no bustle here, only an intense stillness. The street was
deserted, the shop doors closed. There was a ghostlike, chilling
effect that left him uneasy. He called upon himself to remember that
he was not actually in a remote and desolate frontier town from
which the inhabitants had fled; that back of him but a few steps was
abounding life, that outside was the prosaic world passing and
repassing a gate hard to enter. He whistled the fragment of a tune
and went farther along this street of uncanny silence and vacancy,
noting, as he went, the signs on the shop windows. There was the
Busy Bee Restaurant, Jim's Place, the Hotel Renown, the Last Dollar
Dance Hall, Hank's Pool Room. Upon one window was painted the terse
announcement, "Joe--Buy or Sell." The Happy Days Bar adjoined the
General Store.

He moved rapidly through this street. It was no place to linger. At
the lower end it gave insanely upon a row of three-story brownstone
houses which any picture patron would recognize as being wholly of
New York. There were the imposing steps, the double-doored
entrances, the broad windows, the massive lines of the whole. And
beyond this he came to a many-coloured little street out of Bagdad,
overhung with gay balconies, vivacious with spindled towers and
minarets, and small reticent windows, out of which veiled ladies
would glance. And all was still with the stillness of utter
desertion.

Then he explored farther and felt curiously disappointed at finding
that these structures were to real houses what a dicky is to a
sincere, genuine shirt. They were pretentiously false.

One had but to step behind them to discover them as poor shells.

Their backs were jutting beams carried but little beyond the fronts
and their stout-appearing walls were revealed to be fragile
contrivances of button-lath and thin plaster. The ghost quality
departed from them with this discovery.

He left these cities of silence and came upon an open space and
people. They were grouped before a railway station, a small red
structure beside a line of railway track. At one end in black
letters, on a narrow white board, was the name Boomerville.

The people were plainly Western: a dozen cowboys, a sprinkling of
bluff ranchers and their families. An absorbed young man in cap and
khaki and puttees came from a distant group surrounding a camera and
readjusted the line of these people. He placed them to his liking. A
wagon drawn by two horses was driven up and a rancher helped a woman
and girl to alight. The girl was at once sought out by the cowboys.
They shook hands warmly under megaphoned directions from a man back
by the camera. The rancher and his wife mingled with the group. The
girl was drawn aside by one of the cowboys. He had a nobler presence
than the others; he was handsome and his accoutrements seemed more
expensive. They looked into each other's eyes a long time,
apparently pledging an eternal fidelity. One gathered that there
would have been an embrace but for the cowboy's watchful companions.
They must say good-by with a mere handshake, though this was a slow,
trembling, long-drawn clasp while they steadily regarded each other,
and a second camera was brought to record it at a distance of six
feet. Merton Gill thrilled with the knowledge that he was beholding
his first close-up. His long study of the photo-drama enabled him to
divine that the rancher's daughter was going to Vassar College to be
educated, but that, although returning a year later a poised woman
of the world, she would still long for the handsome cowboy who would
marry her and run the Bar-X ranch. The scene was done. The camera
would next be turned upon a real train at some real station, while
the girl, with a final look at her lover, entered a real car, which
the camera would show moving off to Vassar College. Thus conveying
to millions of delighted spectators the impression that a real train
had steamed out of the station, which was merely an imitation of
one, on the Holden lot. The watcher passed on. He could hear the
cheerful drone of a sawmill where logs were being cut. He followed
the sound and came to its source. The saw was at the end of an
oblong pool in which logs floated. Workmen were poling these toward
the saw. On a raised platform at one side was a camera and a man who
gave directions through a megaphone; a neighbouring platform held a
second camera. A beautiful young girl in a print dress and her thick
hair in a braid came bringing Ms dinner in a tin pail to the
handsomest of the actors. He laid down his pike-pole and took both
the girl's hands in his as he received the pail. One of the other
workmen, a hulking brute with an evil face, scowled darkly at this
encounter and a moment later had insulted the beautiful young girl.
But the first actor felled him with a blow. He came up from this,
crouchingly, and the fight was on. Merton was excited by this fight,
even though he was in no doubt as to which actor would win it. They
fought hard, and for a time it appeared that the handsome actor must
lose, for the bully who had insulted the girl was a man of great
strength, but the science of the other told. It was the first fight
Merton had ever witnessed. He thought these men must really be
hating each other, so bitter were their expressions. The battle grew
fiercer. It was splendid. Then, at the shrill note of a whistle, the
panting combatants fell apart.

"Rotten!" said an annoyed voice through the megaphone. "Can't you
boys give me a little action? Jazz it, jazz it! Think it's a love
scene? Go to it, now--plenty of jazz--understand what I mean?" He
turned to the camera man beside him. "Ed, you turn ten--we got to
get some speed some way. Jack"--to the other camera man--"you stay
on twelve. All ready! Get some life into it, now, and Lafe"--this to
the handsome actor--"don't keep trying to hold your front to the
machine. We'll get you all right. Ready, now. Camera!"

Again the fight was on. It went to a bitter finish in which the
vanquished bully was sent with a powerful blow backward into the
water, while the beautiful young girl ran to the victor and nestled
in the protection of his strong arms.

Merton Gill passed on. This was the real thing. He would have a lot
to tell Tessie Kearns in his next letter. Beyond the sawmill he came
to an immense wooden structure like a cradle on huge rockers
supported by scaffolding. From the ground he could make nothing of
it, but a ladder led to the top. An hour on the Holden lot had made
him bold. He mounted the ladder and stood on the deck of what he saw
was a sea-going yacht. Three important-looking men were surveying
the deckhouse forward. They glanced at the newcomer but with a
cheering absence of curiosity or even of interest. He sauntered past
them with a polite but not-too-keen interest. The yacht would be an
expensive one. The deck fittings were elaborate. A glance into the
captain's cabin revealed it to be fully furnished, with a chart and
a sextant on the mahogany desk.

"Where's the bedding for this stateroom?" asked one of the men.

"I got a prop-rustler after it," one of the others informed him.

They strolled aft and paused by an iron standard ingeniously swung
from the deck.

"That's Burke's idea," said one of the men. "I hadn't thought about
a steady support for the camera; of course if we stood it on deck it
would rock when the ship rocked and we'd get no motion. So Burke
figures this out. The camera is on here and swings by that weight so
it's always straight and the rocking registers. Pretty neat, what?"

"That was nothing to think of" said one of the other men, in
apparent disparagement. "I thought of it myself the minute I saw
it." The other two grinned at this, though Merton Gill, standing by,
saw nothing to laugh at. He thought the speaker was pretty cheeky;
for of course any one could think of this device after seeing it. He
paused for a final survey of his surroundings from this elevation.
He could see the real falseness of the sawmill he had just left, he
could also look into the exposed rear of the railway station, and
could observe beyond it the exposed skeleton of that New York
street. He was surrounded by mockeries.

He clambered down the ladder and sauntered back to the street of
offices. He was by this time confident that no one was going to ask
him what right he had in there. Now, too, he became conscious of
hunger and at the same moment caught the sign "Cafeteria" over a
neat building hitherto unnoticed. People were entering this, many of
them in costume. He went idly toward the door, glanced up, looked at
his watch, and became, to any one curious about him, a man who had
that moment decided he might as well have a little food. He opened
the screen door of the cafeteria, half expecting it to prove one of
those structures equipped only with a front. But the cafeteria was
practicable. The floor was crowded with little square polished
tables at which many people were eating. A railing along the side of
the room made a passage to the back where food was served from a
counter to the proffered tray. He fell into line. No one had asked
him how he dared try to eat with real actors and actresses and
apparently no one was going to. Toward the end of the passage was a
table holding trays and napkins the latter wrapped about an
equipment of cutlery. He took his tray and received at the counter
the foods he designated. He went through this ordeal with difficulty
because it was not easy to keep from staring about at other patrons.
Constantly he was detecting some remembered face. But at last, with
his laden tray he reached a vacant table near the centre of the room
and took his seat. He absently arranged the food before him. He
could stare at leisure now. All about him were the strongly marked
faces of the film people, heavy with makeup, interspersed with
hungry civilians, who might be producers, directors, camera men, or
mere artisans, for the democracy of the cafeteria seemed ideal.

At the table ahead of his he recognized the man who had been annoyed
one day by the silly question of the Montague girl. They had said he
was a very important director. He still looked important and
intensely serious. He was a short, very plump man, with pale cheeks
under dark brows, and troubled looking gray hair. He was very
seriously explaining something to the man who sat with him and whom
he addressed as Governor, a merry-looking person with a stubby gray
mustache and little hair, who seemed not too attentive to the
director.

"You see, Governor, it's this way: the party is lost on the desert--
understand what I mean--and Kempton Ward and the girl stumble into
this deserted tomb just at nightfall. Now here's where the big kick
comes--"

Merton Gill ceased to listen for there now halted at his table,
bearing a laden tray, none other than the Montague girl, she of the
slangy talk and the regrettably free manner. She put down her tray
and seated herself before it. She had not asked permission of the
table's other occupant, indeed she had not even glanced at him, for
cafeteria etiquette is not rigorous. He saw that she was heavily
made up and in the costume of a gypsy, he thought, a short vivid
skirt, a gay waist, heavy gold hoops in her ears, and dark hair
massed about her small head. He remembered that this would not be
her own hair. She fell at once to her food. The men at the next
table glanced at her, the director without cordiality; but the other
man smiled upon her cheerfully.

"Hello, Flips! How's the girl?"

"Everything's jake with me, Governor. How's things over at your
shop?"

"So, so. I see you're working."

"Only for two days. I'm just atmosphere in this piece. I got some
real stuff coming along pretty soon for Baxter. Got to climb down
ten stories of a hotel elevator cable, and ride a brake-beam and be
pushed off a cliff and thrown to the lions, and a few other little
things."

"That's good, Flips. Come in and see me some time. Have a little
chat. Ma working?"

"Yeah--got a character bit with Charlotte King in Her Other
Husband." "Glad to hear it. How's Pa Montague?"

"Pa's in bed. They've signed him for Camillia of the Cumberlands,
providing he raises a brush, and just now it ain't long enough for
whiskers and too long for anything else, so he's putterin' around
with his new still."

"Well, drop over sometime, Flips, I'm keeping you in mind."

"Thanks, Governor. Say--" Merton glanced up in time to see her wink
broadly at the man, and look toward his companion who still
seriously made notes on the back of an envelope. The man's face
melted to a grin which he quickly erased. The girl began again:

"Mr. Henshaw--could you give me just a moment, Mr. Henshaw?" The
serious director looked up in quite frank annoyance.

"Yes, yes, what is it, Miss Montague?"

"Well, listen, Mr. Henshaw, I got a great idea for a story, and I
was thinking who to take it to and I thought of this one and I
thought of that one, and I asked my friends, and they all say take
it to Mr. Henshaw, because if a story has any merit he's the one
director on the lot that can detect it and get every bit of value
out of it, so I thought--but of course if you're busy just now--"

The director thawed ever so slightly. "Of course, my girl, I'm busy-
-but then I'm always busy. They run me to death here. Still, it was
very kind of your friends, and of course--"

"Thank you, Mr. Henshaw." She clasped her hands to her breast and
gazed raptly into the face of her coy listener.

"Of course I'll have to have help on the details, but it starts off
kind of like this. You see I'm a Hawaiian princess--" She paused,
gazing aloft.

"Yes, yes, Miss Montague--an Hawaiian princess. Go on, go on!"

"Oh, excuse me; I was thinking how I'd dress her for the last spool
in the big fire scene. Well, anyway, I'm this Hawaiian princess, and
my father, old King Mauna Loa, dies and leaves me twenty-one
thousand volcanoes and a billiard cue--"

Mr. Henshaw blinked rapidly at this. For a moment he was dazed. "A
billiard cue, did you say?" he demanded blankly.

"Yes. And every morning I have to go out and ram it down the
volcanoes to see are they all right--and--"

"Tush, tush!" interrupted Mr. Henshaw scowling upon the playwright
and fell again to his envelope, pretending thereafter to ignore her.

The girl seemed to be unaware that she had lost his attention. "And
you see the villain is very wealthy; he owns the largest ukelele
factory in the islands, and he tries to get me in his power, but
he's foiled by my fiance, a young native by the name of Herman
Schwarz, who has invented a folding ukelele, so the villain gets his
hired Hawaiian orchestra to shove Herman down one of the volcanoes
and me down another, but I have the key around my neck, which Father
put there when I was a babe and made me swear always to wear it,
even in the bath-tub, so I let myself out and unlock the other one
and let Herman out and the orchestra discovers us and chases us over
the cliff, and then along comes my old nurse who is now running a
cigar store in San Pedro and she--" Here she affected to discover
that Mr. Henshaw no longer listened.

"Why, Mr. Henshaw's gone!" she exclaimed dramatically. "Boy, boy,
page Mr. Henshaw." Mr. Henshaw remained oblivious.

"Oh, well, of course I might have expected you wouldn't have time to
listen to my poor little plot. Of course I know it's crude, but it
did seem to me that something might be made out of it." She resumed
her food. Mr. Henshaw's companion here winked at her and was seen to
be shaking with emotion. Merton Gill could not believe it to be
laughter, for he had seen nothing to laugh at. A busy man had been
bothered by a silly girl who thought she had the plot for a
photodrama, and even he, Merton Gill, could have told her that her
plot was impossibly wild and inconsequent. If she were going into
that branch of the art she ought to take lessons, the way Tessie
Kearns did. She now looked so mournful that he was almost moved to
tell her this, but her eyes caught his at that moment and in them
was a light so curious, so alive with hidden meanings, so eloquent
of some iron restraint she put upon her own emotions, that he became
confused and turned his gaze from hers almost with the rebuking
glare of Henshaw. She glanced quickly at him again, studying his
face for the first time. There had been such a queer look in this
young man's eyes; she understood most looks, but not that one.

Henshaw was treating the late interruption as if it had not been.
"You see, Governor, the way we got the script now, they're in this
tomb alone for the night--understand what I mean--and that's where
the kick comes for the audience. They know he's a strong young
fellow and she's a beautiful girl and absolutely in his power--see
what I mean?--but he's a gentleman through and through and never
lays a hand on her. Get that? Then later along comes this Ben Ali
Ahab--"

The Montague girl glanced again at the face of the strange young man
whose eyes had held a new expression for her, but she and Mr.
Henshaw and the so-called governor and all those other diners who
rattled thick crockery and talked unendingly had ceased to exist for
Merton Gill. A dozen tables down the room and nearer the door sat
none other than Beulah Baxter. Alone at her table, she gazed raptly
aloft, meditating perhaps some daring new feat. Merton Gill stared,
entranced, frozen. The Montague girl perfectly understood this look
and traced it to its object. Then she surveyed Merton Gill again
with something faintly like pity in her shrewd eyes. He was still
staring, still rapt.

Beulah Baxter ceased to look aloft. She daintily reached for a
wooden toothpick from the bowl before her and arose to pay her check
at the near-by counter. Merton Gill arose at the same moment and
stumbled a blind way through the intervening tables. When he reached
the counter Miss Baxter was passing through the door. He was about
to follow her when a cool but cynical voice from the counter said,
"Hey, Bill--ain't you fergittin' somepin'."

He looked for the check for his meal; it should have been in one
hand or the other. But it was in neither. He must have left it back
on his tray. Now he must return for it. He went as quickly as he
could. The Montague girl was holding it up as he approached. "Here's
the little joker, Kid," she said kindly.

"Thanks!" said Merton. He said it haughtily, not meaning to be
haughty, but he was embarrassed and also fearful that Beulah Baxter
would be lost. "Exit limping," murmured the girl as he turned away.
He hurried again to the door, paid the check and was outside. Miss
Baxter was not to be seen. His forgetfulness about the check had
lost her to him. He had meant to follow, to find the place where she
was working, and look and look and look! Now he had lost her. But
she might be on one of those stages within the big barns. Perhaps
the day was not yet lost. He crossed the street, forgetting to
saunter, and ventured within the cavernous gloom beyond an open
door. He stood for a moment, his vision dulled by the dusk.
Presently he saw that he faced a wall of canvas backing. Beyond this
were low voices and the sound of people moving. He went forward to a
break in the canvas wall and at the same moment there was a metallic
jar and light flooded the enclosure. From somewhere outside came
music, principally the low, leisurely moan of a 'cello. A beautiful
woman in evening dress was with suppressed emotion kneeling at the
bedside of a sleeping child. At the doorway stood a dark, handsome
gentleman in evening dress, regarding her with a cynical smile. The
woman seemed to bid the child farewell, and arose with hands to her
breast and quivering lips. The still-smiling gentleman awaited her.
When she came to him, glancing backward to the sleeping child, he
threw about her an elaborate fur cloak and drew her to him, his
cynical smile changing to one of deceitful tenderness. The woman
still glanced back at the child, but permitted herself to be drawn
through the doorway by the insistent gentleman. From a door the
other side of the bed came a kind-faced nurse. She looked first at
the little one then advanced to stare after the departing couple.
She raised her hands tragically and her face became set in a mask of
sorrow and despair. She clasped the hands desperately.

Merton Gill saw his nurse to be the Montague mother. "All right,"
said an authoritative voice. Mrs. Montague relaxed her features and
withdrew, while an unkempt youth came to stand in front of the
still-grinding camera and held before it a placard on which were
numbers. The camera stopped, the youth with the placard vanished.
"Save it," called another voice, and with another metallic jar the
flood of light was turned off. The 'cello ceased its moan in the
middle of a bar.

The watcher recalled some of the girl's chat. Her mother had a
character bit in Her Other Husband. This would be it, one of those
moving tragedies not unfamiliar to the screen enthusiast. The
beautiful but misguided wife had been saying good-by to her little
one and was leaving her beautiful home at the solicitation of the
false friend in evening dress--forgetting all in one mad moment. The
watcher was a tried expert, and like the trained faunal naturalist
could determine a species from the shrewd examination of one bone of
a photoplay. He knew that the wife had been ignored by a husband who
permitted his vast business interests to engross his whole
attention, leaving the wife to seek solace in questionable quarters.
He knew that the shocked but faithful nurse would presently discover
the little one to be suffering from a dangerous fever; that a
hastily summoned physician would shake his head and declare in
legible words, "Naught but a mother's love can win that tiny soul
back from the brink of Eternity." The father would overhear this,
and would see it all then: how his selfish absorption in Wall Street
had driven his wife to another. He would pursue her, would find her
ere yet it was too late. He would discover that her better nature
had already prevailed and that she had started back without being
sent for. They would kneel side by side, hand in hand, at the
bedside of the little one, who would recover and smile and prattle,
and together they would face an untroubled future.

This was all thrilling to Merton Gill; but Beulah Baxter was not
here, her plays being clean and wholesome things of the great
outdoors. Far down the great enclosure was another wall of canvas
backing, a flood of light above it and animated voices from within.
He stood again to watch. But this drama seemed to have been
suspended. The room exposed was a bedroom with an open window facing
an open door; the actors and the mechanical staff as well were
busily hurling knives at various walls. They were earnest and
absorbed in this curious pursuit. Sometimes they made the knife
penetrate the wall, oftener it merely struck and clattered to the
floor. Five knives at once were being hurled by five enthusiasts,
while a harried-looking director watched and criticised.

"You're a clumsy bunch," he announced at last. "It's a simple thing
to do, isn't it?" The knife-throwers redoubled, their efforts, but
they did not find it a simple thing to do.

"Let me try it, Mr. Burke." It was the Montague girl still in her
gipsy costume. She had been standing quietly in the shadow observing
the ineffective practice.

"Hello, Flips! Sure, you can try it. Show these boys something good,
now. Here, Al, give Miss Montague that stickeree of yours." Al
seemed glad to relinquish the weapon. Miss Montague hefted it, and
looked doubtful.

"It ain't balanced right," she declared. "Haven't you got one with a
heavier handle?"

"Fair enough," said the director. "Hey, Pickles, let her try that
one you got." Pickles, too, was not unwilling to oblige.

"That's better," said the girl. "It's balanced right." Taking the
blade by its point between thumb and forefinger she sent it with a
quick flick of the wrist into the wall a dozen feet away. It hung
there quivering.

"There! That's what we want. It's got to be quivering when Jack
shoots at Ramon who threw it at him as he leaps through the window.
Try it again, Flips." The girl obliged and bowed impressively to the
applause.

"Now come here and try it through the doorway." He led her around
the set. "Now stand here and see can you put it into the wall just
to the right of the window. Good! Some little knife-thrower, I'll
say. Now try it once with Jack coming through. Get set, Jack."

Jack made his way to the window through which he was to leap. He
paused there to look in with some concern. "Say, Mr. Burke, will you
please make sure she understands? She isn't to let go of that thing
until I'm in and crouched down ready to shoot--understand what I
mean? I don't want to get nicked nor nothing."

"All right, all right! She understands."

Jack leaped through the window to a crouch, weapon in hand. The
knife quivered in the wall above him as he shot.

"Fine and dandy. Some class, I'll say. All right, Jack. Get back.
We'll gun this little scene right here and now. All ready, Jack, all
ready Miss Montague--camera!--one, two, three--come in, Jack." Again
the knife quivered in the wall above his head even while he crouched
to shoot at the treacherous Mexican who had thrown it.

"Good work, Flips. Thanks a whole lot. We'll do as much for you some
time."

"You're entirely welcome, Mr. Burke. No trouble to oblige. How you
coming?"

"Coming good. This thing's going to be a knockout. I bet it'll gross
a million. Nearly done, too, except for some chase stuff up in the
hills. I'll do that next week. What you doing?"

"Oh, everything's jake with me. I'm over on Number Four--Toys of
Destiny--putting a little pep into the mob stuff. Laid out for two
hours, waiting for something--I don't know what."

Merton Gill passed on. He confessed now to a reluctant admiration
for the Montague girl. She could surely throw a knife. He must
practise that himself sometime. He might have stayed to see more of
this drama but he was afraid the girl would break out into more of
her nonsense. He was aware that she swept him with her eyes as he
turned away but he evaded her glance. She was not a person, he
thought, that one ought to encourage.

He emerged from the great building and crossed an alley to another
of like size. Down toward its middle was the usual wall of canvas
with half-a-dozen men about the opening at one corner. A curious
whirring noise came from within. He became an inconspicuous unit of
the group and gazed in. The lights were on, revealing a long table
elaborately set as for a banquet, but the guests who stood about
gave him instant uneasiness. They were in the grossest caricatures
of evening dress, both men and women, and they were not beautiful.
The gowns of the women were grotesque and the men were lawless
appearing, either as to hair or beards or both. He divined the
dreadful thing he was stumbling upon even before he noted the sign
in large letters on the back of a folding chair: "Jeff Baird's
Buckeye Comedies." These were the buffoons who with their coarse
pantomime, their heavy horse-play, did so much to debase a great
art. There, even at his side, was the arch offender, none other than
Jeff Baird himself, the man whose regrettable sense of so-called
humour led him to make these low appeals to the witless. And even as
he looked the cross-eyed man entered the scene. Garbed in the
weirdly misfitting clothes of a waiter, holding aloft a loaded tray
of dishes, he entered on roller skates, to halt before Baird with
his uplifted tray at a precarious balance.

"All right, that's better," said Baird. "And, Gertie, listen: don't
throw the chair in front of him. That's out. Now we'll have the
entrance again. You other boys on the rollers, there--" Three other
basely comic waiters on roller skates came to attention.

"Follow him in and pile up on him when he makes the grand spill--see
what I mean? Get your trays loaded now and get off. Now you other
people, take your seats. No, no, Annie, you're at the head, I told
you. Tom, you're at the foot and start the rough-house when you get
the tray in the neck. Now, all set."

Merton Gill was about to leave this distressing scene but was held
in spite of himself by the voice of a newcomer.

"Hello, Jeff! Atta boy!"

He knew without turning that the Montague girl was again at his
elbow. He wondered if she could be following him.

"Hello, Flips! How's the kid?" The producer had turned cordially to
her. "Just in time for the breakaway stuff. See how you like it."

"What's the big idea?"

"Swell reception at the Maison de Glue, with the waiters on roller
skates in honour of rich Uncle Rollo Glue. The head waiter starts
the fight by doing a fall with his tray. Tom gets the tray in the
neck and soaks the nearest man banquet goes flooey. Then we go into
the chase stuff."

"Which is Uncle Rollo?"

"That's him at the table, with the herbaceous border under his
chin."

"Is he in the fight?"

"I think so. I was going to rehearse it once more to see if I could
get a better idea. Near as I can see now, everybody takes a crack at
him."

"Well, maybe." Montague girl seemed to be considering. "Say, how
about this, Jeff? He's awful hungry, see, and he's begun to eat the
celery and everything he can reach, and when the mix-up starts he
just eats on and pays no attention to it. Never even looks up, see
what I mean? The fight spreads the whole length of the table; right
around Rollo half-a-dozen murders are going on and he just eats and
pays no attention. And he's still eating when they're all down and
out, and don't know a thing till Charlie or someone crowns him with
the punch-bowl. How about it? Ain't there a laugh in that?" Baird
had listened respectfully and now patted the girl on a shoulder.

"Good work, Kid! That's a gag, all right. The little bean's sparking
on all six, ain't it? Drop around again. We need folks like you.
Now, listen, Rollo--you there, Rollo, come here and get this. Now,
listen--when the fight begins--"

Merton Gill turned decisively away. Such coarse foolery as this was
too remote from Beulah Baxter who, somewhere on that lot, was doing
something really, as her interview had put it, distinctive and worth
while.

He lingered only to hear the last of Baird's instructions to Rollo
and the absurd guests, finding some sinister fascination in the
man's talk. Baird then turned to the girl, who had also started off.

"Hang around, Flips. Why the rush?"

"Got to beat it over to Number Pour."

"Got anything good there?"

"Nothing that will get me any billing. Been waiting two hours now
just to look frenzied in a mob."

"Well, say, come around and see me some time."

"All right, Jeff. Of course I'm pretty busy. When I ain't working
I've got to think about my art."

"No, this is on the level. Listen, now, sister, I got another two
reeler to pull off after this one, then I'm goin' to do something
new, see? Got a big idea. Probably something for you in it. Drop in
t' the office and talk it over. Come in some time next week. 'F I
ain't there I'll be on the lot some place. Don't forget, now."

Merton Gill, some distance from the Buckeye set, waited to note what
direction the Montague girl would take. She broke away presently,
glanced brazenly in his direction, and tripped lightly out the
nearest exit. He went swiftly to one at the far end of the building,
and was again in the exciting street. But the afternoon was drawing
in and the street had lost much of its vivacity. It would surely be
too late for any glimpse of his heroine. And his mind was already
cluttered with impressions from his day's adventure. He went out
through the office, meaning to thank the casting director for the
great favour she had shown him, but she was gone. He hoped the
headache had not driven her home. If she were to suffer again he
hoped it would be some morning. He would have the Eezo wafers in one
pocket and a menthol pencil in the other. And she would again extend
to him the freedom of that wonderful city.

In his room that night he tried to smooth out the jumble in his
dazed mind. Those people seemed to say so many things they
considered funny but that were not really funny to any one else. And
moving-picture plays were always waiting for something, with the
bored actors lounging about in idle apathy. Still in bis ears
sounded the drone of the sawmill and the deep purr of the lights
when they were put on. That was a funny thing. When they wanted the
lights on they said "Kick it," and when they wanted the lights off
they said "Save it!" And why did a boy come out after every scene
and hold up a placard with numbers on it before the camera? That
placard had never shown in any picture he had seen. And that queer
Montague girl, always turning up when you thought you had got rid of
her. Still, she had thrown that knife pretty well. You had to give
her credit for that. But she couldn't be much of an actress, even if
she had spoken of acting with Miss Baxter, of climbing down cables
with her and falling off cliffs. Probably she was boasting, because
he had never seen any one but Miss Baxter do these things in her
pictures. Probably she had some very minor part. Anyway, it was
certain she couldn't be much of an actress because she had almost
promised to act in those terrible Buckeye comedies. And of course no
one with any real ambition or capacity could consider such a thing--
descending to rough horse-play for the amusement of the coarser
element among screen patrons.

But there was one impression from the day's whirl that remained
clear and radiant: He had looked at the veritable face of his
heroine. He began his letter to Tessie Kearns. "At last I have seen
Miss Baxter face to face. There was no doubt about its being her.
You would have known her at once. And how beautiful she is! She was
looking up and seemed inspired, probably thinking about her part.
She reminded me of that beautiful picture of St. Cecelia playing on
the piano. . . ."


CHAPTER VI

UNDER THE GLASS TOPS


He approached the office of the Holden studios the following morning
with a new air of assurance. Formerly the mere approach had been an
adventure; the look through the gate, the quick glimpse of the
privileged ones who entered, the mingling, later, with the hopeful
and the near-hopeless ones who waited. But now his feeling was that
he had, somehow, become a part of that higher life beyond the gate.
He might linger outside at odd moments, but rightfully he belonged
inside. His novitiate had passed. He was one of those who threw
knives or battled at the sawmill with the persecuter of golden-
haired innocence, or lured beautiful women from their homes. He
might be taken, he thought, for an actor resting between pictures.

At the gate he suffered a momentary regret at an error of tactics
committed the evening before. Instead of leaving the lot by the
office he should have left by the gate. He should have strolled to
this exit in a leisurely manner and stopped, just inside the
barrier, for a chat with the watchman; a chat, beginning with the
gift of a cigar, which should have impressed his appearance upon
that person. He should have remarked casually that he had had a hard
day on Stage Number Four, and must now be off to a good night's rest
because of the equally hard day to-morrow. Thus he could now have
approached the gate with confidence and passed freely in, with a few
more pleasant words to the watchman who would have no difficulty in
recalling him.

But it was vain to wish this. For all the watchman knew this young
man had never been beyond the walls of the forbidden city, nor would
he know any reason why the besieger should not forever be kept
outside. He would fix that next time.

He approached the window of the casting office with mingled
emotions. He did not hope to find his friend again stricken with
headache, but if it chanced that she did suffer he hoped to be the
first to learn of it. Was he not fortified with the potent Eezo
wafers, and a new menthol pencil, even with an additional remedy of
tablets that the druggist had strongly recommended? It was,
therefore, not with any actual, crude disappointment that he learned
of his friend's perfect well-being. She smiled pleasantly at him,
the telephone receiver at one ear. "Nothing to-day, dear," she said
and put down the instrument.

Yes, the headache was gone, vanquished by his remedies. She was
fine, thank you. No, the headaches didn't come often. It might be
weeks before she had another attack. No, of course she couldn't be
certain of this. And indeed she would be sure to let him know at the
very first sign of their recurrence.

He looked over his patient with real anxiety, a solicitude from the
bottom of which he was somehow unable to expel the last trace of a
lingering hope that would have dismayed the little woman--not hope,
exactly, but something almost like it which he would only translate
to himself as an earnest desire that he might be at hand when the
dread indisposition did attack her. Just now there could be no doubt
that she was free from pain.

He thanked her profusely for her courtesy of the day before. He had
seen wonderful things. He had learned a lot. And he wanted to ask
her something, assuring himself that he was alone in the waiting
room. It was this: did she happen to know--was Miss Beulah Baxter
married?

The little woman sighed in a tired manner. "Baxter married? Let me
see." She tapped her teeth with the end of a pencil, frowning into
her vast knowledge of the people beyond the gate. "Now, let me
think." But this appeared to be without result. "Oh, I really don't
know; I forget. I suppose so. Why not? She often is."

He would have asked more questions, but the telephone rang and she
listened a long time, contributing a "yes, yes," of understanding at
brief intervals. This talk ended, she briskly demanded a number and
began to talk in her turn. Merton Gill saw that for the time he had
passed from her life. She was calling an agency. She wanted people
for a diplomatic reception in Washington. She must have a Bulgarian
general, a Serbian diplomat, two French colonels, and a Belgian
captain, all in uniform and all good types. She didn't want just
anybody, but types that would stand out. Holden studios on Stage
Number Two. Before noon, if possible. All right, then. Another bell
rang, almost before she had hung up. "Hello, Grace. Nothing to-day,
dear. They're out on location, down toward Venice, getting some
desert stuff. Yes, I'll let you know."

Merton Gill had now to make way at the window for a youngish, weary-
looking woman who had once been prettier, who led an elaborately
dressed little girl of five. She lifted the child to the window.
"Say good-morning to the beautiful lady, Toots. Good-morning,
Countess. I'm sure you got something for Toots and me to-day because
it's our birthday--both born on the same day--what do you think of
that? Any little thing will help us out a lot--how about it?"

He went outside before the end of this colloquy, but presently saw
the woman and her child emerge and walk on disconsolately toward the
next studio. Thus began another period of waiting from which much of
the glamour had gone. It was not so easy now to be excited by those
glimpses of the street beyond the gate. A certain haze had vanished,
leaving all too apparent the circumstance that others were working
beyond the gate while Merton Gill loitered outside, his talent, his
training, ignored. His early air of careless confidence had changed
to one not at all careless or confident. He was looking rather
desperate and rather unbelieving. And it daily grew easier to count
his savings. He made no mistakes now. His hoard no longer enjoyed
the addition of fifteen dollars a week. Only subtractions were made.

There came a morning when but one bill remained. It was a ten-dollar
bill, bearing at its centre a steel-engraved portrait of Andrew
Jackson. He studied it in consternation, though still permitting
himself to notice that Jackson would have made a good motion-picture
type--the long, narrow, severe face, the stiff uncomprising mane of
gray hair; probably they would have cast him for a feuding
mountaineer, deadly with his rifle, or perhaps as an inventor whose
device was stolen on his death-bed by his wicked Wall Street
partner, thus leaving his motherless daughter at the mercy of
Society's wolves.

But this was not the part that Jackson played in the gripping drama
of Merton Gill. His face merely stared from the last money brought
from Simsbury, Illinois, and the stare was not reassuring. It seemed
to say that there was no other money in all the world. Decidedly
things must take a turn. Merton Gill had a quite definite feeling
that he had already struggled and sacrificed enough to give the
public something better and finer. It was time the public realized
this.

Still he waited, not even again reaching the heart of things, for
his friend beyond the window had suffered no relapse. He came to
resent a certain inconsequence in the woman. She might have had
those headaches oftener. He had been led to suppose that she would,
and now she continued to be weary but entirely well.

More waiting and the ten-dollar bill went for a five and some
silver. He was illogically not sorry to be rid of Andrew Jackson,
who had looked so tragically skeptical. The five-dollar bill was
much more cheerful. It bore the portrait of Benjamin Harrison, a
smooth, cheerful face adorned with whiskers that radiated success.
They were little short of smug with success. He would almost rather
have had Benjamin Harrison on five dollars than the grim-faced
Jackson on ten. Still, facts were facts. You couldn't wait as long
on five dollars as you could on ten.

Then on the afternoon of a day that promised to end as other days
had ended, a wave of animation swept through the waiting room and
the casting office. "Swell cabaret stuff" was the phrase that
brought the applicants to a lively swarm about the little window.
Evening clothes, glad wraps, cigarette cases, vanity-boxes--the
Victor people doing The Blight of Broadway with Muriel Mercer--Stage
Number Four at 8:30 to-morrow morning. There seemed no limit to the
people desired. Merton Gill joined the throng about the window.
Engagements were rapidly made, both through the window and over the
telephone that was now ringing those people who had so long been
told that there was nothing to-day. He did not push ahead of the
women as some of the other men did. He even stood out of the line
for the Montague girl who had suddenly appeared and who from the
rear had been exclaiming: "Women and children first!"

"Thanks, old dear," she acknowledged the courtesy and beamed through
the window. "Hullo, Countess!" The woman nodded briefly. "All right,
Flips; I was just going to telephone you. Henshaw wants you for some
baby-vamp stuff in the cabaret scene and in the gambling hell.
Better wear that salmon-pink chiffon and the yellow curls. Eight-
thirty, Stage Four. Goo'-by."

"Thanks, Countess! Me for the jumping tintypes at the hour named.
I'm glad enough to be doing even third business. How about Ma?"

"Sure! Tell her grand-dame stuff, chaperone or something, the gray
georgette and all her pearls and the cigarette case."

"I'll tell her. She'll be glad there's something doing once more on
the perpendicular stage. Goo'-by."

She stepped aside with "You're next, brother!" Merton Gill
acknowledged this with a haughty inclination of the head. He must
not encourage this hoyden. He glanced expectantly through the little
window. His friend held a telephone receiver at her ear. She smiled
wearily. "All right, son. You got evening clothes, haven't you? Of
course, I remember now. Stage Four at 8:30. Goo'-by."

" I want to thank you for this opportunity--" he began, but was
pushed aside by an athletic young woman who spoke from under a broad
hat. "Hullo, dearie! How about me and Ella?"

"Hullo, Maizie. All right. Stage Four, at 8:30, in your swellest
evening stuff."

At the door the Montague girl called to an approaching group who
seemed to have heard by wireless or occult means the report of new
activity in the casting office. "Hurry, you troupers. You can eat
to-morrow night, maybe!" They hurried. She turned to Merton Gill.
"Seems like old times," she observed.

"Does it?" he replied coldly. Would this chit never understand that
he disapproved of her trifling ways?

He went on, rejoicing that he had not been compelled to part, even
temporarily, with a first-class full-dress suit, hitherto worn only
in the privacy of Lowell Hardy's studio. It would have been awkward,
he thought, if the demand for it had been much longer delayed. He
would surely have let that go before sacrificing his Buck Benson
outfit. He had traversed the eucalyptus avenue in this ecstasy, and
was on a busier thoroughfare. Before a motion-picture theatre he
paused to study the billing of Muriel Mercer in Hearts Aflame. The
beauteous girl, in an alarming gown, was at the mercy of a fiend in
evening dress whose hellish purpose was all too plainly read in his
fevered eyes. The girl writhed in his grasp. Doubtless he was
demanding her hand in marriage. It was a tense bit. And to-morrow he
would act with this petted idol of the screen. And under the
direction of that Mr. Henshaw who seemed to take screen art with
proper seriousness. He wondered if by any chance Mr. Henshaw would
call upon him to do a quadruple transition, hate, fear, love,
despair. He practised a few transitions as he went on to press his
evening clothes in the Patterson kitchen, and to dream, that night,
that he rode his good old pal, Pinto, into the gilded cabaret to
carry off Muriel Mercer, Broadway's pampered society pet, to the
clean life out there in the open spaces where men are men.

At eight the following morning he was made up in a large dressing
room by a grumbling extra who said that it was a dog's life
plastering grease paint over the maps of dubs. He was presently on
Stage Four in the prescribed evening regalia for gentlemen. He found
the cabaret set, a gilded haunt of pleasure with small tables set
about an oblong of dancing floor. Back of these on three sides were
raised platforms with other tables, and above these discreet boxes,
half masked by drapery, for the seclusion of more retiring merry-
makers. The scene was deserted as yet, but presently he was joined
by another early comer, a beautiful young woman of Spanish type with
a thin face and eager, dark eyes. Her gown was glistening black set
low about her polished shoulders, and she carried a red rose. So
exotic did she appear he was surprised when she addressed him in the
purest English.

"Say, listen here, old timer! Let's pick a good table right on the
edge before the mob scene starts. Lemme see--" She glanced up and
down the rows of tables. "The cam'ras'll be back there, so we can
set a little closer, but not too close, or we'll be moved over. How
'bout this here? Let's try it." She sat, motioning him to the other
chair. Even so early in his picture career did he detect that in
facing this girl his back would be to the camera. He hitched his
chair about.

"That's right," said the girl, "I wasn't meaning to hog it. Say, we
was just in time, wasn't we?"

Ladies and gentlemen in evening dress were already entering. They
looked inquiringly about and chose tables. Those next to the dancing
space were quickly filled. Many of the ladies permitted costly wraps
of fur or brocade to spill across the backs of their chairs. Many of
the gentlemen lighted cigarettes from gleaming metal cases. There
was a lively interchange of talk.

"We better light up, too," said the dark girl. Merton Gill had
neglected cigarettes and confessed this with some embarrassment. The
girl presented an open case of gold attached to a chain pendent from
her girdle. They both smoked. On their table were small plates, two
wine glasses half filled with a pale liquid, and small coffee-cups.
Spirals of smoke ascended over a finished repast. Of course if the
part called for cigarettes you must smoke whether you had quit or
not.

The places back of the prized first row were now filling up with the
later comers. One of these, a masterful-looking man of middle age--
he would surely be a wealthy club-man accustomed to command tables--
regarded the filled row around the dancing space with frank
irritation, and paused significantly at Merton's side. He seemed
about to voice a demand, but the young actor glanced slowly up at
him, achieving a superb transition--surprise, annoyance, and, as the
invader turned quickly away, pitying contempt.

"Atta boy!" said his companion, who was, with the aid of a tiny
gold-backed mirror suspended with the cigarette case, heightening
the crimson of her full lips.

Two cameras were now in view, and men were sighting through them.
Merton saw Henshaw, plump but worried looking, scan the scene from
the rear. He gave hurried direction to an assistant who came down
the line of tables with a running glance at their occupants. He made
changes. A couple here and a couple there would be moved from the
first row and other couples would come to take their places. Under
the eyes of this assistant the Spanish girl had become coquettish.
With veiled glances, with flashing smiles from the red lips, with a
small gloved hand upon Merton Gill's sleeve, she allured him. The
assistant paused before them. The Spanish girl continued to allure.
Merton Gill stared moodily at the half-empty wine glass, then
exhaled smoke as he glanced up at his companion in profound ennui.
If it was The Blight of Broadway probably they would want him to
look bored.

"You two stay where you are," said the assistant, and passed on.

"Good work," said the girl. "I knew you was a type the minute I made
you."

Red-coated musicians entered an orchestra loft far down the set. The
voice of Henshaw came through a megaphone: "Everybody that's near
the floor fox-trot." In a moment the space was thronged with
dancers. Another voice called "Kick it!" and a glare of light came
on.

"You an' me both!" said the Spanish girl, rising.

Merton Gill remained seated. "Can't," he said. "Sprained ankle." How
was he to tell her that there had been no chance to learn this dance
back in Simsbury, Illinois, where such things were frowned upon by
pulpit and press? The girl resumed her seat, at first with
annoyance, then brightened. "All right at that," she said. "I bet we
get more footage this way." She again became coquettish, luring with
her wiles one who remained sunk in ennui.

A whistle blew, a voice called "Save it!" and the lights jarred off.
Henshaw came trippingly down the line. "You people didn't dance.
What's the matter?" Merton Gill glanced up, doing a double
transition, from dignified surprise to smiling chagrin. "Sprained
ankle," he said, and fell into the bored look that had served him
with the assistant. He exhaled smoke and raised his tired eyes to
the still luring Spanish girl. Weariness of the world and women was
in his look. Henshaw scanned him closely.

"All right, stay there--keep just that way--it's what I want." He
continued down the line, which had become hushed. "Now, people. I
want some flashes along here, between dances--see what I mean?
You're talking, but you're bored with it all. The hollowness of this
night life is getting you; not all of you--most of you girls can
keep on smiling--but The Blight of Broadway shows on many. You're
beginning to wonder if this is all life has to offer--see what I
mean?" He continued down the line.

From the table back of Merton Gill came a voice in speech to the
retreating back of Henshaw: "All right, old top, but it'll take a
good lens to catch any blight on this bunch--most of 'em haven't
worked a lick in six weeks, and they're tickled pink." He knew
without turning that this was the Montague girl trying to be funny
at the expense of Henshaw who was safely beyond hearing. He thought
she would be a disturbing element in the scene, but in this he was
wrong, for he bent upon the wine glass a look more than ever fraught
with jaded world-weariness. The babble of Broadway was resumed as
Henshaw went back to the cameras.

Presently a camera was pushed forward. Merton Gill hardly dared look
up, but he knew it was halted at no great distance from him. "Now,
here's rather a good little bit," Henshaw was saying. "You, there,
the girl in black, go on--tease him the way you were, and he's to
give you that same look. Got that cigarette going? All ready.
Lights! Camera!" Merton was achieving his first close-up. Under the
hum of the lights he was thinking that he had been a fool not to
learn dancing, no matter how the Reverend Otto Carmichael denounced
it as a survival from the barbaric Congo. He was also thinking that
the Montague girl ought to be kept away from people who were trying
to do really creative things, and he was bitterly regretting that he
had no silver cigarette case. The gloom of his young face was honest
gloom. He was aware that his companion leaned vivaciously toward him
with gay chatter and gestures. Very slowly he inhaled from a
cigarette that was already distasteful--adding no little to the
desired effect--and very slowly he exhaled as he raised to hers the
bored eyes of a soul quite disillusioned. Here, indeed, was the
blight of Broadway.

"All right, first rate!" called Henshaw. "Now get this bunch down
here." The camera was pushed on.

"Gee, that was luck!" said the girl. "Of course it'll be cut to a
flash, but I bet we stand out, at that." She was excited now, no
longer needing to act.

From the table back of Merton came the voice of the Montague girl:
"Yes, one must suffer for one's art. Here I got to be a baby-vamp
when I'd rather be simple little Madelon, beloved by all in the
village."

He restrained an impulse to look around at her. She was not serious
and should not be encouraged. Farther down the set Henshaw was
beseeching a table of six revellers to give him a little hollow
gayety. "You're simply forcing yourselves to have a good time," he
was saying; "remember that. Your hearts aren't in it. You know this
night life is a mockery. Still, you're playing the game. Now, two of
you raise your glasses to drink. You at the end stand up and hold
your glass aloft. The girl next to you there, stand up by him and
raise your face to his--turn sideways more. That's it. Put your hand
up to his shoulder. You're slightly lit, you know, and you're
inviting him to kiss you over his glass. You others, you're drinking
gay enough, but see if you can get over that it's only half-hearted.
You at the other end there--you're staring at your wine glass, then
you look slowly up at your partner but without any life. You're
feeling the blight, see? A chap down the line here just did it
perfectly. All ready, now! Lights! Camera! You blonde girl, stand
up, face raised to him, hand up to his shoulder. You others,
drinking, laughing. You at the end, look up slowly at the girl, look
away--about there--bored, weary of it all--cut! All right. Not so
bad. Now this next bunch, Paul."

Merton Gill was beginning to loathe cigarettes. He wondered if Mr.
Henshaw would mind if he didn't smoke so much, except, of course, in
the close-ups. His throat was dry and rough, his voice husky. His
companion had evidently played more smoking parts and seemed not to
mind it.

Henshaw was now opposite them across the dancing floor, warning his
people to be gay but not too gay. The glamour of this night life
must be a little dulled.

"Now, Paul, get about three medium shots along here. There's a good
table--get that bunch. And not quite so solemn, people; don't overdo
it. You think you're having a good time, even if it does turn to
ashes in your mouth--now, ready; lights! Camera!"

"I like Western stuff better," confided Merton to his companion. She
considered this, though retaining her arch manner. "Well, I don't
know. I done a Carmencita part in a dance-hall scene last month over
to the Bigart, and right in the mi'st of the fight I get a glass of
somethin' all over my gown that practically rooned it. I guess I
rather do this refined cabaret stuff--at least you ain't so li'ble
to roon a gown. Still and all, after you been warmin' the extra
bench for a month one can't be choosy. Say, there's the princ'ples
comin' on the set."

He looked around. There, indeed, was the beautiful Muriel Mercer,
radiant in an evening frock of silver. At the moment she was putting
a few last touches to her perfect face from a make-up box held by a
maid. Standing with her was another young woman, not nearly so
beautiful, and three men. Henshaw was instructing these. Presently
he called through his megaphone: "You people are excited by the
entrance of the famous Vera Vanderpool and her friends. You stop
drinking, break off your talk, stare at her--see what I mean?--she
makes a sensation. Music, lights, camera!"

Down the set, escorted by a deferential head-waiter, came Muriel
Mercer on the arm of a middle-aged man who was elaborately garnished
but whose thin dyed mustaches, partially bald head, and heavy eyes,
proclaimed him to Merton Gill as one who meant the girl no good.
They were followed by the girl who was not so beautiful and the
other two men. These were young chaps of pleasing exterior who made
the progress laughingly. The five were seated at a table next the
dancing space at the far end. They chatted gayly as the older man
ordered importantly from the head-waiter. Muriel Mercer tapped one
of the younger men with her plumed fan and they danced. Three other
selected couples danced at the same time, though taking care not to
come between the star and the grinding camera. The older man leered
at the star and nervously lighted a gold-tipped cigarette which he
immediately discarded after one savage bite at it. It could be seen
that Vera Vanderpool was the gayest of all that gay throng. Upon her
as yet had come no blight of Broadway, though she shrank perceptibly
when the partially bald one laid his hand on her slender wrist as
she resumed her seat. Food and wine were brought. Vera Vanderpool
drank, with a pretty flourish of her glass.

Now the two cameras were moved forward for close-ups. The older man
was caught leering at Vera. It would surely be seen that he was not
one to trust. Vera was caught with the mad light of pleasure in her
beautiful eyes. Henshaw was now speaking in low tones to the group,
and presently Vera Vanderpool did a transition. The mad light of
pleasure died from her eyes and the smile froze on her beautiful
mouth. A look almost of terror came into her eyes, followed by a
pathetic lift of the upper lip. She stared intently above the
camera. She was beholding some evil thing far from that palace of
revels.

"Now they'll cut back to the tenement-house stuff they shot last
week," explained the Spanish girl.

"Tenement house?" queried Merton. "But I thought the story would be
that she falls in love with a man from the great wind-swept spaces
out West, and goes out there to live a clean open life with him--
that's the way I thought it would be--out there where she could
forget the blight of Broadway."

"No, Mercer never does Western stuff. I got a little girl friend
workin' with her and she told me about this story. Mercer gets into
this tenement house down on the east side, and she's a careless
society butterfly; but all at once she sees what a lot of sorrow
there is in this world when she sees these people in the tenement
house, starving to death, and sick kids and everything, and this
little friend of mine does an Italian girl with a baby and this old
man here, he's a rich swell and prominent in Wall Street and belongs
to all the clubs, but he's the father of this girl's child, only
Mercer don't know that yet. But she gets aroused in her better
nature by the sight of all this trouble, and she almost falls in
love with another gentleman who devotes all his time to relieving
the poor in these tenements--it was him who took her there--but
still she likes a good time as well as anybody, and she's stickin'
around Broadway and around this old guy who's pretty good company in
spite of his faults. But just now she got a shock at remembering the
horrible sights she has seen; she can't get it out of her mind. And
pretty soon she'll see this other gentleman that she nearly fell in
love with, the one who hangs around these tenements doing good--
he'll be over at one of them tables and she'll leave her party and
go over to his table and say, 'Take me from this heartless Broadway
to your tenements where I can relieve their suffering,' so she goes
out and gets in a taxi with him, leaving the old guy with not a
thing to do but pay the check. Of course he's mad, and he follows
her down to the tenements where she's relieving the poor--just in a
plain black dress--and she finds out he's the real father of this
little friend of mine's child, and tells him to go back to Broadway
while she has chosen the better part and must live her life with
these real people. But he sends her a note that's supposed to be
from a poor woman dying of something, to come and bring her some
medicine, and she goes off alone to this dive in another street, and
it's the old guy himself who has sent the note, and he has her there
in this cellar in his power. But the other gentleman has found the
note and has follered her, and breaks in the door and puts up a
swell fight with the old guy and some toughs he has hired, and gets
her off safe and sound, and so they're married and live the real
life far away from the blight of Broadway. It's a swell story, all
right, but Mercer can't act it. This little friend of mine can act
all around her. She'd be a star if only she was better lookin'. You
bet Mercer don't allow any lookers on the same set with her. Do you
make that one at the table with her now? Just got looks enough to
show Mercer off. Mercer's swell-lookin', I'll give her that, but for
actin'--say, all they need in a piece for her is just some stuff to
go in between her close-ups. Don't make much difference what it is.
Oh, look! There comes the dancers. It's Luzon and Mario."

Merton Gill looked. These would be hired dancers to entertain the
pleasure-mad throng, a young girl with vine leaves in her hair and a
dark young man of barbaric appearance. The girl was clad in a mere
whisp of a girdle and shining breast plates, while the man was
arrayed chiefly in a coating of dark stain. They swirled over the
dance floor to the broken rhythm of the orchestra, now clinging, now
apart, working to a climax in which the man poised with his partner
perched upon one shoulder. Through the megaphone came instructions
to applaud the couple, and Broadway applauded--all but Merton Gill,
who stared moodily into his coffee cup or lifted bored eyes to the
scene of revelry. He was not bored, but his various emotions
combined to produce this effect very plausibly. He was dismayed at
this sudden revelation of art in the dance so near him. Imogene
Pulver had once done an art dance back in Simsbury, at the cantata
of Esther in the vestry of the Methodist church, and had been not a
little criticised for her daring; but Imogene had been abundantly
clad, and her gestures much more restrained. He was trying now to
picture how Gashwiler would take a thing like this, or Mrs.
Gashwiler, for that matter! One glimpse of those practically unclad
bodies skipping and bounding there would probably throw them into a
panic. They couldn't have sat it through. And here he was, right up
in front of them, and not turning a hair.

This reflection permitted something of the contemptuous to show in
the random glances with which he swept the dancers? He could not
look at them steadily, not when they were close, as they often were.
Also, he loathed the cigarette he was smoking. The tolerant scorn
for the Gashwilers and his feeling for the cigarette brought him
again into favourable notice. He heard Henshaw, but did not look up.

"Get another flash here, Paul. He's rather a good little bit."
Henshaw now stood beside him. "Hold that," he said. "No, wait." He
spoke to Merton's companion. "You change seats a minute with Miss
Montague, as if you'd got tired of him--see what I mean? Miss
Montague--Miss Montague." The Spanish girl arose, seeming not wholly
pleased at this bit of directing. The Montague girl came to the
table. She was a blithesome sprite in a salmon-pink dancing frock.
Her blonde curls fell low over one eye which she now cocked
inquiringly at the director.

"You're trying to liven him up," explained Henshaw. "That's all--
baby-vamp him. He'll do the rest. He's quite a good little bit."

The Montague girl flopped into the chair, leaned roguishly toward
Merton Gill, placed a small hand upon the sleeve of his coat and
peered archly at him through beaded lashes, one eye almost hidden by
its thatch of curls. Merton Gill sunk low in his chair, cynically
tapped the ash from his tenth cigarette into the coffee cup and
raised bored eyes to hers. "That's it--shoot it, Paul, just a
flash."

The camera was being wheeled toward them. The Montague girl, with
her hand still on his arm, continued her wheedling, though now she
spoke.

"Why, look who's here. Kid, I didn't know you in your stepping-out
clothes. Say, listen, why do you always upstage me? I never done a
thing to you, did I? Go on, now, give me the fishy eye again. How'd
you ace yourself into this first row, anyway? Did you have to fight
for it? Say, your friend'll be mad at me putting her out of here,
won't she? Well, blame it on the gelatin master. I never suggested
it. Say, you got Henshaw going. He likes that blighted look of
yours."

He made no reply to this chatter. He must keep in the picture. He
merely favoured her with a glance of fatigued indifference. The
camera was focused.

"All ready, you people. Do like I said, now. Lights, camera!"

Merton Gill drew upon his cigarette with the utmost disrelish,
raised the cold eyes of a disillusioned man to the face of the
leering Montague girl, turned aside from her with every sign of
apathy, and wearily exhaled the smoke. There seemed to be but this
one pleasure left to him.

"Cut!" said Henshaw, and somewhere lights jarred off. "Just stick
there a bit, Miss Montague. We'll have a couple more shots when the
dancing begins."

Merton resented this change. He preferred the other girl. She lured
him but not in so pronounced, so flagrant a manner. The blight of
Broadway became more apparent than ever upon his face. The girl's
hand still fluttered upon his sleeve as the music came and dancers
shuffled by them.

"Say, you're the actin' kid, all right." She was tapping the floor
with the heel of a satin slipper. He wished above all things that
she wouldn't call him "Kid." He meditated putting a little of
Broadway's blight upon her by saying in a dignified way that his
real name was Clifford Armytage. Still, this might not blight her--
you couldn't tell about the girl.

"You certainly are the actin'est kid on this set, I'll tell the lot
that. Of course these close-ups won't mean much, just about one
second, or half that maybe. Or some hick in the cuttin' room may
kill 'em dead. Come on, give me the fish-eye again. That's it. Say,
I'm glad I didn't have to smoke cigarettes in this scene. They
wouldn't do for my type, standin' where the brook and river meet up.
I hate a cigarette worse'n anything. You--I bet you'd give up food
first."

"I hate 'em, too," he muttered grudgingly, glad to be able to say
this, even though only to one whose attentions he meant to
discourage. "If I have to smoke one more it'll finish me."

"Now, ain't that the limit? Too bad, Kid!"

"I didn't even have any of my own. That Spanish girl gave me these."

The Montague girl glanced over his shoulder at the young woman whose
place she had usurped. "Spanish, eh? If she's Spanish I'm a Swede
right out of Switzerland. Any-way, I never could like to smoke. I
started to learn one summer when I was eight. Pa and Ma and I was
out with a tent Tom-show, me doing Little Eva, and between acts I
had to put on pants and come out and do a smoking song, all about a
kid learning to smoke his first cigar and not doin' well with it,
see? But they had to cut it out. Gosh, what us artists suffer at
times! Pa had me try it a couple of years later when I was doin'
Louise the blind girl in the Two Orphans, playin' thirty cents top.
It was a good song, all right, with lots of funny gags. I'd 'a' been
the laughing hit of the bill if I could 'a' learned not to swallow.
We had to cut it out again after the second night. Talk about
entering into your part. Me? I was too good."

If the distant camera glanced this way it caught merely the
persistent efforts of a beautiful debutante who had not yet felt the
blight of Broadway to melt the cynicism of one who suffered it more
and more acutely each moment. Her hand fluttered on his sleeve and
her left eye continuously beguiled him from under the overhanging
curl. As often as he thought it desirable he put the bored glance
upon her, though mostly he stared in dejection at the coffee cup or
the empty wine glass. He was sorry that she had had that trouble
with the cigar, but one who as Little Eva or poor persecuted Louise,
the blind girl, had to do a song and dance between the acts must
surely come from a low plane of art. He was relieved when, at
megaphoned directions, an elderly fop came to whirl her off in the
dance. Her last speech was: "That poor Henshaw--the gelatin
master'll have megaphone-lip by to-night."

He was left alone at his table. He wondered if they might want a
close-up of him this way, uncompanioned, jaded, tired of it all, as
if he would be saying: "There's always the river!" But nothing of
this sort happened. There was more dancing, more close-ups of Muriel
Mercer being stricken with her vision of tenement misery under the
foul glare of a middle-aged roue inflamed with wine. And there was a
shot of Muriel perceiving at last the blight of Broadway and going
to a table at which sat a pale, noble-looking young man with a high
forehead, who presently led her out into the night to the real life
of the worthy poor. Later the deserted admirer became again a roue
inflamed with wine and submitted to a close-up that would depict his
baffled rage. He clenched his hands in this and seemed to convey,
with a snarling lift of his lip, that the girl would yet be his.
Merton Gill had ceased to smoke. He had sounded on Broadway even the
shallow pleasure of cigarettes. He was thoroughly blighted.

At last a megaphoned announcement from the assistant director
dismissing the extras, keeping the star, the lead, and a few small-
part people, to clean up medium shots, "dramatics," and other work
requiring no crowd. "All you extra people here to-morrow morning,
eight-thirty, same clothes and make-up." There was a quick breaking
up of the revelry. The Broadway pleasure-seekers threw off the
blight and stormed the assistant director for slips of paper which
he was now issuing. Merton Gill received one, labelled "Talent
check." There was fine print upon it which he took no pains to read,
beyond gathering its general effect that the Victor Film-art Company
had the full right to use any photographs of him that its agents
might that day have obtained. What engrossed him to the exclusion of
this legal formality was the item that he would now be paid seven
dollars and fifty cents for his day's work--and once he had been
forced to toil half a week for this sum! Emerging from the stage
into the sunlight he encountered the Montague girl who hailed him as
he would have turned to avoid her.

"Say, trouper, I thought I'd tell you in case you didn't know--we
don't take our slips to that dame in that outside cafeteria any
more. She always pinches off a quarter or may be four bits. They got
it fixed now so the cash is always on tap in the office. I just
thought I'd tell you."

"Thanks," he said, still with the jaded air of the disillusioned. He
had only the vaguest notion of her meaning, but her intention had
been kindly. "Thank you very much."

"Oh, don't mention it. I just thought I'd tell you." She glanced
after him shrewdly.

Nearing the office he observed a long line of Broadway revellers
waiting to cash their slips. Its head was lost inside the building
and it trailed far outside. No longer was any blight to be
perceived. The slips were ready in hand. Instead of joining the line
Merton decided upon luncheon. It was two o'clock, and though waiters
with trays had been abundant in the gilded cabaret, the best screen
art had not seemed to demand a serving of actual food. Further, he
would eat in the cafeteria in evening dress, his make-up still on,
like a real actor. The other time he had felt conspicuous because
nothing had identified him with the ordinary clientele of the place.

The room was not crowded now. Only a table here and there held late
comers, and the choice of foods when he reached the serving counter
at the back was limited. He permitted himself to complain of this in
a practised manner, but made a selection and bore his tray to the
centre of the room. He had chosen a table and was about to sit, when
he detected Henshaw farther down the room, and promptly took the one
next him. It was probable that Henshaw would recall him and praise
the work he had done. But the director merely rolled unseeing eyes
over him as he seated himself, and continued his speech to the man
Merton had before seen him with, the grizzled dark man with the
stubby gray mustache whom he called Governor. Merton wondered if he
could be the governor of California, but decided not. Perhaps an ex-
governor.

"She's working out well," he was saying. "I consider it one of the
best continuities Belmore has done. Not a line of smut in it, but to
make up for that we'll have over thirty changes of costume."

Merton Gill coughed violently, then stared moodily at his plate of
baked beans. He hoped that this, at least, would recall him to
Henshaw who might fix an eye on him to say: "And, by the way, here
is a young actor that was of great help to me this morning." But
neither man even glanced up. Seemingly this young actor could choke
to death without exciting their notice. He stared less moodily at
the baked beans. Henshaw would notice him sometime, and you couldn't
do everything at once.

The men had finished their luncheon and were smoking. The animated
Henshaw continued his talk. "And about that other thing we were
discussing, Governor, I want to go into that with you. I tell you if
we can do Robinson Crusoe, and do it right, a regular five-thousand-
foot program feature, the thing ought to gross a million. A good,
clean, censor-proof picture--great kid show, run forever. Shipwreck
stuff, loading the raft, island stuff, hut stuff, goats, finding the
footprint, cannibals, the man Friday--can't you see it?"

The Governor seemed to see it. "Fine--that's so!" He stared above
the director's head for the space of two inhalations from his
cigarette, imbuing Merton Gill with gratitude that he need not smoke
again that day. "But say, look here, how about your love interest?"

Henshaw waved this aside with his own cigarette and began to make
marks on the back of an envelope. "Easy enough--Belmore can fix that
up. We talked over one or two ways. How about having Friday's sister
brought over with him to this island? The cannibals are going to eat
her, too. Then the cannibals run to their canoes when they hear the
gun, just the same as in the book. And Crusoe rescues the two. And
when he cuts the girl's bonds he finds she can't be Friday's real
sister, because she's white--see what I mean? Well, we work it out
later that she's the daughter of an English Earl that was wrecked
near the cannibal island, and they rescued her, and Friday's mother
brought her up as her own child. She's saved the papers that came
ashore, and she has the Earl's coat-of-arms tattooed on her shoulder
blade, and finally, after Crusoe has fallen in love with her, and
she's remembered a good deal of her past, along comes the old Earl,
her father, in a ship and rescues them all. How about that?"
Henshaw, brightly expectant, awaited the verdict of his chief.

" Well--I don't know." The other considered. "Where's your conflict,
after the girl is saved from the savages? And Crusoe in the book
wears a long beard. How about that? He won't look like anything--
sort of hairy, and that's all."

Henshaw from the envelope on which he drew squares and oblongs
appeared to gain fresh inspiration. He looked up with new light in
his eyes. "I got it--got the whole thing. Modernize it. This chap is
a rich young New Yorker, cruising on his yacht, and he's wrecked on
this island and gets a lot of stuff ashore and his valet is saved,
too--say there's some good comedy, see what I mean?--valet is one of
these stiff English lads, never been wrecked on an island before and
complains all the time about the lack of conveniences. I can see a
lot of good gags for him, having to milk the goats, and getting
scared of the other animals, and no place to press his master's
clothes--things like that, you know. Well, the young fellow explores
the island and finds another party that's been wrecked on the other
side, and it's the girl and the man that got her father into his
power and got all of his estate and is going to make beggars of them
if the girl won't marry him, and she comes on the young fellow under
some palms and they fall in love and fix it up to double-cross the
villain--Belmore can work it out from there. How about that? And
say, we can use a lot of trims from that South Sea piece we did last
year, all that yacht and island stuff--see what I mean?"

The other considered profoundly. "Yes, you got a story there, but it
won't be Robinson Crusoe, don't you see?"

Again Henshaw glanced up from his envelope with the light of
inspiration. "Well, how about this? Call it Robinson Crusoe, Junior!
There you are. We get the value of the name and do the story the way
we want it, the young fellow being shaved every day by the valet,
and he can invite the other party over to dine with him and receive
them in evening dress and everything. Can't you see it? If that
story wouldn't gross big then I don't know a story. And all easy
stuff. We can use the trims for the long shots, and use that inlet,
toward the other end of Catalina for the hut and the beach; sure-
fire stuff, Governor--and Robinson Crusoe, Junior is a cinch title."

"Well, give Belmore as much dope as you've got, and see what he can
work out."

They arose and stood by the counter to pay their checks.

"If you want to see the rushes of that stuff we shot this morning be
over to the projection room at five," said Henshaw as they went out.
Neither had observed the rising young screen actor, Clifford
Armytage, though he had coughed violently again as they left. He had
coughed most plausibly, moreover, because of the cigarettes.

At the cashier's window, no longer obstructed, he received his
money, another five-dollar bill adorned with the cheerfully
prosperous face of Benjamin Harrison and half that amount in silver
coin. Then, although loath to do this, he went to the dressing room
and removed his make-up. That grease paint had given him a world of
confidence.

At the casting office he stopped to tell his friend of the day's
camera triumph, how the director had seemed to single him out from a
hundred or so revellers to portray facially the deadly effect of
Broadway's night life.

"Good work!" she applauded. "Before long you'll be having jobs
oftener. And don't forget, you're called again to-morrow morning for
the gambling-house scene."

She was a funny woman; always afraid he would forget something he
could not possibly forget. Once more in the Patterson kitchen he
pressed his suit and dreamt of new eminences in his chosen art.

The following morning he was again the first to reach the long
dressing room, the first to be made up by the grumbling extra, the
first to reach the big stage. The cabaret of yesterday had overnight
been transformed into a palatial gambling hell. Along the sides of
the room and at its centre were tables equipped for strange games of
chance which only his picture knowledge enabled him to recognize. He
might tarry at these tables, he thought, but he must remember to
look bored in the near presence of Henshaw. The Spanish girl of
yesterday appeared and he greeted her warmly. "I got some cigarettes
this time," he said, "so let me pay you back all those I smoked of
yours yesterday." Together they filled the golden case that hung
from her girdle.

"It's swell, all right," said the girl, gazing about the vast room
now filling with richly clad gamblers.

"But I thought it was all over except the tenement-house scenes
where Vera Vanderpool has gone to relieve the poor," he said.

The girl explained. "This scene comes before the one we did
yesterday. It's where the rich old boy first sees Vera playing
roulette, and she loses a lot of money and is going to leave her
string of pearls, but he says it's a mere trifle and let him pay her
gambling losses, so in a weak moment she does, and that's how he
starts to get her into his power. You'll see how it works out. Say,
they spent some money on this set, all right."

It was indeed a rich set, as the girl had said. It seemed to Merton
Gill that it would be called on the screen "One of those Plague
Spots that Eat like a Cancer at the Heart of New York." He lighted a
cigarette and leaned nonchalantly against a pillar to smile a tired
little smile at the pleasure-mad victims of this life who were now
grouping around the roulette and faro tables. He must try for his
jaded look.

"Some swell shack!" The speaker was back of him, but he knew her for
the Montague girl, and was instantly enabled to increase the
blighted look for which he had been trying. "One natty little hovel,
I'll tell the world," the girl continued. "Say, this puts it all
over the Grand Central station, don't it? Must be right smack at the
corner of Broadway and Fifth Avenue. Well, start the little ball
rolling, so I can make a killing." He turned his head slightly and
saw her dance off to one of the roulette tables, accompanied by the
middle-aged fop who had been her companion yesterday.

Henshaw and his assistant now appeared and began grouping the
players at the various tables. Merton Gill remained leaning wearily
against his massive pillar, trying to appear blase under the chatter
of the Spanish girl. The groups were arranged to the liking of
Henshaw, though only after many trials. The roulette ball was
twirled and the lively rattle of chips could be heard. Scanning his
scene, he noted Merton and his companion.

"Oh, there you are, you two. Sister, you go and stand back of that
crowd around the faro table. Keep craning to look over their
shoulders, and give us your side view. I want to use this man alone.
Here." He led Merton to a round table on which were a deck of cards
and some neatly stacked chips. "Sit here, facing the camera. Keep
one hand on the cards, sort of toying with 'em, see what I mean?"

He scattered the piled chips loosely about the table, and called to
a black waiter: "Here, George, put one of those wine glasses on his
left."

The wine glass was placed. "Now kind of slump down in your chair,
like you saw the hollowness of it all--see what I mean?"

Merton Gill thought he saw. He exhaled smoke, toyed contemptuously
with the cards at his right hand and, with a gesture of repulsion,
pushed the wine glass farther away. He saw the hollowness of it all.
The spirit of wine sang in his glass but to deaf ears. Chance could
no longer entice him. It might again have been suspected that
cigarettes were ceasing to allure.

"Good work! Keep it up," said Henshaw and went back to his cameras.

The lights jarred on; desperate gaming was filmed. "More life at the
roulette tables," megaphoned Henshaw. "Crowd closer around that
left-hand faro table. You're playing for big stakes." The gaming
became more feverish. The mad light of pleasure was in every eye,
yet one felt that the blight of Broadway was real.

The camera was wheeled forward and Merton Gill joyously quit smoking
while Henshaw secured flashes of various groups, chiefly of losers
who were seeing the hollowness of it all. He did not, however,
disdain a bit of comedy.

"Miss Montague."

"Yes, Mr. Henshaw." The Montague girl paused in the act of
sprinkling chips over a roulette lay-out.

"Your escort has lost all his chips and you've lost all he bought
for you--"

The girl and her escort passed to other players the chips before
them, and waited.

"Your escort takes out his wallet, shows it to you empty, and shrugs
his shoulders. You shrug, too, but turn your back on him, facing the
camera, and take some bills out of your stocking--see what I mean?
Give her some bills, someone."

"Never mind, Mr. Henshaw; I already got some there." The pantomime
was done, the girl turned, stooped, withdrew flattened bills from
one of the salmon-pink stockings and flourished them at her escort
who achieved a transition from gloom to joy. Merton Gill, observing
this shameless procedure, plumbed the nether depths of disgust for
Broadway's night life.

The camera was now wheeled toward him and he wearily lighted another
cigarette. "Get a flash of this chap," Henshaw was saying. The
subject leaned forward in his chair, gazing with cynical eyes at the
fevered throng. Wine, women, song, all had palled. Gambling had no
charm--he looked with disrelish at the cigarette he had but just
lighted.

"All right, Paul, that's good. Now get that bunch over at the crap
table."

Merton Gill lost no time in relinquishing his cigarette. He dropped
it into the wine glass which became a symbol of Broadway's dead-sea
fruit. Thereafter he smoked only when he was in the picture. He felt
that he was becoming screen wise. And Henshaw had remembered him.
The cast of The Blight of Broadway might not be jewelled with his
name, but his work would stand out. He had given the best that was
in him.

He watched the entrance of Muriel Mercer, maddest of all the mad
throng, accompanied by the two young men and the girl who was not so
beautiful. He watched her lose steadily, and saw her string of
pearls saved by the elderly scoundrel who had long watched the
beautiful girl as only the Wolf of Wall Street could watch one so
fair. He saw her leave upon his arm, perhaps for further unwholesome
adventure along Broadway. The lights were out, the revelry done.

Merton Gill beyond a doubt preferred Western stuff, some heart-
gripping tale of the open spaces, or perhaps of the frozen north,
where he could be the hard-riding, straight-shooting, two-fisted
wonder-man, and not have to smoke so many cigarettes--only one now
and then, which he would roll himself and toss away after a few
puffs. Still, he had shown above the mob of extra people, he
thought. Henshaw had noticed him. He was coming on.

The Montague girl hailed him as he left the set. "Hullo, old
trouper. I caught you actin' again to-day, right out before the
white folks. Well, so far so good. But say, I'm glad all that
roulette and stuff was for the up-and-down stage and not on the
level. I'd certainly have lost everything but my make-up. So long,
Kid!" She danced off to join a group of other women who were
leaving. He felt a kindly pity for the child. There could be little
future in this difficult art for one who took it so lightly; who
talked so frankly to strangers without being introduced.

At luncheon in the cafeteria he waited a long time in the hope of
encountering Henshaw, who would perhaps command his further services
in the cause of creative screen art. He meant to be animated at this
meeting, to show the director that he could be something more than
an actor who had probed the shams of Broadway. But he lingered in
vain. He thought Henshaw would perhaps be doing without food in
order to work on the scenario for Robinson Crusoe, Junior.

He again stopped to thank his friend, the casting director, for
securing him his first chance. She accepted his thanks smilingly,
and asked him to drop around often. "Mind, you don't forget our
number," she said.

He was on the point of making her understand once for all that he
would not forget the number, that he would never forget Gashwiler's
address, that he had been coming to this studio too often to forget
its location. But someone engaged her at the window, so he was
obliged to go on without enlightening the woman. She seemed to be
curiously dense.


CHAPTER VII

"NOTHING TO-DAY, DEAR!"


The savings had been opportunely replenished. In two days he had
accumulated a sum for which, back in Simsbury, he would have had to
toil a week. Yet there was to be said in favour of the Simsbury
position that it steadily endured. Each week brought its fifteen
dollars, pittance though it might be, while the art of the silver
screen was capricious in its rewards, not to say jumpy. Never, for
weeks at a stretch, had Gashwiler said with a tired smile, "Nothing
to-day--sorry!" He might have been a grouch and given to
unreasonable nagging, but with him there was always a very definite
something to-day which he would specify, in short words if the
occasion seemed to demand. There was not only a definite something
every day but a definite if not considerable sum of money to be paid
over every Saturday night, and in the meantime three very definite
and quite satisfying meals to be freely partaken of at stated hours
each day.

The leisure enforced by truly creative screen art was often occupied
now with really moving pictures of Metta Judson placing practicable
food upon the Gashwiler table. This had been no table in a gilded
Broadway resort, holding empty coffee cups and half empty wine
glasses, passed and repassed by apparently busy waiters with laden
trays who never left anything of a practicable nature. Doubtless the
set would not have appealed to Henshaw. He would never have been
moved to take close-ups, even for mere flashes, of those who ate
this food. And yet, more and more as the days went by, this old-time
film would unreel itself before the eager eyes of Merton Gill. Often
now it thrilled him as might have an installment of The Hazards of
Hortense, for the food of his favourite pharmacy was beginning to
pall and Metta Judson, though giving her shallow mind to base
village gossip, was a good cook. She became the adored heroine of an
apparently endless serial to be entitled The Hazards of Clifford
Armytage, in which the hero had tragically little to do but sit upon
a bench and wait while tempting repasts were served.

Sometimes on the little bench around the eucalyptus tree he would
run an entire five-thousand-foot program feature, beginning with the
Sunday midday dinner of roast chicken, and abounding in tense
dramatic moments such as corned-beef and cabbage on Tuesday night,
and corned-beef hash on Wednesday morning. He would pause to take
superb closeups of these, the corned beef on its spreading platter
hemmed about with boiled potatoes and turnips and cabbage, and the
corned beef hash with its richly browned surface. The thrilling
climax would be the roast of beef on Saturday night, with close-ups
taken in the very eye of the camera, of the mashed potatoes and the
apple pie drenched with cream. And there were close-ups of Metta
Judson, who had never seriously contemplated a screen career,
placing upon the table a tower of steaming hot cakes, while a
platter of small sausages loomed eloquently in the foreground.

With eyes closed he would run this film again and again, cutting
here, rearranging sequences, adding trims from suddenly remembered
meals of the dead past, devising more intimate close-ups, such as
the one of Metta withdrawing pies from the oven or smoothing hot
chocolate caressingly over the top of a giant cake, or broiling
chops, or saying in a large-lettered subtitle--artistically
decorated with cooked foods--"How about some hot coffee, Merton?"

He became an able producer of this drama. He devised a hundred
sympathetic little touches that Henshaw would probably never have
thought of. He used footage on a mere platter of steak that another
director might have ignored utterly. He made it gripping--the
supreme heart-interest drama of his season a big thing done in a big
way, and yet censor-proof. Not even the white-souled censors of the
great state of Pennsylvania could have outlawed its realism, brutal
though this was in such great moments as when Gashwiler carved the
roast beef. So able was his artistry that Merton's nostrils would
sometimes betray him--he could swear they caught rich aromas from
that distant board.

Not only had the fare purveyed by his favourite pharmacy put a
blight upon him equal to Broadway's blight, but even of this
tasteless stuff he must be cautious in his buying. A sandwich, not
too meaty at the centre, coffee tasting strangely of other things
sold in a pharmacy, a segment of pie fair--seeming on its surface,
but lacking the punch, as he put it, of Metta Judson's pie, a
standardized, factory-made, altogether formal and perfunctory pie--
these were the meagre items of his accustomed luncheon and dinner.

He had abandoned breakfast, partly because it cost money and partly
because a gentleman in eastern Ohio had recently celebrated his
hundred and third birthday by reason, so he confided to the press,
of having always breakfasted upon a glass of clear cold water.
Probably ham and eggs or corned--beef hash would have cut him off at
ninety, and water from the tap in the Patterson kitchen was both
clear and cold. It was not so much that he cared to live beyond
ninety or so, but he wished to survive until things began to pick up
on the Holden lot, and if this did bring him many more years, well
and good. Further, if the woman in the casting office persisted, as
she had for ten days, in saying "Nothing yet" to inquiring screen
artists, he might be compelled to intensify the regime of the Ohio
centenarian. Perhaps a glass of clear cold water at night, after a
hearty midday meal of drug--store sandwiches and pie, would work new
wonders.

It seemed to be the present opinion of other waiters on the extra
bench that things were never going to pick up on the Holden lot nor
on any other lot. Strongly marked types, ready to add distinction to
the screen of painted shadows, freely expressed a view that the
motion-picture business was on the rocks. Unaffected by the
optimists who wrote in the picture magazines, they saw no future for
it. More than one of them threatened to desert the industry and
return to previous callings. As they were likely to put it, they
were going to leave the pictures flat and go back to type-writing or
selling standard art-works or waiting on table or something where
you could count on your little bit every week.

Under the eucalyptus tree one morning Merton Gill, making some
appetizing changes in the fifth reel of Eating at Gashwiler's, was
accosted by a youngish woman whom he could not at first recall. She
had come from the casting office and paused when she saw him.

"Hello, I thought it was you, but I wasn't sure in them clothes. How
they coming?"

He stared blankly, startled at the sudden transposition he had been
compelled to make, for the gleaming knife of Gashwiler, standing up
to carve, had just then hovered above the well-browned roast of
beef. Then he placed the speaker by reason of her eyes. It was the
Spanish girl, his companion of the gilded cabaret, later encountered
in the palatial gambling hell that ate like a cancer at the heart of
New York--probably at the corner of Broadway and Fifth Avenue.

He arose and shook hands cordially. He had supposed, when he thought
of the girl at all, that she would always be rather Spanish, an
exotic creature rather garishly dressed, nervously eager, craving
excitement such as may be had in cabarets on Broadway, with a marked
inclination for the lighter life of pleasure. But she wore not so
much as a rose in her smoothly combed hair. She was not only not
excited but she was not exciting. She was plainly dressed in skirt
and shirtwaist of no distinction, her foot-gear was of the most
ordinary, and well worn, and her face under a hat of no allure was
without make-up, a commonplace, somewhat anxious face with lines
about the eyes. But her voice as well as her eyes helped him to
recall her.

She spoke with an effort at jauntiness after Merton had greeted her.
"That's one great slogan, 'Business as Usual!' ain't it? Well, it's
business as usual here, so I just found out from the Countess--as
usual, rotten. I ain't had but three days since I seen you last."

"I haven't had even one," he told her.

"No? Say, that's tough. You're registered with the Service Bureau,
ain't you?"

"Well, I didn't do that, because they might send me any place, and I
sort of wanted to work on this particular lot." Instantly he saw
himself saving Beulah Baxter, for the next installment, from a fate
worse than death, but the one-time Spanish girl did not share this
vision.

"Oh, well, little I care where I work. I had two days at the Bigart
in a hop-joint scene, and one over at the United doin' some board-
walk stuff. I could 'a' had another day there, but the director said
I wasn't just the type for a chick bathing-suit. He was very nice
about it. Of course I know my legs ain't the best part of me--I sure
ain't one of them like the girl that says she's wasted in skirts."
She grinned ruefully.

He felt that some expression of sympathy would be graceful here, yet
he divined that it must be very discreetly, almost delicately,
worded. He could easily be too blunt.

"I guess I'd be pretty skinny in a bathing-suit myself, right now. I
know they won't be giving me any such part pretty soon if I have to
cut down on the meals the way I been doing."

"Oh, of course I don't mean I'm actually skinny--"

He felt he had been blunt, after all.

"Not to say skinny." she went on, "but--well, you know--more like
home-folks, I guess. Anyway, I got no future as a bathing beauty--
none whatever. And this walkin' around to the different lots ain't
helpin' me any, either. Of course it ain't as if I couldn't go back
to the insurance office. Mr. Gropp, he's office manager, he was very
nice about it. He says, 'I wish you all the luck in the world,
girlie, and remember your job as filin' clerk will always be here
for you.' Wasn't that gentlemanly of him? Still, I'd rather act than
stand on my feet all day filing letters. I won't go back till I have
to."

"Me either," said Merton Gill, struggling against the obsession of
Saturday-night dinner at Gashwiler's.

Grimly he resumed his seat when the girl with a friendly "So long!"
had trudged on. In spite of himself he found something base in his
nature picturing his return to the emporium and to the thrice-daily
encounter with Metta Judson's cookery. He let his lower instincts
toy with the unworthy vision. Gashwiler would advance him the money
to return, and the job would be there. Probably Spencer Grant had
before this tired of the work and gone into insurance or some other
line, and probably Gashwiler would be only too glad to have the
wanderer back. He would get off No. 3 just in time for breakfast.

He brushed the monstrous scene from his eyes, shrugged it from his
shoulders. He would not give up. They had all struggled and
sacrificed, and why should he shrink from the common ordeal? But he
wished the Spanish girl hadn't talked about going back to her job.
He regretted not having stopped her with words of confident cheer
that would have stiffened his own resolution. He could see her far
down the street, on her way to the next lot, her narrow shoulders
switching from light to shadow as she trudged under the line of
eucalyptus trees. He hoped she wouldn't give up. No one should ever
give up--least of all Merton Gill.

The days wore wearily on. He began to feel on his own face the tired
little smile of the woman in the casting office as she would look up
to shake her head, often from the telephone over which she was
saying: "Nothing to-day, dear. Sorry!" She didn't exactly feel that
the motion-picture business had gone on the rocks, but she knew it
wasn't picking up as it should. And ever and again she would have
Merton Gill assure her that he hadn't forgotten the home address,
the town where lived Gighampton or Gumwash or whoever it was that
held the good old job open for him. He had divined that it was a
jest of some sort when she warned him not to forget the address and
he would patiently smile at this, but he always put her right about
the name of Gashwiler. Of course it was a name any one might forget,
though the woman always seemed to make the most earnest effort to
remember it.

Each day, after his brief chat with her in which he learned that
there would be nothing to-day, he would sit on the waiting-room
bench or out under the eucalyptus tree and consecrate himself anew
to the art of the perpendicular screen. And each day, as the little
hoard was diminished by even those slender repasts at the drug
store, he ran his film of the Gashwiler dining room in action.

From time to time he would see the Montague girl, alone or with her
mother, entering the casting office or perhaps issuing from the
guarded gate. He avoided her when possible. She persisted in
behaving as if they had been properly introduced and had known each
other a long time. She was too familiar, and her levity jarred upon
his more serious mood. So far as he could see, the girl had no
screen future, though doubtless she was her own worst enemy. If
someone had only taught her to be serious, her career might have
been worth while. She had seemed not wholly negligible in the
salmon-pink dancing frock, though of course the blonde curls had not
been true.

Then the days passed until eating merely at a drug-store lunch
counter became not the only matter of concern. There was the item of
room rent. Mrs. Patterson, the Los Angeles society woman, had, upon
the occasion of their first interview, made it all too clear that
the money, trifling though it must seem for a well-furnished room
with the privilege of electric iron in the kitchen, must be paid
each week in advance. Strictly in advance. Her eye had held a cold
light as she dwelt upon this.

There had been times lately when, upon his tree bench, he would try
to dramatize Mrs. Patterson as a woman with a soft heart under that
polished society exterior, chilled by daily contact with other
society people at the Iowa or Kansas or other society picnics, yet
ready to melt at the true human touch. But he had never quite
succeeded in this bit of character work. Something told him that she
was cold all through, a society woman without a flaw in her armour.
He could not make her seem to listen patiently while he explained
that only one company was now shooting on the lot, but that big
things were expected to be on in another week or so. A certain
skeptic hardness was in her gaze as he visioned it.

He decided, indeed, that he could never bring himself even to
attempt this scene with the woman, so remote was he from seeing her
eye soften and her voice warm with the assurance that a few weeks
more or less need not matter. The room rent, he was confident, would
have to be paid strictly in advance so long as their relations
continued. She was the kind who would insist upon this formality
even after he began to play, at an enormous salary, a certain
outstanding part in the Hazards of Hortense. The exigencies, even
the adversities, of art would never make the slightest appeal to
this hardened soul. So much for that. And daily the hoard waned.

Yet his was not the only tragedy. In the waiting room, where he now
spent more of his time, he listened one day to the Montague girl
chat through the window with the woman she called Countess.

"Yeah, Pa was double-crossed over at the Bigart. He raised that
lovely set of whiskers for Camillia of the Cumberlands and what did
he get for it?--just two weeks. Fact! What do you know about that?
Hugo has him killed off in the second spool with a squirrel rifle
from ambush, and Pa thinking he would draw pay for at least another
three weeks. He kicked, but Hugo says the plot demanded it. I bet,
at that, he was just trying to cut down his salary list. I bet that
continuity this minute shows Pa drinking his corn out of a jug and
playing a fiddle for the dance right down to the last scene. Don't
artists get the razz, though. And that Hugo, he'd spend a week in
the hot place to save a thin dime. Let me tell you, Countess, don't
you ever get your lemon in his squeezer."

There were audible murmurs of sympathy from the Countess.

"And so the old trouper had to start out Monday morning to peddle
the brush. Took him three days to land anything at all, and then
it's nothing but a sleeping souse in a Western bar-room scene. In
here now he is--something the Acme people are doing. He's had three
days, just lying down with his back against a barrel sleeping. He's
not to wake up even when the fight starts, but sleep right on
through it, which they say will be a good gag. Well, maybe. But it's
tough on his home. He gets all his rest daytimes and keeps us
restless all night making a new kind of beer and tending his still,
and so on. You bet Ma and I, the minute he's through with this
piece, are going pronto to get that face of his as naked as the day
he was born. Pa's so temperamental--like that time he was playing a
Bishop and never touched a drop for five weeks, and in bed every
night at nine-thirty. Me? Oh, I'm having a bit of my own in this
Acme piece--God's Great Outdoors, I think it is--anyway, I'm to be a
little blonde hussy in the bar-room, sitting on the miners' knees
and all like that, so they'll order more drinks. It certainly takes
all kinds of art to make an artist. And next week I got some
shipwreck stuff for Baxter, and me with bronchial pneumonia right
this minute, and hating tank stuff, anyway. Well, Countess, don't
take any counterfeit money. So long."

She danced through a doorway and was gone--she was one who seldom
descended to plain walking. She would manage a dance step even in
the short distance from the casting--office door to the window. It
was not of such material, Merton Gill was sure, that creative
artists were moulded. And there was no question now of his own utter
seriousness. The situation hourly grew more desperate. For a week he
had foregone the drug-store pie, so that now he recalled it as very
wonderful pie indeed, but he dared no longer indulge in this luxury.
An occasional small bag of candy and as much sugar as he could
juggle into his coffee must satisfy his craving for sweets.
Stoically he awaited the end--some end. The moving-picture business
seemed to be still on the rocks, but things must take a turn.

He went over the talk of the Montague girl. Her father had perhaps
been unfairly treated, but at least he was working again. And there
were other actors who would go unshaven for even a sleeping part in
the bar-room scene of God's Great Outdoors. Merton Gill knew one,
and rubbed his shaven chin. He thought, too, of the girl's warning
about counterfeit money. He had not known that the casting
director's duties required her to handle money, but probably he had
overlooked this item in her routine. And was counterfeit money
about? He drew out his own remaining bill and scrutinized it
anxiously. It seemed to be genuine. He hoped it was, for Mrs.
Patterson's sake, and was relieved when she accepted it without
question that night.

Later he tested the handful of silver that remained to him and
prayed earnestly that an increase of prosperity be granted to
producers of the motion picture. With the silver he eked out another
barren week, only to face a day the evening of which must witness
another fiscal transaction with Mrs. Patterson. And there was no
longer a bill for this heartless society creature. He took a long
look at the pleasant little room as he left it that morning. The day
must bring something but it might not bring him back that night.

At the drug store he purchased a bowl of vegetable soup, loaded it
heavily with catsup at intervals when the attendant had other
matters on his mind, and seized an extra half--portion of crackers
left on their plate by a satiated neighbour. He cared little for
catsup, but it doubtless bore nourishing elements, and nourishment
was now important. He crumpled his paper napkin and laid upon the
marble slab a trifling silver coin. It was the last of his hoard.
When he should eat next and under what circumstances were now as
uncertain as where he should sleep that night, though he was already
resolving that catsup would be no part of his meal. It might be well
enough in its place, but he had abundantly proved that it was not,
strictly speaking, a food.

He reached the Holden studios and loitered outside for half an hour
before daring the daily inquiry at the window. Yet, when at last he
did approach it, his waning faith in prayer was renewed, for here in
his direst hour was cheering news. It seemed even that his friend
beyond the window had been impatient at his coming.

"Just like you to be late when there's something doing!" she called
to him with friendly impatience. "Get over to the dressing rooms on
the double-quick. It's the Victor people doing some Egyptian stuff--
they'll give you a costume. Hurry along!"

And he had lingered over a bowl of soggy crackers soaked, at the
last, chiefly in catsup! He hurried, with a swift word of thanks.

In the same dressing room where he had once been made up as a
Broadway pleasure seeker he now donned the flowing robe and burnoose
of a Bedouin, and by the same grumbling extra his face and hands
were stained the rich brown of children of the desert. A dozen other
men of the paler race had undergone the same treatment. A sheik of
great stature and noble mien smoked an idle cigarette in the
doorway. He was accoutred with musket and with pistols in his belt.

An assistant director presently herded the desert men down an alley
between two of the big stages and to the beginning of the oriental
street that Merton had noticed on his first day within the Holden
walls. It was now peopled picturesquely with other Bedouins. Banners
hung from the walls and veiled ladies peeped from the latticed
balconies. A camel was led excitingly through the crowded way, and
donkeys and goats were to be observed. It was a noisy street until a
whistle sounded at the farther end, then all was silence while the
voice of Henshaw came through the megaphone.

It appeared that long shots of the street were Henshaw's first need.
Up and down it Merton Gill strolled in a negligent manner, stopping
perhaps to haggle with the vendor who sold sweetmeats from a tray,
or to chat with a tribal brother fresh from the sandy wastes, or to
purchase a glass of milk from the man with the goats. He secured a
rose from the flower seller, and had the inspiration to toss it to
one of the discreet balconies above him, but as he stepped back to
do this he was stopped by the watchful assistant director who stood
just inside a doorway. "Hey, Bill, none of that! Keep your head
down, and pay no attention to the dames. It ain't done."

He strolled on with the rose in his hand. Later, and much nearer the
end of the street where the cameras were, he saw the sheik of noble
mien halt the flower seller, haggle for another rose, place this
daintily behind his left ear and stalk on, his musket held over one
shoulder, his other hand on a belted pistol. Merton disposed of his
rose in the same manner. He admired the sheik for his stature, his
majestic carriage, his dark, handsome, yet sinister face with its
brooding eyes. He thought this man, at least, would be a true Arab,
some real son of the desert who had wandered afar. His manner was so
much more authentic than that of the extra people all about.

A whistle blew and the street action was suspended. There was a long
wait while cameras were moved up and groups formed under the
direction of Henshaw and his assistant. A band of Bedouins were now
to worship in the porch of a mosque. Merton Gill was among these.
The assistant director initiated them briefly into Moslem rites.
Upon prayer rugs they bowed their foreheads to earth in the
direction of Mecca.

"What's the idea of this here?" demanded Merton Gill's neighbour in
aggrieved tones.

"Ssh!" cautioned Merton. "It's Mass or something like that." And
they bent in unison to this noon-tide devotion.

When this was done Henshaw bustled into the group. "I want about a
dozen or fifteen good types for the cafe," he explained to his
assistant. Merton Gill instinctively stood forward, and was
presently among those selected. "You'll do," said Henshaw, nodding.
The director, of course, had not remembered that this was the actor
he had distinguished in The Blight of Broadway, yet he had again
chosen him for eminence. It showed, Merton felt, that his conviction
about the screen value of his face was not ill founded.

The selected types were now herded into a dark, narrow, low-ceiled
room with a divan effect along its three walls. A grizzled Arab made
coffee over a glowing brazier. Merton Gill sat cross-legged on the
divan and became fearful that he would be asked to smoke the
narghileh which the assistant director was now preparing. To one who
balked at mere cigarettes, it was an evil-appearing device. His
neighbour who had been puzzled at prayer-time now hitched up his
flowing robe to withdraw a paper of cigarettes from the pocket of a
quite occidental garment.

"Go on, smoke cigarettes," said the assistant director.

"Have one?" said Merton's neighbour, and he took one. It seemed you
couldn't get away from cigarettes on the screen. East and West were
here one. He lighted it, though smoking warily. The noble sheik, of
undoubtedly Asiatic origin, came to the doorway overlooking the
assistant director's work on the narghileh. A laden camel halted
near him, sneered in an evil manner at the bystanders, and then,
lifting an incredible length of upper lip, set his yellow teeth in
the nearest shoulder. It was the shoulder of the noble sheik, who
instantly rent the air with a plaintive cry: "For the love of
Mike!--keep that man-eater off'n me, can't you?"

His accent had not been that of the Arabian waste-land. Merton Gill
was disappointed. So the fellow was only an actor, after all. If he
had felt sympathy at all, it would now have been for the camel. The
beast was jerked back with profane words and the sheik, rubbing his
bitten shoulder, entered the cafe, sitting cross-legged at the end
of the divan nearest the door.

"All right, Bob." The assistant director handed him the tube of the
water pipe, and the sheik smoked with every sign of enjoyment.
Merton Gill resolved never to play the part of an Arab sheik--at the
mercy of man-eating camels and having to smoke something that looked
murderous.

Under Henshaw's direction the grizzled proprietor now served tiny
cups of coffee to the sheik and his lesser patrons. Two of these
played dominoes, and one or two reclined as in sleep. Cameras were
brought up. The interior being to his satisfaction, Henshaw
rehearsed the entrance of a little band of European tourists. A
beautiful girl in sports garb, a beautiful young man in khaki and
puttees, a fine old British father with gray side whiskers shaded by
a sun-hat with a flowing veil twined about it. These people sat and
were served coffee, staring in a tourist manner at their novel
surroundings. The Bedouins, under stern command, ignored them,
conversing among themselves over their coffee--all but the sheik.

The sheik had been instantly struck by the fair young English girl.
His sinister eyes hung constantly upon her, shifting only when she
regarded him, furtively returning when she ceased. When they left
the cafe, the sheik arose and placed himself partly in the girl's
way. She paused while his dark eyes caught and held hers. A long
moment went before she seemed able to free herself from the hypnotic
tension he put upon her. Then he bowed low, and the girl with a
nervous laugh passed him.

It could be seen that the sheik meant her no good. He stepped to the
door and looked after the group. There was evil purpose in his gaze.

Merton Gill recalled something of Henshaw's words the first day he
had eaten at the cafeteria: "They find this deserted tomb just at
nightfall, and he's alone there with the girl, and he could do
anything, but the kick for the audience is that he's a gentleman and
never lays a finger on her."

This would be the story. Probably the sheik would now arrange with
the old gentleman in the sun-hat to guide the party over the desert,
and would betray them in order to get the beautiful girl into his
power. Of course there would be a kick for the audience when the
young fellow proved to be a gentleman in the deserted tomb for a
whole night--any moving-picture audience would expect him under
these propitious circumstances to be quite otherwise, if the girl
were as beautiful as this one. But there would surely be a greater
kick when the sheik found them in the tomb and bore the girl off on
his camel, after a fight in which the gentleman was momentarily
worsted. But the girl would be rescued in time. And probably the
piece would be called Desert Passion.

He wished he could know the ending of the story. Indeed he sincerely
wished he could work in it to the end, not alone because he was
curious about the fate of the young girl in the bad sheik's power.
Undoubtedly the sheik would not prove to be a gentleman, but Merton
would like to work to the end of the story because he had no place
to sleep and but little assurance of wholesome food. Yet this, it
appeared, was not to be. Already word had run among the extra
people. Those hired to-day were to be used for to-day only. Tomorrow
the desert drama would unfold without them.

Still, he had a day's pay coming. This time, though, it would be but
five dollars--his dress suit had not been needed. And five dollars
would appease Mrs. Patterson for another week. Yet what would be the
good of sleeping if he had nothing to eat? He was hungry now. Thin
soup, ever so plenteously spiced with catsup, was inadequate
provender for a working artist. He knew, even as he sat there cross-
legged, an apparently self-supporting and care-free Bedouin, that
this ensuing five dollars would never be seen by Mrs. Patterson.

There were a few more shots of the cafe's interior during which one
of the inmates carefully permitted his half--consumed cigarette to
go out. After that a few more shots of the lively street which, it
was now learned, was a street in Cairo. Earnest efforts were made by
the throngs in these scenes to give the murderous camel plenty of
head room. Some close-ups were taken of the European tourists while
they bargained with a native merchant for hammered brassware and
rare shawls.

The bad sheik was caught near the group bending an evil glare upon
the beauteous English girl, and once the camera turned while she
faced him with a little shiver of apprehension. Later the sheik was
caught bargaining for a camel train with the innocent-looking old
gentleman in the sun-hat. Undoubtedly the sheik was about to lead
them into the desert for no good purpose. A dreadful fate seemed in
store for the girl, but she must be left to face it without the
support of Merton Gill.

The lately hired extras were now dismissed. They trooped back to the
dressing room to doff their flowing robes and remove the Bedouin
make-up. Merton Gill went from the dressing room to the little
window through which he had received his robe and his slip was
returned to him signed by the assistant director. It had now become
a paper of value, even to Mrs. Patterson; but she was never to know
this, for its owner went down the street to another window and
relinquished it for a five-dollar bill.

The bill was adorned with a portrait of Benjamin Harrison smugly
radiating prosperity from every hair in his beard. He was clearly
one who had never gone hungry nor betrayed the confidence of a
society woman counting upon her room rent strictly in advance. The
portrait of this successful man was borne swiftly to the cafeteria
where its present owner lavishly heaped a tray with excellent food
and hastened with it to a table. He ate with but slight regard for
his surroundings. Beulah Baxter herself might have occupied a
neighbouring table without coming to his notice at once. He was very
hungry. The catsup-laden soup had proved to be little more than an
appetizer.

In his first ardour he forgot his plight. It was not until later in
the meal that the accusing face of Mrs. Patterson came between him
and the last of his stew which he secured with blotters of bread.
Even then he ignored the woman. He had other things to think of. He
had to think of where he should sleep that night. But for once he
had eaten enough; his optimism was again enthroned.

Sleeping, after all, was not like eating. There were more ways to
manage it. The law of sleep would in time enforce itself, while
eating did nothing of the sort. You might sleep for nothing, but
someone had to be paid if you ate. He cheerfully paid eighty cents
for his repast. The catsup as an appetizer had been ruinous.

It was late in the afternoon when he left the cafeteria and the
cheerful activities of the lot were drawing to a close. Extra people
from the various stages were hurrying to the big dressing room,
whence they would presently stream, slips in hand, toward the
cashier's window. Belated principals came in from their work to
resume their choice street garments and be driven off in choice
motor cars.

Merton Gill in deep thought traversed the street between the big
stages and the dressing rooms. Still in deep thought he retraced his
steps, and at the front office turned off to the right on a road
that led to the deserted street of the Western town. His head bowed
in thought he went down this silent thoroughfare, his footsteps
echoing along the way lined by the closed shops. The Happy Days
Saloon and Joe--Buy or Sell, the pool-room and the restaurant, alike
slept for want of custom. He felt again the eeriness of this
desertion, and hurried on past the silent places.

Emerging from the lower end of this street he came upon a log cabin
where activity still survived. He joined the group before its door.
Inside two cameras were recording some drama of the rude frontier.
Over glowing coals in the stone fireplace a beautiful young girl
prepared food in a long-handled frying pan. At a table in the room's
centre two bearded miners seemed to be appraising a buckskin pouch
of nuggets, pouring them from hand to hand. A candle stuck in a
bottle flickered beside them. They were honest, kindly faced miners,
roughly dressed and heavily bearded, but it could be seen that they
had hearts of gold. The beautiful young girl, who wore a simple
dress of blue calico, and whose hair hung about her fair face in
curls of a radiant buff, now served them food and poured steaming
coffee from a large pot.

The miners seemed loth to eat, being excited by the gold nuggets.
They must have struck it rich that day, Merton Gill divined, and now
with wealth untold they would be planning to send the girl East to
school. They both patted her affectionately, keeping from her the
great surprise they had in store.

The girl was arch with them, and prettily kissed each upon his bald
head. Merton at once saw that she would be the daughter of neither;
she would be their ward. And perhaps they weren't planning to send
her to school. Perhaps they were going to send her to fashionable
relatives in the East, where she would unwittingly become the rival
of her beautiful but cold-hearted cousin for the hand of a rich
young stock-broker, and be ill-treated and long for the old miners
who would get word of it and buy some fine clothes from Joe--Buy or
Sell, and go East to the consternation of the rich relatives and see
that their little mountain flower was treated right.

As he identified this photo-play he studied the interior of the
cabin, the rough table at which the three now ate, the makeshift
chairs, the rifle over the fireplace, the picks and shovels, the
shelf along the wall with its crude dishes, the calico curtain
screening off what would be the dressing room of the little mountain
flower. It was a home-like room, for all its roughness. Along one
wall were two bunks, one above the other, well supplied with
blankets.

The director, after a final shot of one of the miners being scalded
by his coffee which he drank from a saucer, had said, "All right,
boys! We'll have the fight first thing in the morning."

Merton Gill passed on. He didn't quite know what the fight would be
about. Surely the two miners wouldn't fight. Perhaps another miner
of loose character would come along and try to jump their claim, or
attempt some dirty work with the little girl. Something like that.
He carried with him the picture of the homey little ulterior, the
fireplace with its cooking utensils, the two bunks with their ample
stock of blankets--the crude door closed with a wooden bar and a
leather latch-string, which hung trustfully outside.

In other circumstances--chiefly those in which Merton Gill had now
been the prominent figure in the film world he meant one day to
become--he would on this night have undoubtedly won public attention
for his mysterious disappearance. The modest room in the Patterson
home, to which for three months he had unfailingly come after the
first picture show, on this night went untenanted. The guardian at
the Holden gate would have testified that he had not passed out that
way, and the way through the offices had been closed at five,
subsequent to which hour several witnesses could have sworn to
seeing him still on the lot.

In the ensuing search even the tank at the lower end of the lot
might have been dragged--without result.

Being little known to the public, however, and in the Patterson home
it being supposed that you could never tell about motion-picture
actors, his disappearance for the night caused absolutely no
slightest ripple. Public attention as regarded the young man
remained at a mirror-like calm, unflawed by even the mildest
curiosity. He had been seen, perhaps, though certainly not noted
with any interest, to be one of the group watching a night scene in
front of one of the Fifth Avenue mansions.

Lights shone from the draped windows of this mansion and from its
portals issued none other than Muriel Mercer, who, as Vera
Vanderpool, freed at last from the blight of Broadway, was leaving
her palatial home to cast her lot finally with the ardent young
tenement worker with the high forehead. She descended the brown-
stone steps, paused once to look back upon the old home where she
had been taught to love pleasure above the worth-while things of
life, then came on to the waiting limousine, being greeted here by
the young man with the earnest forehead who had won her to the
better way.

The missing youth might later have been observed, but probably was
not, walking briskly in the chill night toward the gate that led to
the outer world. But he wheeled abruptly before reaching this gate,
and walked again briskly, this time debouching from the main
thoroughfare into the black silence of the Western village. Here his
pace slackened, and halfway down the street he paused irresolutely.
He was under the wooden porch of the Fashion Restaurant--Give our
Tamales a Trial. He lingered here but a moment, however, then lurked
on down the still thoroughfare, keeping well within the shadow of
the low buildings. Just beyond the street was the log cabin of the
big-hearted miners. A moment later he could not have been observed
even by the keenest eye.

Nothing marked his disappearance, at least nothing that would have
been noted by the casual minded. He had simply gone. He was now no
more than the long-vanished cowboys and sheriffs and gamblers and
petty tradesmen who had once peopled this street of silence and
desolation.

A night watchman came walking presently, flashing an electric torch
from side to side. He noticed nothing. He was, indeed, a rather
imaginative man, and he hoped he would not notice anything. He did
not like coming down this ghostly street, which his weak mind would
persist in peopling with phantom crowds from long-played picture
dramas. It gave him the creeps, as he had more than once confessed.
He hurried on, flashing his torch along the blind fronts of the
shops in a perfunctory manner. He was especially nervous when he
came to corners. And he was glad when he issued from the little
street into the wider one that was well lighted.

How could he have been expected to notice a very trifling
incongruous detail as he passed the log cabin? Indeed many a keener-
eyed and entirely valorous night watchman might have neglected to
observe that the leathern latch-string of the cabin's closed door
was no longer hanging outside.


CHAPTER VIII

CLIFFORD ARMYTAGE, THE OUTLAW


Dawn brought the wide stretches of the Holden lot into gray relief.
It lightened the big yellow stages and crept down the narrow street
of the Western town where only the ghosts of dead plays stalked. It
burnished the rich fronts of the Fifth Avenue mansions and in the
next block illumined the rough sides of a miner's cabin.

With more difficulty it seeped through the blurred glass of the one
window in this structure and lightened the shadows of its interior
to a pale gray. The long-handled frying-pan rested on the hearth
where the little girl had left it. The dishes of the overnight meal
were still on the table; the vacant chairs sprawled about it; and
the rifle was in its place above the rude mantel; the picks and
shovels awaited the toil of a new day. All seemed as it had been
when the director had closed the door upon it the previous night.

But then the blankets in the lower bunk were seen to heave and to be
thrust back from the pale face of Merton Gill. An elbow came into
play, and the head was raised. A gaze still vague with sleep
travelled about the room in dull alarm. He was waking up in his
little room at the Patterson house and he couldn't make it look
right. He rubbed his eyes vigorously and pushed himself farther up.
His mind resumed its broken threads. He was where he had meant to be
from the moment he had spied the blankets in those bunks.

In quicker alarm, now, he reached for his watch. Perhaps he had
slept too late and would be discovered--arrested, jailed! He found
his watch on the floor beside the bunk. Seven o'clock. He was safe.
He could dress at leisure, and presently be an early-arriving actor
on the Holden lot. He wondered how soon he could get food at the
cafeteria. Sleeping in this mountain cabin had cursed him with a
ravenous appetite, as if he had indeed been far off in the keen air
of the North Woods.

He crept from the warm blankets, and from under the straw mattress--
in which one of the miners had hidden the pouch of nuggets--he took
his newly pressed trousers. Upon a low bench across the room was a
battered tin wash--basin, a bucket of water brought by the little
girl from the spring, and a bar of yellow soap. He made a quick
toilet, and at seven-thirty, a good hour before the lot would wake
up, he was dressed and at the door.

It might be chancy, opening that door; so he peered through a narrow
crack at first, listening intently. He could hear nothing and no one
was in sight. He pushed the latch--string through its hole, then
opened the door enough to emit his slender shape.

A moment later, ten feet from the closed door, he stood at ease,
scanning the log cabin as one who, passing by, had been attracted by
its quaint architecture. Then glancing in both directions to be
again sure that he was unobserved, he walked away from his new home.

He did not slink furtively. He took the middle of the street and
there was a bit of swagger to his gait. He felt rather set up about
this adventure. He reached what might have been called the lot's
civic centre and cast a patronizing eye along the ends of the big
stages and the long, low dressing--room building across from them.
Before the open door of the warehouse he paused to watch a truck
being loaded with handsome furniture--a drawing room was evidently
to be set on one of the stages. Rare rugs and beautiful chairs and
tables were carefully brought out. He had rather a superintending
air as he watched this process. He might have been taken for the
owner of these costly things, watching to see that no harm befell
them. He strolled on when the truck had received its load. Such
people as he had met were only artisans, carpenters, electricians,
property-men. He faced them all confidently, with glances of
slightly amused tolerance. They were good men in their way but they
were not actors--not artists.

In the neatly landscaped little green place back of the office
building a climbing rose grew on a trellis. He plucked a pink bud,
fixed it in his lapel, and strolled down the street past the
dressing rooms. Across from these the doors of the big stages were
slid back, and inside he could see that sets were being assembled.
The truckload of furniture came to one of these doors and he again
watched it as the stuff was carried inside.

For all these workmen knew, he might presently be earning a princely
salary as he acted amid these beautiful objects, perhaps attending a
reception in a Fifth Avenue mansion where the father of a beautiful
New York society girl would tell him that he must first make good
before he could aspire to her hand. And he would make good--out
there in the great open spaces, where the girl would come to him
after many adventures and where they would settle to an untroubled
future in the West they both loved.

He had slept; he knew where--with luck--he could sleep again; and he
had money in his pocket for several more ample meals. At this moment
he felt equal to anything. No more than pleasantly aware of his
hunger, sharpened by the walk in this keen morning air, he made a
nonchalant progress toward the cafeteria. Motor cars were now
streaming through the gate, disgorging other actors--trim young men
and beautiful young women who must hurry to the dressing rooms while
he could sit at ease in a first-class cafeteria and eat heavily of
sustaining foods. Inside he chose from the restricted menu offered
by the place at this early hour and ate in a leisurely, almost
condescending manner. Half-a-dozen other early comers wolfed their
food as if they feared to be late for work, but he suffered no such
anxiety. He consumed the last morsel that his tray held, drained his
cup of coffee, and jingled the abundant silver coin in his pocket.

True, underneath it, as he plumed himself upon his adventure, was a
certain pestering consciousness that all was not so well with him as
observers might guess. But he resolutely put this away each time it
threatened to overwhelm him. He would cross no bridge until he came
to it. He even combated this undercurrent of sanity by wording part
of an interview with himself some day to appear in Photo Land:

"Clifford Armytage smiled that rare smile which his admirers have
found so winning on the silver screen--a smile reminiscent, tender,
eloquent of adversities happily surmounted. 'Yes,' he said frankly
in the mellow tones that are his, 'I guess there were times when I
almost gave up the struggle. I recall one spell, not so many years
ago, when I camped informally on the Holden lot, sleeping where I
could find a bed and stinting myself in food to eke out my little
savings. Yet I look back upon that time'--he mischievously pulled
the ears of the magnificent Great Dane that lolled at his feet--'as
one of the happiest in my career, because I always knew that my day
would come. I had done only a few little bits, but they had stood
out, and the directors had noticed me. Not once did I permit myself
to become discouraged, and so I say to your readers who may feel
that they have in them the stuff for truly creative screen art--'"

He said it, dreaming above the barren tray, said it as Harold
Parmalee had said it in a late interview extorted from him by
Augusta Blivens for the refreshment of his host of admirers who read
Photo Land. He was still saying it as he paid his check at the
counter, breaking off only to reflect that fifty-five cents was a
good deal to be paying for food so early in the day. For of course
he must eat again before seeking shelter of the humble miner's
cabin.

It occurred to him that the blankets might be gone by nightfall. He
hoped they would have trouble with the fight scene. He hoped there
would be those annoying delays that so notoriously added to the cost
of producing the screen drama--long waits, when no one seemed to
know what was being waited for, and bored actors lounged about in
apathy. He hoped the fight would be a long fight. You needed
blankets even in sunny California.

He went out to pass an enlivening day, fairly free of misgiving. He
found an abundance of entertainment. On one stage he overlooked for
half an hour a fragment of the desert drama which he had assisted
the previous day. A covered incline led duskily down to the deserted
tomb in which the young man and the beautiful English girl were to
take shelter for the night. They would have eluded the bad sheik for
a little while, and in the tomb the young man would show himself to
be a gentleman by laying not so much as a finger upon the
defenceless girl.

But this soon palled upon the watching connoisseur. The actual shots
were few and separated by barren intervals of waiting for that
mysterious something which photoplays in production seemed to need.
Being no longer identified with this drama he had lost much of his
concern over the fate in store for the girl, though he knew she
would emerge from the ordeal as pure as she was beautiful--a bit
foolish at moments, perhaps, but good.

He found that he was especially interested in bedroom scenes. On
Stage Four a sumptuous bedroom, vacant for the moment, enchained him
for a long period of contemplation. The bed was of some rare wood
ornately carved, with a silken canopy, spread with finest linen and
quilts of down, its pillows opulent in their embroidered cases. The
hide of a polar bear, its head mounted with open jaws, spread over
the rich rug beside the bed. He wondered about this interestingly.
Probably the stage would be locked at night. Still, at a suitable
hour, he could descreetly find out. On another stage a bedroom
likewise intrigued him, though this was a squalid room in a tenement
and the bed was a cheap thing sparsely covered and in sad disorder.
People were working on this set, and he presently identified the
play, for Muriel Mercer in a neat black dress entered to bring
comfort to the tenement dwellers. But this play, too, had ceased to
interest him. He knew that Vera Vanderpool had escaped the blight of
Broadway to choose the worthwhile, the true, the vital things of
life, and that was about all he now cared to know of the actual
play. This tenement bed had become for him its outstanding dramatic
value. He saw himself in it for a good night's rest, waking
refreshed in plenty of time to be dressed and out before the
tenement people would need it. He must surely learn if the big
sliding doors to these stages were locked overnight.

He loitered about the stages until late afternoon, with especial
attention to sleeping apartments. In one gripping drama he felt
cheated. The set showed the elaborately fitted establishment of a
fashionable modiste. Mannequins in wondrous gowns came through
parted curtains to parade before the shop's clientele, mostly
composed of society butterflies. One man hovered attentive about the
most beautiful of these, and whispered entertainingly as she scanned
the gowns submitted to her choice. He was a dissolute--looking man,
although faultlessly arrayed. His hair was thin, his eyes were
cruel, and his face bespoke self-indulgence.

The expert Merton Gill at once detected that the beautiful young
woman he whispered to would be one of those light--headed wives who
care more for fashionable dress than for the good name of their
husbands. He foresaw that the creature would be trapped into the
power of this villain by her love of finery, though he was sure that
the end would find her still a good woman. The mannequins finished
their parade and the throng of patrons broke up. The cameras were
pushed to an adjoining room where the French proprietor of the place
figured at a desk. The dissolute pleasure-seeker came back to
question him. His errant fancy had been caught by one of the
mannequins--the most beautiful of them, a blonde with a flowerlike
face and a figure whose perfection had been boldly attested by the
gowns she had worn. The unprincipled proprietor at once demanded
from a severe-faced forewoman that this girl be sent for, after
which he discreetly withdrew. The waiting scoundrel sat and
complacently pinched the ends of his small dark mustache. It could
be seen that he was one of those who believe that money will buy
anything.

The fair girl entered and was leeringly entreated to go out to
dinner with him. It appeared that she never went out to dinner with
any one, but spent her evenings with her mother who was very, very
ill. Her unworthy admirer persisted. Then the telephone on the
manager's desk called her. Her mother was getting worse. The
beautiful face was now suffused with agony, but this did not deter
the man from his loathsome advances. There was another telephone
call. She must come at once if she were to see her mother alive. The
man seized her. They struggled. All seemed lost, even the choice
gown she still wore; but she broke away to be told over the
telephone that her mother had died. Even this sad news made no
impression upon the wretch. He seemed to be a man of one idea. Again
he seized her, and the maddened girl stabbed him with a pair of long
gleaming shears that had lain on the manager's desk. He fell
lifeless at her feet, while the girl stared in horror at the weapon
she still grasped.

Merton Gill would not have lingered for this. There were tedious
waits, and scenes must be rehearsed again and again. Even the agony
of the girl as she learned of her mother's passing must be done over
and over at the insistence of a director who seemed to know what a
young girl should feel at these moments. But Merton had watched from
his place back of the lights with fresh interest from the moment it
was known that the girl's poor old mother was an invalid, for he had
at first believed that the mother's bedroom would be near by. He
left promptly when it became apparent that the mother's bedroom
would not be seen in this drama. They would probably show the doctor
at the other telephone urging the girl to hurry home, and show him
again announcing that all was over, but the expense of mother and
her deathbed had been saved. He cared little for the ending of this
play. Already he was becoming a little callous to the plight of
beautiful young girls threatened with the loss of that which they
held most dear.

Purposely all day he had avoided the neighbourhood of his humble
miner's home. He thought it as well that he should not be seen much
around there. He ate again at four o'clock, heartily and rather
expensively, and loafed about the stages until six. Then he strolled
leisurely down the village street and out the lower end to where he
could view the cabin. Work for the day was plainly over. The
director and his assistant lingered before the open door in
consultation. A property man and an electrician were engaged inside,
but a glance as he passed showed that the blankets were still in the
bunks. He did not wait to see more, but passed on with all evidences
of disinterest in this lowly abode.

He ascertained that night that the fight must have been had. The
table was overturned, one of the chairs wrecked, and there were
other signs of disorder. Probably it had been an excellent fight;
probably these primitive men of the woods had battled desperately.
But he gave little consideration to the combat, and again slept
warmly under the blankets. Perhaps they would fight again to-morrow,
or perhaps there would be less violent bits of the drama that would
secure him another night of calm repose.

The following morning found him slightly disturbed by two unforeseen
needs arising from his novel situation. He looked carefully at his
collar, wondering how many days he would be able to keep it looking
like a fresh collar, and he regretted that he had not brought his
safety-razor to this new home. Still the collar was in excellent
shape as yet, and a scrutiny of his face in the cracked mirror
hanging on the log wall determined that he could go at least another
day without shaving. His beard was of a light growth, gentle in
texture, and he was yet far from the plight of Mr. Montague.
Eventually, to be sure, he would have to go to the barber shop on
the lot and pay money to be shaved, which seemed a pity, because an
actor could live indefinitely unshaven but could live without food
for the merest fragment of time.

He resolved to be on the lookout that day for a barber-shop set. He
believed they were not common in the photodrama, still one might be
found.

He limited himself to the lightest of breakfasts. He had timidly
refrained from counting his silver but he knew he must be frugal. He
rejoiced at this economy until late afternoon when, because of it,
he simply had to eat a heavier dinner than he had expected to need.
There was something so implacable about this demand for food. If you
skimped in the morning you must make amends at the next meal. He
passed the time as on the previous day, a somewhat blase actor
resting between pictures, and condescending to beguile the tedium by
overlooking the efforts of his professional brethren. He could find
no set that included a barber shop, although they were beds on every
hand. He hoped for another night in the cabin, but if that were not
to be, there was a bed easy of access on Stage Three. When he had
observed it, a ghastly old father was coughing out his life under
its blankets, nursed only by his daughter, a beautiful young
creature who sewed by his bedside, and who would doubtless be thrown
upon the world in the very next reel, though--Merton was glad to
note--probably not until the next day.

Yet there was no need for this couch of the tubercular father, for
action in the little cabin was still on. After making the unhappy
discovery in the cafeteria that his appetite could not be hoodwinked
by the clumsy subterfuge of calling coffee and rolls a breakfast
some six hours previously, he went boldly down to stand before his
home. Both miners were at work inside. The room had been placed in
order again, though the little mountain flower was gone. A letter,
he gathered, had been received from her, and one of the miners was
about to leave on a long journey.

Merton could not be sure, but he supposed that the letter from the
little girl told that she was unhappy in her new surroundings,
perhaps being ill-treated by the supercilious Eastern relatives. The
miner who was to remain helped the other to pack his belongings in a
quaint old carpet sack, and together they undid a bundle which
proved to contain a splendid new suit. Not only this, but now came a
scene of eloquent appeal to the watcher outside the door. The miner
who was to remain expressed stern disapproval of the departing
miner's beard. It would never do, he was seen to intimate, and when
the other miner portrayed helplessness a new package was unwrapped
and a safety razor revealed to his shocked gaze.

At this sight Merton Gill felt himself growing too emotional for a
mere careless bystander, and withdrew to a distance where he could
regain better control of himself. When he left the miner to be shorn
was betraying comic dismay while the other pantomimed the correct
use of the implement his thoughtfulness had provided. When he
returned after half--an-hour's rather nervous walk up another
street, the departing miner was clean shaven and one might note the
new razor glittering on the low bench beside the battered tin basin.

They worked late in his home that night; trifling scenes were taken
and retaken. The departing miner had to dress in his splendid but
ill-fitting new garments and to bid an affectionate farewell to his
partner, then had to dress in his old clothes again for some bit
that had been forgotten, only to don the new suit for close-ups. At
another time Merton Gill might have resented this tediously drawn-
out affair which was keeping him from his rest, for he had come to
look upon this structure as one having rights in it after a certain
hour, but a sight of the razor which had not been touched allayed
any possible feeling of irritation.

It was nine-thirty before the big lights jarred finally off and the
director said, "That's all, boys." Then he turned to call, "Jimmie!
Hey, Jimmie! Where's that prop-rustler gone to now?"

"Here, Mr. Burke, yes, sir."

"We've finished the shack stuff. Let's see--" He looked at the watch
on his wrist--"That'll be all for tonight. Strike this first thing
tomorrow morning."

"Yes, sir," said Jimmie. The door was closed and the men walked
away. Merton trailed them a bit, not remaining too pointedly near
the cabin. He circled around through Fifth Avenue to regain the
place.

Softly he let himself in and groped through the dark until his hand
closed upon the abandoned razor. Satisfying himself that fresh
blades had accompanied it, he made ready for bed. He knew it was to
be his last night in this shelter. The director had told Jimmie to
strike it first thing in the morning. The cabin would still be
there, but it would contain no homely furniture, no chairs, no
table, no wash-basin, no safety-razor and, most vital of lacks--it
would be devoid of blankets.

Yet this knowledge did not dismay him. He slept peacefully after
praying that something good would happen to him. He put it that way
very simply. He had placed himself, it seemed, where things could
only happen to him. He was, he felt, beyond bringing them about.


CHAPTER IX

MORE WAYS THAN ONE


Early he was up to bathe and shave. He shaved close to make it last
longer, until his tender face reddened under the scraping. Probably
he would not find another cabin in which a miner would part with his
beard for an Eastern trip. Probably he would have to go to the
barber the next time. He also succeeded, with soap and water, in
removing a stain from his collar. It was still a decent collar; not
immaculate, perhaps, but entirely possible.

This day he took eggs with his breakfast, intending to wheedle his
appetite with a lighter second meal than it had demanded the day
before. He must see if this would not average better on the day's
overhead.

After breakfast he was irresistibly drawn to view the moving picture
of his old home being dismantled. He knew now that he might stand
brazenly there without possible criticism. He found Jimmy and a
companion property-boy already busy. Much of the furniture was
outside to be carted away. Jimmy, as Merton lolled idly in the
doorway, emptied the blackened coffee pot into the ashes of the
fireplace and then proceeded to spoon into the same refuse heap half
a kettle of beans upon which the honest miners had once feasted. The
watcher deplored that he had not done more than taste the beans when
he had taken his final survey of the place this morning. They had
been good beans, but to do more than taste them would have been
stealing. Now he saw them thrown away and regretted that he could
not have known what their fate was to be. There had been enough of
them to save him a day's expenses.

He stood aside as the two boys brought out the cooking utensils, the
rifle, the miners' tools, to stow them in a waiting handcart. When
they had loaded this vehicle they trundled it on up the narrow
street of the Western town. Yet they went only a little way, halting
before one of the street's largest buildings. A sign above its
wooden porch flaunted the name Crystal Palace Hotel. They unlocked
its front door and took the things from the cart inside.

From the street the watcher could see them stowing these away. The
room appeared to contain a miscellaneous collection of articles
needed in the ruder sort of photodrama. Emptying their cart, they
returned with it to the cabin for another load. Merton Gill stepped
to the doorway and peered in from apparently idle curiosity. He
could see a row of saddles on wooden supports; there were kitchen
stoves, lamps, painted chairs, and heavy earthenware dishes on
shelves. His eyes wandered over these articles until they came to
rest upon a pile of blankets at one side of the room. They were
neatly folded, and they were many.

Down before the cabin he could see the handcart being reloaded by
Jimmie and his helper. Otherwise the street was empty. The young man
at the doorway stepped lightly in and regarded the windows on either
side of the door. He sauntered to the street and appeared to be
wondering what he would examine next in this curious world. He
passed Jimmie and the other boy returning with the last load from
the cabin. He noted at the top of the load the mattress on which he
had lain for three nights and the blankets that had warmed him. But
he was proved not to be so helpless as he had thought. Again he knew
where a good night's rest might be had by one using ordinary
discretion.

Again that day, the fourth of his double life, he went the mad pace,
a well-fed, carefree youth, sauntering idly from stage to stage,
regarding nonchalantly the joys and griefs, the twistings of human
destiny there variously unfolded. Not only was he this to the casual
public notice; to himself he was this, at least consciously. True,
in those nether regions of the mind so lately discovered and now
being so expertly probed by Science, in the mind's dark basement, so
to say, a certain unlovely fronted dragon of reality would issue
from the gloom where it seemed to have been lurking and force itself
upon his notice.

This would be at oddly contented moments when he least feared the
future, when he was most successfully being to himself all that he
must seem to others. At such times when he leisurely walked a world
of plenty and fruition, the dragon would half-emerge from its
subconscious lair to chill him with its head composed entirely of
repellent facts. Then a stout effort would be required to send the
thing back where it belonged, to those lower, decently hidden levels
of the mind--life.

And the dragon was cunning. From hour to hour, growing more restive,
it employed devices of craft and subtlety. As when Merton Gill,
carefree to the best of his knowledge, strolling lightly to another
point of interest, graciously receptive to the pleasant life about
him, would suddenly discover that a part of his mind without
superintendence had for some moments been composing a letter,
something that ran in effect:

"Mr. Gashwiler, dear sir, I have made certain changes in my plans
since I first came to sunny California and getting quite a little
homesick for good old Simsbury and I thought I would write you about
taking back my old job in the emporium, and now about the money for
the ticket back to Simsbury, the railroad fare is--"

He was truly amazed when he found this sort of thing going on in
that part of his mind he didn't watch. It was scandalous. He would
indignantly snatch the half-finished letter and tear it up each time
he found it unaccountably under way.

It was surely funny the way your mind would keep doing things you
didn't want it to do. As, again, this very morning when, with his
silver coin out in his hand, he had merely wished to regard it as a
great deal of silver coin, a store of plenty against famine, which
indeed it looked to be under a not-too-minute scrutiny. It looked
like as much as two dollars and fifty cents, and he would have
preferred to pocket it again with this impression. Yet that
rebellious other part of his mind had basely counted the coin even
while he eyed it approvingly, and it had persisted in shouting aloud
that it was not two dollars and fifty cents but one dollar and
eighty--five cents.

The counting part of the mind made no comment on this discrepancy;
it did not say that this discovery put things in a very different
light. It merely counted, registered the result, and ceased to
function, with an air of saying that it would ascertain the facts
without prejudice and you could do what you liked about them. It
didn't care.

That night a solitary guest enjoyed the quiet hospitality of the
Crystal Palace Hotel. He might have been seen--but was not--to
effect a late evening entrance to this snug inn by means of a front
window which had, it would seem, at some earlier hour of the day,
been unfastened from within. Here a not-too-luxurious but sufficing
bed was contrived on the floor of the lobby from a pile of neatly
folded blankets at hand, and a second night's repose was enjoyed by
the lonely patron, who again at an early hour of the morning, after
thoughtfully refolding the blankets that had protected him, was at
some pains to leave the place as he had entered it without
attracting public notice, perchance of unpleasant character.

On this day it would not have been possible for any part of the mind
whatsoever to misvalue the remaining treasure of silver coin. It had
become inconsiderable, and even if kept from view could be, and was,
counted again and again by mere blind fingertips. They contracted,
indeed, a senseless habit of confining themselves in a trouser's
pocket to count the half-dollar, the quarter, and the two dimes long
after the total was too well known to its owner.

Nor did this total, unimpressive at best, long retain even these
poor dimensions. A visit to the cafeteria, in response to the
imperious demands of a familiar organic process, resulted in less
labour, by two dimes, for the stubbornly reiterative fingertips.

An ensuing visit to the Holden lot barber, in obedience to social
demands construed to be equally imperious with the physical, reduced
all subsequent counting, whether by fingertips or a glance of the
eye, to barest mechanical routine. A single half-dollar is easy to
count. Still, on the following morning there were two coins to
count. True, both were dimes.

A diligent search among the miscellany of the Crystal Palace Hotel
had failed to reveal a single razor. The razor used by the miner
should in all reason have been found, but there was neither that nor
any other. The baffled seeker believed there must have been crooked
work somewhere. Without hesitation he found either Jimmie or his
companion to be guilty of malfeasance in office. But at least one
item of more or less worried debate was eliminated. He need no
longer weigh mere surface gentility against the stern demands of an
active metabolism. A shave cost a quarter. Twenty cents would not
buy a shave, but it would buy at the cafeteria something more
needful to any one but a fop.

He saw himself in the days to come--if there were very many days to
come, of which he was now not too certain--descending to the
unwholesome artistic level of the elder Montague. He would, in
short, be compelled to peddle the brush. And of course as yet it was
nothing like a brush--nothing to kindle the eye of a director
needing genuine brushes. In the early morning light he fingered a
somewhat gaunt chin and wondered how long "they" would require to
grow. Not yet could he be taken for one of those actors compelled by
the rigorous exactions of creative screen art to let Nature have its
course with his beard. At present he merely needed a shave.

And the collar had not improved with usage. Also, as the day wore
on, coffee with one egg proved to have been not long-enduring fare
for this private in the army of the unemployed. Still, his morale
was but slightly impaired. There were always ways, it seemed. And
the later hours of the hungry afternoon were rather pleasantly
occupied in dwelling upon one of them.

The sole guest of the Crystal Palace Hotel entered the hostelry that
night somewhat earlier than was usual; indeed at the very earliest
moment that foot traffic through the narrow street seemed to have
diminished to a point where the entry could be effected without
incurring the public notice which he at these moments so sincerely
shunned. After a brief interval inside the lobby he issued from his
window with certain objects in hand, one of which dropped as he
clambered out. The resulting clamour seemed to rouse far echoes
along the dead street, and he hastily withdrew, with a smothered
exclamation of dismay, about the nearest corner of the building
until it could be ascertained that echoes alone had been aroused.

After a little breathless waiting he slunk down the street, keeping
well within friendly shadows, stepping softly, until he reached the
humble cabin where so lately the honest miners had enacted their
heart-tragedy. He jerked the latch-string of the door and was
swiftly inside, groping a way to the fireplace. Here he lighted
matches, thoughtfully appropriated that morning from the cafeteria
counter. He shielded the blaze with one hand while with the other he
put to use the articles he had brought from his hotel.

Into a tin cooking pot with a long handle he now hastily ladled
well-cooked beans from the discarded heap in the fireplace, by means
of an iron spoon. He was not too careful. More or less ashes
accompanied the nutritious vegetables as the pot grew to be half
full. That was a thing to be corrected later, and at leisure. When
the last bean had been salvaged the flame of another match revealed
an unsuspected item--a half-loaf of bread nestled in the ashes at
the far corner of the fireplace. It lacked freshness; was, in truth,
withered and firm to the touch, but doubtless more wholesome than
bread freshly baked.

He was again on his humble cot in the seclusion of the Crystal
Palace Hotel. Half-reclining, he ate at leisure. It being
inadvisable to light matches here he ate chiefly by the touch
system. There was a marked alkaline flavour to the repast, not
unpleasantly counteracted by a growth of vegetable mould of delicate
lavender tints which Nature had been decently spreading over the
final reduction of this provender to its basic elements. But the
time was not one in which to cavil about minor infelicities. Ashes
wouldn't hurt any one if taken in moderation; you couldn't see the
mould in a perfectly dark hotel; and the bread was good.

The feast was prolonged until a late hour, but the finger--tips that
had accurately counted money in a dark pocket could ascertain in a
dark hotel that a store of food still remained. He pulled the
blankets about him and sank comfortably to rest. There was always
some way.

Breakfast the next morning began with the promise of only moderate
enjoyment. Somehow in the gray light sifting through the windows the
beans did not look as good as they had tasted the night before, and
the early mouthfuls were less blithesome on the palate than the
remembered ones of yesterday. He thought perhaps he was not so
hungry as he had been at his first encounter with them. He
delicately removed a pocket of ashes from the centre, and tried
again. They tasted better now. The mould of tender tints was again
visible but he made no effort to avoid it. For his appetite had
reawakened. He was truly hungry, and ate with an entire singleness
of purpose.

Toward the last of the meal his conscious self feebly prompted him
to quit, to save against the inevitable hunger of the night. But the
voice was ignored. He was now clay to the moulding of the
subconscious. He could have saved a few of the beans when reason was
again enthroned, but they were so very few that he fatuously thought
them not worth saving. Might as well make a clean job of it. He
restored the stewpan and spoon to their places and left his hotel.
He was fed. To-day something else would have to happen.

The plush hat cocked at a rakish angle, he walked abroad with
something of the old confident swagger. Once he doubtfully fingered
the sprouting beard, but resolutely dismissed a half-formed notion
of finding out how the Holden lot barber would regard a proposition
from a new patron to open a charge account. If nothing worse than
remaining unshaven was going to happen to him, what cared he? The
collar was still pretty good. Why let his beard be an incubus? He
forgot it presently in noticing that the people arriving on the
Holden lot all looked so extremely well fed. He thought it singular
that he should never before have noticed how many well-fed people
one saw in a day.

Late in the afternoon his explorations took him beyond the lower end
of his little home street, and he was attracted by sounds of the
picture drama from a rude board structure labelled the High Gear
Dance Hall. He approached and entered with that calm ease of manner
which his days on the lot had brought to a perfect bloom. No one now
would ever suppose that he was a mere sightseer or chained to the
Holden lot by circumstances over which he had ceased to exert the
slightest control.

The interior of the High Gear Dance Hall presented nothing new to
his seasoned eye. It was the dance-hall made familiar by many a
smashing five-reel Western. The picture was, quite normally,
waiting. Electricians were shoving about the big light standards,
cameras were being moved, and bored actors were loafing informally
at the round tables or chatting in groups about the set.

One actor alone was keeping in his part. A ragged, bearded, unkempt
elderly man in red shirt and frayed overalls, a repellent fell hat
pulled low over his brow, reclined on the floor at the end of the
bar, his back against a barrel. Apparently he slept. A flash of
remembrance from the Montague girl's talk identified this wretched
creature. This was what happened to an actor who had to peddle the
brush. Perhaps for days he had been compelled to sleep there in the
interests of dance-hall atmosphere.

He again scanned the group, for he remembered, too, that the
Montague girl would also be working here in God's Great Outdoors.
His eyes presently found her. She was indeed a blonde hussy, short-
skirted, low-necked, pitifully rouged, depraved beyond redemption.
She stood at the end of the piano, and in company with another of
the dance-hall girls who played the accompaniment, she was singing a
ballad the refrain of which he caught as "God calls them Angels in
Heaven, we call them Mothers here."

The song ended, the Montague girl stepped to the centre of the room,
looked aimlessly about her, then seized an innocent bystander, one
of the rough characters frequenting this unsavoury resort, and did a
dance with him among the tables. Tiring of this, she flitted across
the room and addressed the bored director who impatiently awaited
the changing of lights. She affected to consider him a reporter who
had sought an interview with her. She stood erect, facing him with
one hand on a hip, the other patting and readjusting her blonde
coiffure.

"Really," she began in a voice of pained dignity, "I am at a loss to
understand why the public should be so interested in me. What can I
say to your readers--I who am so wholly absorbed in my art that I
can't think of hardly anything else? Why will not the world let us
alone? Hold on--don't go!"

She had here pretended that the reporter was taking her at her word.
She seized him by a lapel to which she clung while with her other
arm she encircled a post, thus anchoring the supposed intruder into
her private affairs. "As I was saying," she resumed, "all this
publicity is highly distasteful to the artist, and yet since you
have forced yourself in here I may as well say a few little things
about how good I am and how I got that way. Yes, I have nine motor
cars, and I just bought a lace tablecloth for twelve hundred
bones--"

She broke off inconsequently, poor victim of her constitutional
frivolity. The director grinned after her as she danced away, though
Merton Gill had considered her levity in the worst of taste. Then
her eye caught him as he stood modestly back of the working
electricians and she danced forward again in his direction. He would
have liked to evade her but saw that he could not do this
gracefully.

She greeted him with an impudent grin. "Why, hello, trouper! As I
live, the actin' Kid!" She held out a hand to him and he could not
well refuse it. He would have preferred to "up-stage" her once more,
as she had phrased it in her low jargon, but he was cornered. Her
grip of his hand quite astonished him with its vigour.

"Well, how's everything with you? Everything jake?" He tried for a
show of easy confidence. "Oh, yes, yes, indeed, everything is."

"Well, that's good, Kid." But she was now without the grin, and was
running a practised eye over what might have been called his
production. The hat was jaunty enough, truly a hat of the
successful, but all below that, the not-too-fresh collar, the
somewhat rumpled coat, the trousers crying for an iron despite their
nightly compression beneath their slumbering owner, the shoes not
too recently polished, and, more than all, a certain hunted though
still-defiant look in the young man's eyes, seemed to speak
eloquently under the shrewd glance she bent on him.

"Say, listen here, Old-timer, remember I been trouping man and boy
for over forty year and it's hard to fool me--you working?"

He resented the persistent levity of manner, but was coerced by the
very apparent real kindness in her tone. "Well," he looked about the
set vaguely in his discomfort, "you see, right now I'm between
pictures--you know how it is."

Again she searched his eyes and spoke in a lower tone: "Well, all
right--but you needn't blush about it, Kid." The blush she detected
became more flagrant.

"Well, I--you see--" he began again, but he was saved from being
explicit by the call of an assistant director.

"Miss Montague. Miss Montague--where's that Flips girl--on the set,
please." She skipped lightly from him. When she returned a little
later to look for him he had gone.

He went to bed that night when darkness had made this practicable,
and under his blankets whiled away a couple of wakeful hours by
running tensely dramatic films of breakfast, dinner, and supper at
the Gashwiler home. It seemed that you didn't fall asleep so quickly
when you had eaten nothing since early morning. Never had he
achieved such perfect photography as now of the Gashwiler corned-
beef hash and light biscuits, the Gashwiler hot cakes and sausage,
and never had Gashwiler so impressively carved the Saturday night
four-rib roast of tender beef. Gashwiler achieved a sensational
triumph in the scene, being accorded all the close--ups that the
most exacting of screen actors could wish. His knife-work was
perfect. He held his audience enthralled by his technique.

Mrs. Gashwiler, too, had a small but telling part in the drama to-
night; only a character bit, but one of those poignant bits that
stand out in the memory. The subtitle was, "Merton, won't you let me
give you another piece of the mince pie?" That was all, and yet, as
screen artists say, it got over. There came very near to being not a
dry eye in the house when the simple words were flashed beside an
insert of thick, flaky-topped mince pies with quarters cut from them
to reveal their noble interiors

Sleep came at last while he was regretting that lawless orgy of the
morning. He needn't have cleaned up those beans in that silly way.
He could have left a good half of them. He ran what might have been
considered a split-reel comedy of the stew-pan's bottom still
covered with perfectly edible beans lightly protected with Nature's
own pastel-tinted shroud for perishing vegetable matter and
diversified here and there with casual small deposits of ashes.

In the morning something good really did happen. As he folded his
blankets in the gray light a hard object rattled along the floor
from them. He picked this up before he recognized it as a mutilated
fragment from the stale half--loaf of bread he had salvaged. He
wondered how he could have forgotten it, even in the plenitude of
his banquet. There it was, a mere nubbin of crust and so hard it
might almost have been taken for a petrified specimen of prehistoric
bread. Yet it proved to be rarely palatable. It's flavour was
exquisite. It melted in the mouth.

Somewhat refreshed by this modest cheer, he climbed from the window
of the Crystal Palace with his mind busy on two tracks. While the
letter to Gashwiler composed itself, with especially clear
directions about where the return money should be sent, he was also
warning himself to remain throughout the day at a safe distance from
the door of the cafeteria. He had proved the wisdom of this even the
day before that had started with a bounteous breakfast. To-day the
aroma of cooked food occasionally wafted from the cafeteria door
would prove, he was sure, to be more than he could bear.

He rather shunned the stages to-day, keeping more to himself. The
collar, he had to confess, was no longer, even to the casual eye,
what a successful screen-actor's collar should be. The sprouting
beard might still be misconstrued as the whim of a director
sanctified to realism--every day it was getting to look more like
that--but no director would have commanded the wearing of such a
collar except in actual work where it might have been a striking
detail in the apparel of an underworldling, one of those creatures
who became the tools of rich but unscrupulous roues who are bent
upon the moral destruction of beautiful young screen heroines. He
knew it was now that sort of collar. No use now in pretending that
it had been worn yesterday for the first time.


CHAPTER X

OF SHATTERED ILLUSIONS


The next morning he sat a long time in the genial sunlight watching
carpenters finish a scaffolding beside the pool that had once
floated logs to a sawmill. The scaffolding was a stout affair
supporting an immense tank that would, evidently for some occult
reason important to screen art, hold a great deal of water. The
sawmill was gone; at one end of the pool rode a small sail-boat with
one mast, its canvas flapping idly in a gentle breeze. Its deck was
littered with rigging upon which two men worked. They seemed to be
getting things shipshape for a cruise.

When he had tired of this he started off toward the High Gear Dance
Hall. Something all day had been drawing him there against his will.
He hesitated to believe it was the Montague girl's kindly manner
toward him the day before, yet he could identify no other influence.
Probably it was that. Yet he didn't want to face her again, even if
for a moment she had quit trying to be funny, even if for a moment
her eyes had searched his quite earnestly, her broad, amiable face
glowing with that sudden friendly concern. It had been hard to
withstand this yesterday; he had been in actual danger of confiding
to her that engagements of late were not plentiful--something like
that. And it would be harder to-day. Even the collar would make it
harder to resist the confidence that he was not at this time
overwhelmed with offers for his art.

He had for what seemed like an interminable stretch of time been
solitary and an outlaw. It was something to have been spoken to by a
human being who expressed ever so fleeting an interest in his
affairs, even by someone as inconsequent, as negligible in the world
of screen artistry as this lightsome minx who, because of certain
mental infirmities, could never hope for the least enviable eminence
in a profession demanding seriousness of purpose. Still it would be
foolish to go again to the set where she was. She might think he was
encouraging her.

So he passed the High Gear, where a four-horse stage, watched by two
cameras, was now releasing its passengers who all appeared to be
direct from New York, and walked on to an outdoor set that promised
entertainment. This was the narrow street of some quaint European
village, Scotch he soon saw from the dress of its people. A large
automobile was invading this remote hamlet to the dismay of its
inhabitants. Rehearsed through a megaphone they scurried within
doors at its approach, ancient men hobbling on sticks and frantic
mothers grabbing their little ones from the path of the monster. Two
trial trips he saw the car make the length of the little street.

At its lower end, brooding placidly, was an ancient horse rather
recalling Dexter in his generously exposed bones and the jaded droop
of his head above a low stone wall. Twice the car sped by him,
arousing no sign of apprehension nor even of interest. He paid it
not so much as the tribute of a raised eyelid.

The car went back to the head of the street where its entrance would
be made. "All right--ready!" came the megaphoned order. Again the
peaceful street was thrown into panic by this snorting dragon from
the outer world. The old men hobbled affrightedly within doors, the
mothers saved their children. And this time, to the stupefaction of
Merton Gill, even the old horse proved to be an actor of rare
merits. As the car approached he seemed to suffer a painful shock.
He tossed his aged head, kicked viciously with his rear feet, stood
absurdly aloft on them, then turned and fled from the monster. As
Merton mused upon the genius of the trainer who had taught his horse
not only to betray fright at a motor car but to distinguish between
rehearsals and the actual taking of a scene, he observed a man who
emerged from a clump of near-by shrubbery. He carried a shotgun.
This was broken at the breech and the man was blowing smoke from the
barrels as he came on.

So that was it. The panic of the old horse had been but a simple
reaction to a couple of charges of--perhaps rock--salt. Merton Gill
hoped it had been nothing sterner. For the first time in his screen
career he became cynical about his art. A thing of shame, of
machinery, of subterfuge. Nothing would be real, perhaps not even
the art.

It is probable that lack of food conduced to this disparaging
outlook; and he recovered presently, for he had been smitten with a
quick vision of Beulah Baxter in one of her most daring exploits.
She, at least, was real. Deaf to entreaty, she honestly braved her
hazards. It was a comforting thought after this late exposure of a
sham.

In this slightly combative mood he retraced his steps and found
himself outside the High Gear Dance Hall, fortified for another
possible encounter with the inquiring and obviously sympathetic
Montague girl. He entered and saw that she was not on the set. The
bar-room dance-hall was for the moment deserted of its ribald crew
while an honest inhabitant of the open spaces on a balcony was
holding a large revolver to the shrinking back of one of the New
York men who had lately arrived by the stage. He forced this man,
who was plainly not honest, to descend the stairs and to sign, at a
table, a certain paper. Then, with weapon still in hand, the honest
Westerner forced the cowardly New Yorker in the direction of the
front door until they had passed out of the picture.

On this the bored director of the day before called loudly, "Now,
boys, in your places. You've heard a shot--you're running outside to
see what's the matter. On your toes, now--try it once." From rear
doors came the motley frequenters of the place, led by the elder
Montague.

They trooped to the front in two lines and passed from the picture.
Here they milled about, waiting for further orders.

"Rotten!" called the director. "Rotten and then some. Listen. You
came like a lot of children marching out of a public school. Don't
come in lines, break it up, push each other, fight to get ahead, and
you're noisy, too. You're shouting. You're saying, 'What's this?
What's it all about? What's the matter? Which way did he go?' Say
anything you want to, but keep shouting--anything at all. Say
'Thar's gold in them hills!' if you can't think of anything else. Go
on, now, boys, do it again and pep it, see. Turn the juice on, open
up the old mufflers."

The men went back through the rear doors. The late caller would here
have left, being fed up with this sort of stuff, but at that moment
he descried the Montague girl back behind a light-standard. She had
not noted him, but was in close talk with a man he recognized as
Jeff Baird, arch perpetrator of the infamous Buckeye comedies. They
came toward him, still talking, as he looked.

"We'll finish here to-morrow afternoon, anyway," the girl was
saying.

"Fine," said Baird. "That makes everything jake. Get over on the set
whenever you're through. Come over tonight if they don't shoot here,
just to give us a look-in."

"Can't," said the girl. "Soon as I get out o' this dump I got to eat
on the lot and everything and be over to Baxter's layout--she'll be
doing tank stuff till all hours--shipwreck and murder and all like
that. Gosh, I hope it ain't cold. I don't mind the water, but I
certainly hate to get out and wait in wet clothes while Sig
Rosenblatt is thinking about a retake."

"Well"--Baird turned to go--"take care of yourself--don't dive and
forget to come up. Come over when you're ready."

"Sure! S'long!" Here the girl, turning from Baird, noted Merton Gill
beside her. "Well, well, as I live, the actin' kid once more! Say,
you're getting to be a regular studio hound, ain't you?"

For the moment he had forgotten his troubles. He was burning to ask
her if Beulah Baxter would really work in a shipwreck scene that
night at the place where he had watched the carpenters and the men
on the sailboat; but as he tried to word this he saw that the girl
was again scanning him with keen eyes. He knew she would read the
collar, the beard, perhaps even a look of mere hunger that he
thought must now be showing.

"Say, see here, Trouper, what's the shootin' all about, anyway? You
up against it--yes." There was again in her eye the look of warm
concern, and she was no longer trying to be funny. He might now have
admitted a few little things about his screen career, but again the
director interrupted.

"Miss Montague--where are you? Oh! Well, remember you're behind the
piano during that gun play just now, and you stay hid till after the
boys get out. We'll shoot this time, so get set."

She sped off, with a last backward glance of questioning. He waited
but a moment before leaving. He was almost forgetting his hunger in
the pretty certain knowledge that in a few hours he would actually
behold his wonder-woman in at least one of her daring exploits.
Shipwreck! Perhaps she would be all but drowned. He hastened back to
the pool that had now acquired this high significance. The
carpenters were still puttering about on the scaffold. He saw that
platforms for the cameras had been built out from its side.

He noted, too, and was puzzled by an aeroplane propeller that had
been stationed close to one corner of the pool, just beyond the
stern of the little sailing-craft. Perhaps there would be an
aeroplane wreck in addition to a shipwreck. Now he had something
besides food to think of. And he wondered what the Montague girl
could be doing in the company of a really serious artist like Beulah
Baxter. From her own story she was going to get wet, but from what
he knew of her she would be some character not greatly missed from
the cast if she should, as Baird had suggested, dive and forget to
come up. He supposed that Baird had meant this to be humorous, the
humour typical of a man who could profane a great art with the
atrocious Buckeye comedies, so called.

He put in the hours until nightfall in aimless wandering and idle
gazing, and was early at the pool-side where his heroine would do
her sensational acting. It was now a scene of thrilling activity.
Immense lights, both from the scaffolding and from a tower back of
the sailing-craft, flooded its deck and rigging from time to time as
adjustments were made. The rigging was slack and the deck was still
littered, intentionally so, he now perceived. The gallant little
boat had been cruelly buffeted by a gale. Two sailors in piratical
dress could be seen to emerge at intervals from the cabin.

Suddenly the gale was on with terrific force, the sea rose in great
waves, and the tiny ship rocked in a perilous manner. Great billows
of water swept its decks. Merton Gill stared in amazement at these
phenomena so dissonant with the quiet starlit night. Then he traced
them without difficulty to their various sources. The gale issued
from the swift revolutions of that aeroplane propeller he had
noticed a while ago. The flooding billows were spilled from the big
tank at the top of the scaffold and the boat rocked in obedience to
the tugging of a rope--tugged from the shore by a crew of helpers--
that ran to the top of its mast. Thus had the storm been produced.

A spidery, youngish man from one of the platforms built out from the
scaffold, now became sharply vocal through a megaphone to assistants
who were bending the elements to the need of this particular hazard
of Hortense. He called directions to the men who tugged the rope, to
the men in control of the lights, and to another who seemed to
create the billows. Among other items he wished more action for the
boat and more water for the billows. "See that your tank gets full-
up this time," he called, whereupon an engine under the scaffold, by
means of a large rubber hose reaching into the pool, began to suck
water into the tank above.

The speaker must be Miss Baxter's director, the enviable personage
who saw her safely through her perils. When one of the turning
reflectors illumined him Merton saw his face of a keen Semitic type.
He seemed to possess not the most engaging personality; his manner
was aggressive, he spoke rudely to his doubtless conscientious
employees, he danced in little rages of temper, and altogether he
was not one with whom the watcher would have cared to come in
contact. He wondered, indeed, that so puissant a star as Beulah
Baxter should not be able to choose her own director, for surely the
presence of this unlovely, waspishly tempered being could be nothing
but an irritant in the daily life of the wonder-woman. Perhaps she
had tolerated him merely for one picture. Perhaps he was especially
good in shipwrecks.

If Merton Gill were in this company he would surely have words with
this person, director or no director. He hastily wrote a one-reel
scenario in which the man so far forgot himself as to speak sharply
to the star, and in which a certain young actor, a new member of the
company, resented the ungentlemanly words by pitching the offender
into a convenient pool and earned even more than gratitude from the
starry-eyed wonder-woman.

The objectionable man continued active, profuse of gesture and loud
through the megaphone. Once more the storm. The boat rocked
threateningly, the wind roared through its slack rigging, and giant
billows swept the frail craft. Light as from a half-clouded moon
broke through the mist that issued from a steam pipe. There was
another lull, and the Semitic type on the platform became
increasingly offensive. Merton saw himself saying, "Allow me, Miss
Baxter, to relieve you of the presence of this bounder." The man was
impossible. Constantly he had searched the scene for his heroine.
She would probably not appear until they were ready to shoot, and
this seemed not to be at once if the rising temper of the director
could be thought an indication.

The big hose again drew water from the pool to the tank, whence, at
a sudden release, it would issue in billows. The big lights at last
seemed to be adjusted to the director's whim. The aeroplane
propeller whirred and the gale was found acceptable. The men at the
rope tugged the boat into grave danger. The moon lighted the mist
that overhung the scene.

Then at last Merton started, peering eagerly forward across the
length of the pool. At the far end, half illumined by the big
lights, stood the familiar figure of his wonder--woman, the slim
little girl with the wistful eyes. Plainly he could see her now as
the mist lifted. She was chatting with one of the pirates who had
stepped ashore from the boat. The wonderful golden hair shone
resplendent under the glancing rays of the arcs. A cloak was about
her shoulders, but at a word of command from the director she threw
it off and stepped to the boat's deck. She was dressed in a short
skirt, her trim feet and ankles lightly shod and silken clad. The
sole maritime touch in her garb was a figured kerchief at her throat
similar to those worn by the piratical crew.

"All ready, Hortense--all ready Jose and Gaston, get your places."

Miss Baxter acknowledged the command with that characteristic little
wave of a hand that he recalled from so many of her pictures, a
half-humorous, half-mocking little defiance. She used it often when
escaping her pursuers, as if to say that she would see them in the
next installment.

The star and the two men were now in the cabin, hidden from view.
Merton Gill was no seaman, but it occurred to him that at least one
of the crew would be at the wheel in this emergency. Probably the
director knew no better. Indeed the boat, so far as could be
discerned, had no wheel. Apparently when a storm came up all hands
went down into the cabin to get away from it.

The storm did come up at this moment, with no one on deck. It struck
with the full force of a tropic hurricane. The boat rocked, the wind
blew, and billows swept the deck. At the height of the tempest
Beulah Baxter sprang from the cabin to the deck, clutching wildly at
a stanchion. Buffeted by the billows she groped a painful way along
the side, at risk of being swept off to her death.

Usually when a man desires to buy a farm he must have, at least,
one-third of his desired investment in cash. The amount to be invested
will include, not only the cost of the land, but the cost of the
necessary equipment of the farm. The percentage of the total
capital which may be borrowed, however, will depend on many circumstances
and is usually a matter of first importance. No man should borrow
more than a banker or other reputable business man considers a
safe investment.

Usually there is no better counselor as to a safe investment than
the local banker. The banker should, and generally does, stand in
much the same relation to the financial welfare of the community
as the physician to its physical, the minister to its moral and
spiritual welfare. The inexperienced person, even if he does not
need to borrow money, would do well to consult some responsible
banker in the neighborhood before making an investment in farm
lands.

The young man should, as early as possible in life, open an
account with the local bank, not merely for the sake of the
habit of saving which this will encourage, but in order to come into
personal business relations with the banker. Instead of concealing
from the bank his business operations, he should seek the advice
of his banker on all important financial matters.

On an average, every farm changes hands at least three times
in a century. Every farm, therefore, must be acquired by purchase,
inheritance or gift at more or less irregular intervals. In the
neighborhood in which the author was born, there is not a farm but
has changed hands since he can remember.

In many cases the farm is now in the possession of a son; in some
instances in that of a grandson of the owner as known by the writer
in his boyhood days. In this particular community the acquirement
of a farm by a person not related to the former owner has
occurred in relatively few instances.

As a rule, when the farm has been acquired by a son, the latter has
operated the farm as tenant or partner for a period previous to his
ownership and during lifetime of the father.

In some instances the son has boarded with the parents or the parents
with the son and his wife; or, in the case of a daughter, with the
daughter and son-in-law.

Where there are several heirs, as is apt to be the case, the son
operating the farm is required to purchase or rent the interest
of the other heirs, unless the farm is large enough to be divided,
which is less seldom the case than is popularly supposed. Thus,
if there are 200 acres of land worth $50 an acre, and five heirs,
the young farmer may inherit $2,000, and be required to assume
the remaining $8,000 as an obligation. He may borrow this money at
the bank, placing a mortgage upon the farm, thus settling with the
other heirs at once.

Or he may pay the other heirs rent on their share of the farm. In
any case he will, if successful, gradually cancel his obligation
and become owner of the farm. That no heir is willing to assume
this responsibility is the most common reason for a farm changing
from one family to another, and the disruption of community
interests.

The customary, or normal, method of acquiring land has been and
still is a combination of tenancy, inheritance and mortgage.

Without some tenant system and without the farm mortgage, it would
be impossible for the average young man to acquire a farm. That men
are constantly advancing from farm tenant to landowner is shown by
statistics giving the percentage of tenants by ages. The majority
of farmers under 30 are renters.

Most farmers over 45 are owners of farm land.

Thus in Illinois, in 1900, approximately 75% of the farmers under
25 years of age rented their farms, while less than 20% of the
farmers over 55 years of age were tenants.

The question for the young man to consider is not what effect the
tenant system has upon the welfare of the nation or what political
ills may be connected with farm mortgages, but how to make use of
these necessary and beneficent agencies for the acquirement of a
farm.

A system of tenancy which leads to absent landlordism and a
permanent tenant class is thoroughly vicious, while a practice
which enables a man to become, within a reasonable period, a
land-owning farmer is a thoroughly approvable and, indeed, necessary
method of acquiring land.

As already indicated, most young men will need in some form or other
to employ more capital than they possess when they start farming.
They must, therefore, determine what is the best form of obtaining
the necessary capital, viz.: whether to borrow the money on a farm
mortgage, or whether to use the capital someone else has invested
in a farm by paying him rent for it.

The conditions of tenancy in this country are often not the most
fortunate, yet the young man of character may well find, for a
time, at least, it would be best for him to rent a farm and invest
his own capital in the necessary machinery and live stock to conduct
it properly.

Much will depend on the character of the arrangement which may be
made. Usually more favorable terms can be secured from landlords
owning large numbers of farms than from the owner of one or two
farms.
The large landowner is content with a moderate income from each farm,
because in the aggregate his income is sufficient for his needs,
while the retired farmer who must live off the proceeds of a single
farm is apt to drive a hard bargain and may not be over particular
concerning the maintenance of said farm. The writer knows a farmer
who owns a good farm purchased from the proceeds of a rented farm.

He continues to live on the rented farm and rents his own, because,
it is said, his landlord is willing to make him more favorable
terms than he makes to his tenant.

The more capable the tenant the more favorable the terms he may
exact.
Certain tenants are in demand and can have their choice of farms. A
prosperous-looking man was pointed out recently as an example of
a tenant capable of buying a farm in one of the most highly developed
counties in the United States.

It was stated that as a renter he could have his choice of any farm
in the county, but that he did not have a dollar invested in farm
land. Possibly he invests his surplus earnings in stocks and
bonds.

It is not the present purpose to determine the relative merits of
the different systems of land tenure, but to try to be helpful
to the beginners by discussing the usual practices in order that
he may know whether the arrangement he is considering is customary
and whether it is likely to prove satisfactory.

Every third farm in the United States is rented under one of three
methods:

1.

A definite money rent may be paid, ranging from $2 to $6 an acre
for land on which the ordinary, staple crops are raised. Perhaps
$3 to $4 is more commonly paid for such land.

2. In the South it is common for the landlord to require a definite
number of pounds of cotton per acre or a certain number of bales
of cotton for a one or two-mule farm, as the case may be.

This is classified by the census authorities as "cash rent," but
will here be called "crop rent."

Crop rent is less common than either cash or share rent in the
northern and western states, although perhaps the most common form
in the South.

Crop rent, however, is met with in some sections, as in western
New York where certain large landowners require a definite number
of bushels of wheat, oats or maize and make certain stipulations
as to hay and straw.

They charge a cash rent for pasture.

3. Much the most common form of tenancy, however, is that
where a certain percentage or share of the product is given the
landlord for the use of the land.

Before entering into a discussion of the customary conditions under
which land is rented on shares it may be helpful to point out the
fundamental differences between cash rent, crop rent and share
rent.
In case of cash rent, the landlord takes no risk, either as to the
price or the amount of product. In the case of crop rent, he shares
the risk as to the variation in price, but not as to the amount
of crop raised.

The latter may depend upon the clemency of the weather or upon the
industry and skill of the tenant.

In the case of share rent, both landlord and tenant share equally
as to variation in the price and the amount of product.

Three forms of share rent may be recognized:

(a) Where landlord furnishes only real estate (land and buildings),
the tenant supplying everything else, including teams, machinery,
labor, seeds and fertilizers. Under these conditions it is
customary for the landlord to receive one-third and the tenant
two-thirds of the crop raised or the product produced.

(b) The second form of share rent is where the landlord furnishes the
real estate; the tenant supplies teams, tools and labor, while
the landlord and tenant own equally all live stock other than teams,
and bear equally all other expenses, as for seeds, fertilizers
and cost of threshing.

Under this system, it is customary for landlord and tenant each to
receive one-half of all sales. As each owns one-half of all the live
stock (teams excepted), each shares equally in all increase.

The landlord pays for the cost of permanent improvements such as
new buildings, fences, repairs and drainage.

The tenant, in making these improvements, in some cases, agrees to
furnish two days' labor for one day's pay.

The theory is that, while the increased value of the real estate
is of advantage only to the landlord, the improved facilities are
of some benefit to the tenant.

Since he can do this work at odd times when not otherwise employed,
he can afford to take a generous view of the matter. It is
obvious that if he remains on the farm long enough the tenant will
come into his share of the benefit, while if he intends to leave
the farm soon he may not. There is in the mind of the writer a
prosperous tenant who, after eighteen years on a single farm,
declared he had no desire to make a change, and doubtless there are
thousands of similar instances.

Under the plan in which the tenant furnishes everything except the
real estate, the tendency of the farm is apt to be downward both
as to the improvements and the crop-producing power of the soil.

The interests of the landlord and tenant are not mutual. This condition
of tenancy leads to growing only those crops which can be readily
sold from the farm and to frequent changes of the tenant, with its
accompanying auction sales of property. In one region, where this
system prevails, it has been facetiously remarked that each tenant
has a sale every year to determine how much he is worth. It is less
trouble than taking an inventory.

In the second form of share rent, the interests of landlord and tenant
are more nearly mutual. Under this system, animal husbandry is
possible, which, generally, involves pasturing and feeding a considerable
part of the crops upon the farm, and even the purchase of nitrogenous
by-products.

All this leads to permanency of tenant, since the landlord and tenant
are both interested in the live stock and other personal property,
which cannot be divided, with economy, each year. It is interesting
to note that the house is the least likely to be kept in
repair.

The improvement of the barns and fences or the laying of tile drains
increases the landlord's income, but he has no financial interest
in the house, so long as the tenant is willing to live in it.

There are, of course, many variations in the arrangement of details
between the landlord and tenant. On many dairy farms in the
northeastern states it is customary for the landlord to own the
cows. While the landlord and tenant share equally from the sale
of milk, butter or cheese, in such cases the increase in the herd
belongs to the owner of the land.

Hence, money from the sale of any animal, old or young, goes to
him. This is because the landlord must keep up the herd.

If a cow is sold, he must furnish another to take her place.

(c) The third type of tenant farming is where the tenant furnishes
nothing but his labor and managerial ability, and receives a share
of the sales, which may be one-third.

This is rather an unusual type of tenancy, since, where the
landlord furnishes all the capital, it is much more common to
employ a farm manager at a monthly wage. The wage varies greatly, but
is seldom below forty dollars or above seventy-five dollars per
month without board, especially to those who have not hitherto had
much managerial experience.

Various attempts at profit sharing have been made. A recent instance
is of a young married man taking 160 acres of tillable land where
the landlord has a fairly well-stocked farm. The young man is to
have a house and everything in the way of living the farm can furnish.
He is to receive $20 a month and one-half the net proceeds, or,
what is called in Chapter XI, the farm income. In considering a
contract of this kind it is necessary to make a careful distinction
between: (1) Gross sales, (2) net proceeds, viz.: the gross sales
less the expenses of running the farm, and (3) profits, which may
be defined for the purpose of this discussion as the net proceeds
less the interest on the investment.

[A]
Assuming 160 acres of land, all tillable, devoted to dairy farming
in eastern United States, gross sales may be estimated at $20 an
acre, or an annual gross income of $3,200, and the net proceeds at
$10 an acre, or $1,600.

Under these conditions the young man's income would be $240, received
as wages, plus $800, as his share of the net proceeds, or a total
of $1,040 a year.

Generally speaking, probably a more satisfactory method, both for
landlord and the farm manager, would be to pay the latter as nearly
as may be what his services should be worth and give him in addition
one-half the profits; that is, one-half of that which was left after
deducting the expenses of running the farm and interest on the
capital invested.

Merely for illustrating the method of calculation, let us assume
this farm with its equipment to be worth $100 an acre, or $16,000.
Let the farm manager be paid $840 a year. Assume the same gross
income, $3,200, and the same cost of operating, $1,600, to which
add $600, the additional salary of the manager.

The total expense is then $2,200, and the net proceeds $1,000.

If 4%, or $640, was charged on the investment, there would be $360
to be divided between landlord and manager, making the salary of
manager $1,020. A simple calculation will show that if 5% were
charged, the salary of the manager would be $940 a year, and if 6%,
$860 a year.

The advantage of the latter method of employment is that the young
man runs less risk, while both receive equally any surplus beyond
fair wages and fair interest on the investment.

In this connection it is important to consider how much may be
reasonably paid for managerial ability. A study of the figures on
page 133 will show that the labor income from a considerable
number of farms of the better class was about 7% of the capital
invested in the farms. The inference is, therefore, that if a man
has $10,000 wisely invested in a farm he may pay $700 for a working
manager; or, to put it in another form, before the owner of a farm
can afford to pay $1,200 a year for a farm manager, he should have
about $17,000 invested.

Moreover, this investment must be in a form calculated to return
an income. If part of it consists of investments for pleasure or
fancy, such investment will not only not add to the income, but
will detract from it by increasing the cost of maintenance.

This is scarcely less important to the employee than it is to the
employer, since if the owner pays a higher salary than the manager
can earn, he quite surely will sooner or later discharge his manager.

This may result disastrously for the discharged young man, not merely
on account of the loss of employment, but because his failure
may militate against his securing satisfactory employment elsewhere.
When an employer is seeking a man, he looks for one who has succeeded.

She was in the familiar street suit now, a skirt and
jacket of some rough brown goods and a cloth hat that kept close to
her small head above hair that seemed of no known shade whatever,
though it was lighter than dark. She flashed a smile at him from her
broad mouth as he came up, though her knowing gray eyes did not join
in this smile. He knew instantly that she was taking him in.

This girl was wise beyond her years, he thought, but one even far
less knowing could hardly have been in two minds about his present
abject condition. The pushed-up collar of his coat did not entirely
hide the once-white collar beneath it, the beard had reached its
perhaps most distressing stage of development, and the suit was
rumpled out of all the nattiness for which it had been advertised.
Even the plush hat had lost its smart air.

Then he plainly saw that the girl would, for the moment at least,
ignore these phenomena. She laughed again, and this time the eyes
laughed, too. "C'mon over and help me hunt for that bar pin I lost.
It must be at this end, because I know I had it on when I went into
the drink. Maybe it's in the pool, but maybe I lost it after I got
out. It's one of Baxter's that she wore in the scene just ahead of
last night, and she'll have to have it again to-day. Now--" She
began to search the ground around the cold brazier. "It might be
along here." He helped her look. Pretty soon he would remember an
engagement and get away. The search at the end of the pool proved
fruitless. The girl continued to chatter. They had worked until one-
thirty before that grouch of a Rosenblatt would call it a day. At
that she'd rather do water stuff than animal stuff-especially lions.
"Lions? I should think so!" He replied to this. "Dangerous, isn't
it?"

"Oh, it ain't that. They're nothing to be afraid of if you know 'em,
but they're so hot and smelly when you have to get close to 'em.
Anything I really hate, it's having to get up against a big, hot,
hairy, smelly lion."

He murmured a sympathetic phrase and extended his search for the
lost pin to the side of the pool. Almost under the scaffold he saw
the shine of precious stones and called to her as he picked up the
pin, a bar pin splendidly set with diamonds. He was glad that he had
found it for her. It must have cost a great deal of money and she
would doubtless be held responsible for its safe-keeping.

She came dancing to him. "Say, that's fine-your eyes are working,
ain't they? I might 'a' been set back a good six dollars if you
hadn't found that." She took the bauble and fastened it inside her
jacket. So the pin, too, had been a tawdry makeshift. Nothing was
real any more. As she adjusted the pin he saw his moment for escape.
With a gallant striving for the true Clifford Armytage manner he
raised the plush hat.

"Well, I'm glad you found Mrs. Rosenblatt's pin-and I guess I'll be
getting on."

The manner must have been defective. She looked through him and said
with great firmness, "Nothing like that, old pippin." Again he was
taken with a violent fit of shivering. He could not meet her eyes.
He was turning away when she seized him by the wrist. Her grip was
amazingly forceful. He doubted if he could break away even with his
stoutest effort. He stood miserably staring at the ground. Suddenly
the girl reached up to pat his shoulder. He shivered again and she
continued to pat it. When his teeth had ceased to be castanets she
spoke:

"Listen here, old Kid, you can't fool any one, so quit trying. Don't
you s'pose I've seen 'em like you before? Say, boy, I was trouping
while you played with marbles. You're up against it. Now, c'mon"--
with the arm at his shoulder she pulled him about to face her-"c'mon
and be nice-tell mother all about it."

The late Clifford Armytage was momentarily menaced by a complete
emotional overthrow. Another paroxysm of shivering perhaps averted
this humiliation. The girl dropped his wrist, turned, stooped, and
did something. He recalled the scene in the gambling hell, only this
time she fronted away from the camera. When she faced him again he
was not surprised to see bills in her hand. It could only have been
the chill he suffered that kept him from blushing. She forced the
bills into his numb fingers and he stared at them blankly. "I can't
take these," he muttered.

"There, now, there, now! Be easy. Naturally I know you're all right
or I wouldn't give up this way. You're just having a run of hard
luck. The Lord knows, I've been helped out often enough in my time.
Say, listen, I'll never forget when I went out as a kid with Her
First False Step-they had lions in that show. It was a frost from
the start. No salaries, no nothing. I got a big laugh one day when I
was late at rehearsal. The manager says: 'You're fined two dollars,
Miss Montague.' I says, 'All right, Mr. Gratz, but you'll have to
wait till I can write home for the money.' Even Gratz had to laugh.
Anyway, the show went bust and I never would 'a' got any place if
two or three parties hadn't of helped me out here and there, just
the same as I'm doing with you this minute. So don't be foolish."

"Well-you see-I don't--" He broke off from nervous weakness. In his
mind was a jumble of incongruous sentences and he seemed unable to
manage any of them.

The girl now sent a clean shot through his armour. "When'd you eat
last?"

He looked at the ground again in painful embarrassment. Even in the
chill air he was beginning to feel hot. "I don't remember," he said
at last quite honestly.

"That's what I thought. You go eat. Go to Mother Haggin's, that
cafeteria just outside the gate. She has better breakfast things
than the place on the lot." Against his will the vision of a
breakfast enthralled him, yet even under this exaltation an instinct
of the wariest caution survived.

"I'll go to the one on the lot, I guess. If I went out to the other
one I couldn't get in again."

She smiled suddenly, with puzzling lights in her eyes. "Well, of all
things! You want to get in again, do you? Say, wouldn't that beat
the hot place a mile? You want to get in again? All right, Old-
timer, I'll go out with you and after you've fed I'll cue you on to
the lot again."

"Well-if it ain't taking you out of your way." He knew that the girl
was somehow humouring him, as if he were a sick child. She knew, and
he knew, that the lot was no longer any place for him until he could
be rightly there.

"No, c'mon, I'll stay by you." They walked up the street of the
Western village. The girl had started at a brisk pace and he was
presently breathless.

"I guess I'll have to rest a minute," he said. They were now before
the Crystal Palace Hotel and he sat on the steps.

"All in, are you? Well, take it easy."

He was not only all in, but his mind still played with incongruous
sentences. He heard himself saying things that must sound foolish.

"I've slept in here a lot," he volunteered. The girl went to look
through one of the windows.

"Blankets!" she exclaimed. "Well, you got the makings of a trouper
in you, I'll say that. Where else did you sleep?"

"Well, there were two miners had a nice cabin down the street here
with bunks and blankets, and they had a fight, and half a kettle of
beans and some bread, and one of them shaved and I used his razor,
but I haven't shaved since because I only had twenty cents day
before yesterday, and anyway they might think I was growing them for
a part, the way your father did, but I moved up here when I saw them
put the blankets in, and I was careful and put them back every
morning. I didn't do any harm, do you think? And I got the rest of
the beans they'd thrown into the fireplace, and if I'd only known it
I could have brought my razor and overcoat and some clean collars,
but somehow you never seem to know when--"

He broke off, eyeing her vaguely. He had little notion what he had
been saying or what he would say next.

"This is going to be good," said the Montague girl. "I can see that
from here. But now you c'mon-we'll walk slow-and you tell me the
rest when you've had a little snack."

She even helped him to rise, with a hand under his elbow, though he
was quick to show her that he had not needed this help. "I can walk
all right," he assured her.

"Of course you can. You're as strong as a horse. But we needn't go
too fast." She took his arm in a friendly way as they completed the
journey to the outside cafeteria.

At this early hour they were the only patrons of the place. Miss
Montague, a little with the air of a solicitous nurse, seated her
charge at a corner table and took the place opposite him.

"What's it going to be?" she demanded.

Visions of rich food raced madly through his awakened mind, wide
platters heaped with sausage and steaks and ham and corned-beef
hash.

"Steak," he ventured, "and something like ham and eggs and some hot
cakes and coffee and--" He broke off. He was becoming too emotional
under this golden spread of opportunity. The girl glanced up from
the bill of fare and appraised the wild light in his eyes.

"One minute, Kid-let's be more restful at first. You know-kind of
ease into the heavy eats. It'll prob'ly be better for you."

"Anything you say," he conceded. Her words of caution had stricken
him with a fear that this was a dream; that he would wake up under
blankets back in the Crystal Palace. It was like that in dreams. You
seemed able to order all sorts of food, but something happened; it
never reached the table. He would take no further initiative in this
scene, whether dream or reality. "You order something," he
concluded. His eyes trustfully sought the girl's.

"Well, I think you'll start with one orange, just to kind of hint to
the old works that something good is coming. Then--lemme see"--she
considered gravely. "Then I guess about two soft-boiled eggs--no,
you can stand three--and some dry toast and some coffee. Maybe a few
thin strips of bacon wouldn't hurt. We'll see can you make the
grade." She turned to give the order to a waitress. "And shoot the
coffee along, sister. A cup for me, too."

Her charge shivered again at the mere mention of coffee. The
juncture was critical. He might still be dreaming, but in another
moment he must know. He closely, even coolly, watched the two cups
of coffee that were placed before them. He put a benumbed hand
around the cup in front of him and felt it burn. It was too active a
sensation for mere dreaming. He put sugar into the cup and poured in
the cream from a miniature pitcher, inhaling a very real aroma.
Events thus far seemed normal. He stirred the coffee and started to
raise the cup. Now, after all, it seemed to be a dream. His hand
shook so that the stuff spilled into the saucer and even out on to
the table. Always in dreams you were thwarted at the last moment.

The Montague girl had noted the trembling and ineffective hand. She
turned her back upon him to chat with the waitress over by the food
counter. With no eye upon him, he put both hands about the cup and
succeeded in raising it to his lips. The hands were still shaky, but
he managed some sips of the stuff, and then a long draught that
seemed to scald him. He wasn't sure if it scalded or not. It was
pretty hot, and fire ran through him. He drained the cup--still
holding it with both hands. It was an amazing sensation to have
one's hand refuse to obey so simple an order. Maybe he would always
be that way now, practically a cripple.

The girl turned back to him. "Atta boy," she said. "Now take the
orange. And when the toast comes you can have some more coffee." A
dread load was off his mind. He did not dream this thing. He ate the
orange, and ate wonderful toast to the accompaniment of another cup
of coffee. The latter half of this he managed with but one hand,
though it was not yet wholly under control. The three eggs seemed
like but one. He thought they must have been small eggs. More toast
was commanded and more coffee.

"Easy, easy!" cautioned his watchful hostess from time to time.
"Don't wolf it--you'll feel better afterwards."

"I feel better already," he announced.

"Well," the girl eyed him critically, "you certainly got the main
chandelier lighted up once more."

A strange exhilaration flooded all his being. His own thoughts
babbled to him, and he presently began to babble to his new friend.

"You remind me so much of Tessie Kearns," he said as he scraped the
sides of the egg cup.

"Who's she?"

"Oh, she's a scenario writer I know. You're just like her." He was
now drunk--maudlin drunk--from the coffee. Sober, he would have
known that no human beings could be less alike than Tessie Kearns
and the Montague girl. Other walls of his reserve went down.

"Of course I could have written to Gashwiler and got some money to
go back there--"

"Gashwiler, Gashwiler?" The girl seemed to search her memory. "I
thought I knew all the tank towns, but that's a new one. Where is
it?"

"It isn't a town; it's a gentleman I had a position with, and he
said he'd keep it open for me." He flew to another thought with the
inconsequence of the drunken. "Say, Kid"--He had even caught that
form of address from her--"I'll tell you. You can keep this watch of
mine till I pay you back this money." He drew it out. "It's a good
solid-gold watch and everything. My uncle Sylvester gave it to me
for not smoking, on my eighteenth birthday. He smoked, himself; he
even drank considerable. He was his own worst enemy. But you can see
it's a good solid--gold watch and keeps time, and you hold it till I
pay you back, will you?"

The girl took the watch, examining it carefully, noting the
inscription engraved on the case. There were puzzling glints in her
eyes as she handed it back to him. "No; I'll tell you, it'll be my
watch until you pay me back, but you keep it for me. I haven't any
place to carry it except the pocket of my jacket, and I might lose
it, and then where'd we be?"

"Well, all right." He cheerfully took back the watch. His present
ecstasy would find him agreeable to all proposals.

"And say," continued the girl, "what about this Gashweiler, or
whatever his name is? He said he'd take you back, did he? A farm?"

"No, an emporium--and you forgot his name just the way that lady in
the casting office always does. She's funny. Keeps telling me not to
forget the address, when of course I couldn't forget the town where
I lived, could I? Of course it's a little town, but you wouldn't
forget it when you lived there a long time--not when you got your
start there."

"So you got your start in this town, did you?"

He wanted to talk a lot now. He prattled of the town and his life
there, of the eight-hour talent-tester and the course in movie-
acting. Of Tessie Kearns and her scenarios, not yet prized as they
were sure to be later. Of Lowell Hardy, the artistic photographer,
and the stills that he had made of the speaker as Clifford Armytage.
Didn't she think that was a better stage name than Merton Gill,
which didn't seem to sound like so much? Anyway, he wished he had
his stills here to show her. Of course some of them were just in
society parts, the sort of thing that Harold Parmalee played--had
she noticed that he looked a good deal like Harold Parmalee? Lots of
people had.

Tessie Kearns thought he was the dead image of Parmalee. But he
liked Western stuff better--a lot better than cabaret stuff where
you had to smoke one cigarette after another--and he wished she
could see the stills in the Buck Benson outfit, chaps and sombrero
and spurs and holster. He'd never had two guns, but the one he did
have he could draw pretty well. There would be his hand at his side,
and in a flash he would have the gun in it, ready to shoot from the
hip. And roping--he'd need to practise that some. Once he got it
smack over Dexter's head, but usually it didn't go so well.

Probably a new clothesline didn't make the best rope--too stiff. He
could probably do a lot better with one of those hair ropes that the
real cowboys used. And Metta Judson--she was the best cook anywhere
around Simsbury. He mustn't forget to write to Metta, and to Tessie
Kearns, to be sure and see The Blight of Broadway when it came to
the Bijou Palace. They would be surprised to see those close--ups
that Henshaw had used him in. And he was in that other picture. No
close-ups in that, still he would show pretty well in the cage-
scene--he'd had to smoke a few cigarettes there, because Arabs smoke
all the time, and he hadn't been in the later scene where the girl
and the young fellow were in the deserted tomb all night and he
didn't lay a finger on her because he was a perfect gentleman.

He didn't know what he would do next. Maybe Henshaw would want him
in Robinson Crusoe, Junior, where Friday's sister turned out to be
the daughter of an English earl with her monogram tattooed on her
left shoulder. He would ask Henshaw, anyway.

The Montague girl listened attentively to the long, wandering
recital. At times she would seem to be strongly moved, to tears or
something. But mostly she listened with a sympathetic smile, or
perhaps with a perfectly rigid face, though at such moments there
would be those curious glints of light far back in her gray eyes.
Occasionally she would prompt him with a question.

In this way she brought out his version of the Sabbath afternoon
experience with Dexter. He spared none of the details, for he was
all frankness now. He even told how ashamed he had felt having to
lead Dexter home from his scandalous grazing before the Methodist
Church. He had longed to leap upon the horse and ride him back at a
gallop, but he had been unable to do this because there was nothing
from which to climb on him, and probably he would have been afraid
to gallop the beast, anyway.

This had been one of the bits that most strangely moved his
listener. Her eyes were moist when he had finished, and some strong
emotion seemed about to overpower her, but she had recovered command
of herself, and become again the sympathetic provider and
counsellor.

He would have continued to talk, apparently, for the influence of
strong drink had not begun to wane, but the girl at length stopped
him.

"Listen here, Merton--" she began; her voice was choked to a
peculiar hoarseness and she seemed to be threatened with a return of
her late strong emotion. She was plainly uncertain of her control,
fearing to trust herself to speech, but presently, after efforts
which he observed with warmest sympathy, she seemed to recover her
poise. She swallowed earnestly several times, wiped her moisture--
dimmed eyes with her handkerchief, and continued, "It's getting late
and I've got to be over at the show shop. So I'll tell you what to
do next. You go out and get a shave and a haircut and then go home
and get cleaned up--you said you had a room and other clothes,
didn't you?"

Volubly he told her about the room at Mrs. Patterson's, and, with a
brief return of lucidity, how the sum of ten dollars was now due
this heartless society woman who might insist upon its payment
before he would again enjoy free access to his excellent wardrobe.

"Well, lemme see--" She debated a moment, then reached under the
table, fumbled obscurely, and came up with more money. "Now, here,
here's twenty more besides that first I gave you, so you can pay the
dame her money and get all fixed up again, fresh suit and clean
collar and a shine and everything. No, no--this is my scene; you
stay out."

He had waved protestingly at sight of the new money, and now again
he blushed.

"That's all understood," she continued. "I'm staking you to cakes
till you get on your feet, see? And I know you're honest, so I'm not
throwing my money away. There--sink it and forget it. Now, you go
out and do what I said, the barber first. And lay off the eats until
about noon. You had enough for now. By noon you can stoke up with
meat and potatoes--anything you want that'll stick to the merry old
slats. And I'd take milk instead of any more coffee. You've thinned
down some--you're not near so plump as Harold Parmalee. Then you
rest up for the balance of the day, and you show here to-morrow
morning about this time. Do you get it? The Countess'll let you in.
Tell her I said to, and come over to the office building. See?"

He tried to tell her his gratitude, but instead he babbled again of
how much she was like Tessie Kearns. They parted at the gate.

With a last wondering scrutiny of him, a last reminder of her very
minute directions, she suddenly illumined him with rays of a
compassion that was somehow half-laughter. "You poor, feckless dub!"
she pronounced as she turned from him to dance through the gate. He
scarcely heard the words; her look and tone had been so warming.

Ten minutes later he was telling a barber that he had just finished
a hard week on the Holden lot, and that he was glad to get the brush
off at last. From the barber's he hastened to the Patterson house,
rather dreading the encounter with one to whom he owed so much
money. He found the house locked. Probably both of the Pattersons
had gone out into society. He let himself in and began to follow the
directions of the Montague girl. The bath, clean linen, the other
belted suit, already pressed, the other shoes, the buttoned, cloth-
topped ones, already polished! He felt now more equal to the
encounter with a heartless society woman. But, as she did not
return, he went out in obedience to a new hunger.

In the most sumptuous cafeteria he knew of, one patronized only in
his first careless days of opulence, he ate for a long time. Roast
beef and potatoes he ordered twice, nor did he forget to drink the
milk prescribed by his benefactress. Plenty of milk would make him
more than ever resemble Harold Parmalee. And he commanded an
abundance of dessert: lemon pie and apple pie and a double portion
of chocolate cake with ice-cream. His craving for sweets was still
unappeased, so at a near-by drug store he bought a pound box of
candy.

The world was again under his feet. Restored to his rightful domain,
he trod it with lightness and certainty. His mind was still a
pleasant jumble of money and food and the Montague girl. Miles of
gorgeous film flickered across his vision. An experienced alcoholic
would have told him that he enjoyed a coffee "hang-over." He wended
a lordly way to the nearest motion-picture theatre.

Billed there was the tenth installment of The Hazards of Hortense.
He passed before the lively portrayal in colours of Hortense driving
a motor car off an open drawbridge. The car was already halfway
between the bridge and the water beneath. He sneered openly at the
announcement: "Beulah Baxter in the Sensational Surprise Picture of
the Century." A surprise picture indeed, if those now entering the
theatre could be told what he knew about it! He considered spreading
the news, but decided to retain the superiority his secret knowledge
gave him.

Inside the theatre, eating diligently from his box of candy, he was
compelled to endure another of the unspeakable Buckeye comedies. The
cross-eyed man was a lifeguard at a beach and there were social
entanglements involving a bearded father, his daughter in an
inconsiderable bathing suit, a confirmed dipsomaniac, two social
derelicts who had to live by their wits, and a dozen young girls
also arrayed in inconsiderable bathing suits. He could scarcely
follow the chain of events, so illogical were they, and indeed made
little effort to do so. He felt far above the audience that cackled
at these dreadful buffooneries. One subtitle read: "I hate to kill
him--murder is so hard to explain."

This sort of thing, he felt more than ever, degraded an art where
earnest people were suffering and sacrificing in order to give the
public something better and finer. Had he not, himself, that very
day, completed a perilous ordeal of suffering and sacrifice? And he
was asked to laugh at a cross--eyed man posing before a camera that
fell to pieces when the lens was exposed, shattered, presumably, by
the impact of the afflicted creature's image! This, surely, was not
art such as Clifford Armytage was rapidly fitting himself, by trial
and hardship, to confer upon the public.

