He took one out of his pocket, opened it, glanced at it, looked surprised
and worried, and stood silent a few moments.  Then he waved his hand in a
wandering and mechanical way, and made an effort or two to say something,
then gave it up, despondently.  Several voices cried out:

"Read it! read it!  What is it?"

So he began, in a dazed and sleep-walker fashion:

"'The remark which I made to the unhappy stranger was this: "You are far
from being a bad man.  [The house gazed at him marvelling.]  Go, and
reform."'  [Murmurs: "Amazing! what can this mean?"]  This one," said the
Chair, "is signed Thurlow G. Wilson."

"There!" cried Wilson, "I reckon that settles it!  I knew perfectly well
my note was purloined."

"Purloined!" retorted Billson.  "I'll let you know that neither you nor
any man of your kidney must venture to--"

The Chair: "Order, gentlemen, order!  Take your seats, both of you,
please."

They obeyed, shaking their heads and grumbling angrily.  The house was
profoundly puzzled; it did not know what to do with this curious
emergency.  Presently Thompson got up.  Thompson was the hatter.  He
would have liked to be a Nineteener; but such was not for him; his stock
of hats was not considerable enough for the position.  He said:

"Mr. Chairman, if I may be permitted to make a suggestion, can both of
these gentlemen be right?  I put it to you, sir, can both have happened
to say the very same words to the stranger?  It seems to me--"

The tanner got up and interrupted him.  The tanner was a disgruntled man;
he believed himself entitled to be a Nineteener, but he couldn't get
recognition.  It made him a little unpleasant in his ways and speech.
Said he:

"Sho, _that's_ not the point!  _That_ could happen--twice in a hundred
years--but not the other thing.  _Neither_ of them gave the twenty
dollars!"  [A ripple of applause.]

Billson.  "I did!"

Wilson.  "I did!"

Then each accused the other of pilfering.

The Chair.  "Order!  Sit down, if you please--both of you.  Neither of
the notes has been out of my possession at any moment."

A Voice.  "Good--that settles _that_!"

The Tanner.  "Mr. Chairman, one thing is now plain: one of these men has
been eavesdropping under the other one's bed, and filching family
secrets.  If it is not unparliamentary to suggest it, I will remark that
both are equal to it.  [The Chair.  "Order! order!"]  I withdraw the
remark, sir, and will confine myself to suggesting that _if_ one of them
has overheard the other reveal the test-remark to his wife, we shall
catch him now."

A Voice.  "How?"

The Tanner.  "Easily.  The two have not quoted the remark in exactly the
same words.  You would have noticed that, if there hadn't been a
considerable stretch of time and an exciting quarrel inserted between the
two readings."

A Voice.  "Name the difference."

The Tanner.  "The word _very_ is in Billson's note, and not in the
other."

Many Voices.  "That's so--he's right!"

The Tanner.  "And so, if the Chair will examine the test-remark in the
sack, we shall know which of these two frauds--[The Chair.
"Order!"]--which of these two adventurers--[The Chair.  "Order!
order!"]--which of these two gentlemen--[laughter and applause]--is
entitled to wear the belt as being the first dishonest blatherskite ever
bred in this town--which he has dishonoured, and which will be a sultry
place for him from now out!"  [Vigorous applause.]

Many Voices.  "Open it!--open the sack!"

Mr. Burgess made a slit in the sack, slid his hand in, and brought out an
envelope.  In it were a couple of folded notes.  He said:

"One of these is marked, 'Not to be examined until all written
communications which have been addressed to the Chair--if any--shall have
been read.'  The other is marked '_The Test_.'  Allow me.  It is
worded--to wit:

"'I do not require that the first half of the remark which was made to me
by my benefactor shall be quoted with exactness, for it was not striking,
and could be forgotten; but its closing fifteen words are quite striking,
and I think easily rememberable; unless _these_ shall be accurately
reproduced, let the applicant be regarded as an impostor.  My benefactor
began by saying he seldom gave advice to anyone, but that it always bore
the hall-mark of high value when he did give it.  Then he said this--and
it has never faded from my memory: '_You are far from being a bad
man_--''"

Fifty Voices.  "That settles it--the money's Wilson's!  Wilson!  Wilson!
Speech!  Speech!"

People jumped up and crowded around Wilson, wringing his hand and
congratulating fervently--meantime the Chair was hammering with the gavel
and shouting:

"Order, gentlemen!  Order!  Order!  Let me finish reading, please."  When
quiet was restored, the reading was resumed--as follows:

"'_Go, and reform--or, mark my words--some day, for your sins you will
die and go to hell or Hadleyburg_--TRY AND MAKE IT THE FORMER.'"

A ghastly silence followed.  First an angry cloud began to settle darkly
upon the faces of the citizenship; after a pause the cloud began to rise,
and a tickled expression tried to take its place; tried so hard that it
was only kept under with great and painful difficulty; the reporters, the
Brixtonites, and other strangers bent their heads down and shielded their
faces with their hands, and managed to hold in by main strength and
heroic courtesy.  At this most inopportune time burst upon the stillness
the roar of a solitary voice--Jack Halliday's:

"_That's_ got the hall-mark on it!"

Then the house let go, strangers and all.  Even Mr. Burgess's gravity
broke down presently, then the audience considered itself officially
absolved from all restraint, and it made the most of its privilege.  It
was a good long laugh, and a tempestuously wholehearted one, but it
ceased at last--long enough for Mr. Burgess to try to resume, and for the
people to get their eyes partially wiped; then it broke out again, and
afterward yet again; then at last Burgess was able to get out these
serious words:

"It is useless to try to disguise the fact--we find ourselves in the
presence of a matter of grave import.  It involves the honour of your
town--it strikes at the town's good name.  The difference of a single
word between the test-remarks offered by Mr. Wilson and Mr. Billson was
itself a serious thing, since it indicated that one or the other of these
gentlemen had committed a theft--"

The two men were sitting limp, nerveless, crushed; but at these words
both were electrified into movement, and started to get up.

"Sit down!" said the Chair, sharply, and they obeyed.  "That, as I have
said, was a serious thing.  And it was--but for only one of them.  But
the matter has become graver; for the honour of _both_ is now in
formidable peril.  Shall I go even further, and say in inextricable
peril?  _Both_ left out the crucial fifteen words."  He paused.  During
several moments he allowed the pervading stillness to gather and deepen
its impressive effects, then added: "There would seem to be but one way
whereby this could happen.  I ask these gentlemen--Was there
_collusion_?--_agreement_?"

A low murmur sifted through the house; its import was, "He's got them
both."

Billson was not used to emergencies; he sat in a helpless collapse.  But
Wilson was a lawyer.  He struggled to his feet, pale and worried, and
said:

"I ask the indulgence of the house while I explain this most painful
matter.  I am sorry to say what I am about to say, since it must inflict
irreparable injury upon Mr. Billson, whom I have always esteemed and
respected until now, and in whose invulnerability to temptation I
entirely believed--as did you all.  But for the preservation of my own
honour I must speak--and with frankness.  I confess with shame--and I now
beseech your pardon for it--that I said to the ruined stranger all of the
words contained in the test-remark, including the disparaging fifteen.
[Sensation.]  When the late publication was made I recalled them, and I
resolved to claim the sack of coin, for by every right I was entitled to
it.  Now I will ask you to consider this point, and weigh it well; that
stranger's gratitude to me that night knew no bounds; he said himself
that he could find no words for it that were adequate, and that if he
should ever be able he would repay me a thousandfold.  Now, then, I ask
you this; could I expect--could I believe--could I even remotely
imagine--that, feeling as he did, he would do so ungrateful a thing as to
add those quite unnecessary fifteen words to his test?--set a trap for
me?--expose me as a slanderer of my own town before my own people
assembled in a public hall?  It was preposterous; it was impossible.  His
test would contain only the kindly opening clause of my remark.  Of that
I had no shadow of doubt.  You would have thought as I did.  You would
not have expected a base betrayal from one whom you had befriended and
against whom you had committed no offence.  And so with perfect
confidence, perfect trust, I wrote on a piece of paper the opening
words--ending with "Go, and reform,"--and signed it.  When I was about to
put it in an envelope I was called into my back office, and without
thinking I left the paper lying open on my desk."  He stopped, turned his
head slowly toward Billson, waited a moment, then added: "I ask you to
note this; when I returned, a little latter, Mr. Billson was retiring by
my street door."  [Sensation.]

In a moment Billson was on his feet and shouting:

"It's a lie!  It's an infamous lie!"

The Chair.  "Be seated, sir!  Mr. Wilson has the floor."

Billson's friends pulled him into his seat and quieted him, and Wilson
went on:

"Those are the simple facts.  My note was now lying in a different place
on the table from where I had left it.  I noticed that, but attached no
importance to it, thinking a draught had blown it there.  That Mr.
Billson would read a private paper was a thing which could not occur to
me; he was an honourable man, and he would be above that.  If you will
allow me to say it, I think his extra word '_very_' stands explained: it
is attributable to a defect of memory.  I was the only man in the world
who could furnish here any detail of the test-mark--by _honourable_
means.  I have finished."

There is nothing in the world like a persuasive speech to fuddle the
mental apparatus and upset the convictions and debauch the emotions of an
audience not practised in the tricks and delusions of oratory.  Wilson
sat down victorious.  The house submerged him in tides of approving
applause; friends swarmed to him and shook him by the hand and
congratulated him, and Billson was shouted down and not allowed to say a
word.  The Chair hammered and hammered with its gavel, and kept shouting:

"But let us proceed, gentlemen, let us proceed!"

At last there was a measurable degree of quiet, and the hatter said:

"But what is there to proceed with, sir, but to deliver the money?"

Voices.  "That's it!  That's it!  Come forward, Wilson!"

The Hatter.  "I move three cheers for Mr. Wilson, Symbol of the special
virtue which--"

The cheers burst forth before he could finish; and in the midst of
them--and in the midst of the clamour of the gavel also--some enthusiasts
mounted Wilson on a big friend's shoulder and were going to fetch him in
triumph to the platform.  The Chair's voice now rose above the noise:

"Order!  To your places!  You forget that there is still a document to be
read."  When quiet had been restored he took up the document, and was
going to read it, but laid it down again saying "I forgot; this is not to
be read until all written communications received by me have first been
read."  He took an envelope out of his pocket, removed its enclosure,
glanced at it--seemed astonished--held it out and gazed at it--stared at
it.

Twenty or thirty voices cried out

"What is it?  Read it! read it!"

And he did--slowly, and wondering:

"'The remark which I made to the stranger--[Voices.  "Hello! how's
this?"]--was this: 'You are far from being a bad man.  [Voices.  "Great
Scott!"]  Go, and reform.'"  [Voice.  "Oh, saw my leg off!"]  Signed by
Mr. Pinkerton the banker."

The pandemonium of delight which turned itself loose now was of a sort to
make the judicious weep.  Those whose withers were unwrung laughed till
the tears ran down; the reporters, in throes of laughter, set down
disordered pot-hooks which would never in the world be decipherable; and
a sleeping dog jumped up scared out of its wits, and barked itself crazy
at the turmoil.  All manner of cries were scattered through the din:
"We're getting rich--_two_ Symbols of Incorruptibility!--without counting
Billson!"  "_Three_!--count Shadbelly in--we can't have too many!"  "All
right--Billson's elected!"  "Alas, poor Wilson! victim of _two_ thieves!"

A Powerful Voice.  "Silence!  The Chair's fished up something more out of
its pocket."

Voices.  "Hurrah!  Is it something fresh?  Read it! read! read!"

The Chair [reading].  "'The remark which I made,' etc.  'You are far from
being a bad man.  Go,' etc.  Signed, 'Gregory Yates.'"

Tornado of Voices.  "Four Symbols!"  "'Rah for Yates!"  "Fish again!"

The house was in a roaring humour now, and ready to get all the fun out
of the occasion that might be in it.  Several Nineteeners, looking pale
and distressed, got up and began to work their way towards the aisles,
but a score of shouts went up:

"The doors, the doors--close the doors; no Incorruptible shall leave this
place!  Sit down, everybody!"  The mandate was obeyed.

"Fish again!  Read! read!"

The Chair fished again, and once more the familiar words began to fall
from its lips--"'You are far from being a bad man--'"

"Name! name!  What's his name?"

"'L. Ingoldsby Sargent.'"

"Five elected!  Pile up the Symbols!  Go on, go on!"

"'You are far from being a bad--'"

"Name! name!"

"'Nicholas Whitworth.'"

"Hooray! hooray! it's a symbolical day!"

Somebody wailed in, and began to sing this rhyme (leaving out "it's") to
the lovely "Mikado" tune of "When a man's afraid of a beautiful maid;"
the audience joined in, with joy; then, just in time, somebody
contributed another line--

   "And don't you this forget--"

The house roared it out.  A third line was at once furnished--

   "Corruptibles far from Hadleyburg are--"

The house roared that one too.  As the last note died, Jack Halliday's
voice rose high and clear, freighted with a final line--

   "But the Symbols are here, you bet!"

That was sung, with booming enthusiasm.  Then the happy house started in
at the beginning and sang the four lines through twice, with immense
swing and dash, and finished up with a crashing three-times-three and a
tiger for "Hadleyburg the Incorruptible and all Symbols of it which we
shall find worthy to receive the hall-mark to-night."

Then the shoutings at the Chair began again, all over the place:

"Go on! go on!  Read! read some more!  Read all you've got!"

"That's it--go on!  We are winning eternal celebrity!"

A dozen men got up now and began to protest.  They said that this farce
was the work of some abandoned joker, and was an insult to the whole
community.  Without a doubt these signatures were all forgeries--

"Sit down! sit down!  Shut up!  You are confessing.  We'll find your
names in the lot."

"Mr. Chairman, how many of those envelopes have you got?"

The Chair counted.

"Together with those that have been already examined, there are
nineteen."

A storm of derisive applause broke out.

"Perhaps they all contain the secret.  I move that you open them all and
read every signature that is attached to a note of that sort--and read
also the first eight words of the note."

"Second the motion!"

It was put and carried--uproariously.  Then poor old Richards got up, and
his wife rose and stood at his side.  Her head was bent down, so that
none might see that she was crying.  Her husband gave her his arm, and so
supporting her, he began to speak in a quavering voice:

"My friends, you have known us two--Mary and me--all our lives, and I
think you have liked us and respected us--"

The Chair interrupted him:

"Allow me.  It is quite true--that which you are saying, Mr. Richards;
this town _does_ know you two; it _does_ like you; it _does_ respect you;
more--it honours you and _loves_ you--"

Halliday's voice rang out:

"That's the hall-marked truth, too!  If the Chair is right, let the house
speak up and say it.  Rise!  Now, then--hip! hip! hip!--all together!"

The house rose in mass, faced toward the old couple eagerly, filled the
air with a snow-storm of waving handkerchiefs, and delivered the cheers
with all its affectionate heart.

The Chair then continued:

"What I was going to say is this: We know your good heart, Mr. Richards,
but this is not a time for the exercise of charity toward offenders.
[Shouts of "Right! right!"]  I see your generous purpose in your face,
but I cannot allow you to plead for these men--"

"But I was going to--"

"Please take your seat, Mr. Richards.  We must examine the rest of these
notes--simple fairness to the men who have already been exposed requires
this.  As soon as that has been done--I give you my word for this--you
shall he heard."

Many voices.  "Right!--the Chair is right--no interruption can be
permitted at this stage!  Go on!--the names! the names!--according to the
terms of the motion!"

The old couple sat reluctantly down, and the husband whispered to the
wife, "It is pitifully hard to have to wait; the shame will be greater
than ever when they find we were only going to plead for _ourselves_."

Straightway the jollity broke loose again with the reading of the names.

"'You are far from being a bad man--' Signature, 'Robert J. Titmarsh.'"

'"You are far from being a bad man--' Signature, 'Eliphalet Weeks.'"

"'You are far from being a bad man--' Signature, 'Oscar B. Wilder.'"

At this point the house lit upon the idea of taking the eight words out
of the Chairman's hands.  He was not unthankful for that.  Thenceforward
he held up each note in its turn and waited.  The house droned out the
eight words in a massed and measured and musical deep volume of sound
(with a daringly close resemblance to a well-known church chant)--"You
are f-a-r from being a b-a-a-a-d man."  Then the Chair said, "Signature,
'Archibald Wilcox.'"  And so on, and so on, name after name, and
everybody had an increasingly and gloriously good time except the
wretched Nineteen.  Now and then, when a particularly shining name was
called, the house made the Chair wait while it chanted the whole of the
test-remark from the beginning to the closing words, "And go to hell or
Hadleyburg--try and make it the for-or-m-e-r!" and in these special cases
they added a grand and agonised and imposing "A-a-a-a-_men_!"

