Produced by Suzanne Shell, Charles Bidwell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


A TRAVELER FROM ALTRURIA

Romance

By W. D. HOWELLS

Author of "THE COAST OF BOHEMIA", "THE QUALITY OF MERCY",
"A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES" etc.

HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON
1908


A TRAVELER FROM ALTRURIA


I


I confess that with all my curiosity to meet an Altrurian, I was in no
hospitable mood toward the traveler when he finally presented himself,
pursuant to the letter of advice sent me by the friend who introduced him.
It would be easy enough to take care of him in the hotel; I had merely to
engage a room for him, and have the clerk tell him his money was not good
if he tried to pay for anything. We may be certain that he did not find the
yoke unbearably galling. He was of humble birth; of a family which must
always have looked up to their "betters" as unspeakably and immeasurably
above them. Dependence was in the order of nature, and a man of Haydn's
good sense was the last in the world to starve and fret because his
freedom to practice his art and develop his powers was complicated with
a sort of feudal service. Some strong souls may find an empty purse
the truest source of inspiration, as Mr Russell Lowell declares it to
be; but it is very much to be doubted whether a careful investigation
would show that a great man's best work was done with the wolf at the
door.

Material Advantages
Haydn had no self-pity: why should we pity him? He had free quarters at
the palace, with liberty to enjoy the company of his wife when she chose
to favour him--an event of rare occurrence.
His salary was raised from time to time. The old prince, his first
employer, paid him 400 florins; his successor increased the amount
first to 600 and then to 782 florins (78 pounds); and finally he had 1400
florins, which last sum was continued to him as a pension when he left
the Esterhazy service. Although money had a much higher purchasing value
in those days, the figures here quoted do not seem princely when we consider
the extent and nature of Haydn's duties, but to a man of Haydn's simple
tastes they would appear ample enough.

At least, they would save him from lying on straw and drinking bad whisky,
which Wagner regarded as among the things that are inimical to the creative
genius.

Artistic Advantages
These were the material advantages of the Eisenstadt appointment.
The artistic advantages were even more important, especially to a young
and inexperienced artist who, so far, had not enjoyed many opportunities
of practically testing his own work. Haydn had a very good band always
at his disposal, the members of which were devoted to him. If he wrote part
of a symphony over-night he could try it in the morning, prune, revise,
accept, reject.

Many a young composer of to-day would rejoice at such an opportunity,
as indeed Haydn himself rejoiced at it.

"I not only had the encouragement of constant approval," he says, speaking
of this period of his career, "but as conductor of an orchestra I could
make experiments, observe what produced an effect and what weakened it, and
was thus in a position to improve, alter, make additions and omissions, and
be as bold as I pleased."
Some Disadvantages
No doubt there were some disadvantages in counterpoise. After the
gay life of Vienna, Eisenstadt must have been dull enough, and there
is plenty of evidence to show that the young artist occasionally
fell into the dumps. In one letter he complains that he "never can
obtain leave, even for four-and-twenty hours, to go to Vienna." In
another he writes: "I am doomed to stay at home.
What I lose by so doing you can well imagine. It is indeed sad
always to be a slave, but Providence wills it so.I stood holding his valise, unable to put it down in my embarrassment at
this eccentric performance, which had been evident not to me alone, but to
all the people who arrived by the train, and all their friends who came
from the hotel to meet them. A number of these passed me on the tally-ho
coach; and a lady, who had got her husband with her for over Sunday, and
was in very good spirits, called gayly down to me: "Your friend seems fond
of exercise!"

"Yes," I answered, dryly; the sparkling repartee which ought to have come
to my help failed to show up. But it was impossible to be vexed with the
Altrurian when he returned to me, unruffled by his bout with the baggage
and serenely smiling.

"Do you know," he said, "I fancied that good fellow was ashamed of my
helping him. I hope it didn't seem a reflection upon him in any way before
your people? I ought to have thought of that."

"I guess we can make it right with him. I dare say he felt more surprised
than disgraced. But we must make haste a little now; your train was half
an hour late, and we shall not stand so good a chance for supper if we are
not there pretty promptly."

"No?" said the Altrurian. "Why?"

"Well," I said, with evasive lightness, "first come, first served, you
know. That's human nature."

"Is it?" he returned, and he looked at me as one does who suspects another
of joking.

"Well, isn't it?" I retorted; but I hurried to add: "Besides, I want to
have time after supper to show you a bit of our landscape. I think you'll
enjoy it." I knew he had arrived in Boston that morning by steamer, and I
now thought it high time to ask him: "Well, what do you think of America,
anyway?" I ought really to have asked him this the moment he stepped from
the train.

"Oh," he said, "I'm intensely interested," and I perceived that he spoke
with a certain reservation. "As the most advanced country of its time,
I've always been very curious to see it."

The last sentence raised my dashed spirits again, and I said, confidently:
"You must find our system of baggage-checks delightful." I said this
because it is one of the first things we brag of to foreigners, and I had
the habit of it. "By-the-way," I ventured to add, "I suppose you meant to
say you _brought_ two checks when I asked you for them at the train just
now? But you really said you _bought_ them."

"Yes," the Altrurian replied, "I gave half a dollar apiece for them at the
station in Boston. I saw other people doing it," he explained, noting my
surprise. "Isn't it the custom?"

"I'm happy to say it isn't yet, on most of our roads. They were tipping
the baggage-man, to make sure that he checked their baggage in time and
put it on the train. I had to do that myself when I came up; otherwise it
might have got along here some time next day. But the system is perfect."

"The poor man looked quite worn out," said the Altrurian, "and I am glad I
gave him something. He seemed to have several hundred pieces of baggage to
look after, and he wasn't embarrassed like your porter by my helping him
put my trunks into the car. May I confess that the meanness of the
station, its insufficient facilities, its shabby waiting-rooms, and its
whole crowded and confused appearance gave me rather a bad impression?"

"I know," I had to own, "it's shameful; but you wouldn't have found
another station in the city so bad."

"Ah, then," said the Altrurian, "I suppose this particular road is too
poor to employ more baggage-men or build new stations; they seemed rather
shabby all the way up."

"Well, no," I was obliged to confess, "it's one of the richest roads in
the country. The stock stands at about 180. But I'm really afraid we shall
be late to supper if we don't get on," I broke off; though I was not
altogether sorry to arrive after the porter had disposed of the baggage. I
dreaded another display of active sympathy on the part of my strange
companion; I have often felt sorry myself for the porters of hotels, but I
have never thought of offering to help them handle the heavy trunks that
they manage.

The Altrurian was delighted with the hotel; and in fact it did look
extremely pretty, with its branching piazzas full of well-dressed people,
and its green lawns where the children were playing. I led the way to the
room which I had taken for him next my own; it was simply furnished, but
it was sweet with matting, fresh linen, and pure whitewashed walls. I
flung open the window-blinds and let him get a glimpse of the mountains
purpling under the sunset, the lake beneath, and the deeply foliaged
shores.

"Glorious! glorious!" he sighed.

"Yes," I modestly assented. "We think that's rather fine." He stood
tranced before the window, and I thought I had better say: "Well, now I
can't give you much time to get the dust of travel off; the dining-room
doors close at eight, and we must hurry down."

"I'll be with you in a moment," he said, pulling off his coat.

I waited impatiently at the foot of the stairs, avoiding the question I
met on the lips and in the eyes of my acquaintance. The fame of my
friend's behavior at the station must have spread through the whole place;
and everybody wished to know who he was. I answered simply he was a
traveler from Altruria; and in some cases I went further and explained
that the Altrurians were peculiar.

In much less time than it seemed my friend found me; and then I had a
little compensation for my suffering in his behalf. I could see that,
whatever people said of him, they felt the same mysterious liking at
sight of him that I had felt. He had made a little change in his dress,
and I perceived that the women thought him not only good-looking but
well-dressed. They followed him with their eyes as we went into the
dining-room, and I was rather proud of being with him, as if I somehow
shared the credit of his clothes and good looks. The Altrurian himself
seemed most struck with the head-waiter, who showed us to our places, and
while we were waiting for our supper I found a chance to explain that he
was a divinity student from one of the fresh-water colleges, and was
serving here during his summer vacation. This seemed to interest my friend
so much that I went on to tell him that many of the waitresses, whom he
saw standing there subject to the order of the guests, were country
school-mistresses in the winter.

"Ah, that is as it should be," he said; "that is the kind of thing I
expected to meet with in America."

"Yes," I responded, in my flattered national vanity, "if America means
anything at all it means the honor of work and the recognition of personal
worth everywhere. I hope you are going to make a long stay with us. We
like to have travelers visit us who can interpret the spirit of our
institutions as well as read their letter. As a rule Europeans never quite
get our point of view. Now a great many of these waitresses are ladies, in
the true sense of the word--selfrespectful, intelligent, refined, and fit
to grace--"

I was interrupted by the noise my friend made in suddenly pushing back his
chair and getting to his feet. "What's the matter?" I asked. "You're not
ill, I hope?"

But he did not hear me. He had run half down the dining-hall toward the
slender young girl who was bringing us our supper. I had ordered rather
generously, for my friend had owned to a good appetite, and I was hungry
myself with waiting for him, so that the tray the girl carried was piled
up with heavy dishes. To my dismay I saw, rather than heard at that
distance, the Altrurian enter into a polite controversy with her, and
then, as if overcoming all her scruples by sheer strength of will, possess
himself of the tray and make off with it toward our table. The poor child
followed him, blushing to her hair; the head-waiter stood looking
helplessly on; the guests, who at that late hour were fortunately few,
were simply aghast at the scandal; the Altrurian alone seemed to think
his conduct the most natural thing in the world. He put the tray on the
side-table near us, and in spite of our waitress's protests insisted upon
arranging the little bird-bath dishes before our plates. Then at last he
sat down, and the girl, flushed and tremulous, left the room, as I could
not help suspecting, to have a good cry in the kitchen. She did not come
back, and the head-waiter, who was perhaps afraid to send another in her
place, looked after our few wants himself. He kept a sharp eye on my
friend, as if he were not quite sure he was safe, but the Altrurian
resumed the conversation with all that lightness of spirits which I
noticed in him after he helped the porter with the baggage. I did not
think it the moment to take him to task for what he had just done; I was
not even sure that it was the part of a host to do so at all, and between
the one doubt and the other I left the burden of talk to him.

"What a charming young creature!" he began. "I never saw anything prettier
than the way she had of refusing my help, absolutely without coquetry or
affectation of any kind. She is, as you said, a perfect lady, and she
graces her work, as I am sure she would grace any exigency of life. She
quite realizes my ideal of an American girl, and I see now what the spirit
of your country must be from such an expression of it."

I wished to tell him that while a country school-teacher who waits at
table in a summer hotel is very much to be respected in her sphere, she is
not regarded with that high honor which some other women command among us;
but I did not find this very easy, after what I had said of our esteem for
labor; and while I was thinking how I could hedge, my friend went on.

"I liked England greatly, and I liked the English, but I could not like
the theory of their civilization or the aristocratic structure of their
society. It seemed to me iniquitous, for we believe that inequality and
iniquity are the same in the last analysis."

At this I found myself able to say: "Yes, there is something terrible,
something shocking, in the frank brutality with which Englishmen affirm
the essential inequality of men. The affirmation of the essential equality
of men was the first point of departure with us when we separated from
them."

"I know," said the Altrurian. "How grandly it is expressed in your
glorious Declaration!"

"Ah, you have read our Declaration of Independence, then?"

"Every Altrurian has read that," answered my friend.

"Well," I went on smoothly, and I hoped to render what I was going to say
the means of enlightening him without offence concerning the little
mistake he had just made with the waitress, "of course we don't take that
in its closest literality."

"I don't understand you," he said.

"Why, you know it was rather the political than the social traditions of
England that we broke with, in the Revolution."

"How is that?" he returned. "Didn't you break with monarchy and nobility,
and ranks and classes?"

"Yes, we broke with all those things."

"But I found them a part of the social as well as the political structure
in England. You have no kings or nobles here. Have you any ranks or
classes?"

"Well, not exactly in the English sense. Our ranks and classes, such as we
have, are what I may call voluntary."

"Oh, I understand. I suppose that from time to time certain ones among you
feel the need of serving, and ask leave of the commonwealth to subordinate
themselves to the rest of the state and perform all the lowlier offices in
it. Such persons must be held in peculiar honor. Is it something like
that?"

"Well, no, I can't say it's quite like that. In fact I think I'd better
let you trust to your own observation of our life."

"But I'm sure," said the Altrurian, with a simplicity so fine that it was
a long time before I could believe it quite real, "that I shall approach
it so much more intelligently with a little instruction from you. You say
that your social divisions are voluntary. But do I understand that those
who serve among you do not wish to do so?"

"Well, I don't suppose they would serve if they could help it," I replied.

"Surely," said the Altrurian, with a look of horror, "you don't mean that
they are slaves."

"Oh no! oh no!" I said; "the war put an end to that. We are all free now,
black and white."

"But if they do not wish to serve, and are not held in peculiar honor for
serving--"

"I see that my word 'voluntary' has misled you," I put in. "It isn't the
word exactly. The divisions among us are rather a process of natural
selection. You will see, as you get better acquainted with the workings of
our institutions, that there are no arbitrary distinctions here but the
fitness of the work for the man and the man for the work determines the
social rank that each one holds."

"Ah, that is fine!" cried the Altrurian, with a glow of enthusiasm. "Then
I suppose that these intelligent young people who teach school in winter
and serve at table in the summer are in a sort of provisional state,
waiting for the process of natural selection to determine whether they
shall finally be teachers or waiters."

"Yes, it might be stated in some such terms," I assented, though I was not
altogether easy in my mind. It seemed to me that I was not quite candid
with this most candid spirit. I added: "You know we are a sort of
fatalists here in America. We are great believers in the doctrine that it
will all come out right in the end."

"Ah, I don't wonder at that," said the Altrurian, "if the process of
natural selection works so perfectly among you as you say. But I am afraid
I don't understand this matter of your domestic service yet. I believe you
said that all honest work is honored in America. Then no social slight
attaches to service, I suppose?"

"Well, I can't say that, exactly. The fact is, a certain social slight
does attach to service, and that is one reason why I don't quite like to
have students wait at table. It won't be pleasant for them to remember it
in after-life, and it won't be pleasant for their children to remember
it."

"Then the slight would descend?"

"I think it would. One wouldn't like to think one's father or mother had
been at service."

The Altrurian said nothing for a moment. Then he remarked: "So it seems
that while all honest work is honored among you, there are some kinds of
honest work that are not honored so much as others."

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Because some occupations are more degrading than others."

"But why?" he persisted, as I thought, a little unreasonably.

"Really," I said, "I think I must leave you to imagine."

"I am afraid I can't," he said, sadly. "Then, if domestic service is
degrading in your eyes, and people are not willing servants among you, may
I ask why any are servants?"

"It is a question of bread-and-butter. They are obliged to be."

"That is, they are forced to do work that is hateful and disgraceful to
them because they cannot live without?"

"Excuse me," I said, not at all liking this sort of pursuit, and feeling
it fair to turn even upon a guest who kept it up. "Isn't it so with you in
Altruria?"

"It was so once," he admitted, "but not now. In fact, it is like a waking
dream to find one's self in the presence of conditions here that we
outlived so long ago."

There was an unconscious superiority in this speech that nettled me, and
stung me to retort: "We do not expect to outlive them. We regard them as
final, and as indestructibly based in human nature itself."

"Ah," said the Altrurian, with a delicate and caressing courtesy, "have I
said something offensive?"

"Not at all," I hastened to answer. "It is not surprising that you did not
get our point of view exactly. You will by-and-by, and then, I think, you
will see that it is the true one. We have found that the logic of our
convictions could not be applied to the problem of domestic service. It is
everywhere a very curious and perplexing problem. The simple old solution
of the problem was to own your servants; but we found that this was not
consistent with the spirit of our free institutions. As soon as it was
abandoned the anomaly began. We had outlived the primitive period when the
housekeeper worked with her domestics and they were her help, and were
called so; and we had begun to have servants to do all the household work,
and to call them so. This state of things never seemed right to some of
our purest and best people. They fancied, as you seem to have done, that
to compel people through their necessities to do your hateful drudgery,
and to wound and shame them with a name which every American instinctively
resents, was neither republican nor Christian. Some of our thinkers tried
to mend matters by making their domestics a part of their families; and in
the life of Emerson you'll find an amusing account of his attempt to have
his servant eat at the same table with himself and his wife. It wouldn't
work. He and his wife could stand it, but the servant couldn't."

I paused, for this was where the laugh ought to have come in. The
Altrurian did not laugh, he merely asked, "Why?"

"Well, because the servant knew, if they didn't, that they were a whole
world apart in their traditions, and were no more fit to associate than
New-Englanders and New-Zealanders. In the mere matter of education--"

"But I thought you said that these young girls who wait at table here were
teachers."

"Oh, I beg your pardon; I ought to have explained. By this time it had
become impossible, as it now is, to get American girls to take service
except on some such unusual terms as we have in a summer hotel; and the
domestics were already ignorant foreigners, fit for nothing else. In such
a place as this it isn't so bad. It is more as if the girls worked in a
shop or a factory. They command their own time, in a measure, their hours
are tolerably fixed, and they have one another's society. In a private
family they would be subject to order at all times, and they would have no
social life. They would be in the family, out not of it. American girls
understand this, and so they won't go out to service in the usual way.
Even in a summer hotel the relation has its odious aspects. The system of
giving fees seems to me degrading to those who have to take them. To offer
a student or a teacher a dollar for personal service--it isn't right, or I
can't make it so. In fact, the whole thing is rather anomalous with us.
The best that you can say of it is that it works, and we don't know what
else to do."

"But I don't see yet," said the Altrurian, "just why domestic service is
degrading in a country where all kinds of work are honored."

"Well, my dear fellow, I have done my best to explain. As I intimated
before, we distinguish; and in the different kinds of labor we distinguish
against domestic service. I dare say it is partly because of the loss of
independence which it involves. People naturally despise a dependant."

"Why?" asked the Altrurian, with that innocence of his which I was
beginning to find rather trying.

"Why?" I retorted. "Because it implies weakness."

"And is weakness considered despicable among you?" he pursued.

"In every community it is despised practically, if not theoretically," I
tried to explain. "The great thing that America has done is to offer the
race an opportunity--the opportunity for any man to rise above the rest
and to take the highest place, if he is able." I had always been proud of
this fact, and I thought I had put it very well, but the Altrurian did not
seem much impressed by it.

He said: "I do not see how it differs from any country of the past in
that. But perhaps you mean that to rise carries with it an obligation
to those below 'If any is first among you, let him be your servant.' Is it
something like that?"

"Well, it is not quite like that," I answered, remembering how very little
our self-made men as a class had done for others. "Every one is expected
to look out for himself here. I fancy that there would be very little
rising if men were expected to rise for the sake of others, in America.
How is it with you in Altruria?" I demanded, hoping to get out of a
certain discomfort I felt in that way. "Do your risen men generally devote
themselves to the good of the community after they get to the top?"

"There is no rising among us," he said, with what seemed a perception of
the harsh spirit of my question; and he paused a moment before he asked in
his turn: "How do men rise among you?"

"That would be rather a long story," I replied. "But, putting it in the
rough, I should say that they rose by their talents, their shrewdness,
their ability to seize an advantage and turn it to their own account."

"And is that considered noble?"

"It is considered smart. It is considered at the worst far better than a
dead level of equality. Are all men equal in Altruria? Are they all alike
gifted or beautiful, or short or tall?"

"No, they are only equal in duties and in rights. But, as you said just
now, that is a very long story. Are they equal in nothing here?"

"They are equal in opportunities."

"Ah!" breathed the Altrurian, "I am glad to hear that."

I began to feel a little uneasy, and I was not quite sure that this last
assertion of mine would hold water. Everybody but ourselves had now left
the dining-room, and I saw the head-waiter eying us impatiently. I pushed
back my chair and said: "I'm sorry to seem to hurry you, but I should like
to show you a very pretty sunset effect we have here before it is too
dark. When we get back, I want to introduce you to a few of my friends. Of
course, I needn't tell you that there is a good deal of curiosity about
you, especially among the ladies."

"Yes, I found that the case in England, largely. It was the women who
cared most to meet me. I understand that in America society is managed
even more by women than it is in England."

"It's entirely in their hands," I said, with the satisfaction we all feel
in the fact. "We have no other leisure class. The richest men among us are
generally hard workers; devotion to business is the rule; but, as soon as
a man reaches the point where he can afford to pay for domestic service,
his wife and daughters expect to be released from it to the cultivation of
their minds and the enjoyment of social pleasures. It's quite right.
That is what makes them so delightful to foreigners. You must have heard
their praises chanted in England. The English find our men rather stupid,
I believe; but they think our women are charming."

"Yes, I was told that the wives of their nobility were sometimes
Americans," said the Altrurian. "The English think that you regard such
marriages as a great honor, and that they are very gratifying to your
national pride."

"Well, I suppose that is so in a measure," I confessed. "I imagine that it
will not be long before the English aristocracy derives as largely from
American millionaires as from kings' mistresses. Not," I added,
virtuously, "that we approve of aristocracy."

"No, I understand that," said the Altrurian. "I shall hope to get your
point of view in this matter more distinctly by-and-by. As yet, I'm a
little vague about it."

"I think I can gradually make it clear to you," I returned.


II

We left the hotel, and I began to walk my friend across the meadow toward
the lake. I wished him to see the reflection of the afterglow in its still
waters, with the noble lines of the mountain-range that glassed itself
there; the effect is one of the greatest charms of that lovely region, the
sojourn of the sweetest summer in the world, and I am always impatient to
show it to strangers.

We climbed the meadow wall and passed through a stretch of woods to a path
leading down to the shore, and, as we loitered along in the tender gloom
of the forest, the music of the hermit-thrushes rang all round us like
crystal bells, like silver flutes, like the drip of fountains, like the
choiring of still-eyed cherubim. We stopped from time to time and
listened, while the shy birds sang unseen in their covert of shadows; but
we did not speak till we emerged from the trees and suddenly stood upon
the naked knoll overlooking the lake.

Then I explained: "The woods used to come down to the shore here, and we
had their mystery and music to the water's edge; but last winter the owner
cut the timber off. It looks rather ragged now." I had to recognize the
fact, for I saw the Altrurian staring about him over the clearing in a
kind of horror. It was a squalid ruin, a graceless desolation, which not
even the pitying twilight could soften. The stumps showed their hideous
mutilation everywhere; the brush had been burned, and the fires had
scorched and blackened the lean soil of the hill-slope and blasted it with
sterility. A few weak saplings, withered by the flames, drooped and
straggled about; it would be a century before the forces of nature could
repair the waste.

"You say the owner did this?" said the Altrurian. "Who is the owner?"

"Well, it does seem too bad," I answered, evasively. "There has been a
good deal of feeling about it. The neighbors tried to buy him off before
he began the destruction, for they knew the value of the woods as an
attraction to summer-boarders; the city cottagers, of course, wanted to
save them, and together they offered for the land pretty nearly as much as
the timber was worth. But he had got it into his head that the land here
by the lake would sell for building lots if it was cleared, and he could
make money on that as well as on the trees; and so they had to go. Of
course, one might say that he was deficient in public spirit, but I don't
blame him, altogether."

"No," the Altrurian assented, somewhat to my surprise, I confess.

I resumed: "There was no one else to look after his interests, and it was
not only his right but his duty to get the most he could for himself and
his own, according to his best light. That is what I tell people when they
fall foul of him for his want of public spirit."

"The trouble seems to be, then, in the system that obliges each man to be
the guardian of his own interests. Is that what you blame?"

"No, I consider it a very perfect system. It is based upon individuality,
and we believe that individuality is the principle that differences
civilized men from savages, from the lower animals, and makes us a nation
instead of a tribe or a herd. There isn't one of us, no matter how much he
censured this man's want of public spirit, but would resent the slightest
interference with his property rights. The woods were his; he had the
right to do what he pleased with his own."

"Do I understand you that, in America, a man may do what is wrong with his
own?"

"He may do anything with his own."

"To the injury of others?"

"Well, not in person or property. But he may hurt them in taste and
sentiment as much as he likes. Can't a man do what he pleases with his own
in Altruria?"

"No, he can only do right with his own."

"And if he tries to do wrong, or what the community thinks is wrong?"

"Then the community takes his own from him." Before I could think of
anything to say to this he went on: "But I wish you would explain to me
why it was left to this man's neighbors to try and get him to sell his
portion of the landscape?"

"Why, bless my soul!" I exclaimed, "who else was there? You wouldn't have
expected to take up a collection among the summer-boarders?"

"That wouldn't have been so unreasonable; but I didn't mean that. Was
there no provision for such an exigency in your laws? Wasn't the state
empowered to buy him off at the full value of his timber and his land?"

"Certainly not," I replied. "That would be rank paternalism."

It began to get dark, and I suggested that we had better be going back
to the hotel. The talk seemed already to have taken us away from all
pleasure in the prospect; I said, as we found our way through the rich,
balsam-scented twilight of the woods, where one joy-haunted thrush was
still singing: "You know that in America the law is careful not to meddle
with a man's private affairs, and we don't attempt to legislate personal
virtue."

"But marriage," he said--"surely you have the institution of marriage?"

I was really annoyed at this. I returned, sarcastically; "Yes, I am glad
to say that there we can meet your expectation; we have marriage, not only
consecrated by the church, but established and defended by the state.
What has that to do with the question?"

"And you consider marriage," he pursued, "the citadel of morality, the
fountain of all that is pure and good in your private life, the source of
home and the image of heaven?"

"There are some marriages," I said, with a touch of our national humor,
"that do not quite fill the bill, but that is certainly our ideal of
marriage."

"Then why do you say that you have not legislated personal virtue in
America?" he asked. "You have laws, I believe, against theft and murder,
and slander and incest, and perjury and drunkenness?"

"Why, certainly."

"Then it appears to me that you have legislated honesty, regard for human
life, regard for character, abhorrence of unnatural vice, good faith, and
sobriety. I was told on the train coming up, by a gentleman who was
shocked at the sight of a man beating his horse, that you even had laws
against cruelty to animals."

"Yes, and I am happy to say that they are enforced to such a degree that a
man cannot kill a cat cruelly without being punished for it." The
Altrurian did not follow up his advantage, and I resolved not to be
outdone in magnanimity. "Come, I will own that you have the best of me on
those points. I must say you've trapped me very neatly, too; I can enjoy a
thing of that kind when it's well done, and I frankly knock under. But I
had in mind something altogether different when I spoke. I was thinking of
those idealists who want to bind us hand and foot and render us the slaves
of a state where the most intimate relations of life shall be penetrated
by legislation and the very hearthstone shall be a tablet of laws."

"Isn't marriage a rather intimate relation of life?" asked the Altrurian.
"And I understood that gentleman on the train to say that you had laws
against cruelty to children, and societies established to see them
enforced. You don't consider such laws an invasion of the home, do you, or
a violation of its immunities? I imagine," he went on, "that the
difference between your civilization and ours is only one of degree, after
all, and that America and Altruria are really one at heart."

I thought his compliment a bit hyperbolical, but I saw that it was
honestly meant, and as we Americans are first of all patriots, and vain
for our country before we are vain for ourselves, I was not proof against
the flattery it conveyed to me civically if not personally.

We were now drawing near the hotel, and I felt a certain glow of pleasure
in its gay effect on the pretty knoll where it stood. In its artless and
accidental architecture it was not unlike one of our immense coastwise
steamboats. The twilight had thickened to dusk, and the edifice was
brilliantly lighted with electrics, story above story, which streamed into
the gloom around like the lights of saloon and state-room. The corner of
wood making into the meadow hid the station; there was no other building
in sight; the hotel seemed riding at anchor on the swell of a placid sea.
I was going to call the Altrurian's attention to this fanciful resemblance
when I remembered that he had not been in our country long enough to have
seen a Fall River boat, and I made toward the house without wasting the
comparison upon him. But I treasured it up in my own mind, intending some
day to make a literary use of it.

The guests were sitting in friendly groups about the piazzas or in rows
against the walls, the ladies with their gossip and the gentlemen with
their cigars. The night had fallen cool after a hot day, and they all had
the effect of having cast off care with the burden of the week that was
past, and to be steeping themselves in the innocent and simple enjoyment
of the hour. They were mostly middle-aged married folk, but some were old
enough to have sons and daughters among the young people who went and came
in a long, wandering promenade of the piazzas, or wove themselves through
the waltz past the open windows of the great parlor; the music seemed one
with the light that streamed far out on the lawn flanking the piazzas.
Every one was well-dressed and comfortable and at peace, and I felt that
our hotel was in some sort a microcosm of the republic.

We involuntarily paused, and I heard the Altrurian murmur: "Charming,
charming! This is really delightful!"

"Yes, isn't it?" I returned, with a glow of pride. "Our hotel here is a
type of the summer hotel everywhere; it's characteristic in not having
anything characteristic about it; and I rather like the notion of the
people in it being so much like the people in all the others that you
would feel yourself at home wherever you met such a company in such a
house. All over the country, north and south, wherever you find a group of
hills or a pleasant bit of water or a stretch of coast, you'll find some
such refuge as this for our weary toilers. We began to discover some time
ago that it would not do to cut open the goose that laid our golden eggs,
even if it looked like an eagle, and kept on perching on our banners just
as if nothing had happened. We discovered that, if we continued to kill
ourselves with hard work, there would be no Americans pretty soon."

The Altrurian laughed. "How delightfully you put it! How quaint! How
picturesque! Excuse me, but I can't help expressing my pleasure in it. Our
own humor is so very different."

"Ah," I said; "what is your humor like?"

"I could hardly tell you, I'm afraid; I've never been much of a humorist
myself."

Again a cold doubt of something ironical in the man went through me, but I
had no means of verifying it, and so I simply remained silent, waiting for
him to prompt me if he wished to know anything further about our national
transformation from bees perpetually busy into butterflies occasionally
idle. "And when you had made that discovery?" he suggested.

"Why, we're nothing if not practical, you know, and as soon as we made
that discovery we stopped killing ourselves and invented the summer
resort. There are very few of our business or professional men now who
don't take their four or five weeks' vacation. Their wives go off early in
the summer, and, if they go to some resort within three or four hours of
the city, the men leave town Saturday afternoon and run out, or come up,
and spend Sunday with their families. For thirty-eight hours or so a hotel
like this is a nest of happy homes."

"That is admirable," said the Altrurian. "You are truly a practical
people. The ladies come early in the summer, you say?"

"Yes, sometimes in the beginning of June."

"What do they come for?" asked the Altrurian.

"I was once a singing boy," he said. "Reutter brought me from
Hainburg to Vienna.

I was industrious when my companions were at play.
I used to take my little clavier under my arm, and go off to practice
undisturbed.

When I sang a solo, the baker near St Stephen's yonder always gave
me a cake as a present.

Be good and industrious, and serve God continually."

A Sixteen-Part Mass!

It is pathetic to think of the boy assiduously scratching innumerable
notes on scraps of music paper, striving with yet imperfect knowledge to
express himself, and hoping that by some miracle of inspiration something
like music might come out of it.
"I thought it must be all right if the paper was nice and full," he said.
He even went the length of trying to write a mass in sixteen parts--an
effort which Reutter rewarded with a shrug and a sneer, and the
sarcastic suggestion that for the present two parts might be deemed
sufficient, and that he had better perfect his copying of music
before trying to compose it.

But Haydn was not to be snubbed and snuffed out in this way. He appealed
to his father for money to buy some theory books.

There was not too much money at Rohrau, we may be sure, for the family was
always increasing, and petty economies were necessary. But the wheelwright
managed to send the boy six florins, and that sum was immediately
expended on Fux's Gradus ad Parnassum and Mattheson's Volkommener
Capellmeister--heavy, dry treatises both, which have long since
gone to the musical antiquary's top shelf among the dust and the
cobwebs.

These "dull and verbose dampers to enthusiasm" Haydn made his constant
companions, in default of a living instructor, and, like Longfellow's
"great men," toiled upwards in the night, while less industrious mortals
snored.

Juvenile Escapades
Meanwhile his native exuberance and cheerfulness of soul were irrepressible.
Several stories are told of the schoolboy escapades he enjoyed
with his fellow choristers.

One will suffice here. He used to boast that he had sung with success at
Court as well as in St Stephen's.

This meant that he had made one of the choir when visits were paid to the
Palace of Schonbrunn, where the Empress Maria and her Court resided.

On the occasion of one of these visits the palace was in the hands
of the builders, and the scaffolding presented the usual temptation
to the youngsters.

"The empress," to quote Pohl, "had caught them climbing it many a time,
but her threats and prohibitions had no effect. One day when Haydn was
balancing himself aloft, far above his schoolfellows, the empress saw
him from the windows, and requested her Hofcompositor to take care
that 'that fair-headed blockhead,' the ringleader of them all, got 'einen
recenten Schilling' (slang for 'a good hiding')." The command was only
too willingly obeyed by the obsequious Reutter, who by this time had
been ennobled, and rejoiced in the addition of "von" to his name.
Many years afterwards, when the empress was on a visit to Prince
Esterhazy, the "fair-headed blockhead" took the cruel delight of
thanking her for this rather questionable mark of Imperial favour!

"Sang like a Crow"

As a matter of fact, the empress, however she may have thought of Haydn
the man, showed herself anything but considerate to Haydn the choir-boy.
The future composer's younger brother, Michael, had now arrived in Vienna,
and had been admitted to the St Stephen's choir. His voice is said
to have been "stronger and of better quality" than Joseph's, which had
almost reached the "breaking" stage; and the empress, complaining
to Reutter that Joseph "sang like a crow," the complacent choirmaster
put Michael in his place.

The empress was so pleased with the change that she personally
complimented Michael, and made him a present of 24 ducats.

Dismissed from St Stephen's
One thing leads to another.

Reutter, it is obvious, did not like Haydn, and any opportunity of playing
toady to the empress was too good to be lost. Unfortunately Haydn
himself provided the opportunity.

Having become possessed of a new pair of scissors, he was itching
to try their quality.

The pig-tail of the chorister sitting before him offered an
irresistible attraction; one snip and lo! the plaited hair lay at his feet.
Discipline must be maintained; and Reutter sentenced the culprit to be
caned on the hand.

This was too great an indignity for poor Joseph, by this time a youth of
seventeen--old enough, one would have thought, to have forsworn
such boyish mischief.

He declared that he would rather leave the cathedral service than submit.
"You shall certainly leave," retorted the Capellmeister, "but you must
be caned first." And so, having received his caning, Haydn was sent adrift
on the streets of Vienna, a broken-voiced chorister, without a
coin in his pocket, and with only poverty staring him in the face.

This was in November 1749.

CHAPTER II

VIENNA--1750-1760
Vienna--The Forlorn Ex-Chorister--A Good Samaritan--Haydn Enskied--Street
Serenades--Joins a Pilgrim Party--An Unconditional Loan--"Attic"
Studies--An Early Composition-- Metastasio--A Noble Pupil--Porpora--Menial
Duties--Emanuel Bach-- Haydn his Disciple--Violin Studies--Attempts
at "Programme" Music--First Opera--An Aristocratic Appointment--Taken
for an Impostor--A Count's Capellmeister--Falls in Love--Marries--
His Wife.

Vienna

The Vienna into
  which Haydn was thus cast, a friendless
    and forlorn youth of seventeen,
was not materially different from the Vienna of to-day.

While the composer was still living, one who had made his acquaintance
wrote of the city: "Represent to yourself an assemblage of palaces and
very neat houses, inhabited by the most opulent families of one of the
greatest monarchies in Europe--by the only noblemen to whom that
title may still be with justice applied.

The women here are attractive; a brilliant complexion adorns an elegant
form; the natural but sometimes languishing and tiresome air of the
ladies of the north of Germany is mingled with a little coquetry and address,
the effect of the presence of a numerous Court...In a word, pleasure has
taken possession of every heart." This was written when Haydn was old
and famous; it might have been written when his name was yet
unknown.

Vienna was essentially a city of pleasure--a city inhabited by
"a proud and wealthy nobility, a prosperous middle class, and a silent,
if not contented, lower class." In 1768, Leopold Mozart, the father of the
composer, declared that the Viennese public had no love of anything
serious or sensible; "they cannot even understand it, and their theatres
furnish abundant proof that nothing but utter trash, such as dances,
burlesques, harlequinades, ghost tricks, and devils' antics will go down
with them." There is, no doubt, a touch of exaggeration in all
this, but it is sufficiently near the truth to let us understand
the kind of attention which the disgraced chorister of St Stephen's
was likely to receive from the musical world of Vienna.

It was Vienna, we may recall, which dumped Mozart into a pauper's grave,
and omitted even to mark the spot.

The Forlorn Ex-Chorister
Young Haydn, then, was wandering, weary and perplexed, through its streets,
with threadbare clothes on his back and nothing in his purse. There was
absolutely no one to whom he could think of turning. He might, indeed,
have taken the road to Rohrau and been sure of a warm welcome from his
humble parents there. But there were good reasons why he should not
make himself a burden on them; and, moreover, he probably feared
that at home he would run some risk of being tempted to abandon his
cherished profession.

Frau Haydn had not yet given up the hope of seeing her boy made a priest,
and though we have no definite information that Haydn himself felt a decided
aversion to taking orders, it is evident that he was disinclined to hazard
the danger of domestic pressure. He had now finally made up his mind that
he would be a composer; but he saw clearly enough that, for the present,
he must work, and work, too, not for fame, but for bread.

A Good Samaritan
Musing on these things while still parading the streets, tired and
hungry, he met one Spangler, a tenor singer of his acquaintance,
who earned a pittance at the Church of St Michael.

Spangler was a poor man--but it is ever the poor who are most helpful
to each other--and, taking pity on the dejected outcast, he invited Haydn
to share his garret rooms along with his wife and child. It is regrettable
that nothing more is known of this good Samaritan--one of those
obscure benefactors who go through the world doing little acts of
kindness, never perhaps even suspecting how far-reaching will be
the results.

He must have died before Haydn, otherwise his name would certainly
have appeared in his will.

Haydn Enskied
Haydn remained with Spangler in that "ghastly garret" all through the
winter of 1749-1750. He has been commiserated on the garret-- needlessly,
to be sure. Garrets are famous, in literary annals at any rate; and is
it not Leigh Hunt who reminds us that the top story is healthier than
the basement? The poor poet in Pope, who lay high in Drury Lane, "lull'd
by soft zephyrs through the broken pane," found profit, doubtless, in
his "neighbourhood with the stars." However that may be, there, in Spangler's
attic, was Haydn enskied, eager for work--work of any kind, so long
as it had fellowship with music and brought him the bare means of
subsistence.

"Scanning his whole horizon In quest of what he could clap eyes on,"
he sought any and every means of making money. He tried to get teaching,
with what success has not been recorded. He sang in choirs, played at balls
and weddings and baptisms, made "arrangements" for anybody who would
employ him, and in short drudged very much as Wagner did at the outset of
his tempestuous career.

Street Serenades
He even took part in street serenades by playing the violin. This last was
not a very dignified occupation; but it is important to remember that
serenading in Vienna was not the lover's business of Italy and Spain, where
the singer is accompanied by guitar or mandoline. It was a much more serious
entertainment. It dated from the seventeenth century, if we are to trust
Praetorius, and consisted of solos and concerted vocal music in various
forms, accompanied sometimes by full orchestra and sometimes by wind
instruments alone. Great composers occasionally honoured their patrons
and friends with the serenade; and composers who hoped to be great found
it advantageous as a means of gaining a hearing for their works. It proved
of some real service to Haydn later on, but in the meantime it does not
appear to have swelled his lean purse. With all his industry he
fell into the direst straits now and again, and was more than once
driven into wild projects by sheer stress of hunger.

Joins a Pilgrim Party
One curious story is told of a journey to Mariazell, in Styria.
This picturesquely-situated village has been for many years the most
frequented shrine in Austria. To-day it is said to be visited by
something like 100,000 pilgrims every year.

The object of adoration is the miraculous image of the Madonna and Child,
twenty inches high, carved in lime-wood, which was presented to the
Mother Church of Mariazell in 1157 by a Benedictine priest.
Haydn was a devout Catholic, and not improbably knew all about Mariazell
and its Madonna. At any rate, he joined a company of pilgrims, and
on arrival presented himself to the local choirmaster for admission,
showing the official some of his compositions, and telling of his eight
years' training at St Stephen's. The choirmaster was not impressed. "I have
had enough of lazy rascals from Vienna," said he. "Be off!" But Haydn,
after coming so far, was not to be dismissed so unceremoniously. He smuggled
himself into the choir, pleaded with the solo singer of the day to be
allowed to act as his deputy, and, when this was refused, snatched the
music from the singer's hand, and took up the solo at the right moment
with such success that "all the choir held their breath to listen." At the
close of the service the choirmaster sent for him, and, apologizing
for his previous rude behaviour, invited him to his house for the
day.

The invitation extended to a week, and Haydn returned to Vienna with money
enough--the result of a subscription among the choir--to serve his immediate
needs.

An Unconditional Loan
But it would have been strange if, in a musical city like Vienna, a youth
of Haydn's gifts had been allowed to starve.

Slowly but surely he made his way, and people who could help began to hear
of him. The most notable of his benefactors at this time was a worthy
tradesman named Buchholz, who made him an unconditional loan of 150
florins.

An echo of this unexpected favour is heard long years after in the composer's
will, where we read: "To Fraulein Anna Buchholz, 100 florins,
inasmuch as in my youth her grandfather lent me 150 florins when I
greatly needed them, which, however, I repaid fifty years ago."

"Attic" Studies
One hundred and fifty florins was no great sum assuredly, but at
this time it was a small fortune to Haydn.

He was able to do a good many things with it.

First of all, he took a lodging for himself--another attic!

Spangler had been very kind, but he could not give the young musician
the privacy needed for study.

It chanced that there was a room vacant, "nigh to the gods and the
clouds," in the old Michaelerhaus in the Kohlmarkt, and Haydn rented
it.

It was not a very comfortable room--just big enough to allow the poor
composer to turn about. It was dimly lighted. It "contained no stove, and
the roof was in such bad repair that the rain and the snow made
unceremonious entry and drenched the young artist in his bed.

In winter the water in his jug froze so hard during the night that
he had to go and draw direct from the well."

For neighbours he had successively a journeyman printer, a footman and a
cook. These were not likely to respect his desire for quiet, but the mere
fact of his having a room all to himself made him oblivious of
external annoyances.

As he expressed it, he was "too happy to envy the lot of kings." He had his
old, worm-eaten spinet, and his health and his good spirits; and although
he was still poor and unknown, he was "making himself all the time," like
Sir Walter Scott in Liddesdale.

An Early Composition
Needless to say, he was composing a great deal. Much of his manuscript
was, of course, torn up or consigned to the flames, but one piece
of work survived.

This was his first Mass in F (No.
11 in Novello's edition), erroneously dated by some writers 1742.
It shows signs of immaturity and inexperience, but when Haydn in his old
age came upon the long-forgotten score he was so far from being displeased
with it that he rearranged the music, inserting additional wind parts.
One biographer sees in this procedure "a striking testimony to the
genius of the lad of eighteen."

We need not read it in that way. It rather shows a natural human tenderness
for his first work, a weakness, some might call it, but even so, more
pardonable than the weakness--well illustrated by some later
instances--of hunting out early productions and publishing them
without a touch of revision.

Metastasio
It was presumably by mere chance that in that same rickety Michaelerhaus
there lived at this date not only the future composer of "The Creation,"
but the Scribe of the eighteenth century, the poet and opera librettist,
Metastasio. Born in 1698, the son of humble parents, this distinguished
writer had, like Haydn, suffered from "the eternal want of pence."

A precocious boy, he had improvised verses and recited them on the street,
and fame came to him only after long and weary years of waiting. In 1729
he was appointed Court poet to the theatre at Vienna, for which he wrote
several of his best pieces, and when he made Haydn's acquaintance his
reputation was high throughout the whole of Europe. Naturally, he
did not live so near the clouds as Haydn--his rooms were on the third
story--but he heard somehow of the friendless, penniless youth in the attic,
and immediately resolved to do what he could to further his interests. This,
as events proved, was by no means inconsiderable.

A Noble Pupil

Metastasio had been entrusted with the education of Marianne von Martinez,
the daughter of a Spanish gentleman who was Master of the Ceremonies
to the Apostolic Nuncio. The young lady required a musicmaster, and the
poet engaged Haydn to teach her the harpsichord, in return for
which service he was to receive free board.

Fraulein Martinez became something of a musical celebrity.
When she was only seventeen she had a mass performed at St Michael's Church,
Vienna. She was a favourite of the Empress Maria Theresa, and is extolled
by Burney--who speaks of her "marvelous accuracy" in the writing of
English--as a singer and a player, almost as highly as Gluck's niece. Her
name finds a place in the biographies of Mozart, who, at her musical
receptions, used to take part with her in duets of her own composition.
Several of her manuscripts are still in the possession of the
Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde.

Something of her musical distinction ought certainly to be attributed to
Haydn, who gave her daily lessons for three years, during which time
he was comfortably housed with the family.

Porpora
It was through Metastasio, too, that he was introduced to Niccolo Porpora,
the famous singing-master who taught the great Farinelli, and whose name
is sufficiently familiar from its connection with an undertaking set on
foot by Handel's enemies in London. Porpora seems at this time to have
ruled Vienna as a sort of musical director and privileged censor, to have
been, in fact, what Rossini was for many years in Paris. He was giving
lessons to the mistress of Correr, the Venetian ambassador--a "rare
musical enthusiast"--and he employed Haydn to act as accompanist
during the lessons.

Menial Duties
We get a curious insight into the social conditions of the musicians
of this time in the bearing of Haydn towards Porpora and his pupil.

That Haydn should become the instructor of Fraulein Martinez in no way
compromised his dignity; nor can any reasonable objection be raised
against his filling the post of, accompanist to the ambassador's
mistress.

But what shall be said of his being transported to the ambassador's
summer quarters at Mannersdorf, and doing duty there for six ducats
a month and his board--at the servants' table?

The reverend author of Music and Morals answers by reminding us that
in those days musicians were not the confidential advisers of kings
like Wagner, rich banker's sons like Meyerbeer, private gentlemen
like Mendelssohn, and members of the Imperial Parliament like Verdi.

They were "poor devils" like Haydn. Porpora was a great man, no doubt,
in his own metier. But it is surely odd to hear of Haydn acting the part
of very humble servant to the singing-master; blackening his boots
and trimming his wig, and brushing his coat, and running his errands, and
playing his accompaniments! Let us, however, remember Haydn's position
and circumstances.

He was a poor man.
He had never received any regular tuition such as Handel received from
Zachau, Mozart from his father, and Mendelssohn from Zelter.
He had to pick up his instruction as he went along; and if he felt constrained
to play the lackey to Porpora, it was only with the object of
receiving in return something which would help to fit him for his
profession.

As he naively said, "I improved greatly in singing, composition, and Italian."
[The relations of Haydn and Porpora are sketched in George Sand's
"Consuelo."]

Emanuel Bach
In the meantime he was carrying on his private studies with the greatest
assiduity. His Fux and his Mattheson had served their turn, and he had
now supplemented them by the first six Clavier Sonatas of Philipp
Emanuel Bach, the third son of the great composer.

The choice may seem curious when we remember that Haydn had at his hand
all the music of Handel and Bach, and the masters of the old contrapuntal
school. But it was wisely made. The simple, well-balanced form of Emanuel
Bach's works "acted as well as a master's guidance upon him, and led
him to the first steps in that style of writing which was afterwards one
of his greatest glories." The point is admirably put by Sir Hubert
Parry.

He says, in effect, that what Haydn had to build upon, and what was
most congenial to him, through his origin and circumstances, was the
popular songs and dances of his native land, which, in the matter of
structure, belong to the same order of art as symphonies and sonatas; and
how this kind of music could be made on a grander scale was what he wanted
to discover.

The music of Handel and Bach leaned too much towards the style of the
choral music and organ music of the church to serve him as a model. For
their art was essentially contrapuntal--the combination of several parts
each of equal importance with the rest, each in a sense pursuing its own
course. In modern music the essential principle is harmonic: the chords
formed by the combination of parts are derived and developed in
reference to roots and keys.

In national dances few harmonies are used, but they are arranged on the same
principles as the harmonies of a sonata or a symphony; and "what
had to be found out in order to make grand instrumental works was
how to arrange more harmonies with the same effect of unity as is
obtained on a small scale in dances and national songs."

Haydn, whose music contains many reminiscences of popular folk-song,
had in him the instinct for this kind of art; and the study of
Philipp Emanuel's works taught him how to direct his energies in
the way that was most agreeable to him.

A Disciple of Emanuel Bach
Although much has been written about Emanuel Bach, it is probable that
the full extent of his genius remains yet to be recognized.
He was the greatest clavier player, teacher and accompanist of his day; a
master of form, and the pioneer of a style which was a complete departure
from that of his father. Haydn's enthusiasm for him can easily be explained.
"I did not leave the clavier till I had mastered all his six sonatas,"
he says, "and those who know me well must be aware that I owe very much to
Emanuel Bach, whose works I understand and have thoroughly studied. Emanuel
Bach himself once complimented me on this fact." When Haydn began to make
a name Bach hailed him with delight as a disciple, and took occasion
to send him word that, "he alone had thoroughly comprehended his
works and made a proper use of them."

This is a sufficient answer to the absurd statement which has been made,
and is still sometimes repeated, that Bach was jealous of the young
composer and abused him to his friends.

A writer in the European Magazine for October 1784, says that Bach was
"amongst the number of professors who wrote against our rising author." He
mentions others as doing the same thing, and then continues: "The only
notice Haydn took of their scurrility and abuse was to publish lessons
written in imitation of the several styles of his enemies, in which their
peculiarities were so closely copied and their extraneous passages
(particularly those of Bach of Hamburg) so inimitably burlesqued,
that they all felt the poignancy of his musical wit, confessed its
truth, and were silent."

Further on we read that the sonatas of Ops. 13 and 14 were "expressly
composed in order to ridicule Bach of Hamburg." All this is manifestly a
pure invention. Many of the peculiarities of Emanuel Bach's style are
certainly to be found in Haydn's works--notes wide apart, pause
bars, surprise modulations, etc., etc

.
In fact, I suppose most
Americans honestly believe because we have a republican form of
government, and manhood suffrage, and so on, that our economic conditions
are peculiar, and that our working-man has a status higher and better than
that of the working-man anywhere else. But he has nothing of the kind. His
circumstances are better, and provisionally his wages are higher, but it
is only a question of years or decades when his circumstances will be the
same and his wages the same as the European working-man's. There is
nothing in our conditions to prevent this."

"Yes, I understood from our friend here," said the Altrurian, nodding
toward me, "that you had broken only with the political tradition of
Europe in your Revolution; and he has explained to me that you do not hold
all kinds of labor in equal esteem; but--"

"What kind of labor did he say we did hold in esteem?" asked the banker.

"Why, I understood him to say that if America meant anything at all it
meant the honor of work, but that you distinguished and did not honor some
kinds of work so much as others; for instance, domestic service, or
personal attendance of any kind."

The banker laughed again. "Oh, he drew the line there, did he? Well, we
all have to draw the line somewhere. Our friend is a novelist, and I will
tell you in strict confidence that the line he has drawn is imaginary. We
don't honor any kind of work any more than any other people. If a fellow
gets up, the papers make a great ado over his having been a woodchopper or
a bobbin-boy, or something of that kind, but I doubt if the fellow himself
likes it; he doesn't if he's got any sense. The rest of us feel that it's
_infra dig._, and hope nobody will find out that we ever worked with our
hands for a living. I'll go further," said the banker, with the effect of
whistling prudence down the wind, "and I will challenge any of you to
gainsay me from his own experience or observation. How does esteem usually
express itself? When we wish, to honor a man, what do we do?"

"Ask him to dinner," said the lawyer.

"Exactly. We offer him some sort of social recognition. Well, as soon as a
fellow gets up, if he gets up high enough, we offer him some sort of
social recognition; in fact, all sorts; but upon condition that he has
left off working with his hands for a living. We forgive all you please to
his past on account of the present. But there isn't a working-man, I
venture to say, in any city or town, or even large village, in the whole
length and breadth of the United States who has any social recognition, if
he is still working at his trade. I don't mean, merely, that he is
excluded from rich and fashionable society, but from the society of the
average educated and cultivated people. I'm not saying he is fit for it;
but I don't care how intelligent and agreeable he might be--and some of
them are astonishingly intelligent, and so agreeable in their tone of mind
and their original way of looking at things that I like nothing better
than to talk with them--all of our invisible fences are up against him."

The minister said: "I wonder if that sort of exclusiveness is quite
natural? Children seem to feel no sort of social difference among
themselves."

"We can hardly go to children for a type of social order," the professor
suggested.

"True," the minister meekly admitted. "But somehow there is a protest in
us somewhere against these arbitrary distinctions--something that
questions whether they are altogether right. We know that they must be,
and always have been, and always will be, and yet--well, I will confess
it--I never feel at peace when I face them."

"Oh," said the banker, "if you come to the question of right and wrong,
that is another matter. I don't say it's right. I'm not discussing that
question; though I'm certainly not proposing to level the fences; I should
be the last to take my own down. I say simply that you are no more likely
to meet a working-man in American society than you are to meet a colored
man. Now you can judge," he ended, turning directly to the Altrurian, "how
much we honor labor. And I hope I have indirectly satisfied your curiosity
as to the social status of the working-man among us."

We were all silent.

Perhaps the others were occupied like myself in trying to recall some
instance of a working-man whom they had met in society, and perhaps we
said nothing because we all failed.

The Altrurian spoke at last.

"You have been so very full and explicit that I feel as if it were almost
unseemly to press any further inquiry; but I should very much like to know
how your working-men bear this social exclusion."

"I'm sure I can't say," returned the banker. "A man does not care much to
get into society until he has something to eat, and how to get that is
always the first question with the working-man."

"But you wouldn't like it yourself?"

"No, certainly, I shouldn't like it myself. I shouldn't complain of not
being asked to people's houses, and the working-men don't; you can't do
that; but I should feel it an incalculable loss. We may laugh at the
emptiness of society, or pretend to be sick of it, but there is no doubt
that society is the flower of civilization, and to be shut out from it is
to be denied the best privilege of a civilized man. There are society
women--we have all met them--whose graciousness and refinement of presence
are something of incomparable value; it is more than a liberal education
to have been admitted to it, but it is as inaccessible to the working-man
as--what shall I say? The thing is too grotesquely impossible for any sort
of comparison. Merely to conceive of its possibility is something that
passes a joke; it is a kind of offence."

Again we were silent.

"I don't know," the banker continued, "how the notion of our social
equality originated, but I think it has been fostered mainly by the
expectation of foreigners, who argued it from our political equality.
As a matter of fact, it never existed, except in our poorest and most
primitive communities, in the pioneer days of the West and among the
gold-hunters of California. It was not dreamed of in our colonial society,
either in Virginia or Pennsylvania or New York or Massachusetts; and the
fathers of the republic, who were mostly slave-holders, were practically
as stiff-necked aristocrats as any people of their day. We have not a
political aristocracy, that is all; but there is as absolute a division
between the orders of men and as little love, in this country as in any
country on the globe. The severance of the man who works for his living
with his hands from the man who does not work for his living with his
hands is so complete, and apparently so final, that nobody even imagines
anything else, not even in fiction. Or, how is that?" he asked, turning to
me. "Do you fellows still put the intelligent, high-spirited, handsome
young artisan, who wins the millionaire's daughter, into your books? I
used sometimes to find him there."

"You might still find him in the fiction of the weekly story-papers; but,"
I was obliged to own, "he would not go down with my readers. Even in the
story-paper fiction he would leave off working as soon as he married the
millionaire's daughter, and go to Europe, or he would stay here and become
a social leader, but he would not receive working-men in his gilded
halls."

The others rewarded my humor with a smile, but the banker said: "Then I
wonder you were not ashamed of filling our friend up with that stuff about
our honoring some kinds of labor. It is true that we don't go about openly
and explicitly despising any kind of honest toil--people don't do that
anywhere now; but we contemn it in terms quite as unmistakable. The
working-man acquiesces as completely as anybody else. He does not remain a
working-man a moment longer that he can help; and after he gets up, if he
is weak enough to be proud of having been one, it is because he feels that
his low origin is a proof of his prowess in rising to the top against
unusual odds. I don't suppose there is a man in the whole civilized
world--outside of Altruria, of course---who is proud of working at a
trade, except the shoemaker Tolstoy, and is a count, and he does not make
very good shoes."

We all laughed again: those shoes of Count Tolstoy's are always such an
infallible joke.

The Altrurian, however, was cocked and primed with another question; he
instantly exploded it: "But are all the working-men in America eager to
rise above their condition? Is there none willing to remain among the mass
because the rest could not rise with him, and from the hope of yet
bringing labor to honor?"

The banker answered: "I never heard of any. No, the American ideal is not
to change the conditions for all, but for each to rise above the rest if
he can."

"Do you think it is really so bad as that?" asked the minister, timidly.

The banker answered: "Bad? Do you call that bad? I thought it was very
good. But, good or bad, I don't think you'll find it deniable, if you
look into the facts. There may be working-men willing to remain so for
other working-men's sake, but I have never met any--perhaps because the
working-man never goes into society."

The unfailing question of the Altrurian broke the silence which ensued:
"Are there many of your working-men who are intelligent and agreeable--of
the type you mentioned a moment since?"

"Perhaps," said the banker, "I had better refer you to one of our friends
here, who has had a great deal more to do with them than I have. He is a
manufacturer, and he has had to do with all kinds of work-people."

"Yes, for my sins," the manufacturer assented; and he added: "They are
often confoundedly intelligent, though I haven't often found them very
agreeable, either in their tone of mind or their original way of looking
at things."

The banker amiably acknowledged his thrust, and the Altrurian asked: "Ah,
they are opposed to your own?"

"Well, we have the same trouble here that you must have heard of in
England. As you know now that the conditions are the same here, you won't
be surprised at the fact."

"But the conditions," the Altrurian pursued--"do you expect them always to
continue the same?"

"Well, I don't know," said the manufacturer. "We can't expect them to
change of themselves, and I shouldn't know how to change them. It was
expected that the rise of the trusts and the syndicates would break the
unions, but somehow they haven't. The situation remains the same. The
unions are not cutting one another's throats now any more than we are. The
war is on a larger scale--that's all."

"Then let me see," said the Altrurian, "whether I clearly understand the
situation as regards the working-man in America. He is dependent upon the
employer for his chance to earn a living, and he is never sure of this. He
may be thrown out of work by his employer's disfavor or disaster, and his
willingness to work goes for nothing; there is no public provision of work
for him; there is nothing to keep him from want nor the prospect of
anything."

"We are all in the same boat," said the professor.

"But some of us have provisioned ourselves rather better and can generally
weather it through till we are picked up," the lawyer put in.

"I am always saying the working-man is improvident," returned the
professor.

"There are the charities," the minister suggested.

"But his economical status," the Altrurian pursued, "is in a state of
perpetual uncertainty, and to save himself in some measure he has
organized, and so has constituted himself a danger to the public peace?"

"A very great danger," said the professor.

"I guess we can manage him," the manufacturer remarked.

"And socially he is non-existent?"

The Altrurian turned with this question to the banker, who said: "He is
certainly not in society."

"Then," said my guest, "if the working-man's wages are provisionally so
much better here than in Europe, why should they be discontented? What is
the real cause of their discontent?"

I have always been suspicious, in the company of practical men, of an
atmosphere of condescension to men of my calling, if nothing worse. I
fancy they commonly regard artists of all kinds as a sort of harmless
eccentrics, and that literary people they look upon as something droll, as
weak and soft, as not quite right. I believed that this particular group,
indeed, was rather abler to conceive of me as a rational person than most
others, but I knew that if even they had expected me to be as reasonable
as themselves they would not have been greatly disappointed if I were not;
and it seemed to me that I had put myself wrong with them in imparting to
the Altrurian that romantic impression that we hold labor in honor here. I
had really thought so, but I could not say so now, and I wished to
retrieve myself somehow. I wished to show that I was a practical man, too,
and so I made answer: "What is the cause of the working-man's discontent?
It is very simple: the walking delegate."


IV

I suppose I could not have fairly claimed any great originality for my
notion that the walking delegate was the cause of the labor troubles: he
is regularly assigned as the reason of a strike in the newspapers, and is
reprobated for his evil agency by the editors, who do not fail to read the
working-men many solemn lessons and fervently warn them against him, as
soon as the strike begins to go wrong--as it nearly always does. I
understand from them that the walking delegate is an irresponsible tyrant,
who emerges from the mystery that habitually hides him and from time to
time orders a strike in mere rancor of spirit and plenitude of power, and
then leaves the working-men and their families to suffer the consequences,
while he goes off somewhere and rolls in the lap of luxury, careless of
the misery he has created. Between his debauches of vicious idleness and
his accesses of baleful activity he is employed in poisoning the mind of
the working-men against his real interests and real friends. This is
perfectly easy, because the American working-man, though singularly shrewd
and sensible in other respects, is the victim of an unaccountable
obliquity of vision which keeps him from seeing his real interests and
real friends--or, at least, from knowing them when he sees them.

There could be no doubt, I thought, in the mind of any reasonable person
that the walking delegate was the source of the discontent among our
proletariate, and I alleged him with a confidence which met the approval
of the professor, apparently, for he nodded, as if to say that I had hit
the nail on the head this time; and the minister seemed to be freshly
impressed with a notion that could not be new to him. The lawyer and the
doctor were silent, as if waiting for the banker to speak again; but he
was silent, too. The manufacturer, to my chagrin, broke into a laugh. "I'm
afraid," he said, with a sardonic levity which surprised me, "you'll have
to go a good deal deeper than the walking delegate. He's a symptom; he
isn't the disease. The thing keeps on and on, and it seems to be always
about wages; but it isn't about wages at the bottom. Some of those fellows
know it and some of them don't, but the real discontent is with the whole
system, with the nature of things. I had a curious revelation on that
point the last time I tried to deal with my men as a union. They were
always bothering me about this and about that, and there was no end to the
bickering. I yielded point after point, but it didn't make any difference.
It seemed as if the more I gave the more they asked. At last I made up my
mind to try to get at the real inwardness of the matter, and I didn't wait
for their committee to come to me--I sent for their leading man, and said
I wanted to have it out with him. He wasn't a bad fellow, and when I got
at him, man to man that way, I found he had sense, and he had ideas--it's
no use pretending those fellows are fools; he had thought about his side
of the question, anyway. I said: 'Now what does it all mean? Do you want
the earth, or don't you? When is it going to end?' I offered him something
to take, but he said he didn't drink, and we compromised on cigars. 'Now
when is it going to end?' said I, and I pressed it home, and wouldn't let
him fight off from the point. 'Do you mean when is it all going to end?'
said he. 'Yes,' said I, 'all. I'm sick of it. If there's any way out I'd
like to know it.' 'Well,' said he, 'I'll tell you, if you want to know.
It's all going to end when you get the same amount of money for the same
amount of work as we do.'"

We all laughed uproariously. The thing was deliciously comical; and
nothing, I thought, attested the Altrurian's want of humor like his
failure to appreciate this joke. He did not even smile in asking: "And
what did you say?"

"Well," returned the manufacturer, with cosey enjoyment, "I asked him if
the men would take the concern and run it themselves." We laughed again;
this seemed even better than the other joke. "But he said, 'No'; they
would not like to do that. And then I asked him just what they would like,
if they could have their own way, and he said they would like to have me
run the business, and all share alike. I asked him what was the sense of
that, and why, if I could do something that all of them put together
couldn't do, I shouldn't be paid more than all of them put together; and
he said that if a man did his best he ought to be paid as much as the best
man. I asked him if that was the principle their union was founded on, and
he said, 'Yes,' that the very meaning of their union was the protection of
the weak by the strong and the equalization of earnings among all who do
their best."

We waited for the manufacturer to go on, but he made a dramatic pause at
this point, as if to let it sink into our minds; and he did not speak
until the Altrurian prompted him with the question, "And what did you
finally do?"

"I saw there was only one way out for me, and I told the fellow I did not
think I could do business on that principle. We parted friends, but the
next Saturday I locked them out and smashed their union. They came back,
most of them--they had to--but I've treated with them ever since 'as
individuals.'"

"And they're much better off in your hands than they were in the union,"
said the professor.

"I don't know about that," said the manufacturer, "but I'm sure I am."

We laughed with him, all but the minister, whose mind seemed to have
caught upon some other point, and who sat absently by.

"And is it your opinion, from what you know of the working-man generally,
that they all have this twist in their heads?" the professor asked.

"They have, until they begin to rise. Then they get rid of it mighty soon.
Let a man save something--enough to get a house of his own, and take a
boarder or two, and perhaps have a little money at interest--and he sees
the matter in another light."

"Do you think he sees it more clearly?" asked the minister.

"He sees it differently."

"What do you think?" the minister pursued, turning to the lawyer. "You are
used to dealing with questions of justice--"

"Rather more with questions of law, I'm afraid," the other returned,
pleasantly, putting his feet together before him and looking down at them
in a way he had. "But, still, I have a great interest in questions of
justice, and I confess that I find a certain wild equity in this
principle, which I see nobody could do business on. It strikes me as
idyllic--it's a touch of real poetry in the rough-and-tumble prose of our
economic life."

He referred this to me as something I might appreciate in my quality of
literary man, and I responded in my quality of practical man: "There's
certainly more rhyme than reason in it."

He turned again to the minister:

"I suppose the ideal of the Christian state is the family?"

"I hope so," said the minister, with the gratitude that I have seen people
of his cloth show when men of the world conceded premises which the world
usually contests; it has seemed to me pathetic.

"And if that is the case, why, the logic of the postulate is that the
prosperity of the weakest is the sacred charge and highest happiness of
all the stronger. But the law has not recognized any such principle, in
economics at least, and if the labor unions are based upon it they are
outlaw, so far as any hope of enforcing it is concerned; and it is bad for
men to feel themselves outlaw. How is it," the lawyer continued, turning
to the Altrurian, "in your country? We can see no issue here, if the first
principle of organized labor antagonizes the first principle of business."

"But I don't understand precisely yet what the first principle of business
is," returned my guest.

"Ah, that raises another interesting question," said the lawyer. "Of
course, every business man solves the problem practically according to his
temperament and education, and I suppose that on first thoughts every
business man would answer you accordingly. But perhaps the personal
equation is something you wish to eliminate from the definition."

"Yes, of course."

"Still, I would rather not venture upon it first," said the lawyer.
"Professor, what should you say was the first principle of business?"

"Buying in the cheapest market and selling in the dearest," the professor
promptly answered.

"We will pass the parson and the doctor and the novelist as witnesses of
no value. They can't possibly have any cognizance of the first principle
of business; their affair is to look after the souls and bodies and
fancies of other people. But what should you say it was?" he asked the
banker.

"I should say it was an enlightened conception of one's own interests."

"And you?"

The manufacturer had no hesitation in answering: "The good of Number One,
first, last, and all the time. There may be a difference of opinion about
the best way to get at it; the long way may be the better, or the short
way; the direct way or the oblique way, or the purely selfish way, or the
partly selfish way; but if you ever lose sight of that end you might as
well shut up shop. That seems to be the first law of nature, as well as
the first law of business."

"Ah, we mustn't go to nature for our morality," the minister protested.

"We were not talking of morality," said the manufacturer; "we were talking
of business."

This brought the laugh on the minister, but the lawyer cut it short:
"Well, then, I don't really see why the trades-unions are not as
business-like as the syndicates in their dealings with all those outside
of themselves. Within themselves they practise an altruism of the highest
order, but it is a tribal altruism; it is like that which prompts a Sioux
to share his last mouthful with a starving Sioux, and to take the scalp of
a starving Apache. How is it with your trades-unions in Altruria?" he
asked my friend.

"We have no trades-unions in Altruria," he began.

"Happy Altruria!" cried the professor.

"We had them formerly," the Altrurian went on, "as you have them now. They
claimed, as I suppose yours do, that they were forced into existence by
the necessities of the case; that without union the working-man was unable
to meet the capitalist on anything like equal terms, or to withstand his
encroachments and oppressions. But to maintain themselves they had to
extinguish industrial liberty among the working-men themselves, and they
had to practise great cruelties against those who refused to join them or
who rebelled against them."

"They simply destroy them here," said the professor.

"Well," said the lawyer, from his judicial mind, "the great syndicates
have no scruples in destroying a capitalist who won't come into them or
who tries to go out. They don't club him or stone him, but they under-sell
him and freeze him out; they don't break his head, but they bankrupt him.
The principle is the same."

"Don't interrupt Mr. Homos," the banker entreated. "I am very curious to
know just how they got rid of labor unions in Altruria."

"We had syndicates, too, and finally we had the _reductio ad absurdum_--we
had a federation of labor unions find a federation of syndicates, that
divided the nation into two camps. The situation was not only impossible,
but it was insupportably ridiculous."

I ventured to say: "It hasn't become quite so much of a joke with us yet."

"Isn't it in a fair way to become so?" asked the doctor; and he turned to
the lawyer: "What should you say was the logic of events among us for the
last ten or twenty years?"

"There's nothing so capricious as the logic of events. It's like a woman's
reasoning--you can't tell what it's aimed at, or where it's going to fetch
up; all that you can do is to keep out of the way if possible. We may come
to some such condition of things as they have in Altruria, where the faith
of the whole nation is pledged to secure every citizen in the pursuit of
happiness; or we may revert to some former condition, and the master may
again own the man; or we may hitch and joggle along indefinitely, as we
are doing now."

"But come, now," said the banker, while he laid a caressing touch on the
Altrurian's shoulder, "you don't mean to say honestly that everybody works
with his hands in Altruria?"

"Yes, certainly. We are mindful, as a whole people, of the divine law--'In
the sweat of thy brow shalt thou eat bread.'"

"But the capitalists? I'm anxious about Number One, you see."

"We have none."

"I forgot, of course. But the lawyers, the doctors, the parsons, the
novelists?"

"They all do their share of hand-work."

The lawyer said: "That seems to dispose of the question of the working-man
in society. But how about your minds? When do you cultivate your minds?
When do the ladies of Altruria cultivate their minds, if they have to do
their own work, as I suppose they do? Or is it only the men who work, if
they happen to be the husbands and fathers of the upper classes?"

The Altrurian seemed to be sensible of the kindly scepticism which
persisted in our reception of his statements, after all we had read of
Altruria. He smiled indulgently, and said: "You mustn't imagine that work
in Altruria is the same as it is here. As we all work, the amount that
each one need do is very little, a few hours each day at the most, so that
every man and woman has abundant leisure and perfect spirits for the
higher pleasures which the education of their whole youth has fitted them
to enjoy. If you can understand a state of things where the sciences and
arts and letters are cultivated for their own sake, and not as a means of
livelihood--"

"No," said the lawyer, smiling, "I'm afraid we can't conceive of that. We
consider the pinch of poverty the highest incentive that a man can have.
If our gifted friend here," he said, indicating me, "were not kept like a
toad under the harrow, with his nose on the grindstone, and the poorhouse
staring him in the face--"

"For Heaven's sake," I cried out, "don't mix your metaphors so, anyway!"

"If it were not for that and all the other hardships that literary men
undergo--

  'Toil, envy, want, the patron and the jail'--

his novels probably wouldn't be worth reading."

"Ah!" said the Altrurian, as if he did not quite follow this joking; and,
to tell the truth, I never find the personal thing in very good taste.
"You will understand, then, how extremely difficult it is for me to
imagine a condition of things like yours--although I have it under my very
eyes--where the money consideration is the first consideration."

"Oh, excuse me," urged the minister; "I don't think that's quite the
case."

"I beg your pardon," said the Altrurian, sweetly; "you can see how easily
I go astray."

"Why, I don't know," the banker interposed, "that you are so far out in
what you say. If you had said that money was always the first motive, I
should have been inclined to dispute you, too; but when you say that money
is the first consideration, I think you are quite right. Unless a man
secures his financial basis for his work, he can't do his work. It's
nonsense to pretend otherwise. So the money consideration is the first
consideration. People here have to live by their work, and to live they
must have money. Of course, we all recognize a difference in the
qualities, as well as in the kinds, of work. The work of the laborer may
be roughly defined as the necessity of his life; the work of the business
man as the means, and the work of the artist and scientist as the end.
We might refine upon these definitions and make them closer, but they
will serve for illustration as they are. I don't think there can be
any question as to which is the highest kind of work; some truths are
self-evident. He is a fortunate man whose work is an end, and every
business man sees this, and owns it to himself, at least when he meets
some man of an aesthetic or scientific occupation. He knows that this
luckier fellow has a joy in his work which he can never feel in business;
that his success in it can never be embittered by the thought that it is
the failure of another; that if he does it well, it is pure good; that
there cannot be any competition in it--there can be only a noble
emulation, as far as the work itself is concerned. He can always look up
to his work, for it is something above him; and a business man often has
to look down upon his business, for it is often beneath him, unless he is
a pretty low fellow."

I listened to all this in surprise; I knew that the banker was a
cultivated man, a man of university training, and that he was a reader and
a thinker; but he had always kept a certain reserve in his talk, which he
now seemed to have thrown aside for the sake of the Altrurian, or because
the subject had a charm that lured him out of himself. "Well, now," he
continued, "the question is of the money consideration, which is the first
consideration with us all: does it, or doesn't it degrade the work, which
is the life, of those among us whose work is the highest? I understand
that this is the misgiving which troubles you in view of our conditions?"

The Altrurian assented, and I thought it a proof of the banker's innate
delicacy that he did not refer the matter, so far as it concerned the
aesthetic life and work, to me; I was afraid he was going to do so. But he
courteously proposed to keep the question impersonal, and he went on to
consider it himself: "Well, I don't suppose any one can satisfy you fully.
But I should say that it put such men under a double strain, and perhaps
that is the reason why so many of them break down in a calling that is
certainly far less exhausting than business. On one side, the artist is
kept to the level of the working-man, of the animal, of the creature whose
sole affair is to get something to eat and somewhere to sleep. This is
through his necessity. On the other side, he is exalted to the height of
beings who have no concern but with the excellence of their work, which
they were born and divinely authorized to do. This is through his purpose.
Between the two, I should say that he got mixed, and that his work shows
it."

None of the others said anything, and, since I had not been personally
appealed to, I felt the freer to speak. "If you will suppose me to be
speaking from observation rather than experience--" I began.

"By all means," said the banker, "go on;" and the rest made haste in
various forms to yield me the word.

"I should say that such a man certainly got mixed, but that his work kept
itself pure from the money consideration, as it were, in spite of him. A
painter or actor, or even a novelist, is glad to get all he can for his
work, and, such is our fallen nature, he does get all he knows how to get:
but, when he has once fairly passed into his work, he loses himself in it.
He does not think whether it will pay or not, whether it will be popular
or not, but whether he can make it good or not."

"Well, that is conceivable," said the banker. "But wouldn't he rather do
something he would get less for, if he could afford it, than the thing he
knows he will get more for? Doesn't the money consideration influence his
choice of subject?"

"Oddly enough, I don't believe it does," I answered, after a moment's
reflection. "A man makes his choice once for all when he embraces the
aesthetic life, or, rather, it is made for him; no other life seems
possible. I know there is a general belief that an artist does the kind of
thing he has made go because it pays; but this only shows the prevalence
of business ideals. If he did not love to do the thing he does, he could
not do it well, no matter how richly it paid."

"I am glad to hear it," said the banker, and he added to the Altrurian:
"So, you see, we are not so bad as one would think. We are illogically
better, in fact."

"Yes," the other assented. "I knew something of your literature as well as
your conditions before I left home, and I perceived that by some anomaly
the one was not tainted by the other. It is a miraculous proof of the
divine mission of the poet."

"And the popular novelist," the lawyer whispered in my ear, but loud
enough for the rest to hear, and they all testified their amusement at my
cost.

The Altrurian, with his weak sense of humor, passed the joke. "It shows no
signs of corruption from greed, but I can't help thinking that, fine as it
is, it might have been much finer if the authors who produced it had been
absolutely freed to their work, and had never felt the spur of need."

"Are they absolutely freed to it in Altruria?" asked the professor. "I
understood you that everybody had to work for his living in Altruria."

"That is a mistake. Nobody works for his living in Altruria; he works for
others' living."

"Ah, that is precisely what our working-men object to doing here," said
the manufacturer. "In that last interview of mine with the walking
delegate he had the impudence to ask me why my men should work for my
living as well as their own."

"He couldn't imagine that you were giving them the work to do--the very
means of life," said the professor.

"Oh no, that's the last thing those fellows want to think of."

"Perhaps," the Altrurian suggested, "they might not have found it such a
hardship to work for your living if their own had been assured, as it is
with us. If you will excuse my saying it, we should think it monstrous in
Altruria for any man to have another's means of life in his power; and in
our condition it is hardly imaginable. Do you really have it in your power
to take away a man's opportunity to earn a living?"

The manufacturer laughed uneasily. "It is in my power to take away his
life; but I don't habitually shoot my fellow-men, and I never dismissed a
man yet without good reason."

"Oh, I beg your pardon," said the Altrurian. "I didn't dream of accusing
you of such inhumanity. But, you see, our whole system is so very
different that, as I said, it is hard for me to conceive of yours, and I
am very curious to understand its workings. If you shot your fellow-man,
as you say, the law would punish you; but if, for some reason that you
decided to be good, you took away his means of living, and he actually
starved to death--"

"Then the law would have nothing to do with it," the professor replied for
the manufacturer, who did not seem ready to answer. "But that is not the
way things fall out. The man would be supported in idleness, probably,
till he got another job, by his union, which would take the matter up."

"But I thought that our friend did not employ union labor," returned the
Altrurian.

I found all this very uncomfortable, and tried to turn the talk back to a
point that I felt curious about: "But in Altruria, if the literary class
is not exempt from the rule of manual labor, where do they find time and
strength to write?"

"Why, you must realize that our manual labor is never engrossing or
exhausting. It is no more than is necessary to keep the body in health. I
do not see how you remain well here, you people of sedentary occupations."

"Oh, we all take some sort of exercise. We walk several hours a day, or we
row, or we ride a bicycle, or a horse, or we fence."

"But to us," returned the Altrurian, with a growing frankness which
nothing but the sweetness of his manner would have excused, "exercise for
exercise would appear stupid. The barren expenditure of force that began
and ended in itself, and produced nothing, we should--if you will excuse
my saying so--look upon as childish, if not insane or immoral."


V

At this moment the lady who had hailed me so gayly from the top of the
coach while I stood waiting for the Altrurian to help the porter with the
baggage, just after the arrival of the train, came up with her husband to
our little group and said to me: "I want to introduce my husband to you.
He adores your books." She went on much longer to this effect, while the
other men grinned round and her husband tried to look as if it were all
true, and her eyes wandered to the Altrurian, who listened gravely. I knew
perfectly well that she was using her husband's zeal for my fiction to
make me present my friend; but I did not mind that, and I introduced him
to both of them. She took possession of him at once and began walking him
off down the piazza, while her husband remained with me, and the members
of our late conference drifted apart. I was not sorry to have it broken up
for the present; it seemed to me that it had lasted quite long enough, and
I lighted a cigar with the husband, and we strolled together in the
direction his wife had taken.

I have as yet received no orders to purchase a pianoforte. I fear that
one may be sent to your house, which may be handsome outside, but the touch
within heavy. If your husband will rely on my opinion, that Herr Schanz
is the best maker for this class of instruments, I would then settle
everything at once. In great haste, yours, etc.,
HAYDN.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

Estoras, August 15.

I ought to have written to you last week in answer to your letter, but as
this day has been long enshrined in my heart, I have been striving earnestly
all the time to think how and what I was to wish for you; so thus eight
days passed, and now, when my wishes ought to be expressed, my small
amount of intellect comes to a standstill, and (quite abashed) I find nothing
to say; why?
wherefore?

because I have not been able to fulfill those musical hopes for this
particular day that you have justly the right to expect. Oh, my most
charming and kind benefactress! if you could only know, or see into my
troubled heart on this subject, you would certainly feel pity and indulgence
for me. The unlucky promised symphony has haunted my imagination
ever since it was bespoken, and it is only, alas!

the pressure of urgent occurrences that has prevented its being
hitherto ushered into the world! The hope, however, of your lenity
towards me for the delay, and the approaching time of the fulfillment
of my promise, embolden me to express my wish, which, among the
hundreds offered to you to-day and yesterday, may perhaps appear
to you only an insignificant interloper; I say perhaps, for it would
be too bold in me to think that you could form no better wish for
yourself than mine.

You see, therefore, most kind and charming lady, that I can wish
nothing for you on your nameday, because my wishes are too feeble, and
therefore unproductive. As for me, I venture to wish for myself your kind
indulgence, and the continuance of your friendship, and the goodness
that I so highly prize.

This is my warmest wish!

But if any wish of mine may be permitted, then mine shall become identical
with your own, for thus I shall feel assured that none other
remains, except the wish once more to be allowed to subscribe myself
your very sincere friend and servant, 
HAYDN.

No further letters appear to have been addressed to the lady until Haydn
started on his first visit to London in December 1790. One or two
extracts from these London letters have been used in Chapter V.,
but as the repetitions will be very slight, we allow the letters
to stand as they are.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

CALAIS, Decr. 31, 1790.

HIGHLY HONOURED LADY,
A violent storm and an incessant pour of rain prevented our arriving
at Calais till this evening (where I am now writing to you), and
to-morrow at seven in the morning we cross the sea to London.

I promised to write from Brussels, but we could only stay there an hour.
I am very well, thank God! although somewhat thinner, owing to fatigue,
irregular sleep, and eating and drinking so many different things.

A few days hence I will describe the rest of my journey, but I must beg you
to excuse me for to-day.

I hope to heaven that you and your husband and children are all well.

I am, with high esteem, etc., yours, 
HAYDN.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

LONDON, Jan. 8, 1791.

I thought that you had received my last letter from Calais. I ought, indeed,
according to my promise, to have sent you some tidings of myself when I
arrived in London, but I preferred waiting a few days that I might detail
various incidents to you.
I must now tell you that on New Year's Day, after attending early mass,
I took ship at half-past seven o'clock a.m., and at five o'clock
in the afternoon arrived safe and well at Dover, for which Heaven
be praised!

During the first four hours there was scarcely any wind, and the vessel
made so little way that in that time we only went one English mile,
there being twenty-four between Calais and Dover. The ship's captain, in
the worst possible humour, said that if the wind did not change we should
be at sea all night. Fortunately, however, towards half-past eleven
o'clock such a favourable breeze began to blow that by four o'clock we had
come twenty-two miles. As the ebb of the tide prevented our large vessel
making the pier, two small boats were rowed out to meet us, into which we
and our luggage were transferred, and at last we landed safely, though
exposed to a sharp gale. The large vessel stood out to sea five hours
longer, till the tide carried it into the harbour. Some of the passengers,
being afraid to trust themselves in the small boats, stayed on board,
but I followed the example of the greater number. I remained on deck during
the whole passage, in order to gaze my fill at that huge monster, the
Ocean. So long as there was a calm I had no fears, but when at length a
violent wind began to blow, rising every minute, and I saw the boisterous
high waves running on, I was seized with a little alarm, and a little
indisposition likewise. But I overcame it all, and arrived safely in
harbour, without being actually ill. Most of the passengers were ill, and
looked like ghosts. I did not feel the fatigue of the journey till I
arrived in London, but it took two days before I could recover
from it.

But now I am quite fresh and well, and occupied in looking at this mighty
and vast town of London, its various beauties and marvels causing
me the most profound astonishment.

I immediately paid the necessary visits, such as to the Neapolitan
Minister and to our own.

Both called on me in return two days afterwards, and a few days ago
I dined with the former--nota bene, at six o'clock in the evening, which
is the fashion here.

My arrival caused a great sensation through the whole city, and I went
the round of all the newspapers for three successive days.
Everyone seems anxious to know me.

I have already dined out six times, and could be invited every day
if I chose; but I must in the first place consider my health, and
in the next my work.

Except the nobility, I admit no visitors till two o'clock in the afternoon,
and at four o'clock I dine at home with Salomon. I have a neat, comfortable
lodging, but very dear. My landlord is an Italian, and likewise a cook, who
gives us four excellent dishes; we each pay one florin thirty kreuzers
a day, exclusive of wine and beer, but everything is terribly dear here.
I was yesterday invited to a grand amateur concert, but as I arrived
rather late, when I gave my ticket, they would not let me in, but
took me to an ante-room, where I was obliged to remain till the
piece which was then being given was over.

Then they opened the door, and I was conducted, leaning on the arm
of the director, up the centre of the room to the front of the
orchestra amid universal clapping of hands, stared at by everyone,
and greeted by a number of English compliments.

I was assured that such honours had not been conferred on anyone for fifty
years. After the concert I was taken into a very handsome room adjoining,
where tables were laid for all the amateurs, to the number of two hundred.
It was proposed that I should take a seat near the top, but as it so
happened that I had dined out that very day, and ate more than
usual, I declined the honour, excusing myself under the pretext of
not being very well; but in spite of this, I could not get off
drinking the health, in Burgundy, of the harmonious gentlemen
present; all responded to it, but at last allowed me to go home.

All this, my dear lady, was very flattering to me; still I wish I
could fly for a time to Vienna, to have more peace to work, for
the noise in the streets, and the cries of the common people selling
their wares, is intolerable.

I am still working at symphonies, as the libretto of the opera is
not yet decided on, but in order to be more quiet, I intend to
engage an apartment some little way out of town.

I would gladly write more at length, but I fear losing this
opportunity.

With kindest regards to your husband, Fraulein Pepi, and all the rest,
I am, with sincere esteem, etc., 
HAYDN.

P.S.--I have a request to make.

I think I must have left my symphony in E flat, that you returned to me,
in my room at home, or mislaid it on the journey. I missed it yesterday,
and being in pressing need of it, I beg you urgently to procure
it for me, through my kind friend, Herr v.

Kees. Pray have it copied out in your own house, and send it by post as
soon as possible. If Herr v. Kees hesitates about this, which I don't
think likely, pray send him this letter. My address is, M. Haydn, 18 Great
Pulteney Street, London.

To Frau v.

Genzinger.

LONDON, Sept. 17, 1791.

MY HIGHLY ESTEEMED FRIEND,

I have received no reply to my two letters of July 3, entrusted to the
care of a composer, Herr Diettenhofer, by whom I likewise sent the
pianoforte arrangement of an andante in one of my new symphonies. Nor have
I any answer either about the symphony in E flat, that I wished to get. I
can now no longer delay inquiring after your own health, as well
as that of your husband, and all your dear family. Is that odious proverb,
"Out of sight, out of mind," to prove true everywhere? Oh no!
urgent affairs or the loss of my letter and the symphony are, no
doubt, the cause of your silence. I feel assured of Herr von Kees's
willingness to send the symphony, as he said he would do so in his letter;
so it seems we shall both have to deplore a loss, and must trust
to Providence.

I flatter myself I shall receive a short answer to this. Now, my dear,
good, kind lady, what is your piano about?
Is a thought of Haydn sometimes recalled by your fair hand? Does my sweet
Fraulein Pepi ever sing poor "Ariadne"? Oh yes! I seem to hear it even
here, especially during the last two months, when I have been
residing in the country, amid lovely scenery, with a banker, whose
heart and family resemble the Genzingers, and where I live as in a
monastery.

God be praised! I am in good health, with the exception of my usual rheumatic
state. I work hard, and in the early mornings, when I walk in the wood alone
with my English grammar, I think of my Creator, of my family, and of
all the friends I have left--and of these you are the most valued
of all.

I had hoped, indeed, sooner to have enjoyed the felicity of seeing
you again; but my circumstances, in short, fate so wills it that I
must remain eight or ten months longer in London.

Oh, my dear, good lady, how sweet is some degree of liberty! I had a
kind Prince, but was obliged at times to be dependent on base souls. I
often sighed for release, and now I have it in some measure. I am quite
sensible of this benefit, though my mind is burdened with more work. The
consciousness of being no longer a bond-servant sweetens all my toils.
But, dear as liberty is to me, I do hope on my return again to enter the
service of Prince Esterhazy, solely for the sake of my poor family. I
doubt much whether I shall find this desire realized, for in his letter
my Prince complains of my long absence, and exacts my speedy return in the
most absolute terms; which, however, I cannot comply with, owing to a new
contract I have entered into here. I, alas! expect my dismissal; but I
hope even in that case that God will be gracious to me, and enable me in
some degree to remedy the loss by my own industry. Meanwhile I console
myself by the hope of soon hearing from you. You shall receive my promised
new symphony two months hence; but in order to inspire me with good
ideas, I beg you will write to me, and a long letter too.

Yours, etc.

HAYDN.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

LONDON, Oct. 13, 1791.

I take the liberty of earnestly entreating you to advance 150 florins for
a short time to my wife, provided you do not imagine that since
my journey I have become a bad manager.

No, my kind, good friend, God blesses my efforts.

Three circumstances are alone to blame.

In the first place, since I have been here, I have repaid my Prince the
450 florins he advanced for my journey; secondly, I can demand no
interest from my bank obligations, having placed them under your care,
and not being able to remember either the names or the numbers,
so I cannot write a receipt; thirdly, I cannot yet apply for the
5883 florins (1000 of which I recently placed in my Prince's hands,
and the rest with the Count v.

Fries), especially because it is English money.
You will, therefore, see that I am no spendthrift. This leads me to hope
that you will not refuse my present request, to lend my wife 150
florins.

This letter must be your security, and would be valid in any court. I will
repay the interest of the money with a thousand thanks on my
return.

I am, etc.,
HAYDN.

...I believe you received my letter the very same day that I was
reading your cruel reproach that Haydn was capable of forgetting
his friend and benefactress.

Oh! how often do I long to be beside you at the piano, even for a
quarter of an hour, and then to have some good German soup. But we cannot
have everything in this world.

May God only vouchsafe to grant me the health that I have hitherto enjoyed,
and may I preserve it by good conduct and out of gratitude to the
Almighty!

That you are well is to me the most delightful of all news. May Providence
long watch over you! I hope to see you in the course of six months,
when I shall, indeed, have much to tell you.

Good-night! it is time to go to bed; it is half-past eleven o'clock. One
thing more. To insure the safety of the money, Herr Hamberger, a good friend
of mine, a man of tall stature, our landlord, will bring you this letter
himself, and you can with impunity entrust him with the money; but I beg
you will take a receipt both from him and from my wife.

Among other things, Herr v. Kees writes to me that he should like to
know my position in London, as there are so many different reports about
me in Vienna. From my youth upwards I have been exposed to envy, so it
does not surprise me when any attempt is made wholly to crush my poor
talents; but the Almighty above is my support. My wife wrote to me that
Mozart depreciates me very much, but this I will never believe. If true,
I forgive him.
There is no doubt that I find many who are envious of me in London also,
and I know them almost all. Most of them are Italians. But they can do me
no harm, for my credit with this nation has been firmly established far too
many years. Rest assured that, if I had not met with a kind reception, I
would long since have gone back to Vienna. I am beloved and esteemed by
everyone, except, indeed, professors [of music]. As for my remuneration,
Mozart can apply to Count Fries for information, in whose hands I placed
500 pounds, and 1000 guilders in those of my Prince, making together
nearly 6000 florins. I daily thank my Creator for this boon, and I
have good hope that I may bring home a couple of thousands besides,
notwithstanding, my great outlay and the cost of the journey. I will now
no longer intrude on your time. How badly this is written! What is Pater
--- doing?
My compliments to him.

Yours, etc.

HAYDN.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

LONDON, Nov. 17, 1791.

I write in the greatest haste, to request that you will send the
accompanying packet, addressed to you, to Herr v. Kees, as it contains the
two new symphonies I promised. I waited for a good opportunity, but could
hear of none; I have therefore been obliged to send them after all by
post. I beg you will ask Herr v. Kees to have a rehearsal of both
these symphonies, as they are very delicate, particularly the last movement
in D, which I recommend to be given as pianissimo as possible, and
the tempo very quick.

I will write to you again in a few days.

Nota bene, I was obliged to enclose both the symphonies to you, not knowing
the address of Herr v. Kees.

I am, etc.

HAYDN.

P.S.--I only returned here to-day from the country.

I have been staying with a mylord for the last fortnight,
a hundred miles from London.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

LONDON, Dec. 20, 1791.

I am much surprised that you did not get my letter at the same time
as the two symphonies, having put them myself into the post here,
and given every direction about them.

My mistake was not having enclosed the letter in the packet. This is
what often happens, dear lady, with those who have too much head work.
I trust, however, that the letter reached you soon afterwards, but
in case it did not, I must here explain that both symphonies were
intended for Herr v.

Kees, but with the stipulation that, after being copied by his order, the
scores were to be given up to you, so that you may prepare a pianoforte
arrangement of them, if you are so disposed. The particular symphony intended
for you will be finished by the end of February at latest. I regret much
having been obliged to forward the heavy packet to you, from not
knowing Herr v.

Kees's address; but he will, of course, repay you the cost of
postage, and also, I hope, hand you over seven ducats.

May I, therefore, ask you to employ a portion of that sum in copying on
small paper my often-applied-for symphony in E minor, and forward
it to me by post as soon as possible, for it may perhaps be six
months before a courier is despatched from Vienna, and I am in
urgent need of the symphony.

Further, I must plague you once more by asking you to buy at Artaria's
my last pianoforte sonata in A flat, that is, with 4 B flat minor,
with violin and violoncello, and also another piece, the fantasia
in C, without accompaniment, for these pieces are not yet published
in London; but be so good as not to mention this to Herr Artaria,
or he might anticipate the sale in England.

I beg you will deduct the price from the seven ducats. To return to the
aforesaid symphonies, I must tell you that I sent you a pianoforte
arrangement of the andante in C minor by Herr Diettenhofer.
"And your young girls,"
he asked of Mrs. Makely--"how is their time occupied?"

"You mean after they come out in society?"

"I suppose so."

She seemed to reflect. "I don't know that it is very differently occupied.
Of course, they have their own amusements; they have their dances, and
little clubs, and their sewing-societies. I suppose that even an Altrurian
would applaud their sewing for the poor?" Mrs. Makely asked, rather
satirically.

"Yes," he answered; and then he asked: "Isn't it taking work away from
some needy seamstress, though? But I suppose you excuse it to the
thoughtlessness of youth."

Mrs. Makely did not say, and he went on: "What I find it so hard to
understand is how you ladies can endure a life of mere nervous exertion,
such as you have been describing to me. I don't see how you keep well."

"We _don't_ keep well," said Mrs. Makely, with the greatest amusement. "I
don't suppose that when you get above the working classes, till you reach
the very rich, you would find a perfectly well woman in America."

"Isn't that rather extreme?" I ventured to ask.

"No," said Mrs. Makely, "it's shamefully moderate," and she seemed to
delight in having made out such a bad case for her sex. You can't stop a
woman of that kind when she gets started; I had better left it alone.

"But," said the Altrurian, "if you are forbidden by motives of humanity
from doing any sort of manual labor, which you must leave to those who
live by it, I suppose you take some sort of exercise?"

"Well," said Mrs. Makely, shaking her head gayly, "we prefer to take
medicine."

"You must approve of that," I said to the Altrurian, "as you consider
exercise for its own sake insane or immoral. But, Mrs. Makely," I
entreated, "you're giving me away at a tremendous rate. I have just been
telling Mr. Homos that you ladies go in for athletics so much now in your
summer outings that there is danger of your becoming physically as well as
intellectually superior to us poor fellows. Don't take that consolation
from me."

"I won't, altogether," she said. "I couldn't have the heart to, after the
pretty way you've put it. I don't call it very athletic, sitting around on
hotel piazzas all summer long, as nineteen-twentieths of us do. But I
don't deny that there is a Remnant, as Matthew Arnold calls them, who do
go in for tennis and boating and bathing and tramping and climbing." She
paused, and then she concluded, gleefully: "And you ought to see what
wrecks they get home in the fall!"

The joke was on me; I could not help laughing, though I felt rather
sheepish before the Altrurian. Fortunately, he did not pursue the inquiry;
his curiosity had been given a slant aside from it.

"But your ladies," he asked, "they have the summer for rest, however they
use it. Do they generally leave town? I understood Mr. Twelvemough to say
so," he added, with a deferential glance at me.

"Yes, you may say it is the universal custom in the class that can afford
it," said Mrs. Makely. She proceeded as if she felt a tacit censure in his
question. "It wouldn't be the least use for us to stay and fry through our
summers in the city simply because our fathers and brothers had to.
Besides, we are worn out, at the end of the season, and they want us to
come away as much as we want to come."

"Ah, I have always heard that the Americans are beautiful in their
attitude toward women."

"They are perfect dears," said Mrs. Makely, "and here comes one of the
best of them."

At that moment her husband came up and laid her shawl across her
shoulders. "Whose character is it you're blasting?" he asked, jocosely.

"Where in the world did you find it?" she asked, meaning the shawl.

"It was where you left it--on the sofa, in the side parlor. I had to take
my life in my hand when I crossed among all those waltzers in there. There
must have been as many as three couples on the floor. Poor girls! I pity
them, off at these places. The fellows in town have a good deal better
time. They've got their clubs, and they've got the theatre, and when the
weather gets too much for them they can run off down to the shore for the
night. The places anywhere within an hour's ride are full of fellows. The
girls don't have to dance with one another there, or with little boys. Of
course, that's all right if they like it better." He laughed at his wife,
and winked at me, and smoked swiftly, in emphasis of his irony.

"Then the young gentlemen whom the young ladies here usually meet in
society are all at work in the cities?" the Altrurian asked him, rather
needlessly, as I had already said so.

"Yes, those who are not out West, growing up with the country, except, of
course, the fellows who have inherited a fortune. They're mostly off on
yachts."

"But why do your young men go West to grow up with the country?" pursued
my friend.

"Because the East is _grown_ up. They have got to hustle, and the West is
the place to hustle. To make money," added Makely, in response to a
puzzled glance of the Altrurian.

"Sometimes," said his wife, "I almost hate the name of money."

"Well, so long as you don't hate the thing, Peggy."

"Oh, we must have it, I suppose," she sighed. "They used to say about the
girls who grew into old maids just after the Rebellion that they had lost
their chance in the war for the Union. I think quite as many lose their
chance now in the war for the dollar."

"Mars hath slain his thousands, but Mammon hath slain his tens of
thousands," I suggested, lightly; we all like to recognize the facts, so
long as we are not expected to do anything about them; then, we deny them.

"Yes, quite as bad as that," said Mrs. Makely.

"Well, my dear, you are expensive, you know," said her husband, "and if we
want to have you--why, we've got to hustle first."

"Oh, I don't blame you, you poor things! There's nothing to be done about
it; it's just got to go on and on; I don't see how it's ever to end."

The Altrurian had been following us with that air of polite mystification
which I had begun to dread in him. "Then, in your good society you
postpone, and even forego, the happiness of life in the struggle to be
rich?"

"Well, you see," said Makely, "a fellow don't like to ask a girl to share
a home that isn't as nice as the home she has left."

"Sometimes," his wife put in, rather sadly, "I think that it's all a
mistake, and that we'd be willing to share the privations of the man we
loved."

"Well," said Makely, with a laugh, "we wouldn't like to risk it."

I laughed with him, but his wife did not, and in the silence that ensued
there was nothing to prevent the Altrurian from coming in with another of
his questions: "How far does this state of things extend downward? Does it
include the working classes, too?"

"Oh no!" we all answered together, and Mrs. Makely said: "With your
Altrurian ideas, I suppose you would naturally sympathize a great deal
more with the lower classes, and think they had to endure all the
hardships in our system; but if you could realize how the struggle goes on
in the best society, and how we all have to fight for what we get, or
don't get, you would be disposed to pity our upper classes, too."

"I am sure I should," said the Altrurian.

Makely remarked: "I used to hear my father say that slavery was harder on
the whites than it was on the blacks, and that he wanted it done away with
for the sake of the masters."

Makely rather faltered in conclusion, as if he were not quite satisfied
with his remark, and I distinctly felt a want of proportion in it; but I
did not wish to say anything. His wife had no reluctance.

"Well, there's no comparison between the two things, but the struggle
certainly doesn't affect the working classes as it does us. They go on
marrying and giving in marriage in the old way. They have nothing to lose,
and so they can afford it."

"Blessed am dem what don't expect nuffin! Oh, I tell you, it's a
working-man's country," said Makely, through his cigar-smoke. "You ought
to see them in town, these summer nights, in the parks and squares and
cheap theatres. Their girls are not off for their health, anywhere, and
their fellows are not off growing up with the country. Their day's work is
over, and they're going in for a good time. And, then, walk through the
streets where they live, and see them out on the stoops with their wives
and children! I tell you, it's enough to make a fellow wish he was poor
himself."

"Yes," said Mrs. Makely, "it's astonishing how strong and well those women
keep, with their great families and their hard work. Sometimes I really
envy them."

"Do you suppose," said the Altrurian, "that they are aware of the
sacrifices which the ladies of the upper classes make in leaving all the
work to them, and suffering from the nervous debility which seems to be
the outcome of your society life?"

"They have not the remotest idea of it. They have no conception of what a
society woman goes through with. They think we do nothing. They envy us,
too, and sometimes they're so ungrateful and indifferent, if you try to
help them, or get on terms with them, that I believe they hate us."

"But that comes from ignorance?"

"Yes, though I don't know that they are really any more ignorant of us
than we are of them. It's the other half on both sides."

"Isn't that a pity, rather?"

"Of course it's a pity, but what can you do? You can't know what people
are like unless you live like them, and then the question is whether the
game is worth the candle. I should like to know how you manage in
Altruria."

"Why, we have solved the problem in the only way, as you say, that it can
be solved. We all live alike."

"Isn't that a little, just a very trifling little bit, monotonous?" Mrs.
Makely asked, with a smile. "But there is everything, of course, in being
used to it. To an unregenerate spirit--like mine, for example--it seems
intolerable."

"But why? When you were younger, before you were married, you all lived at
home together--or, perhaps, you were an only child?"

"Oh, no indeed! There were ten of us."

"Then you all lived alike, and shared equally?"

"Yes, but we were a family."

"We do not conceive of the human race except as a family."

"Now, excuse me, Mr. Homos, that is all nonsense. You cannot have the
family feeling without love, and it is impossible to love other people.
That talk about the neighbor, and all that, is all well enough--" She
stopped herself, as if she dimly remembered who began that talk, and then
went on: "Of course, I accept it as a matter of faith, and the spirit of
it, nobody denies that; but what I mean is, that you must have frightful
quarrels all the time." She tried to look as if this were where she really
meant to bring up, and he took her on the ground she had chosen.

"Yes, we have quarrels. Yes; past, alas!

And who can tell when these happy hours may return?

those charming meetings? where the whole circle have but one heart
and one soul--all those delightful musical evenings, which can only be
remembered, and not described. Where are all those inspired moments? All
gone--and gone for long.

You must not be surprised, dear lady, that I have delayed writing to express
my gratitude. I found everything at home in confusion; for three days I
did not know whether I was capell master, or capell servant; nothing could
console me; my apartments were all in confusion; my pianoforte, that I
formerly loved so dearly, was perverse and disobedient, and rather
irritated than soothed me.

I slept very little, and even my dreams persecuted me, for, while asleep,
I was under the pleasant delusion that I was listening to the opera
of "Le Nozze di Figaro," when the blustering north wind woke me,
and almost blew my nightcap off my head.

[The portion of the letter deleted is that given at page 161, beginning,
"I lost twenty pounds in weight."]
...Forgive me, dear lady, for taking up your time in this very first
letter by so wretched a scrawl, and such stupid nonsense; you must
forgive a man spoilt by the Viennese.

Now, however, I begin to accustom myself by degrees to country life,
and yesterday I studied for the first time, and somewhat in the Haydn
style too.

No doubt, you have been more industrious than myself. The pleasing adagio
from the quartet has probably now received its true expression
from your fair fingers.

I trust that my good Fraulein Peperl [Joseph A., one of the Genzinger
children.] may be frequently reminded of her master, by often singing
over the cantata, and that she will pay particular attention to
distinct articulation and correct vocalization, for it would be a
sin if so fine a voice were to remain imprisoned in the breast.

I beg, therefore, for a frequent smile, or else I shall be much
vexed.

I advise M.

Francois [Franz, author of the Genzinger children.] too to cultivate
his musical talents.

Even if he sings in his dressing-gown, it will do well enough, and I
will often write something new to encourage him. I again kiss your hands
in gratitude for all the kindness you have shown me. I am, etc.,
HAYDN.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

ESTORAS, March 14, 1790.

MOST VALUED, ESTEEMED AND KINDEST FRAU V. GENZINGER,
I ask forgiveness a million times for having so long delayed answering your
two charming letters, which has not been caused by negligence (a sin
from which may Heaven preserve me so long as I live), but from the press
of business which has devolved on me for my gracious Prince, in his
present melancholy condition. The death of his wife overwhelmed the
Prince with such grief that we were obliged to use every means in our
power to rouse him from his profound sorrow. I therefore arranged for
the three first days a selection of chamber music, but no singing. The
poor Prince, however, the first evening, on hearing my favourite Adagio
in D, was affected by such deep melancholy that it was difficult
to disperse it by other pieces. On the fourth day we had an opera, the
fifth a comedy, and then our theatre daily as usual...

If a few hundred thousand
favored Americans enjoyed the privilege of socially contemning all the
rest, it was as clearly right and just that they should do so as that four
thousand American millionaires should be richer than all the other
Americans put together. Such a status, growing out of our political
equality and our material prosperity, must evince a divine purpose to any
one intimate with the designs of Providence, and it seemed a kind of
impiety to doubt its perfection. I excused the misgivings which I could
not help seeing in the Altrurian to his alien traditions, and I was aware
that my friends had done so, too. But, if I could judge from myself, he
must have left them all sensible of their effort; and this was not
pleasant. I could not blink the fact that although I had openly disagreed
with him on every point of ethics and economics, I was still responsible
for him as a guest. It was as if an English gentleman had introduced a
blatant American Democrat into Tory society; or, rather, as if a
Southerner of the olden time had harbored a Northern Abolitionist and
permitted him to inquire into the workings of slavery among his neighbors.
People would tolerate him as my guest for a time, but there must be an end
of their patience with the tacit enmity of his sentiments and the explicit
vulgarity of his ideals, and when the end came I must be attainted with
him.

I did not like the notion of this, and I meant to escape it if I could. I
confess that I would have willingly disowned him, as I had already
disavowed his opinions, but there was no way of doing it short of telling
him to go away, and I was not ready to do that. Something in the man, I do
not know what, mysteriously appealed to me. He was not contemptibly
puerile without being lovably childlike, and I could only make up my mind
to be more and more frank with him and to try and shield him, as well as
myself, from the effects I dreaded.

I fell asleep planning an excursion farther into the mountains, which
should take up the rest of the week that I expected him to stay with me,
and would keep him from following up his studies of American life where
they would be so injurious to both of us as they must in our hotel. A
knock at my door roused me, and I sent a drowsy "Come in!" toward it from
the bedclothes without looking that way.

"Good-morning!" came back in the rich, gentle voice of the Altrurian. I
lifted my head with a jerk from the pillow, and saw him standing against
the closed door, with my shoes in his hand. "Oh, I am sorry I waked you. I
thought--"

"Not at all, not at all," I said. "It's quite time, I dare say. But you
oughtn't to have taken the trouble to bring my shoes in."

"I wasn't altogether disinterested in it," he returned. "I wished you to
compliment me on them. Don't you think they are pretty well done, for an
amateur?" He came toward my bed, and turned them about in his hands, so
that they would catch the light, and smiled down upon me.

"I don't understand," I began.

"Why," he said, "I blacked them, you know."

"You blacked them?"

"Yes," he returned, easily. "I thought I would go into the baggage-room,
after we parted last night, to look for a piece of mine that had not been
taken to my room, and I found the porter there, with his wrist bound up.
He said he had strained it in handling a lady's Saratoga--he said a
Saratoga was a large trunk--and I begged him to let me relieve him at the
boots he was blacking. He refused at first, but I insisted upon trying my
hand at a pair, and then he let me go on with the men's boots; he said he
could varnish the ladies' without hurting his wrist. It needed less skill
than I supposed, and after I had done a few pairs he said I could black
boots as well as he."

"Did anybody see you?" I gasped, and I felt a cold perspiration break out
on me.

"No, we had the whole midnight hour to ourselves. The porter's work with
the baggage was all over, and there was nothing to interrupt the
delightful chat we fell into. He is a very intelligent man, and he told me
all about that custom of feeing which you deprecate. He says that the
servants hate it as much as the guests; they have to take the tips now
because the landlords figure on them in the wages, and they cannot live
without them. He is a fine, manly fellow, and--"

"Mr. Homos," I broke in, with the strength I found in his assurance that
no one had seen him helping the porter black boots, "I want to speak very
seriously with you, and I hope you will not be hurt if I speak very
plainly about a matter in which I have your good solely at heart." This
was not quite true, and I winced inwardly a little when he thanked me with
that confounded sincerity of his which was so much like irony; but I went
on: "It is my duty to you, as my guest, to tell you that this thing of
doing for others is not such a simple matter here, as your peculiar
training leads you to think. You have been deceived by a superficial
likeness; but, really, I do not understand how you could have read all you
have done about us and not realize before coming here that America and
Altruria are absolutely distinct and diverse in their actuating
principles. They are both republics, I know; but America is a republic
where every man is for himself, and you cannot help others as you do at
home; it is dangerous--it is ridiculous. You must keep this fact in mind,
or you will fall into errors that will be very embarrassing to you in your
stay among us, and," I was forced to add, "to all your friends. Now, I
certainly hoped, after what I had said to you and what my friends had
explained of our civilization, that you would not have done a thing of
this kind. I will see the porter, as soon as I am up, and ask him not to
mention the matter to any one, but, I confess, I don't like to take an
apologetic tone with him; your conditions are so alien to ours that they
will seem incredible to him, and he will think I am stuffing him."

"I don't believe he will think that," said the Altrurian, "and I hope you
won't find the case so bad as it seems to you. I am extremely sorry to
have done wrong--"

"Oh, the thing wasn't wrong in itself. It was only wrong under the
circumstances. Abstractly, it is quite right to help a fellow-being who
needs help; no one denies that, even in a country where every one is for
himself."

"I am so glad to hear it," said the Altrurian. "Then, at least, I have not
gone radically astray; and I do not think you need take the trouble to
explain the Altrurian ideas to the porter. I have done that already, and
they seemed quite conceivable to him; he said that poor folks had to act
upon them, even here, more or less, and that if they did not act upon them
there would be no chance for them at all. He says they have to help one
another very much as we do at home, and that it is only the rich folks
among you who are independent. I really don't think you need speak to him
at all, unless you wish; and I was very careful to guard my offer of help
at the point where I understood from you and your friends that it might do
harm. I asked him if there was not some one who would help him out with
his boot-blacking for money, because in that case I should be glad to pay
him; but he said there was no one about who would take the job; that he
had to agree to black the boots, or else he would not have got the place
of porter, but that all the rest of the help would consider it a disgrace,
and would not help him for love or money. So it seemed quite safe to offer
him my services."

I felt that the matter was almost hopeless, but I asked: "And what he
said--didn't that suggest anything else to you?"

"How anything else?" asked the Altrurian, in his turn.

"Didn't it occur to you that if none of his fellow-servants were willing
to help him black boots, and if he did it only because he was obliged to,
it was hardly the sort of work for you?"

"Why, no," said the Altrurian, with absolute simplicity. He must have
perceived the despair I fell into at this answer, for he asked: "Why
should I have minded doing for others what I should have been willing to
do for myself?"

"There are a great many things we are willing to do for ourselves that we
are not willing to do for others. But even on that principle, which I
think false and illogical, you could not be justified. A gentleman is not
willing to black _his own_ boots. It is offensive to his feelings, to his
self-respect; it is something he will not do if he can get anybody else to
do it for him."

"Then in America," said the Altrurian, "it is not offensive to the
feelings of a gentleman to let another do for him what he would not do for
himself?"

"Certainly not."

"Ah," he returned, "then we understand something altogether different by
the word gentleman in Altruria. I see, now, how I have committed a
mistake. I shall be more careful hereafter."

I thought I had better leave the subject, and, "By-the-way," I said, "how
would you like to take a little tramp with me to-day farther up into the
mountains?"

"I should be delighted," said the Altrurian, so gratefully that I was
ashamed to think why I was proposing the pleasure to him.

"Well, then, I shall be ready to start as soon as we have had breakfast. I
will join you down-stairs in half an hour."

He left me at this hint, though really I was half afraid he might stay and
offer to lend me a hand at my toilet, in the expression of his national
character. I found him with Mrs. Makely, when I went down, and she began,
with a parenthetical tribute to the beauty of the mountains in the morning
light: "Don't be surprised to see me up at this unnatural hour. I don't
know whether it was the excitement of our talk last night, or what it was,
but my sulphonal wouldn't act, though I took fifteen grains, and I was up
with the lark, or should have been, if there had been any lark outside of
literature to be up with. However, this air is so glorious that I don't
mind losing a night's sleep now and then. I believe that with a little
practice one could get along without any sleep at all here; at least, _I_
could. I'm sorry to say poor Mr. Makely _can't_, apparently. He's making
up for his share of my vigils, and I'm going to breakfast without him. Do
you know, I've done a very bold thing: I've got the head-waiter to give
you places at our table; I know you'll hate it, Mr. Twelvemough, because
you naturally want to keep Mr. Homos to yourself, and I don't blame you at
all; but I'm simply not going to _let_ you, and that's all there is about
it."

The pleasure I felt at this announcement was not unmixed, but I tried to
keep Mrs. Makely from thinking so, and I was immensely relieved when she
found a chance to say to me, in a low voice: "I know just how you're
feeling, Mr. Twelvemough, and I'm going to help you keep him from doing
anything ridiculous, if I can. I _like_ him, and I think it's a perfect
shame to have people laughing at him. I know we can manage him between
us."

We so far failed, however, that the Altrurian shook hands with the
head-waiter when he pressed open the wire-netting door to let us into the
dining-room, and made a bow to our waitress of the sort one makes to a
lady. But we thought it best to ignore these little errors of his and
reserve our moral strength for anything more spectacular. Fortunately we
got through our breakfast with nothing worse than his jumping up and
stooping to hand the waitress a spoon she let fall; but this could easily
pass for some attention to Mrs. Makely at a little distance. There were
not many people down to breakfast yet; but I could see that there was a
good deal of subdued sensation among the waitresses, standing with folded
arms behind their tables, and that the head-waiter's handsome face was red
with anxiety.

Mrs. Makely asked if we were going to church. She said she was driving
that way, and would be glad to drop us. "I'm not going myself," she
explained, "because I couldn't make anything of the sermon, with my head
in the state it is, and I'm going to compromise on a good action. I want
to carry some books and papers over to Mrs. Camp. Don't you think that
will be quite as acceptable, Mr. Homos?"

"I should venture to hope it," he said, with a tolerant seriousness not
altogether out of keeping with her lightness.

"Who is Mrs. Camp?" I asked, not caring to commit myself on the question.

"Lizzie's mother. You know I told you about them last night. I think she
must have got through the books I lent her, and I know Lizzie didn't like
to ask me for more, because she saw me talking with you, and didn't want
to interrupt us. Such a nice girl! I think the Sunday papers must have
come, and I'll take them over, too; Mrs. Camp is always so glad to get
them, and she is so delightful when she gets going about public events.
But perhaps you don't approve of Sunday papers, Mr. Homos."

"I'm sure I don't know, madam. I haven't seen them yet. You know this is
the first Sunday I've been in America."

"Well, I'm sorry to say you won't see the old Puritan Sabbath," said Mrs.
Makely, with an abrupt deflection from the question of the Sunday papers.
"Though you ought to, up in these hills. The only thing left of it is
rye-and-Indian bread, and these baked beans and fish-balls."

"But they are very good?"

"Yes, I dare say they are not the worst of it."

She was a woman who tended to levity, and I was a little afraid she might
be going to say something irreverent; but, if she were, she was
forestalled by the Altrurian asking: "Would it be very indiscreet, madam,
if I were to ask you some time to introduce me to that family?"

"The Camps?" she returned. "Not at all. I should be perfectly delighted."
S. Shedlock: "The first Dr [Harington] having bestowed much praise on the
second Dr [Haydn], the said second Dr, out of doctorial gratitude, returns
the 1st Dr thanks for all favours recd., and praises in his turn
the said 1st Dr most handsomely."

The title of Haydn's song was "Dr Harington's Compliments."
Opera Concerts
The composer returned to London at the beginning of October for the
winter season's concerts.

These began, as before, in February, and were continued once a week
up to the month of May.

This time they took the form of opera concerts, and were given at the
"National School of Music" in the new concert-room of the King's
Theatre. No fresh symphonies were contributed by Haydn for this series,
though some of the old ones always found a place in the programmes.

Two extra concerts were given on May 21 and June 1, at both of which Haydn
appeared; but the composer's last benefit concert was held on May 4. On
this occasion the programme was entirely confined to his own
compositions, with the exception of concertos by Viotti, the
violinist, and Ferlendis, the oboist.

Banti sang the aria already mentioned as having been written expressly for
her, but, according to the composer, "sang very scanty." The main thing,
however, was that the concert proved a financial success, the net receipts
amounting to 400 pounds. "It is only in England," said Haydn, "that one
can make 4000 gulden in one evening."
Haydn did indeed remarkably well in London. As Pohl says, "he returned
from it with increased powers, unlimited fame, and a competence for life.
By concerts, lessons, and symphonies, not counting his other compositions,
he had again made 1200 pounds, enough to relieve him from all anxiety as
to the future. He often said afterwards that it was not till he had been
to England that he became famous in Germany; by which he meant that
although his reputation was high at home, the English were the first to
give him public homage and liberal remuneration."
Kingly Courtesies
It is superfluous to say that Haydn was as much of a "lion" in London society
during his second visit as he had been on the previous occasion. The attention
bestowed on him in royal circles made that certain, for "society" are
sheep, and royalty is their bell-wether. The Prince of Wales had rather a
fancy for him, and commanded his attendance at Carlton House no fewer than
twenty-six times. At one concert at York House the programme was entirely
devoted to his music. George III and Queen Caroline were present, and
Haydn was presented to the King by the Prince. "You have written a great
deal, Dr Haydn," said the King. "Yes, sire," was the reply; "more than
is good for me." "Certainly not," rejoined His Majesty. He was then
presented to the Queen, and asked to sing some German songs. "My voice,"
he said, pointing to the tip of his little finger, "is now no bigger than
that"; but he sat down to the pianoforte and sang his song, "Ich bin der
Verliebteste." He was repeatedly invited by the Queen to Buckingham Palace,
and she tried to persuade him to settle in England. "You shall have a
house at Windsor during the summer months," she said, and then, looking
towards the King, added, "We can sometimes make music tete-a-tete." "Oh!
I am not jealous of Haydn," interposed the King; "he is a good,
honourable German." "To preserve that reputation," replied Haydn,
"is my greatest pride."
Most of Haydn's appearances were made at the concerts regularly organized
for the entertainment of royalty at Carlton House and Buckingham
Palace, and Haydn looked to be paid for his services.
Whether the King and the Prince expected him to give these services
in return for the supposed honour they had conferred upon him does
not appear.

At all events, Haydn sent in a bill for 100 guineas sometime after his
return to Vienna, and the amount was promptly paid by Parliament.

A Valuable Parrot

Among the other attentions bestowed upon him while in London, mention
should be made of the present of a talking parrot.

Haydn took the bird with him, and it was sold for 140 pounds after his
death. Another gift followed him to Vienna.

A Leicester manufacturer named Gardiner--he wrote a book on The
Music of Nature, and other works--sent him half a dozen pairs of
cotton stockings, into which were woven the notes of the Austrian
Hymn, "My mother bids me bind my hair," the Andante from the
"Surprise" Symphony, and other thematic material.

These musical stockings, as a wit has observed, must have come as a
REAL surprise to Haydn. It was this same Leicester manufacturer, we may
remark parenthetically, who annotated the translation of Bombet's
Life of Haydn, made by his fellow-townsman, Robert Brewin, in 1817.

Haydn's return from London was hastened by the receipt of a communication
from Esterhaz. Prince Anton had been succeeded by his son Nicolaus, who was
as fond of music as the rest of his family, and desired to keep his
musical establishment up to the old standard. During the summer of 1794
he had written to Haydn, asking if the composer would care to
retain his appointment as director.

Haydn was only too glad to assent; and now that his London engagements
were fulfilled, he saw no reason for remaining longer in England.

Accordingly he started for home on the 15th of August 1795, travelling by
way of Hamburg, Berlin and Dresden, and arriving at Vienna in the
early days of September.

Rohrau Reminiscences
Soon after his return he was surprised to receive an invitation to visit
his native Rohrau.

When he arrived there he found that a monument, with a marble bust of
himself, had been erected to his honour in a park near his birthplace.

This interesting memorial consists of a square pillar surmounting
three stone steps, with an inscription on each side.

The visit was productive of mingled feelings to Haydn.

He took his friends to see the old thatch-roofed cottage, and,
pointing to the familiar stove, still in its place, modestly remarked
that there his career as a musician began--a reminiscence of the
now far-away time when he sat by his father's side and sawed away
on his improvised fiddle.

Esterhaz once more
There is little to say about Haydn's labours as Capellmeister of
the Esterhazy household at this time.

Apparently he was only at Eisenstadt for the summer and autumn. Down to
1802, however, he always had a mass ready for Princess Esterhazy's name-day
in September. These compositions are Nos. 2, 1, 3, 16, 4 and 6 of the Novello
edition.

No. 2, Pohl tells us, was composed in 1796, and called the "Paukenmesse,"
from the fact of the drums being used in the Agnus.

No. 3 was written in 1797. It is known in England as the Imperial Mass, but
in Germany as "Die Nelsonmesse," on account of its having been performed
during Nelson's visit to Eisenstadt in 1800.

On that occasion Nelson asked Haydn for his pen, and gave him his
own gold watch in exchange.

The Austrian Hymn
It was shortly after his return to Vienna--in January 1797, to be precise--that
he composed his favourite air, "God preserve the Emperor," better known
as the Austrian Hymn.

The story of this celebrated composition is worth telling with some
minuteness. Its inception was due to Count von Saurau, Imperial High
Chancellor and Minister of the Interior.

Writing in 1820, the count said:

I often regretted that we had not, like the English, a national air
calculated to display to all the world the loyal devotion of our people
to the kind and upright ruler of our Fatherland, and to awaken
within the hearts of all good Austrians that noble national pride
so indispensable to the energetic fulfillment of all the beneficial
measures of the sovereign.

This seemed to me more urgent at a period when the French Revolution was
raging most furiously, and when the Jacobins cherished the idle
hope of finding among the worthy Viennese partisans and participators
in their criminal designs.

[The scandalous Jacobin persecutions and executions in Austria and Hungary
took place in 1796].
I caused that meritorious poet Haschka to write the words, and applied to
our immortal countryman Haydn to set them to music, for I considered
him alone capable of writing anything approaching in merit to the
English "God save the King."

Such was the origin of our national hymn.

It would not have been difficult to match "God save the King," the mediocrity
of which, especially as regards the words, has been the butt of countless
satirists. Beethoven wrote in his diary that he "must show the English what
a blessing they have" in that "national disgrace." If Haydn regarded it
as a "blessing," he certainly did not take it as a model.

He produced an air which, looking at it from a purely artistic point of
view, is the best thing of the national anthem kind that has ever been
written. The Emperor was enchanted with it when sung on his birthday,
February 12, 1797, at the National Theatre in Vienna, and through Count
Saurau sent the composer a gold box adorned with a facsimile of the
royal features. "Such a surprise and such a mark of favour, especially
as regards the portrait of my beloved monarch," wrote Haydn, "I never
before received in acknowledgment of my poor talents."

Haydn's Love for It
We have several indications of Haydn's predilection for this fine air,
which has long been popular as a hymn tune in all the churches. He wrote a
set of variations for it as the Andante of his "Kaiser Quartet." Griesinger
tells us, too, that as often as the warm weather and his strength permitted,
during the last few years of his life, he used to be led into his back
room that he might play it on the piano. It is further related by Dies
that, during the bombardment of Vienna in May 1809, Haydn seated himself
at his instrument every forenoon to give forth the sound of the favourite
song. Indeed, on May 26, only five days before his death, he played it
over three times in succession, and "with a degree of expression that
astonished himself." As one writer puts it, the air "seemed to have
acquired a certain sacredness in his eyes in an age when kings were beheaded
and their crowns tossed to the rabble."

Haydn's first sketch of the melody was found among his papers after his
death. We reproduce it here, with an improvement shown in small notes.
There are, it will be observed, some slight differences between
the draft and the published version of the air:
[figure: a musical score excerpt from the draft]
[figure: a musical score excerpt from the published version]
The collecting of what Tennyson called "the chips of the workshop"
is not as a rule an edifying business, but the evolution of a great
national air must always be interesting.

Plagiarism or Coincidence?

It might perhaps be added that Dr Kuhac, the highest authority on
Croatian folk-song, asserted in an article contributed to the
Croatian Review (1893) that the Austrian National Hymn was based
on a Croatian popular air.

In reviewing Kuhac's collection of Croatian melodies, a work in four volumes,
containing 1600 examples, Dr Reimann signifies his agreement with Kuhac,
and adds that Haydn employed Croatian themes not only in "God preserve
the Emperor," but in many passages of his other works.
These statements must not be taken too seriously. Handel purloined
wholesale from brother composers and said nothing about it. The
artistic morality of Haydn's age was different, and, knowing his character
as we do, we may be perfectly sure that if he had of set purpose introduced
into any of his compositions music which was not his own he would,
in some way or other, have acknowledged the debt.

This hunting for plagiarisms which are not plagiarisms at all but mere
coincidences--coincidences which are and must be inevitable--is fast becoming
a nuisance, and it is the duty of every serious writer to discredit the
practice. The composer of "The Creation" had no need to borrow his melodies
from any source.

CHAPTER VII
"THE CREATION" AND "THE SEASONS"

Haydn's Crowning Achievement--"The Creation" suggested--The "Unintelligible
Jargon" of the Libretto--The Stimulating Effect of London--Haydn's
Self-Criticism--First Performance of "The Creation"--London
Performances--French Enthusiasm--The Oratorio criticized--"The
Seasons."

Haydn's Crowning Achievement
Haydn rounded his life with "The Creation" and "The Seasons." They were the
summit of his achievement, as little to be expected from him, considering
his years, as "Falstaff" was to be expected from the octogenarian
Verdi.

Some geniuses flower late. It was only now, by his London symphonies and
his "Creation," that Haydn's genius blossomed so luxuriantly as
to place him with almost amazing suddenness among the very first
of composers.

There is hardly anything more certain than this, that if he had not come
to London he would not have stood where he stands to-day.
The best of his symphonies were written for London; and it was London,
in effect, that set him to work in what was for him practically a
new direction, leading to the production of an oratorio which at
once took its place by the side of Handel's master-pieces, and rose
to a popularity second only to that of "The Messiah" itself.

"The Creation" suggested

The connection thus established between the names of Handel and Haydn
is interesting, for there can be little question that Haydn was led to
think of writing a large choral work chiefly as the result of frequently
hearing Handel's oratorios during his visits to the metropolis.

The credit of suggesting "The Creation" to Haydn is indeed assigned to
Salomon, but it is more than probable that the matter had already
been occupying his thoughts.

It has been explicitly stated [See note by C.H. Purday in Leisure Hour for
1880, p. 528.] that, being greatly impressed with the effect produced
by "The Messiah," Haydn intimated to his friend Barthelemon his desire
to compose a work of the same kind.
He asked Barthelemon what subject he would advise for such a purpose, and
Barthelemon, pointing to a copy of the Bible, replied: "There! take that,
and begin at the beginning." This story is told on apparently good
authority. But it hardly fits in with the statements of biographers. According
to the biographers, Salomon handed the composer a libretto originally
selected for Handel from Genesis and Paradise Lost by Mr Lidley or
Liddell.

That this was the libretto used by Haydn is certain, and we may
therefore accept it as a fact that Haydn's most notable achievement in
choral music was due in great measure to the man who had brought him to
London, and had drawn from him the finest of his instrumental works.

"The Creation" Libretto

Before proceeding further we may deal finally with the libretto of
"The Creation." The "unintelligible jargon" which disfigures Haydn's
immortal work has often formed the subject of comment; and assuredly nothing
that can be said of it can well be too severe.
"The Creation" libretto stands to the present day as an example of all that
is jejune and incongruous in words for music. The theme has in itself
so many elements of inspiration that it is a matter for wonder
how, for more than a century, English-speaking audiences have
listened to the arrant nonsense with which Haydn's music is associated.

As has been well observed, "the suburban love-making of our first parents,
and the lengthy references to the habits of the worm and the leviathan
are almost more than modern flesh and blood can endure." Many years ago
a leading musical critic wrote that there ought to be enough value,
monetarily speaking, in "The Creation" to make it worth while preparing
a fresh libretto; for, said he, "the present one seems only fit for the
nursery, to use in connection with Noah's ark."

At the Norwich Festival performance of the oratorio in 1872, the
words were, in fact, altered, but in all the published editions of the
work the text remains as it was. It is usual to credit the composer's
friend, Baron van Swieten, with the "unintelligible jargon." The baron
certainly had a considerable hand in the adaptation of the text. But in
reality it owes its very uncouth verbiage largely to the circumstance that
it was first translated from English into German, and then re-translated
back into English; the words, with the exception of the first chorus,
being adapted to the music. Considering the ways of translators, the best
libretto in the world could not but have suffered under such
transformations, and it is doing a real injustice to the memory of Baron
Swieten, the good friend of more than one composer, to hold him up needlessly
to ridicule. [In one of George Thomson's letters to Mrs Hunter we read:
"It it is not the first time that your muse and Haydn's have met,
as we see from the beautiful canzonets.

Would he had been directed by you about the words to 'The Creation'! It is
lamentable to see such divine music joined with such miserable
broken English. He (Haydn) wrote me lately that in three years, by the
performance of 'The Creation' and 'The Seasons' at Vienna, 40,000 florins
had been raised for the poor families of musicians."]
The Stimulus of London
Haydn set to work on "The Creation" with all the ardour of a first love.
Naumann suggests that his high spirits were due to the "enthusiastic
plaudits of the English people," and that the birth of both "The Creation"
and "The Seasons" was "unquestionably owing to the new man he felt
within himself after his visit to England." There was now, in short, burning
within his breast, "a spirit of conscious strength which he knew not he
possessed, or knowing, was unaware of its true worth."

This is somewhat exaggerated. Handel wrote "The Messiah" in twenty-four
days; it took Haydn the best part of eighteen months to complete
"The Creation," from which we may infer that "the sad laws of time"
had not stopped their operation simply because he had been to London.

No doubt, as we have already more than hinted, he was roused and stimulated
by the new scenes and the unfamiliar modes of life which he saw
and experienced in England.

His temporary release from the fetters of official life had also an
exhilarating influence. So much we learn indeed from himself. Thus,
writing from London to Frau von Genzinger, he says:
"Oh, my dear, good lady, how sweet is some degree of liberty!

I had a kind prince, but was obliged at times to be dependent on base
souls. I often sighed for freedom, and now I have it in some measure. I
am quite sensible of this benefit, though my mind is burdened with
more work. The consciousness of being no longer a bond-servant sweetens
all my toils."

If this liberty, this contact with new people and new forms of
existence, had come to Haydn twenty years earlier, it might have
altered the whole current of his career.

But it did not help him much in the actual composition of "The Creation,"
which he found rather a tax, alike on his inspiration and his
physical powers.

Writing to Breitkopf & Hartel on June 12, 1799, he says: "The world daily
pays me many compliments, even on the fire of my last works; but
no one could believe the strain and effort it costs me to produce
these, inasmuch as many a day my feeble memory and the unstrung
state of my nerves so completely crush me to the earth, that I fall
into the most melancholy condition, so much so that for days
afterwards I am incapable of finding one single idea, till at length
my heart is revived by Providence, when I seat myself at the piano
and begin once more to hammer away at it.

Then all goes well again, God be praised!"

Self-Criticism
In the same letter he remarks that, "as for myself, now an old man,
I hope the critics may not handle my 'Creation' with too great
severity, and be too hard on it.

They may perhaps find the musical orthography faulty in various passages,
and perhaps other things also which I have for so many years been
accustomed to consider as minor points; but the genuine connoisseur
will see the real cause as readily as I do, and will willingly cast
aside such stumbling blocks."

It is impossible to miss the significance of all this.

[At this point in the original book, a facsimile of a letter regarding
"The Creation" takes up the entire next page.]

Certainly it ought to be taken into account in any critical estimate of "The
Creation"; for when a man admits his own shortcomings it is
ungracious, to say the least, for an outsider to insist upon them.

It is obvious at any rate that Haydn undertook the composition of the
oratorio in no light-hearted spirit. "Never was I so pious," he says, "as
when composing 'The Creation.'

I felt myself so penetrated with religious feeling that before I sat
down to the pianoforte I prayed to God with earnestness that He would
enable me to praise Him worthily." In the lives of the great composers
there is only one parallel to this frame of mind--the religious fervour
in which Handel composed "The Messiah."
First Performance of the Oratorio
The first performance of "The Creation" was of a purely private
nature.

It took place at the Schwartzenburg Palace, Vienna, on the 29th of April
1798, the performers being a body of dilettanti, with Haydn presiding
over the orchestra.

Van Swieten had been exerting himself to raise a guarantee fund for
the composer, and the entire proceeds of the performance, amounting to 350
pounds, were paid over to him. Haydn was unable to describe his sensations
during the progress of the work.

"One moment," he says, "I was as cold as ice, the next I seemed on fire;
more than once I thought I should have a fit."
There were flowers in the beds along the
underpinning of the house, which stood close to the street, and on one
side of the door was a clump of Spanish willow; an old-fashioned June rose
climbed over it from the other. An aged dog got stiffly to his feet from
the threshold stone and whimpered as our buckboard drew up; the poultry
picking about the path and among the chips lazily made way for us, and as
our wheels ceased to crunch upon the gravel we heard hasty steps, and
Reuben Camp came round the corner of the house in time to give Mrs. Makely
his hand and help her spring to the ground, which she did very lightly;
her remarkable mind had kept her body in a sort of sympathetic activity,
and at thirty-five she had the gracile ease and self-command of a girl.

"Ah, Reuben," she sighed, permitting herself to call him by his first
name, with the emotion which expressed itself more definitely in the words
that followed, "how I envy you all this dear, old, homelike place! I never
come here without thinking of my grandfather's farm in Massachusetts,
where I used to go every summer when I was a little girl. If I had a place
like this, I should never leave it."

"Well, Mrs. Makely," said young Camp, "you can have this place cheap, if
you really want it. Or almost any other place in the neighborhood."

"Don't say such a thing!" she returned. "It makes one feel as if the
foundations of the great deep were giving way. I don't know what that
means exactly, but I suppose it's equivalent to mislaying George's hatchet
and going back on the Declaration generally; and I don't like to hear you
talk so."

Camp seemed to have lost his bitter mood, and he answered, pleasantly:
"The Declaration is all right, as far as it goes, but it don't help us to
compete with the Western farm operations."

"Why, you believe every one was born free and equal, don't you?" Mrs.
Makely asked.

"Oh yes, I believe that; but--"

"Then why do you object to free and equal competition?"

The young fellow laughed, and said, as he opened the door for us: "Walk
right into the parlor, please. Mother will be ready for you in a minute."
He added: "I guess she's putting on her best cap for you, Mr. Homos. It's
a great event for her, your coming here. It is for all of us. We're glad
to have you."

"And I'm glad to be here," said the Altrurian, as simply as the other. He
looked about the best room of a farm-house that had never adapted itself
to the tastes or needs of the city boarder, and was as stiffly repellent
in its upholstery and as severe in its decoration as hair-cloth chairs and
dark-brown wall-paper of a trellis pattern, with drab roses, could make
it. The windows were shut tight, and our host did not offer to open them.
A fly or two crossed the doorway into the hall, but made no attempt
to penetrate the interior, where we sat in an obscurity that left the
high-hung family photographs on the walls vague and uncertain. I made a
mental note of it as a place where it would be very characteristic to have
a rustic funeral take place; and I was pleased to have Mrs. Makely drop
into a sort of mortuary murmur, as she said: "I hope your mother is as
well as usual this morning?" I perceived that this murmur was produced by
the sepulchral influence of the room.

"Oh yes," said Camp, and at that moment a door opened from the room across
the hall, and his sister seemed to bring in some of the light from it to
us where we sat. She shook hands with Mrs. Makely, who introduced me to
her, and then presented the Altrurian. She bowed very civilly to me, but
with a touch of severity, such as country people find necessary for the
assertion of their self-respect with strangers. I thought it very pretty,
and instantly saw that I could work it into some picture of character; and
I was not at all sorry that she made a difference in favor of the
Altrurian.

"Mother will be so glad to see you," she said to him, and, "Won't you come
right in?" she added to us all.

We followed her and found ourselves in a large, low, sunny room on
the southeast corner of the house, which had no doubt once been the
living-room, but which was now given up to the bedridden invalid; a door
opened into the kitchen behind, where the table was already laid for the
midday meal, with the plates turned down in the country fashion, and some
netting drawn over the dishes to keep the flies away.

Mrs. Makely bustled up to the bedside with her energetic, patronizing
cheerfulness. "Ah, Mrs. Camp, I am glad to see you looking so well this
morning. I've been meaning to run over for several days past, but I
couldn't find a moment till this morning, and I knew you didn't object to
Sunday visits." She took the invalid's hand in hers, and, with the air of
showing how little she felt any inequality between them, she leaned over
and kissed her, where Mrs. Camp sat propped against her pillows. She had a
large, nobly moulded face of rather masculine contour, and at the same
time the most motherly look in the world. Mrs. Makely bubbled and babbled
on, and every one waited patiently till she had done, and turned and said,
toward the Altrurian: "I have ventured to bring my friend, Mr. Homos, with
me. He is from Altruria." Then she turned to me and said: "Mr. Twelvemough
you know already through his delightful books"; but, although she paid me
this perfunctory compliment it was perfectly apparent to me that in the
esteem of this disingenuous woman the distinguished stranger was a far
more important person than the distinguished author. Whether Mrs. Camp
read my perception of this fact in my face or not I cannot say, but she
was evidently determined that I should not feel a difference in her. She
held out her hand to me first, and said that I never could know how many
heavy hours I had helped to lighten for her, and then she turned to the
Altrurian and took his hand. "Oh!" she said, with a long, deep-drawn sigh,
as if that were the supreme moment of her life. "And are you really from
Altruria? It seems too good to be true!" Her devout look and her earnest
tone gave the commonplace words a quality that did not inhere in them, but
Mrs. Makely took them on their surface.

"Yes, doesn't it?" she made haste to interpose, before the Altrurian could
say anything. "That is just the way we all feel about it, Mrs. Camp. I
assure you, if it were not for the accounts in the papers and the talk
about it everywhere, I couldn't believe there _was_ any such place as
Altruria; and if it were not for Mr. Twelvemough here--who has to keep all
his inventions for his novels, as a mere matter of business routine--I
might really suspect him and Mr. Homos of--well, _working_ us, as my
husband calls it."

The Altrurian smiled politely, but vaguely, as if he had not quite caught
her meaning, and I made answer for both: "I am sure, Mrs. Makely, if you
could understand my peculiar state of mind about Mr. Homos, you would
never believe that I was in collusion with him. I find him quite as
incredible as you do. There are moments when he seems so entirely
subjective with me that I feel as if he were no more definite or tangible
than a bad conscience."

"Exactly!" said Mrs. Makely, and she laughed out her delight in my
illustration.

The Altrurian must have perceived that we were joking, though the Camps
all remained soberly silent. "I hope it isn't so bad as that," he said,
"though I have noticed that I seem to affect you all with a kind of
misgiving. I don't know just what it is; but, if I could remove it, I
should be very glad to do so."

Mrs. Makely very promptly seized her chance: "Well, then, in the first
place, my husband and I were talking it over last night after we left you,
and that was one of the things that kept us awake; it turned into money
afterward. It isn't so much that a whole continent, as big as Australia,
remained undiscovered till within such a very few years, as it is the
condition of things among you: this sort of all living for one another,
and not each one for himself. My husband says that is simply moonshine;
such a thing never was and never can be; it is opposed to human nature,
and would take away incentive and all motive for exertion and advancement
and enterprise. I don't know _what_ he didn't say against it; but one
thing, he says it's perfectly un-American." The Altrurian remained silent,
gravely smiling, and Mrs. Makely added, with her most engaging little
manner: "I hope you won't feel hurt, personally or patriotically, by what
I've repeated to you. I know my husband is awfully Philistine, though he
_is_ such a good fellow, and I don't, by any means, agree with him on all
those points; but I _would_ like to know what you think of them. The
trouble is, Mrs. Camp," she said, turning to the invalid, "that Mr. Homos
is so dreadfully reticent about his own country, and I am so curious to
hear of it at first hands, that I consider it justifiable to use any means
to make him open up about it."

"There is no offence," the Altrurian answered for himself, "in what Mr.
Makely says, though, from the Altrurian point of view, there is a good
deal of error.

"Does it seem so strange to you," he asked, addressing himself to Mrs.
Camp, "that people should found a civilization on the idea of living for
one another instead of each for himself?"

"No indeed!" she answered. "Poor people have always had to live that way,
or they could not have lived at all."

"That was what I understood your porter to say last night," said the
Altrurian to me. He added, to the company generally: "I suppose that even
in America there are more poor people than there are rich people?"

"Well, I don't know about that," I said. "I suppose there are more people
independently rich than there are people independently poor."

"We will let that formulation of it stand. If it is true, I do not see why
the Altrurian system should be considered so very un-American. Then, as to
whether there is or ever was really a practical altruism, a civic
expression of it, I think it cannot be denied that among the first
Christians, those who immediately followed Christ, and might be supposed
to be directly influenced by His life, there was an altruism practised as
radical as that which we have organized into a national polity and a
working economy in Altruria."

"Ah, but you know," said Mrs. Makely, with the air of advancing a point
not to be put aside, "they had to drop _that_. It was a dead failure. They
found that they couldn't make it go at all among cultivated people, and
that, if Christianity was to advance, they would have to give up all that
crankish kind of idolatry of the mere letter. At any rate," she went on,
with the satisfaction we all feel in getting an opponent into close
quarters, "you must confess that there is a much greater play of
individuality here."

Before the Altrurian could reply, young Camp said: "If you want to see
American individuality, the real, simon-pure article, you ought to go down
to one of our big factory towns and look at the mill-hands coming home in
droves after a day's work, young girls and old women, boys and men, all
fluffed over with cotton, and so dead tired that they can hardly walk.
They come shambling along with all the individuality of a flock of sheep."

"Some," said Mrs. Makely, heroically, as if she were one of these, "must
be sacrificed. Of course, some are not so individual as others. A great
deal depends upon temperament."

"A great deal more depends upon capital," said Camp, with an offensive
laugh. "If you have capital in America, you can have individuality; if you
haven't, you can't."

His sister, who had not taken part in the talk before, said, demurely: "It
seems to me you've got a good deal of individuality, Reub, and you haven't
got a great deal of capital, either," and the two young people laughed
together.

Mrs. Makely was one of those fatuous women whose eagerness to make a point
excludes the consideration even of their own advantage. "I'm sure," she
said, as if speaking for the upper classes, "we haven't got any
individuality at all. We are as like as so many peas or pins. In fact, you
have to be so in society. If you keep asserting your own individuality too
much, people avoid you. It's very vulgar and the greatest bore."

"Then you don't find individuality so desirable, after all," said the
Altrurian.

"I perfectly detest it!" cried the lady, and evidently she had not the
least notion where she was in the argument. "For my part, I'm never happy
except when I've forgotten myself and the whole individual bother."

Her declaration seemed somehow to close the incident, and we were all
silent a moment, which I employed in looking about the room, and taking in
with my literary sense the simplicity and even bareness of its furnishing.
There was the bed where the invalid lay, and near the head a table with a
pile of books and a kerosene-lamp on it, and I decided that she was a good
deal wakeful, and that she read by that lamp when she could not sleep at
night. Then there were the hard chairs we sat on, and some home-made
hooked rugs, in rounds and ovals, scattered about the clean floor; there
was a small melodeon pushed against the wall; the windows had paper
shades, and I recalled that I had not seen any blinds on the outside of
the house. Over the head of the bed hung a cavalryman's sword, with its
belt--the sword that Mrs. Makely had spoken of. It struck me as a room
where a great many things might have happened, and I said: "You can't
think, Mrs. Camp, how glad I am to see the inside of your house. It seems
to me so typical."

A pleased intelligence showed itself in her face, and she answered: "Yes,
it is a real old-fashioned farmhouse. We have never taken boarders, and so
we have kept it as it was built pretty much, and only made such changes in
it as we needed or wanted for ourselves."

"It's a pity," I went on, following up what I thought a fortunate lead,
"that we city people see so little of the farming life when we come into
the country. I have been here now for several seasons, and this is the
first time I have been inside a farmer's house."

"Is it possible!" cried the Altrurian, with an air of utter astonishment;
and, when I found the fact appeared so singular to him, I began to be
rather proud of its singularity.

"Yes, I suppose that most city people come and go, year after year, in the
country, and never make any sort of acquaintance with the people who live
there the year round. We keep to ourselves in the hotels, or, if we go out
at all, it is to make a call upon some city cottager, and so we do not get
out of the vicious circle of our own over-intimacy with ourselves and our
ignorance of others."

"And you regard that as a great misfortune?" asked the Altrurian.

"Why, it's inevitable. There is nothing to bring us together, unless it's
some happy accident, like the present. But we don't have a traveler from
Altruria to exploit every day, and so we have no business to come into
people's houses."

"You would have been welcome in ours long ago, Mr. Twelvemough," said Mrs.
Camp.

"But, excuse me," said the Altrurian, "what you say really seems dreadful
to me. Why, it is as if you were not the same race or kind of men!"

"Yes," I answered. "It has sometimes seemed to me as if our big hotel
there were a ship anchored off some strange coast. The inhabitants come
out with supplies, and carry on their barter with the ship's steward, and
we sometimes see them over the side, but we never speak to them or have
anything to do with them. We sail away at the close of the season, and
that is the end of it till next summer."

The Altrurian turned to Mrs. Camp. "And how do you look at it? How does it
seem to you?"

"I don't believe we have thought about it very much; but, now that Mr.
Twelvemough has spoken of it, I can see that it does look that way. And it
seems very strange, doesn't it, for we are all the same people, and have
the same language and religion and country--the country that my husband
fought for and, I suppose I may say, died for; he was never the same man
after the war. It does appear as if we had some interests in common, and
might find it out if we ever came together."

"It's a great advantage, the city people going into the country so much as
they do now," said Mrs. Makely. "They bring five million dollars into the
State of New Hampshire, alone, every summer."

She looked round for the general approval which this fact merited, and
young Camp said: "And it shows how worthless the natives are, that they
can't make both ends meet, with all that money, but have to give up their
farms and go West, after all. I suppose you think it comes from wanting
buggies and pianos."

"Well, it certainly comes from something," said Mrs. Makely, with the
courage of her convictions.

She was evidently not going to be put down by that sour young fellow, and
I was glad of it, though I must say I thought the thing she left to rankle
in his mind from our former meeting had not been said in very good taste.
I thought, too, that she would not fare best in any encounter of wits with
him, and I rather trembled for the result. I said, to relieve the strained
situation: "I wish there was some way of our knowing each other better.
I'm sure there's a great deal of good-will on both sides."

"No, there isn't," said Camp, "or at least I can answer for our side that
there isn't. You come into the country to get as much for your money as
you can, and we mean to let you have as little as we can. That's the whole
story, and if Mr. Homos believes anything different, he's very much
mistaken."

"I hadn't formed any conclusion in regard to the matter, which is quite
new to me," said the Altrurian, mildly. "But why is there no basis of
mutual kindness between you?"

"Because it's like everything else with us; it's a question of supply and
demand, and there is no room for any mutual kindness in a question of that
kind. Even if there were, there is another thing that would kill it. The
summer folks, as we call them, look down on the natives, as they call us,
and we know it."

"Now, Mr. Camp, I am sure that you cannot say _I_ look down on the
natives," said Mrs. Makely, with an air of argument.

The young fellow laughed. "Oh yes, you do," he said, not unamiably, and he
added, "and you've got the right to. We're not fit to associate with you,
and you know it, and we know it. You've got more money, and you've got
nicer clothes, and you've got prettier manners. You talk about things that
most natives never heard of, and you care for things they never saw. I
know it's the custom to pretend differently, but I'm not going to pretend
differently."

I recalled what my friend the banker said about throwing away cant, and I
asked myself if I were in the presence of some such free spirit again. I
did not see how young Camp could afford it; but then I reflected that he
had really nothing to lose by it, for he did not expect to make anything
out of us; Mrs. Makely would probably not give up his sister as seamstress
if the girl continued to work so well and so cheaply as she said.

"Suppose," he went on, "that some old native took you at your word, and
came to call upon you at the hotel, with his wife, just as one of the city
cottagers would do if he wanted to make your acquaintance?"

"I should be perfectly delighted," said Mrs. Makely, "and I should receive
them with the greatest possible cordiality."

"The same kind of cordiality that you would show to the cottagers?"

"I suppose that I should feel that I had more in common with the
cottagers. We should be interested in the same things, and we should
probably know the same people and have more to talk about--"

"You would both belong to the same class, and that tells the whole story.
If you were out West, and the owner of one of those big twenty-thousand-
acre farms called on you with his wife, would you act toward them as you
would toward our natives? You wouldn't. You would all be rich people
together, and you would understand one another because you had money."

"Now, that is not so," Mrs. Makely interrupted. "There are plenty of rich
people one wouldn't wish to know at all, and who really can't get into
society--who are ignorant and vulgar. And then, when you come to money, I
don't see but what country people are as glad to get it as anybody."

"Oh, gladder," said the young man.

"Well?" demanded Mrs. Makely, as if this were a final stroke of logic. The
young man did not reply, and Mrs. Makely continued: "Now I will appeal to
your sister to say whether she has ever seen any difference in my manner
toward her from what I show to all the young ladies in the hotel." The
young girl flushed and seemed reluctant to answer. "Why, Lizzie!" cried
Mrs. Makely, and her tone showed that she was really hurt.

The scene appeared to me rather cruel, and I glanced at Mrs. Camp with an
expectation that she would say something to relieve it. But she did not.
Her large, benevolent face expressed only a quiet interest in the
discussion.

"You know very well, Mrs. Makely," said the girl, "you don't regard me as
you do the young ladies in the hotel."

There was no resentment in her voice or look, but only a sort of regret,
as if, but for this grievance, she could have loved the woman from whom
she had probably had much kindness. The tears came into Mrs. Makely's
eyes, and she turned toward Mrs. Camp. "And is this the way you _all_ feel
toward us?" she asked.

"Why shouldn't we?" asked the invalid, in her turn. "But, no, it isn't the
way all the country people feel. Many of them feel as you would like to
have them feel; but that is because they do not think. When they think,
they feel as we do. But I don't blame you. You can't help yourselves any
more than we can. We're all bound up together in that, at least."

At this apparent relenting Mrs. Makely tricked her beams a little, and
said, plaintively, as if offering herself for further condolence: "Yes,
that is what that woman at the little shanty back there said: some have to
be rich, and some have to be poor; it takes all kinds to make a world."

"How would you like to be one of those that have to be poor?" asked young
Camp, with an evil grin.

"I don't know," said Mrs. Makely, with unexpected spirit; "but I am sure
that I should respect the feelings of all, rich or poor."

"I am sorry if we have hurt yours, Mrs. Makely," said Mrs. Camp, with
dignity. "You asked us certain questions, and we thought you wished us to
reply truthfully. We could not answer you with smooth things."

"But sometimes you do," said Mrs. Makely, and the tears stood in her eyes
again. "And you know how fond I am of you all!"

Mrs. Camp wore a bewildered look. "Perhaps we have said more than we
ought. But I couldn't help it, and I don't see how the children could,
when you asked them here, before Mr. Homos."

I glanced at the Altrurian, sitting attentive and silent, and a sudden
misgiving crossed my mind concerning him. Was he really a man, a human
entity, a personality like ourselves, or was he merely a sort of spiritual
solvent, sent for the moment to precipitate whatever sincerity there was
in us, and show us what the truth was concerning our relations to one
another? It was a fantastic conception, but I thought it was one that I
might employ in some sort of purely romantic design, and I was
professionally grateful for it. I said, with a humorous gayety: "Yes, we
all seem to have been compelled to be much more honest than we like; and
if Mr. Homos is going to write an account of his travels when he gets
home, he can't accuse us of hypocrisy, at any rate. And I always used to
think it was one of our virtues! What with Mr. Camp, here, and my friend
the banker at the hotel, I don't think he'll have much reason to complain
even of our reticence."

"Well, whatever he says of us," sighed Mrs. Makely, with a pious glance at
the sword over the bed, "he will have to say that, in spite of our
divisions and classes, we are all Americans, and, if we haven't the same
opinions and ideas on minor matters, we all have the same country."

"I don't know about that," came from Reuben Camp, with shocking
promptness. "I don't believe we all have the same country. America is one
thing for you, and it's quite another thing for us. America means ease and
comfort and amusement for you, year in and year out, and if it means work,
it's work that you _wish_ to do. For us, America means work that we _have_
to do, and hard work all the time if we're going to make both ends meet.
It means liberty for you; but what liberty has a man got who doesn't know
where his next meal is coming from? Once I was in a strike, when I was
working on the railroad, and I've seen men come and give up their liberty
for a chance to earn their family's living. They knew they were right, and
that they ought to have stood up for their rights; but they had to lie
down and lick the hand that fed them. Yes, we are all Americans, but I
guess we haven't all got the same country, Mrs. Makely. What sort of a
country has a blacklisted man got?"

"A blacklisted man?" she repeated. "I don't know what you mean."

"Well, a kind of man I've seen in the mill towns, that the bosses have all
got on their books as a man that isn't to be given work on any account;
that's to be punished with hunger and cold, and turned into the street,
for having offended them; and that's to be made to suffer through his
helpless family for having offended them."

"Excuse me, Mr. Camp," I interposed, "but isn't a blacklisted man usually
a man who has made himself prominent in some labor trouble?"

"Yes," the young fellow answered, without seeming sensible of the point I
had made.

"Ah!" I returned. "Then you can hardly blame the employers for taking it
out of him in any way they can. That's human nature."

"Good heavens!" the Altrurian cried out. "Is it possible that in America
it is human nature to take away the bread of a man's family because he has
gone counter to your interest or pleasure on some economical question?"

"Well, Mr. Twelvemough seems to think so," sneered the young man. "But
whether it's human nature or not, it's a fact that they do it, and you can
guess how much a blacklisted man must love the country where such a thing
can happen to him. What should you call such a thing as blacklisting in
Altruria?"

"Oh yes," Mrs. Makely pleaded, "do let us get him to talking about
Altruria on any terms. I think all this about the labor question is so
tiresome; don't you, Mrs. Camp?"

Mrs. Camp did not answer; but the Altrurian said, in reply to her son: "We
should have no name for such a thing, for with us such a thing would be
impossible. There is no crime so heinous with us that the punishment would
take away the criminal's chance of earning his living."

"Oh, if he was a criminal," said young Camp, "he would be all right
_here_. The state would give him a chance to earn his living then."

"But if he had no other chance of earning his living, and had committed no
offence against the laws--"

"Then the state would let him take to the road--like that fellow."

He pulled aside the shade of the window where he sat, and we saw pausing
before the house, and glancing doubtfully at the doorstep, where the dog
lay, a vile and loathsome-looking tramp, a blot upon the sweet and
wholesome landscape, a scandal to the sacred day. His rags burlesqued the
form which they did not wholly hide; his broken shoes were covered with
dust; his coarse hair came in a plume through his tattered hat; his red,
sodden face, at once fierce and timid, was rusty with a fortnight's beard.
He offended the eye like a visible stench, and the wretched carrion seemed
to shrink away from our gaze as if he were aware of his loathsomeness.

"Really," said Mrs. Makely, "I thought those fellows were arrested now. It
is too bad to leave them at large. They are dangerous." Young Camp left
the room, and we saw him going out toward the tramp.

"Ah, that's quite right," said the lady. "I hope Reuben is going to send
him about his business. Why, surely, he's not going to feed the horrid
creature!" she added, as Camp, after a moment's parley with the tramp,
turned with him and disappeared round a corner of the house. "Now, Mrs.
Camp, I think that is really a very bad example. It's encouraging them.
Very likely he'll go to sleep in your barn, and set it on fire with his
pipe. What do you do with tramps in Altruria, Mr. Homos?"

The Altrurian seemed not to have heard her. He said to Mrs. Camp: "Then I
understand from something your son let fall that he has not always been at
home with you here. Does he reconcile himself easily to the country after
the excitement of town life? I have read that the cities in America are
draining the country of the young people."

"I don't think he was sorry to come home," said the mother, with a touch
of fond pride. "But there was no choice for him after his father died; he
was always a good boy, and he has not made us feel that we were keeping
him away from anything better. When his father was alive we let him go,
because then we were not so dependent, and I wished him to try his fortune
in the world, as all boys long to do. But he is rather peculiar, and he
seems to have got quite enough of the world. To be sure, I don't suppose
he's seen the brightest side of it. He first went to work in the mills
down at Ponkwasset, but he was 'laid off' there when the hard times came
and there was so much overproduction, and he took a job of railroading,
and was braking on a freight-train when his father left us."

Mrs. Makely said, smiling: "No, I don't think that was the brightest
outlook in the world. No wonder he has brought back such gloomy
impressions. I am sure that if he could have seen life under brighter
auspices he would not have the ideas he has."

"Very likely," said the mother, dryly. "Our experiences have a great deal
to do with forming our opinions. But I am not dissatisfied with my son's
ideas. I suppose Reuben got a good many of his ideas from his father: he's
his father all over again. My husband thought slavery was wrong, and he
went into the war to fight against it. He used to say when the war was
over that the negroes were emancipated, but slavery was not abolished
yet."

"What in the world did he mean by that?" demanded Mrs. Makely.

"Something you wouldn't understand as we do. I tried to carry on the farm
after he first went, and before Reuben was large enough to help me much
and ought to be in school, and I suppose I overdid. At any rate, that was
when I had my first shock of paralysis. I never was very strong, and I
presume my health was weakened by my teaching school so much, and
studying, before I was married. But that doesn't matter now, and hasn't
for many a year. The place was clear of debt then, but I had to get a
mortgage put on it. The savings-bank down in the village took it, and
we've been paying the interest ever since. My husband died paying it, and
my son will pay it all my life, and then I suppose the bank will
foreclose. The treasurer was an old playmate of my husband's, and he said
that as long as either of us lived the mortgage could lie."

"How splendid of him!" said Mrs. Makely. "I should think you had been very
fortunate."

"I said that you would not see it as we do," said the invalid, patiently.

The Altrurian asked: "Are there mortgages on many of the farms in the
neighborhood?"

"Nearly all," said Mrs. Camp. "We seem to own them, but in fact they own
us."

Mrs. Makely hastened to say: "My husband thinks it's the best way to have
your property. If you mortgage it close up, you have all your capital
free, and you can keep turning it over. That's what you ought to do, Mrs.
Camp. But what was the slavery that Captain Camp said was not abolished
yet?"

The invalid looked at her a moment without replying, and just then the
door of the kitchen opened, and Young Camp came in and began to gather
some food from the table on a plate.

"Why don't you bring him to the table, Reub?" his sister called to him.

"Oh, he says he'd rather not come in, as long as we have company. He says
he isn't dressed for dinner; left his spike-tail in the city."

The young man laughed, and his sister with him.


VIII


Young Camp carried out the plate of victuals to the tramp, and Mrs. Makely
said to his mother: "I suppose you would make the tramp do some sort of
work to earn his breakfast on week-days?"

"Not always," Mrs. Camp replied. "Do the boarders at the hotel always work
to earn their breakfast?"

"No, certainly not," said Mrs. Makely, with the sharpness of offence. "But
they always pay for it."

"I don't think that paying for a thing is earning it. Perhaps some one
else earned the money that pays for it. But I believe there is too much
work in the world. If I were to live my life over again, I should not work
half so hard. My husband and I took this place when we were young married
people, and began working to pay for it. We wanted to feel that it was
ours, that we owned it, and that our children should own it afterward. We
both worked all day long like slaves, and many a moonlight night we were
up till morning, almost, gathering the stones from our fields and burying
them in deep graves that we had dug for them. But we buried our youth and
strength and health in those graves, too, and what for? I don't own the
farm that we worked so hard to pay for, and my children won't. That is
what it has all come to. We were rightly punished for our greed, I
suppose. Perhaps no one has a right to own any portion of the earth.
Sometimes I think so, but my husband and I earned this farm, and now the
savings-bank owns it. That seems strange, doesn't it? I suppose you'll say
that the bank paid for it. Well, perhaps so; but the bank didn't earn it.
When I think of that I don't always think that a person who pays for his
breakfast has the best right to a breakfast."

I could see the sophistry of all this, but I had not the heart to point it
out; I felt the pathos of it, too. Mrs. Makely seemed not to see the one
nor to feel the other very distinctly. "Yes, but surely," she said, "if
you give a tramp his breakfast without making him work for it, you must
see that it is encouraging idleness. And idleness is very corrupting--the
sight of it."

"You mean to the country people? Well, they have to stand a good deal of
that. The summer folks that spend four or five months of the year here
don't seem to do anything from morning till night."

"Ah, but you must recollect that they are _resting_! You have no idea how
hard they all work in town during the winter," Mrs. Makely urged, with an
air of argument.

"Perhaps the tramps are resting, too. At any rate, I don't think the sight
of idleness in rags, and begging at back doors, is very corrupting to the
country people; I never heard of a single tramp who had started from the
country; they all come from the cities. It's the other kind of idleness
that tempts our young people. The only tramps that my son says he ever
envies are the well-dressed, strong young fellows from town that go
tramping through the mountains for exercise every summer."

The ladies both paused. They seemed to have got to the end of their
tether; at least, Mrs. Makely had apparently nothing else to advance, and
I said, lightly: "But that is just the kind of tramps that Mr. Homos would
most disapprove of. He says that in Altruria they would consider exercise
for exercise' sake a wicked waste of force and little short of lunacy."

I thought my exaggeration might provoke him to denial, but he seemed not
to have found it unjust. "Why, you know," he said to Mrs. Camp, "in
Altruria every one works with his hands, so that the hard work shall not
all fall to any one class; and this manual labor of each is sufficient to
keep the body in health, as well as to earn a living. After the three,
hours' work, which constitutes a day's work with us, is done, the young
people have all sorts of games and sports, and they carry them as late
into life as the temperament of each demands. But what I was saying to Mr.
Twelvemough--perhaps I did not make myself clear--was that we should
regard the sterile putting forth of strength in exercise, if others were
each day worn out with hard manual labor, as insane or immoral. But I can
account for it differently with you, because I understand that in your
conditions a person of leisure could not do any manual labor without
taking away the work of some one who needed it to live by; and could not
even relieve an overworked laborer, and give him the money for the work,
without teaching him habits of idleness. In Altruria we can all keep
ourselves well by doing each his share of hard work, and we can help those
who are exhausted, when such a thing happens, without injuring them
materially or morally."

Young Camp entered at this moment, and the Altrurian hesitated. "Oh, do go
on!" Mrs. Makely entreated. She added to Camp: "We've got him to talking
about Altruria at last, and we wouldn't have him stopped for worlds."

The Altrurian looked around at all our faces, and no doubt read our eager
curiosity in them. He smiled and said: "I shall be very glad, I'm sure.
But I do not think you will find anything so remarkable in our
civilization, if you will conceive of it as the outgrowth of the
neighborly instinct. In fact, neighborliness is the essence of
Altrurianism. If you will imagine having the same feeling toward all," he
explained to Mrs. Makely, "as you have toward your next-door neighbor--"

"My next-door neighbor!" she cried. "But I don't _know_ the people next
door! We live in a large apartment house, some forty families, and I
assure you I do not know a soul among them."

He looked at her with a puzzled air, and she continued: "Sometimes it
_does_ seem rather hard. One day the people on the same landing with us
lost one of their children, and I should never have been a whit the wiser
if my cook hadn't happened to mention it. The servants all know each
other; they meet in the back elevator, and get acquainted. I don't
encourage it. You can't tell what kind of families they belong to."

"But surely," the Altrurian persisted, "you have friends in the city whom
you think of as your neighbors?"

"No, I can't say that I have," said Mrs. Makely. "I have my visiting-list,
but I shouldn't think of anybody on _that_ as a neighbor."

The Altrurian looked so blank and baffled that I could hardly help
laughing. "Then I should not know how to explain Altruria to you, I'm
afraid."

"Well," she returned, lightly, "if it's anything like neighborliness as
I've seen it in small places, deliver me from it! I like being
independent. That's why I like the city. You're let alone."

"I was down in New York once, and I went through some of the streets and
houses where the poor people live," said young Camp, "and they seemed to
know each other and to be quite neighborly."

"And would you like to be all messed in with one another that way?"
demanded the lady.

"Well, I thought it was better than living as we do in the country, so far
apart that we never see one another, hardly. And it seems to me better
than not having any neighbors at all."

"Well, every one to his taste," said Mrs. Makely. "I wish you would tell
us how people manage with you socially, Mr. Homos."

"Why, you know," he began, "we have neither city nor country in your
sense, and so we are neither so isolated nor so crowded together. You feel
that you lose a great deal in not seeing one another oftener?" he asked
Camp.

"Yes. Folks rust out living alone. It's Human nature to want to get
together."

"And I understand Mrs. Makely that it is human nature to want to keep
apart?"

"Oh no, but to come together independently," she answered.

"Well, that is what we have contrived in our life at home. I should have
to say, in the first place, that--"

"Excuse me just one moment, Mr. Homos," said Mrs. Makely. This perverse
woman was as anxious to hear about Altruria as any of us, but she was a
woman who would rather hear the sound of her own voice than any other,
even if she were dying, as she would call it, to hear the other. The
Altrurian stopped politely, and Mrs. Makely went on: "I have been thinking
of what Mr. Camp was saying about the blacklisted men, and their all
turning into tramps--"

"But I didn't say that, Mrs. Makely," the young fellow protested, in
astonishment.

"Well, it stands to reason that if the tramps have all been blacklisted
men--"

"But I didn't say that, either."

"No matter! What I am trying to get at is this: if a workman has made
himself a nuisance to the employers, haven't they a right to punish him in
any way they can?"

"I believe there's no law yet against blacklisting," said Camp.

"Very well, then, I don't see what they've got to complain of. The
employers surely know their own business."

"They claim to know the men's, too. That's what they're always saying;
they will manage their own affairs in their own way. But no man, or
company, that does business on a large scale has any affairs that are not
partly other folks' affairs, too. All the saying in the world won't make
it different."

"Very well, then," said Mrs. Makely, with a force of argument which she
seemed to think was irresistible, "I think the workmen had better leave
things to the employers, and then they won't get blacklisted. It's as
broad as it's long."

I confess that, although I agreed with Mrs. Makely in regard to what the
workmen had better do, her position had been arrived at by such
extraordinary reasoning that I blushed for her; at the same time, I wanted
to laugh. She continued, triumphantly: "You see, the employers have ever
so much more at stake."

"Then men have everything at stake--the work of their hands," said the
young fellow.

"Oh, but surely," said Mrs. Makely, "you wouldn't set that against
capital? You wouldn't compare the two?"

"Yes, I should," said Camp, and I could see his eye kindle and his jaw
stiffen.

"Then I suppose you would say that a man ought to get as much for his work
as an employer gets for his capital. If you think one has as much at stake
as the other, you must think they ought to be paid alike."

"That is _just_ what I think," said Camp, and Mrs. Makely burst into a
peal of amiable laughter.

"Now, that is too preposterous!"

"Why is it preposterous?" he demanded, with a quivering nostril.

"Why, simply because it _is_" said the lady, but she did not say why, and
although I thought so, too, I was glad she did not attempt to do it, for
her conclusions seemed to me much better than her reasons.

The old wooden clock in the kitchen began to strike, and she rose briskly
to her feet and went and laid the books she had been holding in her lap on
the table beside Mrs. Camp's bed. "We must really be going," she said, as
she leaned over and kissed the invalid. "It is your dinner-time, and we
shall barely get back for lunch if we go by the Loop road; and I want very
much to have Mr. Homos see the Witch's Falls on the way. I have got two or
three of the books here that Mr. Makely brought me last night--I sha'n't
have time to read them at once--and I'm smuggling in one of Mr.
Twelvemough's, that he's too modest to present for himself." She turned a
gay glance upon me, and Mrs. Camp thanked me, and a number of civilities
followed from all sides. In the process of their exchange, Mrs. Makely's
spirits perceptibly rose, and she came away in high good-humor with the
whole Camp family. "Well, now, I am sure," she said to the Altrurian, as
we began the long ascent of the Loop road, "you must allow that you have
seen some very original characters. But how _warped_ people get living
alone so much! That is the great drawback of the country. Mrs. Camp thinks
the savings-bank did her a real injury in taking a mortgage on her place,
and Reuben seems to have seen just enough of the outside world to get it
all wrong. But they are the best-hearted creatures in the world, and I
know you won't misunderstand them. That unsparing country bluntness--don't
you think it's perfectly delightful? I do like to stir poor Reuben up, and
get him talking. He is a good boy, if he _is_ so wrong-headed, and he's
the most devoted son and brother in the world. Very few young fellows
would waste their lives on an old farm like that; I suppose, when his
mother dies, he will marry and strike out for himself in some growing
place."

"He did not seem to think the world held out any very bright inducements
for him to leave home," the Altrurian suggested.

"Oh, let him get one of these lively, pushing Yankee girls for a wife, and
he will think very differently," said Mrs. Makely.

The Altrurian disappeared that afternoon, and I saw little or nothing of
him till the next day at supper. Then he said he had been spending the
time with young Camp, who had shown him something of the farm-work, and
introduced him to several of the neighbors; he was very much interested in
it all, because at home he was, at present, engaged in farm-work himself,
and he was curious to contrast the American and Altrurian methods. We
began to talk of the farming interest again, later in the day, when the
members of our little group came together, and I told them what the
Altrurian had been doing. The doctor had been suddenly called back to
town; but the minister was there, and the lawyer and the professor and the
banker and the manufacturer.

It was the banker who began to comment on what I said, and he seemed to be
in the frank humor of the Saturday night before. "Yes," he said, "it's a
hard life, and they have to look sharp if they expect to make both ends
meet. I would not like to undertake it myself with their resources."

The professor smiled, in asking the Altrurian: "Did your agricultural
friends tell you anything of the little rural traffic in votes that they
carry on about election time? That is one of the side means they have of
making both ends meet."

"I don't understand," said the Altrurian.

"Why, you know, you can buy votes among our virtuous yeomen from two
dollars up at the ordinary elections. When party feeling runs high, and
there are vital questions at stake, the votes cost more."

The Altrurian looked round at us all aghast. "Do, you mean that Americans
buy votes?"

The professor smiled again. "Oh no; I only mean that they sell them. Well,
I don't wonder that they rather prefer to blink the fact; but it is a
fact, nevertheless, and pretty notorious."

"Good heavens!" cried the Altrurian. "And what defence have they for such
treason? I don't mean those who sell; from what I have seen of the
bareness and hardship of their lives, I could well imagine that there
might sometimes come a pinch when they would be glad of the few dollars
that they could get in that way; but what have those who buy to say?"

"Well," said the professor, "it isn't a transaction that's apt to be
talked about much on either side."

"I think," the banker interposed, "that there is some exaggeration about
that business; but it certainly exists, and I suppose it is a growing evil
in the country. I fancy it arises, somewhat, from a want of, clear
thinking on the subject. Then there is no doubt but it comes, sometimes,
from poverty. A man sells his vote, as a woman sells her person, for
money, when neither can turn virtue into cash. They feel that they must
live, and neither of them would be satisfied if Dr. Johnson told them he
didn't see the necessity. In fact, I shouldn't myself, if I were in their
places. You can't have the good of a civilization like ours without having
the bad; but I am not going to deny that the bad is bad. Some people like
to do that; but I don't find my account in it. In either case, I confess
that I think the buyer is worse than the seller--incomparably worse. I
suppose you are not troubled with either case in Altruria?"

"Oh no!" said the Altrurian, with an utter horror, which no repetition of
his words can give the sense of. "It would be unimaginable."

"Still," the banker suggested, "you have cakes and ale, and at times the
ginger is hot in the mouth?"

"I don't pretend that we have immunity from error; but upon such terms as
you have described we have none. It would be impossible."

The Altrurian's voice expressed no contempt, but only a sad patience, a
melancholy surprise, such as a celestial angel might feel in being
suddenly confronted with some secret shame and horror of the Pit.

"Well," said the banker, "with us the only way is to take the business
view and try to strike an average somewhere."

"Talking of business," said the professor, turning to the manufacturer,
who had been quietly smoking, "why don't some of you capitalists take hold
of farming here in the East, and make a business of it as they do in the
West?"

"Thank you," said the other; "if you mean me, I would rather not invest."
He was silent a moment, and then he went on, as if the notion were
beginning to win upon him: "It may come to something like that, though. If
it does, the natural course, I should think, would he through the
railroads. It would he a very easy matter for them to buy up all the good
farms along their lines and put tenants on them, and run them in their own
interest. Really, it isn't a bad scheme. The waste in the present method
is enormous, and there is no reason why the roads should not own the
farms, as they are beginning to own the mines. They could manage them
better than the small farmers do in every way. I wonder the thing hasn't
occurred to some smart railroad man."

We all laughed a little, perceiving the semi-ironical spirit of his talk;
but the Altrurian must have taken it in dead earnest: "But, in that case,
the number of people thrown out of work would be very great, wouldn't it?
And what would become of them?"

"Well, they would have whatever their farms brought to make a new start
with somewhere else; and, besides, that question of what would become of
people thrown out of work by a given improvement is something that capital
cannot consider. We used to introduce a bit of machinery in the mill,
every now and then, that threw out a dozen or a hundred people; but we
couldn't stop for that."

"And you never knew what became of them?"

"Sometimes. Generally not. We took it for granted that they would light on
their feet somehow."

"And the state--the whole people--the government--did nothing for them?"

"If it became a question of the poor-house, yes."

"Or the jail," the lawyer suggested.

"Speaking of the poor-house," said the professor, "did our exemplary rural
friends tell you how they sell out their paupers to the lowest bidder, and
get them boarded sometimes as low as a dollar and a quarter a week?"

"Yes, young Mr. Camp told me of that. He seemed to think it was terrible."

"Did he? Well, I'm glad to hear that of young Mr. Camp. From all that I've
been told before, he seems to reserve his conscience for the use of
capitalists. What does he propose to do about it?"

"He seems to think the state ought to find work for them."

"Oh, paternalism! Well, I guess the state won't."

"That was his opinion, too."

"It seems a hard fate," said the minister, "that the only provision the
law makes for people who are worn out by sickness or a life of work should
be something that assorts them with idiots and lunatics, and brings such
shame upon them that it is almost as terrible as death."

"It is the only way to encourage independence and individuality," said the
professor. "Of course, it has its dark side. But anything else would be
sentimental and unbusinesslike, and, in fact, un-American."

"I am not so sure that it would be un-Christian," the minister timidly
ventured, in the face of such an authority on political economy.

"Oh, as to that, I must leave the question to the reverend clergy," said
the professor.

A very unpleasant little silence followed. It was broken by the lawyer,
who put his feet together, and, after a glance down at them, began to say:
"I was very much interested this afternoon by a conversation I had with
some of the young fellows in the hotel. You know most of them are
graduates, and they are taking a sort of supernumerary vacation this
summer before they plunge into the battle of life in the autumn. They were
talking of some other fellows, classmates of theirs, who were not so
lucky, but had been obliged to begin the fight at once. It seems that our
fellows here are all going in for some sort of profession: medicine or law
or engineering or teaching or the church, and they were commiserating
those other fellows not only because they were not having the
supernumerary vacation, but because they were going into business. That
struck me as rather odd, and I tried to find out what it meant, and, as
nearly as I could find out, it meant that most college graduates would not
go into business if they could help it. They seemed to feel a sort of
incongruity between their education and the business life. They pitied the
fellows that had to go in for it, and apparently the fellows that had to
go in for it pitied themselves, for the talk seemed to have begun about a
letter that one of the chaps here had got from poor Jack or Jim somebody,
who had been obliged to go into his father's business, and was groaning
over it. The fellows who were going to study professions were hugging
themselves at the contrast between their fate and his, and were making
remarks about business that were, to say the least, unbusinesslike. A few
years ago we should have made a summary disposition of the matter, and I
believe some of the newspapers still are in doubt about the value of a
college education to men who have got to make their way. What do you
think?"

The lawyer addressed his question to the manufacturer, who answered, with
a comfortable satisfaction, that he did not think those young men if they
went into business would find that they knew too much.

"But they pointed out," said the lawyer, "that the great American fortunes
had been made by men who had never had their educational advantages, and
they seemed to think that what we call the education of a gentleman was a
little too good for money-making purposes."

"Well," said the other, "they can console themselves with the reflection
that going into business isn't necessarily making money; it isn't
necessarily making a living, even."

"Some of them seem to have caught on to that fact; and they pitied Jack or
Jim partly because the chances were so much against him. But they pitied
him mostly because in the life before him he would have no use for his
academic training, and he had better not gone to college at all. They said
he would be none the better for it, and would always be miserable when he
looked back to it."

The manufacturer did not reply, and the professor, after a preliminary
hemming, held his peace. It was the banker who took the word: "Well, so
far as business is concerned, they were right. It is no use to pretend
that there is any relation between business and the higher education.
There is no business man who will pretend that there is not often an
actual incompatibility if he is honest. I know that when we get together
at a commercial or financial dinner we talk as if great merchants and
great financiers were beneficent geniuses, who evoked the prosperity of
mankind by their schemes from the conditions that would otherwise have
remained barren. Well, very likely they are, but we must all confess that
they do not know it at the time. What they are consciously looking out for
then is the main chance. If general prosperity follows, all well and good;
they are willing to be given the credit for it. But, as I said, with
business as business, the 'education of a gentleman' has nothing to do.
That education is always putting the old Ciceronian question: whether the
fellow arriving at a starving city with a cargo of grain is bound to tell
the people before he squeezes them that there are half a dozen other
fellows with grain just below the horizon. As a gentleman he would have to
tell them, because he could not take advantage of their necessities; but,
as a business man, he would think it bad business to tell them, or no
business at all. The principle goes all through; I say, business is
business; and I am not going to pretend that business will ever be
anything else. In our business battles we don't take off our hats to the
other side and say, 'Gentlemen of the French Guard, have the goodness to
fire.' That may be war, but it is not business. We seize all the
advantages we can; very few of us would actually deceive; but if a fellow
believes a thing, and we know he is wrong, we do not usually take the
trouble to set him right, if we are going to lose anything by undeceiving
him. That would not be business. I suppose you think that is dreadful?" He
turned smilingly to the minister.

"I wish--I wish," said the minister, gently, "it could be otherwise."

"Well, I wish so, too," returned the banker. "But it isn't. Am I right or
am I wrong?" he demanded of the manufacturer, who laughed.

"I am not conducting this discussion. I will not deprive you of the
floor."

"What you say," I ventured to put in, "reminds me of the experience of a
friend of mine, a brother novelist. He wrote a story where the failure of
a business man turned on a point just like that you have instanced. The
man could have retrieved himself if he had let some people believe that
what was so was not so, but his conscience stepped in and obliged him to
own the truth. There was a good deal of talk about the case, I suppose,
because it was not in real life, and my friend heard divers criticisms. He
heard of a group of ministers who blamed him for exalting a case of common
honesty, as if it were something extraordinary; and he heard of some
business men who talked it over and said he had worked the case up
splendidly, but he was all wrong in the outcome--the fellow would never
have told the other fellows. They said it would not have been business."

We all laughed except the minister and the Altrurian; the manufacturer
said: "Twenty-five years hence, the fellow who is going into business may
pity the fellows who are pitying him for his hard fate now."

"Very possibly, but not necessarily," said the banker. "Of course, the
business man is on top, as far as money goes; he is the fellow who makes
the big fortunes; the millionaire lawyers and doctors and ministers are
exceptional. But his risks are tremendous. Ninety-five times out of a
hundred he fails. To be sure, he picks up and goes on, but he seldom gets
there, after all."

"Then in your system," said the Altrurian, "the great majority of those
who go into what you call the battle of life are defeated?"

"The killed, wounded, and missing sum up a frightful total," the banker
admitted. "But whatever the end is, there is a great deal of prosperity on
the way. The statistics are correct, but they do not tell the whole truth.
It is not so bad as it seems. Still, simply looking at the material
chances, I don't blame those young fellows for not wanting to go into
business. And when you come to other considerations! We used to cut the
knot of the difficulty pretty sharply; we said a college education was
wrong, or the hot and hot American spread-eaglers did. Business is the
national ideal, and the successful business man is the American type. It
is a business man's country."

"Then, if I understand you," said the Altrurian, "and I am very anxious to
have a clear understanding of the matter, the effect of the university
with you is to unfit a youth for business life."

"Oh no. It may give him great advantages in it, and that is the theory and
expectation of most fathers who send their sons to the university. But,
undoubtedly, the effect is to render business life distasteful. The
university nurtures all sorts of lofty ideals, which business has no use
for."

"Then the effect is undemocratic?"

"No, it is simply unbusinesslike. The boy is a better democrat when he
leaves college than he will be later, if he goes into business. The
university has taught him and equipped him to use his own gifts and powers
for his advancement; but the first lesson of business, and the last, is to
use other men's gifts and powers. If he looks about him at all, he sees
that no man gets rich simply by his own labor, no matter how mighty a
genius he is, and that, if you want to get rich, you must make other men
work for you, and pay you for the privilege of doing so. Isn't that true?"

The banker turned to the manufacturer with this question, and the other
said: "The theory is, that we give people work," and they both laughed.

The minister said: "I believe that in Altruria no man works for the profit
of another?"

"No; each works for the profit of all," replied the Altrurian.

"Well," said the banker, "you seem to have made it go. Nobody can deny
that. But we couldn't make it go here."

"Why? I am very curious to know why our system seems so impossible to
you."

"Well, it is contrary to the American spirit. It is alien to our love of
individuality."

"But we prize individuality, too, and we think we secure it under our
system. Under yours, it seems to me that while the individuality of the
man who makes other men work for him is safe, except from itself, the
individuality of the workers--"

"Well, that is their lookout. We have found that, upon the whole, it is
best to let every man look out for himself. I know that, in a certain
light, the result has an ugly aspect; but, nevertheless, in spite of all,
the country is enormously prosperous. The pursuit of happiness, which is
one of the inalienable rights secured to us by the Declaration, is, and
always has been, a dream; but the pursuit of the dollar yields tangible
proceeds, and we get a good deal of excitement out of it as it goes on.
You can't deny that we are the richest nation in the world. Do you call
Altruria a rich country?"

I could not quite make out whether the banker was serious or not in all
this talk; sometimes I suspected him of a fine mockery, but the Altrurian
took him upon the surface of his words.

"I hardly know whether it is or not. The question of wealth does not enter
into our scheme. I can say that we all have enough, and that no one is
even in the fear of want."

"Yes, that is very well. But we should think it was paying too much for it
if we had to give up the hope of ever having more than we wanted," and at
this point the banker uttered his jolly laugh, and I perceived that he had
been trying to draw the Altrurian out and practise upon his patriotism. It
was a great relief to find that he had been joking in so much that seemed
a dead give-away of our economical position. "In Altruria," he asked, "who
is your ideal great man? I don't mean personally, but abstractly."

The Altrurian thought a moment. "With us there is so little ambition for
distinction, as you understand it, that your question is hard to answer.
But I should say, speaking largely, that it was some man who had been able
for the time being to give the greatest happiness to the greatest number--
some artist or poet or inventor or physician."

I was somewhat surprised to have the banker take this preposterous
statement seriously, respectfully. "Well, that is quite conceivable with
your system. What should you say," he demanded of the rest of us
generally, "was our ideal of greatness?"

No one replied at once, or at all, till the manufacturer said: "We will
let you continue to run it."

"Well, it is a very curious inquiry, and I have thought it over a good
deal. I should say that within a generation our ideal has changed twice.
Before the war, and during all the time from the Revolution onward, it was
undoubtedly the great politician, the publicist, the statesman. As we grew
older and began to have an intellectual life of our own, I think the
literary fellows had a pretty good share of the honors that were going--
that is, such a man as Longfellow was popularly considered a type of
greatness. When the war came, it brought the soldier to the front, and
there was a period of ten or fifteen years when he dominated the national
imagination. That period passed, and the great era of material prosperity
set in. The big fortunes began to tower up, and heroes of another sort
began to appeal to our admiration. I don't think there is any doubt but
the millionaire is now the American ideal. It isn't very pleasant to think
so, even for people who have got on, but it can't very hopefully be
denied. It is the man with the most money who now takes the prize in our
national cake-walk."

The Altrurian turned curiously toward me, and I did my best to tell him
what a cake-walk was. When I had finished, the banker resumed, only to
say, as he rose from his chair to bid us good-night: "In any average
assembly of Americans the greatest millionaire would take the eyes of all
from the greatest statesman, the greatest poet, or the greatest soldier we
ever had. That," he added to the Altrurian, "will account to you for many
things as you travel through our country."


IX


The next time the members of our little group came together, the
manufacturer began at once upon the banker:

"I should think that our friend the professor, here, would hardly like
that notion of yours, that business, as business, has nothing to do with
the education of a gentleman. If this is a business man's country, and if
the professor has nothing in stock but the sort of education that business
has no use for, I should suppose that he would want to go into some other
line."

The banker mutely referred the matter to the professor, who said, with
that cold grin of his which I hated:

"Perhaps we shall wait for business to purge and live cleanly. Then it
will have some use for the education of a gentleman."

"I see," said the banker, "that I have touched the quick in both of you,
when I hadn't the least notion of doing so. But I shouldn't really like to
prophesy which will adapt itself to the other--education or business. Let
us hope there will be mutual concessions. There are some pessimists who
say that business methods, especially on the large scale of the trusts and
combinations, have grown worse instead of better; but this may be merely
what is called a 'transition state.' Hamlet must be cruel to be kind; the
darkest hour comes before dawn--and so on. Perhaps when business gets
the whole affair of life into its hands, and runs the republic, as its
enemies now accuse it of doing, the process of purging and living cleanly
will begin. I have known lots of fellows who started in life rather
scampishly; but when they felt secure of themselves, and believed that
they could afford to be honest, they became so. There's no reason why the
same thing shouldn't happen on a large scale. We must never forget that we
are still a very novel experiment, though we have matured so rapidly in
some respects that we have come to regard ourselves as an accomplished
fact. We are really less so than we were forty years ago, with all the
tremendous changes since the war. Before that we could take certain
matters for granted. If a man got out of work, he turned his hand to
something else; if a man failed in business, he started in again from some
other direction; as a last resort, in both cases, he went West, pre-empted
a quarter-section of public land, and grew up with the country. Now the
country is grown up; the public land is gone; business is full on all
sides, and the hand that turned itself to something else has lost its
cunning. The struggle for life has changed from a free-fight to an
encounter of disciplined forces, and the free-fighters that are left get
ground to pieces between organized labor and organized capital. Decidedly,
we are in a transition state, and if the higher education tried to adapt
itself to business needs, there are chances that it might sacrifice itself
without helping business. After all, how much education does business
need? Were our great fortunes made by educated men, or men of university
training? I don't know but these young fellows are right about that."

"Yes, that may all be," I put in. "But it seems to me that you give Mr.
Homos, somehow, a wrong impression of our economic life by your
generalizations. You are a Harvard man yourself."

"Yes, and I am not a rich man. A million or two, more or less; but what is
that? I have suffered, at the start and all along, from the question as to
what a man with the education of a gentleman ought to do in such and such
a juncture. The fellows who have not that sort of education have not that
sort of question, and they go in and win."

"So you admit, then," said the professor, "that the higher education
elevates a business man's standard of morals?"

"Undoubtedly. That is one of its chief drawbacks," said the banker, with a
laugh.

"Well," I said, with the deference due even to a man who had only a
million or two, more or less, "we must allow _you_ to say such things. 
Sometimes, indeed, according to our insular ideas of such things, he
exceeded the bounds of decorum, as in the case of which we are now
compelled to speak. Among the musicians who had been engaged for the
Esterhazy service in 1779 were a couple named Polzelli--the husband a
violinist, the wife a second-rate vocalist. Luigia Polzelli was a
lively Italian girl of nineteen. She does not seem to have been happy with
Polzelli, and Haydn's pity was roused for her, much as Shelley's pity
was roused for "my unfortunate friend," Harriet Westbrook. The pity,
as often happens in such cases, ultimately ripened into a violent
passion.

We are not concerned to adopt an apologetic tone towards Haydn.
But Signora Polzelli was clearly an unscrupulous woman. She first got her
admirer into her power, and then used her position to dun him for money.
She had two sons, and the popular belief of the time that Haydn
was the father of the younger is perpetuated in several of the
biographies.

Haydn had certainly a great regard for the boy, made him a pupil of his
own, and left him a small sum in his first will, which, however, he revoked
in the second.
Signora Polzelli's conduct was probably natural enough in the
circumstances, but it must have been rather embarrassing to Haydn.

After the death of her husband, she wheedled him into signing a paper
promising to marry her in the event of his becoming a widower. This promise
he subsequently repudiated, but he cared for her well enough to leave her
an annuity in his will, notwithstanding that she had married again.
She survived him for twenty-three years, and her two daughters were still
living at Pesth in 1878.

Returning to 1779, an untoward event of that year was the destruction
by fire of the theatre at Esterhaz. The re-building of the house was
set about at once, the prince having meanwhile gone to Paris, and the
re-opening took place on October 15, 1780, when Haydn's "La Fedelta
Premiata," already mentioned, was staged.

Correspondence
It was about this time that he began to correspond with Artaria, the Vienna
music-publisher, with whom he had business dealings for many years. A
large number of his letters is given in an English translation by Lady
Wallace. [See Letters of Distinguished Musicians. Translated from the
German by Lady Wallace. London, 1867]. They treat principally of business
matters, but are not unimportant as fixing the chronological dates of some
of his works. They exhibit in a striking way the simple, honest, unassuming
nature of the composer; and if they also show him "rather eager after gain,
and even particular to a groschen," we must not forget the
ever-pressing necessity for economy under which be laboured, and
his almost lavish benevolence to straitened relatives and friends.

In one letter requesting an advance he writes: "I am unwilling to be
in debt to tradesmen, and, thank God!

I am free from this burden; but as great people keep me so long waiting
for payments, I have got rather into difficulty. This letter, however,
will be your security...I will pay off the interest with my notes." There
is no real ground for charging Haydn with avarice, as some writers
have done. "Even philosophers," as he remarked himself, "occasionally
stand in need of money"; and, as Beethoven said to George Thomson, when
haggling about prices, there is no reason why the "true artist" should not
be "honourably paid."
A London Publisher
It was about this time too that Haydn opened a correspondence with
William Forster of London, who had added to his business of
violin-maker that of a music-seller and publisher.

Forster entered into an agreement with him for the English copyright
of his compositions, and between 1781 and 1787 he published eighty-two
symphonies, twenty-four quartets, twenty-four solos, duets and trios, and
the "Seven Last Words," of which we have yet to speak. Nothing of the Forster
correspondence seems to have survived.

Royal Dedicatees
Among the events of 1781-1782 should be noted the entertainments given
in connection with two visits which the Emperor Joseph II received
from the Grand Duke Paul and his wife. The Grand Duchess was musical,
and had just been present at the famous combat between Clementi and
Mozart, a suggestion of the Emperor.

She had some of Haydn's quartets played at her house and liked them so
well that she gave him a diamond snuff-box and took lessons from
him.

It was to her that he afterwards--in 1802--dedicated his part-songs for
three and four voices, while the Grand Duke was honoured by the dedication
of the six so-called "Russian" quartets. It had been arranged that the
Duke and Duchess should accompany the Emperor to Eisenstadt, but the
arrangement fell through, and an opera which Haydn had written for the
occasion was only produced at Esterhaz in the autumn of 1782.

This was his "Orlando Paladino," better known in its German form
as "Ritter Roland." Another work of this year (1782) was the "Mariazell"
Mass in C major (Novello, No. 15), which derives its name from the
shrine of the Virgin in Styria, the scene of an incident already
related.

The mass was written to the order of a certain Herr Liebe de Kreutzner, and
the composer is said to have taken special pains with it, perhaps
because it reminded him of his early struggling days as a chorister in
Vienna. It was the eighth mass Haydn had written, one being the
long and difficult "Cecilia" Mass in C major, now heard only in a curtailed
form. No other work of the kind was composed until 1796, between
which year and 1802 the best of his masses were produced. To the year
1783 belongs the opera "Armida," performed in 1784 and again in 1797 at
Schickaneder's Theatre in Vienna. Haydn writes to Artaria in March
1784 to say that "Armida" had been given at Esterhaz with "universal
applause," adding that "it is thought the best work I have yet written."
The autograph score was sent to London to make up, in a manner, for
the non-performance of his "Orfeo" there in 1791.

The "Seven Words"
But the most interesting work of this period was the "Seven Words
of our Saviour on the Cross," written in 1785.

The circumstances attending its composition are best told in Haydn's own
words. In Breitkopf & Hartel's edition of 1801, he writes:

About fifteen years ago I was requested by a Canon of Cadiz to compose
instrumental music on the Seven Words of Jesus on the Cross. It was
the custom of the Cathedral of Cadiz to produce an oratorio every
year during Lent, the effect of the performance being not a little
enhanced by the following circumstances.

The walls, windows and pillars of the Church were hung with black cloth,
and only one large lamp, hanging from the centre of the roof, broke the
solemn obscurity. At mid-day the doors were closed and the ceremony
began.

After a short service the bishop ascended the pulpit, pronounced one
of the Seven Words (or sentences) and delivered a discourse thereon. This
ended, he left the pulpit and knelt prostrate before the altar. The pause
was filled by the music. The bishop then in like manner pronounced the
second word, then the third, and so on, the orchestra falling in at the
conclusion of each discourse. My composition was to be subject to these
conditions, and it was no easy matter to compose seven adagios to
last ten minutes each, and follow one after the other without
fatiguing the listeners; indeed I found it quite impossible to
confine myself within the appointed limits.

This commission may be taken as a further evidence of the growing extent
of Haydn's fame. He appears to have been already well known in Spain.
Boccherini carried on a friendly correspondence with him from Madrid,
and he was actually made the hero of a poem called "The Art of
Music," published there in 1779.

The "Seven Words" created a profound impression when performed under the
circumstances just detailed, but the work was not allowed to remain in
its original form, though it was printed in that form by Artaria and
by Forster.

Haydn divided it into two parts, and added choruses and solos, in which form
it was given for the first time at Eisenstadt in October, 1797, and
published in 1801.

The "Seven Words" was a special favourite of the composer himself, who
indeed is declared by some to have preferred it to all his other
compositions.

The "Toy" Symphony
The remaining years of the period covered by this chapter being almost
totally devoid of incident, we may pause to notice briefly two of the
better-known symphonies of the time--the "Toy" Symphony and the more
famous "Farewell." The former is a mere jeu d'esprit, in which, with an
orchestral basis of two violins and a bass, the solo instruments
are all of a burlesque character.

Mozart attempted something of a kindred nature in his "Musical joke," where
instruments come in at wrong places, execute inappropriate phrases,
and play abominably out of tune.

This kind of thing does not require serious notice, especially in the
case of Haydn, to whom humour in music was a very different matter
from the handling of rattles and penny trumpets and toy drums.

The "Farewell" Symphony
The "Farewell" Symphony has often been described, though the circumstances
of its origin are generally mis-stated. It has been asserted, for
example, that Haydn intended it as an appeal to the prince against the
dismissal of the Capelle. But this, as Pohl has conclusively shown, is
incorrect. The real design of the "Farewell" was to persuade the prince to
shorten his stay at Esterhaz, and so enable the musicians to rejoin their
wives and families. Fortunately, the prince was quick-witted enough to see
the point of the joke. As one after another ceased playing and
left the orchestra, until only two violinists remained, he quietly observed,
"If all go, we may as well go too."

Thus Haydn's object was attained--for the time being! The "Farewell" is
perfectly complete as a work of art, but its fitness for ordinary
occasions is often minimized by the persistent way in which its original
purpose is pointed out to the listener.

Free from Esterhaz

Haydn's active career at Esterhaz may be said to have closed with the death,
on September 28, 1790, of Prince Nicolaus. The event was of great
importance to his future. Had the prince lived, Haydn would doubtless
have continued in his service, for he "absolutely adored him." But Prince
Anton, who now succeeded, dismissed the whole Capelle, retaining
only the few members necessary for the carrying on of the church
service, and Haydn's occupation was practically gone.

The new prince nominally held the right to his services, but there was
no reason for his remaining longer at the castle, and he accordingly
took up his residence in Vienna. Thus free to employ his time as he
considered best, Haydn embraced the opportunity to carry out a
long-meditated project, and paid the first of his two visits to
London.

With these we enter upon a new epoch in the composer's life, and one
of great interest to the student and lover of music.

CHAPTER V
FIRST LONDON VISIT--1791-1792
English Music about 1791--Salomon--Mozart and Haydn--Terms for London--Bonn
and Beethoven--Haydn Sea-Sick--Arrives in London-- An Enthusiastic
Welcome--Ideas of the Metropolis--At Court-- Unreasoning Rivalries--Temporarily
eclipsed--Band and Baton-- A Rehearsal Incident--Hanover Square
Rooms--Hoops and Swords-- The "Surprise" Symphony--Gallic Excitement--New
Compositions-- Benefit and Other Concerts--Haydn on Handel--Oxford Doctor
of Music--The "Oxford" Symphony--Relaxations--Royalty again--Pleyel
--Close of Season--Herschel--Haydn at St Paul's--London Acquaintances--Another
Romance--Mistress Schroeter--Love-Letters --Haydn's Note-Book.

English Music about 1791

Haydn came to England in 1791. It may occur to the reader to ask
what England was doing in music at that time, and who were the foremost
representatives of the art. The first question may be partially answered
from the literature of the period. Thus Jackson, in his Present State
of Music in London, published the year after Haydn's arrival, remarks that
"instrumental music has been of late carried to such perfection in London
by the consummate skill of the performers that any attempt to beat the
time would be justly considered as entirely needless." Burney,
again, in his last volume, published in 1789, says that the great
improvement in taste during the previous twenty years was "as different
as civilized people from savages"; while Stafford Smith, writing in 1779,
tells that music was then "thought to be in greater perfection than
among even the Italians themselves."

There is a characteristic John Bull complacency about these statements
which is hardly borne out by a study of the lives of the leading
contemporary musicians. Even Mr Henry Davey, the applauding historian
of English music, has to admit the evanescent character of the
larger works which came from the composers of that "bankrupt century."

Not one of these composers--not even Arne--is a real personality to us like
Handel, or Bach, or Haydn, or Mozart. The great merit of English music
was melody, which seems to have been a common gift, but "the only
strong feeling was patriotic enthusiasm, and the compositions that survive
are almost all short ballads expressing this sentiment or connected
with it by their nautical subjects."

When Haydn arrived, there was, in short, no native composer of real
genius, and our "tardy, apish nation" was ready to welcome with special
cordiality an artist whose gifts were of a higher order.

Salomon
We have spoken of Haydn's visit as a long-meditated project. In 1787
Cramer, the violinist, had offered to engage him on his own terms
for the Professional Concerts; and Gallini, the director of the King's
Theatre in Drury Lane, pressed him to write an opera for that house.
Nothing came of these proposals, mainly because Haydn was too much attached
to his prince to think of leaving him, even temporarily. But the time
arrived and the man with it.
The man was Johann Peter Salomon, a violinist, who, having fallen out
with the directors of the professional concerts, had started concerts on
his own account. Salomon was a native of Bonn, and had been a member of
the Electoral Orchestra there. He had travelled about the Continent a
good deal, and no one was better fitted to organize and direct a series of
concerts on a large scale. In 1790 he had gone abroad in search of singers,
and, hearing of the death of Prince Esterhazy, he set off at once for
Vienna, resolved to secure Haydn at any cost. "My name is Salomon," he
bluntly announced to the composer, as he was shown into his room one morning.
"I have come from London to fetch you; we will settle terms to-morrow."

The question of terms was, we may be sure, important enough for Haydn. But
it was not the only question.

The "heavy years" were beginning to weigh upon him. He was bordering on
threescore, and a long journey in those days was not to be lightly
undertaken.

Moreover, he was still, nominally at least, the servant of Prince
Anton, whose consent would have to be obtained; and, besides all this, he
was engaged on various commissions, notably some for the King of Naples,
which were probably a burden on his conscience.
His friends, again, do not appear to have been very enthusiastic about the
projected visit. There were Dittersdorf and Albrechtsberger, and Dr Leopold
von Genzinger, the prince's physician, and Frau von Genzinger, whose
tea and coffee he so much appreciated, and who sent him such excellent
cream. Above all, there was Mozart--"a man very dear to me," as Haydn
himself said.

Mozart and Haydn
He had always greatly revered Mozart. Three years before this he wrote: "I
only wish I could impress upon every friend of mine, and on great
men in particular, the same deep musical sympathy and profound
appreciation which I myself feel for Mozart's inimitable music;
then nations would vie with each other to possess such a jewel
within their frontiers.

It enrages me to think that the unparalleled Mozart is not yet engaged at
any Imperial Court!

Forgive my excitement; I love the man so dearly." The regard was reciprocal.
"Oh, Papa," exclaimed Mozart, when he heard of Haydn's intention to
travel, "you have had no education for the wide, wide world, and you speak
too few languages." It was feelingly said, and Haydn knew it. "My language,"
he replied, with a smile, "is understood all over the world." Mozart
was really concerned at the thought of parting with his brother composer,
to whom he stood almost in the relation of a son. When it came to the
actual farewell, the tears sprang to his eyes, and he said affectingly:
"This is good-bye; we shall never meet again." The words proved prophetic.
A year later, Mozart was thrown with a number of paupers into a grave which
is now as unknown as the grave of Moliere. Haydn deeply lamented his loss;
and when his thoughts came to be turned homewards towards the close
of his English visit his saddest reflection was that there would
be no Mozart to meet him.

His wretched wife had tried to poison his mind against his friend
by writing that Mozart had been disparaging his genius.

"I cannot believe it," he cried; "if it is true, I will forgive him." It was
not true, and Haydn never believed it. As late as 1807 he burst into tears
when Mozart's name was mentioned, and then, recovering himself,
remarked:
"Forgive me! I must ever weep at the name of my Mozart."
Terms for London
But to return. Salomon at length carried the day, and everything was
arranged for the London visit. Haydn was to have 300 pounds for six symphonies
and 200 pounds for the copyright of them; 200 pounds for twenty new
compositions to be produced by himself at the same number of concerts;
and 200 pounds from a benefit concert. The composer paid his travelling
expenses himself, being assisted in that matter by an advance of 450 florins
from the prince, which he refunded within the year. In order to provide for
his wife during his absence he sold his house at Eisenstadt, the
gift of Prince Nicolaus, which had been twice rebuilt after being
destroyed by fire.

Salomon sent advance notices of the engagement to London, and on the
30th of December the public were informed through the Morning Chronicle
that, immediately on his arrival with his distinguished guest, "Mr Salomon
would have the honour of submitting to all lovers of music his
programme for a series of subscription concerts, the success of which would
depend upon their support and approbation." Before leaving for London
Haydn had a tiff with the King of Naples, Ferdinand IV, who was then in
Vienna.

The composer had taken him some of the works which he had been commissioned
to write, and His Majesty, thanking him for the favour, remarked
that "We will rehearse them the day after to-morrow." "The day after
to-morrow," replied Haydn, "I shall be on my way to England."

"What!" exclaimed the King, "and you promised to come to Naples!" With
which observation he turned on his heel and indignantly left the
room.

Before Haydn had time to recover from his astonishment Ferdinand
was back with a letter of introduction to Prince Castelcicala, the
Neapolitan Ambassador in London; and to show further that the
misunderstanding was merely a passing affair he sent the composer
later in the day a valuable tabatiere as a token of esteem and
regard.

Bonn and Beethoven
The journey to London was begun by Haydn and Salomon on the 15th
of December 1790, and the travellers arrived at Bonn on Christmas
Day.

It is supposed, with good reason, that Haydn here met Beethoven, then a
youth of twenty, for the first time. Beethoven was a member of the Electoral
Chapel, and we know that Haydn, after having one of his masses performed
and being complimented by the Elector, the musical brother of
Joseph II, entertained the chief musicians at dinner at his lodgings.

An amusing description of the regale may be read in Thayer's biography of
Beethoven.
From Bonn the journey was resumed by way of Brussels to Calais, which was
reached in a violent storm and an incessant downpour of rain. "I am very
well, thank God!"

writes the composer to Frau Genzinger, "although somewhat thinner,
owing to fatigue, irregular sleep, and eating and drinking so many
different things."

Haydn Sea-Sick

Next morning, after attending early mass, he embarked at 7:30, and landed
at Dover at five o'clock in the afternoon.

It was his first acquaintance with the sea, and, as the weather was
rather rough, he makes no little of it in letters written from
London.

"I remained on deck during the whole passage," he says, "in order to gaze
my full at that huge monster--the ocean. So long as there was a calm
I had no fears, but when at length a violent wind began to blow, rising
every minute, and I saw the boisterous high waves running on, I
was seized with a little alarm and a little indisposition likewise."

Thus delicately does he allude to a painful episode.

Arrives in London
Haydn reached London in the opening days of 1791. He passed his first
night at the house of Bland, the music-publisher, at 45 High Holborn, which
now, rebuilt, forms part of the First Avenue Hotel. Bland, it should have
been mentioned before, had been sent over to Vienna by Salomon to
coax Haydn into an engagement in 1787.

When he was admitted on that occasion to Haydn's room, he found the
composer in the act of shaving, complaining the while of the
bluntness of his razor.

"I would give my best quartet for a good razor," he exclaimed testily.
The hint was enough for Bland, who immediately hurried off to his lodgings
and fetched a more serviceable tool. Haydn was as good as his word: he
presented Bland with his latest quartet, and the work is still familiarly
known as the "Rasirmesser" (razor) Quartet. The incident was, no doubt,
recalled when Haydn renewed his acquaintance with the music-publisher.

But Haydn did not remain the guest of Bland. Next day he went to live with
Salomon, at 18 Great Pulteney Street, Golden Square, which--also rebuilt--is
now the warehouse of Messrs Chatto & Windus, the publishers. [See Musical
Haunts in London, by F.G.

Edwards, London, 1895] He described it in one of his letters as "a neat,
comfortable lodging," and extolled the cooking of his Italian landlord,
"who gives us four excellent dishes."

But his frugal mind was staggered at the charges. "Everything is terribly
dear here," he wrote.

"We each pay 1 florin 30 kreuzers [about 2s. 8d.] a day, exclusive of
wine and beer." This was bad enough.

An Enthusiastic Welcome

But London made up for it all by the flattering way in which it received
the visitor.

People of the highest rank called on him; ambassadors left cards; the leading
musical societies vied with each other in their zeal to do him
honour. Even the poetasters began to twang their lyres in his praise.
Thus Burney, who had been for some time in correspondence with him, saluted
him with an effusion, of which it will suffice to quote the following
lines:

Welcome, great master!
She seemed to expect some sort of prompting at this point; so I said:
"Well?"

"Well," she repeated, "that is just where your Mr. Homos comes in."

"Oh! How does he come in there?"

"Why, get him to deliver a Talk on Altruria. As soon as he knows it's for
a good object, he will be on fire to do it; and they must live so much in
common there that the public occasion will be just the thing that will
appeal to him."

It did seem a good plan to me, and I said so. But Mrs. Makely was so much
in love with it that she was not satisfied with my modest recognition.

"Good? It's magnificent! It's the very thing! And I have thought it out,
down to the last detail--"

"Excuse me," I interrupted. "Do you think there is sufficient general
interest in the subject, outside of the hotel, to get a full house for
him? I shouldn't like to see him subjected to the mortification of empty
benches."

"What in the world are you thinking of? Why, there isn't a farm-house,
anywhere within ten miles, where they haven't heard of Mr. Homos; and
there isn't a servant under this roof, or in any of the boarding-houses,
who doesn't know something about Altruria and want to know more. It seems
that your friend has been much oftener with the porters and the
stable-boys than he has been with us."

I had only too great reason to fear so. In spite of my warnings and
entreaties, he had continued to behave toward every human being he met
exactly as if they were equals. He apparently could not conceive of that
social difference which difference of occupation creates among us. He
owned that he saw it, and from the talk of our little group he knew it
existed; but, when I expostulated with him upon some act in gross
violation of society usage, he only answered that he could not imagine
that what he saw and knew could actually be. It was quite impossible to
keep him from bowing with the greatest deference to our waitress; he shook
hands with the head-waiter every morning as well as with me; there was a
fearful story current in the house, that he had been seen running down one
of the corridors to relieve a chambermaid laden with two heavy water-pails
which she was carrying to the rooms to fill up the pitchers. This was
probably not true; but I myself saw him helping in the hotel hay-field one
afternoon, shirt-sleeved like any of the hired men. He said that it was
the best possible exercise, and that he was ashamed he could give no
better excuse for it than the fact that without something of the kind he
should suffer from indigestion. It was grotesque, and out of all keeping
with a man of his cultivation and breeding. He was a gentleman and a
scholar, there was no denying, and yet he did things in contravention of
good form at every opportunity, and nothing I could say had any effect
with him. I was perplexed beyond measure, the day after I had reproached
him for his labor in the hay-field, to find him in a group of table-girls,
who were listening while the head-waiter read aloud to them in the shade
of the house; there was a corner looking toward the stables which was
given up to them by tacit consent of the guests during a certain part of
the afternoon.

I feigned not to see him, but I could not forbear speaking to him about it
afterward. He took it in good part, but he said he had been rather
disappointed in the kind of literature they liked and the comments they
made on it; he had expected that with the education they had received, and
with their experience of the seriousness of life, they would prefer
something less trivial. He supposed, however, that a romantic love-story,
where a poor American girl marries an English lord, formed a refuge for
them from the real world which promised them so little and held them so
cheap. It was quite useless for one to try to make him realize his
behavior in consorting with servants as a kind of scandal.

The worst of it was that his behavior, as I could see, had already begun
to demoralize the objects of his misplaced politeness. At first the
servants stared and resented it, as if it were some tasteless joke; but in
an incredibly short time, when they saw that he meant his courtesy in good
faith, they took it as their due. I had always had a good understanding
with the head-waiter, and I thought I could safely smile with him at the
queer conduct of my friend toward himself and his fellow-servants.
To my astonishment he said: "I don't see why he shouldn't treat them as if
they were ladies and gentlemen. Doesn't he treat you and your friends so?"

It was impossible to answer this, and I could only suffer in silence, and
hope the Altrurian would soon go. I had dreaded the moment when the
landlord should tell me that his room was wanted; now I almost desired it;
but he never did. On the contrary, the Altrurian was in high favor with
him. He said he liked to see a man make himself pleasant with everybody;
and that he did not believe he had ever had a guest in the house who was
so popular all round.

"Of course," Mrs. Makely went on, "I don't criticise him--with his
peculiar traditions. I presume I should be just so myself if I had been
brought up in Altruria, which, thank goodness, I wasn't. But Mr. Homos is
a perfect dear, and all the women in the house are in love with him, from
the cook's helpers, up and down. No, the only danger is that there won't
be room in the hotel parlors for all the people that will want to hear
him, and we shall have to make the admission something that will be
prohibitive in most cases. We shall have to make it a dollar."

"Well," I said, "I think that will settle the question as far as the
farming population is concerned. It's twice as much as they ever pay for a
reserved seat in the circus, and four times as much as a simple admission.
I'm afraid, Mrs. Makely, you're going to be very few, though fit."

"Well, I've thought it all over, and I'm going to put the tickets at one
dollar."

"Very good. Have you caught your hare?"

"No, I haven't yet. And I want you to help me catch him. What do you think
is the best way to go about it?"

The banker said he would leave us to the discussion of that question, but
Mrs. Makely could count upon him in everything if she could only get the
man to talk. At the end of our conference we decided to interview the
Altrurian together.

I shall always be ashamed of the way that woman wheedled the Altrurian,
when we found him the next morning, walking up and down the piazza, before
breakfast--that is, it was before our breakfast; when we asked him to go
in with us, he said he had just had his breakfast, and was waiting for
Reuben Camp, who had promised to take him up as he passed with a load of
hay for one of the hotels in the village.

"Ah, that reminds me, Mr. Homos," the unscrupulous woman began on him at
once. "We want to interest you in a little movement we're getting up for
the Union Chapel in the village. You know it's the church where all the
different sects have their services; alternately. Of course, it's rather
an original way of doing, but there is sense in it where the people are
too poor to go into debt for different churches, and--"

"It's admirable!" said the Altrurian. "I have heard about it from the
Camps. It is an emblem of the unity which ought to prevail among
Christians of all professions. How can I help you, Mrs. Makely?"

"I knew you would approve of it!" she exulted. "Well, it's simply this:
The poor little place has got so shabby that _I'm_ almost ashamed to be
seen going into it, for one; and want to raise money enough to give it a
new coat of paint outside and put on some kind of pretty paper, of an
ecclesiastical pattern, on the inside. I declare, those staring white
walls, with the cracks in the plastering zigzagging every _which_ way,
distract me so that I can't put my mind on the sermon. Don't you think
that paper, say of a Gothic design, would be a great improvement? I'm sure
it would; and it's Mr. Twelvemough's idea, too."

I learned this fact now for the first time; but, with Mrs. Makely's
warning eye upon me, I could not say so, and I made what sounded to me
like a Gothic murmur of acquiescence. It sufficed for Mrs. Makely's
purpose, at any rate, and she went on, without giving the Altrurian a
chance to say what he thought the educational effect of wall-paper would
be:

"Well, the long and short of it is that we want you to make this money for
us, Mr. Homos."

"I?" He started in a kind of horror. "My dear lady, I never made any money
in my life. I should think it _wrong_ to make money."

"In Altruria, yes. We all know how it is in your delightful country, and I
assure you that no one could respect your conscientious scruples more than
I do. But you must remember that you are in America now. In America you
have to make money, or else--get left. And then you must consider the
object, and all the good you can do, indirectly, by a little Talk on
Altruria."

He answered, blandly: "A little Talk on Altruria? How in the world should
I get money by that?"

She was only too eager to explain, and she did it with so much volubility
and at such great length that I, who am good for nothing till I have had
my cup of coffee in the morning, almost perished of an elucidation which
the Altrurian bore with the sweetest patience.

When she gave him a chance to answer, at last, he said: "I shall be very
happy to do what you wish, madam."

"_Will_ you?" she screamed. "Oh, I'm so glad! You _have_ been so slippery
about Altruria, you know, that I expected nothing but a point-blank
refusal. Of course, I knew you would be kind about it. Oh, I can hardly
believe my senses! You can't think what a dear you are." I knew she had
got that word from some English people who had been in the hotel; and she
was working it rather wildly, but it was not my business to check her.
"Well, then, all you have got to do is to leave the whole thing to me, and
not bother about it a bit till I send and tell you we are ready to listen.
There comes Reuben, with his ox-team. Thank you so much, Mr. Homos. No one
need be ashamed to enter the house of God"--she said Gawd, in an access of
piety--"after we get that paint and paper on it; and we shall have them on
before two Sabbaths have passed over it."

She wrung the Altrurian's hand; I was only afraid she was going to kiss
him.

"There is but one stipulation I should like to make," he began.

"Oh, a thousand," she cut in.

"And that is, there shall be no exclusion from my lecture on account of
occupation or condition. That is a thing that I can in no wise
countenance, even in America; it is far more abhorrent to me even than
money-making, though they are each a part and parcel of the other."

"I thought it was that," she retorted, joyously. "And I can assure you,
Mr. Homos, there shall be nothing of that kind. Every one--I don't care
who it is or what they do--shall hear you who buys a ticket. Now, will
that do?"

"Perfectly," said the Altrurian, and he let her wring his hand again.

She pushed hers through my arm as we started for the dining-room, and
leaned over to whisper jubilantly: "That will fix it. He will see how much
his precious lower classes care for Altruria if they have to pay a dollar
apiece to hear about it. And I shall keep faith with him to the letter."

I could not feel that she would keep it in the spirit; but I could only
groan inwardly and chuckle outwardly at the woman's depravity.

It seemed to me, though I could not approve of it, a capital joke, and so
it seemed to all the members of the little group whom I had made
especially acquainted with the Altrurian. It is true that the minister was
somewhat troubled with the moral question, which did not leave me wholly
at peace; and the banker affected to find a question of taste involved,
which he said he must let me settle, however, as the man's host; if I
could stand it, he could. No one said anything against the plan to Mrs.
Makely, and this energetic woman made us take two tickets apiece, as soon
as she got them printed, over in the village. She got little hand-bills
printed, and had them scattered about through the neighborhood, at all the
hotels, boarding-houses, and summer cottages, to give notice of the time
and place of the talk on Altruria. She fixed this for the following
Saturday afternoon, in our hotel parlor; she had it in the afternoon so as
not to interfere with the hop in the evening; she put tickets on sale at
the principal houses and at the village drug-store, and she made me go
about with her and help her sell them at some of the cottages in person.

I must say I found this extremely distasteful, especially where the people
were not very willing to buy, and she had to urge them. They all admitted
the excellence of the object, but they were not so sure about the means.
At several places the ladies asked who was this Mr. Homos, anyway; and how
did she know he was really from Altruria? He might be an impostor.

Then Mrs. Makely would put me forward, and I would be obliged to give such
account of him as I could, and to explain just how and why he came to be
my guest; with the cumulative effect of bringing back all the misgivings
which I had myself felt at the outset concerning him, and which I had
dismissed as too fantastic.

The tickets went off rather slowly, even in our own hotel; people thought
them too dear; and some, as soon as they knew the price, said frankly they
had heard enough about Altruria already, and were sick of the whole thing.

Mrs. Makely said this was quite what she had expected of those people;
that they were horrid and stingy and vulgar; and she should see what face
they would have to ask her to take tickets when _they_ were trying to get
up something. She began to be vexed with herself, she confessed, at the
joke she was playing on Mr. Homos, and I noticed that she put herself
rather defiantly _en evidence_ in his company whenever she could in the
presence of these reluctant ladies. She told me she had not the courage to
ask the clerk how many of the tickets he had sold out of those she had
left at the desk.

One morning, the third or fourth, as I was going in to breakfast with her,
the head-waiter stopped her as he opened the door, and asked modestly if
she could spare him a few tickets, for he thought he could sell some. To
my amazement the unprincipled creature said: "Why, certainly. How many?"
and instantly took a package out of her pocket, where she seemed always to
have them. He asked, Would twenty be more than she could spare? and she
answered: "Not at all. Here are twenty-five." and bestowed the whole
package upon him.

That afternoon Reuben Camp came lounging up toward us, where I sat with
her on the corner of the piazza, and said that if she would like to let
him try his luck with some tickets for the Talk he would see what he could
do.

"You can have all you want, Reuben," she said, "and I hope you'll have
better luck than I have. I'm perfectly disgusted with people."

She fished several packages out of her pocket this time, and he asked: "Do
you mean that I can have them all?"

"Every one, and a band of music into the bargain," she answered,
recklessly. But she seemed a little daunted when he quietly took them.
"You know there are a hundred here?"

"Yes, I should like to see what I can do among the natives. Then there is
a construction train over at the junction, and I know a lot of the
fellows. I guess some of 'em would like to come."

"The tickets are a dollar each, you know," she suggested.

"That's all right," said Camp. "Well, good-afternoon."

Mrs. Makely turned to me with a kind of gasp as he shambled away. "I don't
know about that."

"About having the whole crew of a construction train at the Talk? I dare
say it won't be pleasant to the ladies who have bought tickets."

"_Oh_!" said Mrs. Makely, with astonishing contempt, "I don't care what
_they_ think. But Reuben has got all my tickets, and suppose he keeps them
so long that I won't have time to sell any, and then throws them back on
my hands? _I_ know!" she added, joyously. "I can go around now and tell
people that my tickets are all gone; and I'll go instantly and have the
clerk hold all he has left at a premium."

She came back looking rather blank.

"He hasn't got a single one left. He says an old native came in this
morning and took every last one of them--he doesn't remember just how
many. I believe they're going to speculate on them; and if Reuben Camp
serves me a trick like that--Why," she broke off, "I believe I'll
speculate on them myself. I should like to know why I shouldn't. Oh, I
should just _like_ to make some of those creatures pay double, or treble,
for the chances they've refused. Ah, Mrs. Bulkham," she called out to a
lady who was coming down the veranda toward us, "you'll be glad to know
I've got rid of all my tickets. _Such_ a relief!"

"You _have_?" Mrs. Bulkham retorted.

"Every one."

"I thought," said Mrs. Bulkham, "that you understood I wanted one for my
daughter and myself, if she came."

"I certainly didn't," said Mrs. Makely, with a wink of concentrated
wickedness at me. "But, if you do, you will have to say so now, without
any ifs or ands about it; and if any of the tickets come back--I let
friends have a few on sale--I will give you two."

"Well, I do," said Mrs. Bulkham, after a moment.

"Very well; it will be five dollars for the two. I feel bound to get all I
can for the cause. Shall I put your name down?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Bulkham, rather crossly; but Mrs. Makely inscribed her
name on her tablets with a radiant amiability, which suffered no eclipse
when, within the next fifteen minutes, a dozen other ladies hurried up and
bought in at the same rate.

I could not stand it, and I got up to go away, feeling extremely
_particeps criminis_. Mrs. Makely seemed to have a conscience as light as
air.

"If Reuben Camp or the head-waiter don't bring back some of those tickets,
I don't know what I shall do. I shall have to put chairs into the aisles
and charge five dollars apiece for as many people as I can crowd in there.
I never knew anything so perfectly providential."

"I envy you the ability to see it in that light, Mrs. Makely," I said,
faint at heart. "Suppose Camp crowds the place full of his trainmen, how
will the ladies that you've sold tickets to at five dollars apiece like
it?"

"Pooh! What do I care how they like it! Horrid things! And for repairs on
the house of Gawd, it's the same as being in church, where everybody is
equal."

The time passed. Mrs. Makely sold chances to all the ladies in the house;
on Friday night Reuben Camp brought her a hundred dollars; the head-waiter
had already paid in twenty-five. "I didn't dare to ask them if they
speculated on them," she confided to me. "Do you suppose they would have
the conscience?"

They had secured the large parlor of the hotel, where the young people
danced in the evening, and where entertainments were held, of the sort
usually given in summer hotels; we had already had a dramatic reading, a
time with the phonograph, an exhibition of necromancy, a concert by a
college glee club, and I do not know what else. The room would hold
perhaps two hundred people, if they were closely seated, and, by her own
showing, Mrs. Makely had sold above two hundred and fifty tickets and
chances. All Saturday forenoon she consoled herself with the belief that a
great many people at the other hotels and cottages had bought seats
merely to aid the cause, and would not really come; she estimated that at
least fifty would stay away; but, if Reuben Camp had sold his tickets
among the natives, we might expect every one of them to come and get his
money's worth; she did not dare to ask the head-waiter how he had got rid
of his twenty-five tickets.

The hour set for the Talk to begin was three o'clock, so that people could
have their naps comfortably over, after the one o'clock dinner, and be
just in the right frame of mind for listening. But long before the
appointed time the people who dine at twelve, and never take an afternoon
nap, began to arrive, on foot, in farm-wagons, smart buggies, mud-crusted
carryalls, and all manner of ramshackle vehicles. They arrived as if
coming to a circus, old husbands and wives, young couples and their
children, pretty girls and their fellows, and hitched their horses to the
tails of their wagons, and began to make a picnic lunch in the shadow of
the grove lying between the hotel and the station. About two we heard the
snorting of a locomotive at a time when no train was due, and a
construction train came in view, with the men waving their handkerchiefs
from the windows, and apparently ready for all the fun there was to be in
the thing. Some of them had a small flag in each hand, the American Stars
and Stripes and the white flag of Altruria, in compliment to my guest, I
suppose. A good many of the farmers came over to the hotel to buy tickets,
which they said they expected to get after they came, and Mrs. Makely was
obliged to pacify them with all sorts of lying promises. From moment to
moment she was in consultation with the landlord, who decided to throw
open the dining-room, which connected with the parlor, so as to allow the
help and the neighbors to hear without incommoding the hotel guests. She
said that this took a great burden off her mind, and that now she should
feel perfectly easy, for now no one could complain about being mixed up
with the servants and the natives, and yet every one could hear perfectly.

She could not rest until she had sent for Homos and told him of this
admirable arrangement. I did not know whether to be glad or not when he
instantly told her that, if there was to be any such separation of his
auditors, in recognition of our class distinctions, he must refuse to
speak at all.

"Then what in the world are we to do?" she wailed out, and the tears came
into her eyes.

"Have you got the money for all your tickets?" he asked, with a sort of
disgust for the whole transaction in his tone.

"Yes, and more, too. I don't believe there's a soul, in the hotel or out
of it, that hasn't paid at least a dollar to hear you; and that makes it
so very embarrassing. Oh, _dear_ Mr. Homos! You won't be so implacably
high-principled as all that! Think that you are doing it for the house of
Gawd."

The woman made me sick.

"Then no one," said the Altrurian, "can feel aggrieved, or unfairly used,
if I say what I have to say in the open air, where all can listen equally,
without any manner of preference or distinction. We will go up to the edge
of the grove overlooking the tennis-court, and hold our meeting there, as
the Altrurian meetings are always held, with the sky for a roof, and with
no walls but the horizon."

"The very thing!" cried Mrs. Makely. "Who would ever have thought you were
so practical, Mr. Homos? I don't believe you're an Altrurian, after all; I
believe you are an American in disguise."

The Altrurian turned away, without making any response to this flattering
attribution of our nationality to him; but Mrs. Makely had not waited for
any. She had flown off, and I next saw her attacking the landlord, with
such apparent success that he slapped himself on the leg and vanished, and
immediately the porters and bell-boys and all the men-servants began
carrying out chairs to the tennis-court, which was already well set round
with benches. In a little while the whole space was covered, and settees
were placed well up the ground toward the grove.

By half-past two the guests of the hotel came out and took the best seats,
as by right, and the different tallyhoes and mountain wagons began to
arrive from the other hotels, with their silly hotel cries, and their gay
groups dismounted and dispersed themselves over the tennis-court until all
the chairs were taken. It was fine to see how the natives and the trainmen
and the hotel servants, with an instinctive perception of the proprieties,
yielded these places to their superiors, and, after the summer folks were
all seated, scattered themselves on the grass and the pine-needles about
the border of the grove. I should have liked to instance the fact to the
Altrurian, as a proof that this sort of subordination was a part of human
nature, and that a principle which pervaded our civilization, after the
democratic training of our whole national life, must be divinely
implanted. But there was no opportunity for me to speak with him after the
fact had accomplished itself, for by this time he had taken his place in
front of a little clump of low pines and was waiting for the assembly to
quiet itself before he began to speak. I do not think there could have
been less than five hundred present, and the scene had that accidental
picturesqueness which results from the grouping of all sorts of faces and
costumes. Many of our ladies had pretty hats and brilliant parasols, but I
must say that the soberer tone of some of the old farm-wives' brown
calicoes and outdated bonnets contributed to enrich the coloring, and
there was a certain gayety in the sunny glisten of the men's straw hats
everywhere that was very good.

The sky overhead was absolutely stainless, and the light of the cool
afternoon sun streamed upon the slopes of the solemn mountains to the
east. The tall pines in the background blackened themselves against the
horizon; nearer they showed more and more decidedly their bluish green,
and the yellow of the newly fallen needles painted their aisles deep into
the airy shadows.

A little wind stirred their tops, and for a moment, just before the
Altrurian began to speak, drew from them an organ-tone that melted
delicately away as his powerful voice rose.


XI


"I could not give you a clear account of the present state of things in my
country," the Altrurian began, "without first telling you something of our
conditions before the time of our Evolution. It seems to be the law of all
life that nothing can come to fruition without dying and seeming to make
an end. It must be sown in corruption before it can be raised in
incorruption. The truth itself must perish to our senses before it can
live to our souls; the Son of Man must suffer upon the cross before we can
know the Son, of God.

"It was so with His message to the world, which we received in the old
time as an ideal realized by the earliest Christians, who loved one
another and who had all things common. The apostle cast away upon our
heathen coasts won us with the story of this first Christian republic, and
he established a commonwealth of peace and good-will among us in its
likeness. That commonwealth perished, just as its prototype perished, or
seemed to perish; and long ages of civic and economic warfare succeeded,
when every man's hand was against his neighbor, and might was the rule
that got itself called right. Religion ceased to be the hope of this
world, and became the vague promise of the next. We descended into the
valley of the shadow, and dwelt amid chaos for ages before we groped again
into the light.

"The first glimmerings were few and indistinct, but men formed themselves
about the luminous points here and there, and, when these broke and
dispersed into lesser gleams, still men formed themselves about each of
them. There arose a system of things better, indeed, than that darkness,
but full of war and lust and greed, in which the weak rendered homage to
the strong, and served them in the field and in the camp, and the strong
in turn gave the weak protection against the other strong. It was a juggle
in which the weak did not see that their safety was, after all, from
themselves; but it was an image of peace, however false and fitful, and it
endured for a time. It endured for a limited time, if we measure by the
life of the race; it endured for an unlimited time if we measure by the
lives of the men who were born and died while it endured.

"But that disorder, cruel and fierce and stupid, which endured because it
sometimes masked itself as order, did at last pass away. Here and there
one of the strong overpowered the rest; then the strong became fewer and
fewer, and in their turn they all yielded to a supreme lord, and
throughout the land there was one rule, as it was called then, or one
misrule, as we should call it now. This rule, or this misrule, continued
for ages more; and again, in the immortality of the race, men toiled and
struggled, and died without the hope of better things.

"Then the time came when the long nightmare was burst with the vision of a
future in which all men were the law, and not one man, or any less number
of men than all.

"The poor dumb beast of humanity rose, and the throne tumbled, and the
sceptre was broken, and the crown rolled away into that darkness of the
past. We thought that heaven had descended to us, and that liberty,
equality, and fraternity were ours. We could not see what should again
alienate us from one another, or how one brother could again oppress
another. With a free field and no favor we believed we should prosper on
together, and there would be peace and plenty for all. We had the republic
again after so many ages now, and the republic, as we knew it in our dim
annals, was brotherhood and universal happiness. All but a very few, who
prophesied evil of our lawless freedom, were wrapped in a delirium of
hope. Men's minds and men's hands were suddenly released to an activity
unheard of before. Invention followed invention; our rivers and seas
became the warp of commerce where the steam-sped shuttles carried the woof
of enterprise to and fro with tireless celerity; machines to save labor
multiplied themselves as if they had been procreative forces, and wares of
every sort were produced with incredible swiftness and cheapness. Money
seemed to flow from the ground; vast fortunes 'rose like an exhalation,'
as your Milton says.

"At first we did not know that they were the breath of the nethermost pits
of hell, and that the love of money, which was becoming universal with us,
was filling the earth with the hate of men. It was long before we came to
realize that in the depths of our steamships were those who fed the fires
with their lives, and that our mines from which we dug our wealth were the
graves of those who had died to the free light and air, without finding
the rest of death. We did not see that the machines for saving labor were
monsters that devoured women and children, and wasted men at the bidding
of the power which no man must touch.

"That is, we thought we must not touch it, for it called itself prosperity
and wealth and the public good, and it said that it gave bread, and it
impudently bade the toiling myriads consider what would become of them if
it took away their means of wearing themselves out in its service. It
demanded of the state absolute immunity and absolute impunity, the right
to do its will wherever and however it would, without question from the
people who were the final law. It had its way, and under its rule we
became the richest people under the sun. The Accumulation, as we called
this power, because we feared to call it by its true name, rewarded its
own with gains of twenty, of a hundred, of a thousand per cent., and to
satisfy its need, to produce the labor that operated its machines, there
came into existence a hapless race of men who bred their kind for its
service, and whose little ones were its prey almost from their cradles.
Then the infamy became too great, and the law, the voice of the people, so
long guiltily silent, was lifted in behalf of those who had no helper. The
Accumulation came under control for the first time, and could no longer
work its slaves twenty hours a day amid perils to life and limb from its
machinery and in conditions that forbade them decency and morality. The
time of a hundred and a thousand per cent. passed; but still the
Accumulation demanded immunity and impunity, and, in spite of its
conviction of the enormities it had practised, it declared itself the only
means of civilization and progress. It began to give out that it was
timid, though its history was full of the boldest frauds and crimes, and
it threatened to withdraw itself if it were ruled or even crossed; and
again it had its way, and we seemed to prosper more and more. The land was
filled with cities where the rich flaunted their splendor in palaces, and
the poor swarmed in squalid tenements. The country was drained of its life
and force, to feed the centres of commerce and industry. The whole land
was bound together with a network of iron roads that linked the factories
and founderies to the fields and mines, and blasted the landscape with the
enterprise that spoiled the lives of men.

"Then, all at once, when its work seemed perfect and its dominion sure,
the Accumulation was stricken with consciousness of the lie always at its
heart. It had hitherto cried out for a free field and no favor, for
unrestricted competition; but, in truth, it had never prospered except as
a monopoly. Whenever and wherever competition had play there had been
nothing but disaster to the rival enterprises, till one rose over the
rest. Then there was prosperity for that one.

"The Accumulation began to act upon its new consciousness. The iron roads
united; the warring industries made peace, each kind under a single
leadership. Monopoly, not competition, was seen to be the beneficent means
of distributing the favors and blessings of the Accumulation to mankind.
But, as before, there was alternately a glut and dearth of things, and
it often happened that when starving men went ragged through the streets
the storehouses were piled full of rotting harvests that the farmers
toiled from dawn till dusk to grow, and the warehouses fed the moth with
the stuffs that the operative had woven his life into at his loom. Then
followed, with a blind and mad succession, a time of famine, when money
could not buy the super-abundance that vanished, none knew how or why.

"The money itself vanished from time to time, and disappeared into the
vaults of the Accumulation, for no better reason than that for which it
poured itself out at other times. Our theory was that the people--that is
to say, the government of the people--made the people's money, but, as a
matter of fact, the Accumulation made it and controlled it and juggled
with it; and now you saw it, and now you did not see it. The government
made gold coins, but the people had nothing but the paper money that the
Accumulation made. But whether there was scarcity or plenty, the failures
went on with a continuous ruin that nothing could check, while our larger
economic life proceeded in a series of violent shocks, which we called
financial panics, followed by long periods of exhaustion and recuperation.

"There was no law in our economy, but as the Accumulation had never cared
for the nature of law, it did not trouble itself for its name in our order
of things. It had always bought the law it needed for its own use, first
through the voter at the polls in the more primitive days, and then, as
civilization advanced, in the legislatures and the courts. But the
corruption even of these methods was far surpassed when the era of
consolidation came, and the necessity for statutes and verdicts and
decisions became more stringent. Then we had such a burlesque of--"

"Look here!" a sharp, nasal voice snarled across the rich, full pipe of
the Altrurian, and we all instantly looked there. The voice came from an
old farmer, holding himself stiffly up, with his hands in his pockets and
his lean frame bent toward the speaker. "When are you goin' to get to
Altrury? We know all about Ameriky."

He sat down again, and it was a moment before the crowd caught on. Then a
yell of delight and a roar of volleyed laughter went up from the lower
classes, in which, I am sorry to say, my friend the banker joined, so far
as the laughter was concerned. "Good! That's it! First-rate!" came from a
hundred vulgar throats.

"Isn't it a perfect shame?" Mrs. Makely demanded. "I think some of you
gentlemen ought to say something. What will Mr. Homos think of our
civilization if we let such interruptions go unrebuked?"

She was sitting between the banker and myself, and her indignation made
him laugh more and more. "Oh, it serves him right," he said. "Don't you
see that he is hoist with his own petard? Let him alone. He's in the hands
of his friends."

The Altrurian waited for the tumult to die away, and then he said, gently:
"I don't understand."

The old farmer jerked himself to his feet again. "It's like this: I paid
my dolla' to hear about a country where there wa'n't no co'perations nor
no monop'lies nor no buyin' up cou'ts; and I ain't agoin' to have no
allegory shoved down my throat, instead of a true history, noways. I know
all about how it is _here_. Fi'st, run their line through your backya'd,
and then kill off your cattle, and keep kerryin' on it up from cou't to
cou't, till there ain't hide or hair on 'em left--"

"Oh, set down, set down! Let the man go on! He'll make it all right with
you," one of the construction gang called out; but the farmer stood his
ground, and I could hear him through the laughing and shouting keep saying
something, from time to time, about not wanting to pay no dolla' for no
talk about co'perations and monop'lies that we had right under our own
noses the whole while, and, you might say, in your very bread-troughs;
till, at last, I saw Reuben Camp make his way toward him, and, after an
energetic expostulation, turn to leave him again.

Then he faltered out, "I guess it's all right," and dropped out of sight
in the group he had risen from. I fancied his wife scolding him there, and
all but shaking him in public.

"I should be very sorry," the Altrurian proceeded, "to have any one
believe that I have not been giving you a _bona fide_ account of
conditions in my country before the Evolution, when we first took the name
of Altruria in our great, peaceful campaign against the Accumulation. As
for offering you any allegory or travesty of your own conditions, I will
simply say that I do not know them well enough to do so intelligently.
But, whatever they are, God forbid that the likeness which you seem to
recognize should ever go so far as the desperate state of things which we
finally reached. I will not trouble you with details; in fact, I have been
afraid that I had already treated of our affairs too abstractly; but,
since your own experience furnishes you the means of seizing my meaning, I
will go on as before.

"You will understand me when I explain that the Accumulation had not
erected itself into the sovereignty with us unopposed. The working-men,
who suffered most from its oppression had early begun to band themselves
against it, with the instinct of self-preservation, first trade by trade
and art by art, and then in congresses and federations of the trades and
arts, until finally they enrolled themselves in one vast union, which
included all the working-men, whom their necessity or their interest did
not leave on the side of the Accumulation. This beneficent and generous
association of the weak for the sake of the weakest did not accomplish
itself fully till the baleful instinct of the Accumulation had reduced the
monopolies to one vast monopoly, till the stronger had devoured the weaker
among its members, and the supreme agent stood at the head of our affairs,
in everything but name, our imperial ruler. We had hugged so long the
delusion of each man for himself that we had suffered all realty to be
taken from us. The Accumulation owned the land as well as the mines under
it and the shops over it; the Accumulation owned the seas and the ships
that sailed the seas, and the fish that swam in their depths; it owned
transportation and distribution, and the wares and products that were to
be carried to and fro; and, by a logic irresistible and inexorable, the
Accumulation _was_, and we were _not_.

"But the Accumulation, too, had forgotten something. It had found it so
easy to buy legislatures and courts that it did not trouble itself about
the polls. It left us the suffrage, and let us amuse ourselves with the
periodical election of the political clay images which it manipulated and
moulded to any shape and effect at its pleasure. The Accumulation knew
that it was the sovereignty, whatever figure-head we called president or
governor or mayor: we had other names for these officials, but I use their
analogues for the sake of clearness, and I hope my good friend over there
will not think I am still talking about America."

"No," the old farmer called back, without rising, "we hain't got there
quite yit."

"No hurry," said a trainman. "All in good time. Go on!" he called to the
Altrurian.

The Altrurian resumed:

"There had been, from the beginning, an almost ceaseless struggle between
the Accumulation and the proletariate. The Accumulation always said that
it was the best friend of the proletariate, and it denounced, through the
press which it controlled, the proletarian leaders who taught that it was
the enemy of the proletariate, and who stirred up strikes and tumults of
all sorts, for higher wages and fewer hours. But the friend of the
proletariate, whenever occasion served, treated the proletariate like a
deadly enemy. In seasons of overproduction, as it was called, it locked
the workmen out or laid them off, and left their families to starve, or
ran light work and claimed the credit of public benefactors for running at
all. It sought every chance to reduce wages; it had laws passed to forbid
or cripple the workmen in their strikes; and the judges convicted them of
conspiracy, and wrested the statutes to their hurt, in cases where there
had been no thought of embarrassing them, even among the legislators. God
forbid that you should ever come to such a pass in America; but, if you
ever should, God grant that you may find your way out as simply as we did
at last, when freedom had perished in everything but name among us, and
justice had become a mockery.

"The Accumulation had advanced so smoothly, so lightly, in all its steps
to the supreme power, and had at last so thoroughly quelled the uprisings
of the proletariate, that it forgot one thing: it forgot the despised and
neglected suffrage. The ballot, because it had been so easy to annul its
effect, had been left in the people's hands; and when, at last, the
leaders of the proletariate ceased to counsel strikes, or any form of
resistance to the Accumulation that could be tormented into the likeness
of insurrection against the government, and began to urge them to attack
it in the political way, the deluge that swept the Accumulation out of
existence came trickling and creeping over the land. It appeared first in
the country, a spring from the ground; then it gathered head in the
villages; then it swelled to a torrent in the cities. I cannot stay to
trace its course; but suddenly, one day, when the Accumulation's abuse of
a certain power became too gross, it was voted out of that power. You will
perhaps be interested to know that it was with the telegraphs that the
rebellion against the Accumulation began, and the government was forced,
by the overwhelming majority which the proletariate sent to our
parliament, to assume a function which the Accumulation had impudently
usurped. Then the transportation of smaller and more perishable wares--"

"Yes," a voice called--"express business. Go on!"

"Was legislated a function of the post-office," the Altrurian went on.
"Then all transportation was taken into the hands of the political
government, which had always been accused of great corruption in its
administration, but which showed itself immaculately pure compared with
the Accumulation. Discp. Eius Neukom Vindob. Redux. Mdcccxiv.

Desecration of Haydn's Remains
In 1820 the remains were exhumed by order of Prince Esterhazy, and re-interred
with fresh funeral honours in the Pilgrimage Church of Maria-Einsiedel,
near Eisenstadt, on November 7. A simple stone, with a Latin inscription,
is inserted in the wall over the vault. When the coffin was opened,
the startling discovery was made that the skull had been stolen.

The desecration took place two days after the funeral. It appears that one
Johann Peter, intendant of the royal and imperial prisons of Vienna,
conceived the grim idea of forming a collection of skulls, made, as he
avowed in his will, to corroborate the theory of Dr Gall, the founder of
phrenology.
This functionary bribed the sexton, and--in concert with Prince Esterhazy's
secretary Rosenbaum, and with two Government officials named Jungermann
and Ullmann--he opened Haydn's grave and removed the skull.
Peter afterwards gave the most minute details of the sacrilege. He
declared that he examined the head and found the bump of music
fully developed, and traces in the nose of the polypus from which
Haydn suffered.

The skull was placed in a lined box, and when Peter got into difficulties
and his collection was dispersed, the relic passed into the possession
of Rosenbaum. That worthy's conscience seems to have troubled him in the
matter, for he conceived the idea of erecting a monument to the skull
in his back garden! When the desecration was discovered in 1820 there
was an outcry, followed by police search. Prince Esterhazy would stand
no nonsense. The skull must be returned, no questions would be asked,
and Peter was offered a reward if he found it. The notion then occurred
to Rosenbaum of palming off another skull for Haydn's. This he actually
succeeded in doing, the head of some unfortunate individual being
handed to the police. Peter claimed the reward, which was very justly
refused him. When Rosenbaum was dying he confessed to the deception,
and gave the skull back to Peter. Peter formed the resolution of bequeathing
it, by will, to the Conservatorium at Vienna; but he altered his
mind before he died, and by codicil left the skull to Dr Haller,
from whose keeping it ultimately found its way to the anatomical
museum at Vienna.

We believe it is still in the museum. Its proper place is, of course, in
Haydn's grave, and a stigma will rest on Vienna until it is placed
there.

[The great masters have been peculiarly unfortunate in the matter of
their "remains." When Beethoven's grave was opened in 1863, Professor
Wagner was actually allowed to cut off the ears and aural cavities
of the corpse in order to investigate the cause of the dead man's
deafness.

The alleged skeleton of Sebastian Bach was taken to an anatomical museum a
few years ago, "cleaned up," and clothed with a semblance of flesh
to show how Bach looked in life!

Donizetti's skull was stolen before the funeral, and was afterwards sold
to a pork butcher, who used it as a money-bowl.
Gluck was re-buried in 1890 beside Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert, after
having lain in the little suburban churchyard of Matzleinsdorf since 1787.]

A copy of Haydn's will has been printed as one of the appendices to the
present volume, with notes and all necessary information about the interesting
document. Two years before his death he had arranged that his books,
music, manuscripts and medals should become the property of the
Esterhazy family. Among the relics were twenty-four canons which had hung,
framed and glazed, in his bedroom. "I am not rich enough," he said, "to
buy good pictures, so I have provided myself with hangings of a kind
that few possess." These little compositions were the subject of an
oft-quoted anecdote. His wife, in one of her peevish moods, was complaining
that if he should die suddenly, there was not sufficient money in the house
to bury him. "In case such a calamity should occur," he replied, "take
these canons to the music-publisher.

I will answer for it, that they will bring enough to pay for a decent
funeral."

CHAPTER IX
HAYDN: THE MAN

Face and Features--Portraits--Social Habits--Partial to Pretty Women--His
Letters--His Humour--His Generosity--Unspoiled by Success--His
Piety--His Industry--Habits of Composition-- Impatient of Pedantry.

Face and Features
Something of Haydn's person and character will have already been gathered
from the foregoing pages.

He considered himself an ugly man, and, in Addison's words, thought that the
best expedient was "to be pleasant upon himself." His face was deeply
pitted with small-pox, and the nose, large and aquiline, was disfigured by
the polypus which he had inherited from his mother.

In complexion he was so dark as to have earned in some quarters the familiar
nickname of "The Moor." His underlip was thick and hanging, his jaw massive.
"The mouth and chin are Philistine," wrote Lavater under his silhouette,
noting, at the same time, "something out of the common in the eyes
and the nose."

The eyes were dark gray.
They are described as "beaming with benevolence," and he used to
say himself: "Anyone can see by the look of me that I am a good-natured
sort of fellow."

In stature he was rather under the middle height, with legs
disproportionately short, a defect rendered more noticeable by the
style of his dress, which he refused to change with the changes of
fashion. Dies writes: "His features were regular, his expression animated,
yet, at the same time, temperate, gentle and attractive. His face wore a
stern look when in repose, but in conversation it was smiling and cheerful.
I never heard him laugh out loud. His build was substantial, but deficient
in muscle." Another of his acquaintances says that "notwithstanding a cast
of physiognomy rather morose, and a short way of expressing himself,
which seemed to indicate an ill-tempered man, the character of Haydn
was gay, open and humorous." From these testimonies we get the impression
of a rather unusual combination of the attractive and the repulsive,
the intellectual and the vulgar. What Lavater described as the "lofty
and good" brow was partly concealed by a wig, with side curls, and a
pig-tail, which he wore to the last.
His dress as a private individual has not been described in detail, but
the Esterhazy uniform, though frequently changing in colour and style,
showed him in knee-breeches, white stockings, lace ruffles and white
neckcloth. This uniform he never wore except when on actual duty.

Portraits

After his death there were many portraits in chalks, engraved, and
modeled in wax. Notwithstanding his admission of the lack of personal
graces, he had a sort of feminine objection to an artist making him look
old. We read that, in 1800, he was "seriously angry" with a painter who
had represented him as he then appeared.

"If I was Haydn at forty," said he, "why should you transmit to posterity a
Haydn of seventy-eight?" Several writers mention a portrait by Sir
Joshua Reynolds, and even give details of the sittings, but he
never sat to Reynolds, whose eyesight had begun to fail before
Haydn's arrival in England.

During his first visit to London Hoppner painted his portrait at the
special request of the Prince of Wales. This portrait was engraved by
Facius in 1807, and is now at Hampton Court.

Engravings were also published in London by Schiavonetti and
Bartolozzi from portraits by Guttenbrunn and Ott, and by Hardy from
his own oil-painting.

A silhouette, which hung for long at the head of his bed, was engraved
for the first time for Grove's Dictionary of Music. This was said by Elssler,
his old servant, to have been a striking likeness. Of the many busts, the
best is that by his friend Grassi, the sculptor.

[figure: Haydn's silhouette by Lavater] 
Social Habits
Very little has been recorded of his social habits.

Anything like excess in wine is not once mentioned; but it is easy
to see from his correspondence that he enjoyed a good dinner, and was not
insensible to creature comforts. Writing to Artaria from Esterhaz
in 1788, he says: "By-the-bye, I am very much obliged to you for the capital
cheese you sent me, and also the sausages, for which I am your debtor, but
shall not fail when an opportunity offers to return the obligation." In a
subsequent letter to Frau von Genzinger he comically laments the change
from Vienna to Esterhaz: "I lost twenty pounds in weight in three days,
for the effect of my fare at Vienna disappeared on the journey. 'Alas!
alas!' thought I, when driven to eat at the restaurateurs, 'instead of
capital beef, a slice of a cow fifty years old; instead of a ragout with
little balls of force-meat, an old sheep with yellow carrots; instead
of a Bohemian pheasant, a tough grill; instead of pastry, dry apple fritters
and hazelnuts, etc.!
Alas! alas! would that I now had many a morsel I despised in Vienna! Here
in Esterhaz no one asks me, Would you like some chocolate, with milk or
without?

Will you take some coffee, with or without cream? What can I offer you, my
good Haydn? Will you have vanille ice or pineapple?' If I had only a
piece of good Parmesan cheese, particularly in Lent, to enable me to
swallow more easily the black dumplings and puffs! I gave our porter
this very day a commission to send me a couple of pounds." Even amid the
social pleasures and excitements of London, where he was invited out six
times a week and had "four excellent dishes" at every dinner, he longs to
be back in his native land so that he may have "some good German
soup."
Partial to Pretty Women
We read that in Austria he "never associated with any but the musicians,
his colleagues," a statement which cannot be strictly true. In London
he was, as we have seen, something of a "lion," but it is doubtful if
he enjoyed the conventional diversions of the beau monde. Yet he
liked the company of ladies, especially when they were personally
attractive. That he was never at a loss for a compliment may perhaps
be taken as explaining his frequent conquests, for, as he frankly said
himself, the pretty women "were at any rate not tempted by my beauty." Of
children he was passionately fond, a fact which lends additional melancholy
to his own unhappy and childless home life.

His Letters
He was not highly educated, and he does not seem to have taken much interest
in anything outside his own profession. This much may be gathered from
his correspondence, upon which it is not necessary to comment at
length.

Mr Russell Lowell remarks that a letter which is not mainly about the
writer loses its prime flavour. Haydn's letters are seldom "mainly about
the writer." They help us very little in seeking to get at what Newman
called "the inside of things," though some, notably those given at the
end of this volume, embody valuable suggestions. He habitually spoke
in the broad dialect of his native place. He knew Italian well and French
a little, and he had enough Latin to enable him to set the Church
services. Of English he was almost entirely ignorant until he came to London
in 1791, when we hear of him walking the country lanes with an English
grammar in hand. There is an amusing story of a dinner at Madame Mara's,
at which he was present during his first visit. Crossdill, the violoncellist,
proposed to celebrate him with "three times three." The suggestion was at
once adopted, all the guests, with the exception of Haydn himself, standing
up and cheering lustily.

Haydn heard his name repeated, but not understanding what was going on,
stared at the company in blank bewilderment. When the matter was
explained to him he appeared quite overcome with diffidence, putting his
hands before his face and not recovering his equanimity for some minutes.
[See Records of My Life, by John Taylor: London, 1832.]
His Humour
Of hobbies or recreations he appears to have had none, though, to relieve
the dull monotony of life at Eisenstadt or Esterhaz, he occasionally
indulged in hunting and fishing and mountain rambles. A leading trait
in his character was his humour and love of fun. As he remarked to Dies:
"A mischievous fit comes over me sometimes that is perfectly beyond
control." The incident of the removal of the fellow chorister's pig-tail
will at once recur to the memory. The "Surprise" Symphony is another
illustration, to say nothing of the "Toy" Symphony and "Jacob's Dream."

His Generosity
Of his generosity and his kindness to fellow artists there are many proofs.
In 1800 he speaks of himself as having "willingly endeavoured all my
life to assist everyone," and the words were no empty boast. No man
was, in fact, more ready to perform a good deed. He had many needy
relations always looking to him for aid, and their claims were seldom
refused. A brother artist in distress was sure of help, and talented
young men found in him a valuable friend, equally ready to give his advice
or his gold, as the case might require. That he was sometimes imposed upon
goes without saying.

He has been charged with avarice, but the charge is wholly unfounded.
He was simply careful in money matters, and that, to a large extent, because
of the demands that were constantly being made upon him. In commercial
concerns he was certainly sharp and shrewd, and attempts to take advantage
of him always roused his indignation. "By heavens!" he writes to Artaria,
"you have wronged me to the extent of fifty ducats....
This step must cause the cessation of all transactions between us." The
same firm, having neglected to answer some business proposition,
were pulled up in this fashion: "I have been much provoked by the delay,
inasmuch as I could have got forty ducats from another publisher for
these five pieces, and you make too many difficulties about a
matter by which, in such short compositions, you have at least a thirty
fold profit. The sixth piece has long had its companion, so pray make
an end of the affair and send me either my music or my money."
The Haydn of these fierce little notes is not the gentle recluse we are apt
to imagine him. They show, on the contrary, that he was not wanting in
spirit when occasion demanded. He was himself upright and honest in
all his dealings. And he never forgot a kindness, as more than one entry
in his will abundantly testifies. He was absolutely without malice, and
there are several instances of his repaying a slight with a generous deed
or a thoughtful action. His practical tribute to the memory of Werner,
who called him a fop and a "scribbler of songs," has been cited. His
forbearance with Pleyel, who had allowed himself to be pitted against him
by the London faction, should also be recalled; and it is perhaps
worth mentioning further that he put himself to some trouble
to get a passport for Pleyel during the long wars of the French Revolution.
He carried his kindliness and gentleness even into "the troubled region
of artistic life," and made friends where other men would have made
foes.

Unspoiled by Success
His modesty has often been insisted upon. Success did not spoil him. In a
letter of 1799 he asks that a certain statement in his favour should not
be mentioned, lest he "be accused of conceit and arrogance, from which
my Heavenly Father has preserved me all my life long." Here he spoke the
simple truth. At the same time, while entirely free from presumption and
vanity, he was perfectly alive to his own merits, and liked to have
them acknowledged.
When visitors came to see him nothing gave him greater pleasure than to open
his cabinets and show the medals, that had been struck in his honour, along
with the other gifts he had received from admirers.

Like a true man of genius, as Pohl says, he enjoyed distinction and fame,
but carefully avoided ambition.

High Ideals
Of his calling and opportunities as an artist he had a very high idea.
Acknowledging a compliment paid to him in 1802 by the members of the
Musical Union in Bergen, he wrote of the happiness it gave him to think
of so many families susceptible of true feeling deriving pleasure
and enjoyment from his compositions.

"Often when contending with the obstacles of every sort opposed to
my work, often when my powers both of body and mind failed, and I
felt it a hard matter to persevere in the course I had entered on, a secret
feeling within me whispered, 'There are but few contented and happy men
here below; everywhere grief and care prevail, perhaps your labours may
one day be the source from which the weary and worn or the man burdened
with affairs may derive a few moments' rest and refreshment.' What a
powerful motive to press onwards! And this is why I now look back with
heartfelt, cheerful satisfaction on the work to which I have devoted such
a long succession of years with such persevering efforts and exertions."

With this high ideal was combined a constant effort to perfect himself
in his art. To Kalkbrenner he once made the touching remark: "I have
only just learned in my old age how to use the wind instruments, and now
that I do understand them I must leave the world." To Griezinger, again,
he said that he had by no means exhausted his genius: that "ideas were
often floating in his mind, by which he could have carried the art far
beyond anything it had yet attained, had his physical powers been equal to
the task."
His Piety
Closely, indeed inseparably, connected with this exalted idea of
his art was his simple and sincere piety.

He was a devout Christian, and looked upon his genius as a gift from God,
to be freely used in His service. His faith was never assailed with
doubts; he lived and died in the communion of the Catholic Church, and
was "never in danger of becoming either a bigot or a free-thinker." When
Carpani, anticipating latter-day criticism, hinted to him that his Church
compositions were impregnated with a light gaiety, he replied: "I cannot
help it; I give forth what is in me. When I think of the Divine Being,
my heart is, so full of joy that the notes fly off as from a
spindle, and as I have a cheerful heart He will pardon me if I serve Him
cheerfully."
His reverent practice during the composition of "The Creation" has
been mentioned.

"Never was I so pious," he said. There are many proofs of the same
feeling in his correspondence and other writings. Thus he concludes an
autobiographical sketch with the words: "I offer up to Almighty God
all eulogiums, for to Him alone do I owe them. My sole wish is neither
to offend against my neighbour nor my gracious prince, but above all
not against our merciful God." Again, in one of his later letters,
he says "May God only vouchsafe to grant me the health that I have
hitherto enjoyed, and may I preserve it by good conduct, out of gratitude
to the Almighty." The note appended to the first draft of his will is
also significant. Nor in this connection should we forget the words with
which he inscribed the scores of his more important compositions. For the
conclusion he generally adopted Handel's "Soli Deo Gloria" or "Laus Deo,"
with the occasional addition of "et B.V. Mae. et Oms. Sis. (Beatae Virgini
Mariae et Omnibus Sanctis)." Even his opera scores were so inscribed, one
indeed having the emphatic close: "Laus omnipotenti Deo et Beatissimae
Virgini Mariae." The superscription was uniformly "In nomine Domini." It
is recorded somewhere that when, in composing, he felt his inspiration
flagging, or was baulked by some difficulty, he rose from the
instrument and began to run over his rosary. In short, not to labour the
point, he had himself followed the advice which, as an old man, he gave
to the choirboys of Vienna: "Be good and industrious and serve God
continually."

His Industry
The world has seen many an instance of genius without industry, as of industry
without genius. In Haydn the two were happily wedded.
He was always an early riser, and long after his student days were over
he worked steadily from sixteen to eighteen hours a day.
He lived strictly by a self-imposed routine, and was so little addicted
to what Scott called "bed-gown and slipper tricks," that he never sat down
to work or received a visitor until he was fully dressed. He had none
of Wagner's luxurious tastes or Balzac's affectations in regard to a
special attire for work, but when engaged on his more important compositions
he always wore the ring given him by the King of Prussia. In Haydn's case
there are no incredible tales of dashing off scores in the twinkling
of an eye.

That he produced so much must be attributed to his habit of devoting all
his leisure to composition. He was not a rapid worker if we compare him
with Handel and Mozart.

He never put down anything till he was "quite sure it was the right
thing"--a habit of mind indicated by his neat and uniform handwriting
["His notes had such little heads and slender tails that he used,
very properly, to call them his, flies' legs."

--Bombet, p. 97.]--and he assures us: "I never was a quick writer, and
always composed with care and deliberation.

That alone," he added, "is the way to compose works that will last,
and a real connoisseur can see at a glance whether a score has been
written in undue haste or not."

He is quoted as saying that "genius is always prolific." However the
saying may be interpreted, there does not seem to have been about
him anything of what has been called the irregular dishabille of
composers, "the natural result of the habit of genius of watching
for an inspiration, and encouraging it to take possession of the
whole being when it comes."

Habits of Composition
His practice was to sketch out his ideas roughly in the morning,
and elaborate them in the afternoon, taking pains to preserve unity
in idea and form.

"That is where so many young composers fail," he said in reference to the
latter point.

"They string together a number of fragments; they break off almost
as soon as they have begun, and so at the end the listener carries
off no definite impression."

The importance of melody he specially emphasized. "It is the air which
is the charm of music," he remarked, "and it is that which is most
difficult to produce.

The invention of a fine melody is the work of genius."

In another place he says: "In vocal composition, the art of producing
beautiful melody may now almost be considered as lost; and when a
composer is so fortunate as to throw forth a passage that is really
melodious, he is sure, if he be not sensible of its excellence, to
overwhelm and destroy it by the fullness and superfluity of his
instrumental parts." [Compare Mozart's words as addressed to Michael
Kelly: "Melody is the essence of music. I should liken one who
invents melodies to a noble racehorse, and a mere contrapuntist to
a hired post-hack."]returned the Altrurian. "Yes; it is
astonishing how well Bacon in that book, and Sir Thomas More in his
_Utopia_, have divined certain phases of our civilization and polity."

"I think he rather _has_ you, professor," the banker whispered, with a
laugh.

"But all those inspired visionaries," the Altrurian continued, while the
professor sat grimly silent, watching for another chance, "who have borne
testimony of us in their dreams, conceived of states perfect without the
discipline of a previous competitive condition. What I thought, however,
might specially interest you Americans in Altruria is the fact that our
economy was evolved from one so like that in which you actually have your
being. I had even hoped you might feel that, in all these points of
resemblance, America prophesies another Altruria. I know that to some of
you all that I have told of my country will seem a baseless fabric, with
no more foundation, in fact, than More's fairy-tale of another land where
men dealt kindly and justly by one another, and dwelt, a whole nation, in
the unity and equality of a family. But why should not a part of that
fable have come true in our polity, as another part of it has come true in
yours? When Sir Thomas More wrote that book, he noted with abhorrence the
monstrous injustice of the fact that men were hanged for small thefts in
England; and in the preliminary conversation between its characters he
denounced the killing of men for any sort of thefts. Now you no longer put
men to death for theft; you look back upon that cruel code of your mother
England with an abhorrence as great as his own. We, for our part, who have
realized the Utopian dream of brotherly equality, look back with the same
abhorrence upon a state where some were rich and some poor, some taught
and some untaught, some high and some low, and the hardest toil often
failed to supply a sufficiency of the food which luxury wasted in its
riots. That state seems as atrocious to us as the state which hanged a man
for stealing a loaf of bread seems to you.

"But we do not regret the experience of competition and monopoly. They
taught us some things in the operation of the industries. The labor-saving
inventions which the Accumulation perverted to money-making we have
restored to the use intended by their inventors and the Creator of their
inventors. After serving the advantage of socializing the industries which
the Accumulation effected for its own purposes, we continued the work in
large mills and shops, in the interest of the workers, whom we wished to
guard against the evil effects of solitude. But our mills and shops are
beautiful as well as useful. They look like temples, and they are temples,
dedicated to that sympathy between the divine and human which expresses
itself in honest and exquisite workmanship. They rise amid leafy boscages
beside the streams, which form their only power; for we have disused steam
altogether, with all the offences to the eye and ear which its use brought
into the world. Our life is so simple and our needs are so few that the
hand-work of the primitive toilers could easily supply our wants; but
machinery works so much more thoroughly and beautifully that we have in
great measure retained it. Only, the machines that were once the workmen's
enemies and masters are now their friends and servants; and, if any man
chooses to work alone with his own hands, the state will buy what he makes
at the same price that it sells the wares made collectively. This secures
every right of individuality.

"The farm-work, as well as the mill-work and the shop-work, is done by
companies of workers; and there is nothing of that loneliness in our woods
and fields which, I understand, is the cause of so much insanity among
you. It is not good for man to be alone, was the first thought of his
Creator when he considered him, and we act upon this truth in everything.
The privacy of the family is sacredly guarded in essentials, but the
social instinct is so highly developed with us that we like to eat
together in large refectories, and we meet constantly to argue and dispute
on questions of aesthetics and metaphysics. We do not, perhaps, read so
many books as you do, for most of our reading, when not for special
research, but for culture and entertainment, is done by public readers, to
large groups of listeners. We have no social meetings which are not free
to all; and we encourage joking and the friendly give and take of witty
encounters."

"A little hint from Sparta," suggested the professor.

The banker leaned over to whisper to me: "From what I have seen of your
friend when offered a piece of American humor, I should fancy the
Altrurian article was altogether different. Upon the whole, I would rather
not be present at one of their witty encounters, if I were obliged to stay
it out."

The Altrurian had paused to drink a glass of water, and now he went on:
"But we try, in everything that does not inconvenience or injure others,
to let every one live the life he likes best. If a man prefers to dwell
apart, and have his meals in private for himself alone or for his family,
it is freely permitted; only he must not expect to be served as in public,
where service is one of the voluntaries; private service is not permitted;
those wishing to live alone must wait upon themselves, cook their own
food, and care for their own tables. Very few, however, wish to withdraw
from the public life, for most of the discussions and debates take place
at our mid-day meal, which falls at the end of the obligatory labors, and
is prolonged indefinitely, or as long as people like to chat and joke or
listen to the reading of some pleasant book.

"In Altruria _there is no hurry_, for no one wishes to outstrip another,
or in any wise surpass him. We are all assured of enough, and are
forbidden any and every sort of superfluity. If any one, after the
obligatories, wishes to be entirely idle, he may be so, but I cannot now
think of a single person without some voluntary occupation; doubtless
there are such persons, but I do not know them. It used to be said, in the
old times, that 'it was human nature' to shirk and malinger and loaf, but
we have found that it is no such thing. Pleyel's presumption is everywhere
criticized, and yet I love him, and have gone to his concert each time,
and been the first to applaud him. I sincerely rejoice that you and
yours are well. My kind regards to all. The time draws near to put my
trunks in travelling order. Oh! how delighted shall I be to see you
again, and to show personally all the esteem that I felt for you in absence,
and that I ever shall feel for you.

Yours, etc.,
HAYDN.

P.S.--Please apologize to Herr v. Kees for want of time preventing my
sending him the new symphonies. I hope to have the honour of directing them
myself in your house, at our next Christmas music.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

LONDON, April 24, 1792.

I yesterday evening received with much pleasure your last letter of 5 April,
with the extract from the newspaper, extolling my poor talents to the
Viennese. I must confess that I have gained considerable credit with the
English in vocal music, by this little chorus, [The "Storm Chorus,"
see p. 91.] my first attempt with English words.

It is only to be regretted that, during my stay here, I have not been able
to write more pieces of a similar nature, but we could not find
any boys to sing at our concerts, they having been already engaged
for a year past to sing at other concerts, of which there are a
vast number.

In spite of the great opposition of my musical enemies, who are so
bitter against me, more especially leaving nothing undone with my
pupil Pleyel this winter to humble me, still, thank God!

I may say that I have kept the upper hand.

I must, however, admit that I am quite wearied and worn out with so much
work, and look forward with eager longing to the repose which will soon
take pity on me.

I thank you, dear lady, for your kind solicitude about me. Just as you
thought, I do not require to go to Paris at present, from a variety of
reasons, which I will tell you when we meet.

I am in daily expectation of an order from my Prince, to whom I wrote
lately, to tell me where I am to go.

It is possible that he may summon me to Frankfort; if not, I intend (entre
nous) to go by Holland to the King of Prussia at Berlin, thence to Leipzig,
Dresden, Prague, and last of all to Vienna, where I hope to embrace
all my friends.

Ever, with high esteem, etc., 
HAYDN.They constituted an altruistic dominion of the egoistic
empire, and, except as they were tainted by social or worldly ambitions,
it was possible for every woman to be a lady, even in competitive
conditions. Her instincts were unselfish, and her first thoughts were
nearly always of others."

Mrs. Makely jumped to her feet and clapped violently with her fan on the
palm of her left hand. "Three cheers for Mr. Homos!" she shrieked, and all
the women took up the cry, supported by all the natives and the
construction gang. I fancied these fellows gave their support largely in a
spirit of burlesque; but they gave it robustly, and from that time on,
Mrs. Makely led the applause, and they roared in after her.

It is impossible to follow closely the course of the Altrurian's account
of his country, which grew more and more incredible as he went on, and
implied every insulting criticism of ours. Some one asked him about war in
Altruria, and he said: "The very name of our country implies the absence
of war. At the time of the Evolution our country bore to the rest of our
continent the same relative proportion that your country bears to your
continent. The egoistic nations to the north and the south of us entered
into an offensive and defensive alliance to put down, the new altruistic
commonwealth, and declared war against us. Their forces were met at the
frontier by our entire population in arms, and full of the martial spirit
bred of the constant hostilities of the competitive and monopolistic epoch
just ended. Negotiations began in the face of the imposing demonstration
we made, and we were never afterward molested by our neighbors, who
finally yielded to the spectacle of our civilization and united their
political and social fate with ours. At present, our whole continent is
Altrurian. For a long time we kept up a system of coast defences, but it
is also a long time since we abandoned these; for it is a maxim with us
that where every citizen's life is a pledge of the public safety, that
country can never be in danger of foreign enemies.

"In this, as in all other things, we believe ourselves the true followers
of Christ, whose doctrine we seek to make our life as He made it His. The
ruined condition of the venerable pile--it dates from 1128--set Haydn
moralizing on the "Protestant heresy" which led the "rascal mob" to
tear down "what had once been a stronghold of his own religion."
Haydn at Bath
In the following month he spent three days in Bath with Dr Burney, and
Rauzzini, the famous tenor, who had retired to the fashionable watering-place
after a successful career of thirteen years as a singer and teacher
in London.

Rauzzini is little more than a name now, but for Haydn's sake it is worth
recalling his memory. Born at Rome in 1747, his striking beauty of face
and figure had drawn him into certain entanglements which made it expedient
for him to leave his native land.I suppose this is because you are so constantly struck by the
misery arising from economic inequality and want, or the fear of want,
among yourselves, that you instinctively look in that direction. But have
you ever seen sweeter compassion, tenderer sympathy, warmer humanity,
heavenlier charity than that shown in the family where all are
economically equal and no one can want while any other has to give?
Altruria, I say again, is a family, and, as we are mortal, we are still
subject to those nobler sorrows which God has appointed to men, and which
are so different from the squalid accidents that they have made for
themselves. Nor have we thought it necessary to include the supposititious
and doubtful works, for which Pohl's list may be consulted.

INSTRUMENTAL
125 symphonies, including overtures to operas and plays.
Of these 94 are published in parts, 40 in score; 29 remain in MS. About
40 have been arranged for pianoforte 2 hands, 60 for 4 hands, 10 for 8
hands.
Pohl gives a thematic list of the 12 symphonies composed for Salomon,
numbered in the order of their occurrence in the catalogue of the
London Philharmonic Society."There is something," he continued, "which I hardly know how to speak of,"
and here we all began to prick our ears. I prepared myself as well as I
could for another affront, though I shuddered when the banker hardily
called out: "Don't hesitate to say anything you wish, Mr. Homos. I, for
one, should like to hear you express yourself fully."

It was always the unexpected, certainly, that happened from the Altrurian.
"It is merely this," he said: "Having come to live rightly upon earth, as
we believe, or having at least ceased to deny God in our statutes and
customs, the fear of death, as it once, weighed upon us, has been lifted
from our souls. The mystery of it has so far been taken away that we
perceive it as something just and natural. Now that all unkindness has
been banished from among us, we can conceive of no such cruelty as death
once seemed. If we do not know yet the full meaning of death, we know that
the Creator of it and of us meant mercy and blessing by it. When one dies
we grieve, but not as those without hope. We do not say that the dead have
gone to a better place, and then selfishly bewail them, for we have the
kingdom of heaven upon earth already, and we know that wherever they go
they will be homesick for Altruria; and when we think of the years that
may pass before we meet them again our hearts ache, as theirs must. But
the presence of the risen Christ in our daily lives is our assurance that
no one ceases to be, and that we shall see our dead again. It had
been opened in 1775 by J. C.

Bach, the eleventh son of the great Sebastian, when the advertisements
announced that "the ladies' tickets are red and the gentlemen's black."
It was there that, two years after the date of which we are writing,
"Master Hummel, from Vienna," gave his first benefit; Liszt appeared
in 1840, when the now familiar term "recital" was first used;
Rubinstein made his English debut in 1842; and in the same year
Mendelssohn conducted his Scotch Symphony for the first time in
England.

In 1844 the "wonderful little Joachim," then a youth of thirteen
in a short jacket, made the first of his many subsequent visits to
London, and played in the old "Rooms."

Hoops and Swords
So much for the associations of the concert hall in which Haydn directed
some of his finest symphonies. And what about the audiences of Haydn's
time? It was the day of the Sedan chair, when women waddled in hoops,
like that of the lady mentioned in the Spectator, who appeared "as
if she stood in a large drum."

Even the royal princesses were, in Pope's phrase, "armed in ribs of
steel" so wide that the Court attendants had to assist their ungainly
figures through the doorways. Swords were still being worn as a regulation
part of full dress, and special weapons were always provided at a
grand concert for the use of the instrumental solo performers, who,
when about to appear on the platform, were girt for the occasion
by an attendant, known as the "sword-bearer."

[See Musical Haunts in London, F. G. Edwards, quoting Dr W. H. Cummings.]

Haydn's first concert, we have said, was an immense success.
Burney records that his appearance in the orchestra "seemed to have an
electrical effect on all present, and he never remembered a performance
where greater enthusiasm was displayed."

A wave of musical excitement appears to have been passing through London,
for on this very evening both Covent Garden and Drury Lane Theatres
were packed with audiences drawn together by the oratorio performances
there.

Haydn was vastly pleased at having the slow movement of his symphony
encored--an unusual occurrence in those days--and he spoke of it
afterwards as worthy of mention in his biography.

Fresh from the dinner-table, the audience generally fell asleep during
the slow movements!

When the novelty of the Salomon concerts had worn off, many of the
listeners lapsed into their usual somnolence.

Most men in Haydn's position would have resented such inattention by
an outburst of temper.
Haydn took it good-humouredly, and resolved to have his little joke.

The "Surprise" Symphony
He wrote the well-known "Surprise" Symphony. The slow movement of this
work opens and proceeds in the most subdued manner, and at the moment when
the audience may be imagined to have comfortably settled for their
nap a sudden explosive fortissimo chord is introduced. "There all the
women will scream," said Haydn, with twinkling eyes.

A contemporary critic read quite a different "programme" into it. "The
'Surprise,'" he wrote, "might not be inaptly likened to the situation of a
beautiful shepherdess who, lulled to slumber by the murmur of a distant
waterfall, starts alarmed by the unexpected firing of a fowling-piece."
One can fancy the composer's amusement at this highly-imaginative interpretation
of his harmless bit of waggery.

Gallic Excitement
The same success which attended Haydn's first concert marked the
rest of the series. The Prince of Wales's presence at the second concert
no doubt gave a certain "lead" to the musical public. We read in one of
the Gallic newspapers: "It is truly wonderful what sublime and august
thoughts this master weaves into his works.
Passages often occur which it is impossible to listen to without becoming
excited--we are carried away by admiration, and are forced to applaud with
hand and mouth.

The Frenchmen here cannot restrain their transports in soft adagios;
they will clap their hands in loud applause and thus mar the effect."
In the midst of all this enthusiasm the factionists were keeping up their
controversy about the opening of Gallini's Theatre.
Gallini had already engaged the services of Haydn, together with an orchestra
led by Salomon, but nothing could be done without the Lord
Chamberlain's license for the performance of operas.

People were no longer sickened by sloth and surfeit, or
deformed and depleted by overwork and famine. They were wholesomely housed
in healthful places, and they were clad fitly for their labor and fitly
for their leisure; the caprices of vanity were not suffered to attaint the
beauty of the national dress.

"With the stress of superfluous social and business duties, and the
perpetual fear of want which all classes felt, more or less; with the
tumult of the cities and the solitude of the country, insanity had
increased among us till the whole land was dotted with asylums and the mad
were numbered by hundreds of thousands. In every region they were an army,
an awful army of anguish and despair. Now they have decreased to a number
so small, and are of a type so mild, that we can hardly count insanity
among our causes of unhappiness.

"We have totally eliminated chance from our economic life. There is still
a chance that a man will be tall or short in Altruria, that he will be
strong or weak, well or ill, gay or grave, happy or unhappy in love, but
none that he will be rich or poor, busy or idle, live splendidly or
meanly. These stupid and vulgar accidents of human contrivance cannot
befall us; but I shall not be able to tell you just how or why, or to
detail the process of eliminating chance. I may say, however, that it
began with the nationalization of telegraphs, expresses, railroads, mines,
and all large industries operated by stock companies. This at once struck
a fatal blow at the speculation in values, real and unreal, and at the
stock-exchange, or bourse; we had our own name for that gambler's
paradise, or gambler's hell, whose baleful influence penetrated every
branch of business.

"There were still business fluctuations as long as we had business, but
they were on a smaller and smaller scale, and with the final lapse of
business they necessarily vanished; all economic chance vanished. The
founders of the commonwealth understood perfectly that business was the
sterile activity of the function interposed between the demand and the
supply; that it was nothing structural; and they intended its extinction,
and expected it from the moment that money was abolished."

"This is all pretty tiresome," said the professor to our immediate party.
"I don't see why we oblige ourselves to listen to that fellow's stuff. As
if a civilized state could exist for a day without money or business."

He went on to give his opinion of the Altrurian's pretended description,
in a tone so audible that it attracted the notice of the nearest group of
railroad hands, who were listening closely to Homos, and one of them sang
out to the professor: "Can't you wait and let the first man finish?" and
another yelled: "Put him out!" and then they all laughed with a humorous
perception of the impossibility of literally executing the suggestion.

By the time all was quiet again I heard the Altrurian saying: "As to our
social life, I cannot describe it in detail, but I can give you some
notion of its spirit. We make our pleasures civic and public as far as
possible, and the ideal is inclusive and not exclusive. There are, of
course, festivities which all cannot share, but our distribution into
small communities favors the possibility of all doing so. Our daily life,
however, is so largely social that we seldom meet by special invitation or
engagement. When we do, it is with the perfect understanding that the
assemblage confers no social distinction, but is for a momentary
convenience. In fact, these occasions are rather avoided, recalling, as
they do, the vapid and tedious entertainments of the competitive epoch,
the receptions and balls and dinners of a semi-barbaric people striving
for social prominence by shutting a certain number in and a certain number
out, and overdressing, overfeeding, and overdrinking. Anything
premeditated in the way of a pleasure we think stupid and mistaken; we
like to meet suddenly, or on the spur of the moment, out-of-doors, if
possible, and arrange a picnic or a dance or a play; and let people come
and go without ceremony. No one is more host than guest; all are hosts and
guests. People consort much according to their tastes--literary, musical,
artistic, scientific, or mechanical--but these tastes are made approaches,
not barriers; and we find out that we have many more tastes in common than
was formerly supposed.

"But, after all, our life is serious, and no one among us is quite happy,
in the general esteem, unless he has dedicated himself, in some special
way, to the general good. Our ideal is not rights, but duties."

"Mazzini!" whispered the professor.

"The greatest distinction which any one can enjoy with us is to have found
out some new and signal way of serving the community; and then it is not
good form for him to seek recognition. The doing any fine thing is the
purest pleasure it can give; applause flatters, but it hurts, too, and our
benefactors, as we call them, have learned to shun it.

"We are still far from thinking our civilization perfect; but we are sure
that our civic ideals are perfect. What we have already accomplished is to
have given a whole continent perpetual peace; to have founded an economy
in which there is no possibility of want; to have killed out political and
social ambition; to have disused money and eliminated chance; to have
realized the brotherhood of the race, and to have outlived the fear of
death."

The Altrurian suddenly stopped with these words and sat down. He had
spoken a long time, and with a fulness which my report gives little notion
of; but, though most of his cultivated listeners were weary, and a good
many ladies had left their seats and gone back to the hotel, not one of
the natives, or the work-people of any sort, had stirred; now they
remained a moment motionless and silent before they rose from all parts of
the field and shouted: "Go on! Don't stop! Tell us all about it!"

I saw Reuben Camp climb the shoulders of a big fellow near where the
Altrurian had stood; he waved the crowd to silence with out-spread arms.
"He isn't going to say anything more; he's tired. But if any man don't
think he's got his dollar's worth, let him walk up to the door and the
ticket-agent will refund him his money."

The crowd laughed, and some one shouted: "Good for you, Reub!"

Camp continued: "But our friend here will shake the hand of any man,
woman, or child that wants to speak to him; and you needn't wipe it on the
grass first, either. He's a _man_! And I want to say that he's going to
spend the next week with us, at my mother's house, and we shall be glad to
have you call."

The crowd, the rustic and ruder part of it, cheered and cheered till the
mountain echoes answered; then a railroader called for three times three,
with a tiger, and got it. The guests of the hotel broke away and went
toward the house over the long shadows of the meadow. The lower classes
pressed forward, on Camp's invitation.

"Well, did you ever hear a more disgusting rigmarole?" asked Mrs. Makely,
as our little group halted indecisively about her.

"With all those imaginary commonwealths to draw upon, from Plato, through
More, Bacon, and Campanella, down to Bellamy and Morris, he has
constructed the shakiest effigy ever made of old clothes stuffed with
straw," said the professor.

The manufacturer was silent. The banker said: "I don't know. He grappled
pretty boldly with your insinuations. That frank declaration that Altruria
was all these pretty soap-bubble worlds solidified was rather fine."

"It was splendid!" cried Mrs. Makely. The lawyer and the minister came
toward us from where they had been sitting together. She called out to
them: "Why in the world didn't one of your gentlemen get up and propose a
vote of thanks?"

"The difficulty with me is," continued the banker, "that he has rendered
Altruria incredible. Esterhaz
A great deal has been written about Esterhaz, but it is not necessary that
we should occupy much space with a description of the castle and
its surroundings.

The palace probably owed its inception to the prince's visit to Paris in
1764. At any rate, it is in the French Renaissance style, and there is some
significance in the fact that a French traveller who saw it about
1782 described it as having no place but Versailles to compare with
it for magnificence.

It was an oversight not to make him a formal
acknowledgment of some kind. If we offered him money, he would have to
leave it all behind him here when he went home to Altruria."

"Just as _we_ do when we go to heaven," I suggested; the banker did not
answer, and I instantly felt that in the presence of the minister my
remark was out of taste.

"Well, then, don't you think," said Mrs. Makely, who had a leathery
insensibility to everything but the purpose possessing her, "that we ought
at least to go and say something to him personally?"

"Yes, I think we ought," said the banker, and we all walked up to where
the Altrurian stood, still thickly surrounded by the lower classes, who
were shaking hands with him and getting in a word with him now and then.

To Frau v. Genzinger.

ESTORAS, Nov. 18, 1789.

DEAR LADY,

The letter which I received through Herr Siebert gave me another proof
of your excellent heart, as instead of a rebuke for my late remissness,
you express yourself in so friendly a manner towards me, that so
much indulgence, kindness and great courtesy cause me the utmost
surprise, and I kiss your hands in return a thousand times.

If my poor talents enable me to respond in any degree to so much that
is flattering, I venture, dear madam, to offer you a little musical
potpourri.

I do not, indeed, find in it much that is fragrant; perhaps the publisher
may rectify the fault in future editions. If the arrangement of the
symphony in it be yours, oh!
A laugh went up, and then, at sight of Mrs. Makely heading our little
party, the people round Homos civilly made way for us. She rushed upon
him, and seized his hand in both of hers; she dropped her fan, parasol,
gloves, handkerchief, and vinaigrette in the grass to do so. "Oh, Mr.
Homos," she fluted, and the tears came into her eyes, "it was beautiful,
_beautiful_, every word of it! I sat in a perfect trance from beginning to
end, and I felt that it was all as true as it was beautiful. People all
around me were breathless with interest, and I don't know how I can ever
thank you enough."

"Yes. indeed," the professor hastened to say, before the Altrurian could
answer, and he beamed malignantly upon him through his spectacles while he
spoke, "it was like some strange romance."

"I don't know that I should go so far as that," said the banker, in his
turn, "but it certainly seemed too good to be true."

"Yes," the Altrurian responded, simply, but a little sadly; "now that I am
away from it all, and in conditions so different, I sometimes had to ask
myself, as I went on, if my whole life had not hitherto been a dream, and
Altruria were not some blessed vision of the night."

"Then you know how to account for a feeling which I must acknowledge,
too?" "Barbers are not the most diffident people of the world," as one
of the race remarks in "Gil Blas," and Keller was assuredly not
diffident.

"Never mind," he said to Haydn, "you shall have the other." Haydn very
likely did not want the other, but, recognizing with Dr Holmes's
fashionable lady that "getting married is like jumping overboard
anyway you look at it," he resolved to risk it and take Anna Maria
Keller for better or worse.

His Wife

The marriage was solemnized at St Stephen's on November 26, 1760, when the
bridegroom was twenty-nine and the bride thirty-two.
There does not seem to have been much affection on either side to
start with; but Haydn declared that he had really begun to "like"
his wife, and would have come to entertain a stronger feeling for
her if she had behaved in a reasonable way.

Makely pushed in. "Here is Mr. Twelvemough dying to shake hands with
Mr. Homos and compliment his distinguished guest."

"Ah, Mr. Homos knows what I must have thought of his talk without my
telling him," I began, skilfully. "But I am sorry that I am to lose my
distinguished guest so soon."

Reuben Camp broke out: "That was my blunder, Mr. Twelvemough. Mr. Homos
and I had talked it over conditionally, and I was not to speak of it till
he had told you; but it slipped out in the excitement of the moment."

"Oh, it's all right," I said, and I shook hands cordially with both of
them. "It will be the greatest possible advantage for Mr. Homos to see
certain phases of American life at close range, and he couldn't possibly
see them under better auspices than yours, Camp."

"Yes, I'm going to drive him through the hill country after haying, and
then I'm going to take him down and show him one of our big factory
towns."

I believe this was done, but finally the Altrurian went on to New York,
where he was to pass the winter. We parted friends; I even offered him
some introductions; but his acquaintance had become more and more
difficult, and I was not sorry to part with him. That taste of his for low
company was incurable, and I was glad that I was not to be responsible any
longer for whatever strange thing he might do next. Genzinger.

ESTORAS, June 20, 1790.

DEAR, KIND FRIEND,
I take the liberty of sending you a new pianoforte sonata with
violin or flute, not as anything at all remarkable, but as a trifling
resource in case of any great ennui.As for the more cultivated people who had met him,
they continued of two minds upon both points.

THE END