LEFT AT HOME;

Or, The Heart's Resting-place.

by

MARY L. CODE,

Author of
"Wandering May;" "Clarie's Little Charge;"
"Lonely Lily;" Etc.


[Illustration: "They walked on for some distance without saying
much."--_Page 92._]


Kilmarnock:
John Ritchie,
Publisher of Christian Literature.

THE STORY OF WAITSTILL BAXTER.

Illustrated.

                     CREEPING JENNY.
   

                     MY GARDEN OF
   MEMORY. Illustrated.

                     
   THE QUILT OF HAPPINESS. In Evergreen Series.

                     
   HOMESPUN TALES.

                     Rose o' the
   River, The Old Peabody Pew, and Susanna and Sue, in one volume.

                     
   Illustrated.

                     
   LADIES-IN-WAITING. With frontispiece.

                     
   THE ROMANCE OF A CHRISTMAS CARD. Illustrated.

                     PENELOPE'S POSTSCRIPTS. With frontispiece.
A CHILD'S JOURNEY WITH DICKENS.
MOTHER CAREY'S CHICKENS. Illustrated.

ROBINETTA. Illustrated.
REBECCA OF SUNNYBROOK FARM.
REBECCA OF SUNNYBROOK FARM. _Holiday Edition._ Illustrated.
NEW CHRONICLES OF REBECCA. Illustrated.
THE AFFAIR AT THE INN. Illustrated.
THE BIRDS' CHRISTMAS CAROL. Illustrated.
THE BIRDS' CHRISTMAS CAROL. _Holiday Edition._
THE BIRDS' CHRISTMAS CAROL.MIDSUMMER HOLIDAYS AMONG THE MOUNTAINS      108

                     CHAPTER X.
   AT REST NOW                                 114

                     CHAPTER XI.
   CONCLUSION                                  140


[Illustration: ASHTON GRANGE.]


LEFT AT HOME.

CHAPTER I.

LITTLE MILDRED, OR THE GATHERED LAMB.


"Stop, Mr. Arthur, if you please. You are not to go upstairs. Mistress
left orders for you to stay in the library until she came down."

So spoke the younger servant at Ashton Grange, as Arthur rushed upstairs
three steps at a time.

"Why, what's the matter? Why shouldn't I go upstairs? Is anything the
matter?"

"I don't know, Mr. Arthur, whether there is much the matter; but I am
afraid Miss Mildred is ill. The doctor is upstairs, and mistress said
there is not to be a sound of noise."

These words quite sobered Arthur, as he turned from the stairs and went
into the library. It was a pleasant room at all times, but especially so
on a winter's evening, when the frosty night was shining clear and cold
without. A bright fire was blazing, lighting up the crimson carpet and
curtains, and sparkling on the snowy table-cover, where preparations for
such a tea were made as Arthur was usually at this time prepared to
appreciate. But as he sat down on the rug, and, holding his face in his
two hands, gazed earnestly into the fire, he was not thinking of his
hunger. A very grave expression was on his boyish face. He was thinking of
what the housemaid had told him, and wishing very much to know more.

"Why, what can be the matter with baby?" he thought. "She was all right
when I went out. She can't be so very bad, I should think, all in a
minute. No; I don't believe she is. I'm hungry."

And Arthur started up, and came nearer the table, intending to help
himself to something. But then he stopped, and thought again--

"I suppose she is though, or else the doctor wouldn't be here, and every
one wouldn't have to be so quiet. Oh, dear, I wish mother would come. I
wish she would come. I do wish very much she would come."

Then he thought of creeping quietly upstairs, and listening outside the
nursery door; and the temptation to do so was very strong; but he
remembered his mother's injunction, and sat down again on the rug. But it
was very hard to wait. It would have been a great deal easier to Arthur to
do almost anything else just then. One half hour and then another passed,
and no sound came to break the stillness which was in the house, till
Arthur's head dropped on his hand for weariness, and in a few minutes he
was fast asleep. How long he remained so he hardly knew; but he did not
wake until a gentle step came on the stairs. The door was softly opened,
and Arthur's mother entered the room. She was very pale, and had a sad,
sad look on her face, and just sank wearily down in an easy-chair, on the
opposite side of the fireplace to her little boy, who was wide awake now.

"Oh, mother, is it true what Anna says about Mildred, that she is so very
ill?" asked Arthur breathlessly. He had come nearer to his mother, and,
leaning his chin on her knee, he looked eagerly up in her face.

"Yes, Arthur;" and the hand that was pressed on his forehead to stroke
back his brown hair was hot and trembling.

"_Very_ ill?" asked Arthur again. "Why, she was a right just after dinner.
She will get better, won't she, mamma?"

Here my Treasurer friend produced a regular form of subscription contract
for a set of books; but it contained no clause about life membership, or
any other membership, and included no promise of anything further than
the delivery of the books.

The honor of such a vice-presidency being thrust upon me was indeed a
thrilling sensation, and the story was told in a fluent, cohesive, and
logical manner; so well, in fact, that had I not known in advance that
it was purely imaginary from beginning to end, I could scarcely have avoided
giving it full acceptance. But I had heard of the story before, and
although partially prepared, it staggered me surprisingly.
I afterwards learned that every one else canvassed by my interviewer was
equally offered one of the "three vice-presidencies."
There appears to be no defense for book clubs against these bogus
impersonations. The injured club, or society, can sustain no claim for any
special damage, because, as not offering its publications in the open
market, it actually suffers no ascertainable loss of patronage.
The principal damage results to those who are thus victimized in permitting
themselves to be deluded into the belief that they are acquiring the valid
editions of reputable clubs. When club publications come into the open
market they are usually picked up with avidity by collectors, and they have
thus grown into very general favor among book-lovers. Indeed, the high
esteem in which they have come to be regarded offers a productive field
for a few crafty publishers to ply their wily designs in. The audacity
of these schemers carries them to such incredible measures that
they sometimes buy sheet-stock from reputable publishing houses, change
the name of the edition, and deliberately manufacture new titles on
which they print the name of some book club or society.

These counterfeits are sold to the unsuspecting book-buyer, who often
imagines he has landed a prize. Later, he is likely to become
disillusioned.

There can be no doubt that the contemptible practice of thus mutilating and
garbling books should be defined as a felony and made punishable by fine
or imprisonment.Presently the
door opened, and he started up eagerly. It was the housemaid, and the
candle that she held in her hand showed a grave, tear-stained face.

"Mr. Arthur, will you come upstairs?" she said. "Mistress sent me to tell
you. Will you come up to the nursery?"

"Why--what--may I really? What, is she better then?" asked Arthur
joyfully, and yet with a certain trembling at his heart, as he saw the
expression on Anna's face.

"Oh, no, Mr. Arthur," she said, bursting into tears. "Poor, dear little
darling, she can't scarce breathe; its dreadful to hear her, and she such
a sweet little pet. Oh, dear, dear, dear, and whatever will mistress do,
and master?"

But Arthur was not crying now as he went slowly up the stairs, feeling as
if it was all a dream, and not at all as if these were the same stairs
that he generally mounted, or that this was the nursery door where he had
generally bounded in with a laughing shout to the bright little sister
who now lay very near the shore of the other land. She was a very little
girl; not two years ago she had first come; and Arthur, who had been
half-afraid of the tiny baby that lay in the nurse's arms so still and
quiet, had by degrees learnt to love her with all his heart. He knew just
the best ways to please her, and to make her voice ring out the merry crow
he so liked to hear; and always, when she saw her brother coming up the
avenue that led to the house, she would stretch out her tiny arms, and try
to jump from her nurse's arms to meet him.

It was only a few hours ago that Arthur had waved his hand to her, and
made Hector jump and roll along the ground, that she might see him. She
had looked so bright and rosy then, and now it was all so different!

The room felt warm as he entered, and there seemed to be a great many
people around the little white bed where Mildred lay. Arthur never, never
forgot that scene; it lay on his heart like a strange, sad picture all his
life. He could not see his little sister's face, only a stray golden curl
was peeping from the white sheet, and lay on the pillow; he could hear her
breathing, and it made his heart quiver to listen to the sounds. The nurse
was standing a little aside; for there was nothing more for her to do. She
had been placing hot flannels, and trying favourite remedies; but these
were all of no avail. The doctor was standing at the post of the bed; for
he knew that Mildred's little life was ebbing fast. And then Arthur looked
at his father and mother. His mother was sitting by the pillow, and she
almost lay upon the bed as she leant over her little dying child. His
father was standing close by, and Arthur looked again at the expression
that was on his face. He was in general a little afraid of his father; in
fact, for the last two or three years he had not seen him at all, and it
was only by the kind letters and messages from India, that he had known
him of late, and he had thought him rather grave and stern, he was so
different from his sweet, gentle mother; and though Arthur loved him at a
distance, he had quite different feelings for her.

But now, as he looked again, he saw that a softness was on his father's
face, and that the hand that was laid on his wife's shoulder was
trembling; and the thought that was in Arthur's mind just then was,
"Father really looks as if he was going to cry."

Presently his mother went a little closer to her baby, and Arthur just
heard her whisper, "Let her die in my arms." His father looked as if he
thought it would be better not. But she looked up again: "Give her, I
must." So very gently she took the covering from the child, and drew her
to her arms.

Little Mildred did not lie there very long. It was terrible to see her,
and Arthur could hardly bear to look; but he did look as the convulsions
made her struggle and gasp for breath.

At length he heard his father's voice in a low whisper say, "She's gone;
thank God." And then he saw him take a little helpless form from his
mother's arms and lay it back on the white bed, and Arthur saw that his
tiny sister was dead. She was lying still, her breath was gone for ever;
her eyes were closed, and her curls lay soft and golden on the pillow. She
would never open her blue eyes again, and her voice would never more call
"Artie, Artie."

He just saw that his mother sunk down on the floor by the bedside. He
could not see her face, but he heard a deep, deep groan, and then she
said, "My baby, my darling." She did not cry, she only knelt there still
and silent; and then suddenly a great rush of feeling came over Arthur's
heart as the thought of sweet little Mildred lying dead came over his
mind, and he threw himself by his mother's side, burying his face on her
shoulder, and burst into a passion of crying. "Oh, mamma, mamma!" was all
he said. "Don't, Arthur; you had better go down stairs, my boy," said his
father gently. But his mother whispered, "Let him stay;" and she threw her
arms round him, and clasped him so tightly that he could hardly breathe.

Perhaps it was good for her to hear her child's sobs; they seemed to enter
into her heart and melt it, for it was icy in its mourning before.

"God has taken our little Mildred," said Arthur's father presently, in a
very choked, quivering voice. "He has taken her to be very happy with
Himself. He will take care of her for ever."

"I know it," said Arthur's mother; "better than we could."

Presently Arthur got up, and before he went away from the room he threw
his arms once more around his little dead sister, and the tears fell over
her golden curls and her round fair cheeks, which were still round and
red.

He cried himself to sleep that night, and when he awoke in the morning it
was with a dreary feeling that a great deal was gone. He was the only
child now, and as he stood by the little open grave where Mildred's tiny
coffin had been lowered, and as he felt the soft, tight clasp of his
mother's hand in his, Arthur felt he would be a loving boy to her.


CHAPTER II.

GOING TO INDIA.


The home seemed very sad and silent indeed without the little child who
had been laid in the low green-covered grave, and a sadness seemed to have
fallen upon it. At first Arthur went about the house silently and slowly,
and it was some time before his boyish spirits came back to him; but he
was only a boy after all, and a very young boy, and by and by, when the
green leaves came budding on the trees and the spring voice was waking in
the valleys and the fields, when the young lambs answered with their
bleating and the young birds sung a chorus of bursting joy, Arthur's face
brightened, and his step was bounding again. And his mother was glad to
see him with the weary cloud gone, only her heart ached with a deep throb
as she thought of the new care that was hanging over him, and of which he
knew nothing as yet.

One day, when Arthur was passing the door of his mother's morning-room, he
heard his father's voice within, saying, "I think you had better tell him,
Louisa." The door was partly open, and if he listened he would easily be
able to hear what they were saying. The temptation was very strong, and
Arthur yielded to it. It was very wrong, and he knew it.

"Oh, no!" he heard his mother say, "I could not tell him; I don't think I
could. It almost breaks my heart to think of it myself."

"Louisa," said his father--and Arthur thought his voice sounded rather
sad--"you know it is your own choice, and even now you can change if you
like."

"Oh, no, no, dear Ronald!" said his mother--and he could hear that her
voice was quivering and trembling--"you know very well I could not.
Forgive me, I ought to be very thankful I have you still; and so I am. But
tell him yourself, Ronald; you know I am so foolish."

"Very well," said Mr. Vivyan, rising and stirring the fire with great
energy, as if he were then acting what he had made up his mind to do.

And then Arthur stole away, feeling very strange with various mingled
feelings. Something seemed to say that the conversation concerned him, but
what it was all about he could not imagine. Something terrible seemed to
be going to happen; something that his mother could not make up her mind
to tell. And then he remembered how very wrong it had been for him to
listen to this conversation. He had always been taught never to do such a
thing, and the consciousness of his fault weighed heavily on his mind. He
wished very much that he had not waited at the door, when he had seen it
stand so temptingly open. Indeed, so much did he think about what he had
done, that the strange things he had heard hardly troubled him.

But by and by, when he was walking through the lanes, where the primroses
were dotting the hedgerows with green and yellow tufts, he began to think
again of what he had heard, and his step was slow and steady as he
thought. He was not the same Arthur who generally bounded along, startling
the little lambs who were feeding on the other side of the hedge; and
Hector seemed puzzled by the unusual quiet as he ran on first, inviting
his master to follow. Altogether it was a very grave and thoughtful walk,
and when Arthur came in, the quiet look was on his face still, and a very
troubled expression could be seen there.

"Arthur dear, is anything the matter?" asked his mother in the evening, as
he sat on his low stool before the fire doing nothing, and thinking again
of what he had heard and what he had done.

Arthur started, and blushed a very deep red.

"Why should you think there was anything the matter, mother?"

"Because I see there is," she said quietly.

He did not answer, and Mr. Vivyan looked out keenly at him, from behind
the book he was reading. But still Arthur had nothing to say, and the
troubled look came deeper on his face. He came nearer to his mother's
chair, and presently when he found himself there he laid his head on her
lap.

"What is it, my darling?" she asked, laying her hand on his brown hair.
Then the tears came into his eyes, and it was not directly that he was
able to say, "Mother, I know it was very wrong of me; but I heard what you
and papa were saying this morning when you were in the boudoir."

"It was very wrong indeed," said Mr. Vivyan; "I did not think you would
have done such a thing, Arthur."

"Oh, Arthur, Arthur!" said his mother very gently and sadly, "why did you,
why did you not remember?"

He was crying now, and he did not need to be told that he had done very
wrong.

"Well, then, you know all about it, I suppose?" said Arthur's father.

"No, I don't, papa. I only heard that something dreadful was going to
happen; and you told mother to tell some one, and she said she couldn't;
and then you said you would, and I don't remember the rest."

Mr. Vivyan smiled rather sadly, and Arthur felt his mother's arm more
closely clasped around him.

"Was it about me?" asked Arthur presently.

Mr. Vivyan looked up at his wife, and then he said, "Arthur, my boy, when
I was in India before, why did your mother stay in England?"

"I don't know," said Arthur, somewhat surprised at the question. "To take
care of me, I suppose. Oh no, it wasn't, though; it was because she was
ill, and she couldn't live in India, the doctor said."

"Yes; and now, is she as ill as she was then?"

"Oh no, I should think not!" said Arthur brightly. "She is ever so much
better, aren't you, mother?"

"Yes, dear," she said gently.

"Well," said Mr. Vivyan, speaking very slowly, and laying his hand kindly
on Arthur's curls, "did you know, Arthur, that my time for being in
England is very nearly over? there are only six weeks more left."

"Yes, father," said Arthur, and feeling his father's hand laid so tenderly
on his head, he felt more sorry at the thought that he was going than he
had ever done before. "I'm very sorry."

"But then, don't you see, my boy," Mr. Vivyan said, looking anxious and as
if he had great difficulty in expressing himself, "your mother need not
stay at home this time?"

"No," said Arthur, after a pause, "I suppose not. And am I going to India
too?"

"Why no, my dear child. You know how glad we should be to take you with
us; and very likely you do not know, Arthur, what it costs us to leave you
at home. But you know you could not go; children of your age would very
likely not live."

Arthur turned quickly round, and gazed with an incredulous, questioning
look at his father and mother. He could not see his mother's face, for it
was hidden by her hand; but if he had looked closely he might have seen
that her whole form was trembling, though she did not speak a word.

"Papa," said Arthur presently, "what can you mean? Do you really mean that
you and mother are going out to India, and that you are going to leave me
in England by myself?"

"Dear Arthur, you know we must."

Arthur turned away, and for a little while he said nothing. Presently he
spoke--it seemed as if half to himself--"No, I don't believe that," he
said. "I don't believe that could be true."

"Arthur, my darling, darling boy, come here," said his mother, after some
time when nobody had spoken.

Arthur came nearer to his mother, and laid his head upon her knee. He was
feeling almost stunned, and as if he had not understood yet what he had
heard. Then a sudden thought came over him, that it meant he would soon
not be able to do this any more.

"Mamma," he said in a low voice, which was very touchingly sad in its
hopelessness, "need you go? Wouldn't you rather stay at home with me?"

"Oh, Arthur," said Mrs. Vivyan, "you must not say those things, dear."

"Won't you take me with you, then? I don't believe I could stay at home
without you. Won't you take me? Oh, do! please, do!"

All this was said in a very low, mournful voice; for Arthur felt almost
as if he had not strength to cry about it.

"Arthur," said Mr. Vivyan, speaking gravely but kindly, "I tell you we
would if we could; but you must be contented to believe that it cannot
be."

"But I am sure it would do me no harm, father; you don't know how much
heat I can bear. I believe I am better sometimes in hot weather. And oh! I
don't believe I _could_ live in England by myself."

He gave a very weary sigh, and leant his head heavily on his mother.
Presently he felt a tear on his forehead, and he knew that she must be
crying.

"My own darling little mamma," said Arthur, "I love you with my whole
heart. Oh, you don't know how very much I love you!" and he gave a deep,
weary sigh.

She put her arm round him, and pressed him very closely to her heart; and
he felt as if he were a tired little baby, and that it was very nice to
have his mother's arm around him. By and by he began crying; not with a
hard, passionate feeling, but in a weak, weary way, the tears flowing down
one after another over his mother's hands.

"My dear child," said Mr. Vivyan, as the time came nearer for Arthur to go
to bed, "you don't know what it is to your mother and to me to leave you;
but we hope you will be happy by and by, for your aunt will be very kind
to you, and will love you very much. She lives in a very nice part of the
country. You may be sure, Arthur, we should be quite certain that every
one would be kind to you."

"Do you mean that I am to live with some other person?" asked Arthur
listlessly.

"Yes, with my sister; that is, your aunt."

It did not seem to matter very much to Arthur just then where he was
going, or what was to become of him. He knew his father and mother were
going away, and that he was to be left all alone, quite alone it seemed to
him, and a very desolate, forlorn feeling fell over his heart, and seemed
to make him feel numbed and heavy.

"Good night, my own dear mother," said Arthur, as he took his candle. He
was not crying, and there was almost a little wan smile on his face as he
said it, making him look very different from the bright, joyous boy who
generally threw his arms around her neck with an embrace, which was most
emphatic as well as affectionate. He did not know how her heart was aching
for him, and he knew still less of the pain his father felt, but could not
show.

As Arthur sunk on his knees that night by the side of his little bed where
the firelight was brightening and glowing, a deep sob came up from the
very depths of his heart; and when he tried to pray, all he could say was,
"O God, take care of me; for there is nobody else."

Arthur knew what it was to have put his trust in the Saviour of the world,
but hitherto everything had been so bright, and things had come and gone
so smoothly, that he had not thought much about Him. He stayed awake a
very long time, waiting to see if his mother would come and talk to him,
as she very often did when there was anything to say. He did not know what
had passed when he had left the library, that his mother's head had sunk
low, and her heart had shed the tears that he had not seen, and that now
came flowing from her eyes. And he did not know that she was utterly unfit
to speak to any one, so that when she stopped at his door, and seemed to
be going in, his father had said--

"No, Louisa, you must not; I will go and tell him that you would come, but
that you can't."

So that was how it was when Arthur heard his bedroom door open, and looked
round with an eager longing in his eye. He sunk back again on his pillow
when he saw that it was his father that was coming towards him, and he lay
there quite quietly without moving, so that Mr. Vivyan almost thought he
was asleep.

"Arthur," he said, "your mother wished me to tell you that she would have
come to see you herself, only she was not able. You know, my dear little
boy, she is quite ill with the thought of your trouble; and won't you try
and be cheerful, for I am sure you would not like to make her ill, would
you, Arthur?"

"No, father," said Arthur, in a very quiet voice, without lifting his head
or looking up.

"Good night, my child," said his father, stooping down and kissing him;
and then as he took his candle and went away from the room he said to
himself, "He is a very strange boy--very strange indeed. After all, I
don't think he takes it so very much to heart as Louisa imagines."

But he did not know. When Arthur heard his door shut, and when he knew
that no one would come in again, the storm began, and it was a storm of
passion when sorrow, and anger, and affection all raged together.

Arthur had always been a passionate child, and now the wild tempest that
nobody saw showed plainly his uncontrolled feelings. "Oh, dear! oh, dear!
what shall I do?" moaned the poor child to himself, tossing on his bed.
"And am I making mamma ill too? But how can I help it? How _can_ I help
it? I can't help being most frightfully miserable; yes, and angry too. I
am angry. Why did he come back from India to take mother away? I don't
believe she wants to go. Yes, I suppose she does though. Oh, I wish, I
wish he had never come back from India! Everything has gone wrong since. I
don't love him one bit. I wish, oh, I wish it was as it used to be once!"

Poor Arthur, he sobbed and moaned until he was tired, and the knowledge
that he was very wicked did not certainly make him happier.

He sobbed himself to sleep that night, and when the morning sunbeams stole
into the room and lighted on the white curtains of his bed, he awoke with
a dull, desolate feeling of a great pain in his heart.


CHAPTER III.

ARTHUR'S MOTHER; OR, "SAFE IN THE ARMS OF JESUS."


Mrs. Vivyan's morning-room was on the pleasant sunny side of the house,
and was a very favourite retreat of her little boy. Indeed there was one
corner of it which he considered as especially his own. It was a little
sofa near the window, rather hidden in a recess, so that any one might be
lying there and not be seen. Perhaps this idea of privacy was one thing
which made Arthur like it; and then it was near the window, from which
he could see the garden and the birds; and he liked to watch the sun
sparkling on the pond, and making diamond showers of the fountain, which
sometimes he would persuade the gardener to do for him.

And now, with his new deep trouble weighing on his heart, he sought his
usual refuge. Nobody was in the room as Arthur and his companion, Hector,
came in, Arthur throwing himself wearily on the sofa, and Hector making
himself comfortable on the rug.

"Oh, dear!" groaned Arthur, after a while; "I don't think mother cares
very much. Come here, sir; do you care?"

Hector came, and obediently lay down near the sofa.

"Father doesn't care much, that I'm pretty sure of," continued Arthur;
"but I don't mind that so much. I wonder will mother miss me in India. I
wonder will you miss me, Hector, old boy. You ought, and you will too, I
expect. Do you think you will, Hector? Speak to me, do!"

But Hector only gravely wagged his tail.

"Oh, dear! I wish a great deal," said Arthur.

Just then there was a rustling noise at the door, and Arthur lay very
still and quiet as he saw that it was his mother who was coming in. He was
hidden on his sofa, so she did not see that he was there.

Presently she took her work from the table, and sat down in a low chair by
the fire; and Arthur watched her as she sat there, and gazed at her sweet,
gentle face.

He could not understand all that was there; but he could see enough to
make him very sorry that he had said "Mother doesn't care much."

There was such a look of patient sweetness there, and the eyes that she
now and then lifted up were deep with an expression of pain, only over it
all peace was shedding a softness and beauty that he could feel. He
watched her for a long time in silence, until at last a look of intense
pain seemed to furrow her brow, and suddenly she buried her face in her
hands, and he could just hear her say, "My darling, my darling!"

Arthur started up, and as she heard the sound she looked over to where
he was.

"My dear little Arthur, I did not know any one was in the room."

"Mamma, I did not mean to hide--to look--I mean, to listen. I forgot I
ought to have said I was here. Mother, may I say what I was thinking
before you came in?"

"Yes, darling. I always like to hear your thoughts."

"I was just thinking that you didn't seem to care so very much."

"What about?" asked his mother.

"Oh, about all those dreadful things--about dear little Mildred having
died, and about my being left all by myself."

It was not just directly that Mrs. Vivyan was able to answer, and then
she said:

"When you are older, darling, you will find out that it is not always the
people who talk and cry most, who feel things most; and that there is such
a thing as saying 'Thy will be done,' and of not giving way to all our
feelings for the sake of others."

"Ah, yes; that is what I ought to do," said Arthur with a deep sigh.

"Arthur, dear," said Mrs. Vivyan presently, looking straight into the
fire, and closing her hands very tightly, "don't ever think I do not care
or feel. Oh, you never can know how much I have felt! You know nothing
about the hungry feeling in my heart when I think of my darling, darling
little baby, whom God is taking care of now; and how, when I see the
little bed she used to lie on, and her little frocks and shoes, I feel
something biting in my heart, and as if I _must_ have her in my arms
again. And about you, my own precious boy, God knows how I feel, as I
never could express to you; but I can tell Him, and I do."

And Arthur's mother buried her face again in her hands, and burst into an
agony of weeping. He had never seen her cry like that before, and it was
something quite new to him to see his sweet, gentle mother so moved. He
hardly knew what to say to her; so he rose from his sofa, and coming close
up to her chair, he threw his arms with a fervent embrace around her, and
said softly:

"Never mind, my own dear mother; I will try and bear it."

And then Arthur cried too; for the bitterness of what it would be to bear
it came over him.

"God will bless us both in it, my darling," said his mother; "and He will
take care of us while we are separated, and bring us back to each other
again some day, I trust. But Arthur, my own, am I leaving you in a loving
Saviour's arms? Are you there, folded in His everlasting arms?"

"Mother," said Arthur in a faltering voice, "I do really believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ. I am nearly sure I do. But I don't feel happy. I don't
think much about Him, and it makes me feel frightened when I think about
dying."

"But He says, 'Trust, and not be afraid,' and He says, 'I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee.' Oh, Arthur, I do leave you in His arms! for I am
sure you are there if you trust in Him; and perhaps He is taking me away
so that you may feel His arms, and that it is a very sweet thing to be
there, and to be loved and taken care of for ever. As I do," she added,
"in the midst of all my sorrows."


CHAPTER IV.

LAST DAYS AT ASHTON GRANGE.


Mrs. Estcourt, Mr. Vivyan's only sister, was a widow lady living by
herself. Her home was in the neighbourhood of a large town, and here, in a
comfortable, moderately-sized house, she had lived for many years. She had
no children of her own, and when her husband had died she had seemed to
wish to avoid much intercourse with any one, so that Arthur knew very
little of his aunt. Once or twice he had seen her when she had paid very
short visits at Ashton Grange. He remembered a very sad-looking lady, with
a sweet face, who had held his hand as he stood by her chair, and that he
had half liked it, and felt half awkward as she spoke to him. He
remembered that as he had stood there, he had felt afraid to move or
fidget in the least bit, and that every now and then, as he had stolen a
glance at her, he had seen that her large dark eyes had been fixed upon
him. He had been very glad when the nursery dinner-bell rang and he was
obliged to go, without seeming to wish to run away.

"Nurse," said Arthur that day at dinner, "there's a black lady down
stairs."

"A black lady!" said nurse; "there's a way to speak of your aunt, Master
Arthur. Mrs. Estcourt is your papa's own sister."

"Well, she looked all black, I know," said Arthur. "I think I won't go
down stairs much while she is there."

Nurse remarked that if he were going to stay she hoped he would be quiet
and well-behaved; but as he had to keep all his quiet behaviour for the
drawing-room, it is to be feared nurse's temper was tried a little during
the few days that Mrs. Estcourt passed at Ashton Grange. Consequently
Arthur's memories of his aunt were not such as to make him very happy at
the prospect of living with her always.

"Mother," said Arthur, on the evening of the day after he had heard about
these strange things that were going to happen, "is the aunt that I am
going to live with, that one that came here once?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Vivyan; "She is very kind, Arthur, and I know she will
love you very much, if----"

"Yes, if I am good, I know," said Arthur; "and that's just the difference.
You know, mamma, you always love me, whatever I am."

"Of course," said his mother, smiling; "but you could not expect any one
to love you in the way your mother does. You would not like her to be your
mother, would you?"

"No, of course not. Now, mother, tell me something about what her place is
like, and where it is, and what sort of things I shall do when I am there.
I have loads of questions to ask, only I forget them now."

"Well, begin then," said his mother; "perhaps one will remind you of
another."

"First of all, then, what is the name of her place?"

"Myrtle Hill, near Stanton."

"Myrtle Hill! what a funny name. Is it at all like this, mother?"

"No, dear, not much. I am afraid it is a much more orderly kind of place.
But I will try to describe it to you. It is a good many years since I was
there, and I did not notice things so very much. It is a white house with
myrtle trained over the lower parts, and a great many myrtle trees growing
in the avenue; that is why it is called Myrtle Hill. I know there is a
large garden with a good many shady places under the trees, that I
remember thinking would be delightful in the summer. There is a front
garden too."

"That's nice," said Arthur.

"Oh, but I don't expect your aunt will like little boys to have the run of
her garden!"

"I daresay she will," said Arthur. "She is going to be very fond of me,
you know."

"Well, that is question number one. Now, what is the second?"

"Yes; where does she live?"

"It is a good way from this; about six hours by the train, and five miles
from Stanton."

"Oh, yes! and that reminds me of another question. How am I to learn? Will
she teach me? I hope not."

"No," said Mrs. Vivyan; "we have thought you are old enough to go to
school now. There is a very good school between your aunt's house and the
town. It is about two miles from Myrtle Hill, and you would go there every
morning and come back early in the evening."

"Ah, I like that very much," said Arthur joyfully; "that really is jolly,
mother. Who keeps the school?"

"A very nice gentleman. Your father has known him for a long time."

"He is tremendously strict, I suppose?"

"Well, I daresay he likes to be obeyed," said Mrs. Vivyan; "but that is
quite right, isn't it?"

"Yes, of course," Arthur answered. "What is his name, mother?"

"Mr. Carey."

"Well, I don't like that name," said Arthur emphatically; "but I suppose
he can't help that. Does he wear spectacles?"

"No, I should think not," said Mrs. Vivyan, smiling; "he is not old
enough. I think he is not quite so old as your father."

"I suppose he is rather young then. I am glad of that. I should never be
so much afraid of youngish people as of old ones."

"Any more questions?" asked Mrs. Vivyan presently. "There is one question
you have not asked, Arthur, darling, that I was expecting, and it is the
one question that my heart is paining to have to answer."

"What can it be, mother?" said Arthur wonderingly. "I think I have asked a
great many. What can it be?"

And then he thought for a little while very earnestly. At length a
troubled look came into his eyes, and he looked at his mother, and said
softly--

"I know, mother, I know, and I am rather afraid to ask; but I must, for I
want to know. When am I going?" The question came out very slowly.

"Arthur, my own darling little boy," said his mother, pressing her arm
very closely around him, and he could hear the quiver in her voice as she
spoke, "it is very soon. We did not tell you until just at the end, when
we were obliged to do it; because what was the use of making you unhappy
before we need?"

"Well, when is it?" said Arthur.

"It is the day after to-morrow."

"Oh, mother, mother!" was all Arthur said; and he became very still
indeed.

By and by he said, in a very troubled voice, "I wish I had known it
before."

"Why, dear?"

"Because then--oh, mother!" said Arthur, bursting into tears, "I would
have stayed with you all the day, and I would not have done anything you
don't like."

And then the tears came into his mother's eyes, and she said tenderly--

"But I knew it, Arthur dear, and I kept you with me as much as I could.
And, my darling, you do not often do things I don't like."

"Oh, yes I do, mother, very often!" said Arthur, sobbing still.

"Well, dear, if you do, I know that with it all you really do love me."

Arthur gave her hand a passionate squeeze, and said, "Indeed, indeed I do,
mother."

And then Arthur said no more, but fell into a grave fit of musing.
Presently he roused himself, and said, "But, mamma, how can I go in two
days? Are there not things to be done? Mustn't I have a lot of new
clothes, and ever so many things?"

"But, don't you see," said Mrs. Vivyan with a smile, half amused and half
sad, "I have known it for a long time, and I have been making arrangements
that my little boy knew nothing about."

"Oh, well," said Arthur with a deep sigh.

"Would you like to see some of the things that you are going to take away
with you?" asked his mother.

"Yes, I think I should," said Arthur; but he spoke so hesitatingly; for
dearly as he liked preparations for a journey, he remembered with a bitter
pang what the preparations were for, and what the cause of the journey
was.

Mrs. Vivyan opened the door of a small room adjoining her own, which was
generally kept locked, and where, Arthur knew, he was not expected to go
without being allowed. There was a large table near the window; it was
covered with various things; there was a leather writing-case, a new
paint-box, and a Polyglot Bible; there were several new books too, and a
very large pile of new clothes, but they did not take up much of Arthur's
attention. His quick eyes soon detected a fishing rod and cricket bat,
that stood in the corner of the room near by; indeed there seemed to be
nothing that his kind father and mother had not provided. He noticed
something else that was there, and that was a Russia-leather purse; and
when he took it to examine the inside he found that it was not empty--the
first thing he saw was a five pound note!

"Oh, mamma!" What should he do? No key!

No chance of handling such precious tomes till the morning light
with the landlord returned!

"He moved backwards and forwards with a hurried step, prepared his
pocketknife to cut out the panes of glass and untwist the brazen
wires; but a 'prick of conscience' made him desist from carrying
his wicked design into execution.

Ferdinand then advanced towards the window, and, throwing it open and
listening to the rich notes of a concert of nightingales, forgot
the cause of his torments--his situation reminded him of _The Churl
and the Bird_--he rushed with renewed madness into the cupboard,
then searched for the bell, but finding none, he made all sorts of
strange noises.

The landlady rose, and, conceiving robbers to have broken into the
stranger's room, came and demanded the cause of the disturbance.

"'Madam,' said Ferdinand, 'is there no possibility of inspecting
the books in the cupboard? Where is the key?'
"'Alack, sir,' rejoined the landlady, 'what is there that thus
disturbs you in the sight of those books?

Let me shut the closet-door and take away the key of it, and you will
then sleep in peace.'
"'Sleep in peace!' resumed Ferdinand; 'Sleep in wretchedness, you
mean!

I can have no peace unless you indulge me with the key of the book-case.
To whom do such gems belong?'
"'Sir, they are not stolen goods!'
"'Madam, I ask pardon. I did not mean to question their being honest property,
but'--
"'Sir, they are not mine or my husband's.'
"'Who, madam, who is the lucky owner?'
"'An elderly gentleman of the name of--sir, I am not at liberty to mention
his name, but they belong to an elderly gentleman.'
"'Will he part with them? Where does he live? Can you introduce me to him?'

"The good woman soon answered all Ferdinand's rapid queries, but the result
was by no means satisfactory to him.

"He learnt that these uncommonly scarce and precious volumes belonged
to an ancient gentleman whose name was studiously concealed, but who was
in the habit of coming once or twice a week, during the autumn, to
smoke his pipe and lounge over his books, sometimes making extracts from
them and sometimes making observations in the margin with a pencil.

Whenever a very curious passage occurred, he would take out a small
memorandum book and put on a pair of large tortoise-shell spectacles
with powerful magnifying glasses in order to insert this passage with
particular care and neatness. He usually concluded his evening amusements
by sleeping in the very bed in which Ferdinand had been lying.

"Such intelligence only sharpened the curiosity and increased the
restlessness of poor Ferdinand.

He retired to his bibliomaniacal bed, but not to repose. The morning
sunbeams, which irradiated the bookcase with complete effect, shone upon
his pallid countenance and thoughtful brow. He rose at five, walked
in the meadows till seven, returned and breakfasted, stole upstairs
to take a farewell peep at his beloved _Morte d'Arthur_, sighed 'three
times and more,' paid his reckoning, apologized for the night's adventure,
told the landlady he would shortly come and visit her again and try to
pay his respects to the anonymous old gentleman.

"'Meanwhile,' said he, 'I will leave no bookseller's shop in the neighbourhood
unvisited till I gain intelligence of his name and character.'
"The landlady eyed him steadily, took a pinch of snuff with a significant
air, and returning with a smile of triumph to her kitchen, thanked
her stars that she had got rid of such a madman!"
To return, however, to the subject more immediately in hand, it
will be observed that the present age is more prolific of bibliophiles
than any preceding one, and that the growing interest in collecting fine
books is attended by a relatively increasing demand for a higher standard
of excellency of manufacture. A few years ago, there were only two or three
publishers in this country who "specialized" in fine editions, while at
present there are no less than thirty publishing houses, large and small,
and as many more "private presses" engaged in the production of beautiful
books to appease the demands of book-buyers.

Many of these are well established and conducted upon thoroughly honest
business principles; some, unfortunately, are not.
The publication and sale of books--especially the so-called "de luxe"
editions--is, like some other branches of industry, beset with numerous
evils; so many sharp practices, indeed, having been resorted to by a few
conscienceless publishers, and by a certain class of unscrupulous agents,
that buyers have become wary, not to say weary, of being made the victims
of their deceptive inventions. It is indeed lamentable that a few such
pestiferous schemers should thus bring a certain degree of reproach
upon the entire publishing business. It is a common practice among
these _soi-disant_ publishers--many of whom possess neither capital, credit,
nor sense of honor--to buy some lot of etchings or old prints from a
junk-shop, or second-hand dealer, at a trifling price, and thereupon
work the same off on credulous admirers of rare prints for possibly a
thousand times their real value.

And it is a common practice for these insidious sharks further to prey
upon unsuspecting book-buyers by obtaining publications of reputable houses
and falsifying them by the insertion of spurious titles calculated
to delude the buyer into the belief that there are "only fifty
copies issued."

Many of them are ostracized book-salesmen who have at some previous
time enjoyed the confidence of their employers, but have been
ex-communicated by all honest publishers and booksellers on account
of dishonest proclivities.

They are therefore set adrift to prey upon the public, and are a
constant menace to both publishers and buyers.

I shall pay my further respects to these counterfeiters later on
when I come to the subject of Book Clubs; in the mean while, it
need hardly be pointed out that reprehensible methods of this kind
are uniformly condemned among all respectable publishers and
book-dealers, and that buyers should cautiously discriminate against
those who practice them.

It is not surprising that even the honest publishers and dealers themselves
are occasionally made the scapegoats of these obnoxious parasites; but the
astute collector is rarely "caught" by their schemes; and after a
book-buyer has passed the primary or "experience" stages of
book-collecting, he (or she) is designated as a "dead one," in the
common parlance of the underground trade here referred to.

Fortunate, indeed, are the bibliophiles who have passed unscathed into the
category of "dead ones."

That my present condemnatory observations are not directed against that great
majority of publishers, booksellers, and agents whose methods in
business are founded upon sincerity and integrity, will, I take it,
be clearly understood; and I am, indeed, forced partially to disagree
with Mr.

Joline in his vigorous and general proscription of "subscription book-agents,"
for experience shows that there are many worthy people of this class,
however much they may suffer by the sins of some of their kind.

An acquaintance once said to me that he would "_never buy another book_,"
because he had been "buncoed" by a book-agent, to whom he otherwise
referred with an uncomplimentary adjective.

But this did not convince me that his position was more logical
than that of the man who declared he would never take another bath
because a watch had been stolen from his pocket while he was in
bathing at some beach resort.

It is incomprehensible that any one could imagine that our paper
currency system is fraudulent because there are a few "green-goods"
men in the country, or because counterfeit bills appear every now
and then.

We read so much in the papers nowadays of the extravagant sums paid
for rare books by our modern millionaire bibliomaniacs that one is apt
to become somewhat panic-stricken upon experiencing the first
symptoms of the bibliomania.

While these more opulent victims of book-madness vie with one another
in the auction-room, the rational bibliophile sits in the gallery
and views with silent awe and amazement the scrimmage over some
apparently trifling volume that wouldn't fetch ten cents, but for
the fact that it is "unique," and that so and so paid a stupendous
sum for it at some previous sale.

Despair not, dear bibliophile, of never being able to join in the mad
scramble for these "uniques;" nor need you feel that they are essential to
the formation of a library. They possess no virtues perceptible to the
ordinary bibliophile, and it requires all the eloquence of a Cicero to
elucidate their charms when displaying them to friends. For after all,
the chief point of interest in such books is their cost price, and
this you may be obliged to refrain from mentioning for fear you will be
accused of being mentally unbalanced.

It is not necessary to squander a fortune in collecting a library,
nor to be hasty in buying every book you come across.

Better go slowly and select wisely; you will derive more enjoyment from
it, and in later years have less to charge to "experience account."
There are a few "busy" book-collectors who intrust the selection of their
books to secretaries or librarians, and thus sacrifice the keenest
enjoyment of this captivating pursuit. Of all absurdities, this seems the
most insupportable. It would be far more sensible to have your secretary
select your friends, because if you should happen not to like these, you
could abandon them without ceremony or expense.

Why not also attend the opera and your various social functions by
proxy, through your secretary?

If he were as good a courtier as he is "literary adviser," he might succeed
in getting as much enjoyment out of the receptions and dinners as you
would, if you were to attend in person.

Then, think of the _time_ you would save! We frequently hear the remark: "I
have no time to devote to my library.

I am very fond of books, but haven't time to collect or read them." And yet
seeing what may be done in this regard by care and system, and that the
greatest readers have been the busiest men, it seems strange that persons
of intelligence should thus express themselves; should admit such
obvious fatuity of view and procedure.

In referring to this class of book-buyers, Roswell Field says, "The
book-lover, so-called, who lacks any of the thrills that go with the
_establishment_ as well as the enjoyment of a library in all of its
appointments has deprived himself of many of the most pleasurable
literary and semi-literary emotions.

That bibliophile never pats his horse or his dog. To him his books are
merely tools of trade, accessories to knowledge, to be pawed over, thrown
away and replaced by new copies when worn out. He glories in the fact
that his books are his servants rather than his companions, and he affects
to despise and laugh at the sentimental relation which others have
established with their books. Look out for that man! He is not of us; he
is not of the elect; there is as little of warmth and the genial
glow of fellowship in his library as in the middle gallery of the
catacombs in the Appian Way.

His very books cry out against him; but he hears them not, for he is deaf
as well as blind."

One of the busiest men in New York City, whose name is familiar in
financial circles throughout the civilized world, is one of the
most voracious collectors of the age.

He probably transacts more business in a day than half a dozen ordinarily
busy men, and yet finds time to give his personal attention to
every minute detail of his vast collections, to which are added
hundreds, and probably thousands, of items every year.

This is only one of many such examples among our busiest men.

I have often heard persons lament in a pensive and apologetic sort of
way, "Yes, I have a great weakness for fine books." The very presence
of this mis-called weakness, however, is unmistakable proof of great mental
strength, and those who suffer from it may find solace in the fact that
the giants of commerce, leading statesmen, and great men of affairs in
general are frequently thus afflicted all through the periods of their
greatest activity and success. What can possibly afford a more
agreeable relaxation from the toils and perplexities of the day than
to recline in an easy chair before an open grate fire in the
library, surrounded by the silently reposing tomes which record and
preserve the noblest thoughts of past and present generations?

Surely no enjoyment in the home or office can be more delectable
and unfailing in assuaging the worry and solicitude of a strenuous
life than the silent companionship of books.

It is a noteworthy fact that a large percentage of the leading stock
brokers, bankers, active statesmen, and sedulous lawyers are
bibliophiles.

I attribute this to the fact that all of these vocations are extremely
taxing upon the nervous system, and those men who are busily engaged
in them are, during the intermittent hours of rest and recreation,
naturally inclined to seek the most enjoyable and refreshing
diversions; for, as Horace says,--
. . . nunc veterum libris, nunc somno et inertibus horis Ducere
sollicitae jocunda oblivia vitae.

Along with old books, or a nap, and divine hours of leisure-- To taste thus
forgetfulness--sweet, in the midst of life's troubles.

In an article written for The Bibliophile Society's (1903) Year
Book, Caroline Ticknor says, "The true book-lover loves his books
for their helpfulness, for their companionship; but he regards them
as well for their elegant settings."

She also observes that "strange as the anomaly may seem, there are still
many persons of ample means, and some education, who, although they would
be horrified at the very thought of admitting to the home a cheap rug
or vase, to destroy the harmony and bring discord and confusion into the
luxuriance of the furnishings, yet will nonchalantly tolerate the incongruity
of a miserable fragment of a library made up of the cheapest and meanest
editions to be found in the market, such as would be scorned by those of
the most limited means and plebeian tastes. These will be found
inappropriately housed amid the most sumptuous surroundings.

A single rug to adorn the floor, or a single vase resting on a mantle, will
often be found to have cost ten times as much as the whole home library.
And yet the intellects of these people have been nurtured and trained
in their youth by the brilliant thoughts of ancient and modern writers!
Even the favorite author, be it Shakespeare, Dickens, Longfellow,
Tennyson, or some other, is frequently represented by a half dozen or
so disconsolate-looking volumes, the remainder of the set either never
having been bought, or else, if bought, thrown aside, or strewn around
the attic, or abandoned as a child would discard a toy which
afforded it no further amusement.

"It is worthy of remark, however, that the enormously increased demand of
late for beautiful books evinces the fact that cultured and wealthy
people are growing to appreciate the importance not only of having
a good library, but that its quality should embody a degree of
estheticism to correspond with the surroundings."

Many of the most delightful persons, well read and competent to discourse
intelligently upon the merits of books and authors, have never experienced
a single pulsation of true bibliophilism; they have never known
the joy of possessing and admiring a beautiful book, and that the
attachment one bears for such a treasure is wholly reciprocal.

They have not learned that fine books, like human beings, are capable
of mutual affection, and that it is not necessary to devour them in order
to value their charms. "We do not gather books to read them, my Boeotian
friend," says Mr. Joline; "the idea is a childish delusion. 'In early life,'
says Walter Bagehot, 'there is an opinion that the obvious thing to
do with a horse is to ride it; with a cake, to eat it; with a
sixpence to spend it.'

A few boyish persons carry this further, and think that the natural thing
to do with a book is to read it. The mere reading of a rare book is a
puerility, an idiosyncrasy of adolescence; it is the _ownership_
of the book which is the matter of distinction.

The collector of coins does not accumulate his treasures for the purpose
of ultimately spending them in the marketplace. The lover of postage-stamps,
small as his horizon may be, does not hoard his colored bits of paper
with the intent to employ them in the mailing of letters. When some one
complained to Bedford that a book which he had bound did not shut properly,
he exclaimed, 'Why, bless me, sir, you've been _reading_ it!'"

Herrick says that "the truest owner of a library is he who has bought each
book for the love he bears to it; who is happy and content to say, 'Here
are my jewels, my choicest possessions!'" Seneca, the great Roman
philologer, wrote: "If you are fond of books, you will escape the
_ennui_ of life; you will neither sigh for evening, disgusted with the
occupations of the day, nor will you live dissatisfied with yourself or
unprofitable with others." "I am quite transported and comforted in the
midst of my books," says the younger Pliny, who was an ardent book-fancier;
"they give a zest to the happiest and assuage the anguish of the bitterest
moments of existence. Therefore, whether distracted by the cares
or losses of my family or my friends, I fly to my library as the only
refuge in distress: here I learn to bear adversity with fortitude."

Southey thus immortalizes his speechless, yet beloved, library companions:

My never failing friends are they, With whom I converse day by day.

Balfour is no less eloquent in paying worthy tribute to his library:
"The world may be kind or hostile; it may seem to us to be hastening
on the wings of enlightenment and progress to an imminent millennium,
or it may weigh us down with the sense of insoluble difficulty and
irremediable wrong; but whatever else it may be, so long as we have
good health and a library, it can never be dull."

"Bookes," said the immortal Milton, "demeane themselves as well as
men.

Books are not absolutely dead things, but doe contain a potencie
of life in them to be as active as that soule was whose progeny
they are: nay they do preserve as in a violl the purest efficacie
and extraction of that living intellect that bred them.

Unlesse warinesse be us'd, as good almost kill a Man as kill a good Book;
who kills a man kills a reasonable creature, God's Image; but Hee
who destroys a good Booke, kills reason itselfe, kills the image of God,
as it were in the eye."
In the garnering of book-treasures, some collectors are prompted wholly by
mercenary motives--most of them, fortunately, are not. There are
biblio-mercenaries of such sordid inclinations that they would readily
part with almost any book in their possession,--even inscribed presentation
copies!--if lightly tempted with money considerations.
Verily, these parsimonious traders would barter their own souls, if they
possessed any value.

I am indebted to the Secretary of a well-known book club for the following
facts, to confirm which I saw all the correspondence. A certain
book-buyer joined the club some time ago, and subscribed for the first
publication issued after he became a member. Upon receiving the work
he wrote: "I consider them among the most beautiful examples of book-making
that I have ever seen, and prize them above all other books in my
library."

Six months later he sold the copy to a book-agent for twice its original
cost. He "passed" the next publication issued by the club, as it did not
interest him, but appended a postscript to his letter, saying: "If any
member wants an extra copy, I have no objection to one being issued upon
my membership and turned over to him, provided I receive the increase
in price."
The following humorous incident is recorded in the (1903) Year Book of
another prominent book club. It may be explained that the club issued a
very elaborate and beautiful publication, printed upon deckle edge
handmade paper, illustrated with remarque proof copperplate etchings
on Japanese vellum, and in duplicate without remarque on Whatman
paper: "One of the members upon receiving the first two volumes of
the ---- publication, writes: 'The Society starts out by making the
worst kind of a blunder.

The man's picture in the front of the volume is put in twice and
on _two kinds of paper_. I could excuse this error, but imagine my
horror when upon turning to the back of the volume I found the _same
mistake repeated_. This is too much.' He closed by expressing a desire
to resign, saying that he did not know he 'was joining a faddists club,'
and takes occasion to remark further that 'the books are cheaply
finished, not even being trimmed and gilded;' also that he 'can buy
better books in the stores, _with full gilt edges_, for less money.'"

So much has been written about the vagaries of book-collectors and bibliomaniacs
that the subject has long since become threadbare, and about the
only unexplored field of labor left to the choice of him who would
gain a hearing with the reader--if one can be found who is not
already weary of reading what the wags think of his (or her) own
peculiar whims--is to fall in with the spirit of the age and compile
an "International Library of the World's Greatest Gibberish about
Bibliomaniacs."

We have the "World's Greatest" everything else in book-lore, and I shall not
be surprised if some enterprising publisher gets out a "definitive" _de
luxe_ edition of the "World's Greatest Dictionaries."

Indeed, the Holy Bible itself has not escaped, for they are now
making a "de luxe" edition, in fourteen volumes!

to be sold by subscription. It will not be an "Autograph Edition," however.

The freaks and fancies of capricious book-gatherers and bibliomaniacs have
undergone so few changes in the last hundred years that modern writers
on Bibliomania, after vainly searching the horizon for some new development
in the way of symptoms of the disease, or characteristics of those
afflicted, have wandered off into the verdure of adjacent fields to avoid
repetition.

Any one who took notice of things could see that no
children belonged to Myrtle Hill. Everything was in the most perfect
order. The hair mats were white and unruffled, the chairs were placed in
an orderly manner against the wall, and no dust lay upon them. Just as
Arthur was looking round with an admiring eye, one of the doors opened;
and a lady appeared, that he knew was his aunt. It was almost like a new
introduction to him, for he had not seen her for a very long time, and
then only for a day or two. She greeted her brother very warmly, and then
she turned to him. "And so this is Arthur," she said; and it was almost
timidly that she spoke, for she was almost as much afraid of her little
nephew, as he was of her. "Ronald, he is a great deal more like Louisa
than you. His eyes are like hers."

"Yes, I believe he is generally considered to be so," said Mr. Vivyan,
smiling. "A great compliment; don't you think so yourself, Arthur?"

Arthur always had a very peculiar feeling when people looked at him, and
said who he was like. He did not very much approve of it on the whole; and
once he had confidentially asked his mother why the ladies and gentlemen
who came to Ashton Grange did not make remarks about her face, and say who
they thought she was like. At present he was making use of his blue eyes
in taking an accurate account of his aunt.

Well, she was nice. Yes, he thought he should love her. She had a sweet
sound in her voice, and a gentle expression about her mouth, that made him
think she could not be unkind. She was not like his own mother in the
least; she was not nearly so pretty, Arthur thought. His mother had pink
on her cheeks, and a smile on her lips; but _her_ face was very pale and
colourless, her eyes were very deep and sad ones, and when she looked at
him they seemed so large and dark, and as if they were saying what she did
not speak with her lips. He felt he would love his aunt; but he was not
quite sure that he would not be a little afraid of her, at first at any
rate.

"You must be quite ready for something to eat," said Mrs. Estcourt, as she
led the way to the drawing-room. "You dined before you came away, Ronald,
of course."

"Yes, I did; but Arthur did not. I don't think he has had much to eat all
day, poor boy."

Mrs. Estcourt looked very much surprised as she said, "Why, how could that
be, Arthur? I thought boys were always hungry."

"Well, I think I am generally," said Arthur, "only I was not to-day."

"Why not?" said his aunt.

"Don't ask me why, please," said Arthur in a low voice, "or else perhaps I
might cry, and I don't want to do that."

She seemed to understand him, for she asked no more questions; only she
took his hand as they went into the drawing-room, and as Arthur looked in
her face, he thought there was something in her deep eyes, that reminded
him of his mother.

If the hall at Myrtle Hill was neat and orderly, the drawing-room surely
was equally so. There seemed to be everything in the room, that one could
possibly want; and a great many that seemed to Arthur to be of no
particular use. He could not help thinking of the difference there would
be in that room, if he and Hector were to have a round in it. But it was
very bright and comfortable, he thought; and this opinion seemed to be
shared by a large white dog that lay in front of the fire. "Great, sleepy
thing," thought Arthur; "I would not give old Hector for ten cats like
that."

The tea-table itself was a very attractive object to his eyes just then;
and he turned his attention to it now. Arthur thought it looked rather in
keeping with the rest of the room. The silver teapot and cream-jug were
bright and shining, but they were rather small; and he could not help
thinking that it would take a great many of those daintily-cut slices of
bread and butter, to satisfy his appetite; so he was glad to see a
good-sized loaf on a table near, and other more substantial things which
had been added for the travellers. Indeed he need not have been afraid of
not having enough to eat, for his aunt, in her ignorance of boyish
appetites, would not have been surprised, if he had consumed all that was
before him. So that Arthur had to be quite distressed, that he could not
please her by eating everything.

"I wonder what she lives on herself," he thought, as he noticed the one
tiny slice lying almost undiminished on her plate; "and I wonder how I
should feel if I did not eat more than that."

By and by they drew their chairs to the fire, and Mrs. Estcourt gave
Arthur a beautifully-ornamented hand-screen to shade the heat from his
face; as he sat with his feet on the fender, listening to his father's and
aunt's conversation.

"Well, you have a snug little place here," said Mr. Vivyan.

"Yes, I suppose so," Mrs. Estcourt said; but she sighed as she spoke.

"It seems like old times, eh, Daisy?"

A light shone on her face for a minute and then was gone, as she said,
"'Tis very odd to hear any one call me that, Ronald. I have not heard it
since----," and then that deep look of pain came again. But as she looked
at Arthur almost a merry smile curled the corners of her mouth, and she
said, "Arthur thinks so too, I know."

This was true; for he had just been thinking that if his aunt was like a
flower at all, she was more like a lily or a snowdrop, or a very white
violet. But he only said, "Is that what I shall have to call you, then?
Aunt Daisy! that sounds rather funny, I think."

Mrs. Estcourt laughed and said, "Well, I think perhaps it does; so if you
like you can say Aunt Margaret."

"Oh, I don't like that at all!" said Arthur in a very decided tone. "No,
please; I would rather say the other; and I think perhaps you are like a
daisy when you can't see the red."

"Well, you are a funny little boy," Mrs. Estcourt said; and she laughed
quite merrily.

"Arthur," said his father, "you are forgetting your good manners, I am
afraid;" but he seemed rather amused himself.

"Do you often say those funny things, Arthur?" asked his aunt.

"I believe he is rather given to speaking his mind freely," said Mr.
Vivyan.

"Did I say anything rude?" asked Arthur, looking up earnestly into his
aunt's face.

"No, dear, nothing at all; only, you know, I am not accustomed to little
boys; and so perhaps that is why the things they say sound odd to me."

"Well, aunt," said Arthur, "mind, if I seem to say rude things I don't
mean them; I don't really; and I should be very sorry to say rude things
to you, because I think I like you."

"You don't say so," said Mr. Vivyan, laughing.

But Mrs. Estcourt did not laugh; she stooped down and kissed Arthur; and
then she held his hand in hers for a little while, so that it almost felt
to him as if it was some one else's hand, and, though it was very pleasant
to have such a kind aunt, that he felt he would love, it brought a
strange, choking feeling into his throat, and his eyes felt as if they
would like to cry; so he suddenly jumped up, and said--

"I think I should like to go to bed."

Mrs. Estcourt took him up herself into the room that was to be his own. It
was a pretty, pleasant room, and a bright fire was burning in the grate.
There seemed to have been a great deal of thought, spent on the comfort of
the person who was to sleep there; and Arthur almost smiled, if he could
have smiled at anything then, as his aunt hoped he would not want
anything, and said she would send him a night-light presently.

"No, thank you," he said; "I always sleep in the dark."

"You are a brave boy, I suppose," said Mrs. Estcourt.

"I don't know," Arthur said; "but mother always says it is wrong to be
afraid."

"Wrong?" asked his aunt.

"Yes; because don't you know, aunt, we ought to trust in God, mother
says."

"Then are you never afraid, dear Arthur?" his aunt was just going to say;
but as she looked at him she saw that his lips were trembling, and that
the tears were filling his eyes; for the mention of his mother's name was
bringing memories to Arthur, and he was thinking of the times in the old
nursery at Ashton Grange, when he used to be frightened sometimes in the
dark; and she had sat with him then, and told him about the angels of the
Lord encamping round about them that fear Him, and about the kind, tender
Lord Jesus, who takes care of all who put their trust in Him.

So she only put her arms around him, and kissed him very tenderly; and
then she went away. It was only just in time; for as Arthur heard the door
shut behind her, and knew that nobody would see or hear him, the tears
that had been burning under his eyes all the evening came at last, and
Arthur threw himself sobbing upon his bed. But his grief did not last long
that night, for he was very tired and sleepy. He was excited too with the
strange scenes and places, through which he had passed, and on which he
was just entering; so it was not very long before he was sleeping as
soundly in the white curtained bed, that his aunt had taken such pains to
prepare for him, as he had ever done in the old room at Ashton Grange.
That room was empty now. The little bed was there with the coverlet
undisturbed, but no curly head lay on the pillow; and as Arthur's mother
stood there thinking of her little boy, and of the miles that lay between
them, and that soon the broad ocean sweep would separate her from her
child, her heart sank very low, and she thought that she was like Rachael,
weeping for her children. But she was comforted, for she knew the comfort
of having a Friend, who had borne her griefs and carried her sorrows; and
when her heart was overwhelmed within her she said, "Lead me to the Rock
that is higher than I;" and He said to her, "None of them that trust in
Him shall be desolate." She listened to His word that says, "Trust in Him
at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before Him. God is a refuge
for us."

Is it not a happy thing, when a heart is full and bursting--so full that
it cannot contain--to know that there is One, whose name is Love, before
whom that heart can be poured out? Is it not the place where the Master
would have His disciples, sitting at His feet, hearing His word? And is
not that the cure for being careful and troubled about many things? And if
our hearts have chosen that good part, we know that He has promised that
it shall not be taken away. And as Arthur's mother thought of this, she
said, "Hide me under the shadow of thy wings."


CHAPTER VII.

LEFT ALONE.


Arthur had been very tired the night before; so that the spring sun was
shining quite brightly, when he found himself lying awake in his new room.
Indeed, he did not know whether he would have awaked even then, if he had
not heard a knocking at his door, and then a voice saying--

"If you please shall I light your fire?"

"No, thank you," said Arthur; and then to himself he added, "I'm not quite
such a muff as that!" Then he began to examine his room. "I wonder is this
going to be my room always!" thought Arthur. "'Tis much nicer than my room
at home, only I don't like it half so well; indeed, I don't."

It was a very pretty room certainly. The paper on the wall was bright and
soft-looking, with a pattern of bunches of spring flowers, tied with
silver ribbon. The carpet was something of the same sort, and it reminded
him of primroses hidden in the grass. The window-curtains were spotlessly
white, with green cords, and the chair-coverings were a soft green.

"Yes; it certainly is a very nice room," said Arthur to himself, after
looking round and examining everything; "but I think it is a great deal
more like a girl's room than a boy's. What can she think I want with such
a lot of looking-glasses? And I suppose she thinks I like reading and
writing very much;" for he saw that the book-shelves were well filled,
and that in the corner of the room there was a small table, where a
writing-case and inkstand stood. "Well, she may think so. I expect she
will soon find out her mistake."

Arthur was more cheerful this morning, than he had been the evening
before. It was natural to him to feel hopeful in the morning. He liked the
feeling of awaking in a strange place. At least he had always liked it
hitherto; though with the pleasant feeling of excitement and interest it
brought, there came a dreamy heart-sinking too; for he could not forget,
that this was to be no visit, but that he was to live on here for years
and years without his mother.

But the sun was shining very brightly into his room, and as he stood
waiting for some call downstairs; he thought he would like to see what
kind of surroundings belonged to his new home.

Very different was the view he now saw from the country that lay around
Ashton Grange. From the highest window there, the view extended over only
a few miles, and the green wooded hills that arose, not so very far off,
marked the horizon to the pretty country scene that Arthur knew so well;
but here a wide stretch of country lay beneath him, undulating here and
there, but spreading far on, covered with fields and trees, and dotted
with hamlets, until it faded away into grey distance. The sun had risen
not long before, and the rosy beams were falling on the country, lighting
with a ruddy radiance the windows of the cottages, and sparkling on the
little river that was winding peacefully through the pasture land. It was
a very sweet scene, and Arthur felt its beauty. He could not see the town,
where they arrived the night before; for a stretch of woodland near by
shut it out from his sight.

Having looked at the distant hills, he now turned his attention to the
objects nearer home. How very neatly the gravel walks were rolled. The
grass was smooth and evenly cut; not even the little daisies were allowed
to peep their modest heads from the lawn. "Well, I wonder aunt cuts off
all the heads of her namesakes," said Arthur to himself. His window was at
the side of the house, and he could see that the garden surrounded it on
all sides, and that the low trees that led down to the arbour gave their
name to Myrtle Hill. It was early spring-time yet, and not very many
flowers were blooming; only here and there bright-coloured tufts of
crocuses and primroses were shining on the brown earth, and the snowdrops
were shaking their bended heads, in the morning breeze. Arthur looked at
it all, and wondered whether he should ever be as familiar with this
place, as he was with the home far away. This thought led him into a
reverie, and he began to wonder what every one was doing at this time
there--who was feeding Hector; and would the gardener's boy remember to
water the seeds; though he remembered with a deep sigh that it did not
matter very much, as long before they would be in bloom, Ashton Grange
would be empty and deserted; and this thought was a very dreary one.
Arthur was beginning to feel very dismal again. The changing spring sky,
too, had become overclouded; the morning sun was hidden, and it seemed as
if a shower was going to fall. There was a prospect of a shower indoors,
too; for Arthur dashed the tear-drops from his eyes, and said, "I won't
cry; no, I won't; I'm always crying now. I wonder how mother can keep from
it so well. Well, perhaps when I am as old as she is I shall be able; or,
perhaps I shall be like papa, and not want to cry. I wonder if he does
ever; it would be queer to see father cry. Perhaps he did when he was in
India by himself."

And Arthur almost laughed to himself at the idea. Presently a bell
sounded through the house. "I suppose," thought Arthur, "that is the
breakfast-bell; it ought to be by this time. But then, suppose it should
not be; suppose it should be some bell that I have nothing to do with; it
would not be at all pleasant to go down. I think I will wait for a little,
and see; but then, if it should be the breakfast-bell, aunt will think I
am a lazy thing. So what shall I do? I will go."

And so saying, Arthur opened his door in a determined manner, walking
along the corridor; where some canaries were hung in a cage, making his
ears quite aware of their presence. Notwithstanding the courage with which
he had left his room, it was with a cautious step he came near the
dining-room, and opening the door very gently he was quite relieved to see
that his father and his aunt were both there.

As he came into the room Mrs. Estcourt was talking to his father, and she
seemed in rather an anxious state of mind, as he listened to her with an
amused expression on his face. "You know, Ronald, you--you really must
begin breakfast, the carriage will be coming round in no time. And you are
not nearly ready, dear Arthur," she said, giving him a hurried kiss.
"Where are the railway rugs and the shawls? Your father will want them;
for it is a cold morning."

"Now, my dear sister," said Arthur's father, putting his hand on her
shoulder, "don't be putting yourself into a fuss about nothing; I always
take my time, and I think I generally manage to come in all right in the
end. I want some breakfast, please, when you are ready, Daisy. Good
morning, my darling little boy," and Mr. Vivyan put his arm very tightly
round Arthur's neck, and gave him such a kiss, as he had never remembered
having had from him before. "Now, don't cry, Arthur," he said; for this
loving embrace from his father was bringing the tears into his eyes again.
"Do you know what I was thinking about, when I was looking out of my
window this morning? I was thinking of you; and I came to the conclusion
that you ought to think yourself very well off. Here you are with an aunt
who is going to make ever so much of you, I can see; going to live in a
most beautiful country, with a school near, where, of course, the boys
will be pleasant companions if you are pleasant to them; a half-holiday
every Saturday; a father and mother gone away for a little while, thinking
of you all the day; and a letter from India--I won't say how often. Ah, it
was very different when you and I were young! Eh, Daisy?"

"No. I think I was very happy then," said Mrs. Estcourt. "I am sure our
grandfather and grandmother were just as good as any one could be."

"Yes; for you, my dear, I daresay they were; but I was not you, you know.
Well, I'm very glad some times have not to come over again. I suppose
Arthur is feeling that just now."

Mr. Vivyan himself seemed very well contented with his present position,
and Arthur thought so.

"Father," he said presently, "as I have to stay in England, of course I
would rather be with Aunt Daisy than with any one else, and I think this
is a very pretty place indeed. But you don't know how frightfully I wish I
was going to India with you. Don't you wish you could take me, father?"
asked Arthur a little wistfully.

"My dear little boy, I wish it so much, that it is one of the things it
is better not to think about. And then, you know, you must always look on
the bright side of things, and there are plenty of bright sides for you.
Just think of all the bright sides I have been showing you. Now, let us
have some breakfast, or really, auntie, I shall be late."

But before Mrs. Estcourt moved, she said in a very low voice, and as if
she did not think any one else heard her--

"There is not always a bright side to look at." For she was thinking that
all the brightness had been taken away from her life's story. Would not
Arthur's mother have said, "If there is none anywhere else, look to where
the Lord Jesus waits to bless you, saying, 'Your heart shall rejoice;' and
then the light of His love would make the shadiest life shine with a
summer gleaming?"

Arthur's appetite seemed really gone this morning, and his aunt's
attention was too much occupied with anxiety about his father's comfort
for the journey, to notice that he was eating hardly anything; and in the
midst of his trouble the thought came across Arthur's mind that it was a
very good thing he was not hungry, as he felt a great deal too shy to help
himself.

Presently there was the sound of carriage wheels on the gravel outside.
"Now," said Mrs. Estcourt, starting up, "there is the carriage, Ronald; I
knew it would be here before you were ready."

"Well," said Mr. Vivyan quietly, "you know one of us would have to be
ready first, and I would rather the carriage waited for me than I for it.
Besides, I am quite ready. Now, my dear sister, expend your energies in
seeing if my luggage is all right."

Then Arthur and his father were left alone.

"Now, my darling boy," Mr. Vivyan said, "come here. I want to speak to
you, and to say good-bye."

So Arthur came closer to his chair, and his father put his arms around
him, and took his hand in his.

"Arthur," he said, "perhaps you don't know how much I love you, and how
deeply anxious I am about you, that you should grow up to be a man that
your mother need not be ashamed of. You know, Arthur, I cannot talk to you
as she does; but I pray for you every day, and now especially that I am
leaving you. But we shall have another home on earth some day, I trust;
and, better than that, you know about the home where the Lord Jesus is
waiting for those who are washed in His blood. You are going to that home,
my precious boy?"

"Yes, father," said Arthur in a low voice.

"Well, then, you know you always have that to think about; and now I will
give you this text to keep from me while I am away, 'Goodness and mercy
shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of
the Lord for ever.' And won't it be nice to get a letter from India!"

"Yes, oh yes, father," said Arthur, bursting into a flood of tears; "but
it would be so much nicer to be going."

"Hush, hush," said Mr. Vivyan kindly; "you know there are some things that
God has forbidden, and it is wrong to think of how nice they would be. I
suppose you cannot think of how pleasant a great many things you have are
just now, but by and by you will find it out."

This was just what Arthur was thinking. It was very strange to him to hear
his father talking in this way to him; he had never done so before; and it
made him love him as he did not know he ever could. It was quite true that
everything was looking black and gloomy, and that to try and see
brightness in his life at Myrtle Hill seemed to make the dreary feeling
more intense at his heart. But still he could lie down at the feet of the
Master who is so kind, and rest there while earthly things were so dark,
and trust Him, waiting while the violence of the storm was passing. Arthur
had answered the Shepherd's call--"Follow thou me," and the one who has
said that "He gathers the lambs in His arms, and carries them in His
bosom."

"And now, my boy," said Mr. Vivyan, "God bless you and keep you; good-bye,
my own dear little boy." Then he put his arm around Arthur's neck, and
kissed him. A minute after, Arthur was standing by himself before the
drawing-room fire; and when presently he heard the carriage roll away, and
the sounds became gradually fainter and fainter in the distance, he felt
that he was all alone.

Indeed, he hardy knew what he felt. There seemed to be a sudden quiet hush
within him, and as he looked outside the window where the carriage had
just stood, and the bustle of going away had just ceased, the quiet of
every thing seemed very still and deep. Only the little birds were just
the same, singing gaily as if nothing had happened, and the morning breeze
was brushing the myrtle trees as they did every spring morning when the
sun was making the country look glad.

Presently he heard steps outside the door, and as they came nearer and
nearer, Arthur felt as if he would like to run away; for he was afraid his
aunt might talk about his father and mother, and he felt as if he could
not talk of anything just then. But he need not have been afraid, Mrs.
Estcourt was wiser than that, and she only said kindly--

"Would you like to go out and look about you a little, Arthur dear? It
will not rain just yet, I think; and you may go where you like; at least,
that is, if you are accustomed to go by yourself."

"I should think I am, indeed," said Arthur; "why I have done that ever
since I was eight."

"You won't lose your way?" asked his aunt anxiously.

"If I do, I shall have to find it again, you know, aunt," said Arthur.

"You are a funny little fellow," said Mrs. Estcourt. "Well, if you get
hungry before luncheon-time, you must come and tell me."

Arthur thought of Hector, and how pleasant it would be if his old friend
would come bounding in answer to his whistle; then he looked at the sleepy
white-haired creature lying on the hearth-rug.

"Aunt Daisy," he said, "would you like me to take out that white fellow?"

"What, dear?" said Mrs. Estcourt. "Oh, I don't know, Arthur; I think,
perhaps, not just yet; not until you are more accustomed to it."

"Very well," said Arthur, as he went away; and he said to himself, "I
would quite as soon not."

Arthur felt, as he stood outside the hall door, as if all the world was
before him, to choose where he would go. He thought he would first examine
the garden, which encircled the house on all sides. A gap in the myrtle
bushes led him down a narrow path into a large space, which the fruit
trees and vegetables showed was the kitchen garden. He walked round, and
noticed how neatly the beds were kept, and that the walks even here were
stripped of weeds. Two boys who were working there, rather older than
himself, eyed him curiously. Arthur wondered whether they knew who he was;
but he felt inclined to be where there was no one else just then. So he
left the garden, and passing out through the iron gate, he found himself
on the high road, turning to walk down in the direction which they had
come the night before. Presently a sign-post stood before him, one hand
pointing to Stratton, and the other to Harford. Arthur followed the last
name along a green, flowery lane, where the wild roses were mantling their
green, and here and there an early bud was making its appearance. He
walked on for some distance, until the high road was hidden by a bend in
the lane, and the green trees began to arch overhead; and on each side,
the road was bordered with grass and green, velvety moss; the birds were
warbling soft songs in the branches, and from the wood hard by the sweet
cooing of the pigeons could be heard. It was a very pleasant spot, so much
so, that when Arthur threw himself down on the grass to rest, he said with
a deep sigh, "Well, it might be worse; and Aunt Daisy is certainly very
kind."

"Yes, it might be worse," he continued to himself; "and it is nice to
think of by and by, when they come back. Suppose they were dead!" He
shuddered at the thought. "I can quite fancy what mother will look like
when she sees me again. No; I don't believe I can, though. How will she
feel, and how shall I feel? I suppose very different from what I do now;
for I shall be really a man then. Oh, dear! I had better not think of that
time yet. I must try and think about all the things God gives. Father said
something like that. Father was very kind to me to-day. I did not know he
could be so kind."

Arthur did not know then much about the true, deep, persistent tenderness
of a father's love; but we know that when God spoke a word that expresses
His heart to His people, He called Himself His children's Father.

"Let me see!" continued Arthur. "Five years, and in every year three
hundred and sixty-five days. If I multiply three hundred and sixty-five by
five, I shall know how many days I have to wait, and then I could mark off
one every day; but, oh, dear! that makes a great, great many."

So he sprang up from the grass, and walked briskly on the shady road,
where the sunlight was falling softly; for Arthur meant never to cry,
unless he could not possibly help it, and certainly not out of doors. He
wandered over a good distance--for it was pleasant exploring in the new
country--until he suddenly remembered his aunt at home, and that she would
be thinking he had lost his way. "And I must not begin by frightening
her," said Arthur to himself.

Up till this time Arthur's first day had passed more brightly than he had
expected. It would be hard for him to be very unhappy on that spring day,
with everything rejoicing around him, and the free country breathing in
soft breezes. But it was different when he came in. The house seemed very
dark and gloomy after the cheerful sunlight, and it seemed to him as if
there was no sound of any sort indoors, except now and then a faint noise
from the servants' regions far away; for even the canary-birds were
silent, and the fat dog was sleeping its life away upon the hearth-rug.
Indeed, Arthur thought he could almost imagine, that the hairy creature
and the soft hearth-rug were one and the same. There seemed to be nothing
at all to do within doors, and he could not be out always. Besides, the
bright morning was fast changing, and grey, gloomy clouds were gathering
over the country. The myrtle trees were beginning to shake with a rainy
wind, and he could see that the fine weather was gone for that day.

Altogether, Arthur felt very dismal as he stood at the drawing-room
window, near to where his aunt was sitting at her writing-table.

"Have you had a nice walk?" she asked presently.

"Yes, aunt," said Arthur, tapping very forcibly on the window.

"And what did you see?"

"Oh, nothing particular!" said Arthur.

Mrs. Estcourt saw that she must try some other subject to talk about.

"Have you anything you would like to do, dear, until dinner-time?"

"No, I don't think so, aunt."

"What do you generally do at home when you are not walking?"

"I don't know, really aunt," Arthur answered. "I suppose I do lessons."

"Oh, but I don't want you to begin lessons just yet. Well, then, what do
you do when it is neither lessons nor walking?"

"Sometimes I go for messages, and sometimes I make things with my tools."

"Make things! How do you mean, dear?"

"Oh, I make boats and things! and I used to make wedges for a window in
mamma's room that rattled with the wind. Have you any windows that don't
shut quite tightly, aunt?" asked Arthur. "I could make you some by and by,
if you have."

Mrs. Estcourt smiled; but she was not able to remember any window that
needed Arthur's arrangements. So he was left to himself and the rain
again; for the drops were falling thickly against the window now. At first
he employed himself in tracing their course down the glass, but very soon
he was tired of that, and presently Mrs. Estcourt heard a heavy sigh.

"That was a very deep sigh," she said cheerily. "What did it mean?"

"Well," said Arthur, "partly, I think, it meant that I wish I had
something to do."

His aunt thought that boys were very curious things, and wondered what
they could do. She felt almost inclined to echo Arthur's sigh; but she
thought a moment, and then she said--

"Would you like to have a skein of wool to wind into a ball?"

"Yes," said Arthur. He was quite glad to have even this to do. At home it
was not the occupation he generally chose; but now, as he stood with the
blue wool encircling two chairs, steadily unwinding it into a ball, it
seemed quite pleasant work. Mrs. Estcourt had quite made up her mind, that
the skein would be spoiled, and so when her little nephew brought it to
her, wound and unbroken, it was an agreeable surprise, and she began to
have a higher opinion of boys in general.

The day seemed to wear very slowly on, and with the waning light Arthur's
heart seemed to sink very low. So quiet was he, that his aunt could hardly
understand him, and any one who had seen the boisterous, lively boy at
Ashton Grange, would hardly have known him as the same one who was sitting
so quietly before the drawing-room fire in the lamplight. He was sitting
there in dreamy fashion with a very sad, heavy heart, when his aunt asked
him what was his bedtime. A fortnight ago, if this question had been put
to Arthur, he would not have given the same answer that he did now. Then
he had considered it one of the greatest hardships of his life, that a
quarter before nine was the time when he was expected to disappear. A
preface (if there be one) should partake something of the spirit of the
work; for if it be not brief, lively, and humorous, it is ten to one but
your reader falls asleep before he enters upon chapter the first,
and when he wakes, fears to renew his application, lest he should
be again caught napping.

Long introductions are like lengthy prayers before meals to hungry men,
they are mumbled over with unintelligible rapidity, or altogether omitted,
for the more solid gratifications of the stomach, or the enjoyments of
the mind.

In what fantastic shape and countenance then shall an author appear to
obtain general approbation? or in what costume is he most likely to
insure success?

If he assumes a fierce and haughty front, his readers are perhaps offended
with his temerity, and the critics enraged at his assurance.
If he affects a modest sneaking posture, and humbly implores their
high mightinesses to grant him one poor sprig of laurel, he is
treated slightingly, and despised, as a pitiful fellow who wants
that essential ingredient in the composition of a man of talent and
good breeding, ycleped by the moderns confidence.

If he speaks of ~13~~
the excellence of his subject, he creates doubts both with his readers
and reviewers, who will use their endeavours to convince him he has not
a correct knowledge of his own abilities. But if, like a well bred man at
court, he enters the drawing-room of literature in good taste, neither
too mean nor too gaudy, too bold or too formal, makes his bow with the air
and finish of a scholar and a gentleman, and passes on to his place,
unheedful of remark (because unconscious of offence), he is sure to
command respect, if he does not excite admiration.

Accept then, reader, this colloquial chapter, as the author's apology for
a preface, an imaginary short conference, or letter of introduction, which
brings you acquainted with the eccentric writer of this volume; and as in
all well regulated society a person is expected to give some account
of himself before he is placed upon terms of intimacy with the
family, you shall in the next page receive a brief sketch of the
characteristics of the author.

[Illustration: page013]
~13~~

A FEW THOUGHTS ON MYSELF.

The early biography of a man of genius is seldom, if ever, accurately
given to the public eye, unless, indeed, he is one of those _rara avis_
who, with the advantages of great qualifications, inherits high ancestral
distinctions. But if, as is generally the case, from obscurity of birth
and humble life he rises into notice by the force and exertion of his
talents, the associates of his brighter fortunes know but little of the
difficulties which have obstructed his progress, or the toils and fatigues
he has endured, to arrive at that enviable point from which the temple
of Fame, and the road to fortune, may be contemplated with some chance of
enjoyment and success. Unwilling to speak of himself, lest he should
incur the charge of vanity or egotism, he modestly trusts to the
partial pen of friendship, or the conjectural pen of the commentator,
to do justice to events which no quill could relate so well as his
own, and which, if impartially and sensibly written, must advance
him in the estimation of society, and convince the world that with
the mastery of the great secret in his power, he was not more capable
of appreciating the characters of the age than familiar with the
lights and shadows of his own.

"Honour and shame from no condition rise; Act well your part, there all the
honour lies."
The reader will, no doubt, anticipate that the name of Bernard Blackmantle
is an assumed quaint cognomen, and perhaps be not less suspicious of the
author's right and title to the honorary distinction annexed:
~14~~
let him beware how he indulges in such chimeras, before he has fully entered
into the spirit of the volume before him, lest, on perusal,
conviction should compel him to retract the ungracious thought.

To be plain, he is not desirous of any higher honorary distinction than
the good opinion of his readers. And now, sons and daughters of
Fashion!

ye cameleon race of giddy elves, who flutter on the margin of the whirlpool,
or float upon the surface of the silvery stream, and, hurried forwards
by the impetus of the current, leave yourselves but little time for
reflection, one glance will convince you that you are addressed by an old
acquaintance, and, heretofore, constant attendant upon all the gay
varieties of life; of this be assured, that, although retired from
the fascinating scene, where gay Delight her portal open throws to
Folly's throng, he is no surly misanthrope, or gloomy seceder, whose
jaundiced mind, or clouded imagination, is a prey to disappointment,
envy, or to care.

In retracing the brighter moments of life, the festive scenes of
past times, the never to be forgotten pleasures of his halcyon days,
when youth, and health, and fortune, blest his lot, he has no tongue
for scandal--no pen for malice--no revenge to gratify, but is only
desirous of attempting a true portraiture of men and manners, in
the higher and more polished scenes of life.

If, in the journey through these hitherto unexplored regions of
fancy, ought should cross his path that might give pain to worthy
bosoms, he would sooner turn aside than be compelled to embody the
uncandid thought.

"Unknowing and unknown, the hardy Muse "Boldly defies all mean and
partial views; "With honest freedom plays the critic's part, "And
praises, as she censures, from the heart."

And now, having said nearly as much as I think prudent of myself, and
considerably more than my ~17~~
bookseller usually allows by way of prefatory matter, I shall conclude this
chapter by informing the reader of some facts, with which I ought
to have commenced it, namely--For my parents, it must suffice that
my father was a man of talent, my mother accomplished and esteemed,
and, what is more to their honour, they were affectionate and kind:
peace to their manes!

I was very early in life bereft of both; educated at one of the public
schools, I was, in due time, sent to matriculate at Oxford, where,
reader, I propose to commence my Eccentric Tour.

[Illustration: Page018]
[Illustration: Page019]

A SHANDEAN SCENE, 
BETWEEN LADY MARY OLDSTYLE AND HORATIO HEARTLY.

"I know him well," said Horatio, with a half-suppressed sigh, as he
finished the introductory chapter to the first volume of the English
Spy, or Colloquial Sketches of Men and Manners.

"He is no misanthrope," said my aunt, taking off her spectacles to wipe
away the pearly drop which meek-eyed pity gave to the recollection of scenes
long passed.

Horatio paused--the book dropped instinctively upon his knee, as his raised
eye involuntarily caught the benign aspect of virtue and intelligence,
softened by the crystal gems of feeling. "I wish I knew where he lived,"
said my aunt. "I'll find him out," said Horatio;-"Do," said my aunt, "and
tell him an old friend of his father's, on whom fortune has deigned to smile
in the winter of her days, would feign extend to him as much of worldly
happiness as can be derived from the enjoyment of worldly treasure."
~18~~
By that sort of magical attraction which imperceptibly links together the
souls of kindred spirits, Horatio's chair had made an angular movement,
of at least six degrees, in a direction nearer to his venerable relation:
no lover ever pressed with more fervency of affection the yielding hand
of his soul's deity, than did the grateful nephew, at this moment,
clasp within his eager grasp the aged palm of bounteous charity.

"I wish he may accept your kind offer," said Horatio.
"And why should he not?" said my aunt, with a half inclination of extricating
her hand, and a penetrating glance of doubt, directed full in the face
of the speaker: "I know not," said Horatio, (hesitating, as if fearful of
giving offence), "but,"-"But what?" said my aunt;-"But I fear his natural
love of independence, and eccentricity of mind, will admit of no constraint,
which his high sense of honor will anticipate must be partially the
case whenever he submits himself to accept the favors of even such
generous hearts as yours." "He would feel no such thing," said my aunt.
"He could not resist the impression," said Horatio; "your liberality would,
I know, be calculated to dispossess him of the painful sensation;
but if the inherent pride of the man could be subdued, or calmed
into acquiescence, by breathing the enchanting air of friendship,
the weight of gratitude, the secret monitor of fine-wrought minds,
would overpower his tongue, and leave him, in his own estimation,
a pauper of the poorest class."

"Then I'll adopt another mode," said my aunt; "and though I hate the affectation
of secret charities, because I think the donor of a generous action is well
entitled to his reward, both here and hereafter,--I'll hand out some way,
anonymously or otherwise, to indulge my humour of serving him."

"You are an angel!" said Horatio, with his eyes fixed on the ground--(the
spirit of the angel of benevolence,--quoth Reason, whispering in his ear,
would have been ~19~~
a better metaphor,--certainly inhabits the aged bosom of your father's
sister). Horatio's upraised eye rested on the wrinkled front of his
antique relative, just as the corrective thought gleamed in visionary
brightness o'er his brain; the poetic inspiration of the moment fled like
the passing meteor, but the feeling which excited it remained engrafted
on his memory for ever. "How shall we find him out, my dear Horatio?"
said my aunt, her whole countenance animated with delight at the last
flattering ejaculation of her nephew-"where shall we seek him?

--I'll order the carriage directly." The glow of pleasure and anticipatory
gratification, which at this moment beamed in the countenance of the old
lady, brought back the circling current of health to the cheeks
of age, and, with the blush of honest feeling, dispelled the stains of
time; the furrowed streaks of care vanished from her front, and left her
whole frame proportionably invigorated.

If the mere contemplation of a generous action can thus inspire the
young, and give new life to age, what a load of misery and deformity
might not the sons and daughters of nature divest themselves of,
by following the inherent dictates of benevolence!

Reflection, whenever he deigned to penetrate the pericranium of my cousin
Horatio, took entire possession of the citadel, and left him not even the
smallest loophole for the observation of any passing event. He was just
fixed in one of these abstracted reveries of the mind, traversing over the
halcyon scenes of his collegiate days, and re-associating himself with
his early friend, the author of the eccentric volume then in his hand,
when the above monition sprung from his heart, like the crystal stream
that sparkles in the air, when first it bursts through the mineral
bondage of the womb of nature.

"You are right," said my aunt. Horatio started with surprise, almost unconscious
of her presence, or ~20~~

what he had said to deserve her approbation. "True happiness," she continued,
"is the offspring of generosity and virtue, and never inhabits a bosom where
worldly interest and selfish principles are allowed to predominate.
There are many who possess all the requisites for the enjoyment
of true happiness, who, from the prejudices of education, or the
mistaken pride of ancestry, have never experienced the celestial
rapture: they have never been amalgamated with society, are strangers
to poverty themselves, and cannot comprehend its operation upon
others; born and moving in a sphere where the chilling blasts of
indigence never penetrate, or the clouds of adversity appal, they
have no conception of the more delightful gratification which springs
from the source of all earthly happiness, the pleasure and ability
of administering to the wants and comforts of our fellow creatures."

                                   "Yours is the true philosophy of nature, aunt," said Horatio, "where
principle and practice may be seen, arm in arm, like the twin
sisters, Charity and Virtue,--a pair of antique curiosities much
sought after, but rarely found amid the assemblage of _virtu_ in
the collections of your modern people of fashion."

"I'll alter my will to-morrow morning," thought my aunt; "this boy deserves
to be as rich in acres as he already is in benevolence: he shall have the
Leicestershire estate added to what I have already bequeathed him, by way
of codicil."

"You would be delighted with my friend Bernard, aunt," said Horatio, "that
is, when he is in good spirits; but you must not judge of him by the
common standard of estimation: if, on the first introduction, he
should happen to be in one of those lively humours when his whole
countenance is lighted up with the brilliancy of genius, you would
be enraptured by the sallies of his wit, and the solidity of his
reasoning; but if, on the contrary, he should unfortunately ~21~~
be in one of those abstracted moods when all terrestrial objects
are equally indifferent, you will, I fear, form no very favourable
opinion of his merit.

He is an eccentric in every respect, and must not be judged of by the
acquaintance of an hour.

We were boys together at Eton, and the associations of youth ripened with
maturity into the most sincere friendly attachment, which was materially
assisted by the similarity of our dispositions and pursuits, during
our residence at college.

Your kind notice of my poor friend, aunt, has revived the fondest recollections
of my life--the joyous scenes of infancy, when the young heart,
free from the trammels of the world, and buoyant as the bird of
spring, wings along the flowery path of pleasure, plucking at will
the sweets of nature, and decking his infant brow with wreaths of
fresh gathered wild flowers."

Horatio paused, not for want of subject, but a train of recollections
overpowered his memory, producing an unspeakable sensation, which
for a moment choked his utterance.

"There is a blank in this work, which you shall fill up," said my aunt;
"you must perform the office of an impartial historian for your friend,
and before we proceed farther with this volume, give me the history of
your school-boy days."
[Illustration: Page021] 
~22~~

SCHOOL-BOY REMINISCENCES.

ON EARLY FRIENDSHIP.

In many a strain of grief and joy My youthful spirit sung to thee;
But I am now no more a boy, And there's a gulf 'twixt thee and me.

Time on my brow has set his seal; I start to find myself a man, And know
that I no more shall feel As only boyhood's spirit can.

ETONIAN.

There is an imperceptible but powerfully connecting link in our early
associations and school-boy friendships, which is very difficult to
describe, but exceedingly grateful to reflect on; particularly
when the retrospective affords a view of early attachments ripened
into perfection with maturity, and cementing firmly with increasing
years.

Youth is the period of frankness and of zeal, when the young heart, buoyant
with hope and cheering prospects, fills with joy, and expands in all
the brightness of fancy's variety. The ambition, lures, and conflicting
interests of the world, have as yet made no inroad upon the mind;
the bosom is a stranger to misery, the tongue to deceit, the eye
glows with all the luxuriance of pleasure, and the whole countenance
presents an animated picture of health and intelligence illumined
with delight.

           The playfulness or incaution of youth may demand correction, or
produce momentary pain; but the tears of ~23~~
infancy fall like the summer dew upon the verdant slope, which the
first gleam of the returning sun kisses away, and leaves the face
of nature tinged with a blush of exquisite brilliancy, but with no
trace of the sparkling moisture which lately veiled its beauty.

                                  This is the glittering period of life, when the gay perspective of
the future seems clothed in every attractive hue, and the objects
of this world assume a grace divine: then it is that happiness,
borne on the wings of innocence and light-hearted mirth, attends
our every step, and seems to wait obedient to our will.

                                          What a painful reverse may not the retrospective view afford!

how unlike is the finished picture to the inspiring sketch.

The one breathing the soft air of nature, and sparkling in brilliant tints
of variegated hues, serene, clear, and transparent, like the magic
pencilling of the heavenly Claude, shedding ambrosial sweets around.

The reverse indistinct, and overpowered with gloomy shadows, a mixture of
the terrific and the marvellous, like the stormy and convulsive
scenes of the mighty genius of Salvator Rosa, with here and there
a flash of wildest eccentricity, that only serves to render more
visible the murky deformity of the whole.

Horatio had just finished his introductory rhapsody, when the door opened,
and my aunt's servant entered with tea and toast: the simmering
of the water round the heated tube of the urn, tingling in the ears
of Heartly, broke the thread of his narration.

There was a pause of nearly a minute, while John was busy in arranging the
equipage. "You should have waited till I had rung, John," said my aunt.
"Please your ladyship," said John, "you directed me always to bring
tea in at six precisely, without waiting for orders."

My aunt looked puzzled: "You are right, John, I did; and (addressing
Horatio) the fault of the interruption must therefore rest with me." Horatio
bowed; the compliment was too flattering to be ~24~~
misunderstood.

"Draw the curtains, John," said my aunt, "and make up the fire: we
can help ourselves to what we want--you need not wait; and do not
interrupt us again until you are rung for."

"This is very mysterious," thought John, as he closed to the
drawing-room door; and he related what he thought to my lady's maid, when
he returned to the servants' hall. "You are, no conjurer, John," said
Mrs.

Margaret, with an oblique inclination of the head, half amorous and half
conceited--"the old lady's will has been signed and sealed these
three years; I was present when it was made--ay, and I signed it
too, and what's more, I knows all its contents; there are some
people in the world (viewing herself in an opposite looking-glass)
who may be very differently circumstanced some day or other."

John's heart had long felt a sort of fluttering inclination to
unburthen itself, by linking destinies with the merry Mrs.

Margaret; the prospect of a handsome legacy, or perhaps an annuity,
gave an additional spur to John's affectionate feelings, and that
night he resolved to put the question.

All this Mrs. Margaret had anticipated, and as she was now on the verge of
forty, she very prudently thought there was no time to lose. "They are a
pair of oddities," continued the waiting-maid; "I have sometimes
surprised them both crying, as if their hearts would break, over a
new book: I suppose they have got something very interesting, as
my lady calls it and Mr.

Horatio is sermonizing as usual."--Mrs Margaret was not far wrong in her
conjecture, for when my aunt and Horatio were again alone, she rallied him
on the serious complexion of his style.

[Illustration: page025]
~25~~

CHARACTER OF BERNARD BLACKMANTLE.

BY HORATIO HEARTLY.

You shall have it from his own pen, said Horatio. In my portfolio, I have
preserved certain scraps of Bernard's that will best speak his character;
prose and poetry, descriptive and colloquial, Hudibrastic and pastoral,
trifles in every costume of literary fancy, according with the peculiar
humour of the author at the time of their inditing, from these you shall
judge my eccentric friend better than by any commendation of mine. I shall
merely preface these early offerings of his genius with a simple
narrative of our school-boy intimacy.

I had been about three months at Eton, and had grown somewhat familiar
with the characters of my associates, and the peculiarities of their
phraseology and pursuits, when our dame's party was increased by the
arrival of Bernard Blackmantle. It is usual with the sons of old Etona,
on the arrival of a fresh subject, to play off a number of school-boy
witticisms and practical jokes, which though they may produce a little
mortification in the first instance, tend in no small degree to display
the qualifications of mind possessed by their new associate, and give
him a familiarity with his companions and their customs, which
otherwise would take more time, and subject the stranger to much
greater inconvenience.

Bernard underwent all the initiatory school ceremonies and ~26~~
humiliations with great coolness, but not without some display of that
personal courage and true nobleness of mind, which advances the
new comer in the estimation of his school-fellows.

First impressions are almost always indelible: there was a frankness
and sincerity in his manner, and an archness and vivacity in his
countenance and conversation, that imperceptibly attached me to the
young stranger.

We were soon the most inseparable cons,{1} the depositors of each other's
youthful secrets, and the mutual participators in every passing sport
and pleasure.

Naturally cheerful, Bernard became highly popular with our miniature
world; there was however one subject which, whenever it was
incautiously started by his companions, always excited a flood of
tears, and for a time spread a gloomy abstraction over his mind.

Bernard had from his very infancy been launched into the ocean of life without
a knowledge of his admiral{2} but not without experiencing all that a
mother's fondness could supply: when others recapitulated the
enjoyments of their paternal home, and painted with all the glow
of youthful ardour the anticipated pleasures of the holidays, the
tear would trickle down his crimsoned cheek; and quickly stealing
away to some sequestered spot, his throbbing bosom was relieved by
many a flood of woe.

Arthur found
conversation with his companion rather difficult to keep up; most of his
questions were answered by "yes" or "no;" and to anything that he said,
not requiring an answer, Edgar gave a short laugh.

"There'll be lots of wild strawberries here soon," he said; "don't you
like them?"

"Pretty well," said Edgar listlessly, "when I can't get others."

Arthur was beginning to think he had better say nothing, when suddenly the
other boy turned to him, and said curiously--

"I suppose it was because you are converted that you came?"

"Yes," Arthur answered.

"How did you know I was?" he asked, after some little time, when they had
walked on in silence.

"Why, I don't know; some of the others said things about you; and,
besides, you know you are."

He would not say that he had noticed Arthur Vivyan's ways, and that he had
seen there, what showed him there was a difference between him and the
other boys; still less would he tell him just then, that there was an
aching wish in his heart that he could say the same for himself.

"Yes," Arthur said, "I am, Edgar; and do you know I wish you were."

"How do you know I am not?"

"Well, I don't _know_," said Arthur; "but I don't much think you are. Are
you?"

"No," said Edgar, pulling violently at the leaves that grew on the bushes
near.

"Shouldn't you like to be?"

"What is the use of liking?" asked Edgar North. "I shall be if it is God's
will, and I shan't if it is not."

"Oh," said Arthur, "that is a dreadful way to talk. I'm quite sure it is
not the right way."

"Well, I know I have thought a great deal about it, especially when I have
been ill, and it always makes me miserable, so I try not to think, and I
can't think what made me begin it now. Do let us talk about something
else."

And suddenly Edgar became very much interested in the subject of the next
local examination, in which several of his schoolfellows expected to take
part, and was much more lively for the rest of the walk than he had been
before.

But he did not seem to avoid Arthur; on the contrary, after that day, he
often seemed to try to be near him; and at length he surprised him very
much, by asking if he would come out for another walk. Arthur remembered
the last one that they had had, and he wondered why! it was not for any
pleasure to himself that he agreed, but at any rate this time it was not a
cricket-day.

"You did not want to come, did you?" asked Edgar, after some little time,
when they had been walking along through the fields, and had now reached a
distant one, where the hawthorn hedge was throwing a sheltering shade.
"And I expect you would just as soon sit down, as walk on further. Shall
we stop here?"

"What a queer fellow you are, Edgar," said Arthur; "I can't make you out
at all."

"How am I queer?" asked Edgar.

"Why, you _are_ queer; you are different from all the others. Perhaps it
is because you are not strong."

"No, I know I am not," Edgar said; "the doctor at my grandmother's used to
say I should not live."

Arthur looked very earnestly at Edgar's pale, passionless face.

"Did he really? Are you sorry?"

"Oh, I dare say he did not know! and if he did, I cannot help it; so what
is the use of being sorry or glad? Perhaps you may not, just as likely."

"But," said Arthur, "if I had heard any one say that about me, I should
think more about it than you seem to do."

"Why, it would be all right for you, because you are converted, you know."

"But, Edgar," and Arthur looked very earnestly into his dark, sad eyes,
"don't you wish you were?"

Edgar's eyes fell before his gaze. He looked away, and seemed to be
dreamily watching the glistening sunbeams, darting through the trees; but
presently the tears gathered, and he said, with a weary sigh,

"Oh, Arthur, if you only knew how much I wish it! if you only knew what I
would give, to know I was converted!"

"Didn't your mother ever talk to you about it?" asked Arthur, remembering
the sweet words that had fallen into his own heart; "or your father?"

"I don't remember my mother," said Edgar, "and papa died two years ago;
but it was two years before that, when I saw him last."

"Poor Edgar," said Arthur softly; for, though he did not say this had been
a bitter grief to him, there was something in his tone so hopelessly sad
and sorrowful, that the tears came into Arthur's eyes to hear it.

Edgar saw the tears in Arthur's eyes, and a little faint smile came in his
own. "You are very different from the others, Arthur," he said. "I haven't
had any one kind to me, since papa went to India."

"Did your father go to India?" Arthur asked brightly. "So did mine. So we
are alike, then."

"Ah, but yours will come back some day, and your mother too; but mine will
never, never come back any more!"

"Tell me about them," said Arthur.

"Well, you know I told you mamma died ever so long ago, so I don't
remember her at all; but papa used to tell me how nice she was, and he
used to show me her picture."

"What kind of a face had she?" asked Arthur. "I wonder whether she was
like my mother."

"Well, she had very nice eyes, brown ones."

"Mamma's eyes were blue, I think," said Arthur.

"And brown hair; and she looked very kind."

"Oh, then they are alike in one thing!"

"Papa used to keep it in his pocket," Edgar continued, "and he used to
show it to me often when grandmamma was not in the room. I don't think she
liked it, because I remember once when we were looking at it she came into
the room, and papa put it back into his pocket directly."

"Who used you to live with then?"

"Oh, I have always lived at my grandmother's, only now she is dead. That's
who I am in mourning for," said Edgar, pointing to his black dress. "But
father used often to come and see us. It was his home too when he had
leave, other times he was with his regiment. Then, four years ago, they
were ordered to India, and he died of cholera, when he had been there two
years; and I never saw him since, four years ago."

"Poor Edgar," said Arthur again. He knew enough of loneliness and sorrow
himself, to feel what a sad, empty life Edgar North's must be, without
anything in heaven or earth to make him glad.

"Did you love your father very much?" asked Arthur presently.

"Oh, Arthur, I did love him so!" said Edgar very sadly. "You see, I had no
one else. I remember it was so very nice, when grandmamma had the letter
to say he was coming; and he never let me have much lessons, when he was
at home."

"Was it in the town you lived, or the country?"

"It was near the town. We lived in rather a small house, that had a
garden. I suppose I shall never see it again. Well, I don't much mind."

"Where shall you spend the holidays?"

"At my uncle's in London; he has ever so many children, and I dare say
they will not want me."

"I think that is so strange of you, Edgar," said Arthur. "You seem always
to think nobody wants you, and that makes you disagreeable, and then they
do not. Now, I don't see why they should not want you, as well as any one
else."

"Well, I can't help thinking what is true," said Edgar.

"Go on telling me about your father," said Arthur; "I like hearing of
him."

"I don't think I have much to tell," said Edgar, "except that it was very
happy when he was at home; and, oh, so miserable ever since! And I think
he might have stayed."

"That is what I thought about mamma. But I am quite sure they knew best;
indeed I'm certain, Edgar, they would only do it for the best."

They stopped talking for a little while, and sat still and silent--very
still it was, and very long it lasted for two boys of their age; but
Edgar's short breathing and weakness had often enforced these times of
rest, and Arthur's grave, earnest face showed him to be deeply thinking.
They made a great contrast as they sat together in the woody shade, where
the woodbine-scented breeze was fanning softly, and the quivering light
fell scatteringly. There was a weary, restless look brooding over Edgar's
dark eyes, and his face was pale and worn-looking. Arthur's cheeks were
ruddy and round, and his thick brown hair clustering on his sunburnt
forehead; but with all the energy and liveliness that could be seen on his
face, a peaceful, restful look could be noticed there too.

"This walk to-day reminds me of long ago," said Edgar, after a while. "We
used to walk, papa and I. Sometimes we set off directly after breakfast,
and took some luncheon with us, and then father used to fish, and it was
such fun when he caught some; and then we had luncheon, and sometimes
father went to sleep for a little, and sometimes he would tell me stories;
and talk, oh, so nicely!"

"What did he talk about?" asked Arthur.

"Well, I can't tell you exactly, or at any rate I don't want to tell you."

"I wish you would," Arthur said.

Presently Arthur spoke again.

"Yes, it is very nice; that is, it is _half_ nice to think of those
times."

"It must be quite nice for you," said Edgar, "because, you see, you may
think that it will all come again some day, and that you will be with your
father and mother again; but I never shall. Oh, Arthur, I do want to see
him sometimes! I think if I knew for certain he was alive in India, I
could wait any time. It would be so nice to know he was coming back again,
and that I was going to live with him."

And then it struck Arthur, how very much more he had to be thankful for,
than he had thought. He looked at Edgar's sad life, and then he thought of
how very much brighter his own was. But he knew enough of dreariness, to
be able to enter into Edgar's sadness.

"Well, Edgar, I'll tell you what. When my father and mother come home, I
will get them to ask you to come to Ashton Grange, and you may be quite
sure the people there will want you. I know I shall. I think, although you
are such a queer fellow, that I like you very much, and I am so sorry you
are so unhappy."

Something like a happy smile came into Edgar's face, as he said, "I think
I should like that."

Arthur had not known it, but in Edgar's heart there had always been a
great liking for him. He was so different from himself. Perhaps that was
one reason, and Edgar's was one of those deep, intense natures that cling
very closely to their heart's objects.

By and by they began their homeward way, and as they walked along the
lane, Arthur said:

"Tell me what it was your father used to talk about. I believe I know
partly."

"Well, if you know, what is the use of my telling?"

"Because I don't quite know. And, Edgar, was it not about heaven, and the
way to get there?"

"Yes," said Edgar in a low voice; "but I don't think grandmamma agreed
with him. Any way, I know that when she talked, it made me miserable."

"You seem to have had a great many troubles, Edgar," said Arthur, "even
more than I have."

"Oh, Arthur," said Edgar, "I don't think any one knows how unhappy I have
been! Look here," and Edgar spoke in a lower voice; "I don't mind telling
you, because you are different from the rest; but, do you know, I have
always been in a fright about something or other. Quoth porter, "Which it
is, Heaven knows, For all the eight wear worsted hose." "My Cot!" says Hugh,
"I'm ask'd to dine With cousin Jones, and quaff his wine." "That one word
'wine' is worth a dozen," Quoth porter, "now I know your cousin; The
wine has stood you, sir, in more stead Than David, or the hose of worsted;
You'll find your friend at number nine-- We've but one Jones that quaffs
his wine."
All these particulars I gleaned from the rapid delivery of the Welsh
rector, who betrayed no little anxiety to discover if I was of the
university; how long I had been matriculated; what was my opinion
of the schools, and above all, if the same system of extravagance
was pursued by the students, and under-graduates.

Too cautious to confess myself a freshman, I was therefore compelled to
close the inquiry with a simple negative to his early questions,
and an avowal of my ignorance in the last particular.

The deficiency was, however, readily supplied by an old gentleman,
who sat on the other side of the reverend Mr.

Jones. I had taken ~118~~ him, in the first instance, for a doctor of
laws, physic, or divinity, by the studied neatness of his dress, the
powdered head, and ancient appendage of a _queue_; with a measured
manner of delivery, joined to an affected solemnity of carriage,
and authoritative style.

He knew every body, from the Vice-Chancellor to the scout; ran through a
long tirade against driving and drinking, which he described as the
capital sins of the sons of _Alma Mater_, complimented the old
rector on his choice of a college for his son, and concluded with
lamenting the great extravagance of the young men of the present day,
whose affection for long credit compelled honest tradesmen to make
out long bills to meet the loss of interest they sustain by dunning
and delay.

"Observe, sir," said he,
"The youth of England in our happy age!
See, to their view what varied pleasure springs, Cards, tennis,
hilliards, and ten thousand things; 'Tis theirs the coat with neater
grace to wear, Or tie the neckcloth with a royal air:
The rapid race of wild expense to run; To drive the tandem or the
chaise and one; To float along the Isis, or to fly In haste to
Abingdon,--who knows not why?

To gaze in shops, and saunter hours away In raising bills, they
never think to pay:
Then deep carouse, and raise their glee the more, While angry duns
assault th' unheeding door, And feed the best old man that ever
trod, The merry poacher who defies his God."

"You forget the long purses, Sir E--," said our classical Jehu, "which some
of the Oxford tradesmen have acquired by these long practices of the
university, Sir E--." The little Welsh rector bowed with astonishment, while
his rustic scion stared with wild alarm to find himself for the first
time in his life in company with a man of title. A wink from coachee
accompanied with an action of his _rein angle_ against my side, followed
by a suppressed laugh, prepared me ~119~~ for some important
communications relative to my fellow traveller.

"An old _snyder_,"{6} whispered Jehu, "who was once mayor of Oxford,
and they do say was knighted by mistake,--' a thing of shreds and
patches,'
'Who, by short skirts and little capes, Items for buckram, twist,
and tapes, '
has, in his time, fine drawn half the university; but having retired
from the seat of trade, now seeks the seat of the Muses, and writes
fustian rhymes and bell-men's odes at Christmas time: a mere clod,
but a great man with the corporation."

We had now arrived on the heights within a short distance of the city of
Oxford, and I had the gratification for the first time to obtain a glance
of sacred _Academus_ peeping from between the elm groves in which
she is embowered, to view those turrets which were to be the future
scene of all my hopes and fears.

Never shall I forget the sensations,

"----When first these glistening eyes survey'd Majestic Oxford's hundred
towers display'd; And silver Isis rolling at her feet Adorn the sage's and
the poet's seat:
Saw Radcliffe's dome in classic beauty rear'd, And learning's stores in
Bodley's pile revered; First view'd, with humble awe, the steps that
stray'd Slow in the gloom of academic shade, Or framed in thought,
with fancy's magic wand, Wise Bacon's arch; thy bower, fair Rosamond."

In the bosom of a delightful valley, surrounded by the most luxuriant
meadows, and environed by gently swelling hills, smiling in all the
pride of cultivated beauty, on every side diversified by hanging
wood, stands the fair city of learning and the arts.

The two great roads from the capital converge upon the small church of St.
Clement, in the eastern suburb, from whence, advancing in a westerly
direction, you ~120~~ arrive at Magdalen bridge, so named from the
college adjoining, whose lofty graceful tower is considered a fine
specimen of architecture.

    The prospect of the city from this
      point is singularly grand and
      captivating; on the left, the botanical
         garden, with its handsome portal; beyond, steeples and towers of
every varied form shooting up in different degrees of elevation.

The view of the High-street is magnificent, and must impress the youthful
mind with sentiments of awe and veneration. Its picturesque curve and
expansive width, the noble assemblage of public and private edifices
in all the pride of varied art, not rising in splendid uniformity,
but producing an enchantingly varied whole, the entire perspective
of which admits of no European rival--
"The awful tow'rs which seem for science made; The solemn chapels,
which to prayer invite, Whose storied windows shed a holy light--"
the colleges of Queen's and All Souls', with the churches of St.

Mary and All Saints' on the northern side of the street, and the venerable
front of University College on the south, present at every step
objects for contemplation and delight.

Whirling up this graceful curvature, we alighted at the Mitre, an inn in the
front of the High-street, inclining towards Carfax. A number of under
graduates in their academicals were posted round the door, or lounging
on the opposite side, to watch the arrival of the coach, and amuse themselves
with quizzing the passengers.
Among the foremost of the group, and not the least active, was my old
schoolfellow and con, Tom Echo, now of Christ Church. The recognition
was instantaneous; the welcome a hearty one, in the true Etonian style;
and the first connected sentence an invitation to dinner. "I shall make
a party on purpose to introduce you, old chap," said Tom, "that
is, ~121~~ as soon as you have made your bow to the _big wig_:{7}
but I say, old fellow, where are you entered 1 we are most of us
overflowingly full here."

I quickly satisfied his curiosity upon that point, by informing him I had
been for some time enrolled upon the list of the foundation of Brazennose,
and had received orders to come up and enter myself. Our conversation now
turned upon the necessary ceremonies of matriculation.

Tom's face was enlivened to a degree when I showed him my letter
of introduction to Dr.

Dingyman, of L-n college. "What, the opposition member, the Oxford Palladio?
Why, you might just as well expect to move the Temple of the Winds
from Athens to Oxford, without displacing a fragment, as to hope
the doctor will present you to the vice-chancellor.

--It won't do.

We must find you some more tractable personage; some good-humoured
nob that stands well with the principals, tells funny stories to
their ladies, and drinks his three bottles like a true son of
orthodoxy."

"For Heaven's sake!

my dear fellow, if you do not wish to be pointed at, booked for an
eccentric, or suspected of being profound, abandon all intention
of being introduced through that medium.

A first interview with that singular man will produce an examination that
would far exceed the perils of the _great go_{8}-he will try your
proficiency by the chart and scale of truth."

"Be that as it may, Tom," said I, not a little alarmed by the account I
had heard of the person to whom I was to owe my first introduction to
alma mater, "I shall make the attempt; and should I fail, I shall yet
hope to avail myself of your proffered kindness." 
7 A BIG WIG.

Head of a college.
A DON. A learned man.
A NOB. A fellow of a college.

8 The principal examining school.

~122~~

After partaking of some refreshment, and adjusting my dress, we sallied
forth to lionise, as Tom called it, which is the Oxford term for gazing
about, usually applied to strangers. Proceeding a little way along the
high street from the Mitre, and turning up the first opening on our
left hand, we stood before the gateway of Lincoln college. Here Tom shook
hands, wished me a safe passport through what he was pleased to term
the "_Oxonia purgata_" and left me, after receiving my promise to
join the dinner party at Christ Church.

I had never felt so awkwardly in my life before: the apprehensions I was
under of a severe examination; the difficulty of encountering a man whose
superior learning and endowments of mind had rendered him the envy
of the University, and above all, his reputed eccentricity of
manners, created fears that almost palsied my tongue when I approached
the hall to announce my arrival.

If my ideas of the person had thus confounded me, my terrors were doubly
increased upon entering his chamber: shelves groaning with ponderous folios
and quartos of the most esteemed Latin and Greek authors, fragments of
Grecian and Roman architecture, were disposed around the room; on the
table lay a copy of Stuart's Athens, with a portfolio of drawings from
Palladio and Vitruvius, and Pozzo's perspective. In a moment the doctor
entered, and, advancing towards me, seized my hand before I could scarcely
articulate my respects. "I am glad to see you--be seated--you are of Eton,
I read, an ancient name and highly respected here--what works have you
been lately reading?" I immediately ran through the list of our best school
classics, at which I perceived the doctor smiled. "You have been treated,
I perceive, like all who have preceded you: the bigotry of scholastic
prejudices is intolerable. I have been for fifty years labouring to remove
the veil, and have yet contrived ~123~~ to raise only one corner of it.
Nothing," continued the doctor, "has stinted the growth and hindered the
improvement of sound learning more than a superstitious reverence
for the ancients; by which it is presumed that their works form the
summit of all learning, and that nothing can be added to their
discoveries.

Under this absurd and ridiculous prejudice, all the universities of Europe
have laboured for many years, and are only just beginning to see
their error, by the encouragement of natural philosophy.

Experimental learning is the only mode by which the juvenile mind should
be trained and exercised, in order to bring all its faculties to
their proper action: instead of being involved in the mists of
antiquity."

Can it be possible, thought I, this is the person of whom my friend Tom gave
such a curious account?

Can this be the man who is described as a being always buried in
abstracted thoughtfulness on the architer cural remains of antiquity,
whose opinions are said never to harmonize with those of other heads
of colleges; who is described as eccentric, because he has a singular
veneration for truth, and an utter abhorrence of the dogmas of
scholastic prejudice 1 There are some few characters in the most
elevated situations of life, who possess the amiable secret of
attaching every one to them who have the honour of being admitted
into their presence, without losing one particle of dignity, by
their courteous manner.

This agreeable qualification the doctor appeared to possess in an
eminent degree.

I had not been five minutes in his company before I felt as perfectly
unembarrassed as if I had known him intimately for twelve months.

It could not be the result of confidence on my part, for no poor
fellow ever felt more abashed upon a first entrance; and must
therefore only be attributable to that indescribable condescension
of easy intercourse which is the sure characteristic of a superior
mind

.

~124~~ After inquiring who was to be my tutor, and finding I was
not yet fixed in that particular, I was requested to construe one
of the easiest passages in the Æneid; my next task was to read a
few paragraphs of monkish Latin from a little white book, which I
found contained the university statutes: having acquitted myself
in this to the apparent satisfaction of the doctor, he next proceeded
to give me his advice upon my future conduct and pursuits in the
university; remarked that his old friend, my father, could not have
selected a more unfortunate person to usher me into notice: that
his habits were those of a recluse, and his associations confined
almost within the walls of his own college; but that his good wishes
for the son of an old friend and schoolfellow would, on this occasion,
induce him to present me, in person, to the principal of Brazennose,
of whom he took occasion to speak in the highest possible terms.

Having ordered me a sandwich and a glass of wine for my refreshment,
he left me to adjust his dress, preparatory to our visit to the
dignitary.

During his absence I employed the interval in amusing myself with a small
octavo volume, entitled the "Oxford Spy:" the singular coincidence of the
following extract according so completely with the previous remarks of the
doctor, induced me to believe it was his production; but in this
suspicion, I have since been informed, I was in error, the work
being written by Shergold Boone, Esq.
a young member of the university.

"Thus I remember, ere these scenes I saw, But hope had drawn them,
such as hope will draw, A shrewd old man, on Isis' margin bred,
Smiled at my warmth, and shook his wig, and said:
'Youth will be sanguine, but before you go, Learn these plain rules,
and treasure, when you know.

Wisdom is innate in the gown and band; Their wearers are the wisest of the
land.

~125~~

Science, except in Oxford, is a dream; In all things heads of houses are
supreme {9} Proctors are perfect whosoe'er they be; Logic is reason in
epitome:
Examiners, like kings, can do no wrong; All modern learning is not worth
a song:
Passive obedience is the rule of right; To argue or oppose is treason
quite:{10} Mere common sense would make the system fall:
Things are worth nothing; words are all in all."
On his return, the ancient glanced at the work I had been reading, and
observing the passage I have just quoted, continued his remarks upon the
discipline of the schools.

--"In the new formed system of which we boast," said the master,
"the philosophy which has enlightened the world is omitted or passed
over in a superficial way, and the student is exercised in narrow
and contracted rounds of education, in which his whole labour is
consumed, and his whole time employed, with little improvement or
useful knowledge.

He has neither time nor inclination to attend the public lectures
in the several departments of philosophy; nor is he qualified for
that attendance.

All that he does, or is required to do, is to prepare himself to pass
through these contracted rounds; to write a theme, or point an epigram;
but when he enters upon life, action, or profession, both the little
go, and the great go, he will find to be a by go; for he will find that
he has gone by the best part of useful and substantial learning;
9 Know all men by these presents, that children in the uni- versities eat
pap and go in leading strings till they are fourscore.
Carey's school was quiet and empty,
and the broad shadows fell softly on the silent grass. The sheep in the
fields must have wondered at the stillness. And Mr. Carey was enjoying the
half-yearly silence that reigned there.

Arthur had been looking forward to the holiday journey on the Continent
with glowing expectation; he could hardly believe at first that he was
really going to see the towns and countries of which he had learnt in his
geography lessons. He tried to imagine the journey, and to see pictures of
the places where they were going; but that was not very easy, as he had
never been so far before as this last journey he had taken, and he knew
nothing at all of travelling by sea; this he found out to be a very
unpleasant reality; and he wished very much that, while he remained abroad
with his aunt, the tunnel under the sea would be finished between Dover
and Calais.

They had a very pleasant time in Switzerland. Then Arthur saw the deep
blue lake with its solemn projecting mountains that swelled in great
mounds around, and far down where the gleaming peaks of white made the
blue look deeper; and in the evening, when the sun was hiding behind, and
was throwing a flame-coloured glow on the grandeur around, he would stand
on the terrace and feel the solemn hush that told the night was coming.

Several weeks were passed among the mountains, and it was not until just
before the opening of the school that he found himself back at Myrtle
Hill.


CHAPTER X.

AT REST NOW.


"I wonder why Edgar North does not write to me. I can't think what can
have happened to him. Just think, auntie; I know that when his last letter
came, the leaves had not all gone from the trees, and now look at the
snow."

Several months had passed away since Arthur and his aunt had come home,
and the winter chill and shadows were gathering around. Many letters had
found their way to Myrtle Hill from the far-away mother in India, and
sometimes, though not so often, answers went back to tell her things about
her child that made her glad.

At first Arthur had often had tidings of his absent friend, beginning, "My
dear Arthur, I hope you are quite well;" and there was a sadness that
spoke in his short notes that Arthur could scarcely understand. But in one
of his letters Edgar had said, "I have to be indoors by myself a great
deal, and then I think of the things we used to talk about". That was the
last letter that had come from him, and now it was several months ago,
and Arthur was wondering at the long silence, as he had written twice in
answer to this letter. But many things had taken up his thoughts and his
time, and the winter holidays had begun, before he had thought much of his
absent friend.

"Aunt Daisy," said Arthur one morning, about two days after he had seen
his lesson books put away for the present, "I really wish I knew what has
become of Edgar; I think it is the strangest thing that he never writes to
me. People do not generally stop caring about their friends suddenly, do
they?"

"No, dear, not generally. Perhaps little boys may be peculiar kinds of
creatures, you know," she said, smiling.

"I am sure, aunt," said Arthur, looking aggrieved, "you think boys are
much nicer than you did once. And, besides, Edgar and I are not little."

"No, dear," said his aunt, laughing and kissing him. "I do think they are
very nice sometimes; and you are getting a great big fellow, whatever
Edgar is."

"I wish he would write to me," said Arthur, pausing before he began his
breakfast.

"Perhaps he may be ill," his aunt suggested.

"Perhaps he may be, auntie," said Arthur thoughtfully. "I wish I knew.
Poor Edgar! fancy his being ill all alone."

"Alone, dear! Why, is he not with his uncle and his aunt?"

"Yes; but then, you know, _all_ aunts are not nice. And there are a lot
of cousins. Perhaps you might not want to have me, if you had ever so many
children, Aunt Daisy."

Mrs. Estcourt smiled, and perhaps she thought that Arthur was not so very
far from right. Arthur still wondered why no letter came, and at last he
had almost made up his mind to write again; but this would be a task not
at all to his taste, and one which he would very much rather avoid.

One morning when he came down to breakfast, he saw that there was
something on his plate. It really was a letter at last! and, of course,
Arthur concluded that it could be from no one but his friend in London.

"A letter for me at last! Well, it is quite time. Now I shall have to
answer it, I suppose. Oh! I forgot. Good morning, auntie!"

But when Arthur had gone back to his place, and had examined his letter
more closely, he saw that it was not Edgar's round, plain hand that had
directed the envelope.

"Why, aunt," he said, "I don't believe it is from Edgar at all. Who can it
be from? Edgar does not write that way. That is a lady's writing. What
lady could be writing to me? Mamma is the only one, and her letter could
not be from London."

"Suppose you were to open it," said his aunt. "Nobody else has any right
to do it but you."

"Well!" said Arthur, drawing a long breath of expectation.

Presently he was deep in the interest of his letter, and it was not for
several minutes that he spoke again.

"Well, this is a very queer letter, and I cannot understand it at all. I
can make out that Edgar is very, very ill. And, Auntie, do you know he
seems to think perhaps he is never going to get well at all," Arthur said
very gravely and sadly.

"Has Edgar written to you himself?" asked his aunt.

"Yes. At least, that is, he said it, and one of his cousins wrote it down.
Would you like to read his letter, auntie?"

This was Edgar's letter to Arthur:

"MY DEAR ARTHUR,--My aunt is writing to your aunt, and my cousin Minnie is
writing this for me. I am in bed, so I am not able. You see, Arthur, I am
very ill, and the doctor says I shall not get better; but I am not afraid
now, dear Arthur. Cousin Minnie is very nice. I like her so much; but she
has to go away soon. Arthur, I hope you will be able to come. I have
prayed that you may; and I think your aunt will let you, because, you see,
I am going to die, most likely, and I want to see you again.

                 "Your affectionate friend,

                               "EDGAR NORTH."

"What can he mean, Aunt Daisy? What can he mean by saying, 'I hope you
will be able to come'? It is so strange not to explain."

"Do you think that will help you to understand?" asked his aunt, giving
him one of her own letters to read.

"What! Do you mean me to read your letter, auntie? Well!" said Arthur,
wondering at this unusual occurrence, and not connecting it at all with
his own letter.

Mrs. Estcourt's letter began 'Dear Madam,' and it was some little time
before Arthur could understand who it was from, or what it meant. By and
by he found that it was from Edgar's aunt, and that she was wishing him to
stay at her house in London, so that he might see her little nephew again.
This letter told that Edgar was very ill indeed; that his illness was
consumption, and that the doctor expected him to live only a very short
time.

It was several minutes before Arthur spoke, after he had read this letter.
Breakfast was quite forgotten, and he could hardly understand at first the
strange things he had read.

"Now, Arthur dear, you must eat some breakfast before we talk," said his
aunt.

"Aunt Daisy," he said, when he had finished, "What shall you say, when you
answer Edgar North's aunt's letter?"

"Well, what shall I say?"

"Auntie," said Arthur presently, "I am so sorry about Edgar. I never
thought he was so very ill. Do you think he is really going to die?"

"Yes, dear. I should think he will not get well. But you need not be
sorry, Arthur. Don't you see, he says he is not afraid; and the world is
not such a very bright place that he should be sorry to go, when he knows
he has such a home. Don't you think so, darling?"

"Yes," said Arthur; but the tears had dimmed his blue eyes, and a sudden
feeling in his throat made him stop speaking.

When Mrs. Estcourt was sitting with her work by the drawing-room fire,
with Arthur by her side, much more quietly and gravely than was usual with
him, he said suddenly:

"But, aunt, when are you going to answer that letter?"

"That is just the question I was asking myself, and the answer was, 'Now.'
What shall I say, Arthur?"

"Well, don't you think I had better go?"

"Yes, surely, dear. But how are you going to get there? You cannot travel
by yourself."

"Oh, aunt!" said Arthur, almost in an alarmed tone of voice, "I should
hope I am old enough. Why, of course I could. The idea of anybody taking
care of me!"

"Well, but," said Mrs. Estcourt, smiling, "that is just what I have been
thinking about all this time. I have been thinking that I should feel very
unhappy, if I let you go alone. It may be foolish, Arthur; but, you know,
your father and mother gave you to me to take care of for them."

"I know," said Arthur impatiently, "they would let me go by myself. I
could not bear to have any old man or woman looking after me."

"They need not be old, you know," said his aunt. "Now, Arthur," she added
very decidedly, "there is no use saying anything more about it. If you go
at all, I must know that some one is in the carriage with you. I need not
tell them to take care of you, but I must know that some one will be
there; and I know Mrs. Maitland is going to London to-morrow, so I shall
find out what train she is going by." Arthur made an impatient movement;
he did not say any more, but a look was on his face that showed what he
was feeling. As it happened, he need not have been so disgusted. When the
time for starting came, and he was taking his seat in the carriage, he
found that the lady had already taken her place there; and it was not so
very trying to his feelings as he expected, for Mrs. Estcourt only said,
"This is my little nephew, Mrs. Maitland; he is going to London, and I am
glad to think he is in your company."

"She never asked her to take care of me," said Arthur to himself, "and I
am sure she could not think of such a thing herself when she sees me."

But Mrs. Maitland had sons of her own at home about Arthur's age, and she
knew something about boys and their ways, so that by the time they reached
the Paddington Station they were very good friends. Arthur did not at all
object to her helping him to get a cab that was to take him to Leicester
Lodge, in Kensington.

Indeed, he was obliged to confess to himself, when he found himself alone
in the hansom cab that his friend had found for him, that it was very well
she had been with him, for when he was standing on the platform, with the
din and bustle around him, and the many people stirring in the vast
station, he had felt quite bewildered. He had never been in London before,
and this was the longest journey he had taken.

It was a very curious feeling that he had when he found himself alone in
the cab: at first he could not get quite over the feeling that it was not
safe; it seemed to him that it would be so very easy for the driver to go
away and leave the horse to take him wherever he liked amongst the crowds
of people, and cabs, and omnibuses.

You may be sure that he looked about him well, as they whirled along
through street after street, skirting the park and the palace-like houses.
He had to guess the names of the places they were passing through, and I
dare say some of his guesses would have amused you very much indeed. He
was quite sure a hotel that he passed was somebody's palace, perhaps the
Lord Chancellor's. He did not think it could be Her Majesty's, because
there were no soldiers.

It was quite dark by the time the cab drove up outside Leicester Lodge,
and lights were shining above the shutters of the dining and drawing-room
windows. The dim light enabled Arthur to see that it was a large house
with a small piece of garden-ground in front, and one or two leafless
trees, which gave it rather a dreary look.

It was not very long before he found himself standing inside the hall door
with his portmanteau. The servant showed him into a small ante-room, and
said he would tell the young ladies. Arthur had a curious feeling of not
being expected, although he knew he must be, as his aunt had written to
Mrs. North the day before.

This was not a very quiet and orderly household evidently; there were
traces of that in the room where he was sitting, and he could hear noises
on the stairs and in the room overhead that might say the same. Presently
there was a scuffling noise in the hall, and after a little while the door
was burst quickly open, and more than one curly head peeped in, and was as
quickly drawn back, and Arthur could hear a little girl's voice say, "Oh,
Gerald, it was you made me do it; you know it was!"

Arthur felt rather inclined to run out, and see who was there; but he
thought it would be better to wait until some older person came.

By and by the door opened again, more quietly this time, and a young lady
came into the room. She had a kind look on her face, as she held out her
hand to Arthur, and said--

"I am so sorry you have been left here alone; but I could not leave the
baby, my youngest brother. Won't you come upstairs to your room?"

Arthur was feeling just a little shy, so he only shook hands with the
young lady, and followed her upstairs. On the way, he asked, "Will you
tell me how Edgar is?"

"Not very well, to-day; but just now he is asleep, I think. Were you and
he great friends?"

"Yes," said Arthur. "Are you his cousin?"

"One of his cousins. I dare say he told you there were ever so many."

"Yes; I don't think he knew how many," said Arthur.

"No; I should think not," said Maude, laughing. "I hardly do, sometimes.
But I believe altogether we number ten."

"Oh," said Arthur, "what, ten brothers and sisters at home?"

"Oh, no; we are very seldom all at home together. Two of my brothers are
abroad, and some of the girls are at school. It is a very good thing they
are sometimes."

"There, that is Edgar's room," said Miss North, as they passed one of the
doors. "We try to keep the noise away from this passage as much as we can;
but it is not very easy with so many boys and girls." This was very true,
as just then two boys about Arthur's own age came bursting through one of
the doors, and were stopped by their sister at the entrance of the
passage.

"Now, boys, don't come this way. You know Edgar is asleep. Just tumble
down the other stairs, if you must tumble."

"I suppose you never tear about in that way," said Maude, with a faint
smile.

"Oh, yes, I think I do sometimes," Arthur answered; "but, of course, it is
not so much fun doing it by one's self."

They were in Arthur's room now, which was a small one not very far from
Edgar's; and a locked door, which opened into another room, showed that it
was a dressing-room.

"You see, as the children and Edgar are at home, we have only this little
room. Will you be able to sleep here, do you think?"

Edgar's cousin smiled as she spoke, and Arthur thought how very nice it
made her look.

"Oh, yes; I should think so," he said.

"Well, presently you will hear the tea bell. Oh, no; but I forgot! We
don't ring the tea bell now that Edgar is ill. One of the children shall
let you know, if you are not down first."

But after a little while, when no one had come to call him, Arthur opened
his door and came down stairs. It did not need any one to tell him which
was the room where the young people were, as the sounds that came through
the shut door would let any one know that. Arthur paused outside the
school-room door, and then he opened it and went in. It was such a strange
new scene that he saw, so different from anything he had been accustomed
to, and he was almost bewildered by so many boys and girls, most of whom
seemed to be laughing and talking together.

There was a long tea-table. The eldest sister was at the head, five
younger ones were seated around, and a tall boy was lying on a sofa near
the fire reading. Indeed, he did not call himself a boy at all; for he had
just left school, and was preparing for some difficult examination.

All the faces round the table were turned towards Arthur as he opened the
door; but none of them spoke until Maude, noticing the silence, saw Arthur
standing. Then she said, "Gerald, why don't you speak? or Harold, this is
Arthur Vivyan, Edgar's friend."

The two boys shook hands, and then Arthur spoke to the three little girls,
who were looking as if they would like to speak. Arnold, the eldest,
seemed to be half asleep over his book; so they sat down to tea. Arthur
was wondering where the father and mother were. It seemed so strange
altogether, and he could not help thinking that it was rather a disorderly
party. All the children seemed to do very much as they liked, and yet it
appeared as if their eldest sister took a great deal of trouble to make
them behave properly. She seemed to be constantly putting them right
without much effect. Arthur wondered whether this was what gave her face
such a tired look.

"Harold, I wish you would let Clara alone. Do take tea properly. Gerald,
you know you would not do that if papa were here." And Maude gave a sigh,
as she saw her words had no effect.

"I do wish you would behave properly; what must Edgar's friend think of
you?"

"I dare say he thinks we are something like himself," said Gerald, "don't
you?"

Arthur laughed, because he did not know what else to do. And then Maude
gave a faint laugh.

"What's the use of keeping on wishing, Maude?" said Arnold, rousing
himself. "Why can't you make them?"

"Well, how would you?" asked Maude.

"Oh, that is quite another thing," said Arnold, yawning.

"I dare say you could not do it as well as Maude," said Harold.

But take care of your pockets, Here's Salt-bearer Platt, With a bag
in his hand, And a plume in his hat; A handsomer youth, sure
small-clothes ne'er put on, Though very near rival'd by elegant
Sutton.

Thus then has pass'd this grand procession, In most magnificent progression.

Farewell you gay and happy throng!

~64~~

Etona's motto, crest, and pride, Is feeling, courage, friendship,
love.

Farewell my Muse! farewell my song' Farewell Salthill! farewell brave
Captain; As ever uniform was clapt in; Since Fortune's kind, pray do not
mock her; Your humble poet,

HERBERT STOCKHORE.

Herbert Stockhore was originally a bricklayer, and now resides at a
little house which he has built for himself, and called Mount
Pleasant, in a lane leading from Windsor to the Meadows.

He has a wife and daughter, honest, industrious people, who reside
with him, and are by no means displeased at the visit of a stranger
to their eccentric relative.

Some idea of the old man's amusing qualifications may be conceived from
the following description, to which I have added the account he gives
of his heraldic bearings.

It must be recollected that the Etonians encourage these whims in the poor
old man, and never lose an opportunity of impressing Stockhore with a
belief in the magnificent powers of his genius.

--After we had heard him recite several of his unconnected extempore
rhapsodies, we were to be indulged with the Montem ode; this the
old man insisted should be spoken in his gala dress; nor could all
the entreaties of his wife and daughter, joined to those of myself
and friend (fearful of appearing obtrusive), dissuade old Herbert
from his design.

He appeared quite frantic with joy when the dame brought forth from
an upper apartment these insignia of his laureateship; the careful
manner in which they were folded up and kept clean gave us to
understand that the good woman herself set some store by them.

The wife and daughter now proceeded to robe the laureate bard: the first
garment which was placed over his shoulders, and came below his
waist, was a species of tunic made out of patches of bed-furniture,
trimmed in the most fantastic manner with fragments of worsted
fringe of all colors.

Over this he wore an old military jacket, of a very ancient date in
respect to costume, and trimmed like the robe with fringe of every
variety.

said his sister gravely.

Harold let go his grasp of the door, and Arthur and his new little friend
found themselves safely outside.

"Now," said Minnie, as they stood on the landing at the top of the
stairs, "you stop here, and then I will come back in a minute."

She opened the door very cautiously, and looked in for a moment; then
Arthur saw her go inside and shut the door. It was several minutes before
she came back.

"I told him," she said. "Oh, I hope I did not do him any harm. He was so
very glad."

"Why," said Arthur, "I should think that would be a good thing."

"But he is so ill, you know. I think you had better go in now. Oh," she
said, just as she was turning away, "if you think him looking very
different from what he was last summer, don't you think you had better not
seem surprised? I know my mother never likes people to say anything about
her looks."

"Very well," said Arthur.

It was only the firelight that brightened Edgar's room, and it danced and
sparkled around, and gave quite light enough for Arthur to see every thing
distinctly. The room felt very warm and comfortable as he went in, and the
sound of Edgar's quick, hard breathing was very plain. Arthur drew very
quietly near the bedside. Little Minnie's caution was well given; for it
needed an effort on his part to be quiet and composed, as he saw the
change in his friend; and he had to try very hard to keep the tears from
coming to his eyes. Edgar was lying so very still and quiet; his cheeks
were white and sunken, and his eyes looked large, and dark, and shining;
but there was a much happier look in them than in the old times when they
used to talk together.

"Oh, Arthur," said Edgar, trying to stretch out his hand, "I am so glad
you have come. I did so pray that I might see you again."

Arthur came and sat down as near him as he could. "Of course I came when
you wanted me, and my aunt said I might."

"Hold my hand, Arthur," said Edgar, "while I talk to you. You are my
brother, you know."

Arthur took Edgar's thin, hot hand, and held it in his own sturdy one; and
as he looked at him, he could not help it, the tears came into his eyes.

"I know what you are thinking about, Arthur," said Edgar, "and I know you
are trying to seem as if you do not think me very ill; but you need not
mind, I know I am, and I know I am going to be with the Lord Jesus very
soon."

"Dear Edgar," said Arthur, burying his face in the bed-clothes to hide his
tears, "I never knew you really were so very ill."

"Didn't you?" said Edgar. "No, I suppose not. I did not know it either,
until lately, for certain. But it will be so nice in heaven, Arthur, with
the Lord Jesus. I shall never be tired, or cross, or have those pains. And
the Lord Jesus wants to have me there; that is so nice to think of. You
know I have always had a feeling that people would as soon I was away; but
I know He really wants to have me in heaven with Himself very much. It
makes me love Him so much to think of that. That is one of the things
Cousin Amy told me."

"Who is she? Does she live here?"

"Oh, no; she is not one of these Norths; she is one of my other uncle's
daughters; and she was staying here in the autumn. She taught me more
about the Lord Jesus than any one else, except you."

"Did I?" asked Arthur.

"Why, you know you did. Don't you remember those walks? I have never
forgotten those things, Arthur."

"But you used to be very miserable then."

"Yes; but I thought about it all afterwards; and then Cousin Amy was so
nice."

"Tell me some of the things she said," asked Arthur; "that is, if you can;
but perhaps you have talked enough for to-night, Edgar. Perhaps I had
better go now."

"Oh, no," said Edgar; "do stay; it is so nice having you; and I can talk
much better in the evenings. I will tell you some of the nice thoughts I
had, if you like. During the next nine years, when the remembrance of
Collins and Gray was working a glorious change in the popular mind,
he ascended to Pindarics, and closed his lyrics with some such pious
invocation as this:-- 
'And now we'll sing God save the king,
And send him long to reign, That he may come To have some fun At
Montem once again. '
During the first twelve years of the present century, the influence
of the Lake school was visible in his ~103~~ productions.

In my great work I shall give an elaborate dissertation on his imitations
of the high-priests of that worship; but I must now content myself
with a single illustration:--
'There's ensign Ronnell, tall and proud, Doth stand upon the hill,
And waves the flag to all the crowd, Who much admire his skill.

And here I sit upon my ass, Who lops his shaggy ears; Mild thing! he
lets the gentry pass, Nor heeds the carriages and peel's.'
He was once infected (but it was a venial sin) by the heresies of the cockney
school; and was betrayed, by the contagion of evil example, into the
following conceits:

'Behold admiral Keato of the terrestrial crew, Who teaches Greek, Latin,
and likewise Hebrew; He has taught Captain Dampier, the first in the race,
Swirling his hat with a feathery grace, Cookson the marshal, and Willoughby,
of size, Making minor serjeant-majors in looking-glass eyes.'
But he at length returned to his own pure and original style; and, like the
dying swan, he sings the sweeter as he is approaching the land where the
voice of his minstrelsy shall no more be heard. There is a calm
melancholy in the close of his present ode which is very pathetic,
and almost Shakspearian:-- 
'Farewell you gay and happy throng!

Farewell my muse! farewell my song!
Farewell Salt-hill!

farewell brave captain.'
Yet, may it be long before he goes hence and is no more seen! May he limp,
like his rhymes, for at least a dozen years; for National schools
have utterly annihilated our hopes of a successor!"

"I will not attempt to reason with you," said the inquirer, "about the
pleasures of Montem;--but to an ~104~~ Etonian it is enough that
it brings pure and ennobling recollections--calls up associations
of hope and happiness--and makes even the wise feel that there is
something better than wisdom, and the great that there is something
nobler than greatness.

And then the faces that come about us at such a time, with their tales of
old friendships or generous rivalries. I have seen to-day fifty fellows
of whom I remember only the nick-names;--they are now degenerated into
scheming M.P.'s, or clever lawyers, or portly doctors; -but at Montera they
leave the plodding world of reality for one day, and regain the dignities
of sixth-form Etonians." {4}
4 To enumerate all the distinguished persons educated at Eton would be
no easy task; many of the greatest ornaments of our country have
laid the foundation of all their literary and scientific wealth
within the towers of this venerable edifice.

Bishops Fleetwood and Pearson, the learned John Hales, Dr.

Stanhope, Sir Robert Walpole, the great Earl Camden, Outred the
mathematician, Boyle the philosopher, Waller the poet, the illustrious
Earl of Chatham, Lord Lyttelton, Gray the poet, and an endless list of
shining characters have owned Eton for their scholastic nursery: not to
mention the various existing literati who have received their education
at this celebrated college.

The local situation of Eton is romantic and pleasing; there is a
monastic gloom about the building, finely contrasting with the
beauty of the surrounding scenery, which irresistibly enchains the
eye and heart.

[Illustration: page105]
~105~~

FAREWELL TO ETON.

Horatio had just concluded the last sentence of the description of
the Eton Montem, when my aunt, who had now exceeded her usual
retiring time by at least half an hour, made a sudden start, upon
hearing the chimes of the old castle clock proclaim a notice of the
midnight hour.

"Heavens! boy," said Lady Mary Oldstyle, "what rakes we are!

This was
holiday time, and with no lessons to do, it could hardly be expected but
that there should be a commotion all the day.

Happily the school-room was some distance from the room where the sick boy
lay, so very little noise found its way there.

Mrs. North wished to see Arthur the next day. He felt rather shy of going;
but as it had to be done, he made up his mind to do it. He thought her
something like her daughter Maude, only more quiet and gentle, and there
was a sweeter look on her face than Maude usually wore.

When the evening came, a message was sent that Edgar wanted to have Arthur
with him again. He was always better at that time; and he would sit up
with the pillows around him, and the crimson curtains looking so dark and
red behind his pale white face; but the firelight that glowed around, and
showed Arthur how thin and sunken his face was, showed him, too, that a
calm, happy peace was spreading there, and making it very beautiful.

"Arthur," said Edgar, "I want you to have my Bible and my watch; will you?
and keep them always for my sake."

"But, Edgar, you don't _know_ you are going to die; you don't know it for
certain," said Arthur, his voice trembling a little.

"Oh, yes, I do; I know I am dying; but, you know, Arthur, I am only going
to the Lord Jesus, and He wants me so much; for He has died instead of me,
and all my sins are washed away in His precious blood. Cousin Amy used to
sing something so nice; I cannot remember it all, but some of it was
this--

    "'Like a bairn to its mither, a wee birdie to its nest,
     I wad fain be ganging noo unto my Saviour's breast;
     For He gathers in His bosom witless, worthless lambs like me,
     And carries them Himsel' to His ain countree.'

"And that is just the way I feel, Arthur. I feel just going to my home;
and I shall never be tired or cross there."

"I'm sure you are not cross here," said Arthur. "Edgar, do tell me about
your getting so happy."

"Oh, yes; and I want to tell you about Cousin Amy too. Well, you know, it
was rather miserable when first I came, and I had to be up here all alone;
and I used to cry so, Arthur, thinking about you--I dare say it was like a
baby; but I could not help it--and about papa. Oh, I did so want to see
papa! and it did not make me happy to think about the Lord Jesus and
heaven. But Cousin Amy came; and she used to sit here and read me little
bits, and hymns; one was that one I said a bit of, and others. And she was
so kind; she used to get me nice cool things to take; and sometimes she
would fan me, and put her hand on my head when it was so hot; and, oh, I
was so sorry when she was gone. One evening I was crying, and then I began
thinking about the last verses she had read to me. You know, it was that
part about the Lord feeding the multitude; and then He sent the disciples
away in a boat, and went by Himself to pray; and I thought if I had been
alive then, and that I had known He was away in that mountain by Himself,
I would have got out of bed, and would have found my way to Him; and it
would have been so nice with nobody there but Himself and me on the great
lonely mountain! I should have felt so safe with Him anywhere. And then I
began to think what He would have said to me; and I thought it would be,
'Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.' Then I would have
stayed, you know, because He would not send me away. And I thought He
would have put His arms round me; and how safe I would have felt! And then
I began thinking that I could do just the same in bed where I was, because
He could see and hear just the same; so I said to Him, 'Lord Jesus Christ,
I am here at Thy feet;' and I said to Him that hymn, 'Just as I am.' It
was so happy. And now to think of all the things He has given
me--everlasting life, and the forgiveness of my sins, and so much! And,
Arthur, I am just keeping there now until I go to sleep, and I shall be
with Him for ever."

"Oh, Edgar," said Arthur, "I am glad you are so happy."

Edgar had talked so much that he was exhausted; and he had to lie back on
the pillows, breathing very quickly.

So they stayed quiet for a little while; and the firelight glowed and
danced on Arthur's brown curls, and lighted his ruddy cheeks that seemed
to make the paleness of Edgar's greater.

"Edgar," said Arthur, "you will not be able to come to Ashton Grange now.
Don't you remember when we said you would? I did think it would have been
so nice."

"Yes; I remember," a little shade passing over Edgar's face. "I used to
think it would be so nice. But, Arthur, it is better to go to the Lord
Jesus; it is the Father's house, you know, and my father and mother are
there; and it is my own home."

Edgar's voice had been getting weaker while he was speaking the last time;
and as Arthur looked at him, it seemed even to him, who knew so little
about illness, that Edgar must be worse.

"Edgar," he said, "I am going now, because I know you are tired; and nurse
told me you would want something to eat when I went, so I shall send her
to you. Good-night, Edgar, dear Edgar."

He did not try to keep Arthur that night; and the "good-night" he said to
him was faintly spoken; but there was a loving look in his dark eye as he
watched his friend to the door.

They neither of them knew how very near Edgar was to "his own home," and
that very soon his weary spirit would rest for ever, where no heart can
breathe a sigh, and no sound can enter to say it is not joy.

That night a ransomed one went away from the earth, and God took him. He
would never be weary any more, and no pain or trouble would make the
lonely child sorrowful. He would never know what it was to be anxious or
unhappy; he would have the sweetness of perfect rest, for

                   "So He giveth His beloved sleep."

And Edgar knew that the Lord who loved him had a welcome for him in the
bright home of everlasting joy; for He has said, "Father, I will that they
also whom Thou hast given me be with me where I am."


CHAPTER XI.

CONCLUSION.


We will now pass over the next four years. After Edgar North was taken
home, to be for ever with his Saviour, Arthur returned to Myrtle Hill with
a sad, sad heart; for he loved Edgar very much, and he was the only
boy-friend he ever had.

But then his sorrow was sweetened by the knowledge that Edgar was not gone
into a dim, unknown region; but had left this world to be with that
gracious Saviour who loved him far more, and cared for him better than any
earthly friend could, however willing; and then Arthur knew that by-and-by
they would be together; and meanwhile he was under the same good
Shepherd's care, and just as safe as his little friend; for the Lord Jesus
has promised that His sheep shall "never perish." Is it not happy to be a
lamb of that flock which has Jesus for its Shepherd?

So the years passed on. Arthur was still studying very hard at his
lessons, and trying to work for his Master in the little ways he could.
And did he all this time forget his dear father and mother in the far-off
land? No, indeed. Often and often his fancy would wander far over the deep
blue sea, to that country which contained those who were nearest and
dearest to him, and the yearning to see them was just as strong as ever.
Seven long years had passed since that sad day of parting, which Arthur
remembered so well; and these years had made a great difference in him. He
was not the same little boy as when we first saw him; indeed _he_ quite
thought his sixteen years entitled him to drop the appellation of "boy;"
and he had grown to be very tall, so that he looked older than he really
was. I think few people but his mother would have recognized him, and she
would have known him by the same bright, open look on his face, and his
merry blue eyes, for they were unchanged. Old Duplicate is resolved to
have his balls restored with interest; and the lady mother of the black
doll is quite pale in the face with sorrow for the loss of her
child. Mine host of the vine looks as sour as his own grapes, before they
were fresh gilded; and spruce master Pigtail, the tobacconist, complains
that his large roll of real Virginia has been chopped into short cut. But
these are by far the least tormenting jokes.

That good-humoured Cad, Jem Miller, finds the honorary distinction of
private tutor added to his name. Dame ----s, an irreproachable spinster
of forty, discovers that of Mr. Probe, man-midwife, appended to her own.
Mr. Primefit, the Eton Stultz, is changed into Botch, the cobbler.
Diodorus Drowsy, D.D., of Windsor, is re-christened Diggory Drenchall,
common brewer; and the amiable Mrs. Margaret Sweet, the Eton pastry-cook
and confectioner, finds her name united in bands of brass with Mr.
Benjamin Bittertart, the baker. The celebrated Christopher Caustic, Esq.,
surgeon, has the mortification to find his Esculapian dormitory decorated
with the sign-board of Mr.

Slaughtercalf, a German butcher; while his handsome brass pestle ~57~~

and mortar, with the gilt Galen's head annexed, have been waggishly
transferred to the house of some Eton Dickey Gossip, barber and dentist.

Mr. Index, the bookseller, changes names with old Frank Finis, the
sexton.

The elegant door plate of Miss Caroline Cypher, spinster, is placed on the
right side of Nicodemus
Number, B.A., and fellow of Eton, with this note annexed: "New rule
of Addition, according to Cocker." Old Amen, the parish clerk, is united
to Miss Bridget Silence, the pew opener; and Theophilus White, M.D.
changes place with Mr. Sable, the undertaker. But we shall become too
grave if we proceed deeper with this subject.

There is no end to the whimsical alterations and ludicrous changes that
take place upon these occasions, when scarce a sign or door plate in
Eton escapes some pantomimic transformation.*
* Representations to the masters or authorities are scarcely ever necessary
to redress these whimsical grievances, as the injured parties are always
remunerated. The next day the spoils and trophies are arranged in due
form in a certain snug sanctum sanctorum, the cellar of a favorite
inn, well known by the name of the _Oppidan's_ Museum; for a view
of which see the sketch made on the spot by my friend Bob Transit.The day could not have been more lovely; it was a soft, bright,
early summer's evening, and the country around Myrtle Hill looked very
beautiful in the mellow sunlight; the trees which surrounded the house
cast long, dark shadows on the green sloping lawn, and rustled gently as
the breeze stirred amongst them. Arthur was out there watching and
listening for the sound of carriage wheels, and though the time seemed to
him to be creeping instead of flying, it was not really so very long
before he heard it. In another minute a tall, fair lady was stepping out
of the carriage. Arthur only said "Mother!" and rushed into her arms, and
then to his father: it would be hard to say which was the happiest in that
meeting-moment, only Arthur felt rather as if he were in a dream. May not
such earthly joys show us a little what it will be to see the One whom,
having not seen, we love? THE DIARY OF A GOOSE GIRL. Illustrated.

A CATHEDRAL COURTSHIP, and PENELOPE'S ENGLISH EXPERIENCES.
Illustrated.
A CATHEDRAL COURTSHIP. _Holiday Edition_, enlarged. Illustrated by
C. E. BROCK.

PENELOPE'S PROGRESS. (In Scotland.)
PENELOPE'S IRISH EXPERIENCES.It was not until late in the evening that Arthur and his mother were quite
alone, when all the first bustle and talking were over; and then what a
happy, quiet talk it was! and how their hearts were overflowing with
happiness! Then they both knelt down together again before the throne of
grace, and Mrs. Scotland; III. Ireland.
_Holiday Edition._ With many illustrations by CHARLES E BROCK.
TIMOTHY'S QUEST. A Story for Anybody, Young or Old, who cares to
read it. _Holiday Edition._ Illustrated.
POLLY OLIVER'S PROBLEM. Illustrated.

MARM LISA.Arthur left Myrtle Hill to live with his father and mother; and his mother
rejoiced to see that her fondest hopes and wishes for him were fulfilled;
and when he had left his childhood behind him, it was still his joy to
deliver to others the glad message of salvation with which his Master had
entrusted him.


FINIS.


KILMARNOCK:
JOHN RITCHIE, PUBLISHER.