"I was slower in making such good friends with the other bear,"
continued Wenonah, "because the little one I was feeding was such a
greedy little pig.  He would not, for a long time, let me gather a
handful and give to the big bear that, once or twice, got so close to me
as to put its cold nose against my face.  My! it made me shiver.  But I
said in my heart, `I will be brave, for I want to save Roddy,'" and the
child's voice broke.  "I did want to see my father, and my mother, and
Minnehaha again."

"But we did not cry here, did we?" said Roderick.

But the memory of that event was too great for them now, and throwing
themselves in each other's arms they burst out in a passionate fit of
weeping, that was so contagious no eyes remained dry in that group of
loved ones there gathered to hear their pathetic story.

When calm again Wenonah went on with the story:

"After a while the little ones had enough, and then they began wrestling
and playing with each other.  They acted as if they wanted Roddy to play
with them, and I told him to do so, but not to hurt them, and perhaps
the old father and mother bears would not hurt us before we could run
away."

"Yes," said Roddy, "I had great times with them, but they always wanted
to wrestle with me more than any other kind of sport."

"I kept gathering berries," said Wenonah, "while Roddy played with the
young bears.  The old ones kept me busy now and were just about as
greedy as the young ones had been.

"After a while I said to Roddy, `We must try and get away from here,'
for we did want to come home and see you all.

"We did not talk very much to each other, for our voices seemed to make
the bears angry.  But we found that when we tried to get away they got
right in front of us and stopped us with their big bodies.  This made me
feel very bad, but I did not tell Roddy.  Some time early in the day I
heard some one calling, and I tried to answer, but one of the bears
struck me such a blow with one of his paws, and showed his dreadful
teeth in such a way, that I was so frightened that I dare not call
again."

Said little Roddy, once again: "When I saw that naughty bear hit my
sister with his paw I wanted to hit him with a stick."

"This voice of whatever it was seemed to frighten the bears, and so off
they started," said Wenonah, "and they made us go along with them.  We
had to go; for if we stopped, or tried to go some other way, they
growled at us, and pushed us with their noses, and so we had to go with
them.  Soon they came out of the bushes and crossed over the sand, and
went up on the other side into the dark woods.  We were very much
afraid, but we whispered that we would not cry, but just be brave, for
we knew you would soon come and fight those great big bears.

Then Mrs. Hill asked questions on the subject, and I sat by stitching
at my embroidery while Arthur described my father's disgrace.

My letter to my mother was not written that day.

In the afternoon we went out, and in the excitement of shopping I tried
to forget everything--who I was, what I was, what I had done, and what I
ought to do. In the evening Arthur Noble appeared again, and with him
came his father. Sir Arthur and Mr.

Hill conversed apart, but I could hear the fiery old baronet giving
vent to his anger against my father.

Arthur devoted himself to Mrs. Hill and me. I was bewildered and distracted
at the position in which my rash conduct had placed me, and I was very
silent. Arthur exerted himself to amuse me, and under the spell of his
attractions my remorse was smothered.

I have not spoken to you yet of the wonderful affection which Mrs. Hill
lavished on me. You have seen it lately, but it was the same from the
first. She made me her daughter at once, as far as her conduct to me could
do so, though I had been some months her companion before she declared
her intention of formally adopting me.

Day followed day, and Arthur was always by my side. A new feverish dream
of happiness encompassed me, and it was only in the quiet of wakeful
nights that I thought of my mother and sisters and brother, and
longed to hear some news of my sorrowful home.

Every night my wrestlings with my selfish nature grew weaker and
weaker. I could not risk exposure and banishment from Arthur's presence.
I left Paris for Rome without writing to my mother.

You will hate me, Margery. I hate myself. I gave myself up to the delight
of the hour, and in selfish happiness drowned the reproaches of
my conscience, till I told myself at last that it was too late to
undo what I had done.

Time flew, and I became engaged to Arthur, secretly at first, for he
dreaded his father's displeasure.

We went from place to place, staying a few months here and a few months
there. We spent a year at Rome, and Arthur was with us nearly all the
time. When we had been some time engaged, Arthur confided in his father,
and asked his consent to our marriage. Sir Arthur was hopelessly enraged
at the idea, and, as we could not marry without his consent, we have
been obliged to be patient ever since. Arthur has always kept telling
me that he knew his father would relent in time.

And he was right. The time has come. Sir Arthur has at last reluctantly
withdrawn his opposition, and we may be married on any day in the
future which I may choose to name.

Stay, stay! do not ask me any questions, or I shall not be able to go on.
Let me tell you everything before I stop. I used to dream that when I
was married to Arthur, when no power on earth could separate us, I would
confess who I was, seek out my mother, and ask her forgiveness.
Remorse never left me, and I had bitterness in the midst of my happiness.
Arthur suspected that I had trouble which I would not share with him,
yet I could not bring myself to confess, so great was my fear of being
parted from him.

Some time before that evening when I first met you in London, I went to
see some friends of Arthur's. During that time, for several months, I
had not seen Mr. or Mrs. Hill; but in the meanwhile Mrs. Hill had written
to me of their intention of coming here to Hillsbro', saying that Mr.
Hill's new agent had written such cheerful accounts of the estate,
that he felt a longing to be on the spot, giving encouragement to the
improvements which were going forward. She did not mention the name
of the new agent, and it was only on that evening when I first met
you, when with shame and bitter self-reproach I heard you defend
my poor mother so valiantly, it was only then I knew that the agent
was my brother, and that I was actually coming to live within a few
miles of my deserted home.Said Wenonah: "I was afraid to answer, for the bears had always been so
angry at us when we made any noise; but I knew that sweet call meant
rescue and home, and must be answered, and so, while putting a big
handful of berries in the mouth of the fiercest old bear, I gave the
answering call.  Then came the reply.

"I must have been trembling, for in my reply I shook in my voice, and
the bears were angry and growled at me.  How ever, I knew I could
correctly give the owl call which Mustagan knew was our signal of
danger.  So when I passed behind a tree I gave it as loud as I could, as
though from an owl in the tree above me.  When all was right again I
gave the robin song, and you all know the rest."


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

CONGRATULATIONS--OTHER INCIDENTS OF LOST CHILDREN--LONG EXCURSION BY THE
BOYS--INDIAN LEGEND--"WHY IS THE BEAR TAILLESS?"--OXFORD LAKE--BLACK
BEARS AS FISHERMEN--THE LOOKOUT FROM THE TREES--FISH-STEALING BEARS--THE
CONFLICT--BEARS VERSUS BOYS AND INDIANS--SAM'S SUCCESSFUL THRUST--PLENTY
OF BEAR MEAT.

The thrilling adventures and escape of Wenonah and Roderick were, of
course, the great sensations that were most talked about for many a day.
Children have wonderful recuperative powers, and so the two little ones
recovered from the effects of their strange mishaps long before Mr and
Mrs Ross or even Minnehaha did.  But time is a great healer, and soon
all were well and in good spirits again.

The event produced a deep impression upon Frank, Sam, and Alec, and drew
out from the older servants at the home and some of the Indians some
very interesting stories.  It is simply amazing what a difference there
is in people in respect to their ability to find their way out of a
forest when once the trail is lost.  Some people invariably get lost in
as small an area as a hundred-acre forest, and are almost sure to come
out on the opposite side to the one desired.  Indians, perhaps on
account of their living so much in the woods, are not so liable to get
bewildered and lost as white people.  Still some of them are as easily
perplexed as other people.

One of this class went out hunting and lost himself so completely that
his friends became alarmed and went searching for him.  When they
fortunately found him, one, chaffing him, said:

"Hello, are you lost?"

To this he indignantly replied:

"No, Indian not lost, Indian here; but Indian's wigwam lost!"

It would never do for him to admit that such a thing could possibly
happen as his being lost.

So popular and beloved were Mr Ross and his family that not only did
the congratulations on the recovery of the children come from the Hudson
Bay Company officials and other white people from far and wide, but
Indians of other tribes, who had known Mr Ross in the years gone by,
when he was in the company's service, came from great distances, and in
their quiet but expressive way indicated their great pleasure at the
restoration of the little ones to their parents.  Mustagan was, of
course, the hero of the hour, and as usual he received the
congratulations with his usual modesty and gave great credit to Big Tom.
He also had nothing but kind words for the brave white lads, who had so
coolly and unflinchingly played their part in the closing scene of the
rescue.  His only regret was that he had not had them take their guns
with them when they went to the front with the berries, so that they
might have had a share in the grand fusillade that stopped so suddenly
the rush of the furious bears.  The actions of the bears in thus sparing
the children's lives brought out from the Indians several remarkable
stories of similar conduct known to have occurred elsewhere.

One Indian told of an old mother bear that boldly attacked an Indian
woman who, with her young babe, had gone out into the forest to gather
wood.  The mother fought for her child until unconscious.  When she came
to herself both the bear and the papoose were gone.  She returned to her
wigwam and gave the alarm, but as the men were away hunting several days
passed ere they could begin the search.

When at length they discovered the bear's den they found the child was
there alive.  In killing the bear they had to take the greatest care
lest they hurt the child, as the bear seemed in its ferocity to think
more of defending the child from them than of saving its own life.  The
child when rescued was perfectly naked, yet was fat and healthy, and
cried bitterly when taken away from the warm den and the body of the
dead bear that it had suckled with evident satisfaction.

To this and other wonderful stories the boys listened with the greatest
delight.  The fact is, while the children were lost they were as
miserable a trio as could be found, and now the reaction had come, and
they were just bubbling over with delight and ready for any story that
had, even in the remotest degree, anything similar to what had so
excited them.

Indians love good companions, and they found them in the boys; so it was
not long before some of those who had come from Oxford Lake invited them
to return with them, and they promised them some rare sport.  At first
Mr Ross was a bit fearful about letting them go so far, but as Big Tom
and Martin Papanekis offered to go in charge of the two canoes he at
length yielded.  So, in company with the Indians from that place, they
started off in great spirits, well supplied with guns and ammunition,
and all the necessary camping outfit for a ten days' or two weeks'
excursion.

It was with very great delight that the boys set off with their fresh,
dusky, red companions on this trip.  It was principally down the rapid
lakes and rivers up which the boatmen gallantly rowed on their journey
from York Factory.  The running of the rapids, especially a wild,
dangerous one through Hell's Gate, very much excited the boys.

On one of the beautiful islands in Oxford Lake they pitched their tents,
and had some capital sport in fishing for the gamy trout which there
abound.  The only drawback to the fishing in such a land as this, where
the fish are so abundant, is that the sportsmen soon get weary with
drawing up the fish so rapidly.  The finest whitefish in the world are
to be found in Oxford Lake.  They, however, will not take the hook, and
so are caught only in gill nets.

Black bears are quite numerous in this part of the country.  They are
very fond of fishing, and so it was proposed to try and get a shot at
one or two, as the Indians well knew their favourite resorts.  Indeed,
the Indian tradition of why the bear has such a short tail is the result
of his preference for fish diet.  They say that originally the bear had
a beautiful tail, so long that with it he could easily whisk the flies
off his ears.  One winter a greedy bear, not content to stay in his den
and sleep as bears ought to do, wandered out on a great frozen lake.
There he met a fox hurrying along with a fine fish in his mouth.  The
bear being the larger and stronger animal, he rushed at him to capture
the fish.  The fox, seeing him coming, quietly dropped it on the ice,
and, putting his forepaw upon it, said to the bear:

"Why bother yourself with such an insignificant fish as this, when, if
you hurry, you can get any number of fine large ones."

"Where are they to be found?" asked the bear.

"Why," said the fox, "did you not hear the thunder of the cracking ice
on the lake?"

"Yes, I heard it, and trembled," said the bear.

"Well, you need not fear," said the fox, "for it was only the Frost King
splitting the ice, and there is a great crack, and the fish are there in
great numbers.  All you have to do is to go and sit across the crack and
drop your long, splendid tail in the water, and you will be delighted to
see with what pleasure the fish will seize hold of it.  Then all you
will have to do will be to just whisk them out on the ice, and then you
will have them."

The silly bear swallowed this story, and away he rushed to a crack in
the ice.  These cracks are very frequently found in these northern lakes
in bitter cold weather.  They are caused by the ice contracting and thus
bursting.

Down squatted the bear on his haunches, and, dropping his beautiful tail
in the water, he patiently waited for the bite.  But the water in these
cracks soon freezes again, especially when it is fifty or sixty degrees
below zero, and so it was not long before in this crack it was solid
again.  And so when the bear got tired waiting for a bite, or even a
nibble, he tried to leave the place, but found it was impossible without
leaving his tail behind him.  This he had to do, or freeze or starve to
death, and so he broke loose, and ever after has been tailless.

This is one of the many traditions that abound among the Indians.  They
have traditions to account for almost everything in nature.  Some of
them are interesting, ingenious; others are ridiculous and senseless.
It is well-known, however, no matter how the bear lost his beautiful
tail, if he ever had one, he is still very fond of fish, and often
displays a great deal of ingenuity in capturing them.

So it was decided that, if possible, the boys should have a chance to
see him at his work, and, if possible, get a shot or two, as this was
the favourable time of the year, as certain kinds of fish were spawning
in the shallows of the streams, and for them he would be on the lookout.
As these regions were the hunting grounds of the Oxford Indians, whom
they had accompanied from Mr Ross's, they knew every place likely to be
frequented by the bears; and so three canoes were fitted out, with one
of our boys in each, and away they started, full of pleasurable
anticipation, not so much just now to shoot or kill, as to find the
place where they could see bruin at what was at this season his
favourite occupation, namely, that of catching fish.

Oxford Lake, when no storms are howling over it, is one of the most
beautiful in the world.  As the weather was now simply perfect, the boys
enjoyed very much the canoe excursions, and, in addition, a fair amount
of shooting.  Ducks, partridges and other birds were shot on the wing,
or at the points where they stopped to rest and eat.

They were rewarded in their search by finding several places where the
bears had undoubtedly been at work at their favourite pastime.  The
shrewd Indians were also able to tell as to the success or ill luck of
the bears in their fishing efforts.

At places where only a few bones or fins were to be seen scattered
about, the Indians said:

"Poor fishing here; only catch a few, eat them all up."

However, they found other places where only part of the fish had been
eaten, and here the Indians said:

"This looks better.  When fish plenty, bear eat only the best part."

At length, however, they reached a place that made even the eyes of the
generally imperturbable Indians flash with excitement.  It was on the
north-eastern part of the lake, where the river that flows from Rat Lake
enters into Oxford Lake.  Here, not far from the mouth of the stream,
were some gravelly shallows which were evidently favourite resorts for
the fish during the spawning season.  Just a little way out from the
shore were several broad, flat granite rocks that rose but a little
above the surface of the water.  Between these rocks and the shore was
quite a current of water that ran over a gravelly bed.

On the mainland opposite this flat ridge of granite rocks were to be
seen a large number of fish, each ranging in weight from eight to ten
pounds.  What most excited and pleased the Indians was that while the
numerous tracks indicated that several bears had been there fishing only
the night before, yet each fish had only had one piece bitten out of it,
and that was on the back just a little behind the head.  Bears are very
dainty when they have abundance to choose from, and so, when fish are
very plentiful, especially the whitefish, they are content with only
biting out that portion containing some dainty fat, which is, as we have
said, on the swell of the back just behind the head.

When this discovery was made the men in the other canoes were notified,
and quietly and quickly, plans were made to not only see the bears at
work that night, when they would return, but to have some shots at them;
for the Indians said:

"Bears not such fools as to leave such a place while food so plenty."

The impression among those who knew their habits was that even now the
bears were sleeping not very far away in the dense forests.  So the
place was carefully looked over, and the best spots for observation were
selected.  An important consideration was to form some idea, as to the
direction, from which the bears would come, if they returned that night
to this spot.  Indian cleverness, sharpened by experience in such
matters, enabled them to solve this very important question by studying
the trail along which they had been cautiously coming and going very
recently.  This they found to be almost a straight line running directly
back into the depths of the dense forest.

To climb trees as points of observation from which to view bears is, as
a general thing, a dangerous experiment, as bears themselves are such
capital climbers.  But there are times when it is the only possible
course available for those who would observe their action, on account of
the flatness of the country thereabout.  So, speedily as possible, the
trees were selected that were considered most suitable.  These were
situated a little north and south of the spot where the bears had thrown
their fish on the shore.  They were a little distant from the trail
along which it was likely the bears would come.  Three trees were thus
selected, and it was decided that Sam, Alec, and Frank should each have
one Indian in his tree with him in case of attack.  The other Indians
were to remain out from the shore in their canoes, sheltered from view
by some rocks that were not far distant.  They were not so far away as
to be beyond call, if they should be needed.

All these matters having been decided upon, they entered their canoes
again and quietly paddled out to one of the rocky isles, not far
distant, and on the side opposite to the mainland they gathered some dry
wood and had a good dinner, for which they had capital appetites.  Then
the Indians lit their pipes and curled down on the rocks for a smoke and
rest, and urged the boys also to try and get some sleep.  They at first
thought they were too excited, in view of the coming night's adventures,
to sleep, but as the Indians so desired they lay down near the shore,
and the rippling waves were such a soothing lullaby that, strange to
say, they were soon in dreamless slumber.

A couple of hours was all that could be allowed them, for, as the
Indians said:

"Sometimes bears move around early, and we must be all there in the
trees before they come."

All the preparations were soon made.  The guns were freshly loaded with
ball, and some extra ammunition was taken in the pockets of each one.
Their hunting knives were given a few rubs on the stones to see that
they were keen and sharp.  In addition, much to the boys' surprise,
there was given to each one of them a good solid birch club, about
eighteen inches in length and an inch and a half thick.  As an extra
precaution against their being dropped, the Indians, who had prepared
them while the boys slept, had bored a hole through one end, and
inserted a deerskin thong to slip over the wrist.  How they were to be
used, and the wisdom of preparing them, we shall see later on.  The
Indians were similarly armed, but, in addition, they stuck their hunting
hatchets in their belts.

A few final instructions were given and the signals decided upon, and
then the boys and their Indian comrades were noiselessly paddled to the
shore.  They were landed as closely as possible to the trees into which
they were to be ensconced, so as to leave but little scent of their
footsteps on the ground.

In the two trees selected on the north side were Frank and Alec, each
with an Indian hunter, while Sam and his comrade took up their assigned
station in a fine large tree on the south side.  It was about an hour
before sundown ere they were all quietly stowed away in these peculiar
resting places.  The other Indians quietly paddled back to the places
designated beyond the rocks.

For a couple of hours they had to sit there in silence, broken only by
the singing of some birds around them, or the call or cry of some wild
animal in the forest.  They were first aroused by hearing the crunching
of bones where they had noticed the fish lying.  On peering out from
their hiding places they saw an old black fox, with a litter of half-
grown ones, making a hasty meal out of the fish.  The Indians would have
loved to have captured them, as the skin of the black fox is very
valuable.  However, it was not foxes they were now after, but bears;
and, besides this, the skin of the fox is only prime in the cold, wintry
months.  So they had to be content with watching them as there they
greedily devoured the fish.  Suddenly they were disturbed in their
repast, and dashed away, each with a piece of fish in its mouth, and the
watchers observed that what had caused their sudden retreat was a large
wolverine that had quite unexpectedly appeared upon the scene.  He, too,
seemed to be fond of fish, and at once began to feast upon them.

Not long, however, was he permitted to thus enjoy himself, for out in
the beautiful gloaming a great black bear was seen emerging from the now
dark forest upon the shore.  At his coming the thievish wolverine at
once slunk away.  The bear did not attempt to eat any of the fish that
were still remaining; but, after a short survey of the coast up and down
to see that all was clear, he boldly plunged into the water and crossed
over to one of the shallow rocks only a few yards away.  Hardly had he
reached it ere another, and then another, bear came out from the forest
along the central trail which the men had earlier in the day discovered.

They were not long in joining their comrade on the smooth, wide rocks
which we have described.  After they had spent a little time in
inspection they lay down on the rocks facing the shore, as close to the
water as they could without really touching it.  These movements could
be distinctly seen by the boys, as they were looking out toward the
west, where the sky was still bright and the few clouds golden.

For a few minutes the bears were very still, then there was a quick
movement on the part of one of them as he shot out one of his handlike
paws into the water under a passing fish, and threw it from him across
the stream, high and dry, up on the shore.  Soon the other bears were
similarly employed, and the fish were rapidly being captured.  The boys
excitedly watched these sturdy fishermen, and were astonished at the
cleverness and quickness with which they were able to throw out the fish
upon the shore.  Although they had to throw them quite a number of
yards, they very seldom miscalculated and allowed any to fall short and
thus drop back into the water.

But before the pile of fish had become very large there happened
something else to divert the attention of the spectators from the three
four-footed fishermen out on the flat rocks.  Suddenly they heard the
sounds of tearing flesh and breaking bones.  On looking down to see who
were these new intruders, they were able to see not many yards below
them a couple of other bears that, in their prowling around and looking
for their supper, had found their way to this capital supply of fish.
As the watchers peered down at them it was evident by the greedy way in
which they attacked the fish that they were so hungry as not to be at
all particular.

Their sudden appearance and attack on the fish were not at all
appreciated by the industrious trio that had been so skillfully catching
these fish for their own supper.  They had no disposition to be
fishermen for others, and so with growls of rage they suddenly dashed
into and across the water, and sprang upon the intruders.  It was a
fierce battle, and but little of it could be distinctly seen, especially
when under the shadows of the trees.  When, however, in their struggles
they came out on the bright, sandy shore, there was still enough of the
western twilight in which to witness a good deal of terrific fighting.
Bears have thick fur and tough hides, and so their battles are generally
carried on until one side is shaken into exhaustion or knocked into
submission.  But so stubborn was the fight here that it continued with
but few intermissions until the moon, which was nearly full, had so
risen up that everything was made about as bright as in the daytime.

It was evident that the two intruding bears were so hungry that,
although they had been well shaken, they were loath to consider
themselves beaten or to leave so sumptuous a supper, and so they again
returned to the conflict.  The battle was renewed in all its fury, and
when the three were again victorious the vanquished ones, instead of
again retreating into the forest, each shaking off his opponent rushed
to the nearest tree and began its ascent, one followed by two bears and
the other by one.

These two trees, up which the five bears were now climbing, happened to
be the ones in which Frank and Alec and their two Indian companions were
hid.

Bears are capital climbers, and these two fellows, stimulated by the
cuffs and bites of their antagonists behind them, made good time in the
ascent.  Now, for the first time, the boys saw for what purpose they had
been armed with those handy birch clubs.  A bear's tenderest spot is his
nose.  This the Indians well know, and so, when they are chased by a
bear, always defend themselves by there striking him.  A bear that will
stand heavy blows with a club on his skull, or shoulders, or even paws,
gives up the fight at once when rapped over the nose.

Secrecy was now no longer possible, and so the quiet command of the
Indians to the boys was:

"Hit them on the nose whenever you can."

The two angry bears were so taken up with the attack of their own
species behind them that they little imagined that there were enemies
above, and so about the first suspicions they had of the presence of the
boys and Indians were the smart raps they received on their noses.

Whack! whack! whack! fell the blows upon their snouts, and down they
dropped suddenly to the ground, each of them carrying with him an
assailant that happened to be just below him.  The sudden discomfiture
of the bears brought a cheer from the boys.  This, of course, startled
and excited the other bears, that were in a very pugnacious mood.

The two were additionally angry at the ugly blows that had met them, and
the other three fishermen seemed to imagine that fresh assailants were
there in the trees ready to come down and rob them of their supper of
fish.  This they resolved to resist, and so the fight was on in good
earnest.

The Indians declare the bears know how to talk with each other; anyway,
these five seemed for the present to proclaim a truce among themselves,
that together they might attack their common foes, who were ensconced up
there above them in the trees.

Hill has changed his agent. Have you not heard? No, of course. Hollingford
is the name of these people. The father was a banker, the bank smashed,
and he ran away with large sums of money."
I thought--nay, I was quite sure--that Miss Leonard started at the mention
of the word Hollingford; and I also thought that she turned deathly
pale; but she bent over her flowers at the moment, and the light was very
subdued. No one else seemed to notice it, so it is just possible I may
have been mistaken.

"Mr. Hill's new agent is, then, the son of Mr. Hollingford, the banker?"
said Miss Leonard, after a pause. "I did not know that they belonged to
that part of the country."
"Oh! I do not know about that; but the mother and son have taken a farm
there lately, trying to make shift for themselves, poor things!

They say young Hollingford has some Quixotic ideas about paying
some of his father's liabilities; and if he has, I am sure it is
very creditable to him. But I for one am inclined to doubt it. Bad
conduct generally runs in families."
"Madam," said I, with my cheeks getting very hot, "Mrs. Hollingford was
my mother's dear friend."

"Highty tighty, Miss Dacre," said the lady, "we never know how our
friends are going to turn out. I say nothing but what is true. And
allow me to warn you, my dear, that if you will persist in identifying
yourself with such people you must make up your mind to hear them
spoken of as they deserve."
"Madam," said I again, flashes of lightning now dancing before my eyes,
"I am very sorry I ever entered your house; and I shall certainly never
enter it again."
Not waiting for more I made her a curtsy, and walked out of the room. I
found the dressing-room where I had left my cloak, fully determined
to go home at once, if I could only get the carriage.

I had to wait some time, however, and whilst I sat alone the door
opened and Rachel Leonard came hurriedly up to my side.

"I could not go away without bidding you good-night," she said,
holding both my hands in both of hers.

"Perhaps we may meet again. God bless you!"
Her voice was unsteady, her face pale, her eyes wet. A lady came to the
door and said, "Now, Rachel, we are waiting!" She dropped my hand and was
gone.

"Who is she?"

I asked of Grace, as soon as we were together, "What relation is she to
the Hills?"

"None whatever," said Grace; "only an adopted daughter. There is some
romantic story about her, I believe. She went to Mrs. Hill as a companion
first. The Hills, who are the most eccentric old couple in the world,
took a violent fancy to her, and adopted her for their own. I
believe she is an orphan of a very good family. They keep up a
wonderful fuss about her; and people say they have made her their
heiress."
"I wonder why she looked so strangely at the mention of the Hollingfords?"
I said musingly.

"My dear Margery," said Grace, shaking her head, "I give you up. You
are perfectly insane on the subject of the Hollingfords. What will you
imagine next?"
"I do not think I imagined it," said I. "I am sure that she turned
as white as your cloak."
"Well, well," said Grace, "there may be some deep mystery for all
I know.

Miss Leonard may, like yourself, have a taste for agriculture; or may have
known young Mr. Hollingford before he turned ploughman. I advise you
to think about it. You have materials for a pretty romance to take
into exile with you."
And I did think about it long afterwards.

CHAPTER II.

My children, you must remember that I am speaking of an old-fashioned
time, and I travelled down to Hillsbro' by coach. The promenade of a
fashionable watering-place had hitherto been my idea of the country.
Imagine, then, how my hungry eyes devoured the new beauties presented
to them.

I had provided myself with a book, and I had hoped to fall asleep over
it, yet here I was with my eyes riveted to a pane of glass, afraid
to wink lest I should miss something. Grace's warning, "You will fret
yourself to death, you will be back before a month," grew faint in my
ears. When night shut out my new world and I fell asleep, I dreamed
of extraordinary phenomena--trees stalking about the plains, fairies
leaping out of the foam of the rivers.

I opened my eyes to a rose-coloured dawn. We had stopped before a little
village inn. A row of pigeons with burnished necks looked down on me
from their perch on the signboard above the door; a half-dressed,
curly-headed child peeped out of a window from under the eaves, and
clapped his hands at the steaming horses: and a young man walked out of
the inn with a whip in his hand, and asked if there might be a lady inside
the coach whose destination was Hillsbro' Farm.

I was soon seated by his side in a gig. By a few careful glances I had
easily assured myself that there was nothing of the ploughman in the
appearance of Mrs. Hollingford's son. You will want to know what I thought
of him that morning, and I will tell you. He seemed to me the beau ideal
of a country gentleman: nothing less than this, and something more. You
have known him, my dears, stooped and white-haired, and have loved
him in his age for the sake of the heart that never grew old.

But on that brilliant autumn morning when he and I first sat side by side,
the same lovable spirit was clothed with the strength and beauty of
mortal youth.

The vivid life of the country was sweet to me that early morning.

Carts of hay lumbered past us, almost crushing us into the hedges as they
swept along heavily, leaving a trail of fragrance in the air.
Red and brown leaves lay thick on the ground, making beautiful the
undulations of the roads. Mists of dew hung among the purple folds of
the hills, and the sun dashed the woods and streams with kindling
gold.

By and by the whole country side was laughing in the full face of
the day.

Hillsbro' Farmhouse was, and is, a low long dwelling built of dark bricks,
and standing among orchards and meadows, green pasture lands and
running streams. Its ivied chimneys had for background the sombre lines
of a swelling moor, belted by a wood of pines which skirted the hollow
wherein the earth nourished the fatness and sweetness of the thrifty
farm acres.

Along the edge of the moor the road ran that led to Hillsbro' Hall, and
a short cut through the wood brought one down upon a back entrance to
the squire's own grounds.

The dear old farm! Roses were blowing in that morning at the open sashes
of the big, heavy, roughly hung windows.

Two young girls, who were afterwards dear to me as fibres of my
heart, lingered beside the open door; stately handsome Jane, with
her solemn observant black eyes and trim dark dress, and frolicsome
Mopsie, with her laughing face, and her hat tied down, gipsy fashion,
with a red ribbon.

They lingered to see me, to take their share in giving me a welcome,
and then set out on their long walk, discussing me by the way. They
told me of it afterwards. Jane said I was only fit for a glass case, and
Mopsie declared I alighted from the old gig as if I had a mind to
dance.

They were awed by the high heels on my boots, the feather in my hat, and
the quilted satin of my pelisse. They wondered I could deign to speak
anything but French, and concluded I did so only out of compliment to
their homeliness.

And I, meanwhile, decked in all the fanciful elegancies of a London
toilette, sat down to breakfast in the long parlour at Hillsbro'
Farm, with something in my heart that would not let me eat though
I was hungry, and something in my eyes that would not let me see
very well, though the sun came rich and yellow through each of the
wide windows, forming one broad golden path down the middle of the
room.

I saw but dimly the dark brown walls and ceiling, the stiff-backed
chairs with their worn covers, the jar full of late roses that stood
in either window, the heap of trailing ivy that overran the huge
grate. It was Mrs. Hollingford's face that did it as she sat, kind,
careful, hospitable, pressing on me sweet home-made cakes, fresh butter,
fragrant tea, delicious cream, and delicate pink eggs. Ah me! it was
her face that did it.

There was my great lady, my beneficent friend, my valiant woman. Her
eyes were somewhat sunken, the fire of their energy a trifle slackened,
her brow a little seamed; the strain of fortitude had drawn a tight cord
about her mouth. Whence, then, that new touching beauty that made one
see the stamp of heaven's nobility shining on her face? Had I quite
forgotten her, or was she indeed something new?

It was as if grief had chiselled her features afresh out of the
superfluous roundings of prosperity, wasted them into perfect
sweetness, hacked them into purer refinement.

She wore a strait black gown of the coarsest material, only the fair folds
of muslin about her throat giving daintiness to her attire. Her son
breakfasted with us, and I fancied he often looked at me curiously
as if to say, "What concern can she have with us?

why did she come? how long will she remain?" I had talked to him
without embarrassment as we drove along, but now I could hardly speak.
Never had I felt so shy in any company as I did in the presence of my
mother's friend.

After breakfast she led me to my room, bright and airy, but scantily
furnished.

It had a window looking out on an orchard threaded by long alleys, over
which hung a glowing roof of fruit-laden branches.

And here I unpacked my trunks and stowed away my elegant dresses in a
huge painted wardrobe smelling of apples. I laid aside with a kind
of shame all the little ornaments I was accustomed to wear, and dressed
myself in the plainest gown I possessed. Descending the quaint old
staircase again, I found Mrs.

Hollingford walking up and down the hall waiting patiently for my
appearance.

"What a great woman you have grown, my love!" she said, drawing my
hand within her arm, and leading me through the open hall door.

"But you have still your mother's fair hair and sunny eyes. Will you
walk with me for an hour? I have much to say to you, and the sooner
it is said the better."
Then she told me the story of her life, and misfortunes, sternly, sweetly,
with strange humility and fortitude. I knew much of it before, but she
would tell it all.

"And now, my love," she said, "you know us as we are. Your mother,
when she made me your guardian, did not foresee the changes that
were to take place.

You have other friends who are willing to give you a home. You have come
here of your own will. When you wish to leave us we shall not wonder."

I threw my arms round her neck and told her I would not leave her.

Never, since Miss Kitty Sweetman went to India, had my heart gone forth
so completely to anyone.

She bade me not be too hasty. "You will find our life so
different from anything you have ever known," she said.

"We all fear it for you. We are so busy here. We have always a purpose
before our eyes to make us work."
"Then I shall work too," I said. "I will not be the only drone in such
a thrifty hive."
She smiled at this, and shook her head. But I immediately began to cast
about for the means by which I might find it possible to keep my
word.

CHAPTER III.

I soon learned to love the farm. I began to know the meaning of the
word "home."

The beauty and lovableness of some persons and places takes you by surprise;
with others they steal upon you by degrees; but there was that about
Hillsbro' Farm which I loved much at once and more afterwards. Looking
at it in the most commonplace way, it had all the peace and plenty
of an English farmhouse, while for eyes that sought more they would
find enough that was picturesque in the orchard's ruddy thickets,
where the sun struck fire on frosty mornings; in the wide pasture
lands sloping to the sedgy river, where the cows cooled their feet
on sultry evenings.

You know as well as I the curious bowery garden beyond the lower window
of the parlour, stocked with riches and sweets of all kinds, rows of
bee-hives standing in the sun, roses and raspberries growing side
by side.

The breaths of thyme and balm, lavender and myrtle, were always in
that parlour. You know the sheep-fold and the paddock, the old tree
over the west gable where the owl made his nest--the owl that used to
come and sit on our school-room windowsill and hoot at night. You
know, the sun-dial where the screaming peacock used to perch and
spread his tail; the dove-cote, where the silver-necks and fan-tails
used to coo and ruffle their feathers.

You know, too, all the quaint plannings and accidents of the old house;
how the fiery creeper ran riot through the ivy on the dark walls, dangling
its burning wreaths over the windows; how the hall door lay open all day
with the dogs sleeping on the broad door-step. Also, within, that there
were long dark passages, rooms with low ceilings; a step up here, and
a step down there; fireplaces twisted into odd corners, narrow
pointed windows, and wide latticed ones.

You know all the household recesses, the dairies and pantries and
store-rooms; but you cannot know how Mrs.
Hollingford toiled amongst them, filling them with her industry one day
that they might be emptied the next; hardening her delicate hands
with labour to the end that justice might be done, that some who had
lost might gain, that a portion of her husband's heavy debts might
be paid, and a portion of the curse of the impoverished lifted from
his guilty shoulders.

No luxury was ever permitted in that household. Old gowns were
worn and mended till they could be worn and mended no longer. The girls
were of an age to go abroad to school, but they must be contented
with such education as they could pick up at home, so long as one
poor creature suffered straits through their father's fault.

The only indulgence allowed was almsgiving. Mopsie might divide her
dinner with a hungry child, or Jane bestow her new petticoat on an aged
woman; but they must, in consequence, deny themselves and suffer
inconvenience till such time as it came to be again their turn to
have their absolute wants relieved.

I did, indeed, feel like a drone in a hive when, on leaving my room
in the mornings, I met Mrs. Hollingford coming from her work in
the dairy, John Hollingford arriving from his early visit to a distant
part of the farm, Jane from her sewing closet where she made and mended
the linen of the household, and Mopsie from the kitchen with a piled
dish of breakfast-cakes, showing what her morning task had been. I could
not eat for envy. Why could I not be of use to somebody? I gave Mopsie
some gay ribbons, which were returned to me by her mother. Nothing
might she wear but her plain black frock and white frill. I gave Jane
a book of poems with woodcuts, and that was accepted with rapture. This
encouraged me. I picked up two little children on the road, and to one
I gave a bright silk girdle for a skipping-rope, and to the other a doll
dressed from the materials of a fine gauze hat, which I picked to pieces
for the purpose.

I was not going to be a peony flaunting among thrifty modest vetches. At
first I was sorry for the destruction of my pretty things, but
soon I grew to admire the demureness of my gray gown and little black
apron. I learned to make pies and cakes, to sweep a room and set it to
rights, to wash and get up linen and laces, to churn, to make
butter.

But as many hands were engaged in these matters, I was often thrown
out of employment. I made music for my friends in the evenings, and, as
they liked it, this was something; but it was not enough. A new spirit
had entered into me. I felt my old self lost in the admiration which
I had conceived for the new friends who had accepted me amongst them.

By and by I found out a little niche of usefulness for myself. Jane and
Mopsie attended the village school. One day I went to the town to buy
some trifle and call for the girls. It was past the hour for breaking
up, and I found Mopsie romping with some rude-looking girls on the green,
while Jane, detained for some fault, sat alone in the school-room,
perched on a bench, her arms folded and her eyes gloomily fixed
on the wall.

When I entered she blushed crimson. She was a proud girl, and I
knew she was hurt at my seeing her disgrace. I coaxed her to speak out
her trouble.

"I could teach the whole school," she said, fiercely--"master,
mistress, and all--and yet I am kept sitting over a, b, c, like a baby.
I get so sick of it that sometimes I answer wrong by way of novelty.
Then I have to hold out my hand for the rod. To-day I drew Portia
and Shylock on my slate, and forgot to finish my sum; therefore I
am disgraced!"

I seized the happy moment and offered myself to the girls as a governess.
Mopsie stopped on the road and hugged me in delight. Jane squeezed my
hand and was silent during the rest of the walk, except when she said,

"Mother will never consent. I am too proud, and she wants me to be humbled.
She thinks it is good for me to go to the village school."

That night, however, I laid my plan before Mrs. Hollingford, and, after
some trouble, I attained my point.

We chose for our school-room an unoccupied chamber at the end of a long
passage upstairs. It was furnished with a deal table and chairs, and
a small square of green carpet laid upon the sanded floor. It had three
latticed windows looking westward, and one of those odd grates I
have mentioned, large enough to cook a dinner. We kept it filled
with logs, and in the evenings, after we had drawn the curtains in
the parlour, set the tea-table, and made Mrs. Hollingford comfortable
on the sofa for an hour's rest, we three retreated to our school-room
for a chat in the firelight. Here John joined us when he happened
to come home early, and many a happy hour we passed, four of us
sitting round the blazing logs, talking and roasting apples. We
told stories, tales of the outer world, and legends of the country
around us. We described places and people we had seen, and our
fancies about others we had not seen. John, who had travelled, was
the most frequent speaker; and as I was a wonder of experience to
his sisters, just so was he a wonder to me. We laughed, cried, or
listened in breathless silence, all as he willed, while the purple
and yellow lingered in the sky behind the lattice, and the moaning
of the wind through the forlorn fields, the hissing of the roasting
apples, and the crackling of the burning wood, kept up an accompaniment
to his voice.
There were other evenings, too, when John was late, and Mopsie,
having grown tired of serious talk, tripped off to hear the lasses
singing Bold Robin Hood in the kitchen. Then Jane used to open her
heart to me, and talk about the troubles of the family. Her heart
was stern and bitter against her father. Well had she said she was
proud; well had her mother wished to humble her, if that could be
done.On and on, and at length out from the shadows of
some bushes into the clear moonlight, came the creature, and now the
sharp eyes of the Indians saw that it was a wolverine.  The fact of our
party being so high above it was the only reason they had not been
detected.

It was evident from its actions that it was on a beaver hunt.  At every
extra noise the busy animals made in the water, as logs were rolled in
or the beavers plunged in with birch or willow saplings in their mouths,
the wolverine stopped and listened.  There was but little wind, and so
it was evident that even when the cruel beast had nearly reached the
shore, and there crouched behind a small rock, the beavers were still
unconscious of his presence.  There was only a little strip of land
about a yard between this rock and the water; but along this narrow
strip of land the beavers had been coming and going while at their
varied duties.  This, in some way or other, the cunning wolverine seemed
to have discovered.

But while the boys and some of the Indians were intently watching his
movements, others of them, as the result of long experience, had
occasionally cast a searching glance in every direction around them.

"Hist!" in a quiet whisper arrested the attention of all.  Without a
word, but by a gesture scarcely perceptible, they were directed to look
along the very trail the wolverine had made, and there stealthily moving
along, now in the light and now in the shadow, were two large grey
wolves.

This was complicating matters, and making things interesting indeed.
The Indians, leaving the boys their guns loaded with ball, and enjoining
perfect silence upon them, took up their own weapons and noiselessly
withdrew.  So gloriously bright was the night in that land where fogs
and mists are almost unknown, and where the rays of the moon cast a
clear and distinct shadow, that everything passing was distinctly seen.

There out in the waters, and around the shore and on the dam, were
perhaps thirty beavers hard at work.  Here to the left below them lay
crouching, like a ball of black wool, the savage, alert wolverine,
patiently waiting until an unsuspecting beaver, loaded with wood,
stones, or gravel, should pass along that trail within reach of his
deadly spring.

A couple of hundred yards behind the wolverine, and yet high enough up
on the hillside to observe his every movements, and yet not be observed
by him, were the two wolves, now crouching down flat upon the ground.
As they remained so quiet, the boys were surprised and wondered, if they
were after the wolverine, why they did not attack him.  But, while they
watched the wolverine, it was not wolverine meat they were after, but
beaver.  But their wish and hope was that the wolverine might obtain it
for them.  How far their expectations were realised we shall soon see.

"Hush!" said Alec, "look!"  And sure enough there were the Indians, some
hundreds of yards behind the wolves, and spread out like a third of a
circle, cautiously moving on toward the two wolves, which were intently
watching the wolverine, which was watching the beavers.  It was to the
hunters an interesting sight, and so fascinated the boys that they could
hardly keep still.  Soon the tension was broken and there was a sudden
change.

A couple of fine large beavers came in sight along the trail on the
shore with a large stone, which they were evidently wishing to take to
the dam.  So intent were they upon their work that they knew not of
danger until with a great spring the wolverine had fastened his sharp
teeth and claws in the back of one of them, which uttered a cry of pain
as he was dashed to the ground.  The other beaver instantly sprang into
the water, as did all the other beavers within sound of that death-cry.

In a few seconds the wolves, with great bounding leaps, had cleared the
space between them and the wolverine.  They fiercely attacked him and
endeavoured to at once secure the beaver.  But the wolverine is a plucky
animal when thus assailed, and he made a good fight for his hard-earned
supper.  In the meantime, the instant the wolves started, the Indians,
who from their higher ground had seen the movements, also began to
advance; and so, ere the wolves and wolverine had settled the matter as
to the ownership of the dead beaver, a volley of bullets killed the
wolves, while the wolverine turned and began climbing up the steep place
of the hill where the boys were hid.

"Shoot him!" shouted the Indians.  A volley rang out from the guns of
the boys, and a dead wolverine with three bullets in him went tumbling
back to the bottom of the hill.

No need of silence now, and so the long-continued hush was broken with a
will, and there were many shouts and congratulations.  The boys speedily
and safely descended the side of the hill, that sloped downward in the
direction of the men, and joined them at the spot where they were
examining the dead wolves and beaver.  The wolverine had not had much
time to kill the latter ere the wolves were upon him, and so he was not
very much torn.  The splendid broad tail was uninjured, and was eagerly
examined by the boys.  The dead wolverine was dragged in by the men, and
it was decided, as dry wood was abundant, for some of them to make a
fire, while others went for kettles, food, and blankets, and there spent
the rest of the night.

They had two objects in view.  One was to be on hand to skin the animals
early in the morning, and the other was to have the opportunity of
inspecting the beaver dam, and seeing the size of some of the stumps
where those wonderful animals, with their teeth alone, had cut down some
great trees.

A tired, sleepy trio of boys were they even ere their midnight meal was
eaten, and so very quickly after they were rolled up in their blankets
and stretched out on the smooth rock fast asleep.

As there are many wild animals in this part of the country, the Indians,
ere they lay down to sleep, took the precaution of rolling some of the
logs cut down by the beavers on the fire.  These would keep up a blaze
until at least sunrise, after which there would be no danger.

Refreshing and invigorating is the sleep which comes to those who have
the courage and enterprise to visit these lands, and in this way live
out a great deal in the open air.  The night was never close and sultry.
The air seems full of ozone, and scented with the balm of the great
forest.  So it was here as in many similar experiences with these
hearty, healthy lads.  So soundly did they sleep that it was after eight
o'clock ere they opened their eyes.  As they sprang up, half ashamed of
themselves, the Indians chided them not, but one, in broken English,
comforted them when he said:

"Plenty sleep, strong men, clear eye, firm grip; good medicine."

So they were comforted by this, and ever after when they overslept
themselves they called it "good medicine."

The wolves and wolverine were already skinned, and so as soon as the
boys had had their breakfasts, which had long been waiting them, they
set off to visit the beaver dam.  When they reached it the boys could
hardly realise how it was possible that animals not heavier than an
ordinary retriever dog could build such a structure.  It was in shape
like a crescent, with the outer curve up stream.  It was thus able to
meet and best resist the force of the great currents in times of
freshets and floods.

Many of the logs used in its construction would have been prized as
valuable for timber in saw mills.  Then, in addition to the large logs,
there were great numbers that were smaller.  The stones, gravel, and mud
used would require many men, with horses and carts, for many days to
transport.  Yet here visible to the eye were gathered all of this
material by these animals, that have no tools but their teeth and paws,
and all piled up and arranged in a manner so scientific and accurate
that the finest engineer in the land would not have lost anything in his
reputation to have claimed the work as his most careful planning.

The beaver house was also visited.  It was apparently all built on the
land, but it so overhung the lake at one side that the water ever found
access, and there was abundance of room for the beavers to swim out or
in whenever they desired.  No attempt was made to break it, nor in any
way to disturb it, neither would there be in the winter months, when the
Indians would make the attack upon them.  A more clever and successful
way for their capture is well known, and this would be put in practice.
But we must not anticipate an interesting adventure at this very spot.

The return to Sagasta-weekee was made in a few days.  With the exception
of an upset of a canoe in one of the rapids, where they were trying to
work up stream instead of making a portage, nothing of a very startling
nature occurred.  Alec was the boy who was in this canoe, and he was
quite carried under by the rapid current, and only reappeared above the
surface a couple of hundred feet lower down.  Fortunately there were
some canoes near at hand, and he was quickly rescued.  But the accident
gave them all a great fright.  LVII.

PÚSHKIN, THE RUSSIAN POET.

NO. I.

SKETCH OF PÚSHKIN'S LIFE AND WORKS, BY THOMAS B. SHAW, B.A.

OF CAMBRIDGE, ADJUNCT PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LITERATURE IN THE IMPERIAL
ALEXANDER LYCEUM, TRANSLATOR OF "THE HERETIC," &C.

&C.

Among the many striking analogies which exist between the physical
and intellectual creations, and exhibit the uniform method adopted
by Supreme Wisdom in the production of what is most immortal and
most precious in the world of thought, as well as of what is most
useful and beautiful in the world of matter, there is one which
cannot fail to arise before the most actual and commonplace
imagination.

This is, the great apparent care exhibited by nature in the preparation
of the _nidus_--or matrix, if we may so style it--in which the genius
of the great man is to be perfected and elaborated. Nature creates
nothing in sport; and as much foresight--possibly even more--is
displayed in the often complicated and intricate machinery of concurrent
causes which prepare the development of great literary genius, as in
the elaborate in-foldings which protect from injury the germ of the
future oak, or the deep-laid and mysterious bed, and the unimaginable
ages of growth and hardening, necessary to the water of the diamond, or
to the purity of the gold.

Púshkin is undoubtedly one of that small number of names, which have
become incorporated and identified with the literature of their
country; at once the type and the expression of that country's
nationality--one of that small but illustrious bard, whose writings
have become part of the very household language of their native
land--whose lightest words may be incessantly heard from the lips
of all classes; and whose expressions may be said, like those of
Shakspeare, of Molière, and of Cervantes, to have become the natural
forms embodying the ideas which they have expressed, and in expressing,
consecrated.

In a word, Púshkin is undeniably and essentially the great national poet
of Russia.

In tracing, therefore, this author's double existence, and in essaying
to give some account of his external as well as his interior life--in
sketching the poet and the man--we cannot fail to remark a striking
exemplification of the principle to which we have alluded; and as
we accompany, in respectful admiration, his short but brilliant
career, we shall have incessant occasion to remember the laws which
regulated its march--laws ever-acting and eternal, and no less
apparent to the eye of enlightened criticism, than are the mighty
physical influences which guide the planets in their course, to the
abstract reason of the astronomer.

Alexander Púshkin was born (as if destiny had intended, in assigning his
birth-place--the ancient capital of Russia, and still the dwelling-place
of all that is most intense in Russian nationality--to predict all the
stuff and groundwork of his character) at Moscow, on the 26th of
May 1799.

His family, by the paternal side, was one of the most ancient and
distinguished in the empire, and was descended from Rátcha, a
German--probably a Teutonic knight--who settled in Muscovy in the
thirteenth century, and took service under Alexander Névskii, (1252-1262,)
and who is the parent root from which spring many of the most illustrious
houses in Russia--those of Púshkin, of Buturlín, of Kaménskii, and
of Metelóff. Nor was the paternal line of Púshkin's house undistinguished
for other triumphs than those recorded in the annals of war; his
grandfather, Vassílii Lvóvitch Púshkin, was a poet of considerable
reputation, and was honoured, no less than Alexander's father, with
the intimacy of the most illustrious literary men of his age--of
Dmítrieff, Karamzín, and Jukóvskii.

But perhaps the most remarkable circumstance connected with Púshkin's
origin--a circumstance of peculiar significance to those who, like
ourselves, are believers in the influence, on human character,
of _race_, or _blood_, is the fact of his having been the grandson,
by the mother's side, of an African. The cold blood of the north,
transmitted to his veins from the rude warrior of Germany, was thus
mingled with that liquid lightning which circles through the fervid
bosom of the children of the desert; and this crossing of the race
(to use the language of the course) produced an undeniable modification
in our poet's character.

His maternal grandfather was a negro, brought to Russia when a child by
Peter the Great, and whose subsequent career was one of the most romantic
that can be imagined. The wonderful Tsar gave his sable protégé, whose
name was Annibal, a good education, and admitted him into the marine
service of the empire--a service in which he reached (in the reign of
Catharine) the rank of admiral. He took part in the attack upon Navarin
under Orlóff, and died after a long and distinguished career of
service, having founded, in his new country, the family of Annibáloff,
of which Púshkin was the most distinguished ornament, and of whose
African origin the poet, both in personal appearance and in mental
physiognomy, bore the most unequivocal marks.

To the memory of this singular progenitor, Púshkin has consecrated more
than one of his smaller works, and has frequently alluded to the African
blood which he inherited from the admiral.

In 1811, Púshkin obtained (through the interest of Turgénieff, to
whom Russia is thus, in some sort, indebted for her great poet) admission
into the Imperial Lyceum of Tsárskoë Seló, where he was to receive the
education, and to form the friendships, which so strongly coloured, not
only the literary productions of his whole career, but undoubtedly
modified, to a considerable extent, the personal character of the
poet.

This institution, then recently established by the Emperor Alexander, and
always honoured by the peculiar favour and protection of its illustrious
founder, was modelled on the plan of those _lycées_ which France owed
to the genius of Napoleon; and was intended to confer upon its pupils the
advantage of a complete encyclopedic education, and, not only embracing
the preparatory or school course, but also the academic _curriculum_
of a university, was calculated to dismiss the students, at the end
of their course of training, immediately into active life.

The Lyceum must be undoubtedly considered as having nursed in its
bosom a greater number of distinguished men than any other educational
institution in the country; and our readers may judge of the peculiar
privileges enjoyed by this establishment, (the primary object of
whose foundation was, that of furnishing to the higher civil
departments in the government, and to the ministry of foreign
affairs in particular, a supply of able and accomplished _employés_,)
from the fact of its having been located by the emperor in a wing
of the palace of Tsárskoë
Seló--the favourite summer residence of the Tsars of Russia since
the time of Catharine II.

It is to the last-named sovereign, as is well known to travellers, that
this celebrated spot is indebted for its splendid palace and magnificent
gardens, forming, perhaps, the most striking object which gratifies the
stranger's curiosity in the environs of St Petersburg.

The students of the Lyceum are almost always youths of the most distinguished
families among the Russian nobility, and are themselves selected from
among the most promising in point of intellect. The system of education
pursued within its walls is of the most complete nature, partaking,
as may be concluded from what we have said, of both a scientific and
literary character; and a single glance at a list of the first
course (of which Púshkin was a member) will suffice to show, that
it counted, among its numbers, many names destined to high
distinction.

Among the comrades and intimate friends of Púshkin at the Lyceum, must
be mentioned the elegant poet, the Baron Délvig, whose early death was
so irreparable a loss to Russian literature, and must be considered as
the severest personal bereavement suffered by Púshkin--"his brother,"
as he affectionately calls him, in the muse as in their fate. Nor must
we forget Admiral Matiúshkin, a distinguished seaman now living, and
commanding the Russian squadron in the Black Sea. We could specify a
number of other names, all of more or less note in their own country,
though the reputation of many of them has not succeeded, for various
reasons, in passing the frontiers.

From the system of study, no less than from the peculiar social
character, if we may so express it, which has always prevailed in
the Lyceum of Tsárskoë Seló, we must deduce the cause of the peculiar
intensity and durability of the friendships contracted within its
bosom--a circumstance which still continues to distinguish it to a
higher degree than can be predicated of any other institution with
which we are acquainted; and we allude to this more pointedly from
the conviction, that it would be absolutely impossible to form a
true idea of Púshkin--not only as man, but even as a poet--were we
to leave out of our portrait the immense influence exerted on the
whole of his career, both in the world of reality and in the regions
of art, by the close and intimate friendships he formed in the
Lyceum, particularly that with Délvig.

Few portions of poetical biography contain a purer or more touching
interest than the chapter describing the school or college friendships
of illustrious men; and the innumerable allusions to Lyceum comrades and
Lyceum happiness, scattered so profusely over the pages of Púshkin, have
an indescribable charm to the imagination, not less delightful than the
recital of Byron's almost feminine affection for "little Harness,"
or the oft-recalled image of the Noble Childe's boyish meditation
in the elm-shadowed churchyard of Harrow.

During the six years which Púshkin passed at the Lyceum, (from 1811
to 1817,) the intellect and the affections of the young poet were rapidly
and steadily developing themselves. He could not, it is true, be
considered as a diligent scholar, by those who looked at the
progress made by him in the regular and ostensible occupations of
the institution; but it is undeniable, that the activity of his
powerful, accurate, and penetrating mind found solid and unremitting
occupation in a wide circle of general reading.

His own account of the acquirements he had made at this period, and of
the various branches of study which he had cultivated with more or less
assiduity, proves that, however desultory may have been the nature of
his reading, and however unformed or incoherent were his literary
projects, he possessed, in ample measure, even at this period, the
great elements of future fame; viz.
the habit of vigorous industry, and the power of sustained abstraction and
contemplation.

His personal appearance, at this time, was a plain index of his
character, intellectual as well as moral. The closely-curled and wiry
hair, the mobile and irregular features, the darkness of the
complexion, all betrayed his African descent; and served as an
appropriate outside to a character which was early formed in all
its individuality, and which remained unchanged in its principal
features during the whole of the poet's too short existence.

Long will the youthful traditions of the Lyceum recall the outlines of
Púshkin's character; long will the unbiassed judgment of boyhood do
justice to the manliness, the honour, the straightforwardness of
the great poet's nature, and hand down, from one young generation to
another, numberless traits exemplifying the passionate warmth of
his heart, the gaiety of his temper, and the vastness of his memory.

In all cases where circumstances come fairly under their observation, the
young are the best judges of internal character, as well as the most
unerring physiognomists of the outward lineaments of the face. Púshkin
was extremely popular among his comrades--the generosity of his
character had peculiar charms for the unsophisticated minds of the
young; and the vigour of a body never enfeebled in infancy by
luxurious indulgence, enabled him to obtain, by sharing in their
sports, no less consideration among them than he derived from the
play of his penetrating and sarcastic humour.

His poetical existence was now already begun: to the Lyceum period of
Púshkin's life we must ascribe not only a considerable number of
short pieces of verse--those first flutterings of the bird before
it has strength to leave the nest--but even the conception of many
poetical projects which time and study were hereafter to mature
into masterpieces.

The short and fugitive essays in poetry to which we have just alluded,
appeared in a literary journal at various periods, and under anonymous
signatures--a circumstance to be deplored, as it has deprived us of
the means of examining how far these slight attempts, composed in the
twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth years of his age, gave promise of
future excellence. In themselves, they were probably so crude
and _unlicked_ as to justify the poet in the indifference
which prevented him from claiming these early compositions, and
allowing them to be incorporated in the collections of his writings.
During his residence at the Lyceum, however, he undoubtedly meditated
the plan of his charming romantic poem, "Ruslán and Liudmíla," and
probably even composed the opening of the work.

To this period, too, are to be assigned some stanzas of great merit,
entitled "Recollections of Tsárskoë Seló," and an "Epistle to
Licinius"--both works exhibiting considerable skill and mastery in
versification, but by far too much tinged (as might indeed be
expected) with the light reflected from the youthful poet's reading
to deserve a place among his original productions.

For the amusement of his comrades, also, he wrote a number of
ludicrous and humorous pieces, which derived their chief merit from
the circumstances which suggested them; and were calculated rather to
excite a moment's laughter in the merry circle of schoolfellows, than to
be cited as specimens of the author's comic powers, particularly when
we reflect, that the broadly humorous was never Púshkin's favourite or
even successful manner of writing: in the delicate, subdued, Cervantes
tone of humour, however, he was destined to become perhaps the most
distinguished writer of his country--but let us not anticipate. One
production, connected with the Lyceum, is, however, too important (not
perhaps in itself, so much as in the circumstances accompanying
it) to be passed over in a biography of our poet.

This is a didactic poem entitled "Infidelity," which Púshkin composed
and read at the public examination at the Lyceum, at the solemn _Act_,
(a ceremony resembling that which bears the same name at Oxford and
Cambridge, and which takes place at the conferring of the academical
degree.) It was on this occasion that Púshkin was publicly saluted _Poet_,
in the presence of the Emperor, by the aged Derjávin--the greatest
Russian poet then living, and whose glory was so soon to be eclipsed
by the young student whom he prophetically applauded.

It is impossible not to be affected by the sight of the sunset of that
genius whose brightest splendour is worthily reflected in the sublime
ode, "God"--one of the noblest lyrics in the Russian, or, indeed, in
any language--thus heralding, as it were, the dawning of a more brilliant
and enduring daybreak; even as in the northern summer the vapoury
evening glow melts imperceptibly into the dawn, and leaves no night
between.

This event, so calculated to impress the vivid and ardent imagination
of the young poet, has been most exquisitely described by himself in
the literary journal, "Sovreménnik," (The Contemporary,) vol. viii. p.
241.

On quitting the Lyceum, in October 1817, Púshkin entered the civil
service, and was immediately attached to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.

Young, noble, cultivated, possessed in the highest degree of those
talents which are certain to enchant society, he plunged, as might naturally
have been expected, with all the ardour of his African blood, into the
pleasures and amusements of the capital. His success in society, and the
eagerness with which he was welcomed every where, might easily have
been foreseen, particularly when we keep in mind the universal hospitality
which distinguishes the higher classes of Russian society, and the
comparative rarity in this country of literary celebrity, which tends
to render merit of that nature certain of a respectful, if not
exaggerated appreciation. "The three years," to quote the words of
one--himself a personal friend of the poet's--who has succeeded in
seizing with admirable fidelity the principal features of Púshkin's
intellectual physiognomy, "the three years which he passed in St
Petersburg, after quitting the Lyceum, were devoted to the amusements
of the fashionable world, and to the irresistible enchantments of
society.

Well done, red man!  Would that some white hunters, when bent on the
wholesale destruction of valuable animals just for the mad ambition to
kill, had some of his wisdom and religion!

The deer were bled, and, when the entrails were removed, they were
placed where they could be found next day by those who would come for
them.  The Indian cut out a splendid haunch, which he strapped on his
back, then the return trip was begun, and the camp was reached in the
small hours of the next morning.  Very tired but very proud was Alec as
he strode with his Indian companion into the camp.  The fire was burning
low, for all the rest of the party were sound asleep, and it looked as
though they had been so for hours.  Alec, who had been so successful,
was anxious to hear how it had fared with Frank, who had started off
with another Indian after the other herd that had been sighted.

However, he was too tired and sleepy to say much then, and so Alec did
not trouble him.  Alec enjoyed the hastily prepared supper, for which he
had a glorious appetite, after such a long, heavy day's exciting sport.
Then he rolled his blanket around him and cuddled between Sam and Frank,
and was soon wrapped in dreamless slumber.

The chief and favourite part of the breakfast the next morning was the
broiled steaks of that famous haunch of venison which Alec's comrade had
brought back to the camp.

Three Boys in the Wild North Land--by Egerton Ryerson Young


CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

FRANK'S ADVENTURES--THE REINDEER FOLLOWED--UNWELCOME INTERLOPERS--
COWARDLY WOLVES STALKING THE FAWNS--REPELLED BY THE GALLANT BUCKS--CLOSE
QUARTERS--SUCCESSFUL SHOTS--DIFFERENT GAME THAN REINDEER--VISIONS OF
SPLENDOUR.

Frank's experience was a very different one from that of Alec.  He and
his companion had started out in a westerly direction until they sighted
the herd of deer a few miles away.  They followed them up until they
came so near as to have been able to have shot some, but, like other
hunters, they were anxious to kill the leader, so as to throw the herd
in confusion.  With this object in view they carefully skulked along,
hiding behind the clumps of bushes and rocky ridges that were quite
numerous.

All at once they heard a snorting and a sound of rushing hither and
thither among the deer, and so they carefully climbed up some rocks and
cautiously looked over to try and find out what was the cause of the
commotion.  At first they could not make out what was the matter, but
after a while they saw that the herd had other hunters than themselves
after them.  These were a pack of wolves.

They were at the front of the herd, and so Frank and the Indian quickly
drew back from the rock, and hurried on to see the battle.  Fortunately
for them, the reindeer were so excited by the presence of the wolves
that our two hunters were able to get among some large jagged rocks that
rose up fifty or sixty feet, not very distant from them.  Here they had
a capital view of the valley in which were the deer and the wolves.
There seemed to be about a dozen wolves in the pack, and perhaps two
hundred reindeer in the herd, including about thirty young ones that
seemed about five or six months old.

The object of the wolves seemed to be to evade the great antlers of the
bucks and to capture those very pretty young fawns.  It was very
interesting to watch the skill and courage, with which the great
antlered bucks would close up, like a company of cavalry, and charge the
wolves when they ventured too close to the herd.  The wolves never
waited to receive the charge, but ignominiously turned tail and ran for
their lives.  They, however, soon returned when no longer pursued.
There seemed to be a thorough understanding among the deer as to the
position each should take while menaced by the wolves.  The large
antlered ones formed the outside circle.  Next inside were the hornless
males and the does, while in a compact body in the centre were the
fawns.

Thus on they slowly moved, while the wolves attempted at various parts
to break through, but always quickly retreated when a company of the
bucks gallantly charged them.

This strange conflict was watched by Frank and his companion for some
time with intense interest, until it had an abrupt ending.  It came
about this way.  In one of the determined charges made upon the wolves
by, perhaps, thirty reindeer, they drove their cowardly enemies right up
among the rocks just beyond where Frank and his companion had hid
themselves.  The close proximity of the wolves so excited Frank that he
whispered to the Indian:

"Let us fire at the wolves and never mind the deer."

The fact was that Frank's sympathies had so gone out for the deer, as he
watched the incessant schemings of the wolves to get at the beautiful
fawns and the gallant efforts of the older ones to defend them, that he
had no heart to fire into the herd.  He could well see that their firing
into the herd would so terrify and disorganise them that the wolves
would easily destroy the little ones.

From where they were hid the two hunters noticed that the wolves, now no
longer chased by the reindeer, were again clustering near the rocks,
utterly unconscious of the fact that between them and the herd were some
more dreaded foes than even the antlered deer.

"All right," said the Indian, in answer to Frank's request, "but be sure
and kill two with your bullet."

Simultaneously there rang out the double report, and four wolves fell
dead, while the others, terrified by this attack, so unexpected and so
close, fled away toward the distant forest.

After seeing that the wolves did not stop in their flight, it did not
take Frank and his Indian companion long to reach a position where the
herd of deer could again be seen.  Frank was delighted to observe that,
although they seemed to be somewhat startled by the distant report of
the guns, they had not broken their formation, but were more quickly
hurrying away.  To skin the four wolves and return with their pelts to
the camp was all the sport they had, or wanted, for that day.

At first Alec was inclined to boast of a more successful day in reindeer
hunting, but when he heard the whole story he was willing to admit that
perhaps, after all, Frank's had been the nobler experience.

Sam's characteristic comments were:

"Man, but I would have liked to have had a crack at that great leader!
But, after all, I think I would have preferred to have had the
satisfaction of knocking over a couple more of those dirty, thievish,
murdering wolves."

One more great excursion was arranged ere they returned, and that was to
a large lake to which watchers had been sent some days before.

A couple of days after Frank and Alec had had the adventures with
reindeer, these watchers returned with word that the deer were numerous
on the shores of the lake, and were often seen swimming out in its
water.  The two days' rest in the camp had been much needed and enjoyed.
Now all were fresh and eager to be off again.

Very little time is lost in breaking up a camp when once it is decided
to move, and so in a short time the canoes, propelled by the paddles in
the hands of the stalwart Indians, were dancing over the sunlit waves to
their next destination, some twenty miles away.  Here they found the
Indians who had been sent as scouts or watchers had already returned and
prepared a cozy camp for their reception.  A dinner of venison, bear's
meat, and ducks was ready for them, and after the score of miles of
paddling--for the boys always insisted on each doing his share--they
were all, with good appetites, ready to do ample justice to the hunter's
fare.

As the anticipated sport would be exciting, and was generally considered
to be more successful in the forenoons, it was decided to keep quiet
that afternoon and evening.  So the guns were all cleaned and oiled and
many pipes of tobacco were smoked by the Indians, while the boys
wandered along the shores and enjoyed the sights of that picturesque
land.  Just a little before sunset they had a display of colour such as
is seldom given to mortals to see upon this earth of ours.  In the west
there floated a cloud that seemed to hang in the sky like a great prism.
Beyond it the sun in his splendour was slowly settling down toward the
horizon.  Through this prism-like cloud there were reflected and settled
upon the waters all the colours of the rainbow.  Every dancing wave
seemed at times to be of the deepest crimson, then they all seemed like
molten gold, then they were quickly transformed into some other gorgeous
hue, until the whole lake seemed literally ablaze with dazzling colours.

The boys were awed and silenced amid these glories, and sat down on a
rock entranced and almost overwhelmed.  By-and-by the prism-like cloud
that had hung for perhaps half an hour in that position slowly drifted
away, and the sun again shone out in undimmed splendour and the glorious
vision ended.

Then the spell that had so long entranced the boys was broken, and in
silence for a time they looked at each other.  Frank was the first to
speak, and his quiet words were:

"I have seen the `sea of glass mingled with fire' that John saw in
Patmos."

"And I," said Alec, "thought of the city of mansions where the streets
are of gold, and the walls jasper, and the gates pearl."

"And I," said Sam, "thought, `If that is a glimpse of heaven I can
understand why one has said, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared
for them that love him."'"

With quiet actions, and yet with happy hearts, they returned to the camp
from the long stroll.

Three Boys in the Wild North Land--by Egerton Ryerson Young


CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

BOYS' ADVENTURE WITH REINDEER IN THE LAKE--GADFLIES AND OTHER DEER
PESTS--PECULIAR WEAPONS--DANGEROUS ANTAGONISTS--HOOFS AND HORNS--FRANK'S
SUCCESS--ATTACK ON THE LEADER--CANOE SMASHED--ALEC AND THE INDIANS IN
THE WATER--SAM'S STRATAGEM--SUCCESS AT LAST--THE RETURN TRIP--
SIGNIFICANT SIGNS--DUCKS AND GEESE HEADING SOUTHWARD--INDIANS UNEASY--
JOURNEY HASTENED--SAGASTA-WEEKEE REACHED--SUMMER ENDED--WINTER BEGUN.

Refreshed and invigorated by the much needed rest, the boys with their
appointed Indian companions started off early the next morning for the
lake, which seemed to have become the reindeer's favourite bathing
resort.

So early did they arrive at the lake that they had to wait for some
hours ere a deer was to be seen.  The principal reason why the deer
spend so much time in the water seems to be to get rid of a number of
troublesome flies that very much annoy them.  Some species of gadfly
have the power not only to sting them, but to insert their eggs under
the skin, which soon develops into a large grub.  Some of the skins of
the reindeer are so perforated by these pests that they are absolutely
worthless to the Indians.

Another reason why the deer were late in coming out into the lake was
the fact that, as the summer was nearly gone, the nights were now long
and cool; and the gadflies being only troublesome in the warm hours of
bright sunshine, it was nearly noon ere they came out from their forest
retreats and plunged into the lake.

A herd of reindeer swimming in the water is a very pretty sight.  Having
large lungs, and thus being very buoyant, they swim high in the water,
and being good swimmers they make, when a number of them are disporting
themselves undisturbed, a very beautiful picture.

While our party of hunters were waiting in their shady retreat, secluded
from observation, the Indians with as little noise as possible cut down
and smoothly trimmed for use some poles.  When fully prepared they were
between ten and twelve feet long and from one to two inches in diameter.
To the larger ends of each were securely lashed with deerskin thongs
long, sharp, double-edged knives.

It was about eleven o'clock ere the Indian scouts, sent out to watch the
movements of the deer, returned with the report that the greater portion
of the herd had taken to the water.  In order to be sure of success in
the hunt it was decided to carefully carry the canoes through the woods,
and embark as near as possible to the spot where the deer had plunged
into the lake.  This would place the hunters in the rear of their game,
and thus give them a very decided advantage.

As the Indians were anxious to get as many reindeer as possible for the
sake of the meat, a large portion of which they decided to make into
pemmican, they decided to send out six canoes on this day's expedition.

Our three boys were each assigned a canoe with some Indian hunters who
were supposed to be well versed in this exciting sport.  Each canoe was
furnished with one of these newly improvised spears, while each boy and
hunter had his gun and axe.

The whole six canoes were very noiselessly placed in the water at a spot
where some great overhanging branches reached down to the water's edge.
All were thus enabled to embark without attracting attention, or in the
slightest degree alarming the deer that were now swimming about in the
lake.  Pushing aside the bushes, they all shot out as nearly as possible
together, and, vigorously plying their paddles, began the attack.

The deer, startled and alarmed by the suddenness of the appearance of
the canoes, at first attempted to escape by returning to the shore.
Finding, however, that their retreat was cut off, all there was left for
them to do was to boldly strike out from the land and get, if possible,
beyond the reach of their pursuers.  As the lake was, however, a very
large one there was no possibility of their being able to swim across.
The Indians well knew they would not attempt it; but after endeavouring
to shake off pursuit by swimming out from land, if unsuccessful they
would return and give battle in the water, if there was no other course
open to them.

The three canoes, in each of which was one of the boys, started out side
by side, and there was a good deal of excitement and rivalry, as to whom
should fall the honour of bagging the first reindeer.

Fast as the reindeer can swim, Indian canoemen can paddle their canoes
much faster, and so it was not long ere the deer were overtaken.

"Kill none but those in prime condition," were the orders received by
all; "and let no canoe kill more than four."

As on some former occasions in similar hunting adventures, the boys were
each assigned the post of honour, which was the position in the very
front of the canoe, so that they could be the first to attack the deer
when they came within striking distance.

As they drew near to the deer, and saw how they swam, the boys were able
to see what effective weapons the ones formed by the binding of the
knives to the poles really were.  Of course the terrified deer made the
most desperate efforts to escape; but in spite of all they could do
their pursuers steadily gained upon them.

"Do not be in a hurry," said one of the Indians in Frank's canoe to him
when he seemed so eager to throw his newly formed spear, as though it
were a javelin, at a great antlered fellow they were approaching, but
who, as though conscious of their desires to reach his head, very
cleverly and rapidly kept them off.

The Indians well know, some by bitter experience, the ability of the
reindeer to kick out so viciously and effectively behind, even when
swimming, as to smash the canoe that has been paddled up close to them
by the over-eager, excited hunters.  Hence experienced Indians give that
end of a swimming reindeer a wide berth, and endeavour to get within
striking distance of his head.

"Ready now!" the man quickly spoke again, as this time by a quick
movement they succeeded in getting beyond his heels, and came rapidly
alongside of him.

"Strike him just behind the head, and strike hard," were the next words
Frank heard, and with all his strength he plunged his spear into the
neck of the great animal.  He did not, however, as he should have done,
strike across the spine so as to sever the spinal cord, and so he only
inflicted an ugly flesh wound which irritated the great animal and
caused him to turn round and give battle to the canoe and all its
occupants.  But, rapidly, as he turned, he was not quicker than were the
sharp Indians, who, watching every movement and seeing the failure of
Frank, suddenly began to paddle back from him.  Rendered furious by the
wound, and seeing his enemies retreating, he came on as resolutely and
rapidly as possible.

"Try the gun," said one of the Indians, and Frank, mortified by his
failure with the spear, was not slow to respond.  Carefully aiming for
the curl on the forehead, between the eyes, he pulled the trigger, and
as the report rang out the great deer suddenly turned over dead in the
water.  A cheer rang out, proclaiming the first one thus obtained.  Alec
and his men struck out for one of great size that they supposed was the
leader of the herd.  He not only had a most magnificent set of antlers,
but by the way in which he swam in the water he seemed to possess not
only magnificent lungs, but to be still trying to have some control over
the frightened deer.  When he saw that he was himself being attacked he
immediately, as became the leader of the herd, turned to meet the
advancing canoe and give battle.

It was unfortunate for Alec that his Indian canoemen, while clever
hunters, were inexperienced in the tactics of our old, wily reindeer.
It would have been wise on their part if, when they saw him swing round
and boldly come on to the attack, they had quickly used their guns; but
that is considered the last resort in this kind of sport--the great
ambition is to kill the deer with their spears.

So here Alec and his comrades wished to carry off honours in this
contest; and so, when the great fellow came within reaching distance,
they tried, with a couple of spears, to kill him; but a clever, rapid
twist of his horns seemed to parry their spear thrusts, and before they
knew how it happened the side of the canoe was crushed in as an
eggshell, and they were all struggling in the water.

It was well for them that they were good swimmers; and so they struck
out for the other canoes, the occupants of which, seeing the disaster,
at once began paddling to their rescue.  The greatest danger to be
feared was that the infuriated deer would take after one or more of
them, in which case they would have a poor chance indeed, as a man
swimming is no match for a deer in the water.  With horns and sharp,
chisel-like hoofs, he is able to make a gallant fight, as we have
already seen in the case of the deer and wolves.

However, it was soon seen, in this instance, that no danger was to be
feared.  The deer kept venting his displeasure on the canoe, so that he
paid not the slightest notice to those who had so suddenly sprung out of
it on the opposite side from him, and were rapidly swimming away.  The
poor canoe, however, had to be the butt of his ire--as well as of his
horns--and soon all there was left of it were a few pieces of splinters
floating on the water.  The guns, axes, spears, and other heavy articles
were at the bottom of the lake.

The swimmers were helped into the other canoes, and the sport was
resumed.  When several deer had been killed they were fastened by long
deerskin thongs, like lariats, to the stern of a couple of canoes and
towed through the water to the shore.  Alec and his wet comrades went
with them, and at a great fire built up on the beach soon dried
themselves, and were none the worse for their involuntary swim.

For a time the great deer that had come off so victorious was left
swimming around in his glory, none seeming to care to get into close
quarters with him.  Sam, however, was of a different mind, and was eager
for a round with him.  Of course it would not have been difficult to
shoot him, but, as has been stated, the Indians think there is no honour
or skill in shooting a deer in the water, where he cannot swim as fast
as they can paddle their canoes.  So they were just holding back in each
canoe and waiting for some one else to tackle the big fellow.

When Sam told the Indians in his canoe that he wished they would attack
him they admired his courage and grit, and one of them, with a bit of a
twinkle in his eye, asked:

"You able to swim as well as Alec?"

"Yes, indeed," he replied; "but there will be no need for my trying."

"How you want to kill him?" asked another Indian.

Sam's quick rejoinder was: "I want to spear him, of course."

His enthusiasm was contagious, and the Indians said:

"All right; we will try."

So word was signalled to the other boats that the one in which Sam was
would try the gallant old fellow.  The Indians in the other canoes heard
this with pleasure, and ceased for a time from their pursuits to see the
struggle.

The Indians in charge of Sam's canoe wisely explained to him how, if
they were possibly able to get him alongside of the deer, to try to
spear him across the spinal column as near the head as possible.  They
also took the precaution to have a couple of guns and axes handy where,
in case of emergency, they could be instantly utilised.

When the great reindeer saw them coming down so boldly toward him he at
once accepted the situation, and leaving a number of deer that with him
had been keeping together for some time he gallantly turned to face
them.

When within twenty or thirty yards, as decided upon by the Indian, they
suddenly veered to the right, and kept paddling in eccentric circles
around him, keeping him as nearly as possible about the same distance in
the centre.  That he could not reach the canoe and annihilate it as
easily as he did the other one seemed to very much irritate him, and for
a time he was furious with rage.  Yet in spite of his fury they quietly,
yet warily, watched him, and kept up their circular movements about him.
After a time, seeing it to be an utter impossibility to catch them, he
turned and endeavoured to swim to the shore.

Now the attacked became the aggressors, and so, rapidly, the canoe
followed in his wake.  Several times they tried to draw up alongside to
spear him, but a sudden turn of that well-antlered head was enough to
cause them to draw back in a hurry.  But something must be done, or he
would speedily be at the land.  So another canoe was signalled to make a
feint to attack him from the other side.  The one in which Frank was
paddling with his Indians soon came up, and when told what was desired
of them quickly responded.

The deer, thus worried by the two, had hardly a fair chance, but he
gallantly kept up the unequal struggle for quite a time.  Sam's canoemen
at length saw an unguarded place and so dashed in alongside the big
fellow, and at the right minute the Indian steering called out to Sam:

"Now give it to him in the neck, close up to his head."

Sam, however, was not quick enough, and therefore his spear, which he
plunged with all the force he was capable of into the deer, while it did
not instantly kill, so cut down the side of the neck as to sever some
large veins.  Unfortunately for Sam, he could not withdraw the spear
from the deer, and he was in no humour to lose it, so he hung on to it;
but before he knew where he was a great bound of the deer jerked him out
of the canoe.  However, he fell fairly and squarely on the back of the
great deer, and he was not such a fool as not to avail himself of such
an opportunity for a ride.  So speedily righting himself on this odd
steed, amid the laughter of Frank and the Indians, he was evidently in
for a good time.

It might have fared badly with him if the deer had been able to have
used his horns freely, or have moved with his usual speed in the water;
but the additional weight on his back so sank him down that he was
powerless to do harm.  All he could do, after a few desperate efforts to
get rid of his burden, was to start for the shore, and so he speedily
continued swimming toward it as though this was his usual employment.

Sam hung on without much trouble, but as they neared the shore he began
to wonder what might happen next.  But when his antlered steed reached
the shallow waters his strength gave way from the excessive loss of
blood from the severed veins in his neck, and soon he dropped dead.  The
great carcass was dragged ashore, while the bodies of the others killed
were towed in by the canoes.  They killed altogether ten animals, but
the reindeer hunt in the water that day, considering the loss of a fine
canoe and all its contents, was not voted an unqualified success.

All the Indians present at the camp, which they made near the spot from
which they had embarked in the morning, went to work at the venison
there landed, and in a few hours they had it all cut into strips and
broad flakes and hung up on stagings of poles speedily erected.  A
smokeless fire under [it], and the bright sun above it, in a few days
made the meat so hard and dry that, by using the backs of their axes for
hammers and pounding this meat on the smooth wooden logs, they
thoroughly pulverised it.  Then packing it in bags made of the green
hides of the deer, and saturating the whole mass with the melted fat
taken from around the kidneys of the reindeer, they had prepared a most
palatable kind of pemmican.  If well prepared in this way it was
considered fully equal to that made from the buffalo on the great
plains.

The superlative dandy inhabitant of a first floor from the ground in
Bond-street, and the finished inhabitant of a first floor from heaven
(who lives by diving) in Fleet- street, are in kindness and habits
precisely the same.There they made a
visit of a few days at the home of the missionary.  It was a great joy
to meet with this devoted, heroic man and his equally brave and noble
wife, who for the sake of Christianisation and civilisation of the
Indians of this section of the country had willingly sacrificed the
comforts and blessings of civilisation and come to this land.  Only
twice a year did they hear from the outer world, and only once every
year had they any opportunity of receiving any of the so-called
"necessaries of life" at this remote station.  Yet they said and showed
that they were very happy in their work, and rejoiced at the success
which, not only to themselves but to any unbiased observer, was so
visibly manifested in the greatly improved lives and habits of the
natives.  Missions to such people are not failures.

They would have been delighted to have lingered longer in this home, and
with this delightful missionary and his good wife, who so reminded each
of the boys of his own dear mother.  In 1820 the poem of "Ruslán and
Liudmíla" was completed, and its appearance must be considered as
giving the finishing blow to the worn-out classicism which characterizes
all the poetical language of the eighteenth century.

This revolution was begun by Jukóvskii himself, to whom Russian literature
owes so much; and he hailed with delight the new and beautiful production
of the young poet--the "conquering scholar," as Jukóvskii affectionately
calls Púshkin--which established for ever the new order of things
originating in the good taste of the "conquered master," as he
designates himself.

The ever timid spirit of criticism was, as usual, exemplified in
the judgments passed by the literary journals upon this elegant
innovation.They could not but help
noticing the large numbers of geese and ducks that were flying over
them, and all were going south.  The boys would have liked, where they
were specially numerous, to have stopped and had a few hours' shooting,
but the Indians said:

"Perhaps to-morrow you will see it was best for us to get home."

So "forward" was the word, and on they went and reached home after an
exceedingly rapid journey from Oxford Lake.

They met with a right royal welcome at Sagasta-weekee.  There is
always the same tendency in the "chief priests" of every race and
period to be tempted to sacrifice moral considerations to expediency,
and to prefer the empty fabric of an imposing Church establishment
to the people who make the Church.Frank, Alec, and Sam had each to give some account of their adventures
to the household as they were gathered that evening around the roaring
fire, which was much enjoyed.  Then prayers were offered, and away the
boys went to their rooms.  If the mere contemplation of a generous action
can thus inspire the young, and give new life to age, what a load of
misery and deformity might not the sons and daughters of nature divest
themselves of, by following the inherent dictates of benevolence!When they awoke the next morning the sleet and snow were beating with
fury against the window panes, and all nature was white with snow.

Shortly after the wind went down, and then the ice covered over all the
open waters, and they saw that that most delightful summer in the Wild
North Land was ended, and the winter, with its cold and brightness and
possibilities for other kinds of sports and adventures, had begun.