"We've always imagined that Cousin Katherine must have been in love with
your father, Uncle Basil, before he married," said Elinor, when they
had reached the heavy stage of sweet pudding; "and when the will was
read, we were sure of it. For, of course, mother was just as nearly
related to her as uncle Basil was."

It was difficult for Mary to realize that this Aunt Sara could be a
sister of the handsome, dark-faced man with burning eyes whose features
had remained cameo-clear in her memory since childhood. But Mrs.
Home-Davis was the ugly duckling of a handsome and brilliant family, an
accident of fate which had embittered her youth, and indirectly her
daughter's.

"How shall I get away from them?" Mary asked herself, desperately, that
night. But fate was fighting for her in the form of a man she had never
seen, a man not even in London at the moment.

In a room below Mary's Elinor was asking Mrs. Home-Davis how they could
get rid of the convent cousin.

"She won't do," the young woman said.

"She reminds me of her mother," remarked Mrs. Home-Davis. "I thought she
would grow up like that."

"Yet there's a look in her eyes of Uncle Basil," Elinor amended,
brushing straight hair of a nondescript brown, which she admired because
it was long.

"With such a combination of qualities as she'll probably develop, she'd
much better have stayed in her convent," the elder woman went on.

"I wish to goodness she had," snapped Elinor.

"You are--er--thinking of Doctor Smythe, dear?"

"Ye-es--partly," the younger admitted, reluctantly; for there was
humiliation to her vanity in the admission. "Not that Arthur'd care for
that type of girl, particularly, or that he'd be disloyal to me--if he
were let alone. But you can see for yourself, mother--_is_ she the kind
that will let men alone? At dinner she made eyes even at the footman. I
was watching her."

"She can't have met any men, unless at that old Scotchwoman's house,"
replied Mrs. Home-Davis. "Perhaps even their Romish consciences would
have forced them to show her a few, before she took her vows--Catholic
young men, of course."

"Perhaps one of them decided her to break the vows."

"She hasn't really broken them, you know, Elinor. We must be just."

"Well, anyhow, she hasn't the air of an engaged person. And if she's
here when Arthur gets back to London, I feel in my bones, mother,
there'll be ructions."

"Arthur" was Doctor Smythe, a man not very young, whom Elinor Home-Davis
had known for some time; but it was only lately that she had begun to
hope he might ask her to marry him. She valued him, for he was the one
man she had ever succeeded in attracting seriously, and though she knew
he would not think of proposing if she had not some money which would be
helpful in his career, she was eager to accept him. Had she realized
sooner that there was a chance with Arthur Smythe, she would not have
let her mother make that promise concerning Italy, for she could not be
left alone in London all winter. Arthur Smythe would think that too
strange; yet now she would not go out of England for anything. He was in
Paris attending a medical congress, and planned afterward to visit the
châteaux country with a friend; but he would be back in two or three
weeks. Now that Elinor had seen Mary, she felt that changes must be made
quickly. In other circumstances, it would have been pleasant to loiter
about Italy, stopping at the best hotels at Mary's expense, on money
that ought to have been the Home-Davises; but as it was, Elinor could
think of nothing better to do than to send Mary off by herself, in a
hurry. Or, as Mrs. Home-Davis said, "some one suitable" might be
travelling at the right time, and they could perhaps find an excuse for
stopping at home themselves.

"You can be ill, if necessary," suggested Elinor.

"Yes, I can be ill, if necessary--or you can," replied her mother.

Mary had not known that there could be such noise in the world as the
noise of London. She did not sleep that night; and the fog was blacker
than ever in the morning. Shopping had to be put off for three days; and
then Lady MacMillan was too near-sighted and too absent-minded to be of
much use. She was telegraphed for from her box of a castle, at the end
of the week, because her housekeeper was ailing--an old woman who was
almost as much friend as servant. Mary would have given anything to
return with her, even if to go back must mean retiring into the convent
forever; but the gate of the past had gently shut behind her. She could
not knock upon it for admittance, at least not until she had walked
farther along the path of the future.

When Lady MacMillan had gone, Mrs. Home-Davis and Elinor showed no
interest in the convent cousin. They went about their own concerns as if
she did not exist, leaving her to go about hers, if she chose. They were
both interested, they explained, in the Suffragist movement; also they
had charities to look after. There was no time to bother with Mary's
shopping, but of course she could have their maid, Jennings, to go out
with: in fact, she must not attempt to go alone. Consequently, Mary
bought only necessaries, in the big, confusing shops that glared white
in the foggy twilight, for Jennings as a companion was more depressing
than the cold. She was middle-aged, very pinched and respectable in
appearance, with a red nose, always damp at the end; and she disapproved
of lace and ribbons on underclothing. Mrs. Home-Davis and Miss Elinor
would never think of buying such things as Miss Grant admired. Jennings
would have pioneered Miss Grant to the British and South Kensington
museums if Miss Grant had wished to go, but Mary had no appetite for
museums in the dark and forbidding November, which was the worst that
London had known for years. Her aunt never suggested a theatre, or the
opera, or anything which Mary was likely to find amusing, for a plan
decided upon with Elinor was being faithfully carried out. The convent
cousin was to be disgusted with Cromwell Road, and bored with London, so
that she might be ready to snatch at the first excuse to get away. And
once away, Mrs. Home-Davis promised Elinor to find some pretext for
refusing to receive her back again.

The plan succeeded perfectly, though, had the ladies but guessed, no
complicated manoeuvres would have been necessary, Mary having determined
upon escape in the moment of arrival. She was shut up in her room for a
few days with a cold, after she had been a week in Cromwell Road, and
when she was let out, after all danger of infection for her relatives
had passed, she dared to propose Italy as a cure for herself.

"I know you have important engagements," Mary said, hastily, "and of
course you couldn't go with me at such short notice; but I don't feel as
if I could wait. I may be ill on your hands. I feel as if I should be,
unless I run away where it's warm and bright."

Mrs. Home-Davis, much as she wanted to take the girl at her word, could
not resist retorting: "It's not very bright and warm in Scotland at this
time of year, yet you don't seem to have been ill there."

Mary could have replied that in the convent she had had the warmth and
brightness of love, but she merely mumbled that she had often taken
cold in the autumn.

"It will be impossible for us to leave home at present," her aunt went
on. "If you're determined to go, I must get you some one to travel with,
or you must have an elderly maid-companion. Perhaps that would be best.
One can't always find friends travelling at the time they're wanted."

"Mary isn't such a baby that she ought to need looking after," said
Elinor. "She's nearly twenty-five--as old as I am--and you don't mind my
going to Exeter alone."

Elinor was twenty-eight. When she was a child she had assumed airs of
superiority on the strength of her age, Mary remembered, but now she and
her cousin seemed suddenly to match their years. Mary was glad of this,
however, and bolstered Elinor's argument by admitting her own maturity.
"I don't want a companion-maid, please," she said, with the mingling of
meekness and violent resolution which had ended her novitiate. "It will
be better for my Italian, to get one in Italy. I shall be safe alone
till I arrive. You see, Reverend Mother has given me a letter to the
Superior in the mother-house, and other letters, too. I shall have
friends in Florence and Rome, and lots of places."

"But it wouldn't look well for you to travel alone," Mrs. Home-Davis
objected.

"Nobody will be looking at me. Nobody will know who I am," Mary argued.
Then, desperately, "Rather than you should find me a companion, Aunt
Sara, I won't go to Italy at all. I----"

She could have chosen no more efficacious threat; though if she had been
allowed to finish her sentence, she would have added, "I'll go back to
Scotland to Lady MacMillan's, or stay in the convent."

Thus the sting would have lost its venom for the Home-Davises, but
Elinor, fearing disaster, cut the sentence short. "Oh, for mercy's sake,
mother, let Mary have her own way," she broke in. "You can see she means
to in the end, so why disturb yourself? Nothing can happen to her."

Elinor's eyes anxiously recalled to her mother a letter that had come
from Doctor Smythe that morning announcing his return at the end of the
week. It was providential that Mary should have proposed going, as it
would have been awkward otherwise to get her out of the house in time;
and Elinor was anxious that she should be taken at her word.

"It's more of appearances than danger that I'm thinking," Mrs.
Home-Davis explained, retiring slowly, face to the enemy, yet with no
real desire to win the battle. "Perhaps if I write Mrs. Larkin in
Florence--a nice, responsible woman--to find a family for you to stay
with, it may do. Only in that case, you mustn't stop before you get to
Florence. I'll buy your ticket straight through, by the Mont Cenis."

"No, please," Mary protested, mildly. "Not that way. I've set my heart
on going along the Riviera, not to stop anywhere, but to see the coast
from the train. It must be so lovely: and after this blackness to see
the blue Mediterranean, and the flowers, and oranges, and the red rocks
that run out into the sea; it's a dream of joy to think of it. I've a
friend who has been twice with her father. She told me so much about the
Riviera. It can't be much farther than the other way."

So it was settled, after some perfunctory objections on the part of Mrs.
Home-Davis, who wished it put on record that she had been overruled by
Mary's obstinacy. If undesirable incidents should happen, she wanted to
say, "Mary _would_ go by herself, without waiting for me. She's of age,
and I couldn't coerce her."


III


Mary felt like an escaped prisoner as the train began to move out of
Victoria Station--the train which was taking her toward France and
Italy. It was like passing through a great gray gate, labeled "This way
to warmth and sunshine and beauty." Already, though the gate itself was
not beautiful, Mary seemed to see through it, far ahead, vistas of
lovely places to which it opened. She sat calmly, as the moving carriage
rescued her from Aunt Sara and Elinor on the platform, but her hands
were locked tightly inside the five-year-old squirrel muff, which would
have been given away, with everything of hers, if Sister Rose had not
changed a certain decision at the eleventh hour. She was quivering with
excitement and the wild sense of freedom which she had not tasted in
London.

In leaving the convent she had not felt this sense of escaping, for the
convent had been "home," the goodbyes had drowned her in grief, and she
had often before driven off with Lady MacMillan, in the springy barouche
behind the fat horses. Even the journey to London had not given her the
thrill she hoped for, as rain had fallen heavily, blotting out the
landscape. Besides, she had even then regarded her stay in London with
the Home-Davises only as a stage on the journey which was eventually to
lead her into warmth and sunlight.

This train, with the foreign-looking people who rushed about chattering
French and German, Italian and Arabic on the platform and in the
corridors, seemed to link London mysteriously with other lands. Even the
strong, active porters, who sprang at huge trunks piled on cabs, and
carried them off to the weighing-room, were different from other
porters, more important, part of a great scheme, and their actions added
to her excitement. She liked the way that an alert guard put her into
her compartment, as if he were posting a letter in a hurry, and had
others to post. Then the great and sudden bustle of the train going out
made her heart beat.

Mary had been brought to the station early, for Elinor had been nervous
lest she might miss the train, and Doctor Smythe was coming at four
o'clock that afternoon. But others who were to share the compartment
were late. It was violently exciting to have them dash in at the last
moment, and dispose of bags and thick rugs in straps to be used on the
Channel.

They were two, mother and daughter perhaps; a delicate birdlike girl and
a plump middle-aged woman with an air of extreme self-satisfaction.

In themselves they did not appear interesting, but Mary was interested,
and wondered where they were going. When they took out fashion-papers
and sixpenny novels, however, she felt that they were no longer worth
attention. How could they read, when they were saying goodbye to
England, and when each minute the windows framed charming pictures of
skimming Kentish landscape? The strangely shaped oast-houses puzzled
Mary. She longed to ask what they were, but the woman and the girl
seemed absorbed in their books and papers. Mary thought they must be
dull and stupid; but suddenly it came to her that to many people, these
among others, maybe, this journey was a commonplace, everyday affair.
Even going to France or Italy might not be to them a high adventure.
Extraordinary to reflect that all over the world men and women were
travelling, going to wonderful new places, seeing wonderful new things,
and taking it as a matter of course!

She had never seen the sea; and when the billowing fields and neat
hedges changed to chalky downs, a sudden whiff of salt on the air
blowing through a half-open window made her heart leap. She nearly
cried, "The sea!" but controlled herself because of her prim
fellow-passengers.

Mary would have been surprised if she had known their real feelings
toward her, which were not as remote as she supposed.

She looked, they both thought, like a schoolgirl going abroad for her
Christmas holidays, only it was early for holidays: but if she were a
schoolgirl it was strange that she should be travelling alone. Her furs
were old-fashioned and inexpensive, her gray tweed dress plain and
without style, her hat had a home-made air, but from under the short
skirt peeped smart patent-leather shoes with silver buckles and pointed
toes, and there was a glimpse of silk stockings thin as a mere polished
film. A schoolgirl would not be allowed to have such shoes and
stockings, which, in any case, were most unsuited to travelling. (Poor
Mary had not known this, in replacing the convent abominations which had
struck Peter as pathetic; and Mrs. Home-Davis had not troubled to tell
her); nor would a schoolgirl be likely to have delicate gray suède
gloves, with many buttons, or a lace handkerchief like a morsel of
seafoam. These oddities in Mary's toilet, due to her inexperience and
untutored shopping, puzzled her companions; and often, while she
supposed them occupied with the fashions, they were stealing furtive
glances at her clear, saintly profile, the full rose-red lips which
contradicted its austerity, and the sparkling waves of hair meekly drawn
down over the small ears. Her rapt expression, also, piqued their
curiosity.

They were inclined to believe it a pose, put on to attract attention;
and though they could not help acknowledging her beauty, they were far
from sure that she was a person to be approved. At one instant the
mother of the birdlike girl fancied her neighbour a child. The next, she
was sure that the stranger was much more mature than she looked, or
wished to look. And when, on leaving the train at Dover, Mary spoke
French to a young Frenchman in difficulties with an English porter, the
doubting hearts of her fellow-travellers closed against the offender.
With an accent like that, this was certainly not her first trip abroad,
they decided. With raised eyebrows they telegraphed each other that they
would not be surprised if she had an extremely intimate knowledge of
Paris and Parisian ways.

Even the Frenchman she befriended was ungrateful enough not to know
quite what to think of Mary. He raised his hat, and gave her a look of
passionate gratitude, in case anything were to be got by it: but the
deep meaning of the gaze was lost on the lately emancipated Sister Rose.
She blushed, because it happened to be the first time she had ever
spoken to a young man unchaperoned by Lady MacMillan: but she was
regarding him as a fellow-being, and remembering that she had been
instructed to seize any chance of doing a kindness, no matter how small.
She had never been told that it was not always safe for a girl to treat
a Frenchman as a fellow-being.

Afterward, on the boat, when a porter had placed her in a sheltered
deck-seat with a curved top, the fellow-being ventured again to thank
the English Mees for coming to his rescue. It was a pleasure to Mary to
speak French, which had been taught her by Sister Marie-des-Anges, a
French nun from Paris; and she and the young man plunged into an
animated conversation. Her travelling companions had chairs on deck not
far off, and they knew what to think of the mystery now. They were on
the way to Mentone, but as they intended stopping a day in Paris, and
going on by a cheaper train than the _train de luxe_, Mary did not see
them again during the journey.

She was unconscious of anything in her appearance or conduct to arouse
disapproval. Her one regret concerning the thin silk stockings and
delicate shoes (which she had bought because they were pretty) was that
her ankles were cold. She had no rug; but the Frenchman insisted on
lending her his, tucking it round her knees and under her feet. Then she
was comfortable, and even more grateful to him than he had been to her
for translating him to the porter. He was dark and thin, cynically
intelligent looking, of a type new to Mary; and she thanked him for
being disappointed that she could not stop in Paris. He inquired if, by
chance, she were going to Monte Carlo. When she said no, she was passing
on much farther, he was again disappointed, because, being an artist, he
often ran down to Monte Carlo himself in the winter, and it would have
been a great privilege to renew acquaintance with so charming an English
lady.

Mary had feared that she might be ill in crossing the Channel, as she
had never been on the water before, and could not know whether she were
a good or a bad sailor. Aunt Sara and Elinor had told her unpleasant
anecdotes of voyages; but when Dover Castle on its gray height, and
white Shakespeare Cliff with its memories of "Lear," had faded from her
following eyes, still she would hardly have known that the vessel was
moving. The purring turbines scarcely thrilled the deck; and presently
Mary ate sandwiches and drank a decoction of coffee, brought by her new
friend. He laughed when she started at a mournful hoot of the siren, and
was enormously interested to hear that she had never set eyes upon the
sea until to-day. Mademoiselle, for such an ingenue, was very
courageous, he thought, and looked at Mary closely; but her eyes
wandered from him to the phantom-shapes that loomed out of a pale,
wintry mist: tramps thrashing their way to the North Sea: a vast,
distant liner with tiers of decks one above the other: a darting
torpedo-destroyer which flashed by like a streak of foam.

Everything was so interesting that Mary would far rather not have had to
talk, but she had been brought up in a school of old-fashioned courtesy.
To her, a failure in politeness would have been almost a crime: and as
the sisters had never imagined the possibility of her talking with a
strange young man, they had not cautioned her against doing so.

She had meant to scribble a few notes of her impressions during the
journey, for the benefit of Reverend Mother and the nuns, posting her
letter in Paris; but as the Frenchman appeared surprised at her
travelling alone, and everybody else seemed to be with friends, she
decided not to write until Florence. There, when she could say that she
had reached her journey's end safely, she might confess that she had
left London without her relatives or even the companion-maid they
advised.

"If Reverend Mother saw Aunt Sara, even for five minutes," Mary said to
herself, "she couldn't blame me."

As it happened, there had been such a rush at the last, after the great
decision was made, that Mary had not written to the convent. She had
only telegraphed: "Leaving at once for Florence. Will write."

She was hoping that Reverend Mother would not scold her for what she had
done, when suddenly another cliff, white as the cliffs of Dover,
glimmered through the haze. Then she forgot her sackcloth, for,
according to the Frenchman, this was old Grisnez, pushing its inquiring
nose into the sea; and beyond loomed the tall lighthouse of Calais.

It was absurdly wonderful on landing at Calais to hear every one talking
French. Of course, Mary had known that it would be so, but actually to
hear it, and to think that these people had spoken French since they
were babies, was ridiculously nice. She felt rewarded for all the pains
she had taken to learn verbs and acquire exactly the right accent; and
she half smiled in a friendly way at the dark porters in their blue
blouses, and at the toylike policemen with their swords and capes. Her
porter was a cross-looking, elderly man, but at the smile she had for
him he visibly softened; and, with her dressing-bag slung by a strap
over his broad shoulder, made an aggressive shield of his stout body to
pilot her through the crowd.

Now she left behind the two Englishwomen and her French acquaintance,
for she was a passenger in the _luxe_, which started earlier than the
ordinary first-class train for Paris. The Frenchman hoped and believed
that she would regret his society, but she forgot him before the train
went out, having no premonition of any future meeting.

This, then, was what they called a _wagon lit_! She was delighted with
her quarters, supposing, as the compartment seemed small, that it was
entirely for her use during the journey. She had been told that she
would be provided with a bed, and she wondered how it was to be
arranged.

Darkness fell over France, but Mary felt that she could see through the
black veil, away to the south, where roses were budding in warm
sunshine. She was whole-heartedly glad, for the first time, to be out of
the convent.

If it had not been winter and night, she would perhaps have longed to
stop in Paris, but the sight of the great bleak Gare du Nord chilled
her. The ordeal of the _douane_ had to be gone through there, and Mary
was glad when it was over, and she could go on again, though she was
once more protected by a gallant porter; and a youngish official of the
customs, after a glance at her face, quickly marked crosses on her
luggage without opening it. Other women, older and not attractive, saw
this favouritism, and swelled with resentment, as Elinor Home-Davis had
when saying:

"_Is_ she the kind who can ever let men alone? She makes eyes at the
footman!"

Mary had never heard of "making eyes." One did not use these vulgar
expressions at the convent. But Peter would have known what Elinor
meant; and even Reverend Mother knew instinctively that, if Mary Grant
went out into the world, she would unconsciously influence all sorts and
conditions of men with whom she came in contact, as the moon influences
the tides. And Reverend Mother would have felt it safer for just such
creatures as Mary to live out their lives in the shelter of a convent.
But Mary thought only how kind Frenchmen even of the lower classes were,
and wondered if those of other nations were as polite. Slowly the train
took her round Paris, and, after what seemed a long time, stopped in
another huge station, which shivered under a white, crude flood of
electric light. Its name--Gare du Lyon--sounded warm, however, and sent
her fancy flying southward again. She was growing impatient to get on
when, to her surprise, a porter hovering in the corridor with a large
dressing-bag plumped it into the rack beside her own. Mary started.
Could it be possible that any one else had a right to come in with her?

The question was answered by the appearance of a marvellous lady who
followed the porter. "Which of us is here?" she asked. "Oh, it's you,
Mrs. Collis! That's your bag, I think."

She spoke like an Englishwoman, yet there was a faint roll of the "r"
suggestive of foreign birth or education. Mary had never seen any one
like her before. She was unusually tall, as tall as a man of good
height, and her figure was magnificent. Evidently she was not ashamed of
her stature, for her large black hat had upstanding white wings, and her
heels were high. Her navy blue cloth dress braided with black that had
threads of gold here and there was made to show her form to the best
advantage. Mary had not known that hair could be as black as the heavy
waves which melted into the black velvet of the hat. The level brows
over the long eyes were equally black, and so were the thick short
lashes. Between these inky lines the eyes themselves were as coldly gray
and empty as a northern sea, yet they were attractive, if only by an
almost sinister contrast. The skin was extraordinarily white, and it did
not occur to Mary that Nature alone had not whitened it, or reddened the
large scarlet mouth. Women did not paint at the convent, nor did Lady
MacMillan's guests. Mary did not know anything about paint. She thought
the newcomer very handsome, yet somehow formidable.

In a moment other people trooped into the corridor and grouped round the
door of Mary's compartment. There was a wisp of a woman with neat
features and sallow complexion, who looked the essence of respectability
combined with a small, tidy intelligence. She was in brown from head to
foot, and her hair was brown, too, where it was not turning gray.
Evidently she was Mrs. Collis, for she took a lively interest in the
bag, and said she must have it down, as the stupid people had put it
wrong side up. She spoke like an American, though not with the
delicately sweet drawl that Peter had. Behind her stood a pretty girl
whose features were neatly cut out on somewhat the same design, and
whose eyes and hair were of the same neutral brown. She had a waist of
painful slenderness, and she reminded Mary of a charming wren. Behind
her came another girl, older and of a different type, with hair yellow
as a gold ring, round eyes of opaque, turquoise blue, without
expression, and complexion of incredible pink and white. Her lips, too,
were extremely pink, and her brows and lashes almost as black as those
of the tall woman. She wore pale purple serge, with a hat to match, and
had a big bunch of violets pinned on a fur stole which was bobbing and
pulsing with numberless tiny, grinning heads of dead animals. On her
enormous muff were more of these animals, and tucked under one arm
appeared a miniature dog with a ferocious face. In the wake of these
ladies who surged round the door and sent forth waves of perfume,
presently arrived a man who joined them as if reluctantly, and because
he could think of nothing else to do.

He was much taller than the woman who had come first, and must have been
well over six feet. His clean-shaven, aquiline face was of a dead
pallor. There were dark shadows and a disagreeable fulness under his
gray, wistful eyes, which seemed to appeal for help without any hope of
receiving it. He walked wearily and slouchingly, stooping a little, as
if he were too tired or bored to take the trouble of throwing back his
shoulders.

The ladies talked together, very fast, all but the tall one, who, though
she talked also, did not chatter as the others did, but spoke slowly, in
a low tone which must be listened to, or it could not be heard. The four
laughed a good deal, and when the tall woman smiled she lost something
of her fascination, for she had large, slightly prominent eye-teeth
which went far to spoil her handsome red mouth. The others paid great
attention to her, and to the big man with the sad eyes. In loud voices,
as if they wished people to hear, they constantly addressed these two as
Lord and Lady Dauntrey.

"I--are you quite sure that you're to be here?" Mary ventured, when Mrs.
Collis had whisked into the compartment, and was ringing for some one to
take down her bag, after the train had started. "I thought--I had this
place to myself."

"Why, if you have, there must be a mistake," replied the American. "Have
you taken both berths?"

"No," said Mary. "Only one. Are there two?"

"My, yes, of course. In some there are four. But this is one of the
little ones. I expect"--and she smiled--"that you haven't made many long
journeys?"

"I haven't travelled at all before," Mary answered, blushing under the
eyes turned upon her.

"Well, you'll find it's all right, what I say," the American lady went
on. "But"--and she lost interest in Mary--"aren't we silly? Miss
Wardrobe had better come in here, where there's only one place, and my
daughter and I'll take a compartment together, as the car seems pretty
full."

"Please don't call me Miss Wardrobe!" exclaimed the golden-haired girl.
"That's the eighth time. I've counted." As she spoke, her tiny dog
yapped in a thin voice at the offender, its round eyes goggling.

"I hope you'll excuse me, I'm sure," returned the American, acidly.

"I must say, I really don't think mamma's had occasion to mention your
name as many times as eight since we first had the pleasure of meeting,"
the charming wren flew to her mother's rescue. "But you've got such a
difficult name."

"Anyhow, it isn't like everybody else's, which is _something_," retorted
the girl who had been called "Miss Wardrobe."

Mary began to be curious to know what the real name was. But perhaps she
would find out later, as the young woman was to share her little room.
It would be interesting to learn things about this odd party, yet she
would rather have been alone.

Soon after Paris there was dinner in the dining-car not far away, and
Mary had opposite her the girl with the queer name. No one else was at
the table. At first they did not speak, and Mary remembered the training
of her childhood, never to seem observant of strangers; but she could
not help looking sometimes at her neighbour. The first thing the latter
did on sitting down was to draw off her gloves, and roll them inside
out. She then opened a chain bag of platinum and gold, which looked
rather dirty, and taking out, one after another, eight jewelled rings,
slipped them on affectionately. Several fingers were adorned with two or
three, each ring appearing to have its recognized place. When all were
on, their wearer laid a hand on either side of her plate, and regarded
first one, then the other, contentedly, with a slight movement causing
the pink manicured nails to glitter, and bringing out deep flashes from
diamonds, rubies, and emeralds. Glancing up suddenly, with
self-conscious composure, the young woman saw that her neighbour's eyes
appreciated the exhibition. She smiled, and Mary smiled too.

"If I didn't think my stable-companion was all right, I wouldn't have
dared put them on," remarked "Miss Wardrobe." "But I do feel so--well,
undressed almost, without my rings; don't you?"

"I haven't any," Mary confessed.

"Why--don't you like rings?"

"Yes, on other people. I love jewels. But for myself, I've never thought
of having any--yet."

"I've thought more about it than about anything else," remarked the
girl, smiling a broad, flat smile that showed beautiful white teeth. She
looked curiously unintelligent when she smiled.

"Perhaps I shall begin thinking more about it now."

"That sounds interesting. What will start your mind to working on the
subject? Looking at my rings?" She had an odd, persistent accent which
irritated Mary's ears. If it was like anything the convent-bred girl had
heard, it resembled the accent of a housemaid who "did" her bedroom in
Cromwell Road. This maid had said that she was a London girl. And
somehow Mary imagined that, if she had rings, she would like taking them
out of a gold bag and putting them on at the dinner-table. Because Mary
had never had for a companion any girl or woman not a lady, she did not
know how to account for peculiarities which would not have puzzled one
more experienced.

"Perhaps," she answered, smiling.

"Maybe you mean to win a lot of money at Monte, and buy some?"

"At Monte--does that mean Monte Carlo? Oh, no, I'm going to Florence.
But some money has been left to me lately, so I can do and have things I
shouldn't have thought of before." Mary explained all this frankly, yet
without any real wish to talk of her own affairs.

The four others of the party were at a table opposite; and as there was
a moment's lull in the rush of waiters and clatter of plates for a
change of courses, now and then a few words of conversation at one table
reached another. As Mary mentioned the legacy Lady Dauntrey suddenly
flashed a glance at her, and though the long pale eyes were turned away
immediately, she had the air of listening to catch the rest of the
sentence. By this time the little quarrel over "Miss Wardrobe's" name
had apparently been forgotten. The five were on good terms, and talked
to each other across the gangway. Again the title of the two leading
members of the party was called out conspicuously, and people at other
tables turned their heads or stretched their necks to look at this party
who advertised the "jolly time" they were having. They chattered about
"Monte," and about celebrities supposed to have arrived there already,
though it was still early in the season. Lady Dauntrey told anecdotes of
the "Rooms," as if to show that she was not ignorant of the place; but
Lord Dauntrey said nothing unless he were addressed, and then answered
in as few words as possible. Nevertheless he had something of that
old-world courtesy which Mary had been taught, and she felt an odd,
instinctive sympathy with him. She even found herself pitying the man,
though she did not know why. A man might be taciturn and tired-looking
yet not unhappy.

They sat a long time at dinner before they were allowed to pay and go.
Lord Dauntrey's party smoked, and the girl at Mary's table offered her a
cigarette from a gold case with the name "Dodo" written across it in
diamonds. Mary thanked her, and refused. She had heard girls at school
say that they knew women who smoked, but she had never seen a woman
smoking. It seemed odd that no one looked surprised.

Her neighbour, whom she now heard addressed as Miss Wardropp, did not
come into their compartment at once, but stopped in another of the same
size, where she, with Lord and Lady Dauntrey and Miss Collis, played a
game with a little wheel which they turned. When Mary stood in the
corridor, while the beds were being made, she saw them turning this
wheel, and wondered what the game could be. They had a folding board
with yellow numbers on a dark green ground, and they were playing with
ivory chips of different colours.

Mary had the lower berth, but when she realized how much pleasanter it
would be to sleep in the upper one, she could not bring herself to take
it. She felt that it would be selfish to be found there when Miss
Wardropp came to undress; and when the latter did appear, toward
midnight, it was to see the lower berth left free.

"Why, but you were below. Didn't you know that?" she inquired rather
sharply, as if she expected her room mate to insist on changing.

"Yes," Mary replied meekly. "But I--I left it for you, and your little
dog."

"Well, I do think that's about the most unselfish thing I ever heard of
any one doing!" exclaimed Miss Wardropp. "Thank you very much, I'm sure.
No good my refusing now, as you're already in?"

"No, indeed," Mary laughed.

"I wish you were going with us to the Villa Bella Vista," said the
other. "From what I can see, we don't seem likely to get much
unselfishness there, from anybody."

Then, as she undressed, showing exquisite underclothing, she followed
her ambiguous remark by pouring out information concerning herself, her
companions, and their plans.

She was from Australia, and intimated that her father, lately dead, had
left plenty of money. She had met Lord and Lady Dauntrey a month ago in
Brighton at the Metropole. Where the Dauntreys had "picked up the
Collises," Dodo Wardropp did not know, but they were "late
acquisitions." "Lord and Lady Dauntrey have taken a furnished villa at
Monte for the season," she went on, "a big one, so they can have lots of
guests. I and the Collises are the first instalment, but they're
expecting others: two or three men with titles."

She said this as if "titles" were a disease, like measles. As she rubbed
off the day's powder and paint with cold cream, there was a nice smell
in the little room of the _wagon lit_, like the scent of a theatrical
dressing-room.

"I suppose you're looking forward to a delightful winter," Mary
ventured, from her berth, as Dodo hid a low-necked lace nightgown under
a pink silk kimono embroidered with gold.

"I hope!" exclaimed Miss Wardropp. "I pay for it, anyhow. I don't mind
telling, as you aren't going to Monte, and won't know any of them, that
we're sort of glorified paying-guests. The Collises haven't said to me
they're that, and I haven't said what I am; but we know. I'm paying
fourteen guineas a week for my visit, and I've a sneaking idea her
ladyship's saving up the best room for other friends who'll give more. I
could live at the Hôtel de Paris in Monte Carlo, I expect, for that
price, but you see the catch is that Lord and Lady Dauntrey can
introduce their guests to swell people. I wouldn't meet the right kind
if I lived in a hotel, even with a first-rate chaperon. I know, for I
came to Monte Carlo with an Australian friend, for a few days on my way
to England. It's no use being at a resort if you don't get into the
smart set, is it?"

"I suppose not," said Mary. "But I think I care more about places than
people."

"I don't understand that feeling. I want to get in with the best. And
though Lord Dauntrey's poor, and I imagine disappointed in expectations
of money with her, he must be acquainted with a lot of important titled
people. He's a viscount, you know, and that's pretty high up."

"I didn't know," Mary confessed. "I don't know anything about society."

"You seem to have led a retired sort of life," Miss Wardropp remarked,
though without much curiosity, for she was not really interested in any
woman except herself, or those connected with her affairs. "Surely you
read about their wedding in South Africa last Spring?"

"No. I have never read newspapers."

"I don't bother either, except society news and fashion pages. But there
were pictures of them both everywhere. I expect she got the photographs
in, for he doesn't seem a man to like that sort of thing. Lord Dauntrey
was out in South Africa for years, trying to make his fortune, but it
didn't appear to come off. Friends of mine I knew at Brighton, who took
me there, a rich Jew and his wife who'd lived in Africa, said when the
Dauntreys turned up at the Metropole that he'd been at a pretty low ebb
out there. I believe he studied for a doctor, but I don't know if he
ever practised. Nobody can say exactly who Lady Dauntrey was originally,
but she was a widow when he married her, and supposed to have money. He
doesn't seem to care for society, but she's ambitious to be some one.
She's so good-looking she's sure to succeed. I expect to know everybody
smart at Monte. That's what I've been promised, and Lady Dauntrey'll
entertain a good deal. If that doesn't amuse her husband he can shoot
pigeons, and gamble at the Casino. He's got a system at roulette that
works splendidly on his little wheel. We were playing it this evening.
But I expect I'm boring you. You look sleepy. I'll turn in, and go
bye-bye with Diablette."

For the rest of the night all was silence in the compartment, save for
the gobbling noises made in her sleep by the griffon Diablette. Mary lay
awake in her upper berth, longing to look out, and thrilling to musical
cries of big baritone voices at the few stops the train made: "Di-jon-n,
cinq minutes d'arrêt! Ma-con-n, cinq minutes d'ar-rêt! Ly-on, dix
minutes d'a-rr-êt!"

It was wonderful to hear the names ring like bells out of the mystery
and darkness of night, names she had known all her life since she had
been old enough to study history or read romance. She thought that the
criers must have been chosen for their resonant voices, and in her mind
she pictured faces to match, dark and ruddy, with great southern eyes;
for now the train was booming toward Provence: and though Mary began to
be drowsy, she held herself awake on purpose to hear "Avignon" shouted
through the night.

Very early, almost before it was light, she arose noiselessly, bathed as
well as she could, and dressed, so as to be able to look out at
Marseilles. Miss Wardropp was asleep, and as the train slowed into the
big station in the pale glimmer of the winter morning, Mary walked to
the end of the car. The stop would be twenty minutes, and as the train
gave its last jerk Mary jumped on to the platform.

The sky was of a faint, milky blue, like the blue that moves under the
white cloud in a moonstone, and the first far down ray of morning sun,
coming up with the balmy wind from still, secret places where the youth
of the world slept, shimmered golden as a buttercup held under the
pearly chin of a child. This was only Marseilles, but already the smell
of the south was in the air, the scent of warm salt sea, of eucalyptus
logs burning, and pine trees and invisible orange groves. Roch
(which was my mentor's name) was not qualified to arrange their
lessons, or to qualify me to benefit by them. I was, moreover, like
all the children of my age and of my station, dressed in the
handsomest clothes to go out, and naked and dying with hunger in the
house,"[2235] and not through unkindness, but through household
oversight, dissipation, and disorder, attention being given to things
elsewhere.
One might easily count the fathers who, like the Marshal de Belle-Isle,
brought up their sons under their own eyes, and themselves attended
to their education methodically, strictly, and with tenderness.

As to the girls, they were placed in convents; relieved from this care,
their parents only enjoy the greater freedom.

Even when they retain charge of them they are scarcely more of a burden
to them. Little Félicité de Saint-Aubin[2236] sees her parents "only
on their waking up and at meal times." Their day is wholly taken up;
the mother is making or receiving visits; the father is in his
laboratory or engaged in hunting. Up to seven years of age the child
passes her time with chambermaids who teach her only a little
catechism, "with an infinite number of ghost stories." About this time
she is taken care of; but in a way which well portrays the epoch.
The Marquise, her mother, the author of mythological and pastoral
operas, has a theater built in the chateau; a great crowd of
company resorts to it from Bourbon-Lancy and Moulins; after rehearsing
twelve weeks the little girl, with a quiver of arrows and blue
wings, plays the part of Cupid, and the costume is so becoming she
is allowed to wear it in common during the entire day for nine
months.

To finish the business they send for a dancing-fencing master, and,
still wearing the Cupid costume, she takes lessons in fencing and
in deportment.

"The entire winter is devoted to playing comedy and tragedy." Sent out
of the room after dinner, she is brought in again only to play on the
harpsichord or to declaim the monologue of Alzire before a numerous
assembly. Undoubtedly such extravagances are not customary; but
the spirit of education is everywhere the same; that is to say, in the
eyes of parents there is but one intelligible and rational existence,
that of society, even for children, and the attentions bestowed on
these are solely with a view to introduce them into it or to prepare
them for it.

Even in the last years of the ancient régime[2237] little boys have their
hair powdered, "a pomatumed chignon (bourse), ringlets, and curls";
they wear the sword, the chapeau under the arm, a frill, and a coat
with gilded cuffs; they kiss young ladies' hands with the air of
little dandies.

A lass of six years is bound up in a whalebone waist; her large
hoop-petticoat supports a skirt covered with wreaths; she wears
on her head a skillful combination of false curls, puffs, and knots,
fastened with pins, and crowned with plumes, and so high that
frequently "the chin is half way down to her feet"; sometimes they
put rouge on her face.

She is a miniature lady, and she knows it; she is fully up in her
part, without effort or inconvenience, by force of habit; the unique, the
perpetual instruction she gets is that on her deportment; it may be said
with truth that the fulcrum of education in this country is the
dancing-master.[2238] They could get along with him without any
others; without him the others were of no use. For, without him, how
could people go through easily, suitably, and gracefully the thousand
and one actions of daily life, walking, sitting down, standing up,
offering the arm, using the fan, listening and smiling, before
eyes so experienced and before such a refined public?

This is to be the great thing for them when they become men and women,
and for this reason it is the thing of chief importance for them as
children. Along with graces of attitude and of gesture, they already
have those of the mind and of expression. Scarcely is their tongue
loosened when they speak the polished language of their parents.

The latter amuse themselves with them and use them as pretty dolls; the
preaching of Rousseau, which, during the last third of the last century,
brought children into fashion, produces no other effect.

They are made to recite their lessons in public, to perform in
proverbs, to take parts in pastorals.

Their sallies are encouraged. They know how to turn a compliment, to invent
a clever or affecting repartee, to be gallant, sensitive, and even
spirituelle. The little Duc d'Angoulême, holding a book in his hand,
receives Suffren, whom he addresses thus: "I was reading Plutarch
and his illustrious men. You could not have entered more
apropos."[2239] The children of M. de Sabran, a boy and a girl, one
eight and the other nine, having taken lessons from the comedians
Sainval and Larive, come to Versailles to play before the king and
queen in Voltaire's "Oreste," and on the little fellow being interrogated
about the classic authors, he replies to a lady, the mother of three
charming girls, "Madame, Anacreon is the only poet I can think
of here!"

Another, of the same age, replies to a question of Prince Henry of
Prussia with an agreeable impromptu in verse.[2240] To cause witticisms,
trivialities, and mediocre verse to germinate in a brain eight years
old, what a triumph for the culture of the day! It is the last
characteristic of the régime which, after having stolen man away from
public affairs, from his own affairs, from marriage, from the family,
hands him over, with all his sentiments and all his faculties, to
social worldliness, him and all that belong to him. Below him fine ways
and forced politeness prevail, even with his servants and tradesmen. A
Frontin has a gallant unconstrained air, and he turns a compliment.[2241]
An Abigail needs only to be a kept mistress to become a lady.

A shoemaker is a "monsieur in black," who says to a mother on saluting
the daughter, "Madame, a charming young person, and I am more sensible
than ever of the value of your kindness," on which the young girl,
just out of a convent, takes him for a suitor and blushes scarlet.
Undoubtedly less unsophisticated eyes would distinguish the difference
between this pinchbeck louis d'or and a genuine one; but their
resemblance suffices to show the universal action of the central
mint-machinery which stamps both with the same effigy, the base
metal and the refined gold.

IV. Enjoyment.

The charm of this life.--Etiquette in the 18th Century.--Its perfection
and its resources.--Taught and prescribed under feminine authority.

A society which obtains such ascendancy must possess some charm; in no
country, indeed, and in no age has so perfect a social art rendered
life so agreeable.

Paris is the school-house of Europe, a school of urbanity to which the
youth of Russia, Germany, and England resort to become civilized. Lord
Chesterfield in his letters never tires of reminding his son of this,
and of urging him into these drawing-rooms, which will remove "his
Cambridge rust." Once familiar with them they are never abandoned,
or if one is obliged to leave them, one always sighs for them.

"Nothing is comparable," says Voltaire,[2242] "to the genial life one
leads there in the bosom of the arts and of a calm and refined
voluptuousness; strangers and monarchs have preferred this repose, so
agreeably occupied in it and so enchanting to their own countries and
thrones. The heart there softens and melts away like aromatics slowly
dissolving in moderate heat, evaporating in delightful perfumes."
Gustavus III, beaten by the Russians, declares that he will pass
his last days in Paris in a house on the boulevards; and this is
not merely complimentary, for he sends for plans and an estimate.[2243]
A supper or an evening entertainment brings people two hundred
leagues away.

Some friends of the Prince de Ligne "leave Brussels after breakfast,
reach the opera in Paris just in time to see the curtain rise, and, after
the spectacle is over, return immediately to Brussels, traveling all
night."--Of this delight, so eagerly sought, we have only imperfect
copies, and we are obliged to revive it intellectually. It consists, in
the first place, in the pleasure of living with perfectly polite
people; there is no enjoyment more subtle, more lasting, more
inexhaustible.

Man's self-esteem or vanity being infinite, intelligent people are
always able to produce some refinement of attention to gratify it.

Worldly sensibility being infinite there is no imperceptible shade of
it permitting indifference.

After all, Man is still the greatest source of happiness or of misery to
Man, and in those days this everflowing fountain brought to him sweetness
instead of bitterness. Not only was it essential not to offend, but it
was essential to please; one was expected to lose sight of oneself
in others, to be always cordial and good-humored, to keep one's own
vexations and grievances in one's own breast, to spare others
melancholy ideas and to supply them with cheerful ideas.

"Was any one old in those days? It is the Revolution which brought
old age into the world, Your grandfather, my child,[2244] was handsome,
elegant, neat, gracious, perfumed, playful, amiable, affectionate, and
good-tempered to the day of his death. People then knew how to live
and how to die; there was no such thing as troublesome infirmities.
If any one had the gout, 'he walked along all the same and made
no faces; people well brought up concealed their sufferings. There was
none of that absorption in business which spoils a man inwardly and
dulls his brain. People knew how to ruin themselves without letting it
appear, like good gamblers who lose their money without showing uneasiness
or spite. A man would be carried half dead to a hunt. It was thought
better to die at a ball or at the play than in one's bed, between four
wax candles and horrid men in black. People were philosophers; they
did not assume to be austere, but often were so without making a
display of it.
If one was discreet, it was through inclination and without pedantry
or prudishness.

People enjoyed this life, and when the hour of departure came they
did not try to disgust others with living. The last request of my
old husband was that I would survive him as long as possible and live
as happily as I could."

When, especially, women are concerned it is not sufficient to be
polite; it is important to be gallant.

Each lady invited by the Prince de Conti to Ile-Adam "finds a carriage
and horses at her disposal; she is free to give dinners every day
in her own rooms to her own friends

."[2245] Mme.
de Civrac having to go to the springs, her friends undertake to
divert her on the journey; they keep ahead of her a few posts, and,
at every place where she rests for the night, they give her a little
féte champêtre disguised as villagers and in bourgeois attire, with
bailiff and scrivener, and other masks all singing and reciting
verses.

A lady on the eve of Longchamp, knowing that the Vicomte de V--possesses
two calèches, makes a request for one of them; it is disposed of;
but he is careful not to decline, and immediately has one of the
greatest elegance purchased to lend it for three hours; he is only
too happy that anybody should wish to borrow from him, his prodigality
appearing amiable but not astonishing.[2246] The reason is that
women then were queens in the drawing-room; it is their right; this
is the reason why, in the eighteenth century, they prescribe the
law and the fashion in all things.[2247] Having formed the code of
usages, it is quite natural that they should profit by it, and see
that all its prescriptions are carried out.

In this respect any circle "of the best company" is a superior tribunal,
serving as a court of last appeal.[2248] The Maréchale de Luxembourg
is an authority; there is no point of manners which she does not
justify with an ingenious argument.

Any expression, any neglect of the standard, the slightest sign of pretension
or of vanity incurs her disapprobation, from which there is no appeal,
and the delinquent is for ever banished from refined society. Any
subtle observation, any well-timed silence, an "oh" uttered in an
appropriate place instead of an "Ah," secures from her, as from M.

Talleyrand, a diploma of good breeding which is the commencement
of fame and the promise of a fortune.

Under such an "instructress" it is evident that deportment, gesture,
language, every act or omission in this mundane sphere, becomes,
like a picture or poem, a veritable work of art; that is to say,
infinite in refinement, at once studied and easy, and so harmonious
in its details that its perfection conceals the difficulty of
combining them.

A great lady "receives ten persons with one courtesy, bestowing on each,
through the head or by a glance, all that he is entitled to;"[2249]
meaning by this the shade of regard due to each phase of position,
consideration, and birth.

"She has always to deal with easily irritated amour-propres; consequently
the slightest deficiency in proportion would be promptly detected,"[2250]
But she is never mistaken, and never hesitates in these subtle
distinctions; with incomparable tact, dexterity, and flexibility of tone,
she regulates the degrees of her welcome. She has one "for women of
condition, one for women of quality, one for women of the court,
one for titled women, one for women of historic names, another for
women of high birth personally, but married to men beneath them;
another for women who by marriage have changed a common into a
distinguished name; another still for women of reputable names in
the law; and, finally, another for those whose relief consists
chiefly of expensive houses and good suppers."

A stranger would be amazed on seeing with what certain and adroit steps
she circulates among so many watchful vanities without ever hurting
or being hurt. "She knows how to express all through the style of her
salutations; a varied style, extending through imperceptible gradations,
from the accessory of a single shrug of the shoulder, almost an
impertinence, to that noble and deferential reverence which so few women,
even of the court, know how to do well; that slow bending forward, with
lowered eyes and straightened figure, gradually recovering and
modestly glancing at the person while gracefully raising the body up,
altogether much more refined and more delicate than words, but very
expressive as the means of manifesting respect."--This is but a single
action, and very common; there are a hundred others, and of importance.
Imagine, if it is possible, the degree of elegance and perfection to
which they attained through good breeding. I select one at random, a
duel between two princes of the blood, the Comte d'Artois and the Duc
de Bourbon; the latter being the offended party, the former, his
superior, had to offer him a meeting[2251], "As soon as the Comte d'Artois
saw him he leaped to the ground, and walking directly up to him, said
to him smiling: 'Monsieur, the public pretends that we are seeking each
other.' The Duc de Bourbon, removing his hat, replied, 'Monsieur, I am
here to receive your orders.'

--'To execute your own,' returned the Comte d'Artois, 'but you must allow
me to return to my carriage.' He comes back with a sword, and the
duel begins. After a certain time they are separated, the seconds deciding
that honor is satisfied, 'It is not for me to express an opinion,'
says the Comte d'Artois, 'Monsieur le Duc de Bourbon is to express
his wishes; I am here only to receive his orders.'

--'Monsieur,' responds the Duc de Bourbon, addressing the Comte
d'Artois, meanwhile lowering the point of his sword, 'I am overcome
with gratitude for your kindness, and shall never be insensible
to the honor you have done me.'"

--Could there be a more just and delicate sentiment of rank, position,
and circumstance, and could a duel be surrounded with more graces?

There is no situation, however thorny, which is not saved by
politeness.

Through habit, and a suitable expression, even in the face of the king,
they conciliate resistance and respect. When Louis XV, having exiled
the Parliament, caused it to be proclaimed through Mme. Du Barry that
his mind was made up and that it would not be changed, "Ah, Madame,"
replied the Duc de Nivernais, "when the king said that he was looking at
yourself."--"My dear Fontenelle," said one of his lady friends to him,
placing her hand on his heart, "the brain is there likewise."

Fontenelle smiled and made no reply.

We see here, even with an academician, how truths are forced down, a
drop of acid in a sugar-plum; the whole so thoroughly intermingled
that the piquancy of the flavor only enhances its sweetness. Night after
night, in each drawing-room, sugar-plums of this description are
served up, two or three along with the drop of acidity, all the
rest not less exquisite, but possessing only the sweetness and
the perfume.

Such is the art of social worldliness, an ingenious and delightful
art, which, entering into all the details of speech and of action,
transforms them into graces; which imposes on man not servility
and falsehood, but civility and concern for others, and which, in
exchange, extracts for him out of human society all the pleasure
it can afford.

V. Happiness.

What constitutes happiness in the 18th Century.--The fascination of
display.--Indolence, recreation, light conversation.

One can very well understand this kind of pleasure in a summary
way, but how is it to be made apparent? Taken by themselves the pastimes
of society are not to be described; they are too ephemeral; their
charm arises from their accompaniments.

A narrative of them would be but tasteless dregs, does the libretto of an
opera give any idea of the opera itself?--If the reader would revive for
himself this vanished world let him seek for it in those works
that have preserved its externals or its accent, and first in the
pictures and engravings of Watteau, Fragonard and the Saint-Aubins,
and then in the novels and dramas of Voltaire and Marivaux, and
even in Collé and Crébillon fils;[2252] then do we see the breathing
figures and hear their voices, What bright, winning, intelligent
faces beaming with pleasure and with the desire to please!

What ease in bearing and in gesture!

What piquant grace in the toilet, in the smile, in vivaciousness of
expression, in the control of the fluted voice, in the coquetry of hidden
meanings! How involuntarily we stop to look and listen! Attractiveness
is everywhere, in the small spirituelle heads, in the slender hands, in
the rumpled attire, in the pretty features, in the demeanor. The
slightest gesture, a pouting or mutinous turn of the head, a plump little
wrist peering from its nest of lace, a yielding waist bent over an
embroidery frame, the rapid rustling of an opening fan, is a feast for
the eyes and the intellect. It is indeed all daintiness, a delicate
caress for delicate senses, extending to the external decoration of
life, to the sinuous outlines, the showy drapery, and the refinements
of comfort in the furniture and architecture. Fill your imagination
with these accessories and with these figures and you will take as
much interest in their amusements as they did.

In such a place and in such company it suffices to be together to be
content. Their indolence is no burden to them for they sport with
existence.--At Chanteloup, the Duc de Choiseul, in disgrace, finds the
fashionable world flocking to see him; nothing is done and yet no hours
of the day are unoccupied.[2253] "The Duchess has only two hours' time
to herself and these two hours are devoted to her toilet and her
letters; the calculation is a simple one: she gets up at eleven;
breakfasts at noon, and this is followed by conversation, which lasts
three or four hours; dinner comes at six, after which there is play and
the reading of the memoirs of Mme. de Maintenon." Ordinarily "the
company remains together until two o'clock in the morning."

Intellectual freedom is complete. There is no confusion, no anxiety.
They play whist and tric-trac in the afternoon and faro in the
evening.
"They do to day what they did yesterday and what they will do to-morrow;
the dinner-supper is to them the most important affair in life,
and their only complaint in the world is of their digestion. Time goes
so fast I always fancy that I arrived only the evening before." Sometimes
they get up a little race and the ladies are disposed to take part in it,
"for they are all very agile and able to run around the drawing room
five or six times every day." But they prefer indoors to the open air;
in these days true sunshine consists of candle-light and the finest sky
is a painted ceiling; is there any other less subject to inclemencies or
better adapted to conversation and merriment?--They accordingly chat
and jest, in words with present friends, and by letters with absent
friends.
They lecture old Mme. du Deffant, who is too lively and whom they style
the "little girl"; the young Duchesse, tender and sensible, is "her
grandmamma." As for "grandpapa," M. de Choiseul, "a slight cold keeping
him in bed he has fairy stories read to him all day long, a species of
reading to which we are all given; we find them as probable
as modern history. Do not imagine that he is unoccupied. He has had
a tapestry frame put up in the drawing room at which he works, I cannot
say with the greatest skill, but at least with the greatest assiduity.
. . . Now, our delight is in flying a kite; grandpapa has never
seen this sight and he is enraptured with it." The pastime, in itself,
is nothing; it is resorted to according to opportunity or the taste of
the hour, now taken up and now let alone, and the abbé soon writes:
"I do not speak about our races because we race no more, nor of
our readings because we do not read, nor of our promenades because
we do not go out.

What, then, do we do? Some play billiards, others dominoes, and others
backgammon. We weave, we ravel and we unravel. Time pushes us on and
we pay him back."
Other circles present the same spectacle. Every occupation being an
amusement, a caprice or an impulse of fashion brings one into favor.

At present, it is unraveling, every white hand at Paris, and in the chateaux,
being busy in undoing trimmings, epaulettes and old stuffs, to pick out
the gold and silver threads. They find in this employment the semblance
of economy, an appearance of occupation, in any event something to keep
them in countenance.

Suddenly she recalled a solemn warning from Mrs. Home-Davis that some
hotels refused to receive women travelling alone, and her heart was
inclined to fail as she asked for a room. But fortunately this was not
one of those cruel hotels Aunt Sara had heard about. Mary was received
civilly and without surprise. A view of the sea? Certainly Mademoiselle
could have a room with a view of the sea. It would be at the price of
from thirty to fifty francs a day. Mary said that she would like to see
a room for thirty francs, and felt economical and virtuous as she did
so. She had been brought up to consider economy a good thing in the
abstract, but she knew practically nothing of the value of money, as she
had never bought anything for herself until she went to London. It
seemed to her now that, with fifty thousand pounds, she was so rich that
she could have anything she wanted in the world, but she had nebulous
ideas as to what to want.

A pretty little pink and gray room was shown her, so pretty that it
seemed cheap until she heard that food and everything else was "extra";
but the view decided her to take it. The large window looked southwest,
with the harbour and rock of Monaco to the right, and to the left an
exquisite group of palms on the Casino terrace, which gave an almost
mysterious value to a background of violet sky melting into deeper
violet sea. As she stood looking out, silver voices of bells chimed
melodiously across the water, from the great Byzantine cathedral on the
Rock. It was all beautiful and poetic. Mary would have taken the room if
it had been a hundred instead of a paltry thirty francs a day. But she
could not afford to stop and look at the violet sea, still haunted by
the red wreckage of sunset. She had her shopping to do, for she must
somehow find exactly the right hat and dress, ready to put on, or she
would have to dine in her room, and that would be imprisonment on the
first night at Monte Carlo.

She ran quickly downstairs again, not in the least tired after her
journey, and changed a thousand-franc note, which perhaps inspired
official confidence in the young English lady with only a hand-bag for
luggage. Also, she inquired where she could buy the prettiest things to
wear, and was directed to the Galerie Charles Trois, which turned out to
be that covered gallery with shops and restaurants that she had noticed
when driving up the hill.

By this time, though it was not yet dark, lights gleamed everywhere like
great diamonds scintillating among the palms, or stars shining on the
hills. The grass and trees and flowers in the _Place_ of the Casino
looked twice as unreal as before, all theatrically vivid in colour, and
extraordinarily flat, as if cut out of painted cardboard against a
background of gauze.

The ruined castle and old rock-town tumbling down the far-off hillside
still smouldered in after-sunset fire, windows glittering like the
rubies in some lost crown, dropped by a forgotten king in battle. But
the red of the sky was paling to hyacinth, a strange and lovely tint
that was neither rose nor blue. As Mary went to buy herself pretty
things, walking through a scene of beauty beyond her convent dreams, she
murmured a small prayer of thanksgiving that she had been guided to this
heavenly place.

She must write to Reverend Mother and Peter, she thought, explaining why
she was here, and how glad she was that she had happened to come. Then
it struck her suddenly, though more humorously than disagreeably, that
it would be rather difficult to explain, especially in a way to satisfy
Peter. Perhaps dear Reverend Mother would be anxious for her safety, if
Peter said any of those rather silly things of Monte Carlo which at the
last she had said to her--Mary. After all, maybe it would be better to
keep to the first plan and not write until she could date a letter
Florence. Then she put the little worry out of her mind and gave her
soul to the shop-windows in the Galerie Charles Trois.

It was a fascinating gallery, where lovely ladies walked, wonderfully
dressed, pointing out dazzling jewellery in plate glass windows, to
slightly bored men who were with them. Nearly everybody who passed sent
out wafts of peculiarly luscious perfume. Mary walked the length of the
gallery, so as to see all the shops there were to see, before deciding
upon anything. She passed brilliantly lighted restaurants where people
were having tea, some of them at little tables out of doors, protected
by glass screens; and as she walked, people stared at her a good deal,
especially the men who were with the lovely ladies; and the bored look
went out of their eyes. Mary noticed that she was stared at, and was
uncomfortable, because she imagined that her gray tweed and travelling
hat drew unfavourable attention.

But she intended to change all this. She would soon be as well dressed
as anybody, and no one would stare any more. In one window there were
displayed, not only gowns, but hats and cloaks, and exquisite furs, all
shown on wax models with fashionably dressed hair and coquettish faces.
One pink and white creature with a startlingly perfect figure wore a
filmy robe of that intense indigo just taken on by the sea. Underneath a
shadowlike tunic of dark blue chiffon there was a glint of pale gold, a
sort of gold and silver sheath which encased the form of the waxen lady.

"My hair is that colour," Mary thought, and imagined herself in the
dress. The next thing was to walk in and ask a very agreeable
Frenchwoman if the gown were likely to fit her without alteration. "I
must have something at once," Mary explained. "My luggage has gone to
Italy."

The agreeable Frenchwoman was sympathetic. But yes, the dress would fit
to perfection, not a doubt of it, for Mademoiselle had the ideal figure
for model robes. And if, unfortunately, the trunks had all gone,
Mademoiselle would want not only one dress but several? And hats? Yes,
naturally. Other things also, of the same importance. The house made a
speciality of trousseaux. Had Mademoiselle but the time to look? She
need not buy anything, or fear giving trouble. Then Madame added a few
compliments against which Mary, unaccustomed to such food, was not
proof.

She bought the blue chiffon over pale gold, which was hastily tried on
behind a gilded screen; and the wax lady was robbed of gold embroidered
stockings and golden shoes to match. There was a hat of dark blue with a
crown of silver-threaded golden gauze, which was indispensable with the
dress. To wear over this a long cloak of white satin with a wide collar
of swansdown, was the _dernier cri_ of Paris, Madame assured her
customer. There were other dresses and hats too, for morning and
afternoon, and even more extravagant _dessous_ than those Jennings had
tabooed in London.

After the first, Mary forgot to ask prices. She was lost in a delirium
of buying, and ordered whatever she liked, until her brain was tired.

She then thanked Madame charmingly for her politeness and asked to have
the things sent home at once.

But yes, they should go on the moment. And would Mademoiselle pay now,
or at her hotel?

Mary laughed at herself, because she had forgotten about paying. It
might as well be now, as she wished to go farther and get some gloves.
Deftly Madame made out the account. It came to three thousand eight
hundred and ninety francs.

When Mary had mentally turned francs into pounds she was a little
startled; but luckily, against her aunt's advice, she had come away with
a good deal of ready money, English, French, and Italian. It took nearly
all she had to settle the bill, but, as Madame remarked gayly,
Mademoiselle had left herself enough for an evening game at the Casino.
This was, of course, true, as more could somehow be obtained to-morrow.
For the moment Mary had forgotten her curiosity about the pleasant,
basking animal in the garden, but she decided that, after dinner--which
she must have soon, as she was already beginning to be hungry--she would
walk into the monster's smiling mouth.


VI


Prince Giovanni Della Robbia, known to his friends in Rome as Vanno,
went down early to dinner at the Paris. This, not because he was hungry,
but having come to the hotel because he knew that his Juliet of
Marseilles was there, he had no intention of missing a chance to look at
her. If she did not appear early, he would go on dining until it was
late, no matter how late.

Such a resolution, and just such an adventure as this into which he had
flung himself with characteristic impulsiveness and passion, were
strange for Prince Vanno, because since a first unhappy love, when he
was a mere boy, he had avoided women. Adventure and romance were in his
blood, the Italian blood of his father, the Irish-American blood of his
beautiful mother. But his adventures had not been love adventures, since
that first agony had driven him for comfort to the silence of the
desert. Since then he had gone back to the desert for desire of great
empty spaces, and the fire of eastern stars, needing comfort no longer
for a lost love. That had passed out of his heart years ago, leaving no
scar of which he was conscious.

He had just come back from the desert now, and an Arab astrologer who
was a friend of his had told him that December of this year would be
for him a month of good luck and great happenings, the star of his birth
being in the ascendant. Almost it began to look as if there might be
something in the prophecy; and Prince Vanno, laughing at himself (with
the dry sense of humour that came from the Irish-American side of his
parentage), was half inclined to be superstitious. Astronomy was his
love at present, not astrology, and last year he had discovered a small
blue planet which had been named after him and whose sapphire beauty had
been much admired. Still, because he had always had a passion for the
stars, and went to the east to see them at their brightest, he was
tolerant of those who believed in their influence upon earth-dwellers;
therefore he was ready to yield with confident ardour to sudden impulses
in this the month of his star. Mary Grant's eyes had looked to him like
stars, and he had followed them. Already he had had one stroke of luck
in the adventure, for he had been bound to Monte Carlo from Marseilles,
before he saw her, not to try his fortune at the tables, but to meet his
elder brother and sister-in-law who were to finish their honeymoon close
by, at Cap Martin, and to stay for an aviation week at Nice, when an
invention of his would be tried for the first time. But if Mary had gone
on beyond Monte Carlo, he too would have gone on. Having plunged into
the adventure, for a pair of eyes, he was prepared to pursue it to the
end wherever the end might be, even if he missed the flying week and
broke an engagement with the bride and bridegroom. But it was luck that
she should be getting out at the place where he had meant to stop for
his own reasons.

He supposed, of course, that she was travelling with relatives or
friends. Although he had seen her mounting the steps of a _wagon lit_
apparently alone, this did not argue that some one who belonged to her
was not inside. And when, from the window of the train whence he leaned
at every station, he saw her again at Monte Carlo, she was surrounded by
a crowd. One of the ladies shoulder to shoulder with her might be a
mother or aunt, one of the men a father or uncle; and it had been the
same when he followed, just in time to see her get into the Hôtel de
Paris omnibus. Already the vehicle was full. She was the last in. His
idea was that, being the youngest of her party, she had waited for them
to be placed before taking a seat herself.

He knew of her now, having examined the visitors' book at the Paris,
that she was "Miss M. Grant"; that the name was written in a very
pretty, rather old-fashioned hand; that after it came "London" in the
same writing. He was sure the name must be hers, because it was last on
the page before he wrote his own; and she had gone in last, after
everybody else, leaving the people she was with to do their name-signing
before her. Also, the other women on the page were all "Madame" or
"Frau" or "Mrs." He was rather surprised, somehow, to learn that she was
English. In spite of her unusually fair hair he had fancied that she
would turn out to be French, her type was so _spirituelle_, yet so
suggestive of "temperament."

If he had not been following a pair of eyes, Prince Vanno would have
gone to a quiet hotel in the Condamine, to be near the aviation ground,
for, being utterly unsnobbish, like all Italians of great families, he
rather disliked "smart" crowds, rich food, and gorgeous decorations. But
the only way not to lose the stars he followed was to keep near them. He
would not for a great deal have questioned the hotel people about "Miss
M. Grant," otherwise he might have learned for how long a time her room
was engaged, and, incidentally, that she was alone. But as it was, he
had to find out things for himself, and to do this must be in the same
hotel.

It was only seven o'clock when he came down from his little room at the
top of the house, not nearly as expensive as Mary's, and stopped at the
foot of the marble stairs, which he liked better than the lift, to look
round the big hall. There was no great crowd, for most people who had
come in from the Casino were dressing for dinner, and Prince Vanno saw
at a glance that Miss M. Grant was not there. He went on slowly through
the Louis Seize tea-room, to the gorgeous restaurant with its domed and
gilded ceiling, its immense wall paintings, and glass front.

At one of these window tables--a very small one--sat a lovely creature,
alone. A good many heads were turning to look at her, so probably she
had not long ago arrived. For an instant Vanno's eyes were fixed upon
the glittering figure, and the bowed face shadowed by an eccentric hat,
without recognizing it. But it was only for an instant. Then, with a
shock of surprise which was almost horror, he realized that this lovely,
low-necked bird of Paradise creature was the same gentle girl he had
followed.

"Dio!" he said to himself, and bit his lip. He felt the blood rush up to
his face, as if some one had given him an insulting blow, which he could
not avenge because his hands were tied.

There were two or three other young and beautiful women alone, dressed
with equal extravagance, their gowns as low, their hats as big; only
she, his Juliet, was more beautiful than any. That was the difference
between them. But was it the only difference? The young man, whose eyes
still reflected the golden light of vast desert spaces, asked himself
the question with a sick sinking of the heart. He had followed an angel,
and found her--what? Because about those two or three others there was
no question at all. And why was she here alone, dressed like them,
if--but he would not finish the sentence in his mind. He resolved to
study the girl, and give her the full benefit of the doubt, so long as
there was a ray of hope.

Vanno had not gone so far as to fall in love at first sight; yet coming
back from the desert with his heart open to beauty and romance, he had
been willing to let himself go to the brink, or over it, if it were
worth while, else he would not have followed Juliet's eyes. But he
wished to have nothing to do with the white angel if she were a fallen
angel. Such a one would be easy to know, to walk with and talk with,
whereas he might have found it difficult to make the acquaintance of a
conventionally brought up girl. Some men might have been glad to find
the heroine of a romantic adventure dining alone at a fashionable hotel
at Monte Carlo, in a sheath-like, low-cut dress and a hat of to-morrow's
fashion. But Prince Vanno Della Robbia was sick at heart, and dazed as
by a blow.

His father, Duca di Rienzi, had a strain of stern asceticism in his
nature, and even the impulsive, warm-hearted American mother could not
wholly redeem from gloom the cold palace in Rome and the dark fourteenth
century castle at Monte Della Robbia. Each of these natures had given
something to Vanno, and the differences were so strongly marked that his
elder brother had said, "to know Vanno was like knowing two men of
entirely opposite characters, each struggling for mastery over the
other." But even in his asceticism he was ardent. Whatever he did, he
did with passion and fervour, which he could laugh at as if from a
distance sometimes, but could not change. And his ideas of the right
life for women were not unlike the ideas of eastern men. Women should be
guarded, kept apart from all that was evil or even unpleasant. So the
lovely American mother had been guarded, somewhat against her will, by
the Duke, and she had died while she was still young. She had never
talked to Vanno of women's life and girls' life in her own country, for
she had gone to the unseen land while he was still a boy. If she had
stayed, perhaps he would not have had to go to the desert for comfort,
when he at twenty loved a woman of twenty-eight, who flirted with him
until he was half mad, and then married an American millionaire.

The table nearest Mary was not engaged, for it was too early in the
evening for a crowd in the Paris restaurant. Vanno signified to a waiter
his desire for this table, and was taken to it. He sat down facing Mary,
and pretended to study the menu. He hardly knew what he ordered. A
waiter was bringing the girl a small bottle of champagne, in an
ice-pail. The man cut the wires, and extracted the cork neatly, but with
a slight popping sound. Mary started a little, and glancing up at the
waiter smiled at him gayly, with a dimple in each cheek. Her big hat was
placed jauntily on one side, and the deep blue velvet brim, with the
gauzy gold of the soft crown, was extremely striking on the silver-gold
waves of her hair. In her wonderful dress, which showed a good deal of
white neck, she looked so fashionably sophisticated that Vanno feared
the start she gave at the popping of the cork might be affected. He
gazed across at her with mingled disapproval and admiration which gave
singular intensity to his deep-set, romantic eyes as Mary met them.

She was in a mood to be delighted with everything that happened, and it
seemed a charming happening that the handsome young man from Marseilles
should have chanced to come to this hotel. It did not occur to her that
his coming might not be an accident, and she was pleased to see him
again.

Her bringing up, in all that concerned her treatment of men, had been
neglected; rather, it had not been given at all. As a schoolgirl she had
never met any men except a few mild youths when visiting Lady MacMillan,
and then she had never seen them alone. She had thought herself a child,
and had behaved as a child, in those days. Then had come her years as a
postulant and as a novice. Men had ceased to exist as influences in her
life. It had not been necessary to teach her what to do when in their
society, for it had seemed improbable that she ever would be. When, at
the last moment, she had decided that after all she "had not the
vocation," there had been little or no time to prepare her for the
world. And she had come out of the convent with no social wisdom except
the wisdom of kindness and courtesy to all fellow-beings.

Man was decidedly a fellow-being, and Mary, to whom he was interesting
because entirely new, was inclined to be very kind to him, especially
when he had the handsome, almost tragic dark face of a Romeo or a young
Dante, and eyes like wells of ink into which diamonds had fallen.

She was feeling childishly pleased with herself in her new dress, for
she loved beautiful things, and knew next to nothing of suitability,
provided the colours were right. By day, one had blouses and skirts,
and high-necked frocks. At night, if one were in the world, one wore low
gowns. She had learned this from Peter and other girls at school, and
also from Lady MacMillan. When there were entertainments at the convent
for the pupils, as there were several times each year, the girls put on
their prettiest clothes. They had low-necked gowns for the dances, at
which their partners were, of course, invariably girls, and they said
that, when they "came out," they would have their dresses cut lower and
made more fashionably. Of this, the sisters quite approved for their
girls, whom they trusted never to do, never to wear, anything immodest.
At Lady MacMillan's, Mary had worn simple evening dress, before she
resolved to become a nun; and in London even Aunt Sara and Elinor, with
their thin necks, had considered it necessary to display more than their
collarbones each night at dinner.

Mary, having little money in her schoolgirl days, had never owned
anything very pretty, and now she thought it right and pleasant to make
up for lost time. The "Madame" of the shop in the Galerie Charles Trois
had earnestly recommended this gown and this hat for dinner and the
Casino; therefore Mary was sure that her costume must be as suitable as
it was beautiful, and that she was quite "in the picture," in this
magnificent room. She admired the lovely, perfumed ladies with wonderful
complexions and clothes, at neighbouring tables, and was thankful that
she looked not too unlike them. She hoped that she might become
acquainted with at least one or two of the prettiest before long,
because it must be pleasant to make friends in hotels with other people
who were alone like one's self. Peter also had admired the lovely ladies
with wonderful complexions and clothes who chose to live in the best
hotels at Monte Carlo; but she admired them in a different way, with a
kind of fearful fascination. And she had never talked of them to Mary.
One did not talk to Sister Rose of such things.

Mary was glad that the Dante young man (she began to call him thus, for
his profile really was like the poet's, and after all too stern for
Romeo) could see her in this dress and hat, after having a sight of her
first in the tweed, which she had now grown to detest. It really did
seem as if he remembered, for he looked at her with a straight look,
almost as if he were asking a grave, important question. She was afraid
that he must be unhappy, for certainly his eyes were tragic, if they
were not reproachful; and of course they couldn't be reproachful, as he
didn't know her, and had nothing to be reproachful about.

The waiter who served her was a charming person, with delightful
manners, almost like those of the Frenchman who had been kind to her on
the way to Paris. He recommended things on the menu, which turned out to
be exquisite. They were the most expensive, also, but Mary did not know
that. It seemed quite odd that one should have to pay for food at all,
for always it had appeared to come as a matter of course, like the air
one breathed. When he advised her sympathetically to try a little
champagne, refreshed with ice, she would have been grieved to hurt his
feelings by refusing, even if she had not rather wanted to know what
champagne was like. People in books drank it when they wished to be
merry and enjoy themselves, and it made their eyes bright and their
cheeks red. Mary had had the chance of reading very few novels, but she
recalled this bit of useful knowledge concerning champagne.

She tasted it, and found it nice, deliciously cold and sparkling. No
wonder it made the eyes bright! But after all, she could not drink much,
though it seemed a shame to waste anything so good. "You can have the
rest," she said to the waiter, when she had finished her first glass. He
was surprised, for most ladies, he noticed, could finish two or three
glasses, or even more.

Again the man with the profile of a young Dante was looking at her with
the grave, anxious look that puzzled her. She met his eyes for the third
or fourth time, and was so sorry for his apparent unhappiness where
every one else seemed merry, that she half smiled, very sweetly and
gently, as one would smile at a gloomy child.

The man did not return her kindness. An angry flash lit his eyes, and he
looked extremely haughty and unapproachable, no longer a lonely figure
needing sympathy, but a high personage. Mary lowered her lashes,
abashed; and when she did this Vanno, who was on the point of hating
her because she was not the white angel he had thought, doubted again,
and was more bewildered than ever. Her friendly smile had been sweet,
and he, who was here only because of her, had quenched its light! He
regretted passionately his own ungraciousness, no matter what the girl
might be. And she looked so young, her eyes so full of sea and heaven!
On what errand had she come alone to this place? He determined that he
would know, and soon.


VII


Mary ordered coffee in the hall, because something of her delight in the
gay restaurant had been crushed out by Vanno's snub. She was no longer
at peace under his eyes, and wished to avoid meeting them again, so it
was pleasanter to go away. But even in the hall she could not forget
him, as she had forgotten him after Marseilles. When he too came out
from the restaurant, not long after, she saw him, though he was at a
distance, saw him without even turning her eyes; and she thought how
tall he was, and how much a man, although slender to the point of
leanness. He sat on a sofa in the hall, and ordered coffee. Mary knew,
though she did not look at him again, and interested herself instead in
other people.

All those who came from dinner, except the Prince, drank their coffee
and went out. Some went by the front door, taking the direction of the
Casino. Others disappeared into an unknown part of the hotel; and so
many chose this way, that Mary inquired of a passing waiter where they
were all going. "To the Casino, Mademoiselle, by the underground
passage, to avoid the night air," the servant answered.

To the Casino. Everybody was going to the Casino. It was time that Mary
should go to the Casino, too. She had brought down her new white cloak
with the swansdown collar, and asked a liveried man to put it aside for
her while she dined. Now she claimed it again, and having no fear of the
"night air," walked out into the azure flood which had overflowed the
fantastic fairyland like deep, blue water. The gardens lay drowned in
this translucent, magic sea, and the coolness of the sunset hour had
been mysteriously followed by a balmy warmth, like the temperature of a
summer night in England.

There were as many people in the _Place_ as there had been in the
afternoon, and all those who were not sitting on garden seats looking at
the Casino were walking toward the Casino, or just coming out of the
Casino. The eyes of the big, horned animal were blazing with light, and
glared in the blue dusk with the hard, bright stare of the gold eyes in
a peacock's tail. Windows of the Riviera Palace on the hill above were
like orange-coloured lanterns hung against an indigo curtain; and in the
_Place_ itself bunches of vivid yellow lights, in globes like
illuminated fruit set on tall lamp posts, lit the foreground of the
strange picture with unnatural brilliance. Grass and trees were a vivid,
arsenical green, almost vicious yet beautiful, and the flowers gleamed
like resting butterflies. The summer warmth of the air had a curiously
tonic and exciting quality. It seemed to have gathered into its breath
the sea's salt, the luscious sweetness of heavy white datura bells
dangling among dark leaves in the gardens, an aromatic tang of pepper
trees and eucalyptus, and a vague, haunting perfume of women's hair and
laces. These mingling odours, suggested to the senses rather than
apprehended by them, mounted to Mary's brain, and set her heartstrings
quivering with unknown emotions sweet as pleasure and keen as pain.

As she went slowly down the hotel steps to walk across the _Place_ her
eyes held a new expression. When she had first told herself that she
could not stay at the convent, they had asked, looking toward the world,
"What is life?" Now they said, "I have begun to live, and I will go on,
on, no matter where, because I must know what life means."

Her cheeks were burning still from the first champagne she had ever
tasted, and the sweet air cooled them pleasantly. Seeing a number of
people on benches opposite the Casino, she decided to sit down for a few
minutes before going in. None of these benches was empty, but one was
unoccupied save for a young man and a girl, who sat at one end. Mary
rather timidly took the other corner, but the couple, after giving her a
long stare, returned to their conversation as if she were no more than a
shadow.

"This is the last, last straw!" the man grumbled, in English. "I thought
there was one missing."

"They never forget to add it to the rest," said the girl.

"Not they," he echoed. "And I wasn't doing so badly at one time. I've a
mind to apply for the _viatique_."

"I shouldn't have the courage."

"Oh, I should. I'd like to get something out of them. I hate the
Riviera, anyhow. There's too much scenery all over the place. No rest
for the eye."

"But supposing you change your mind, and want come back and try your
luck? You couldn't, if you'd taken the _viatique_."

"Yes I could--when I'd paid it back. It's supposed to be a loan, you
know, which you have to repay before you're allowed to play again."

"Oh, I didn't know!"

A group of young men walked past, laughing. "Never saw such a run of
luck," said one. "Seventeen on red and I was on it from the first.
Glorious place, Monte! Let's drink its health!"

They turned, stared with interest at Mary, and passed on, lowering their
voices. She caught the words "something new," but there was no sense in
them for her ears. She saw the Dauntreys hurrying to the Casino, with
Mrs. Collis and her daughter, and Dodo Wardropp. Two men were with them,
both young, and one rather distinguished looking. All were too deeply
absorbed in themselves and each other to notice her. The ladies were
charmingly dressed, and so were most of the women who passed, all going
quickly like the figures of a cinematograph; but some were of the
strangest possible types. Mary said to herself that they must be
infinitely more interesting in their own secret selves than lookers on
could ever know. The hidden realities in all these passionately
egotistic selves came to her as she sat watching, in attractive or
repellent flashes of light. Then she lost the secret again, and they
became mere puppets in a moving show. The only real thing was the
Casino, and she began to study the large bright face of it.

Although Mary had never travelled till now, she knew something of
architecture from beautiful pictures of ancient Greece and Rome, and
Egypt, and of the world's noblest cathedrals, which decorated the
schoolroom walls at St. Ursula's-of-the-Lake. This building, it seemed
to her, was of no recognized type of architecture. It was neither
classic nor Gothic: not Renaissance, Egyptian, nor Moorish. It gave the
impression of being a mere fantastic creation of a gay and irresponsible
brain. If a confectioner accustomed to work in coloured sugars were to
dream of a superlative masterpiece, his exalted fancy might take some
such shape as this.

The irregular, cream-coloured façade was broken up into many separate
parts by pillars and frenzied ornaments of plaster, and there had been
addition after addition, stretching away long and low to the left. A row
of large windows, discreetly veiled so that no shadows could be cast
from within, glowed with warm yellow light. Their refusal to betray any
hint of what passed on the other side suggested a hidden crowd busy
with some exciting, secret pleasure. Along the cornice of the newer
portions at the left of the original Casino were perched bronze youths
with golden wings, their hands holding aloft bunches of golden flowers.
Two towers meretriciously mosaiced with coloured tiles balanced the
centre of the higher and middle building, and a portico of iron and
glass, ornate yet banal as the architecture of a railway station,
protected the carpeted steps and the three large doors which were
grouped closely together, doors through which people constantly passed
in and out like bees at the entrance to a hive. In the pensive sweetness
of the semi-tropical night, this fantastic erection in plaster and
gilding and coloured ornaments seemed an outrage, a taunt, a purposeful
affront; and yet--the very violence of the contrast, its outrageousness,
gave it a kind of obsessing charm.

Unseen from where Mary sat, the Mediterranean sighed upon its ancient
rocks. A faint breath of the mysteriously perfumed air stirred the
exotic palms over her head and made their fronds rub against each other
gratingly, as if some secret signal were being carried on from one to
another. Turning to right, to left, or to look behind her, dimly seen
mountains soared toward a sky that deepened from asphodel to the dark
indigo of a star-powdered zenith. Eastward in the distance ran a linked
chain of lights along the high road that led to Italy; and a bright
cluster like a knot of fireflies, pulsing on the breast of a mountain,
marked the old hill-village of Roquebrune. Kindly enveloping nature was
so sane and wholesome in her vast wisdom and stillness that the
sugar-cake Casino and all its attendant artificialities struck into the
brooding peace a shrill note of challenging incongruity. The little
sparkling patch of light and colour that was Monte Carlo proclaimed that
it was there for some extraordinary and powerful purpose, that its
bizarre beauty was dedicated to exceptional uses; and it occurred to
Mary that the temple of Chance must after all diverge from every rule of
architecture in order to stamp its meaning on the mind. The feverish
decorations began to express to her the fever of gambling, and even to
create a desire for it. She felt this longing grow more insistent, like
strains of exciting music that swelled louder and louder; and suddenly
in the midst she seemed to hear Peter's voice saying, "What if it should
be true, the thing your father was afraid of?"

What if it were true? How could she tell? In his last terrible letter he
had reminded her that she had wild blood in her veins, and told her to
"be careful."

She had thought when hearing Peter's descriptions of the Riviera that
the gambling part of life there would interest her least of all, but
already she was under the spell of the Casino. It drew her toward it, as
if Fate sat hiding behind the veiled bright windows, just as Monte Carlo
had called irresistibly, forcing her to get out of the train when she
had meant to go on. She began to doubt her own nature, her own courage
and strength of will. She thought of what was passing on the other side
of the cream-white walls as if it were a battle into which she was
compelled to plunge, and she imagined that thus a young soldier might
feel in a first engagement--tremulous, and almost sick with anxiety
which was not quite fear.

Her heart beating fast, she jumped up, and crossing the road resolutely
mounted the steps which were guarded by tall, fine men in blue livery.
Inside the doors which she had watched so long she found herself
entering an outer lobby. Beyond was another, also kept by liveried men.
A room led off this, and Mary could see people leaving their wraps with
attendants who stood behind counters. She parted with her cloak, and was
given a metal disc bearing a number. Near by, a French couple, who
looked like bride and groom, were examining their discs, and telling
each other that it would be tempting Providence not to stake money on
such numbers as _onze_ and _dix-sept_. At this, Mary glanced again at
her bit of metal. Its number was 124. She remembered hearing from Peter
that in the game of roulette it was a favourite "tip" to bet on the
number representing your age. Peter spurned the idea as silly and
childish; but Mary thought it might do to begin with, as she knew
nothing better. Her age being twenty-four, she decided to adopt the
French bride's suggestion, and bet on the last two numbers cut into her
cloak-ticket.

Beyond the second lobby, she passed into a vast pillared hall, where
men and women, not all in evening dress, were strolling up and down,
smoking and chatting, or sitting on leather-covered benches, to stare
aimlessly at the promenaders, as if they were tired, or waiting for
something to happen.

This hall puzzled Mary, for she had imagined that beyond the two lobbies
she would pass directly into the gambling-rooms. Here were no tables
such as Peter had described; and the fact that she must go still farther
seemed to increase the mystery or secrecy of the place. Mary hesitated,
not knowing which way to turn, for there were several doors under the
high galleries that ran the whole length of the hall. I began to perceive
in a little time the advantage of having cultivated an acquaintance with
Thompson of the Seven Stars. For nothing could now pass in Bristol,
relative to the seamen employed in this trade, but it was soon brought
to me. If there was any thing amiss, I had so arranged matters
that I was sure to hear of it.

He sent for me one day to inform me that several of the seamen, who had
been sent out of Marsh-street into the Prince, which was then at
Kingroad, and on the point of sailing to Africa for slaves, had, through
fear of ill-usage on the voyage, taken the boat and put themselves
on shore.

He informed me at the same time that the seamen of the Africa, which was
lying there also and ready to sail on a like voyage, were not satisfied,
for that they had been made to sign their articles of agreement, without
being permitted to see them. To this he added that Mr.
Sheriff, one of the mates of the latter vessel, was unhappy also
on this account.

Sheriff had been a mate in the West India trade, and was a respectable man
in his line. He had been enticed by the captain of the Africa, under
the promise of peculiar advantages, to change his voyage.
Having a wife and family at Bristol, he was willing to make a
sacrifice on their account.

But when he himself was not permitted to read the articles, he began to
suspect bad work, and that there would be nothing but misery in
the approaching voyage.

Thompson entreated me to extricate him, if I could.

He was sure, he said, if he went to the Coast with that man, meaning the
captain, that he would never return alive.

I was very unwilling to refuse any thing to Thompson. I was deeply
bound to him in gratitude for the many services he had rendered me, but
I scarcely saw how I could serve him on this occasion. I promised
however, to speak to him in an hour's time; I consulted my friend Truman
Harford in the interim; and the result was, that he and I should
proceed to Kingroad in a boat, go on board the Africa, and charge
the captain in person with what he had done, and desire him to
discharge Sheriff, as no agreement, where fraud or force was used
in the signatures, could be deemed valid.

If we were not able to extricate Sheriff by these means, we thought that
at least we should know, by inquiring of those whom we should see on
board, whether the measure of hindering the men from seeing their
articles on signing them had been adopted.

It would be useful to ascertain this, because such a measure had been
long reported to be usual in this, but was said to be unknown in any
other trade.

Having passed the river's mouth and rowed towards the sea, we
came near the Prince first, but pursued our destination to the Africa.
Mr. Sheriff was the person who received us on board. I did not know him
till I asked his name. I then told him my errand, with which he seemed
to be much pleased.
On asking him to tell the captain that I wished to speak with him, he
replied that he was on shore. This put me to great difficulty, as I did
not know then what to do. I consulted with Truman Harford, and it was
our opinion, that we should inquire of the seamen, but in a very
quiet manner, by going individually to each, if they had ever
demanded to see the articles on signing them, and if they had been
refused.

We proposed this question to them. They replied, that the captain had
refused them in a savage manner, making use of threats and oaths. There
was not one contradictory voice on this occasion. We then asked Mr.
Sheriff what we were to do. He entreated us by all means to take him
on shore. He was sure that under such a man as the captain, and particularly
after the circumstance of our coming on board should be made known to
him, he would never come from the coast of Africa alive.

Upon this, Truman Harford called me aside, and told me the
danger of taking an officer from the ship; for that, if any accident
should happen to her, the damage might all fall upon me. I then inquired
of Mr. Sheriff if there was any officer on board, who could manage the
ship. He pointed one out to me, and I spoke to him in the cabin. This
person told me I need be under no apprehension about the vessel, but
that every one would be sorry to lose Mr. Sheriff. Upon this ground,
Truman Harford, who had felt more for me than for himself, became now
easy. We had before concluded, that the obtaining any signature by fraud
or force would render the agreement illegal. We therefore joined in
opinion, that we might take away the man. His chest was accordingly put
into our boat. We jumped into it with our rowers, and he followed us,
surrounded by the seamen, all of whom took an affectionate leave of him,
and expressed their regret at parting. Soon after this there was a
general cry of "Will you take me too?" from the deck; and such a sudden
movement appeared there, that we were obliged to push off directly
from the side, fearing that many would jump into our boat and go
with us.

After having left the ship, Sheriff corroborated the desertion of the
seamen from the Prince, as before related to me by Thompson. He spoke
also of the savage disposition of his late captain, which he had even
dared to manifest though lying in an English port. I was impressed by
this account of his rough manners; and the wind having risen before
and the surf now rolling heavily, I began to think what an escape
I might have had; how easy it would have been for the savage captain,
if he had been on board, or for any one at his instigation, to have
pushed me over the ship's side.

This was the first time I had ever considered the peril of the
undertaking.

But we arrived safe; and though on the same evening I left my name at
the captain's house, as that of the person who had taken away his
mate, I never heard more about it.

In pursuing my inquiries into the new topic suggested by Mr.

Falconbridge, I learnt that two of three of the seamen of the ship Thomas,
which had been arrived now nearly a year from the Coast, were in a
very crippled and deplorable state. I accordingly went to see them.
One of them had been attacked by a fever, arising from circumstances
connected with these voyages. The inflammation, which had proceeded
from it, had reached his eyes. It could not be dispersed; and the
consequence was, that he was then blind.

The second was lame. He had badly ulcerated legs, and appeared to
be very weak. The third was a mere spectre. I think he was the
most pitiable object I ever saw. I considered him as
irrecoverably gone. They all complained to me of their bad usage
on board the Thomas. They said they had heard of my being in Bristol,
and they hoped I would not leave it, without inquiring into the
murder of William Lines.

On inquiring who William Lines was, they informed me that he had been one
of the crew of the same ship, and that all on board believed that he had
been killed by the chief mate; but they themselves had not been
present when the blows were given him.

They had not seen him till afterwards; but their shipmates had told
them of his cruel treatment, and they knew that soon afterwards he had
died.

In the course of the next day, the mother of Lines, who lived in
Bristol, came to me and related the case.

I told her there was no evidence as to the fact, for that I had seen three
seamen, who could not speak to it from their own knowledge. She said,
there were four others then in Bristol who could. I desired her
to fetch them.

When they arrived I examined each separately, and cross-examined them
in the best manner I was able. I could find no variation in their account,
and I was quite convinced that the murder had taken place. The mother
was then importunate that I should take up the case. I was too much
affected by the narration I had heard to refuse her wholly, and yet I did
not promise that I would.

I begged a little time to consider of it. During this I thought of
consulting my friend Burges.
But I feared he would throw cold water upon it, as he had done in the
case of the captain of the Alfred. I remembered well what he had then
said to me, and yet I felt a strong disposition to proceed.

For the trade was still going on. Every day, perhaps, some new act
of barbarity was taking place.
And one example, if made, might counteract the evil for a time. I
seemed, therefore to incline to stir in this matter, and thought, if I
should get into any difficulty about it, it would be better to do
it without consulting Mr. Burges, than, after having done it, to fly
as it were in his face. I then sent for the woman, and told her, that
she might appear with the witnesses at the Common Hall, where the
magistrates usually sat on a certain day.

We all met at the time appointed, and I determined to sit as near to the
mayor as I could get. The hall was unusually crowded. One or two
slave-merchants, and two or three others, who were largely concerned
in the West India trade, were upon the bench. For I had informed the mayor
the day before of my intention, and he, it appeared, had informed them.
I shall never forget the savage looks which these people gave me; which
indeed were so remarkable, as to occasion the eyes of the whole court
to be turned upon me.

They looked as if they were going to speak to me, and the people looked
as if they expected me to say something in return. They then got
round the mayor, and began to whisper to him, as I supposed, on the
business before it should come on. One of them, however, said aloud to
the former, but fixing his eyes upon me, and wishing me to overhear
him, "Scandalous reports had lately been spread, but sailors were not
used worse in Guineamen than in other vessels." This brought the
people's eyes upon me again.

I was very much irritated, but I thought it improper to say any thing.
Another, looking savagely at me, said to the mayor, "that he had known
captain Vicars a long time; that he was an honourable man[A], and would
not allow such usage in his ship. There were always vagabonds to hatch
up things:" and he made a dead point at me, by putting himself
into a posture which attracted the notice of those present, and by staring
me in the face, I could now no longer restrain myself, and I said aloud
in as modest a manner as I could, "You, sir, may know many things which
I do not.
But this I know, that if you do not do your duty, you are amenable to a
higher court." The mayor upon this looked at me, and directly my
friend Mr.
Burges, who was sitting as the clerk to the magistrates, went to him
and whispered something in his ear; after which all private conversation
between the mayor and others ceased, and the hearing was ordered to
come on.

[Footnote A: We may well imagine what this person's notion of another
man's honour was; for he was the purser of the Brothers and of
the Alfred, who, as before mentioned, sent the captains of those ships
out a second voyage, after knowing their barbarities in the former. And
he was also the purser of this very ship Thomas, where the murder had
been committed. I by no means, however, wish by these observations to
detract from the character of captain Vicars, as he had no concern
in the cruel deed.]

I shall not detain the reader by giving an account of the evidence which
then transpired. The four witnesses were examined, and the case was so
far clear. Captain Vicars, however, was sent for. On being questioned,
he did not deny that there had been bad usage, but said that the young
man had died of the flux. But this assertion went for nothing when
balanced against the facts which had come out; and this was so evident,
that an order was made out for the apprehension of the chief mate. He
was accordingly taken up. The next day, however, there was a rehearing
of the case, when he was returned to the gaol, where he was to lie
till the Lords of the Admiralty should order a sessions to be held
for the trial of offences committed on the high seas.

This public examination of the case of William Lines, and the way in
which it ended, produced an extraordinary result; for after this time
the slave-captains and mates, who used to meet me suddenly, used as
suddenly to start from me, indeed to the other side of the pavement, as
if I had been a wolf, or tiger, or some dangerous beast of prey.

Such of them as saw me before hand, used to run up the cross streets or
lanes, which were nearest to them, to get away. Seamen, too, came from
various quarters to apply to me for redress. One came to me, who had
been treated ill in the Alexander, when Mr. Falconbridge had been the
surgeon of her. Three came to me, who had been ill-used in the voyage
which followed, though she had then sailed under a new captain. Two
applied to me from the Africa, who had been of her crew in the
last voyage.

Two from the Fly. Two from the Wasp. One from the Little Pearl, and
three from the Pilgrim or Princess, when she was last upon the coast.

The different scenes of barbarity, which these represented to me,
greatly added to the affliction of my mind. My feelings became now
almost insupportable. I was agonized to think that this trade should last
another day. I was in a state of agitation from morning till night. I
determined I would soon leave Bristol. I saw nothing but misery in
the place.

I had collected now, I believed, all the evidence it would afford; and to
stay in it a day longer than was necessary, would be only an interruption
for so much time both of my happiness and of my health. I determined
therefore to do only two or three things, which I thought to be proper,
and to depart in a few days.

And first I went to Bath, where I endeavoured to secure the respectable
paper belonging to that city in favour of the abolition of the
Slave-trade.

This I did entirely to my satisfaction, by relating to the worthy editor
all the discoveries I had made, and by impressing his mind in a forcible
manner on the subject.

And it is highly to the honour of Mr. Crutwell, that from that day he
never ceased to defend our cause; that he never made a charge for
insertions of any kind; but that he considered all he did upon
this occasion in the light of a duty, or as his mite given in charity
to a poor and oppressed people.

The next attempt was to lay the foundation of a commitee in Bristol, and
of a petition to Parliament from it for the abolition of the Slave-trade.
I had now made many friends.

A gentleman of the name of Paynter had felt himself much interested
in my labours.

Mr.

Joseph Harford, a man of fortune, of great respectability of
character, and of considerable influence, had attached himself to
the cause.

Dr. Fox had assisted me in it.

Mr.

Hughes, a clergyman of the Baptist church, was anxious and ready
to serve it; Dr.

Camplin, of the Establishment, with several of his friends, continued
steady.

Matthew Wright, James Harford, Truman Harford, and all the Quakers to
a man, were strenuous, and this on the best of principles, in its
support. To all these I spoke, and I had the pleasure of seeing that my
wishes were likely in a short time to be gratified in both these
cases.

It was now necessary that I should write to the commitee in London.
I had written to them only two letters, during my absence; for I
had devoted myself so much to the great object I had undertaken,
that I could think of little else.

Hence some of my friends among them were obliged to write to different
persons at Bristol, to inquire if I was alive. I gave up a day or two,
therefore, to this purpose. I informed the commitee of all my discoveries
in the various branches to which my attention had been directed, and
desired them in return to procure me various official documents
for the port of London, which I then specified. Having done this, I
conferred with Mr. Falconbridge, relative to being with me at Liverpool.

I thought it right to make him no other offer than that his expenses
should be paid. He acceded to my request on these disinterested terms;
and I took my departure from Bristol, leaving him to follow me in
a few days.

CHAPTER XVII.

_Author secures the Glocester paper, and lays the foundation of a
petition from that city--does the same at Worcester--and at
Chester--arrives at Liverpool--collects specimens of African
produce--also imports and exports--and muster-rolls--and accounts
of dock-duties--and iron instruments used in the Slave-trade--His
introduction to Mr.

Norris, and others--Author and his errand become known--People visit
him out of curiosity--Frequent controversies on the subject of the
Slave-trade._
On my arrival at Glocester, I waited upon my friend Dean Tucker.

He was pleased to hear of the great progress I had made since he left me.
On communicating to him my intention of making interest with the editors
of some provincial papers, to enlighten the public mind, and with
the inhabitants of some respectable places, for petitions to Parliament,
relative to the abolition of the Slave-trade, he approved of it,
and introduced me to Mr.

Raikes, the proprietor of the respectable paper belonging to that
city.

Mr. Raikes acknowledged, without any hesitation, the pleasure he should
have in serving such a noble cause; and he promised to grant me, from
time to time, a corner in his paper, for such things as I might point
out to him for insertion. This promise he performed afterwards, without
any pecuniary consideration, and solely on the ground of benevolence.

He promised also his assistance as to the other object, for the promotion
of which I left him several of my Summary Views to distribute.

At Worcester I trod over the same ground, and with the same success.
Timothy Bevington, of the religious society of the Quakers, was the only
person to whom I had an introduction there. He accompanied me to the
mayor, to the editor of the Worcester paper, and to several others,
before each of whom I pleaded the cause of the oppressed Africans
in the best manner I was able.

I dilated both on the inhumanity and on the impolicy of the trade,
which I supported by the various facts recently obtained at Bristol.

I desired, however, as far as petitions were concerned, (and this desire
I expressed on all other similar occasions,) that no attempt should be
made to obtain these, till such information had been circulated on the
subject, that every one, when called upon, might judge, from his knowledge
of it, how far he would feel it right to join in it. For this purpose I
left also here several of my Summary Views for distribution.

After my arrival at Chester, I went to the bishop's residence, but
I found he was not there.

Knowing no other person in the place, I wrote a note to Mr. Cowdroy, whom
I understood to be the editor of the Chester paper, soliciting an interview
with him.

I explained my wishes to him on both subjects.

He seemed to be greatly rejoiced, when we met, that such a measure as
that of the abolition of the Slave-trade was in contemplation.
Living at so short a distance from Liverpool, and in a county from
which so many persons were constantly going to Africa, he was by
no means ignorant, as some were, of the nature of this cruel traffic;
but yet he had no notion that I had probed it so deeply, or that I
had brought to light such important circumstances concerning it,
as he found by my conversation.

He made me a hearty offer of his services on this occasion, and
this expressly without fee or reward.

I accepted them most joyfully and gratefully.

It was, indeed, a most important thing, to have a station so near
the enemy's camp, where we could watch their motions, and meet any
attack which might be made from it.

And this office of a sentinel Mr. Cowdroy performed with great vigilance;
and when he afterwards left Chester for Manchester, to establish
a paper there, he carried with him the same friendly disposition
towards our cause.

My first introduction at Liverpool was to William Rathbone, a member
of the religious society of the Quakers. He was the same person, who,
before the formation of our commitee, had procured me copies of several
of the muster-rolls of the slave-vessels belonging to that port, so
that, though we were not personally known, yet we were not strangers
to each other.
Isaac Hadwen, a respectable member of the same society, was the person
whom I saw next. I had been introduced to him, previously to my journey,
when he was at London, at the yearly meeting of the Quakers, so
that no letter to him was necessary.

As Mr. Roscoe had generously given the profits of The Wrongs of Africa to
our commitee, I made no scruple of calling upon him.
His reception of me was very friendly, and he introduced me afterwards
to Dr. Currie, who had written the preface to that poem. There was
also a fourth, upon whom I called, though I did not know him. His name
was Edward Rushton.

He had been an officer in a slave-ship, but had lost his sight, and had
become an enemy to that trade. On passing through Chester, I had
heard, for the first time, that he had published a poem called
West-Indian Eclogues, with a view of making the public better
acquainted with the evil of the Slave-trade, and of exciting their
indignation against it.

Of the three last it may be observed, that, having come forward thus
early, as labourers, they deserve to be put down, as I have placed
them in the map, among the forerunners and coadjutors in this great
cause, for each published his work before any efforts were made publicly,
or without knowing that any were intended. Rushton, also, had the
boldness, though then living in Liverpool, to affix his name to his
work. These were the only persons whom I knew for some time after my
arrival in that place.

It may not, perhaps, be necessary to enter so largely into my proceedings
at Liverpool as at Bristol. The following account, therefore, may
suffice.

In my attempts to add to my collection of specimens of African produce,
I was favoured with a sample of gum ruber astringens, of cotton
from the Gambia, of indigo and musk, of long pepper, of black pepper
from Whidàh, of mahogany from Calabàr, and of cloths of different
colours, made by the natives, which, while they gave other proofs
of the quality of their own cotton, gave proofs also, of the variety
of their dyes.

I made interest at the Custom-house for various exports and imports,
and for copies of the muster-rolls of several slave-vessels, besides
those of vessels employed in other trades.

By looking out constantly for information on this great subject, I
was led to the examination of a printed card or table of the
dock-duties of Liverpool, which was published annually.

The town of Liverpool had so risen in opulence and importance, from
only a fishing-village, that the corporation seemed to have a pride
in giving a public view of this increase. Hence they published and
circulated this card. Now the card contained one, among other facts,
which was almost as precious, in a political point of view, as any I
had yet obtained.
Then, as it began to revolve, with a
deft turn of the wrist he launched the ball in a whizzing rush along a
narrow shelf inside the rosewood rim, and in a direction contrary to the
whirl of the disc.

For several seconds, which seemed long and tense to Mary, the wheel
revolved, the ivory ball dashing wildly around until the croupier
proclaimed in his calm, impersonal voice: "Rien ne va plus!" Some people
reluctantly ceased their feverish staking of louis, notes, and
five-franc pieces, but others dashed on money up to the last instant.
The wheel slackened speed; the ball lost momentum, and, rolling down the
slope, struck one of a lozenge-shaped row of obstacles. It rebounded,
almost sprang out of the wheel, hesitated over a pocket, and leaped into
the next, where it lay still.

"Vingt-quatre, noir, pair et passe," announced the calm voice.

"Twenty-four! My age and my ticket number! I meant to stake on it!" Mary
cried out aloud in her excitement. "Now it is too late."

Her regret was so keen as to be agonizing. It seemed that a serious
misfortune had befallen her. Something in her head was going round with
the ball. She felt as if she ought to have won all the money lying
there on the table, as if she had a right to it.

People who had won and were having their winnings paid to them were too
busy to notice what went on behind their backs; but some of those who
had lost and had nothing to do till the time to stake again, tittered
faintly and craned their heads round to look at the girl who was almost
crying because she had not staked on twenty-four, her age. But Mary did
not realize that she was the object of any one's attention, for the
statuelike woman in black was shrilly insisting that she had had the
maximum, nine louis, on the number 24. "_En plein_, I tell you, _en
plein_!"

"But no, excuse me, Madame, you had money on black and the second dozen,
on pair, and on the _carré_ of twenty-four; but nothing on the number
itself. Your maximum was on twenty-six," the croupier explained firmly.

"I tell you it was on twenty-four!" shrieked the actress.

"Madame is mistaken. You staked in so many different places, it is
impossible for you to remember."

"It is still more impossible for you. Do you intend to pay me?"

"But certainly, for everything you won."

"And the maximum on twenty-four?"

"Not that, Madame."

"I will complain to the management!"

"As Madame pleases."

"I will stop the game till I am paid!"

One of the two inspectors left his high chair, came to the enraged lady
and attempted to soothe her. She looked magnificent in her passion, ten
years having fallen like a mask from the marble face.

The croupier, who had paid her for several bets won, attempted to go on
with his duties. People, some delighting in the "row," others annoyed at
the delay, placed their stakes, but she, a lioness at bay, stared
furiously without putting a piece on the table. As the disc turned,
however, she pounced. She threw a louis into the wheel. But the
croupier, without changing countenance, took out the coin, pushed it
back to her, and began spinning again. In went another louis and again
the croupier stopped the wheel. Voices rose in complaint: Russian
voices, German voices, English voices. "Is this going on all night?"

"Pay Madame," said one of the inspectors.

Quietly and with incredible quickness nine times thirty-five louis were
counted out, payment for a maximum on a number. As the croupier pushed
the notes and gold across the table, a beautiful white hand, blazing
with rings, thrust it proudly back again. "That is all I wanted," the
actress said, with the air of Lady Macbeth. "The acknowledgment that I
was right. Keep the money."

The croupier shrugged his shoulders, and spun the wheel, with a bored
air.

"Faites vos jeux, Messieurs."

"Shall I put something for you on twenty-four?" hastily asked Madame
d'Ambre.

"But it has just come."

"It may come again. Often a number repeats. Shall I or not? An instant,
and it will be too late."

With her heart in her throat, Mary handed the Frenchwoman a
hundred-franc note crushed in a ball. Madame d'Ambre asked a croupier
near where she stood to stake the money. He did so, just in time. The
ball slipped into the pocket of number 21. "Too bad! But better luck
next time. Will you try a simple chance, red or black, for instance? Or
one of the dozens?"

"No, twenty-four again," answered a voice that Mary hardly knew as her
own. "I must!" With a trembling hand, she gave her friend nine louis.
"That's the maximum for a number, you said," she faltered. "Please put
it on."

"But all your money will soon be gone at this rate. A louis would bring
you thirty-five----"

"No, no, the maximum!"

Madame d'Ambre, aided by her croupier-neighbour, obeyed.

A strange golden haze floated before Mary's eyes. She could not see
through it. She tried to tell herself, as the big wheel spun, that this
was not important at all; that it did not really matter what happened:
yet something inside her said, "It's the most important thing in the
world, to win, to win, to make all these people envy you. It isn't the
money, it's the joy, the triumph, the ecstasy."

The ball dropped. Mary could not look, could not have seen if she had
looked: but her whole soul listened for the croupier's announcement.

"Vingt-quatre, noir, pair et passe."

She trembled all over, as if she were going to fall. She could hardly
believe that she had heard aright, until Madame d'Ambre exclaimed close
to her ear: "You have won! I told you that I would bring you luck!"

The actress, petulant with persistent ill fortune, got up muttering, and
pushed back her chair. Mechanically Mary dropped into it. A pile of
money, notes and gold, was moved toward her by the croupier's rake.
People were staring. She was young and beautiful, and evidently half
fainting with excitement. Besides, she had won a large sum. It was
always a good thing to win on a number _en plein_. But to win the
maximum on a number! That somehow did not often happen except to Russian
grand dukes and American millionaires.

Mary, confused, and quivering like a struck violin, took her winnings,
but, supposing all the money on her side of the table to be hers also,
earned by the nine louis, began gayly to gather in with small,
white-gloved hands everything within reach.

A cry of protest went up, half laughing, half indignant. Groups of
non-players who had been chatting or strolling round the rooms hurried
to the table to see "what was the row," any sensation, big or small,
being an event to receive thankfully.

"Mais, Mademoiselle!"

The small, predatory hands were arrested: quickly it was explained that
when a player wins he has not won all the money on the table. There are
others also in luck. Mary, abashed, but too excited to be deeply shamed,
apologized in pretty French. Those she would unwittingly have robbed
were disarmed by soft eyes and the appeal of dimples. Even hawklike old
women ceased to glare. "It is her first séance," was the forgiving
whisper. The neat piles of money which she had reduced to ruin and
confusion were sorted out again between croupiers and players, while the
game obligingly waited. If the offender had been old and dowdy, every
one would have grumbled angrily at the bother and delay, but as it was,
men grinned and women were tolerant. After three minutes' halt play was
ready to begin again.

"Better come away now, Mademoiselle. It is I who counsel you," advised
Madame d'Ambre. "It is not well to trust such luck too far. Or else,
play with a few five-franc pieces to amuse yourself. If you win, so much
to the good. If you lose, what matter? You have still the _gros lot_."

"I couldn't do that. I must trust my luck. I am going on. I shall play
on twenty-four again. I wish there were more ways than one for me to
back it, and I would," Mary cried, her cheeks red bonfires of
excitement.

Madame d'Ambre shrugged her thin shoulders, seeing her own profits
diminished. But, a woman of the world, she knew when it was useless to
protest. And perhaps this wild amateur was indeed inspired. "There are
seven ways in which to back your number for one spin," she said, carried
away a little by Mary's spirit. "_En plein_--that is, full on the number
as before; _à cheval_--the number and its neighbour; your own and two
others--_transversale plain_; the _carré_--four in a square; six--the
_transversale simple_: the dozen in which your number is; its column;
also the colour. Twenty-four is black. If your number loses, you may win
on something else."

"Very well. Maximums on all, please."

"Impossible! You may not have money enough. On other chances the
maximums are much larger."

Mary, confused and fearful of being too late, did not stop to reflect or
argue. "Nine louis on each of the chances, then," she panted.

Madame d'Ambre, reflecting selfishly that even if all stakes lost there
would still be a good sum to divide from the last winnings, began
placing money in desperate haste, the croupier delaying for an instant
his _rien ne va plus_, while one of his fellows helped in putting on the
gold. Others, who had finished staking over each other's hats and
shoulders, and the whole ring of watchers outside, awaited the decision
of Mary's destiny with almost as keen interest as if it were their own.

"Vingt-quatre, noir, pair et passe."

A murmur rose, and went to Mary's head like wine. This seemed a miracle,
performed for her. Unconscious of irreverence, she thought that surely
the saints had worked this wonder. She forgot that, because she won,
others must lose.

"It is marvellous! But these blessed amateurs! It is always they who
have the great luck. Twice running--and after twenty-four had been spun
just before twenty-one."

The numbers were all marked in their right colours with roulette pencils
on little cards, or in well-kept notebooks by the players. Every one
knew what had "come out" at the table for many past coups.

"If you'll back twenty-four again, I'll go on it, too," said, in
English, a young man in the chair at Mary's right. He was a brown,
well-groomed, clean-shaven youth, whose hair was so light that it looked
straw-coloured in contrast with his sunburnt skin. "It's _en chaleur_,
as they say of numbers when they keep coming up. It may come a third
time running. I've seen it happen. Five repetitions is the record. What
do you say?"

"I meant to play twenty-four again, anyway," Mary answered, with the
peculiar soft obstinacy which had opened the gates of Saint
Ursula-of-the-Lake and brought her to Monte Carlo.

"You are plucky!"

"This time, surely, I've money enough for maximums on everything," Mary
said to the Frenchwoman behind her, who was now becoming superstitious
concerning the luck of her _petite dinde_.

Without protest, Madame d'Ambre selected from the piles of gold and
notes now ranged in front of Mary the stakes indicated, and, with a hand
not quite steady, placed those within her reach. The neighbouring
croupier, faintly smiling, obligingly did the rest, noting without
surprise that many players were sportingly, yet timidly, risking fat
five-franc pieces on the amateur's number. It was the sort of thing they
generally did, the _imbeciles_, when a player was having a sensational
run of luck. But certainly there was something magnetic and fatal about
this pretty young woman, who was new to the game and the place,
something curiously inspiring. Not only he as well as the gamblers felt
it, but the croupier at the wheel. The spinner felt in his bones that
whether he wished it or not he was certain to spin a third twenty-four.

A round of applause went up from perhaps fifty pairs of hands when the
ball was seen to lie once more in the pocket numbered 24. Mary,
realizing that the applause was meant for her, felt like a spirit
released from its body. She was a goddess on a pinnacle. This was life:
the wine of life. It was not the money she thought of. All the gold and
paper which had suddenly become hers was nothing in itself, but what it
represented was victory extending over the forces of nature. This
mysterious game, whose next turn none could foretell, seemed to be
yielding its secret to her. She had the conviction that Something was
telling her what to do, what would happen with the spin of the wheel.
It would be madness and a kind of vile ingratitude to stop now, while
the Something was there.

Hearing the applause, which meant a coup of uncommon interest, people
came hurrying from every direction, some even running, with a peculiar
step which kept them from slipping on the polished floor. Many had
learned this from long practice in running in with the early gamblers at
the morning opening of the Casino, when it is "first come, first
served," at the chairs.

Those who had been watching the play at other tables, or those who had
been losing, joined the rush.

"What is she going to do now, _cette petite sorcière_?" was the
question. Hearing it, Mary was flattered to a higher pitch of excitement
and self-confidence. She must, she must do something to justify
everybody's expectation. The Casino was hers, and there was no world
outside--nothing but this magic place of golden light and golden coins.

"What next?" inquired Madame d'Ambre, late mentor, now courtier.

"I'll do whatever you do," said the brown young man, who was English or
American.

She looked at the disc as a seeress looks at a crystal. The spinner had
his hand on the cross-piece of metal which turns the wheel.

"What does that 0 mean, on the little brown square between the red and
black numbers?" she asked her neighbour gravely.

"That's what they call 'zero.' You can bet on it like any number; but
when it comes, if you're not on it, all your stakes go--biff!--except on
the simple chances, when you are put in 'prison,' or else you can take
back half. Lots of people like zero better than anything, because they
think the croupiers try to spin it, for the good of the bank. It's
called _l'ami de la maison_."

"How nice and friendly," said Mary. "I'll put money on zero. What's the
maximum?"

"The same as on the other numbers _en plein_: nine louis."

"Then I'll have that on zero," said Mary.

Many players followed her lead, and every one was calling out "zero" and
pushing or throwing coins to the croupiers to be staked on that chance.

"Zero!"

Mary was paid nine times thirty-five louis, six thousand three hundred
francs, and the others who, superstitiously following her lead, had
risked five-franc pieces and louis on _l'ami de la maison_, shared her
luck in different degrees.

"Zero once more, please, Madame," said Mary to her companion.

"But no! impossible! It will be something else."

"Perhaps. Still--I will try."

She was right. Zero came again, followed by louder rounds of applause.
By this time the whole Casino knew what was going on. A glorified
amateur, an English girl, was winning maximums on numbers again and
again, in succession, at the table nearest the wall-portrait of the
architect, in the Salle Schmidt. Non-players or discouraged losers bore
down upon the "architect's table," running even from the distant
trente-et-quarante room.

The story sounded rather like a fairy tale, but the enormous crowd round
the centre of interest, and the comparatively slack business being done
at other tables, proved its truth. None of the newcomers, even the
tallest, could see, but they could hear, and they could feel the thrill
from the inner circle.

"And now, Mademoiselle? What will you do? Remember, your luck can't go
on forever," murmured Madame d'Ambre, anxious to divide the spoil, which
might yet vanish like fairy gold.

"I--I will take twenty-four again, and everything round it."

Many players who had money left, and could reach to put on their stakes,
also chose twenty-four. And twenty-four came up. This was historic! No
one but the Grand Duke Michael and the few famous punters of the world
had such persistent and consecutive luck.

A chef de table in a high chair stood up and unobtrusively beckoned a
footman hovering on the far fringe of the crowd. Three minutes later,
with equal unobtrusiveness, more money was brought, lest the supply of
the table should run low. Few noticed, or knew that anything unusual had
happened, with the exception of the play; but Madame d'Ambre had been
hoping for and expecting something of the sort.

"They are afraid you will break the bank," she said, in a stage-whisper
not meant to be wasted. Those near her who understood French glanced up
quickly. Croupiers smiled and said nothing. A murmur went round the
table, and flowed like the rippling circles from a stone dropped in a
pond, to the crowd which ringed it in.

"What do you mean?" asked Mary.

"Oh, the bank does not really break! They do not even stop play in these
days. But they send for more money lest it be needed. Ah, the colossal
compliment!"

The pride in Mary's heart was like a stab of pain, almost unbearable in
its intensity. But suddenly, as if the current of her thought had been
broken, her inspiration seemed gone. The Something was no longer there,
telling her where to stake. She wished to play again, but felt at sea,
without a rudder. Her unconscious vanity rebelled against risking loss
at this table of which she had been the queen, the idol.

She rose, pale and suddenly tired. "I won't play any more," she said, in
a little voice, like a child's.

"Oh, why?" asked the young man with the straw-coloured hair.

"I don't know why," she answered. "Only I don't want to."

"Your money!" exclaimed Madame d'Ambre. "We must have all the gold put
into _mille_ notes, or you cannot carry it."

For an instant Mary had forgotten the money and the necessity of taking
it away, but Madame d'Ambre, who had now firmly identified her own
interests with those of her protégée, attended to the practical duties
of the partnership. She was somewhat disagreeably conscious that the
young man's eyes were fixed upon her as she collected her friend's
enormous winnings. As people made way for the Frenchwoman and her
starlike companion to pass, this man gathered up his small store of gold
and silver, and followed. On the outskirts of the crowd stood the
Dauntreys and their party. Mary and Madame d'Ambre passed close to them,
but the heroine of the moment was too intensely excited to recognize any
one. She walked as if on air, her hands full of notes, some of which she
was stuffing into her gold-beaded bag.

"Why, it's the girl in the train who said she was going to Florence,"
exclaimed Dodo Wardropp. "Can she be the one who's made the sensation?"

"Yes, it's she," said Lady Dauntrey. "See how they're looking at her,
and pointing her out. I wonder if it's true she's won thousands of
pounds?"

No one answered. Lord Dauntrey had slipped quietly away from the others,
and found a place at a table near enough to play over some one's head.
This was the first time he had found a chance to test his new system,
except on the toy roulette wheel. He began staking five-franc pieces,
and writing down notes in a small book. The bored look was burned out of
his weary eyes. They brightened, and a more healthful colour slowly
drove away his unnatural paleness.

The others, who had been playing in the new rooms, did not follow or
look for him. They stared at every one who seemed worth staring at. The
two Americans and Dodo expected Lady Dauntrey to know everybody. It was
for this, partly, that they were paying large sums to her, and they felt
a depressed need of getting their money's worth. So far the arrangements
for their comfort at the Villa Bella Vista were disappointing. Still,
two young men of title were there, and that was something, although one
of them was only an Austrian count, and the other no better than a
baronet. But Lord Dauntrey promised for to-morrow morning Dom Ferdinand
de Trevanna, the Pretender to an historic throne.

Dodo, according to Miss Collis, had "grabbed" the English baronet, and
left her only the Austrian count, who looked younger than any man could
really be, and had a wasp-waist which, when he bowed--as he did
irritatingly often--seemed liable to snap in two. It was if anything
more slender than her own, and she disliked him for it. Lady Dauntrey
had Mrs. Collis on her hands, and looked sombrely discontented. But she
waked up at sight of Mary. The long, pale eyes between black fringes
followed the blue and silver-gold figure with silent interest. Then the
handsome face became subtle and greedy.

As Mary was piloted outside the crowd by Madame d'Ambre, four young
women separated themselves hastily from the group round the table, and
bore down upon the pair. They were young, or else clinging desperately
to the ragged edges of their youth, and all four were dressed in clothes
which had been beautiful. They knew Madame d'Ambre, knew her very well
indeed, for they called her "Madeleine" or "Chère Lena." Nevertheless,
she did not appear pleased to see them.

"Bon soir, mes amies," she said evasively, and would have passed on,
but, laughingly, they stopped her. One, who had a marvellous complexion,
large black eyes, and bright golden hair, exclaimed, with a charming
Parisian accent, that they could not let their Madeleine leave them like
that. They had been waiting to congratulate her friend.

"We pray that thou wilt introduce us, dear one," the spokeswoman
suggested. "Surely Mademoiselle wishes to add to her happiness by making
others happy?" She turned a swimming gaze upon Mary. "Figure to
yourself, Mademoiselle; we are unlucky; four companions in misery. It is
our bad luck which has united us. Our jewels are all pawned. Not one of
us has eaten anything since the first _déjeuner_. And we have a hunger!"

Mary stared, disconcerted by this tale of misfortune suddenly flung at
her head, and scarcely sure if it were not a practical joke. The four
young women were so charmingly dressed, their hair was so carefully
waved, their complexions so pink and white, that it was impossible to
believe in their poverty. Besides, they could evidently afford perfume,
so luscious that it must be expensive. Mary thought that they smelled
very good; then, a little too good; then, far, far too good, and at last
almost unbearable.

"You are joking," she said, timidly.

"Indeed we are not," replied another of the group, a red-haired girl
with brown, almond-shaped eyes. "We so hope that you will be an angel,
and invite us all to supper."

"What nonsense, Clotilde!" exclaimed Madame d'Ambre. "We have already an
engagement for supper."

"Ah, then surely, Mademoiselle, you will share your luck with us in some
way? Otherwise, you can't hope to keep it."

"I should be glad to share it," Mary said, warmly. "What can I do?"

The red-haired lady broke into gestures. "She who has won a fortune asks
us who have nothing what she can do for us? How she is amusing, this
pretty English one!"

"Would you--might I--that is----" Mary began to stammer.

"We would--you might!" Clotilde finished for her, laughing.

"I wonder you have not more pride!" Madame d'Ambre reproached the four,
her white-rose cheeks flushing with annoyance.

"Pride does not buy us supper, or new hats," the girl with golden hair
reminded her.

"Oh, please take these, and do whatever you like with them," Mary said
hastily, her voice quivering with shyness and compassion. She began
dealing out her thousand-franc notes, and did not stop until she had
given one to each of the four.

It was at this moment that Prince Giovanni Della Robbia, unable to
resist his desire to follow Mary to the Casino, came within sight of
her. This was the picture he saw: the strikingly dressed girl,
bright-eyed, carmine-cheeked, feverishly distributing notes to a crowd
of young women more showily dressed than herself.

He turned away instantly, chilled and disgusted.


IX


Others were less fastidious than Vanno.

The calm-faced man with black pads over the left eye and ear joined
Madame d'Ambre, with a lazy yet determined air, and a glance of interest
at Mary. Seeing the brown youth who had been at her table, the elder man
nodded to him. This gave Mary's late neighbour an excuse which he had
wanted. He stopped, and held out his hand. "How are you, Captain
Hannaford?" he asked.

"Hullo, Carleton!" returned the other. "Here for the Nice flying week?"

"Yes," said Carleton, who, beside Hannaford the Englishman, showed by
contrast his American origin. His chin was all that Peter had said an
American's chin ought to be, and he had keen, brilliant blue eyes.
Hannaford, though taller than he, was stouter as well as older, and
therefore appeared less tall. He was of a more stolid type, and it
seemed incredible that such an adventure as that sketched by Madame
d'Ambre could approach such a man. Yet for once, gossip and truth were
one. The thing had happened. Hannaford had lately retired from the army,
after being stationed for two years in Egypt. For months he had lingered
aimlessly in Monte Carlo. Life seemed over for him. But time remained,
and must be killed, unless he preferred to kill himself. He had met Dick
Carleton in Egypt last year, where the youngest American aeronaut was
making experiments with a new monoplane in a convenient tract of desert.
At that time Captain Hannaford had not worn the little black silk pads.
He was grateful to the American for not seeming to look at them now.

"I'm here for the flying, with a hydro-aeroplane I'm rather proud of,"
Carleton went on, "but I'm not staying at Monte. I'm visiting Jim
Schuyler, at his place between here and Cabbé-Roquebrune. Lovely place
it is. No wonder he never bothers with the Casino, except for concerts
and opera. Have you met him?"

"No. But I know him by name, of course. The names of these American
millionaires are all-pervading, like microbes. Why does he pitch his
tent on the threshold of Monte, if not for the Casino?"

"He says lots of people live about here who never play: and there are
other attractions. He has all the gambling he wants in Wall Street:
comes here for beauty and music. He gets plenty of both; doesn't go in
for society any more than for roulette, but seems to enjoy himself, the
two or three months he does the hermit act in his gorgeous garden. He's
at the opera to-night. Motored me over. We'll meet, and go back together
to Stellamare. Meanwhile----"

"Meanwhile, I rather guess, as you'd say, that you'd like to meet my
charming--er--acquaintance, and her friend."

"I _never_ say 'guess,' nor does anybody else, except in books or plays,
but I should like to meet the ladies."

"Madame d'Ambre is so busy regretting she didn't get smaller change for
her _protégée's_ unforeseen charities that she's forgotten us. I was
watching the fun at your table, toward the last."

At the sound of her name, the Frenchwoman turned. Four thousand francs
was gone forever, but there was as little use in wailing over money
wasted as in crying for spilt milk, so she smiled her pathetic,
turned-down smile at Captain Hannaford, and looked wistfully at Dick
Carleton. Then quickly, lest further irrevocable things should happen,
she laid her hand on Mary's arm. It was a gloved hand, and the glove had
been mended many times. Soon, it must be thrown away; but perhaps that
need not matter now. There might be a path leading to new gloves and
other things. She introduced Captain Hannaford to Mademoiselle Grant,
and he in turn introduced "Mr. Richard Carleton, the well-known airman,"
to them both. Madeleine could speak a little English, but with
difficulty, and preferred French. Still, it would have been unwise to
tell secrets in English when she was near.

Seeing that she had no intention of passing on the introduction,
Clotilde et Cie. retired gracefully, each of the four a thousand francs
richer and a thousand times happier than she had been five minutes
before.

"What about supper?" said Hannaford. "Gambling always makes me hungry.
I'm in luck to-night. Won't you three be my guests at Ciro's?"

"You are always in luck nowadays," sighed Madame d'Ambre. A shadow
seemed to pass over the stolid face of the man, but she did not see it.
"Naturally we accept the kind invitation, is it not so, dear
Mademoiselle?"

"I must be at Ciro's anyhow, about midnight," said Carleton, "for
Schuyler asked me to meet him there for a Welsh rabbit after the opera.
But I'll be delighted to go over and sit with you till he comes." He had
the pleasant drawl of a Southerner.

"Oh, you're very, very kind," stammered Mary. "But I"--she hesitated,
and glanced appealingly at Madame d'Ambre--"I think it's rather late,
and I shall have to go home."

"Home?" echoed Hannaford, questioningly.

"My hotel," she explained.

As Madame d'Ambre drew her friend aside for a murmur of advice, the two
men looked at each other, Carleton puzzled, Hannaford with raised
eyebrows. "I think they're both charming," the American remarked in a
low voice. "That little Madame d'Ambre isn't nearly as pretty as Miss
Grant, but she's fetching, and looks a bit down on her luck, as if she'd
had trouble."

"Perhaps she has," said Hannaford.

"But, dear Mademoiselle," Madeleine was pleading at a little distance,
"why won't you go to supper? Do! It would be so pleasant. I have so
little happiness; and this would at least give me an hour of
distraction."

"You can go without me," said Mary. "Captain Hannaford is your friend,
isn't he?"

"Ah, I see! The sight of the poor afflicted man disgusts you. If you
refuse, he will know why. It will be ungracious--cruel."

"Don't say that," Mary implored, much distressed. "I wouldn't hurt his
feelings for the world. It's true I _can't_ bear to look at him, though
he hasn't a bad face. But it isn't only that. I could try to get over
it. The other reason is, I never met him or Mr. Carleton before,
and--and I don't know anything about society, or what is done; but I
have a sort of feeling----"

"Mais mon Dieu!" murmured Madame d'Ambre. "Quelle petite sotte! No
matter. It is a pretty pose, and suits you well. I am the last to find
fault with it. Yet listen. These gentlemen are distinguished. Captain
Hannaford is an English officer who has been of a courage incredible. He
can wear many medals if he chooses. Now he is very sad, despite his luck
in the Casino. He needs cheering. And this young Monsieur Carleton, the
American, I have read of him in the papers. He is widely known as a man
who flies, and these airmen are of a nobility of character! I am your
chaperon. What more do you ask? I am the widow of a naval officer. Do
you not owe me something for the good turn I have done you to-night?"

"Yes, indeed, I owe you a great deal," Mary admitted.

It was quite certain that what Madame d'Ambre considered as owing to her
would be paid.

Prince Vanno saw the four leaving the Casino together, Mary and Carleton
walking behind the other two. He had met both the Englishman and the
American in Egypt once or twice, and had not thought of them since. Now
he would forget neither. The story about Hannaford and his retirement
from the army, Vanno knew. He had heard nothing of Carleton except what
was to his credit, but somehow this fact made it no less unpleasant for
Vanno that the aeronaut should be talking with Mary. He did not believe
they had met before to-night.

The Galerie Charles Trois was brilliantly lighted, and supper was
beginning behind immense glass windows at Ciro's and the glittering
white and gold restaurant of the Metropole. At Ciro's there had been a
dinner in honour of two celebrated airmen, and the decorations remained.
There were suspended monoplanes and biplanes made of flowers, and when
the great Ciro himself saw Carleton, he came forward, inviting the young
man to take a window-table.

Carleton explained that he was only a guest; but this made no
difference. Except the King of Sweden's table, and that of the Grand
Duke Cyril, Mr. Carleton and his friends must have the best.

"My dear friend," said Hannaford, as they sat down, letting his eyes
dwell on Madame d'Ambre's costume, "it's lucky for us that we are with a
celebrity, or the fatted calf would not have been prepared for us. No
use disguising the truth: you and I are a little the worse for wear.
Only with you, the damage is temporary. Put you into a new frock and
hat, and you'll revive like a flower in fresh water. Nothing can revive
me. You see, I look facts in the face."

"Could one not make facts pleasant to see, if one must look them in the
face?" Mary ventured, gently.

"I'm sure you will make them so for Madame," said Hannaford.

"It is only those who are very happy, or very miserable, who can joke
forever, as you do," said Madame d'Ambre. "I can understand you now, or
I could, at my worst. But for the moment I have new life. I try to
forget the future."

As they ate a delicious and well-chosen supper she revived, delicately,
and regarded her misfortunes from a distance. "To think, if I had not
met you all, and if I had kept my resolve," she said, "by now I should
have found out the great secret."

As she spoke, a tall, thin man came to the table, and laid his hand on
Dick Carleton's shoulder. So doing, he stood looking straight into
Madame d'Ambre's face. She started a little, and blushed deeply. Blushes
were a great stock-in-trade with Madame d'Ambre. They proved that,
unlike Clotilde et Cie., she did not paint her face: that she was
altogether a different order of being. But this blush was less
successful than usual. It was a flush of annoyance, and showed that she
was vexed.

The man was more American in type than Carleton, though indefinably so.
If a critic had been asked how he would know this person to be a New
Yorker, even if met wrapped in bearskins at the North Pole, he might
have been at a loss to explain. Nevertheless, the dark face with its
twinkling, heavily black-lashed blue eyes, its short, wavy black hair
turning gray at the temples, its prominent nose and chin, lips and jaws
slightly aggressive in their firmness, was the distilled essence of New
York. So were the strong, lean figure, and the nervous, virile hands.

"Hello, Jim!" exclaimed Carleton, turning quickly at the touch on his
shoulder. "I've only played with a dish or two. I was waiting for you,
really." He got up, and rather shyly introduced the party to his host of
the celebrated Stellamare.

"I have the pleasure of knowing this lady slightly, already," said
Schuyler, still fixing Madeleine with his straight, disconcerting gaze.

"Madame d'Ambre?"

"I don't think we knew each other's name. I had the honour of doing a
small--a very small--service for Madame, such a service as any man may
be allowed to do for a lady at Monte Carlo."

If he laid an emphasis on the last two words, it was hardly strong
enough to be noticed, unless by the person most concerned.

"Do sit down with us, and eat the Welsh rabbit Carleton has been talking
about," said Hannaford. "This is my show. I shall be delighted, and I'm
sure I speak for the ladies."

Madame d'Ambre murmured something, and Mary smiled a more than
ordinarily friendly smile; for she knew that this was the distant cousin
of whom she had heard from Peter, the "Jim" who, in Molly Maxwell's
eyes, was an heroic figure. Peter never tired of telling anecdotes of
Jim's wonderful feats of finance, his coolness and daring in times of
black panic or perilous uncertainty in Wall Street, his scholarly
attainments, of which he never spoke; his passion for music and gardens,
and other contradictory traits such as no one would have expected in a
keen business man. Sometimes Mary had fancied that Peter was a little
inclined to fall in love with Jim Schuyler, perhaps because he was one
of the few men she knew who did not grovel at her feet. Now Mary looked
at the man with intense interest, and could imagine a girl like Molly
Maxwell making him her hero, in spite of the difference between their
ages. Molly was not twenty-one. He must be thirty-eight or forty, and
would have looked hard if it had not been for the blue eyes which might
soften dangerously under certain influences.

Mary's first impulse on hearing his name was to cry out, "Why, your
cousin Molly Maxwell is my best friend!" But something imperatively
stopped her. Deep down under the excitement and pleasure of this
adventure into which fate had plunged her, murmured a little voice,
saying, "You ought not to have come to this place alone, when they all
trusted you to go straight to Florence." And if she were doing wrong and
meant to keep on doing wrong, she must not associate herself with Saint
Ursula-of-the-Lake, in the minds of people here. It would not be fair to
the convent and Reverend Mother, not even fair to Aunt Sara and Elinor,
who believed her to be journeying obediently toward Florence. Thinking
thus, she determined to say nothing of her own life to those she might
meet at Monte Carlo. Soon she would go away, and no real harm would have
been done to any one. As for this supper, if she had lingering doubts
that it was not quite "the thing" to have accepted, the name of Jim
Schuyler chased them away like clouds before the sun. It was like being
with an old friend to have Peter's cousin there; and Dick Carleton was
staying with him. Mr. Carleton and Captain Hannaford were friends, and
Mr. Schuyler evidently knew Madame d'Ambre, so everything had turned out
delightfully. Also it was exciting to see how people who came in looked
at her and whispered. She could not help knowing that they said,
"There's the girl who won so much in the Casino that everybody rushed to
her table and applauded."

It was wonderful, intoxicating, to be the heroine of such a place, to
have experienced players envy her. She longed for to-morrow morning, so
that she might go back to the same table at the Casino, and play on zero
and twenty-four again. "I think I shall always make that my game, and go
to the same table," she said to herself, with the unconscious egotism
and vanity of a child.

"What was that I caught as I arrived, about 'finding out the great
secret?'" Schuyler asked, when he sat down at a place made for him on
Madame d'Ambre's right hand. Again he fixed his eyes on her, this time
with polite interest. "I thought the words sounded familiar. I remember
your saying something of the sort, I'm sure, the evening of our first
meeting."

"I do not recall it, Monsieur," replied Madeleine.

"It was on the Casino terrace," he went on, reflectively. "I was walking
there between the first and second acts of an opera, about a fortnight
ago. We met, and you seemed depressed, Madame. It was then I was able to
do you that small service."

"I did not think of it as a service," she said, bitterly.

"Ah, now the occasion has come back to you. What, not a service when a
lady has a little bottle of poison stuck into her belt, and a man drinks
it himself rather than she should keep her threat and swallow it!"

"It was not a threat. I would have drunk the poison and ended
everything," she insisted.

"If I hadn't been so selfish and greedy as to take it out of your hand
and sample it. Strange it did me no harm. I had a presentiment it
wouldn't, somehow. But of course my system may be poison-proof. By the
way, isn't that the same pretty little bottle I see now, tucked into
your belt! And were you thinking of trying its effect again to-night, if
these friends hadn't come in time to cheer you up, and so put off the
evil day?"

"You are very cruel to make sport of my tragedy, Monsieur!" Madame
d'Ambre exclaimed, her soft wistfulness flashing into anger. "These
sympathetic ones have saved me from myself by their generosity. They
have made me happy. Why do you go out of your way to remind me of
misery?"

Schuyler's blue eyes twinkled cynically, yet not unkindly. "I quite
understand that you can be saved from yourself only by sufficient
generosity, Madame," he said. "The question is, what is sufficient? Too
much sometimes goes to the head. Far be it from me to upset your cup of
happiness. But drink wisely, Madame, in little sips, not in great gulps.
It's better for the health--of all concerned. And the contents of your
bottle will no doubt be just as efficacious another time."

"I know what you mean," she flung at him, viperishly. "You have heard of
Mademoiselle's luck to-night. You think I mean to take advantage of her.
I would not----"

"Of course not, Madame. You, the widow of a naval officer! Have I
accused you of anything?" Schuyler cut her short, with sudden gayety of
manner. "I've heard of Mademoiselle's luck. She was pointed out to me
by a man I know, as I came in, just before joining you. But as I'm aware
that you're a good business woman, my idea is that the advantage you'll
take won't amount to more than 5 per cent. More would be usury, and give
Mademoiselle an unfavourable idea of Monte Carlo manners."

He spoke with deliberation, allotting each word its full value; and
before Madame d'Ambre could leash her rage, he turned to Mary. "Talking
of Monte Carlo manners," he took up the theme again, "you mustn't judge
hastily. There isn't _one_ Monte Carlo. There are many. I don't suppose
you ever saw a cocktail of any sort, much less one called the 'rainbow?'
It's in several different coloured layers of liquid, each distinct from
the other, as far as taste and appearance are concerned, though they
blend together as you drink. It wouldn't do to sip the top layer, and
say what the decoction was like, before you absorbed the whole--with
discrimination. Well, that cocktail's something like Monte Carlo. Only
you begin the cocktail at the top. In the Monte Carlo rainbow you
sometimes begin at the bottom."

He looked steadily at Mary as he finished his simile. Then he lifted the
silver cover of a dish which had just arrived, and gave his whole
attention to a noble Welsh rabbit, an odd dainty for a Riviera
supper--but Ciro prided himself on gratifying any whim of any customer,
at five minutes' notice.

Captain Hannaford had listened in silence, with a light of malicious
amusement in his eyes, which travelled from Madeleine to Mary, from Mary
to Madeleine, and occasionally to Dick Carleton.

Mary, despite her blank ignorance of the world and its ways, was far
from stupid or slow of understanding. She realized that Schuyler's
harangue to Madame d'Ambre was all, or almost all, for her: and she
caught his meaning in the last sentence of the rainbow allegory. He
wanted her to know that she had "begun at the bottom," and must beware.
She was half vexed, half grateful; vexed for Madeleine, and grateful for
herself, because, being Peter's hero, he must be a good man, who would
not be cruel to a woman for sheer love of cruelty. But her shamed pity
for Madeleine was stronger than her gratitude; and instead of giving
less out of her winnings than she had planned to give, she impulsively
decided to give more; this, not because she believed in or liked
Madeleine d'Ambre, but because she winced under a sister woman's
humiliation. The ugly flash in the eyes that had been wistful, shocked
her. She saw that they were cat-coloured eyes, and Jim Schuyler scored
as he meant to score, in her resolve to pay Madame d'Ambre well, then
gently to slip out of her friendship.

"When we finish supper, she can go with me to my hotel, and we'll divide
the money into three parts," Mary said to herself. "I'll give her two,
and keep one. Even one will be like a little fortune; and whatever
happens I'll keep enough to get away with; but I _must_ play again
to-morrow. It's too wonderful to stop yet."

But she was reckoning without Jim Schuyler.

When he saw the eyes of Madeleine hint that it was time to go, he said
quickly, "Well, Mademoiselle, have you counted your winnings, and do you
know exactly what they amount to?"

"No," said Mary, "not yet. I thought Madame d'Ambre and I might do that
afterward."

"Can't we save you the trouble?" he asked. "Why not spread your store
here on the table, and let us all work out the calculation? Everybody
knows you broke the bank, so there's no imprudence or ostentation in
displaying your wealth."

Without a word, Mary accepted the suggestion, since not to do so would
have seemed ungrateful.

"She's given away a lot already," said Carleton. "I saw her distributing
_mille_ notes to lovely but unfortunate gamblers, as if she were dealing
out biscuits."

"Oh, I gave away only four," Mary excused herself. "They were nothing."

Everybody laughed except Madeleine.

The fat stacks of French banknotes were extracted with some effort from
the hand-bag into which they had been stuffed. Captain Hannaford and
Schuyler counted while the others watched, Carleton with amused
interest, Mary with comparative indifference, because the actual money
meant less to her than the thrill of winning it, and Madame d'Ambre on
the verge of tears. She considered that she was being robbed of her
rights, for she knew that this merciless man with the hard jaw and
pleasant blue eyes intended to keep her hands off the money.

"One hundred and nine thousand francs!" Schuyler announced at last. "I
congratulate you, Mademoiselle. And I wish you'd let me advise you."

"If I did, what would you say?" Mary smiled.

"I should say: 'Go home to-morrow.'"

"But I've just come away from home. I don't want to go back."

"Well, then, go to some other place, a place without a Casino."

"I suppose that's good advice," said Mary. "But--I can't take it yet."

"I'm sorry," returned Peter's cousin.

The whole conversation had been in French from the first, as Madame
d'Ambre knew little English; and Mary's accent was so perfect that to an
American or English ear it passed as Parisian. Neither Hannaford,
Schuyler, nor Carleton supposed that she had just arrived from England,
though her name--if they had caught it correctly--was English or Scotch.
"Mademoiselle" they called her, and wondering who and what she was,
vaguely associated her with France, probably Paris.

"How long shall you stay?" asked Carleton, in the pause that followed.

"I don't know," Mary said. "A few days, perhaps."

"Will you come down to the Condamine and see my hydro-aeroplane
to-morrow? I'm keeping her there, and practising a bit in the harbour,
before taking her to Nice."

"Oh, I should love to! I've never seen any sort of aeroplane, not even a
picture of one."

"That's clever and original of you, anyhow. Where have you been, to
avoid them? What time to-morrow? Is ten o'clock too early?"

Mary blushed. "Would afternoon suit you? I feel as if I should have luck
again, if I played in the morning."

"Afternoon, of course," Carleton assented politely, though he was
disappointed; for in giving the invitation he had been following his
friend's lead in trying to save the moth from the candle. "Shall we say
three o'clock? I'll call for you."

"We'll both call, with my car," said Schuyler. "But what about that 5
per cent. which I suppose you want to give your roulette teacher?" he
went on, with apparent carelessness.

"I want to give her more," Mary confessed, with that soft obstinacy
which people found difficult to combat.

But Schuyler had weapons for padded barricades. He turned to Madeleine.
"I'm certain that Madame will refuse to accept more," he said.

She faced him defiantly. Then her eyes fell. She dared not make him an
active enemy. Though he never gambled, he was a man of influence at the
Casino, for he was a friend of those highest in authority, and had
power "on the Rock," also, for the Prince and he were on visiting terms,
Madeleine d'Ambre had learned these details since the evening on the
terrace when he had tested her "poison."

"Yes, I--should refuse to accept," she echoed, morosely.

"Virtue is its own reward; and there may be others," Schuyler said as he
deducted a sum equal to 5 per cent. from Mary's winnings and pushed it
across the table.

But even this was not the end of his interference. When Madeleine rose
and Mary sprang up obediently, he proposed that they, the three men,
should see the ladies home. This plan was carried out; and when Mary had
been left at the door of the Hôtel de Paris, they insisted on taking
Madame d'Ambre at once down the hill to her lodgings in the Condamine.
The penance was made only a little lighter to the victim by a lift in
Schuyler's automobile. She was far from grateful to its owner, and made
no answer except a twist of the shoulders to his last words: "Remember
not to change your mind. It isn't safe in this climate."

When they had dropped Hannaford at his hotel, also in the Condamine,
Carleton lost no time in satisfying his curiosity. "I never saw you take
so much trouble, Jim, over a woman. Is it a case of love at first sight,
old man?"

"Bosh!" said Schuyler, "Don't you know me better? That girl puzzles me.
There's something very odd about her. I'm conceited enough to think I
can generally size people up pretty well at first sight, but she beats
me. I can't make her out. And besides----"

"Besides--what?"

"I know I never saw her before, yet her face seems familiar. I associate
her with--it's idiotic--but with the person I care for most in the
world. Heaven knows why. I don't."

"Do I know who that person is?" Carleton ventured, unable to resist the
temptation.

"No, you don't know," the older man returned, rather gruffly. "And I'm
pretty sure you never will, because the less I talk or think about that
person the better for me. That part of the story has nothing to do with
the case. There's only this queer impression of mine. And I had a weird
feeling as if it were my bounden duty to see that this little girl
wasn't victimized by an unscrupulous woman. So I did what I could."

"I should think you did!" exclaimed the other. "I couldn't have done as
much. Poor Madame d'Ambre."

"Her real name's probably the French for Smith, without a 'de' in it,
unless it's to spell devil. If she's a widow, she's a grassy one. Her
game is to be found crying on the Casino terrace by moonlight,
preparatory to drinking poison, because she's tired of life and its
temptations. If it's a young lieutenant just off his ship for a flutter
at Monte, or some other lamb of that fleeciness, he's soon shorn.
There's quite a good living in it, I understand. She always contrives to
make the youngsters believe her an innocent angel, whom they must try to
save."

"But you seem to have been on in that act. Was it a moonlight scene?"

"Plenty of moonshine--and clear enough for me to see through the
angelhood to the designing minxhood. The poison was water, coloured, I
should think, with cochineal, and pleasantly flavoured with a little
bitter almond. But--well, one sees through people sometimes, as if they
were jelly-fish, and yet is a little sorry for them just because they
_are_ jelly-fish, stranded on the beach."

"I see," said Carleton.

They were spinning along the white way that winds between mountain and
sea, out of the principality, and so toward Cap Martin, Mentone, and on
to Italy. The tramcars had ceased to run; the endless daytime procession
of motor-cars and carriages was broken by the hours of sleep, and the
glimmering road was empty save for immense, white-covered carts which
had come from distant Lombardy, and over Alpine passes, bringing eggs
and vegetables for the guests of Hercules. Slowly, yet steadily,
shambled the tired mules, and would shamble on till dawn. There were
often no lights on the carts, which moved silently, like mammoth ghosts,
great lumbering vehicle after vehicle, each drawn by three or four mules
or horses. As the lamps of Schuyler's powerful car flashed on them
round sharp rock-corners, tearing the veil of shadow, they loomed up
unexpectedly in the night, like some mystery suddenly revealed in a
place of peace.

Schuyler liked motoring at night on the Riviera; for he never tired of
the dark forms of mountains, cut out black in the creamy foam of
star-spattered clouds, or the salt smell of the sea and its murmur,
singing the same song Greeks and Romans had heard on these shores. He
never tired of meeting the huge carts from Italy, travelling slowly
through the dark. He always had the same keen, foolish wish to know
whence they came, and what were the thoughts behind the bright eyes
which waked from sleep and stared for an instant, as his lamps pried
under the great quaking canopies: and more than all he enjoyed arriving
at his own gate, seeing the pale shimmer of his marble statues against
backgrounds of ivy and ilex, and drawing in the sweetness of his orange
blossoms and roses. Because he never tired of these things the two
months at Stellamare, often spent alone except for servants, were the
best months of his year. Through stress and strain he thought of them,
as a thirsty man thinks of a long draught of cool water; and he spent
them quietly, living in each moment: not complicating his leisure with
many acquaintances or amusements, and neither vexed nor pleased because
people called him selfish, and gossipped about his palace in a garden as
a place mysterious and secret. He was not quite in Paradise in his
retreat there, because he was not a perfectly happy man; but he did not
expect perfect happiness, and hoped for nothing better on earth than his
lonely holidays at Stellamare.

Descending a steep hill toward the sea as the big car slipped between
tall marble gate-posts, a perfume as of all the sweetest flowers of the
world, gathered in a bouquet, was flung into the two men's faces. In the
distance, beyond the house whose windows suddenly lit up as if by magic,
a wide semi-circle of marble columns glimmered pale against the sea's
deep indigo. And away across the stretch of quiet water glittered the
amazing jewels of Monte Carlo.

"By Jove! no Roman emperor could have had a lovelier garden, or a more
splendid palace on this coast," said Carleton, as he stood on the steps
of the house modelled after the description of Pliny's villa at
Laurentum. "Your greatest wish must be fulfilled."

"My greatest wish," Schuyler echoed, with a faint sigh. And in the
starlight his face lost its hard lines. But Carleton did not see.

The door was thrown open by an old Italian servant, who had the profile
of a captive Saracen king.

They went in together, and left the night full of perfume, and the song
of little waves fringed with starlight, that broke on the rocks like
fairy-gold--the vanishing fairy-gold of the Casino across the water.

And at the same moment (for it was very late) the dazzling illumination
of the Casino terrace was dimmed, as if half the diamonds had been shut
up in velvet cases.

A great peace fell upon the night, as though the throbbing of a
passionate heart had ceased.


X


Vanno Della Robbia wished to think no more of the false stars that he
had followed; for there was every reason now to believe them false
stars. Yet something deep down in him refused to believe this; and he
could not help thinking of them as before. But he would not give way to
what seemed like weakness, and so he fought against the memory.

If he had come to Monte Carlo only for the sake of the girl, he would
have left again next morning. Having come for other things, however, it
would have been weaker to go than stay. His brother and sister-in-law
had not arrived yet at their villa at Cap Martin, and were not due for
some days, as Angelo had taken his bride to Ireland, to show her to a
much loved cousin, the Duchess of Clare. Also there was the week of
aviation, to which Vanno had been looking forward with interest during
the voyage from Alexandria to Marseilles. A parachute which he had
invented was to be used for the first time.

Though he could not help thinking of the eyes which haunted him with
their lure of purity and innocence, he would not concern himself further
with the comings and goings of Miss M. Grant of London. He went instead
about his own affairs. He slept badly; but Vanno was accustomed to
taking little sleep, therefore it did not occur to him to be tired
because he woke finally at seven, after having lain awake till the
ringing of Ste. Devote's five o'clock bells, down in the ravine.
Instead, he felt a kind of burning energy which forced him to activity
of some sort. After his cold bath he dressed quickly, and went out to
walk, wishing himself back in the Libyan desert, where he had not seen
or thought of any woman.

It was only half-past seven, and the sun was still low in the east, just
rising above the mountains of Italy. It shone through a slit in two long
purple clouds, and its shining lit the sea. Vanno ran down the steps to
the Casino terrace, coming upon it near the clump of nymphlike palms,
and the marble bust of Berlioz that Mary could see from her window.
Hercules' Rock was on fire with sunrise, and the Prince's palace looked
in the magic flame like a strange Valhalla.

Not a soul was to be seen, not even a gardener employed by the Casino,
and all the watching eyes of the horned animal were asleep. Vanno stared
at the great cream-white building with a brooding resentment, because of
the influence which he believed it to exert over his clouded star. He
fancied that she had been drawn here by its extraordinary magnetism
which pulsed like electricity across Europe; and that, if she had not
already been swept off her feet, soon she would be, and her soul
drowned. To his own surprise, he could himself feel the mysterious
power of the place. As he looked at the long windows framed in rose-red
marble he remembered what his Arab friend, the astrologer in the desert,
had said to him about this month of December.

"Could it be possible, if there were anything in the science of
astrology," Vanno asked himself, "that the stars could rule the chances
in a game of chance?" Vaguely he thought, with the mystic side of his
nature, that to study, and prove or disprove this idea, might be
interesting. But the side that was stern and ascetic thrust away the
suggestion. He remembered the thousands of people who drifted here from
all over the world, hoping for one reason or other to get the gold
guarded by this big white dragon. Some perhaps believed in their stars;
others had studied systems, and tried them on little roulette wheels at
home; but nearly all went away defeated. The form of the long, high
mountain called the Tête de Chien looked to Vanno like a giant man lying
face down in despair, the shape of his head, his back, and supine legs
tragic in desperate abandon. "That's a symbol," Vanno said, half aloud,
and felt no longer the strange pulling at his heartstrings which for a
moment had drawn him, too, under the influence. He thought of himself as
one of the few, the very few, people within a wide range of Monte Carlo
for whom the Casino meant nothing. For surely there were few indeed.
Even the peasants among the mountains owed their living indirectly to
the Casino. Because of its existence they were able to command large
prices for their fruit and flowers and vegetables, or anything they
could produce which pleasure-lovers drawn by the Casino could possibly
want. Over there on the Rock, where red roofs of houses crowded closely
together, everybody lived in one way or other by the Casino. No one,
Vanno had been told, who was not Monegasque by birth or nationalization
was allowed to live on the Rock. Probably many of the croupiers in the
Casino and their families had houses there, and perhaps many were
shopkeepers down in the Condamine, where the cheap hotels and
lodging-houses were. Few of those hotels, or the more luxurious ones at
Monte Carlo itself, would exist if it were not for the Casino, and the
whole Riviera would be less prosperous. But Vanno was persuaded that he
cared nothing for the gold of the dragon.

Once before, when he was almost a boy, he had come here with his brother
Angelo for a few days. They had gone to see the Prince, whose ancient
family, the Grimaldis, was older and more important even than the house
of Rienzi. Vanno had promised Angelo that he would call at the palace
this time, and he decided to do so formally in the afternoon; the
morning he resolved to spend in walking up to La Turbie and down again.
The exercise would clear his brain; and he fancied that he remembered
the way well enough to find it again without asking directions.

There was something else he might do also, if there were time. A priest
whom, as a boy, he had known well at Monte Della Robbia was now curé at
Roquebrune. They corresponded, and in coming to the Riviera, Vanno had
planned to look him up. He was in a mood to want a full day's programme.

In a few moments' walking he left Monte Carlo behind and came out upon
the open hillside, where, above him, he saw the path leading skyward
like an interminable staircase. Often as he mounted, bareheaded, his hat
in his hand, he caught himself mentally trespassing on forbidden ground,
thinking of his lost Giulietta, and wondering what she had been doing,
every day and hour of her life since she was a child. He had never felt
this pressing, insistent curiosity about any human being before. His
thoughts followed the girl everywhere, wherever she might be; and
something--the same Something which refused to disbelieve in her--seemed
to know where she was at that moment, even how she looked, and what was
in her soul, though his outer intelligence could see nothing. That
rebellious Something longed to turn back toward Monte Carlo, to keep
near her and guard her. It cried out strongly to do this, but Vanno
would not listen. He sang to himself as he walked up the mule path among
olive trees; and peasants coming down from the mountains, their nailed
boots rattling on the cobblestones, were singing, too, strange wordless
songs without tune, songs neither French nor Italian, but with a wild
eastern lilt leaping out of their monotony, reminiscent of the days
when Saracens ruled the coast. Some faces, too, were like the faces of
eastern men, high featured, with enormous, flashing eyes. Here and there
was one of a bold yet dreamy, gray-eyed, brown-haired type Vanno had not
met before in any of his travels. He remembered that this country had
belonged to the Ligurians before his ancestors, the Romans, took it
after two hundred years' hard fighting: and types are persistent. He had
heard that there were ruined Ligurian forts to be traced still, among
the higher hills and mountains; and the monument of La Turbie, whither
he was bound, was Augustus Cæsar's emblem of triumph over the Ligurian
tribes.

The funicular was not running at this hour, and the white lacings of the
Upper Corniche were empty save for a cart or two, bringing down loads of
wallflower-tinted stone from some mountain quarry, for the building of a
villa. Vanno had easily found his way on to a mule path, rough yet well
kept, and ancient perhaps as the hidden Ligurian forts. Round him was
the gray-green shimmer of olive trees, and their old, thick roots that
crawled and climbed the rocks were like knotted snakes asleep. Bands of
pines marched and mourned along the skyline, and in the midst of
glittering laurels cypress trees stood up straight and black as
burnt-out torches.

Clouds that had darkened the east when Vanno started veiled the sun now,
like lazy eyelids. The gay glitter was gone from the world, and the sea
was of a dull velvety gray, dappled with silver-gleams that sifted
through holes in the clouds, making the water look like scales on a
fish's back. Far below lay the strip of frivolous fairyland, all that
most strangers know of the Riviera: the pleasure towns with their palms
and tropical flowers, the decorated villas, to live in which Vanno
thought would be like living in hollowed-out birthday cakes. And the
soft, thoughtful grayness which was dimming the sunshine suited this
different, higher world as well as it suited his mood. The loveliness of
trees, and the pale splendour of mountain peaks carved in bas-relief
against the pearl-gray sky, rang out to his soul like a chime of bells
from a cathedral tower, giving him back the mastery of himself. It was
good to be here, where there were no sounds except the voice of Nature,
singing her eternal song, in the universal language, and where the life
of man seemed as distant as the far-down windows that glittered
mysteriously out of shadows, as the eyes of a cat glitter at night.

Inarticulate, enchanting whispers of the love and joy which have been in
the world and may be again floated up to Vanno's imagination like the
chanting of mermaids heard under the sea. He felt that, if he should
meet his Giulietta now, he would believe in her, and his belief would
make her worthy of itself, if she were not already worthy. "May the
wings of our souls never fail us," he said aloud, as if it were a
prayer.

Almost before the time when Vanno Della Robbia had known words enough
to clothe his most childish thoughts, he had possessed an unknown land,
a kingdom and a castle of his own more beautiful than sunset clouds. To
this land he always travelled when he was alone, and often at night in
dreams. It had been around him in the desert where his errand had been
to study the eastern stars; and the observatory at Monte Della Robbia,
built with money left him by his mother, was one gateway to that land.
When he was in this secret kingdom he was brother to the stars. All
knowledge came echoing through his soul, as if whispered to him by past
selves, other incarnations of himself, who had gleaned it in their
lives, from days when the world was young. He had a thousand souls,
which had known great sorrows and joys and adventures. His blood seemed
to smoke gold, like spray on rushing surf in sunshine. Never had he
admitted any one he had known (except the people his own mind created
for inhabitants of that kingdom) into his land; but now the girl whose
name he scarcely knew stood at the door of the castle, asking to come
in, saying with her eyes, which he had likened to stars, that she was
the princess who had a right to live there. Hers was the face of his
dream. She was the song of the mermaids. The voice he had heard--would
always hear in the sea--spoke of her. She was the light of the morning.
Hers the face in the sunrise, and the twilight. _Maria_ has the air of
having been contracted for, while that fastidious overseer who lurks at
the elbow of every honest craftsman, condemning this or that phrase,
readjusting the other faulty piece of construction, has frankly
abandoned the contractor. _Maria_ was the daughter of an artist cadger
(name of _Drello_), friend of the great and seller of their autograph
letters, whereby he was astute enough to make a comfortable living.

_Maria_ had a dull brother named _Laertes_, who accidentally met a highness,
who fell very abruptly in love with _Maria_ and made her strictly
dishonourable proposals.

_Maria_ drew herself up, compelled him to apologise and go away, until
the nineteenth chapter, when she made similar proposals to the highness,
now a duly and unhappily married _King of Sarmania_. But she is saved
by the chivalrous love-lorn dwarf, _Tomsk_, who, with the irascible
singing-master _Sulzer_, is responsible for the chief elements of vitality
in this rather suburban romance.

And I found myself never believing in _Maria's_ wondrous beauty
and quite sharing _Sulzer's_ poor opinion of her singing. But this of
course was mere prejudice.

* * * * *
In _Grizel Married_ (Mills and Boon) Mrs. George de Horne Vaizey exhibits
the highest-handed method of treating Romance that ever I met.
For consider the situation to be resolved. _Dane Peignton_ was engaged
to _Teresa_, but in love with _Lady Cassandra Raynor_, whose husband,
I regret to add, was still alive. _Dane_ and _Cassandra_ had never
told their love, and concealment might have continued to prey on
their damask cheeks, if Mrs.

Vaizey had not (very naturally), wished to give us a big emotional scene
of avowal. It is the way in which this is done that compels my homage.
Off go the characters on a picnic, obviously big with fate.

_Teresa_ goes, and _Dane_ and _Cassandra_, the fourth being _Grizel_, whom
you may recall pleasantly from an earlier book; but, though she fills
the title _rôle_ in this one, she has little to do with its development.
Of course I saw that something tragic was going to happen to somebody
on that picnic--cliffs or tides or mad bulls or something. But I don't
suppose that in twenty guesses you could get at the actual instrument of
destiny. _Cassandra_ chokes over a fish-bone!
That's what I meant about Mrs.

Vaizey's courage. And the reward of it is that, after your first moment
of incredulity, the fish-bone isn't in the least bit absurd. Poor
_Cassandra_ comes quite near to expiring of it; and _Dane_, having
thumped and battered her into safety, sobs out his wild and whirling
passion, while _Grizel_ and poor _Teresa_ have just to sit about and
listen. It really is rather a striking and original climax; incidentally
it is far the best scene in an otherwise not very brilliant tale.
But, having attended that picnic, I shall be astonished if you don't,
want to go on to the end and see how it all straightens out.

* * * * *
[Illustration: Bargain Two-seater, with most of the accessories; only
done fifty miles; water-cooled-engine; owner giving up driving.]
* * * * *
"At 9.30 o'clock, as the fog lifted somewhat, the rescuing steamer
Lyonnesse had sighted the Gothland, fast on the rocks, with a bad
list to starboard, and apparently partly filled with pater."
_Daily Chronicle._
"Our Special Correspondent's" father seems to be a big man.Vanno did not go down to the low levels; but asking the way of an old
peasant whose head was wrapped in a red handkerchief, he learned how to
find the hill-village of Roquebrune, keeping to the mule paths. He had
made up his mind to invite himself to lunch with his old friend the
curé.

This was another world from the world of the Casino and shops and
hotels. The very air was different; nimble, and crystal clean. All the
perfumes were aromatic; balsam of pine, and the country sweetness of
thyme and mint, the pure breath of nature. Sloping down the mountains
eastward toward Italy and descending more than halfway from La Turbie,
Vanno came to the rock-town with the ruined castle which Mary had looked
up to from Monte Carlo in last night's sunset. It seemed to have slid
from a taller height above, and to have been arrested by miracle before
much harm was done; and Vanno remembered the curé's first letter which
had told him the legend of the place: how Roquebrune in punishment for
the sins of its inhabitants was shaken off its high eyrie by a great
earthquake, but stopped on the shoulder of the mountain through
intercession of the Virgin, the special patron _sainte vierge_ of the
district. The town and its dominating castle seen from below showed as
if flattened against the mountain's breast; but coming into the place on
foot, the mountain retired into the background, and the huge mediæval
ruin was sovereign lord of all.

The whole village had been made by robbing the castle of brick and
stone, as La Turbie was built of the Trophy. The castle itself grew out
of the rock, so that it was difficult to see where nature's work ended
or men's began; and the old, old houses crowding up to and huddled
against its foundations had cramped themselves into ledges and boulders
like men making their last stand in a mountain battle. The streets were
tunnels, with vistas of long, dark stone stairways running up and down
into mystery. Here and there above secretive doorways were beautiful
carvings set into the thick stone walls, relics of the castle's
decorations. There is a disposition to make people happy and to take
great delight in their gratitude. To be kind, to be loved is the object
of the head of a government, of a man in place. This goes so far that
God is prefigured according to this model.Dark Saracen eyes gleamed out of the cold shadows in
tunnelled streets, seeming to warm them with their light; and as Vanno
reached the tiny _Place_ where towered a large, old church, the pavement
was flooded by a wave of brown-faced boys and girls, laughing and
shouting. School was just out; and behind the children followed a man in
the black cassock of a priest. He was walking slowly, reading from a
little book. Vanno stood still, with eagerness and affection in his
eyes, and willed him to look up.

This man had been the Prince's tutor, after Vanno was six, until he had
passed his tenth birthday. It was years now since they had seen each
other, eight perhaps, for it must be as long ago that the curé had come
back to visit Rome. But the cheery, intelligent dark face had not
changed much, except that it was less round, and the silvering of the
once black hair had spiritualized it strangely.

The wave of children, after glances thrown at the newcomer, had ebbed
away in different directions. The little cobble-paved _Place_ became
suddenly still. The priest moved leisurely, reading his book. Then, when
he was quite near Vanno, he suddenly lifted his thick black lashes as if
a voice had called his name. His good brown eyes and sunburned face lit
up as though in a flash of sunlight.

"Principino!" he exclaimed.

Vanno grasped both his hands, book and all.

"What a happy surprise!" cried the curé, in Italian, and Vanno answered
in the same language.

"But you knew I was coming one of these days. You got my letter? And
perhaps Angelo has written?"

"Yes. He has written. I am to take the second breakfast with him and his
bride one day soon after they arrive at Cap Martin, and bless their
villa for them. You see, he too remembers the poor old friend!" and the
curé smiled, a charming smile, showing beautiful teeth, strong and white
as a boy's. "He said you would meet him, for the week of the flying men,
but that is not quite yet. And your letter said the same. I did not look
for you till some days later."

"Well, here I am," cried Vanno. "I came only yesterday afternoon, and my
first thought is for you, Father. You look just the same. It might be
months instead of years since we saw each other last! Will you give me
lunch? I had only a cup of coffee and a croissant at La Turbie, and I'm
as hungry as a wolf."

"A wolf this shepherd is not afraid to let into his fold. Will I _not_
give you lunch? Though, alas! not being prepared for an honoured guest,
it will hardly be worth your eating. If you have changed, my Principino,
it is for the better. From a youth you have become a man."

They walked together across the _Place_, Vanno very slim and tall beside
the shorter, squarer figure of the man of fifty. Into the church the
curé led the Prince, and through the cool, incense-laden dusk to a door
standing wide open. Outside was a green brightness, which made the
doorway in the twilit church look like a huge block of flawed emerald
set into the wall.

"My garden," said the priest, speaking affectionately, as of a loved
child. "I think, Principino, you would like your _déjeuner_ in the grape
arbour. It is only a little arbour, and the garden is small. But wait,
you will see it has a charm that many grander gardens lack."

They stepped from the brown dusk of the church out into the bright
picture of a garden, which seemed unreal, a little garden in a dream, as
complete and perfect in its way, Vanno thought, as an old Persian prayer
rug.

We do not ask for the thanks of the Council in contributing to their annual
receipts, now usually amounting to £10,000.: we were studying the interest
of our readers, which uniformly brings its own reward. The first of the
present illustrations is the _Emu Enclosure_, in the old Garden. Several
broods of _Emus_ have been reared by the Society at their Farm at
Kingston Hill; and some of the year's birds are usually exhibited here.
Next is the _Pelican Enclosure_, containing a house of mimic rock-work,
and a capacious tank of water, the favourite element of the Pelican.
One pair in mature plumage, and a second pair, supposed to be the young
of the same species, are exhibited. The third Cut is the _Aviary for small
and middle-sized birds_, at the north-eastern corner of the Garden.

Here are kept various British Birds, as the different species of Crows
and Song Birds.

The bamboo ornaments of the building are not, therefore, of the appropriate
character that we so much admire elsewhere in the Gardens.

[1] The _Literary Gazette_ first published the Ground Plan of the Zoological
Gardens, from a lithograph circulated among the members, towards the
close of the year 1827. In seeking to do ourselves justice, we
must not forget others.

Our first Engraving, a _Bird's Eye View of the Gardens_ from an original
sketch, appeared in No. 330, of _The Mirror_, September 6, 1828.

[Illustration: "Happy Jerry"]
The individual with this felicitous _soubriquet_, was a specimen of the
great Mandrill Baboon, in its adult state, the _Papio Maimon_ of
Geoffrey, and the _Cynocephalus Maimon_ of Desmarest. It is a native
of the Gold Coast and Guinea, in Africa, where whole droves of them often
plunder the orchards and vineyards.

Their colours are greyish brown, inclining to olive above; the cheeks are
blue and furrowed, and the chin has a sharp-pointed orange beard; the
nose grows red, especially towards the end, where it becomes of a
bright scarlet.

Such are, however, only the colours of the adult animal; the young differs
materially, on which account it has been considered by naturalists
as a distinct species.

Jerry is now a member of death's "antic court," but his necrology may be
interesting to the reader. Mr. Cross describes him as "from on board a
slave vessel that had been captured off the Gold Coast, in the year
1815," when he was supposed to be three years old. He was landed at
Bristol, and was there purchased by the proprietor of a travelling
menagerie, who kept him for some years, and taught him the various
accomplishments he after excelled in, as sitting in a chair, smoking,
drinking grog, &c.; probably he required but little tuition in the
latter; since we find a fondness for fermented liquors numbered among
his habits by the biographers of his species. In 1828, Jerry was
purchased by Mr. Cross, and exhibited at the King's Mews, when he appeared
in full vigour, and attracted a large number of daily visitors.
He was fed daily from the table of his owner, and almost made a
parlour guest; taking tea, toast, bread and butter, soup, boiled and
roast meats, vegetables, pastry, &c., with as much _gout_ as any member
of a club in his vicinity.

In 1829, his eccentricities reached the royal ear at Windsor, and
George the Fourth, (whose partiality to _exotics_, animate or
inanimate, was well known,) sent an "express command" that Jerry
should attend at the Castle. The invitations of royalty are always
undeclinable, and Jerry obeyed accordingly."Why not?" cried the priest, enraptured. "You could buy beautiful land,
a plateau of orange trees and olives, carpeted with violets--the petite
campagne I spoke of. You could build a villa, small enough to shut up
and put to sleep when you tired of it. We would be your caretakers, the
old Mademoiselle and I."

"Would you have me live in my villa alone?" Vanno smiled.

The curé looked merrily sly. "Why not with a bride?" he ventured. "Why
not follow your brother Angelo's example?"

"I must see his bride first, to judge whether his example is worth
following. We haven't met yet."

"Ah," exclaimed the priest, "that reminds me of rather a strange thing!
There came a lady here--but I will tell you, Principino, while we
lunch."

Beaming with pleasure in his hospitality, the curé ushered his guest
into the arbour, which, like a seabird's nest, almost overhung the
cliff. Under shelter of the thick old grapevine and a pink cataract of
roses, a common deal table was spread with coarse but spotless damask.
In a green saucer of peasant ware, one huge pink rose floated in water.
The effect was more charming than any bouquet. There was nothing to eat
but brown bread with creamy cheese, and grapes of a curious colour like
amber and amethysts melted and run together; yet to Vanno it seemed a
feast.

The curé explained that the grapes had been grown on this arbour, and
that he had them to eat and to give away, all winter. When the porcelain
doll of a woman came back, she brought a bottle of home-made wine for
Vanno, and some little sponge cakes. But when the Prince said that in
England such cakes were named "lady fingers," the curé laughed gayly,
and pretended to be horrified. This brought him back to his story,
which, in the excitement of helping his guest to food, he had almost
forgotten.

"I was going to tell you," he went on, "of a strange thing, and a lady
unknown to me, who called here. She was from England, I should say."

Vanno's heart gave a quick throb. "Could it be possible?" he wondered,
"Was she young and beautiful?" he asked aloud. But the answer dashed his
rather childish hope.

"Not beautiful, and not a girl, but young still. 'Striking' would be the
word to express her. And her age, about thirty."

Vanno lost interest. "Why was it so strange that she should call?" he
inquired. "People must find their way here sometimes; even those who
haven't you for a friend."

"Yes, sometimes; and I am glad to see them. This was strange only
because the lady knew that I was a friend of your family. She came
because of that, and put a great many questions; but she refused to tell
her name. She said it was not necessary to mention it."

Interest came back again in a degree. "What was she like?" the Prince
wanted to know.

The curé thought for a moment, and answered slowly. "I can see her
still," he said, "because there was something different about her from
any one else I ever saw. As she came toward me in the _Place_, where you
and I met, she looked like a statue moving, her face was so white, and
her eyes seemed to be white, too, like the eyes of a statue. But when
she drew nearer, I saw that they were a pale, whitish blue, rimmed with
thin lines of black. There was very little colour in her lips or in her
light brown hair, and she had on a gray hat and travelling dress."

"Idina Bland!" Vanno exclaimed.

"You recognize the lady from my description?"

"Yes. What you say about her eyes is unmistakable. She's a distant
cousin of ours--on our mother's side: Irish, from the north of Ireland;
but she has lived a good deal in America with my mother's brother and
sister. She has no nearer relatives than ourselves, and for three
winters she was in Rome--oh, long after you went away. I thought she was
in America now. I wonder----" He broke off abruptly, and his face was
troubled. "What questions did she ask you?" he went on. "Were they
about--my brother?"

"Yes. She wished to know if I could tell her just when he was expected
with his bride, and what would be their address when they arrived. I had
the impression from something she said that she had heard about me from
you."

"I don't remember," said Vanno. "I may have mentioned to her that we had
a friend, a curé near Monte Carlo. She has a singularly good memory. She
never forgets--or forgives," he added, half under his breath. "When did
she come here?"

"The day before yesterday it was, Principino."

"Did she say whether she was staying in the neighbourhood?"

"No, she said nothing about herself, except that she had known your
family well for years."

"And about Angelo--what?"

"Nothing, except the questions. She wanted me to tell her whether I had
ever met or heard anything of his bride."

"I suppose you didn't give her much satisfaction?"

"Not much, my Principino. I could not, if I would. But I did say that I
believed they were expected in ten days or a fortnight. I hope I was not
indiscreet?"

"Not at all. Only--but it doesn't matter."

"Then, if it doesn't matter, let us turn to a subject nearer our hearts.
The favour you wished to ask? Which you may consider granted."

After all, it was not quite as easy to explain as Vanno had thought, in
his moments of exaltation on the mountain. But he was still determined
to carry out his plan.

"You know, Father, when I was a little boy I used to talk with you about
what I should do when I grew up, and how I should never fall in love
with any girl, no matter how beautiful, unless she had eyes like my
favourite stars? How you used to laugh about those 'eyes like stars!'
Yesterday I saw a girl in a train at Marseilles. I got into the train,
meaning to follow her, no matter how far. It was not like me to do
that."

"Pardon me. I think it was," chuckled the curé. "You would always act on
impulse, you man of fire--and ice."

"Well, she got off at Monte Carlo, where I myself wanted to stop. I
thought that was great luck, at first. I turned over in my mind ways of
making her acquaintance. I believed it would be hard to do, but I meant
to do it. Now, I'm not sure--not sure of anything about her. I'm not
even sure whether I want to know her or not. The favour I have to ask
is, that you help me to judge--and help her, if you have to judge
harshly."

"I?"

"Yes, you, Father. If she needs help, I'm not the one to help her. But
you could do it." And Vanno plunged deeper into explanations, warming
with his story and forgetting his first shy stiffness.

As he talked, the curé's gaze dwelt on him affectionately,
appreciatively. He admired the clear look and its fire of noble purity,
not often seen, he feared, on the face of a young man brought up to
believe the world at his feet. He admired the dark eyes, profound as the
African nights they had loved. He noted the rich brown of the swarthy
young face, clear as the profile on old Roman coins, and thought, as he
had thought before, that Murillo would have liked to paint that
colouring. He approved his Prince's way of speaking, when he lost
self-consciousness and his gestures became free and winged. "How his
mother would have loved him as he is now, if she had lived," the priest
thought, remembering the warm-hearted Irish-American girl, whose
impulses had been held down by the sombre asceticism of her husband,
which increased with years. No wonder Prince Vanno was his father's
favourite! Angelo had written that the duke disapproved his marriage,
but that Vanno when he had met the bride would "somehow make it all
come right." It would be a terrible thing if this younger son should
fall in love with the wrong woman; but it was too early yet to begin
preachings and warnings. The curé's kind heart gave him great tact.

"I am to go downstairs and look at this lady, then?" he said.

"Downstairs?"

"Only my expression for going down _there_. I always say that I live
upstairs, here at Roquebrune. And I like the upstairs life best."

"Well, you must come down and dine with me, anyhow. Then you will see
her, and tell me what you think."

The curé broke into a laugh, like a boy's. "Me dine at your Hôtel de
Paris, my son? That is a funny thought. You're inconsistent. If you
think it unsuitable for a lady alone, what about me, a poor country
priest from the mountains?"

"You wouldn't be alone. And you're a man. Besides, it's a good object.
When you've seen her, you must make acquaintance with her somehow. _I_
won't do it. Not while I doubt her."

"Hm! My Principino, you don't know what you are asking me. I am a
priest."

"That's why I ask you. She's--I'll tell you, Father, if she goes on
winning money, you can write to beg for your poor. Then, if she's
charitable, she'll give, and come up to see your church."

"And you think the rest is simple! Well, for your sake I will do what I
can."

"Will you dine with me to-night?"

"Impossible. I cannot leave the village for so much as an hour for the
present. I am shepherd of a mountain flock, remember, and my first duty
is to them. At any moment I may have a summons to one who is dying. A
black sheep he has been perhaps, but all the more should he be washed
white at the last. And I must hold myself ready to give him the extreme
unction when I am sent for, if it be now or not till next week."

Vanno had set his heart upon his plan, and could hardly bear to have it
indefinitely postponed; but he had learned through old experience that
his good friend was not one to be persuaded from duty.

"You'll let me know the moment you're free, in any case," he urged.

"That very moment. But, meanwhile, something may happen that will help
you to judge the lady for yourself--something definite."

"I should have judged her already, if it weren't for her eyes," Vanno
said, with a sigh. "They have a look as if she'd just seen heaven! I can
hardly tell you how, but they are different from all other women's eyes.
They send out a ray of light, like an arrow to your heart."

"Mon Dieu!" exclaimed the priest.

"Don't laugh, Father. It's true, or I wouldn't have felt about her as I
did from the first moment we looked at each other. She's beautiful, but
I assure you it wasn't her beauty that made me follow her. It was
something more mysterious than that. I swear to you, it was as if her
eyes said to me, 'Why, here you are at last, you whom I've known since
the beginning of things. I am the one you've waited for all your life.'"

"All your life! Twenty-seven years, is it not?"

"Twenty-nine this month, Father. I'm not a boy, and I've cared very much
only for one woman. To be sure, if, as may be possible, I owe it to this
procedure that I still have a fairly good head of hair, I did not
suffer in vain, and I humbly apologize.

This careful treatment of my scalp was accompanied by an equally
painstaking treatment of my complexion, and this painful care also
showed a tendency to apply too drastic remedies.

If my skin was chapped by the east wind or the severe heat of the sun,
my mother was immediately at hand with a slice of lemon as an
unfailing remedy. And it always helped. Cold cream and such things would
have been more to my fancy and would doubtless have accomplished
the same end. But my mother showed the same relentlessness toward
herself, and one who valiantly leads the way into the battle may
properly command others to follow.

During the time that we occupied the rented apartment I became seven years
of age, just old enough to retain all sorts of things; and yet I remember
exceedingly little from that period, in fact but two events.

These I probably recall because a vivid color impression helped me
to retain them.

One of the events was a great fire, in which the barns outside the
Eheinsberg Gate burned down.

However, I must state in advance that it was not the burning of the
barns that impressed itself upon my memory, but a scene that took
place immediately before my eyes, one only incidentally occasioned
by the fire, which I did not see at all.

On that day my parents were at a small dinner party, clear at the
other end of the city.

When the company was suddenly apprised of the news that all the barns
were on fire, my mother, who was a very nervous person, immediately
felt certain that her children could not escape death in the flames,
or were at least in grave danger of losing their lives.
The
air with which the silver cover was taken off and the dish shown to Mary
made her feel there was nothing she could do to show her appreciation,
without disappointing the man, unless she bent down and kissed the egg
passionately. Her smile seemed inadequate, and she ate with a worried
fear of seeming ungrateful, especially as she was impelled to hurry,
lest those people in front of the Casino should take all the places at
the tables. She wanted to sit down to gamble, for the strenuous game she
had played last night, with many stakes, would be impossible when
stretching over people's heads.

By half-past nine she was in the crowd, all her money, with the
exception of two hundred pounds she had put by, crushed into her big
beaded hand-bag. She remembered how at Aberdeen the night she went to
the theatre people stood like this, patiently waiting for the pit-door
to open. What did she not remember about that, her first and only visit
to a theatre?

At last the Casino doors yawned, as if they disliked waking up. The
procession rolled toward them, like a determined and vigorous python.
Mary was carried ahead with the rush. She had forgotten that she ought
to have renewed her ticket, but fortunately she was not asked for it;
and as she had come without a wrap, there was nothing to turn her aside
from the rooms.

Once across the threshold of the big Salle Schmidt, the struggle began.
It was not only the young and agile who raced each other to the tables.
Men who looked as if they might have pulled one foot from the grave in
order to reach the Casino, hobbled wildly across the slippery floor.
Fat elderly ladies waddled with indomitable speed, like women tied up in
bags for an obstacle race; and an invalid gentleman, a famous player,
with his attendant--the first to get in--was swept along in a small bath
chair ahead of the crowd, an expression of fierce exhilaration on a
gaunt face white as bleached bone. But the young and healthy gamblers
had an advantage, especially those with long legs.

Only yesterday Mary would have let herself be passed by every one,
rather than push into a place which somebody else wanted. Now, however,
the gambler's fever was in her. Whatever happened, she must get a seat
at the table where she had played last night. To do so was the most
important thing on earth. Slender and tall and long-limbed, she ran like
a young Diana; though not since she had become Sister Rose had she ever
been undignified enough to run. Straight as an arrow she aimed for the
table she wanted, and convulsively seized the back of the last unclaimed
chair. It was grasped at the same instant by a young man of rather
distinguished appearance, who would in other circumstances no doubt have
yielded place to a woman, especially a young and pretty girl. But he too
had the gambler's fever. He struggled with Mary for the chair, and would
have secured it by superior strength if she had not dropped limply into
it as he drew it out for himself.

"Well done!" muttered a woman already settled in a neighbouring seat.
"That's one of the Pretenders to the throne of Portugal."

Instead of being overawed, Mary found herself laughing in the joy of her
triumph. "He can't have this throne, anyhow," she panted, out of breath.

Then she noticed that Lord Dauntrey was with her defeated rival. He had
secured a chair, but getting up, gave it to the royal personage, who was
his paying guest at the Villa Bella Vista. Lord Dauntrey had not seen,
or had not recognized, Mary. He appeared to be more alive than he had
been before, almost a different man. Though his features were stonily
calm as the features of a mask, Mary felt that he was intensely excited,
and completely absorbed in the game about to begin. He had a notebook
over which his sleek brown head and Dom Ferdinand de Trevanna's short
black curls were bent eagerly. It was evident that they had some plan of
play which they were working out together.

It was just as thrilling, Mary thought, to be in the Casino by day as by
night, and even more interesting now, because she knew how to play,
instead of having to depend upon Madame d'Ambre. She had feared that her
too solicitous friend might be lying in wait for her this morning, but
she need have had no anxiety. Madeleine never appeared before noon.
Perhaps she might have made a superhuman effort had there been
reasonable hope of anything to gain. But Madame d'Ambre had learned to
read faces: and Mary's had told her that for a time there was nothing
more to expect. She would be comfortably lazy while her money held out.

Mary's seat was near the spinner, one of the croupiers who had seen her
sensational wins twelve hours ago. He smiled recognition. "Take zero
again, and the neighbours," he mumbled cautiously. "I'll try and make
you win."

Mary wanted to know what "neighbours" meant, and was told hastily that
they were the numbers lying nearest to zero on the wheel.

"But I feel as if twenty-four would come," she objected.

"Very well, if Mademoiselle prefers twenty-four, I will see what I can
do," replied the obliging croupier, like most of his fellow-spinners
wishing to give the impression that he could control the ball.

Twenty-four did not respond to his efforts, but twenty-two was the first
number spun, and as Mary had staked maximums on everything surrounding
her number, she won heavily. Throughout the whole morning luck still
favoured her. She lost sometimes, and her wins were not as sensational
as those of last night, but they made people stare and talk, and added
so many notes to the troublesome contents of her bag that, to the
amusement of everybody, when the time came to go she stuffed gold and
paper into the long gloves she had taken off while playing. Both gloves
were full and bulged out in queer protuberances, like Christmas
stockings. But this was not until nearly two o'clock, when Mary had
grown so hungry that she could no longer concentrate her thoughts upon
the game. Meanwhile, different relays of croupiers and inspectors had
come and gone, and the crowd round the table had changed. Very few
remained of the players who had raced for chairs at the opening hour.
Many had lost and taken themselves off, discouraged; others had a habit
of darting from table to table "for luck"; some had won as much as they
wanted to win, and departed quietly as a man goes home from his office.
But among the few faithful ones were Lord Dauntrey and his royal friend,
who was stared at a good deal, and evidently recognized. By this time
Lord Dauntrey had noticed Mary, his attention being attracted to her by
Dom Ferdinand, but as he had not been introduced to the girl in the
train, he did not bow. The excitement had died from his face, leaving it
gray as the ashes in a burnt-out fire, and his cheeks looked curiously
loose on the bones, as if his muscles had fallen away underneath. Mary
had not taken time to watch his game, but she saw that most of the
silver and gold once neatly piled in front of the two players had
disappeared, and she was afraid that they had lost a good deal. It
seemed unnecessary and almost stupid to her that people should lose. She
did not see why every one could not play as she did.

As she reluctantly rose to go away, driven by hunger, she had to pass
close to Dom Ferdinand and Lord Dauntrey. There was no crowd round the
chairs, as the morning throng had thinned for _déjeuner_, and she heard
Lord Dauntrey say: "I assure you, Monseigneur, it never went as badly as
this on my roulette at home. You saw the records. But nobody can win at
every séance. Don't be discouraged. I'm confident my system's
unbreakable in the end."

It was half-past two when Mary began luncheon, and she had to finish in
a hurry when Schuyler and Carleton called for her with the motor-car.
The following robbery was committed there in or verging on the year 1676:
About four o'clock one morning, a gentleman was robbed by one Nicks, on
a bay mare, just as he was on the declivity of the hill, on the west
side. Nicks rode away, and as he said, was stopped nearly an hour by the
difficulty of getting a boat, to enable him to cross the river; but he
made the best use of it as a kind of bait to his horse.
From thence he rode across the county of Essex to Chelmsford. Here he
stopped about an hour to refresh his horse, and give the animal a
ball;--from thence to Braintree, Bocking, and Withersfield; thence over
the Downs to Cambridge; and from thence, keeping still the cross roads,
he went by Fenny Stratford, [9] to Godmanchester and Huntingdon, where
he and his mare baited about an hour; and, as he said himself, he slept
about half an hour: then holding on the north road, and keeping a
full gallop most of the way, he came to York the same afternoon; put
off his boots and riding clothes, and went dressed as if he had been an
inhabitant of the place, to the bowling-green, where, among many other
gentlemen, was the Lord Mayor of the city. He, singling out his lordship,
studied to do something particular that the mayor might remember him,
and then took occasion to ask him what o'clock it was. The mayor,
pulling out his watch, told him the time, which was a quarter before,
or a quarter after eight at night. Upon a prosecution for this robbery,
the whole merit of the case turned upon this single point:--the person
robbed, swore to the man, to the place, and to the time, in which the
robbery was committed; but Nicks, proving by the Lord Mayor of York,
that he was as far off as _Yorkshire_ at that time, the jury
acquitted him on the bare supposition, that the man could not be
at two places so remote on one and the same day

.

[9] Fenny, or Fen Stanton, not Stratford, must be here meant, as the
former is in the direct road from Cambridge to Huntingdon.

I need not remind your numerous readers that the roads in 1676 were in a
very different plight to those of 1831; at the former period it would
not have been possible for Tom Thumb to have trotted sixteen miles
an hour on any turnpike road in England.

Even my friend, the respected driver of the Old Union Cambridge
Coach to London, can remember, in his time, the coach being two days
on the road, and occasionally being indebted to farmers for the loan of
horses to drag the coach wheels out of their sloughy tracks.

J.S.W.

* * * * *

DIGNIFIED REPROOF.

Catherine Parthenay, niece of the celebrated Anna Parthenay, returned
this spirited reply to the importunities of Henry IV.

--"Your majesty must know, that although I am too humble to become
your wife, I am at the same time descended from too illustrious a
family ever to become your mistress."

P.

* * * * * 

L--A--W.
The circumlocution and diffuseness of law papers--the apparent
redundancy of terms, and multiplicity of synonymes, which may be
found on all judicial proceedings, are happily hit off in the
following, which we copy from _Jenk's New York Evening Journal_:--
"A LAWYER'S STORY.You wouldn't really like it, would you?"
he asked, flushing under the compliment of her trust in him, and
admiring her pluck. "You don't mean that you'd go up with me?"

"I would if you'd take me." Her eyes were shining once more. "It would
be--like all one's most marvellous dreams come true."

"You wouldn't be afraid?"

"Oh, no, not with you."

This was delicious flattery. Carleton promptly fell in love with Mary.
Not to have done so would have been base ingratitude. No woman had ever
paid him so great a compliment. He had thought her bewilderingly pretty
before. Now she was the most beautiful woman in the world.

"You're the bravest girl on earth!" he exclaimed, ardently.

"Better leave her on earth, then," Schuyler said dryly. "We need brave
women."

"There's no danger," Carleton protested with indignation. "Do you think
I'd take her, if I thought there were?"

"Not if you thought there were. And I don't say there is. But Miss
Grant's here without her people----"

"I have no people," Mary cut him short. "Because you can't count aunts,
can you, especially if they dislike you very much?"

Both men laughed.

"I must be your passenger," she said. "Now I've seen the
hydro-aeroplane, I shan't eat or sleep till I've been up in it."

Carleton looked at his host. "You know, at worst she could only get a
wetting if I kept over the sea," he said. "And very likely the _Flying
Fish_ will be cranky and refuse to rise."

"Here's hoping!" mumbled Schuyler. He did not define the exact nature of
his hope, but offered no further objections.

Mary, seeing that she was to have her wish, was anxious to start at
once, and almost surprised at herself for her own courage. But Carleton
explained that she could not "make an ascent," as he laconically called
it, dressed as she was. She must have a small, close fitting hat, and a
veil to tie it firmly down, also a heavy wrap. He had an oilskin coat
which he could lend her, to put over it. Mary was not, however, to be
turned from her desire by small obstacles. She had no very thick coat,
but knew where to buy a lovely moleskin, very long, down to her feet.
She could secure it and be ready in ten minutes if Mr. Schuyler would
send her up the hill in his car. Permission was granted and she went
spinning off with the chauffeur, both Schuyler and Carleton awaiting her
return at the hangar, down on the beach by the harbour.

The "ten minutes" prolonged themselves to twenty, and while they were
slowly passing, three men who had been on the Rock, writing their names
in the visitors' book at the palace, came strolling down the long flight
of paved steps to the harbour. One of these was Captain Hannaford. The
other Englishman was also an officer, Major Norwood, who had known
Hannaford long ago. And the third member of the party was the Maharajah
of Indorwana, an extremely troublesome young Indian royalty who was
"seeing Europe" under the guardianship of his reluctant bear leader,
Norwood. Since the pair had landed at Marseilles, three weeks ago,
Norwood had passed scarcely a peaceful moment by night or day. His
authority over his charge was officially absolute; but in practise it
could only be enforced by violence, which the unfortunate officer had
not yet brought himself to exert. If he did not wish the Maharajah (who
was twenty and had never before been out of his native land) to fall
into some new mischief every hour, he was obliged to find for the youth
a ceaseless succession of amusements. Monte Carlo was to have been but
the affair of a day. The Maharajah, however, had decided differently. He
liked the place, and firmly refused to move. The two had now been
staying for a week at the Metropole, and Major Norwood had telegraphed
to the India Office in London for instructions.

The night before, he had been dragged by his charge to three dances at
open-all-night restaurants, where professionals entertained the
audience. The Maharajah had insisted on learning to dance, his
instructress being an attractive Russian girl; then, as the fun grew
furious, he had forgotten his eastern dignity, and pirouetted for a
wager, with a valuable jar containing a palm. This jar he had promptly
broken, and had not been conciliatory to the proprietor. At five o'clock
he had driven his own car--bought at Marseilles--to Nice, full to
overflowing with his late partners. There had been a slight accident,
and to console the girls for their fright the Maharajah had divided all
his ready money among them. Since then he had had one fight with a
German, whom he had jostled, and who had called him a black man. Major
Norwood had been obliged to use the most nerve-racking exertions to keep
his princeling out of a French prison. Slightly subdued, the Maharajah
had consented to call at the palace at Monaco, to walk through the
beautiful gardens on the Rock with Hannaford, and to visit the Fish
Museum; but there was a yearning for new excitements in his dangerous
dark eyes, and Norwood had been thankful to see Carleton the airman
standing on the beach by his hangar. The two Americans were introduced
to the Indian royalty, and Carleton, not too eagerly, had just begun to
explain the features of his _Flying Fish_, when the big blue car brought
Miss Grant back.

At sight of Mary in a newly bought motor-bonnet, the Maharajah's eyes
lit up. He had seen her the night before at the Casino, and had started
the applause after her first sensational win. Now he asked to be
introduced, and Major Norwood's weary heart sank. Judging from the
expression of the plump olive face, this was going to be another case of
infatuation, and already there had been one on the ship, and one at
Cannes, both of which had necessitated the most delicate diplomacy. The
Maharajah was passionately fond of jewels, and had brought with him from
home some of the finest in his collection, which he intended to wear in
London. But on board ship he had given an emerald worth five hundred
pounds to the pretty young wife of an old Indian judge, who could not
resist accepting it; and at Cannes he had bestowed a diamond aigrette on
a second-rate actress. Major Norwood had tried to get these valuables
back, in vain; and now felt symptoms of heart failure whenever his
charge looked at a beautiful woman.

The Maharajah had an extraordinarily winning manner, however, almost
like that of a dignified child, and his way of speaking English was
engaging. "[2] Thus, Jerry was not in the parlous state described
by Touchstone: he was not damned, like the poor shepherd: _he_ had
been to court. He had also learnt good and gallant manners. He recognised
many of his frequent visiters, and if any female among them was
laid hold of, in his presence, he would bristle with rage, strike
the bars of his cage with tremendous force, and violently gnash his
teeth at the ungallant offender

.

[2] This reminds us of the attachment of the late Duke of Norfolk to his
dogs.

They were admitted to the apartment in which his Grace dined; and he
often selected the fine cuts from joints at table, and threw the
pieces to the curs upon the polished oak floors of Aruudel Castle.

In the autumn of 1831, Jerry's health began to decline, and he was
accordingly removed from Charing Cross to the suburban salubrity of
the Surrey Zoological Gardens.

All was of no avail: though, as a biographer would say of a nobler animal,
every remedy was tried to restore him to health. Life's fitful fever
was well nigh over with him, and in the month of December
last--he died. His body was opened and examined, when it appeared that
his death was through old age; and, although he had been a free
liver, and, as Mr. Cross facetely observes, "was not a member of a
Temperance Society," his internal organization did not seem to have
suffered in the way usually consequent upon hard drinking.
Perhaps a few ascetic advocates of cant and care-wearing abstinence
will think that we ought to conceal this exceptionable fact, lest Jerry's
example should be more frequently followed. Justice demands otherwise;
and as the biographers of old tell us that Alexander the Great died of
hard-drinking, so ought we to record that Happy Jerry's life was
not shortened by the imperial propensity: in this case, the monkey
has beat the man: proverbially, the man beats the monkey.

Jerry had, however, his share of ailment: he had been a martyr to that
love-pain, the tooth-ache; several of his large molar teeth being
entirely decayed.
This circumstance accounted for the gloomy appearance he would
sometimes put on, and his covering his head with his hands, and
laying it in his chair.

Poor fellow! we could have sympathized with him from our very hearts--we
mean teeth. Jerry's remains have been carefully embalmed, (we hope in
his favourite spirit,) and are now at the Surrey Gardens; where the arrival
of a living congener is daily expected. Meanwhile, will nobody write
the _hic jacet_ of the deceased?
The aviator tilted the control, as if to watch the action, and
suddenly, to the amazement of all the spectators, what had been an
unusual looking double-decked motor-boat sprang out of the harbour into
the air. It rose gracefully and gradually to a height of perhaps four
hundred feet, flying as if it aimed straight for the far-distant
pearl-cluster of Bordighera, on the Italian coast.

Vanno had an extraordinary sensation, as if his heart stopped beating,
and as if at the same time an iron band across his chest stopped the
expansion of his lungs. It was such a sensation as a man might have in
the moment of death, and it was so unlike anything he had ever felt
before that, for a few seconds of physical agony, he asked himself
dazedly what was the matter. Then, suddenly, he knew that he was
afraid--afraid for the girl. And he hated Carleton for risking her life.
He felt a savage longing to do the young airman some bodily injury as a
punishment for what he, Vanno, was made to suffer.

The relief was so great when the _Flying Fish_ dropped slowly down and
settled again into the water that Vanno was slightly giddy with the rush
of blood through his veins. He watched the hydro-aeroplane turn and head
back for the mouth of Monaco harbour; and it seemed to him that he had
lived through years in a few minutes, as one can have a lifetime's
experience in one short dream. He sickened as he thought what would be
his feelings now if the machine had fallen and turned over, too far off
for any hope of rescue from land. If those "eyes like stars" had been
closed until eternity, with no hope that he could ever learn the secret
of the soul behind them, nothing the future might have to give could
make up for the loss. It was only when the _Flying Fish_ swam safely
into the harbour that Vanno remembered his irritation at seeing Mary
with all those men, the only woman among them. After what he had gone
through since then, this annoyance seemed a ridiculously small thing;
but no sooner was she on land again, received with acclamations from
her new friends and applause by the crowd which had quickly collected,
than Vanno felt the same tingling anger.

The girl was making herself notorious! At this rate she would be talked
of everywhere. Strangers would snapshot her as she passed. Her picture
would be for sale on one of those Monte Carlo postcards of celebrities
which were newly taken every day; she would be in the local English
illustrated newspaper. He walked off quickly, with his head down, so as
to lose himself in the crowd and not be seen by Mary or her companions.

She was pale as a drowned girl when Carleton and Hannaford helped her
out of the oilskin which had protected her new fur cloak; and never,
perhaps, had she been so beautiful. There was something unearthly about
her, as if she had seen a vision and the blinding light of it still
shone white upon her face. As he touched her, Hannaford felt a thrill as
of new life go through him. By his own wild recklessness he had spoilt
his career and put himself, so he believed, beyond the pale of any
woman's love. He had thought that he had trained himself not to care;
but in that instant, while Mary, dazed by her vision, almost hung in his
arms and Carleton's, he knew that he was as other men. He wondered why
last night she had meant no more to him than a pretty new face at Monte
Carlo, a rather amusing problem which would soon lose its abstruse
charm. It was like tearing out a live nerve to feel that she could think
of him only with disgust or maybe horror. Yet he knew that, now he had
seen her face with the wonderful light on it, he would have to try and
win something from her, if only pity. The idea came to him that she and
he, and these men with them, and Madeleine d'Ambre, and others who would
gather round the beautiful and lucky player, were figures being woven
into a web of tapestry together; that they were forced to group
themselves as the weaver of the web decreed. He saw his own figure woven
into an obscure and shadowy corner far from that of Mary, and, rebelling
against the choice of the weaver, wished to tear the tapestry in pieces.
But the next moment he was ready to smile at himself with the quiet,
cynical smile which had become familiar to all those who knew him.
"Nothing is tragic unless you think so," he said to himself. Yet he
could not put out of his mind the fancy of the web with figure after
figure being woven into it, against the background of sea and mountain.
It was not unlike the idea which had come to Peter in a half-waking
dream the night after Mary went away. And at the convent in the north of
Scotland the same thought still came back to Peter, though no news had
yet been received there from Monte Carlo.

"Were you afraid?" the Maharajah of Indorwana asked Mary, as the colour
slowly flowed back to her face.

"No," she said, dreamily, "not afraid. But it was like dying and going
to another world. When we were rushing through the water with the loud
noise of machinery in our ears, and the glassy screen of spray over our
heads, I lost my breath. The gourmand bolts and bolts, and smacks his
chops-- Eyes every dish that enters, with a stare Of greed and terror,
lest one thing go by him.
The glances that he casts along the board, At every slice that's carved,
have that in them Beyond description. I would rather dine Beside an
ox--yea, share his cog of draff; Or with a dog, if he'd keep his own side;
Than with a glutton on the rarest food.
A thousand times I've dined upon the waste, On dry-pease bannock,
by the silver spring.Hannaford looked at her closely as she spoke. He was continually
thinking of death as a dark room, behind a shut door which he would
perhaps choose to open. He felt that he would like to talk to her some
day about what she really expected to find on the other side of the
door.

Nothing else was quite real to him in the scene, when everybody pressed
round Carleton, congratulating him on his machine and the exploit of
which the airman seemed to think little. It was not real when Schuyler
invited Hannaford and his two companions to crowd into the big car, and
be spun up the hill to Monte Carlo. He remembered the illumined look on
Mary's face (though it was gone now) and the faint ray of hope it had
sent into that secret place where his real self lived wearily.


XII


If Mary had died and waked up in another world, it could hardly have
been more of a contrast to her old existence than the new life at Monte
Carlo to the life at St. Ursula's-of-the-Lake.

And the Mary at Monte Carlo was a different person from the Mary at the
Scotch convent. She had a new set of thoughts and feelings of which she
would not have believed herself capable in Scotland. She would have been
surprised and shocked at them in another, a few weeks ago. Now she was
not shocked or surprised at them even in herself. They seemed natural
and familiar. She was at home with them all, and with her new self, not
even realizing that it was a new self. And she grew more beautiful, like
a flower taken from a dark northern corner of the garden and planted in
a sheltered, sunny spot.

She no longer thought of turning her back upon Monte Carlo in a few
days, and journeying on to Florence. She stayed, without making definite
plans; but she did not write to the convent. She knew that Reverend
Mother would not like her to be here, gambling, and it would be too
difficult to explain. There was no use in trying, and she could not bear
the thought of having to read a reproachful letter, when she was so
happy and every one was being so nice to her. I had looked up and shouted
something to Andrey when suddenly I heard a shell that seemed
as though it would break right over me. I braced myself, as one does,
to meet it. For a moment I heard nothing but the noise; my nostrils were
choked with the smell and my eyes blinded with dust. But I knew that I
had not been hit, and I stood there, rather stupidly, wondering. Then
cleared. I saw that all the right corner of the house was gone,
and that Semyonov had run forward and was kneeling on the ground.After sending off this message she felt relieved for a few days, as if
she were secure from danger; but sometimes she waked in the night to
worry lest Aunt Sara knew any one on the Riviera who might be instructed
to look up a stray niece. Then she would comfort herself by reflecting
that Mrs. Home-Davis was not at all the sort of woman to know people at
Monte Carlo. She was too dull and uninteresting.

