It should also be borne in mind that any accident to a boat among these
islands is more likely to prove disastrous than elsewhere, since there
are probably not a score out of the twenty thousand Lofoden fishermen
who pass half their lives on the water, who know how to swim. The water
is too cold to make bathing a luxury, and they are not sufficiently
prepossessed in favour of cleanliness to make it a duty. Nevertheless,
they are bold sailors, in their way, and a tougher, hardier, more
athletic class of men it would be difficult to find. Handsome they are
not, but quite the reverse, and the most of them have an awkward and
uncouth air; but it is refreshing to look at their broad shoulders,
their brawny chests, and the massive muscles of their legs and arms.
During the whole voyage, I saw but one man who appeared to be diseased.
Such men, I suspect, were the Vikings--rough, powerful, ugly, dirty
fellows, with a few primitive virtues, and any amount of robust vices.
We noticed, however, a marked change for the better in the common
people, as we advanced northward. They were altogether better dressed,
better mannered, and more independent and intelligent, but with a hard,
keen, practical expression of face, such as one finds among the shoremen
of New-England. The school system of Norway is still sadly deficient,
but there is evidently no lack of natural capacity among these people.
Their prevailing vice is intemperance, which here, as in all other parts
of the country, is beginning to diminish since restrictions have been
placed upon the manufacture and sale of spirituous liquors,
simultaneously with the introduction of cheap and excellent fermented
drinks. The statistics of their morality also show a better state of
things than in the South. There is probably no country population in the
world where licentiousness prevails to such an extent as in the
districts of Guldbrandsdal and Hedemark.

A voyage of four hours across the West Fjord brought us to the little
village of Balstad, at the southern end of West-Vaagöe. The few red,
sod-roofed houses were built upon a rocky point, behind which were some
patches of bright green pasture, starred with buttercups, overhung by a
splendid peak of dark-red rock, two thousand feet in height. It was a
fine frontispiece to the Lofoden scenery which now opened before us.
Running along the coast of West and East Vaagöe, we had a continual
succession of the wildest and grandest pictures--thousand feet
precipices, with turrets and needles of rock piercing the sky, dazzling
snow-fields, leaking away in cataracts which filled the ravines with
foam, and mazes of bald, sea-worn rocks, which seem to have been thrown
down from the scarred peaks in some terrible convulsion of nature. Here
and there were hollows, affording stony pasturage for a few sheep and
cows and little wooden fisher-huts stood on the shore in the arms of
sheltered coves. At the village of Svolvær, which is built upon a pile
of bare stones, we took on board a number of ladies in fashionable
dresses, with bonnets on the backs of their heads and a sufficiency of
cumbrous petticoats to make up for the absence of hoops, which have not
yet got further north than Drontheim. In seeing these unexpected
apparitions emerge from such a wild corner of chaos I could not but
wonder at the march of modern civilisation. Pianos in Lapland, Parisian
dresses among the Lofodens, billiard-tables in Hammerfest--whither shall
we turn to find the romance of the North!

We sailed, in the lovely nocturnal sunshine, through the long,
river-like channel--the Rasksund, I believe, it is called--between the
islands of East-Vaagöe and Hindöe, the largest of the Lofodens. For a
distance of fifteen miles the strait was in no place more than a mile in
breadth, while it was frequently less than a quarter. The smooth water
was a perfect mirror, reflecting on one side the giant cliffs, with
their gorges choked with snow, their arrowy pinnacles and white lines of
falling water--on the other, hills turfed to the summit with emerald
velvet, sprinkled with pale groves of birch and alder, and dotted, along
their bases, with the dwellings of the fishermen. It was impossible to
believe that we were floating on an arm of the Atlantic--it was some
unknown river, or a lake high up among the Alpine peaks. The silence of
these shores added to the impression. Now and then a white sea-gull
fluttered about the cliffs, or an eider duck paddled across some glassy
cove, but no sound was heard: there was no sail on the water, no human
being on the shore. Emerging at last from this wild and enchanting
strait, we stood across a bay, opening southward to the Atlantic, to the
port of Steilo, on one of the outer islands. Here the broad front of the
island, rising against the roseate sky, was one swell of the most
glorious green, down to the very edge of the sea, while the hills of
East-Vaagöe, across the bay, showed only naked and defiant rock, with
summit-fields of purple-tinted snow. In splendour of coloring, the
tropics were again surpassed, but the keen north wind obliged us to
enjoy it in an overcoat.

Toward midnight, the sun was evidently above the horizon, though hidden
by intervening mountains. Braisted and another American made various
exertions to see it, such as climbing the foremast, but did not succeed
until about one o'clock, when they were favoured by a break in the
hills. Although we had daylight the whole twenty-four hours, travellers
do not consider that their duty is fulfilled unless they see the sun
itself, exactly at midnight. In the morning, we touched at Throndenaes,
on the northern side of Hindöe, a beautiful bay with green and wooded
shores, and then, leaving the Lofodens behind us, entered the
archipelago of large islands which lines the coast of Finmark. Though
built on the same grand and imposing scale as the Lofodens, these
islands are somewhat less jagged and abrupt in their forms, and exhibit
a much more luxuriant vegetation. In fact, after leaving the Namsen
Fjord, near Drontheim, one sees very little timber until he reaches the
parallel of 69°. The long straits between Senjen and Qvalö and the
mainland are covered with forests of birch and turfy slopes greener than
England has ever shown. At the same time the snow level was not more
than 500 feet above the sea, and broad patches lay melting on all the
lower hills. This abundance of snow seems a singular incongruity, when
you look upon the warm summer sky and the dark, mellow, juicy green of
the shores. One fancies that he is either sailing upon some lofty inland
lake, or that the ocean-level in these latitudes must be many thousand
feet higher than in the temperate zone. He cannot believe that he is on
the same platform with Sicily and Ceylon.

After a trip up the magnificent Maans Fjord, and the sight of some
sea-green glaciers, we approached Tromsöe, the capital of Finmark. This
is a town of nearly 3000 inhabitants, on a small island in the strait
between Qvalö and the mainland. It was just midnight when we dropped
anchor, but, although the sun was hidden by a range of snowy hills in
the north, the daylight was almost perfect. I immediately commenced
making a sketch of the harbour, with its fleet of coasting vessels. Some
Russian craft from Archangel, and a Norwegian cutter carrying six guns,
were also at anchor before the town. Our French traveller, after amusing
himself with the idea of my commencing a picture at sunset and finishing
it at sunrise, started for a morning ramble over the hills. Boats
swarmed around the steamer; the coal-lighters came off, our crew
commenced their work, and when the sun's disc appeared, before one
o'clock, there was another day inaugurated. The night had vanished
mysteriously, no one could tell how.


CHAPTER XXV.

FINMARK AND HAMMERFEST.


The steamer lay at Tromsöe all day, affording us an opportunity to visit
an encampment of Lapps in Tromsdal, about four miles to the eastward. So
far as the Lapps were concerned, I had seen enough of them, but I joined
the party for the sake of the northern summer. The captain was kind
enough to despatch a messenger to the Lapps, immediately on our arrival,
that their herd of reindeer, pasturing on the mountains, might be driven
down for our edification, and also exerted himself to procure a horse
for the American lady. The horse came, in due time, but a side saddle is
an article unknown in the arctic regions, and the lady was obliged to
trust herself to a man's saddle and the guidance of a Norseman of the
most remarkable health, strength, and stupidity.

Our path led up a deep valley, shut in by overhanging cliffs, and
blocked up at the eastern end by the huge mass of the fjeld. The
streams, poured down the crags from their snowy reservoirs, spread
themselves over the steep side of the hill, making a succession of
quagmires, over which we were obliged to spring and scramble in
breakneck style. The sun was intensely hot in the enclosed valley, and
we found the shade of the birchen groves very grateful. Some of the
trees grew to a height of forty feet, with trunks the thickness of a
man's body. There were also ash and alder trees, of smaller size, and a
profusion of brilliant wild flowers. The little multeberry was in
blossom; the ranunculus, the globe-flower, the purple geranium, the
heath, and the blue forget-me-not spangled the ground, and on every
hillock the young ferns unrolled their aromatic scrolls written with
wonderful fables of the southern spring. For it was only spring here, or
rather the very beginning of summer. The earth had only become warm
enough to conceive and bring forth flowers, and she was now making the
most of the little maternity vouchsafed to her. The air was full of
winged insects, darting hither and thither in astonishment at finding
themselves alive; the herbage seemed to be visibly growing under your
eyes; even the wild shapes of the trees were expressive of haste, lest
the winter might come on them unawares; and I noticed that the year's
growth had been shot out at once, so that the young sprays might have
time to harden and to protect the next year's buds. There was no lush,
rollicking out-burst of foliage, no mellow, epicurean languor of the
woods, no easy unfolding of leaf on leaf, as in the long security of our
summers; but everywhere a feverish hurry on the part of nature to do
something, even if it should only be half done. And above the valley,
behind its mural ramparts, glowered the cold white snows, which had
withdrawn for a little while, but lay in wait, ready to spring down as
soon as the protecting sunshine should fail.

The lady had one harmless tumble into the mud, and we were all pretty
well fatigued with our rough walk, when we reached the Lapp encampment.
It consisted only of two families, who lived in their characteristic
_gammes_, or huts of earth, which serve them also for winter dwellings.
These burrows were thrown up on a grassy meadow, beside a rapid stream
which came down from the fjeld; and at a little distance were two folds,
or _corrals_ for their reindeer, fenced with pickets slanting outward. A
number of brown-haired, tailless dogs, so much resembling bear-cubs that
at first sight we took them for such, were playing about the doors. A
middle-aged Lapp, with two women and three or four children, were the
inmates. They scented profit, and received us in a friendly way,
allowing the curious strangers to go in and out at pleasure, to tease
the dogs, drink the reindeer milk, inspect the children, rock the baby,
and buy horn spoons to the extent of their desire. They were smaller
than the Lapps of Kautokeino--or perhaps the latter appeared larger in
their winter dresses--and astonishingly dirty. Their appearance is much
more disgusting in summer than in winter, when the snow, to a certain
extent, purifies everything. After waiting an hour or more, the herd
appeared descending the fjeld, and driven toward the fold by two young
Lapps, assisted by their dogs. There were about four hundred in all,
nearly one-third being calves. Their hoarse bleating and the cracking
noise made by their knee-joints, as they crowded together into a dense
mass of grey, mossy backs, made a very peculiar sound; and this combined
with their ragged look, from the process of shedding their coats of
hair, did not very favourably impress those of our party who saw them
for the first time. The old Lapp and his boy, a strapping fellow of
fifteen, with a ruddy, olive complexion and almost Chinese features,
caught a number of the cows with lassos, and proceeded to wean the young
deer by anointing the mothers' dugs with cow-dung, which they carried in
pails slung over their shoulders. In this delightful occupation we left
them, and returned to Tromsöe.

As we crossed the mouth of the Ulvsfjord, that evening we had an open
sea horizon toward the north, a clear sky, and so much sunshine at
eleven o'clock that it was evident the Polar day had dawned upon us at
last. The illumination of the shores was unearthly in its glory, and the
wonderful effects of the orange sunlight, playing upon the dark hues of
the island cliffs, can neither be told nor painted. The sun hung low
between Fuglöe, rising like a double dome from the sea, and the tall
mountains of Arnöe, both of which islands resembled immense masses of
transparent purple glass, gradually melting into crimson fire at their
bases. The glassy, leaden-coloured sea was powdered with a golden bloom,
and the tremendous precipices at the mouth of the Lyngen Fjord, behind
us, were steeped in a dark red, mellow flush, and touched with
pencillings of pure, rose-coloured light, until their naked ribs seemed
to be clothed in imperial velvet. As we turned into the Fjord and ran
southward along their bases, a waterfall, struck by the sun, fell in
fiery orange foam down the red walls, and the blue ice-pillars of a
beautiful glacier filled up the ravine beyond it. We were all on deck,
and all faces, excited by the divine splendour of the scene, and tinged
by the same wonderful aureole, shone as if transfigured. In my whole
life I have never seen a spectacle so unearthly beautiful.

Our course brought the sun rapidly toward the ruby cliffs of Arnöe, and
it was evident that he would soon be hidden from sight. It was not yet
half-past eleven, and an enthusiastic passenger begged the captain to
stop the vessel until midnight. "Why," said the latter, "it is midnight
now, or very near it; you have Drontheim time, which is almost forty
minutes in arrears." True enough, the real time lacked but five minutes
of midnight, and those of us who had sharp eyes and strong imaginations
saw the sun make his last dip and rise a little, before he vanished in a
blaze of glory behind Arnöe. I turned away with my eyes full of dazzling
spheres of crimson and gold, which danced before me wherever I looked,
and it was a long time before they were blotted out by the semi-oblivion
of a daylight sleep.

The next morning found us at the entrance of the long Alten Fjord. Here
the gashed, hacked, split, scarred and shattered character of the
mountains ceases, and they suddenly assume a long, rolling outline, full
of bold features, but less wild and fantastic. On the southern side of
the fjord many of them are clothed with birch and fir to the height of a
thousand feet. The valleys here are cultivated to some extent, and
produce, in good seasons, tolerable crops of potatoes, barley, and
buckwheat. This is above lat. 70°, or parallel with the northern part of
Greenland, and consequently the highest cultivated land in the world. In
the valley of the Alten River, the Scotch fir sometimes reaches a
height of seventy or eighty feet. This district is called the Paradise
of Finmark, and no doubt floats in the imaginations of the settlers on
Mageröe and the dreary Porsanger Fjord, as Andalusia and Syria float in
ours. It is well that human bliss is so relative in its character.

At Talvik, a cheerful village with a very neat, pretty church, who
should come on board but Pastor Hvoslef, our Kautokeino friend of the
last winter! He had been made one of a Government Commission of four,
appointed to investigate and report upon the dissensions between the
nomadic Lapps and those who have settled habitations. A better person
could not have been chosen than this good man, who has the welfare of
the Lapps truly at heart, and in whose sincerity every one in the North
confides.

We had on board Mr. Thomas, the superintendent of the copper works at
Kaafjord, who had just resigned his seat in the Storthing and given up
his situation for the purpose of taking charge of some mines at Copiapo,
in Chili. Mr. Thomas is an Englishman, who has been for twenty years
past one of the leading men of Finmark, and no other man, I venture to
say, has done more to improve and enlighten that neglected province. His
loss will not be easily replaced. At Talvik, his wife, a pleasant,
intelligent Norwegian lady, came on board; and, as we passed the rocky
portals guarding the entrance to the little harbour of Kaafjord, a gun,
planted on a miniature battery above the landing-place, pealed forth a
salute of welcome. I could partly understand Mr. Thomas's long residence
in those regions, when I saw what a wild, picturesque spot he had chosen
for his home. The cavernous entrances to the copper mines yawned in the
face of the cliff above the outer bay below, on the water's edge, stood
the smelting works, surrounded by labourers' cottages; a graceful white
church crowned a rocky headland a little further on; and beyond, above a
green lawn, decked with a few scattering birches, stood a comfortable
mansion, with a garden in the rear. The flag of Norway and the cross of
St. George floated from separate staffs on the lawn. There were a number
of houses, surrounded with potato-fields on the slope stretching around
the bay, and an opening of the hills at its head gave us a glimpse of
the fir forests of the inland valleys. On such a cloudless day as we
had, it was a cheerful and home-like spot.

We took a friendly leave of Mr. Thomas and departed, the little battery
giving us I don't know how many three-gun salutes as we moved off. A
number of whales spouted on all sides of us as we crossed the head of
the fjord to Bosekop, near the mouth of the Alten River. This is a
little village on a bare rocky headland, which completely shuts out from
view the rich valley of the Alten, about which the Finmarkers speak with
so much enthusiasm. "Ah, you should see the farms on the Alten," say
they; "there we have large houses, fields, meadows, cattle, and the
finest timber." This is Altengaard, familiar to all the readers of
Mügge's "Afraja." The _gaard_, however, is a single large estate, and
not a name applied to the whole district, as those unfamiliar with Norsk
nomenclature might suppose. Here the Catholics have established a
mission--ostensibly a missionary boarding-house, for the purpose of
acclimating arctic apostles; but the people, who regard it with the
greatest suspicion and distrust, suspect that the ultimate object is the
overthrow of their inherited, venerated, and deeply-rooted Lutheran
faith. At Bosekop we lost Pastor Hvoslef, and took on board the chief of
the mission, the Catholic Bishop of the Arctic Zone--for I believe his
diocese includes Greenland, Spitzbergen, and Polar America. Here is a
Calmuck Tartar, thought I, as a short, strongly-built man, with sallow
complexion, deep-set eyes, broad nostrils, heavy mouth, pointed chin,
and high cheek-bones, stepped on board; but he proved to be a Russian
baron, whose conversion cost him his estates. He had a massive head,
however, in which intellect predominated, and his thoroughly polished
manners went far to counteract the effect of one of the most
unprepossessing countenances I ever saw.

M. Gay, who had known the bishop at Paris, at once entered into
conversation with him. A short time afterwards, my attention was drawn
to the spot where they stood by loud and angry exclamations. Two of our
Norwegian _savans_ stood before the bishop, and one of them, with a face
white with rage, was furiously vociferating: "It is not true! it is not
true! Norway is a free country!" "In this respect, it is not free,"
answered the bishop, with more coolness than I thought he could have
shown, under such circumstances: "You know very well that no one can
hold office except those who belong to your State Church--neither a
Catholic, nor a Methodist, nor a Quaker: whereas in France, as I have
said, a Protestant may even become a minister of the Government." "But
we do not believe in the Catholic faith:--we will have nothing to do
with it!" screamed the Norwegian. "We are not discussing our creeds,"
answered the bishop: "I say that, though Norway is a free country,
politically, it does _not_ secure equal rights to all its citizens, and
so far as the toleration of religious beliefs is concerned, it is behind
most other countries of Europe." He thereupon retreated to the cabin,
for a crowd had gathered about the disputants, and the deck-passengers
pressing aft, seemed more than usually excited by what was going on. The
Norwegian shaking with fury, hissed through his set teeth: "How dare he
come here to insult our national feeling!" Yes, but every word was true;
and the scene was only another illustration of the intense vanity of the
Norwegians in regard to their country. Woe to the man who says a word
against Norway, though he say nothing but what everybody knows to be
true! So long as you praise everything--scenery, people, climate,
institutions, and customs--or keep silent where you cannot praise, you
have the most genial conversation; but drop a word of honest dissent or
censure, and you will see how quickly every one draws back into his
shell. There are parts of our own country where a foreigner might make
the same observation. Let a Norwegian travel in the Southern States, and
dare to say a word in objection to slavery!

There is nothing of interest between Alten and Hammerfest, except the
old sea-margins on the cliffs and a small glacier on the island of
Seiland. The coast is dismally bleak and barren. Whales were very
abundant; we sometimes saw a dozen spouting at one time. They were of
the hump-backed species, and of only moderate size; yet the fishery
would doubtless pay very well, if the natives had enterprise enough to
undertake it. I believe, however, there is no whale fishery on the whole
Norwegian coast. The desolate hills of Qvalö surmounted by the pointed
peak of the Tjuve Fjeld, or "Thief Mountain,"--so called because it
steals so much of the winter sunshine,--announced our approach to
Hammerfest, and towards nine o'clock in the evening we were at anchor in
the little harbour. The summer trade had just opened, and forty Russian
vessels, which had arrived from the White Sea during the previous week
or two, lay crowded before the large fish warehouses built along the
water. They were all three-masted schooners, the main and mizen masts
set close together, and with very heavy, square hulls. Strong Muscovite
faces, adorned with magnificent beards, stared at us from the decks, and
a jabber of Russian, Finnish, Lapp, and Norwegian, came from the rough
boats crowding about our gangways. The north wind, blowing to us off the
land, was filled with the perfume of dried codfish, train oil, and
burning whale-"scraps," with which, as we soon found, the whole place is
thoroughly saturated.

There is one hotel in the place, containing half a dozen chambers of the
size of a state-room. We secured quarters here with a great deal of
difficulty, owing to slowness of comprehension on the part of an old
lady who had charge of the house. The other American, who at first took
rooms for himself and wife, gave them up again very prudently; for the
noises of the billiard-room penetrated through the thin wooden
partitions, and my bed, at least, had been slept in by one of the
codfish aristocracy, for the salty odour was so pungent that it kept me
awake for a long time. With our fare, we had less reason to complain.
Fresh salmon, arctic ptarmigan, and reindeer's tongue were delicacies
which would have delighted any palate, and the wine had really seen
Bordeaux, although rainy weather had evidently prevailed during the
voyage thence to Hammerfest. The town lies in a deep bight, inclosed by
precipitous cliffs, on the south-western side of the island, whence the
sun, by this time long past his midsummer altitude, was not visible at
midnight. Those of our passengers who intended returning by the
_Nordkap_ climbed the hills to get another view of him, but
unfortunately went upon the wrong summit, so that they did not see him
after all. I was so fatigued, from the imperfect sleep of the sunshiny
nights and the crowd of new and exciting impressions which the voyage
had given me, that I went to bed; but my friend sat up until long past
midnight, writing, with curtains drawn.


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE MIDNIGHT SUN.


Most of the travellers who push as far north as Hammerfest content
themselves with one experience of the midnight sun, and return with the
same steamer to Drontheim. A few extend their journey to the North Cape,
and, once a year, on an average, perhaps, some one is adventurous enough
to strike across Lapland to Torneå. The steamers, nevertheless, pass the
North Cape, and during the summer make weekly trips to the Varanger
Fjord, the extreme eastern limit of the Norwegian territory. We were
divided in opinion whether to devote our week of sunshine to the North
Cape, or to make the entire trip and see something of the northern coast
of Europe, but finally decided that the latter, on the whole, as being
unfamiliar ground, would be most interesting. The screw-steamer Gyller
(one of Odin's horses) was lying in the harbour when we arrived, and was
to leave in the course of the next night; so we lost no time in securing
places, as she had but a small cabin and no state-rooms. Nevertheless,
we found her very comfortable, and in every respect far superior to the
English vessels which ply between Hull and Christiania. Our fellow
travellers were all returning to Drontheim--except three Norwegian
officers on their way to make an official inspection of the fortress of
Wardöhuus--and the last we saw of them was their return, an hour past
midnight, from making a second attempt to see the sun from the hills.
The night was somewhat obscured, and I doubt if they were successful.

When I went on deck on the morning after our departure, we were in the
narrow strait between the island of Mageröe, the northern extremity of
which forms the North Cape, and the mainland. On either side, the shores
of bare bleak rock, spotted with patches of moss and stunted grass, rose
precipitously from the water, the snow filling up their ravines from the
summit to the sea. Not a tree nor a shrub, nor a sign of human
habitation was visible; there was no fisher's sail on the lonely waters,
and only the cries of some sea-gulls, wheeling about the cliffs, broke
the silence. As the strait opened to the eastward, a boat appeared,
beating into Kjelvik, on the south-eastern corner of the island; but the
place itself was concealed from us by an intervening cape. This is the
spot which Von Buch visited in the summer of 1807, just fifty years ago,
and his description would be equally correct at the present day. Here,
where the scurvy carries off half the inhabitants,--where pastors coming
from Southern Norway die within a year,--where no trees grow, no
vegetables come to maturity, and gales from every quarter of the Icy Sea
beat the last faint life out of nature, men will still persist in
living, in apparent defiance of all natural laws. Yet they have at least
an excuse for it, in the miraculous provision which Providence has made
for their food and fuel. The sea and fjords are alive with fish, which
are not only a means of existence but of profit to them, while the
wonderful Gulf Stream, which crosses 5000 miles of the Atlantic to die
upon this Ultima Thule in a last struggle with the Polar Sea, casts up
the spoils of tropical forests to feed their fires. Think of arctic
fishers burning upon their hearths the palms of Hayti, the mahogany of
Honduras, and the precious woods of the Amazon and the Orinoco!

In the spring months, there are on an average 800 vessels on the
northern coast, between the North Cape and Vadsö, with a fishing
population of 5000 men on board, whose average gains, even at the scanty
prices they receive amount to $30 apiece, making a total yield of
$150,000. It is only within a very few years that the Norwegian
Government has paid any attention to this far corner of the peninsula.
At present, considering the slender population, the means of
communication are well kept up during eight months in the year, and the
result is an increase (perceptible to an old resident, no doubt) in the
activity and prosperity of the country.

On issuing from the strait, we turned southward into the great Porsanger
Fjord, which stretches nearly a hundred miles into the heart of Lapland,
dividing Western from Eastern Finmark. Its shores are high monotonous
hills, half covered with snow, and barren of vegetation except patches
of grass and moss. If once wooded, like the hills of the Alten Fjord,
the trees have long since disappeared, and now nothing can be more bleak
and desolate. The wind blew violently from the east, gradually lifting a
veil of grey clouds from the cold pale sky, and our slow little steamer
with jib and fore-topsail set, made somewhat better progress. Toward
evening (if there is such a time in the arctic summer), we reached
Kistrand, the principal settlement on the fjord. It has eight or nine
houses, scattered along a gentle slope a mile in length, and a little
red church, but neither gardens, fields, nor potato patches. A strip of
grazing ground before the principal house was yellow with dandelions,
the slope behind showed patches of brownish green grass, and above this
melancholy attempt at summer stretched the cold, grey, snow-streaked
ridge of the hill. Two boats, manned by sea-Lapps, with square blue
caps, and long ragged locks of yellow hair fluttering in the wind,
brought off the only passenger and the mails, and we put about for the
mouth of the fjord.

Running along under the eastern shore, we exchanged the dreadful
monotony through which we had been sailing for more rugged and
picturesque scenery. Before us rose a wall of dark cliff, from five to
six hundred feet in height, gaping here and there with sharp clefts or
gashes, as if it had cracked in cooling, after the primeval fires. The
summit of these cliffs was the average level of the country; and this
peculiarity, I found, applies to all the northern shore of Finmark,
distinguishing the forms of the capes and islands from those about Alten
and Hammerfest, which, again, are quite different from those of the
Lofodens. "On returning from Spitzbergen," said a Hammerfest merchant to
me, "I do not need to look at chart or compass, when I get sight of the
coast; I know, from the formation of the cliffs, exactly where I am."
There is some general resemblance to the chalk bluffs of England,
especially about Beachy Head, but the rock here appears to be
mica-slate, disposed in thin, vertical strata, with many violent
transverse breaks.

As we approached the end of the promontory which divides the Porsanger
from the Laxe Fjord, the rocks became more abrupt and violently
shattered. Huge masses, fallen from the summit, lined the base of the
precipice, which was hollowed into cavernous arches, the home of myriads
of sea-gulls. The rock of Sværholtklub, off the point, resembled a
massive fortress in ruins. Its walls of smooth masonry rested on three
enormous vaults, the piers of which were buttressed with slanting piles
of rocky fragments. The ramparts, crenelated in some places, had
mouldered away in others, and one fancied he saw in the rents and scars
of the giant pile the marks of the shot and shell which had wrought its
ruin. Thousands of white gulls, gone to their nightly roost, rested on
every ledge and cornice of the rock; but preparations were already made
to disturb their slumbers. The steamer's cannon was directed towards the
largest vault, and discharged. The fortress shook with the crashing
reverberation; "then rose a shriek, as of a city sacked"--a wild,
piercing, maddening, myriad-tongued cry, which still rings in my ears.
With the cry, came a rushing sound, as of a tempest among the woods; a
white cloud burst out of the hollow arch-way, like the smoke of an
answering shot, and, in the space of a second, the air was filled with
birds, thicker than autumn leaves, and rang with one universal, clanging
shriek. A second shot, followed by a second outcry and an answering
discharge from the other caverns, almost darkened the sky. The whirring,
rustling and screaming, as the birds circled overhead, or dropped like
thick scurries of snow-flakes on the water, was truly awful. There could
not have been less than fifty thousand in the air at one time, while as
many more clung to the face of the rock, or screamed from the depth of
the vaults. Such an indignation meeting I never attended before; but,
like many others I have heard of, the time for action was passed before
they had decided what to do.

It was now eleven o'clock, and Sværholt glowed in fiery bronze lustre as
we rounded it, the eddies of returning birds gleaming golden in the
nocturnal sun, like drifts of beech leaves in the October air. Far to
the north, the sun lay in a bed of saffron light over the clear horizon
of the Arctic Ocean. A few bars of dazzling orange cloud floated above
him, and still higher in the sky, where the saffron melted through
delicate rose-colour into blue, hung light wreaths of vapour, touched
with pearly, opaline flushes of pink and golden grey. The sea was a web
of pale slate-colour, shot through and through with threads of orange
and saffron, from the dance of a myriad shifting and twinkling ripples.
The air was filled and permeated with the soft, mysterious glow, and
even the very azure of the southern sky seemed to shine through a net of
golden gauze. The headlands of this deeply-indented coast--the capes of
the Laxe and Porsanger Fjords, and of Mageröe--lay around us, in
different degrees of distance, but all with foreheads touched with
supernatural glory. Far to the north-east was Nordkyn, the most northern
point of the mainland of Europe, gleaming rosily and faint in the full
beams of the sun, and just as our watches denoted midnight the North
Cape appeared to the westward--a long line of purple bluff, presenting
a vertical front of nine hundred feet in height to the Polar Sea. Midway
between those two magnificent headlands stood the Midnight Sun, shining
on us with subdued fires, and with the gorgeous colouring of an hour for
which we have no name, since it is neither sunset nor sunrise, but the
blended loveliness of both--but shining at the same moment, in the heat
and splendour of noonday, on the Pacific Isles.

This was the midnight sun as I had dreamed it--as I had hoped to see it.

Within fifteen minutes after midnight, there was a perceptible increase
of altitude, and in less than half an hour the whole tone of the sky had
changed, the yellow brightening into orange, and the saffron melting
into the pale vermilion of dawn. Yet it was neither the colours, nor the
same character of light as we had had, half an hour _before_ midnight.
The difference was so slight as scarcely to be described; but it was the
difference between evening and morning. The faintest transfusion of one
prevailing tint into another had changed the whole expression of heaven
and earth, and so imperceptibly and miraculously that a new day was
already present to our consciousness. Our view of the wild cliffs of
Sværholt, less than two hours before, belonged to yesterday, though we
had stood on deck, in full sunshine, during all the intervening time.
Had the sensation of a night slipped through our brains in the momentary
winking of the eyes? Or was the old routine of consciousness so firmly
stereotyped in our natures, that the view of a morning was sufficient
proof to them of the preëxistence of a night? Let those explain the
phenomenon who can--but I found my physical senses utterly at war with
those mental perceptions wherewith they should harmonise. The eye saw
but one unending day; the mind notched the twenty-four hours on its
calendar, as before.

Before one o'clock we reached the entrance of the Kiöllefjord, which in
the pre-diluvial times must have been a tremendous mountain gorge, like
that of Gondo, on the Italian side of the Simplon. Its mouth is about
half a mile in breadth, and its depth is not more than a mile and a
half. It is completely walled in with sheer precipices of bare rock,
from three to five hundred feet in height, except at the very head,
where they subside into a stony heap, upon which some infatuated mortals
have built two or three cabins. As we neared the southern headland, the
face of which was touched with the purest orange light, while its
yawning fissures lay in deep-blue gloom, a tall ruin, with shattered
turrets and crumbling spires, detached itself from the mass, and stood
alone at the foot of the precipice. This is the _Finnkirka_, or "Church
of the Lapps," well known to all the northern coasters. At first it
resembles a tall church with a massive square spire; but the two parts
separate again, and you have a crag-perched castle of the middle-ages,
with its watch-tower--the very counterpart of scores in Germany--and a
quaint Gothic chapel on the point beyond. The vertical strata of the
rock, worn into sharp points at the top and gradually broadening to the
base, with numberless notched ornaments and channels fluted by the rain,
make the resemblance marvellous, when seen under the proper effects of
light and shade. The lustre in which we saw it had the effect of
enchantment. There was a play of colours upon it, such as one sees in
illuminated Moorish halls, and I am almost afraid to say how much I was
enraptured by a scene which has not its equal on the whole Norwegian
coast, yet of which none of us had ever heard before.

We landed a single passenger--a government surveyor apparently--on the
heap of rocks beyond, and ran out under the northern headland, which
again charmed us with a glory peculiarly its own. Here the colours were
a part of the substance of the rock, and the sun but heightened and
harmonised their tones. The huge projecting masses of pale yellow had a
mellow gleam, like golden chalk; behind them were cliffs, violet in
shadow; broad strata of soft red, tipped on the edges with vermilion;
thinner layers, which shot up vertically to the height of four or five
hundred feet, and striped the splendid sea-wall with lines of bronze,
orange, brown, and dark red, while great rents and breaks interrupted
these marvellous frescoes with their dashes of uncertain gloom. I have
seen many wonderful aspects of nature, in many lands, but rock-painting
such as this I never beheld. A part of its effect may have been owing to
atmospheric conditions which must be rare, even in the North; but,
without such embellishments, I think the sight of this coast will nobly
repay any one for continuing his voyage beyond Hammerfest.

We lingered on deck, as point after point revealed some change in the
dazzling diorama, uncertain which was finest, and whether something
still grander might not be in store. But at last Nordkyn drew nigh, and
at three o'clock the light became that of day, white and colourless.
The north-east wind blew keenly across the Arctic Ocean, and we were
both satisfied and fatigued enough to go to bed. It was the most
northern point of our voyage--about 71° 20', which is further north than
I ever was before, or ever wish to be again.


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE VARANGER FJORD.--ARCTIC LIFE.


When we awoke, after six hours' sleep, with curtains drawn to keep out
the daylight, our steamer was deep in the Tana Fjord, which receives the
waters of the Tana River, the largest Lapland stream flowing into the
Arctic Ocean. The greater part of the day was consumed in calling at two
settlements of three houses each, and receiving and delivering mails of
one letter, or less. The shores of this fjord are steep hills of bare
rock, covered with patches of snow to the water's edge. The riven walls
of cliff, with their wonderful configuration and marvellous colouring,
were left behind us, and there was nothing of the grand or picturesque
to redeem the savage desolation of the scenery. The chill wind, blowing
direct from Nova Zembla, made us shiver, and even the cabin saloon was
uncomfortable without a fire. After passing the most northern point of
Europe, the coast falls away to the south-east, so that on the second
night we were again in the latitude of Hammerfest, but still within the
sphere of perpetual sunshine. Our second night of sun was not so rich in
colouring as the first, yet we remained on deck long enough to see the
orb rise again from his lowest dip, and change evening into morning by
the same incomprehensible process. There was no golden transfiguration
of the dreadful shore; a wan lustre played over the rocks--pictures of
eternal death--like a settled pallor of despair on Nature's stony face.

One of the stations on this coast, named Makur, consisted of a few
fishermen's huts, at the bottom of a dismal rocky bight. There was no
grass to be seen, except some tufts springing from the earth with which
the roofs were covered, and it was even difficult to see where so much
earth had been scraped together. The background was a hopelessly barren
hill, more than half enveloped in snow. And this was midsummer--and
human beings passed their lives here! "Those people surely deserve to
enter Paradise when they die," I remarked to my friend, "for they live
in hell while upon earth." "Not for that," he answered, "but because it
is impossible for them to commit sin. They cannot injure their
neighbours, for they have none. They cannot steal, for there is nothing
to tempt them. They cannot murder, for there are none of the usual
incentives to hate and revenge. They have so hard a struggle merely _to
live_, that they cannot fall into the indulgences of sense; so that if
there is nothing recorded in their favour, there is also nothing against
them, and they commence the next life with blank books."

"But what a life!" I exclaimed. "Men may be happy in poverty, in
misfortune, under persecution, in life-long disease even, so that they
are not wholly deprived of the genial influences of society and
Nature--but what is there here?" "They know no other world," said he,
"and this ignorance keeps them from being miserable. They do no more
thinking than is necessary to make nets and boats, catch fish and cook
them, and build their log-houses. Nature provides for their marrying and
bringing up their children, and the pastor, whom they see once in a long
time, gives them their religion ready made." God keep them ignorant,
then! was my involuntary prayer. May they never lose their blessed
stupidity, while they are chained to these rocks and icy seas! May no
dreams of summer and verdure, no vision of happier social conditions, or
of any higher sphere of thought and action, flash a painful light on the
dumb-darkness of their lives!

The next day, we were in the Varanger Fjord, having passed the fortress
of Vardöhuus and landed our military committee. The Norwegian shore was
now low and tame, but no vegetation, except a little brown grass, was to
be seen. The Russian shore, opposite, and some twenty-five or thirty
miles distant, consisted of high, bold hills, which, through a glass,
appeared to be partially wooded. The Varanger Fjord, to which so
important a political interest has attached within the last few years,
is about seventy miles in depth, with a general direction towards the
south-west. The boundary-line between Norwegian and Russian Finmark
strikes it upon the southern side, about half-way from the mouth, so
that three-fourths, or more, of the waters of the fjord belong to
Norway. There is, however, a wonderful boundary-line, in addition, drawn
by Nature between the alien waters. That last wave of the Gulf Stream
which washes the North Cape and keeps the fjords of Finmark open and
unfrozen the whole year through, sweeps eastward along the coast, until
it reaches the head of Varanger Fjord. Here its power is at last spent,
and from this point commences that belt of solid ice which locks up the
harbours of the northern coast of Russia for six months in the year. The
change from open water to ice is no less abrupt than permanent. Pastor
Hvoslef informed me that in crossing from Vadsö, on the northern coast,
to Pasvik, the last Norwegian settlement, close upon the Russian
frontier, as late as the end of May, he got out of his boat upon the
ice, and drove three or four miles over the frozen sea, to reach his
destination.

The little fort of Vardöhuus, on an island at the northern entrance of
the fjord, is not a recent defence, meant to check Russian plans in this
quarter. It was established by Christian IV. nearly two and a half
centuries ago. The king himself made a voyage hither, and no doubt at
that time foresaw the necessity of establishing, by military occupation,
the claims of Denmark to this part of the coast. The little fortress has
actually done this service; and though a single frigate might easily
batter it to pieces, its existence has kept Russia from the ownership of
the Varanger Fjord and the creation (as is diplomatically supposed,) of
an immense naval station, which, though within the Arctic waters, would
at all times of the year be ready for service. It is well known that
Russia has endeavoured to obtain possession of the northern side of the
fjord, as well as of the Lyngen Fjord, near Tromsöe, towards which her
Lapland territory stretches out a long arm. England is particularly
suspicious of these attempts, and the treaty recently concluded between
the Allied Powers and Sweden had a special reference thereto. The
importance of such an acquisition to Russia is too obvious to be pointed
out, and the jealous watchfulness of England is, therefore, easy to
understand. But it is a singular thing that the conflicting forces of
Europe find a fulcrum on a little corner of this dead, desolate,
God-forsaken shore.

About ten o'clock we reached Vadsö, the limit of the steamer's route.
Here we had intended taking a boat, continuing our voyage to Nyborg, at
the head of the fjord, crossing thence to the Tana, and descending that
river in season to meet the steamer in the Tana Fjord on her return. We
were behind time, however, and the wind was light; the people informed
us that we could scarcely carry out the project; so we reluctantly gave
it up, and went ashore to spend the day. Vadsö is a town of about 800
inhabitants, with a secure though shallow harbour, which was crowded
with fishing vessels and Russian traders from the White Sea. It lies on
the bleak hill-side, without a tree or bush, or a patch of grass large
enough to be seen without close inspection, and its only summer perfume
is that of dried fish. I saw in gardens attached to one or two houses a
few courageous radishes and some fool-hardy potatoes, which had ventured
above ground without the least chance of living long enough to blossom.
The snow had been four feet deep in the streets in the beginning of
June, and in six weeks it would begin to fall again. A few forlorn cows
were hunting pasture over the hills, now and then looking with
melancholy resignation at the strings of codfish heads hanging up to
dry, on the broth of which they are fed during the winter. I took a walk
and made a sketch during the afternoon, but the wind was so chill that
I was glad to come back shivering to our quarters.

We obtained lodgings at the house of a baker, named Aas, who had learned
the art of charging, and was therefore competent to conduct a hotel. In
order to reach our room, we were obliged to pass successively through
the family dwelling-room, kitchen, and a carpenter's workshop, but our
windows commanded a full view of a grogshop across the way, where
drunken Lapps were turned out with astonishing rapidity. It was the
marriage month of the Lapps, and the town was full of young couples who
had come down to be joined, with their relatives and friends, all in
their gayest costumes. Through the intervention of the postmaster, I
procured two women and a child, as subjects for a sketch. They were
dressed in their best, and it was impossible not to copy the leer of
gratified vanity lurking in the corners of their broad mouths. The
summer dress consisted of a loose gown of bright green cloth, trimmed on
the neck and sleeves with bands of scarlet and yellow, and a peculiar
head-dress, shaped like a helmet, but with a broader and flatter crest,
rounded in front. This, also, was covered with scarlet cloth, and
trimmed with yellow and blue. They were greatly gratified with the
distinction, and all the other Lapps, as in Kautokeino, would have
willingly offered themselves. I found the same physical characteristics
here as there--a fresh, ruddy complexion, inclining to tawny; bright
blue eyes, brown hair, high cheek-bones, and mouths of enormous width.
They are not strikingly below the average size, Heine says, in one of
his mad songs:

     "In Lapland the people are dirty,
       Flat-headed, and broad-mouthed, and small
     They squat round the fire while roasting
       Their fishes, and chatter and squall;"

which is as good a description of them as can be packed into a stanza.
On the present occasion they were all drunk, in addition. One of them
lay for a long time at the door, with his legs doubled under him as he
fell, the others stepping over his body as they went in and out. These
poor creatures were openly and shamelessly allowed to drug themselves,
as long as their money lasted. No wonder the race is becoming extinct,
when the means of destruction is so freely offered.

Vadsö, although only forty miles from Vardö, at the mouth of the fjord,
has a much drier and more agreeable climate, and the inhabitants are
therefore loud in praise of their place. "We have no such fogs as at
Vardö," say they; "our fish dry much better, and some years we can raise
potatoes." For the last four or five years, however, the winters have
been getting more and more severe, and now it is impossible to procure
hay enough to keep their few cattle through the winter. We had on board
a German who had been living there five years, and who appeared well
satisfied with his lot. "I have married here," said he; "I make a good
living with less trouble than in Germany, and have no wish to return."
Singularly enough, there were also two Italian organ grinders on board,
whom I accosted in their native language; but they seemed neither
surprised nor particularly pleased. They dropped hints of having been
engaged in some political conspiracy; and one of them said, with a
curious mixture of Italian and Norsk words "_Jeg voglio ikke
ritornare_." I said the same thing ("I shall not return") as I left
Vadsö.

We sailed early the next morning, and in the afternoon reached Vardö,
where we lay three hours. Here we took on board the three officers, who
had in the meantime made their inspection. Vardöhuus is a single
star-shaped fort, with six guns and a garrison of twenty-seven men.
During the recent war, the garrison was increased to three hundred--an
unnecessary precaution, if there was really any danger of an attack to
be apprehended, so long as the defences of the place were not
strengthened. One of the officers, who had gone out fishing the night
previous, caught eighty-three splendid cod in the space of two hours. It
was idle sport, however, for no one would take his fish as a gift, and
they were thrown on the shore to rot. The difficulty is not in catching
but in curing them. Owing to the dampness of the climate they cannot be
hung up on poles to dry slowly, like the _stock-fish_ of the Lofodens,
but must be first salted and then laid on the rocks to dry, whence the
term _klip_ (cliff) fish, by which they are known in trade.

At the mouth of the Tana we picked up four Englishmen, who had been
salmon fishing on the river. They were sunburnt, spotted with mosquito
bites, and had had little luck, the river being full of nets and the
fjord of seals, between which the best of the salmon are either caught
or devoured; but they spoke of their experience with true English
relish. "Oh, it was very jolly!" said one: "we were so awfully bitten by
mosquitoes. Then our interpreter always lost everything just before we
wanted it--think of his losing our frying-pan, so that we had to fry in
the lids of our kettles; He had a habit of falling overboard and getting
nearly drowned before we could pull him in. We had a rough time of it,
but it was very jolly, I assure you!" The young fellows meant what they
said; they were all the better for their roughing, and I wish the
spindle-shanked youths who polk and flirt at Newport and Saratoga had
manliness enough for such undertakings.

We reached Hammerfest on the last day of July, and re-occupied our old
quarters. That night the sun went below the horizon for the first time
in eight days, but his depth was too slight to make any darkness
visible. I was quite tired of the unending daylight, and would willingly
have exchanged the pomp of the arctic midnight for the starlit darkness
of home. We were confused by the loss of night; we lost the perception
of time. One is never sleepy, but simply tired, and after a sleep of
eight hours by sunshine, wakes up as tired as ever. His sleep at last is
broken and irregular; he substitutes a number of short naps, distributed
through the twenty-four hours, for the one natural repose, and finally
gets into a state of general uneasiness and discomfort. A Hammerfest
merchant, who has made frequent voyages to Spitzbergen, told me that in
the latitude of 80° he never knew certainly whether it was day or night,
and the cook was the only person on board who could tell him.

At first the nocturnal sunshine strikes you as being wonderfully
convenient. You lose nothing of the scenery; you can read and write as
usual; you never need be in a hurry, because there is time enough for
everything. It is not necessary to do your day's work in the daytime,
for no night cometh. You are never belated, and somewhat of the stress
of life is lifted from your shoulders; but, after a time, you would be
glad of an excuse to stop seeing, and observing, and thinking, and even
enjoying. There is no _compulsive_ rest such as darkness brings--no
sweet isolation, which is the best refreshment of sleep. You lie down in
the broad day, and the summons, "Arise!" attends on every reopening of
your eyes. I never went below and saw my fellow-passengers all asleep
around me without a sudden feeling that something was wrong: they were
drugged, or under some unnatural influence, that they thus slept so fast
while the sunshine streamed in through the port-holes.

There are some advantages of this northern summer which have presented
themselves to me in rather a grotesque light. Think what an aid and
shelter is removed from crime--how many vices which can only flourish in
the deceptive atmosphere of night, must be checked by the sober reality
of daylight! No assassin can dog the steps of his victim; no burglar can
work in sunshine; no guilty lover can hold stolen interviews by
moonlight--all concealment is removed, for the sun, like the eye of God,
sees everything, and the secret vices of the earth must be bold indeed,
if they can bear his gaze. Morally, as well as physically, there is
safety in light and danger in darkness; and yet give me the darkness and
the danger! Let the patrolling sun go off his beat for awhile, and show
a little confidence in my ability to behave properly, rather than worry
me with his sleepless vigilance.

I have described the smells of Hammerfest, which are its principal
characteristic. It seemed to me the dreariest place in the world on
first landing, a week previous; but, by contrast with what we had in the
meantime seen, it became rather cheerful and comfortable. I was visiting
a merchant after our return, and noticed with pleasure a stunted ash
about eight feet high, in an adjoining garden. "Oh!" said he, in a tone
of irritated pride, "we have plenty of trees here; there is quite a
forest up the valley." This forest, after some search, I found. The
trees were about six feet high, and some of them might have been as
thick as my wrist. In the square before the merchant's house lay a crowd
of drunken Lapps, who were supplied with as much bad brandy as they
wanted by a licensed grogshop. The Russian sailors made use of the same
privilege, and we frequently heard them singing and wrangling on board
their White Sea junks. They were _unapproachably_ picturesque,
especially after the day's work was over, when they generally engaged in
hunting in the extensive forests of their beards, and exercised the law
of retaliation on all the game they caught.

A long street of turf-roofed houses, whose inhabitants may be said to be
under the sod even before they die, leads along the shore of the bay to
a range of flakes redolent of drying codfish. Beyond this you clamber
over rocks and shingles to a low grassy headland, whereon stands a
pillar commemorating the measurement of a meridian line of 25° 20', from
the Danube to the Polar Sea, which was accomplished by the Governments
of Austria, Russia, and Sweden, between the years 1816 and 1852. The
pillar marks the northern terminus of the line, and stands in lat. 70°
40' 11.3". It is a plain shaft of polished red granite, standing on a
base of grey granite, and surmounted by a bronze globe, on which a map
of the earth is roughly outlined.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE RETURN TO DARKNESS.--NORWEGIAN CHARACTER.


I do not intend to trace our return, step by step, down the Norwegian
coast. The splendid weather which prevailed during our upward voyage,
enabled us to see all the interesting points, leaving only those parts
which we missed in the few hours devoted to sleep, to give a little
novelty to our return. During the whole trip we had not a drop of
rain,--the rarest good fortune in these latitudes,--and were therefore
twice enabled to enjoy, to the fullest extent, the sublime scenery of
the Lofoden Isles and the coast of Nordland. This voyage has not its
like in the world. The traveller, to whom all other lands are familiar,
has here a new volume of the most wonderful originality and variety,
opened to him. The days are illuminated pages, crowded with pictures,
the forms and hues of which he can never forget. After I returned to the
zone of darkness, and recovered from the stress and tension of three
weeks of daylight, I first fully appreciated the splendours of the
arctic sun. My eyes were still dazzled with the pomp of colour, and the
thousand miles of coast, as I reviewed them in memory, with their chaos
of island-pyramids of shattered rock, their colossal cliffs, their
twisted fjords, and long fjeld-levels of eternal snow, swam in a sea of
saffron and rosy light, in comparison with which the pale blue day
around me seemed dull and dead. My dream of the North, in becoming a
reality, has retained the magical atmosphere of dreams, and basks in the
same gorgeous twilight which irradiates the Scandinavian sagas.

I was particularly struck during the return, with the rapid progress of
summer--the flying leaps with which she clears her short course. Among
the Lofodens, the potatoes were coming into blossom, and the rye and
barley into head; the grass was already cut, in many places, and drying
on poles, and the green of the woods and meadows showed the dark, rich
character of southern lands. Owing to this rapidity of growth, all the
more hardy varieties of vegetables may be successfully cultivated. Mr.
Thomas informed me that his peas and beans at Kaafjord (lat. 70° N.)
grew three inches in twenty-four hours, and, though planted six weeks
later than those about Christiania, came to maturity at the same time.
He has even succeeded in raising excellent cauliflowers. But very few of
the farmers have vegetable gardens, and those which I saw contained only
radishes and lettuce, with a few useful herbs. One finds the same
passion for flowers, however, as in Northern Sweden, and the poorest are
rarely without a rose or a geranium in their windows.

Pastor Hvoslef, who was again our fellow-traveller for a few hours, gave
me some interesting information concerning the Lapps. They are, it
seems, entitled to the right of suffrage, and to representation in the
Storthing, equally with the Norwegians. The local jurisdiction repeats
on a small scale what the Storthing transacts on a large one, being
entirely popular in its character, except that the _vogts_ and _länsmen_
(whose powers are somewhat similar to those of our judges and country
magistrates) are not elected. But each district chooses from among its
inhabitants a committee to confer upon and arrange all ordinary local
matters. These committees, in turn, choose persons to constitute a
higher body, who control the reciprocal relations of the several
districts, and intervene in case of difficulties between them. The
system is necessarily simpler and somewhat more primitive in its
character than our local organisations in America; but it appears at
present to answer every purpose. The heavy responsibility resting upon
judges in Norway--the severity of the checks and penalties by which
their probity is insured--probably contributes to make the
administration of the laws more efficacious and easy. The Lapps are not
a difficult people to govern, and much of the former antagonism between
them and the poorer classes of the Norwegians has passed away. There is
little, if any, amalgamation of the two races, nor will there ever be,
but there is probably as little conflict between them as is compatible
with the difference of blood.

At Tromsöe, a tall, strong, clerical gentleman came on board, who proved
to be the noted Pastor Lamers, one of the first if not the very first
Clergyman in Norway, who has refused to receive the government
support--or, in other words, has seceded from the Church, as a State
establishment, while adhering to all its fundamental doctrines. It is
the first step towards the separation of Church and State, which must
sooner or later come, in Norway and in Sweden. He has a congregation of
three hundred members, in Tromsöe, and is about organising a church at
Gibostad, on the island of Senjen. He has some peculiar views, I
believe, in relation to the baptism of children, and insists that the
usual absolution dealt out by the Pastors is of no effect without full
confession and the specification of particular sins--but in other
respects he is entirely orthodox, retaining even the ceremonial of the
Eucharist. This, in the Lutheran church of Norway, comes so near to the
Roman Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation, that one cannot easily
perceive any difference. Instead of bread, an unleavened wafer is
administered to the communicants, the priest saying, as he gives it,
"This is the _true_ body and blood of Jesus Christ." Mr. Forrester, a
devout admirer of the Church, which he thinks identical with that of
England in all its essentials, says, "The Lutherans reject the Romish
doctrine of transubstantiation, but they hold that of a spiritual and
ineffable union of the divine nature with the elements, the substance of
which remains unchanged. This is called _consubstantiation_." Verily,
the difference between tweedledum and tweedledee--one being as absurd as
the other.

No one, coming from a land where all sects stand upon an equal footing,
and where every church must depend for existence on its own inherent
vitality, can fail to be struck with the effete and decrepit state of
religion in Sweden and Norway. It is a body of frigid mechanical forms
and ceremonies, animated here and therewith a feeble spark of spiritual
life, but diffusing no quickening and animating glow. I have often been
particularly struck with the horror with which the omission of certain
forms was regarded by persons in whom I could discover no trace of any
religious principle. The Church has a few dissensions to combat; she has
not been weakened by schism; but she is slowly ossifying from sheer
inertia. The Reformation needs to be reformed again, and perhaps the
tardy privileges granted to the _Haugianer_ and _Läsare_--the northern
Methodists--may result in producing a body of Dissenters large enough to
excite emulation, action, and improvement. In Norway, the pastors have
the best salaries and the easiest places of all government officials.
Those who conscientiously discharge their duties have enough to do; but
were this universally the case, one would expect to find the people less
filthy, stupid, and dishonest than they are in many parts of the
country. A specimen of the intelligence of one, who is now a member of
the Storthing, was communicated to me by a gentleman who heard it. The
clergyman advocated the establishment of telegraph lines in Norway, "not
for the sake of sending news," said he, "that is of no consequence. But
it is well known that no wolf can pass under a telegraph wire, and if we
can get lines put up throughout the country, all the wolves will be
obliged to leave!" Of course, I do not mean to assert that the Norwegian
clergymen, as a body, are not sincere, zealous, well-informed men. The
evil lies rather in that system which makes religion as much a branch of
government service as law or diplomacy; and which, until very recently,
has given one sect an exclusive monopoly of the care of human souls.

I had a strong desire to converse with Pastor Lamers in relation to the
stand he has taken, but he was surrounded by a crowd of persons during
his stay on board, and no opportunity presented itself. The sensation
which his presence produced, showed that there are restless elements at
work in the mind of the people. The stony crust is beginning to heave
and split at last. Even the deck-passengers gathered into little groups
and talked earnestly. Two gentlemen near me were discussing the question
of an Established Church, one contending, that a variety of sects tended
only to confuse, perplex, and unchristianise the uneducated, unthinking
class, while the other asserted that this very class adhered most
tenaciously to whatever faith had been taught them. At this moment a
woman standing near us exclaimed: "There were false prophets in all
times, and there are false prophets now! We must beware of them!"--the
earnestness of her speech affording a good comment on the argument just
produced. Whatever may be the popular opinion concerning the course of
Pastor Lamers, I could not but notice the marked respect displayed by
every one who approached him.

In passing Hindöe we saw two magnificent golden eagles wheeling around
one of the loftiest cliffs. The wind blew strongly from the south-west,
increasing until we had what sailors call a dry gale in crossing the
West Fjord, but it abated the next day and by the late twilight we
recrossed the arctic circle. This night there was great rejoicing on
board, at the discovery of a star. We had not seen one for a month, and
some of the passengers coming from Finmark had been more than two months
in daylight. While we were all gazing upon it as upon some extraordinary
phenomenon, a flood of yellow lamp-light suddenly streamed through the
cabin skylight. The sky was still brilliant with sunset in the north,
but it was dark enough to see to sleep. We could not yet cover ourselves
all over, even as with a cloak; still there was a shelter and friendly
covering for the helpless body. Our sleep became sound and regular, and
its old power of restoration was doubly sweet, since we had known what
it was to be deprived of it.

Our fellow-passengers, after leaving Carlsoe, where the young Englishmen
stopped to hunt, were almost exclusively Norwegian, and this gave us
further opportunities of becoming acquainted with some peculiarities of
the national character. Intelligent Norwegians, especially those who
have travelled, are exceedingly courteous, gentlemanly, and agreeable
persons. The three officers on board were men of unusual intelligence
and refinement, and we considered ourselves fortunate in having their
company during the entire voyage. The _landhand lare_, or country
merchants, and government officials of the lower ranks, exhibit more
reserve, and not unfrequently a considerable amount of ignorance and
prejudice. Perhaps the most general feature of the Norwegian character
is an excessive national vanity, which is always on the alert, and fires
up on the slightest provocation. Say everything you like, except that
Norway in any respect is surpassed by any other country. One is assailed
with questions about his impressions of the scenery, people, government,
&c.--a very natural and pardonable curiosity, it is true, and one only
demands in return that his candour be respected, and no offence taken.
This, however, is rarely the case. If there is no retaliatory answer on
the spot, you hear a remark days afterwards which shows how your mild
censure has rankled in the mind of the hearer. My friend was asked by a
passenger whether he did not think the women of Finmark very beautiful.
It was impossible to answer in the affirmative: the questioner went off
in high dudgeon, and did not speak to him again for several days.

In the Varanger Fjord, we had pretty freely expressed our impressions of
the desolate coast. Afterwards on returning past the grand cliff scenery
of Nordkyn, we were admiring some bold formation of the rocks, when a
Norwegian came up and said, in a tone of angry irony: "Ah, you find a
little to admire at last, do you? You find _some_ beauty in our country,
after all?" So in regard to the government. The Norwegians may be justly
proud of their constitution, which is as republican in its character as
our own. There is so much in the administration of the government which
every one must heartily commend, that they should be less sensitive in
regard to minor faults. This sensitiveness, however, is partly accounted
for, when we remember that for four hundred years Norway was a Danish
province, and that only forty-three years ago she leaped at once from
subjection to a freedom such as no other country in Europe enjoys. The
intense pride and self-glorification of the people resembles that of a
youth who for the first time assumes a dress-coat and standing collar.
King Oscar, on his accession to the throne, gave the country a separate
national flag, and nowhere does one see such a display of flags. All
over the land and all along the shores, the colours of Norway are
flying.

Jealousy of Sweden and dislike of the Swedes are inherited feelings, and
are kept alive by a mutual prejudice on the part of the latter people.
One cannot but smile a little at the present union of Sweden and Norway,
when he finds that the countries have separate currencies, neither of
which will pass at its full value in the other--separate tariffs, and of
course Custom-house examinations between the two, and, if the Norwegians
had their way, would have separate diplomatic representatives abroad.
Yet the strength of Norway is undoubtedly in her alliance with Sweden:
alone, she would be but a fourth-rate power. Enough has been done to
satisfy her national feeling and secure her liberties against assault,
and it is now time that this unnecessary jealousy and mistrust of a
kindred race should cease. The Swedes have all the honesty which the
Norwegians claim for themselves, more warmth and geniality of character,
and less selfish sharpness and shrewdness. Mügge tells a story of a
number of Swedes who were at a dinner party in Paris, where the health
of "the King of Sweden and Norway" was proposed and drunk with great
enthusiasm. One glass was observed to be untouched. It belonged to a
Norwegian, who, when called upon for an explanation, said: "I cannot
drink such a toast as this, but I will drink the health of the King of
Norway, who is also King of Sweden!"

One cannot find fault with a people for their patriotism. I have always
admired that love of _Gamle Norge_ which shines through Norwegian
history, song, and saga--but when it is manifested in such ridiculous
extremes, one doubts the genuineness of the feeling, and suspects it of
being alloyed with some degree of personal vanity. There are still evils
to be eradicated,--reproaches to be removed,--reforms to be achieved,
which claim all the best energies of the best men of the country, and
positive harm is done by concealing or denying the true state of
things.


CHAPTER XXIX.

DRONTHEIM AND BERGEN.


We spent another day and a half in Drontheim, before reshipping in the
steamer for Bergen. With the exception of a trip to the Lierfoss, or
falls of the Nid, however, it was by no means a satisfactory sojourn.
The hotel was full, and we could only get quarters in the billiard-room,
through which other guests were continually passing and repassing. Two
small boys were quite inadequate to the service; the table d'hote was
the scantiest I ever saw, and the charges at the rate of three dollars a
day. The whole of Sunday was consumed in an attempt to recover our
carrioles, which we left behind us on embarking for Hammerfest. The
servants neglected to get them on Saturday evening, as we had ordered,
and in the morning the man who had the key of the warehouse went into
the country, taking it with him. The whole day was spent in searching
and waiting, and it was only by unremitting exertions that we succeeded
in putting them on board in the evening. Owing to this annoyance, I was
unable to attend service in the cathedral, or even to see the inside of
it.

Our drive to the Lierfoss, in the evening, was an exquisite enjoyment.
The valley of the Nid, behind Drontheim, is one of the most carefully
cultivated spots in Norway. Our road led up the stream, overlooking rich
levels of grain and hay fields, studded with large and handsome
farm-houses, while the lower slopes of the hills and the mound-like
knolls scattered along their bases, were framed to the very summit,
steep as they were. The whole scene was like a piece of landscape
gardening, full of the loveliest effects, which were enhanced by the
contrast of the grey, sterile mountains by which the picture was framed.
The soft, level sunshine, streaming through the rifts of broken
thunder-clouds in the west, slowly wandered over the peaceful valley,
here lighting up a red-roofed homestead, there a grove in full summer
foliage, or a meadow of so brilliant an emerald that it seemed to shine
by its own lustre. As we approached the Lierfoss, the road was barred
with a great number of gates, before which waited a troop of ragged
boys, who accompanied us the whole of the way, with a pertinacity equal
to that of the little Swiss beggars.

The Nid here makes two falls about half a mile apart, the lower one
being eighty, and the upper one ninety feet in height. The water is of a
dark olive-green colour, and glassy transparency, and so deep that at
the brink it makes huge curves over the masses of rock in its bed
without breaking into the faintest ripple. As you stand on a giant
boulder above it, and contrast the swift, silent rush with the
thundering volume of amber-tinted spray which follows, you feel in its
full force the strange fascination of falling water--the temptation to
plunge in and join in its headlong revelry. Here, however, I must admit
that the useful is not always the beautiful. The range of smoky mills
driven by a sluice from the fall had better be away. The upper fall is
divided in the centre by a mass of rock, and presents a broader and more
imposing picture, though the impetus of the water is not so great.

The coast between Drontheim and Bergen is, on the whole, much less
striking than that further north; but it has some very grand features.
The outer islands are, with few exceptions, low and barren, but the
coast, deeply indented with winding fjords, towers here and there into
sublime headlands, and precipitous barriers of rock. Christiansund,
where we touched the first afternoon, is a singularly picturesque place,
built on four islands, separated by channels in the form of a cross. The
bare, rounded masses of grey rock heave up on all sides behind the
houses, which are built along the water's edge; here and there a tree of
superb greenness shines against the colourless background, and the
mountains of the mainland, with their tints of pink and purple, complete
the picture. The sun was burningly hot, and the pale-green water
reflected the shores in its oily gloss; but in severe storms, I was
told, it is quite impossible to cross from one island to another, and
the different parts of the town sometimes remain for days in a state of
complete isolation. I rose very early next morning, to have a view of
Molde and the enchanting scenery of the Romsdals-fjord. The
prosperous-looking town, with its large square houses, its suburban
cottages and gardens, on the slope of a long green hill, crowned with
woods, was wholly Swiss in its appearance, but the luminous morning
vapors hovering around the Alpine peaks in the east, entirely hid them
from our view. In this direction lies the famous Romsdal, which many
travellers consider the grandest specimen of Norwegian scenery.
Unfortunately we could not have visited it without taking an entire
week, and we were apprehensive lest the fine weather, which we had now
enjoyed for twenty-four days, should come to an end before we were done
with the Bergenstift. It is almost unexampled that travellers make the
voyage from Drontheim to the Varanger Fjord and back without a cloudy
day. While we had perpetual daylight, the tourists whom we left behind
were drenched with continual rains.

Aalesund is another island port, smaller than Christiansund, but full as
picturesque. The intense heat and clearness of the day, the splendour of
the sunshine, which turned the grassy patches on the rocks into lustrous
velvet, and the dark, dazzling blue of the sea belonged rather to
southern Italy than to Norway. As we approached Bergen, however, the sky
became gradually overcast, and the evening brought us clouds and
showers. Not far from Aalesund was the castle of Rollo, the conqueror of
Normandy. All this part of the coast is Viking ground: from these fjords
went forth their piratical dragons, and hither they returned, laden with
booty, to rest and carouse in their strongholds. They were the
buccaneers of the north in their time, bold, brave, with the virtues
which belong to courage and hardihood, but coarse, cruel, and brutal.
The Viking of Scandinavian song is a splendid fellow; but his original,
if we may judge from his descendants, was a stupid, hard-headed,
lustful, and dirty giant, whom we should rather not have had for a
companion. Harold Haarfager may have learnt in Constantinople to wash
his face, and comb his beautiful hair, but I doubt if many of his
followers imitated him. Let us hope that Ingeborg changed her dress
occasionally, and that Balder's temple was not full of fleas; that
Thorsten Vikingsson placed before his guests something better than
_fladbröd_ and rancid butter; and that Björn and Frithiof acted as
honestly towards strangers as towards each other. The Viking chiefs,
undoubtedly, must have learned the comfort of cleanliness and the
delights of good living, but if such habits were general, the nation has
greatly degenerated since their time.

We stayed on deck until midnight, notwithstanding the rain, to see the
grand rock of Hornelen, a precipice 1200 feet high. The clouds lifted a
little, and there was a dim, lurid light in the sky as our steamer swept
under the awful cliff. A vast, indistinct mass, reaching apparently to
the zenith, the summit crowned with a pointed tour, resembling the
Cathedral of Drontheim, and the sides scarred with deep fissures, loomed
over us. Now a splintered spire disengaged itself from the gloom, and
stood defined against the sky; lighter streaks marked the spots where
portions had slid away; but all else was dark, uncertain, and sublime.
Our friendly captain had the steamer's guns discharged as we were
abreast of the highest part. There were no separate echoes, but one
tremendous peal of sound, prolonged like the note of an organ-pipe, and
gradually dying away at the summit in humming vibrations.

Next morning, we were sailing in a narrow strait, between perpendicular
cliffs, fluted like basaltic pillars. It was raining dismally, but we
expected nothing else in the neighbourhood of Bergen. In this city the
average number of rainy days in a year is _two hundred_. Bergen weather
has become a by-word throughout the north, and no traveller ventures to
hope for sunshine when he turns his face thither. "Is it still raining
at Bergen?" ask the Dutch skippers when they meet a Norwegian captain.
"Yes, blast you; is it still blowing at the Texel?" is generally the
response.

We took on board four or five lepers, on their way to the hospital at
Bergen. A piece of oil-cloth had been thrown over some spars to shield
them from the rain, and they sat on deck, avoided by the other
passengers, a melancholy picture of disease and shame. One was a boy of
fourteen, upon whose face wart-like excrescences were beginning to
appear; while a woman, who seemed to be his mother, was hideously
swollen and disfigured. A man, crouching down with his head between his
hands, endeavoured to hide the seamed and knotted mass of protruding
blue flesh, which had once been a human face. The forms of leprosy,
elephantiasis, and other kindred diseases, which I have seen in the
East, and in tropical countries, are not nearly so horrible. For these
unfortunates there was no hope. Some years, more or less, of a life
which is worse than death, was all to which they could look forward. No
cure has yet been discovered for this terrible disease. There are two
hospitals in Bergen, one of which contains about five hundred patients;
while the other, which has recently been erected for the reception of
cases in the earlier stages, who may be subjected to experimental
courses of treatment, has already one hundred. This form of leprosy is
supposed to be produced partly by an exclusive diet of salt fish, and
partly by want of personal cleanliness. The latter is the most probable
cause, and one does not wonder at the result, after he has had a little
experience of Norwegian filth. It is the awful curse which falls upon
such beastly habits of life. I wish the Norwegians could be made
Mussulmen for awhile, for the sake of learning that cleanliness is not
only next to godliness, but a necessary part of it. I doubt the
existence of filthy Christians, and have always believed that St. Jerome
was atrociously slandered by the Italian painters. But is there no
responsibility resting upon the clergymen of the country, who have so
much influence over their flocks, and who are themselves clean and
proper persons?

Bergen is also, as I was informed, terribly scourged by venereal
diseases. Certainly, I do not remember a place, where there are so few
men--tall, strong, and well-made as the people generally are--without
some visible mark of disease or deformity. A physician of the city has
recently endeavoured to cure syphilis in its secondary stage, by means
of inoculation, having first tried the experiment upon himself; and
there is now a hospital where this form of treatment is practiced upon
two or three hundred patients, with the greatest success, as another
physician informed me. I intended to have visited it, as well as the
hospital for lepers; but the sight of a few cases, around the door of
the latter establishment, so sickened me, that I had no courage to
undertake the task.

Let me leave these disagreeable themes, and say that Bergen is one of
the most charmingly picturesque towns in all the North. Its name, "The
Mountain," denotes one of its most striking features. It is built upon
two low capes, which project from the foot of a low mountain, two
thousand feet high, while directly in its rear lies a lovely little
lake, about three miles in circumference. On the end of the northern
headland stands the fortress of Berghenhuus, with the tall square mass
of Walkendorf's Tower, built upon the foundations of the former palace
of King Olaf Kyrre, the founder of the city. The narrow harbour between
is crowded with fishing-vessels,--during the season often numbering from
six to eight hundred,--and beyond it the southern promontory, quite
covered with houses, rises steeply from the water. A public grove,
behind the fortress, delights the eye with its dark-green mounds of
foliage; near it rise the twin towers of the German Church, which boasts
an age of nearly seven hundred years, and the suburbs on the steep
mountain-sides gradually vanish among gardens and country-villas, which
are succeeded by farms and grazing fields, lying under the topmost
ridges of the bare rock. The lake in the rear is surrounded with the
country residences of the rich merchants--a succession of tasteful
dwellings, each with its garden and leafy arbours, its flowers and
fountains, forming a rich frame to the beautiful sheet of water. Avenues
of fine old lindens thread this suburban paradise, and seats, placed at
the proper points, command views of which one knows not the loveliest.
Everything has an air of ancient comfort, taste, and repose. One sees
yet, the footsteps of mighty Hansa, who for three centuries reigned here
supreme. The northern half of Bergen is still called the "German
Quarter," and there are very few citizens of education who do not speak
the language.

With one or two exceptions, the streets are rough and narrow. There are
no quaint peculiarities in the architecture, the houses being all of
wood, painted white or some light colour. At every door stands a barrel
filled with water, to be ready in case of fire. Owing to the great
number of fishing-vessels and its considerable foreign trade, Bergen is
a much more lively and bustling place than either Christiania or
Drontheim. The streets are well populated, and the great square at the
head of the harbour is always thronged with a motley concourse of
fishermen, traders, and country people. Drunkenness seems to be a
leading vice. I saw, at least, fifty people, more or less intoxicated,
in the course of a short walk, one afternoon. The grog shops, however,
are rigidly closed at six o'clock on Saturday evening, and remain so
until Monday morning, any violation or evasion of the law being severely
punished. The same course has been adopted here as in Sweden; the price
of brandy has been doubled, by restrictions on its manufacture, and
every encouragement has been afforded to breweries. The beer of
Christiania is equal in flavour and purity to any in the world, and it
is now in great demand all over Norway.

The day after our arrival the sky cleared again, and we were favoured
with superb weather; which might well be the case, as the people told me
it had previously been raining every day for a month. The gardens,
groves, and lawns of velvet turf, so long moistened, now blazed out with
splendid effect in the hot August sunshine. "Is there such a green
anywhere else in the world?" asked my friend. "If anywhere, only in
England--but scarcely there," I was obliged to confess. Yet there was an
acquaintance of mine in Bergen, a Hammerfest merchant, who, in this
rare climax of summer beauty, looked melancholy and dissatisfied. "I
want to get back to the north," said he, "I miss our Arctic summer.
These dark nights are so disagreeable, that I am very tired of them.
There is nothing equal to our three months of daylight, and they alone
reconcile us to the winter." Who will say, after this, that anything
more than the fundamental qualities of human nature are the same in all
climates? But from the same foundation you may build either a Grecian
temple or a Chinese pagoda.

The lions of Bergen are soon disposed of. After you have visited the
fortress and admired the sturdy solidity of Walkendorf's Tower, you may
walk into the German church which stands open (or did, when we were
there), without a soul to prevent you from carrying off some of the
queer old carved work and pictures. The latter are hideous enough to be
perfectly safe, and the church, though exceedingly quaint and
interesting, is not beautiful. Then you may visit the museum, which
contains an excellent collection of northern fish, and some very curious
old furniture. The collection of antiquities is not remarkable; but it
should be remembered that the museum has been created within the last
twenty years, and is entirely the result of private taste and
enterprise. One of the most singular things I saw was a specimen (said
to be the only one in existence) of a fish called the "herring-king,"
about twelve feet in length by one in thickness, and with something of
the serpent in its appearance. The old Kraaken has not shown himself for
a number of years, possibly frightened away by the appearance of
steamers in his native waters. In spite of all the testimony which
Capell Brooke has collected in favour of his existence, he is fast
becoming a myth.

Bergen, we found, is antiquated in more respects than one. On sending
for horses, on the morning fixed for our departure, we were coolly told
that we should have to wait twenty-four hours; but after threatening to
put the law in force against the _skyds-skaffer_, he promised to bring
them by one o'clock in the afternoon. In this city of 30,000
inhabitants, no horses are kept in readiness at the post-station; but
are furnished by farmers somewhere at a distance. In the matter of
hotels, however, Bergen stands in the front rank of progress, rivalling
Christiania and Drontheim. The fare is not so good, and the charges are
equally high. There are two little inns, with five or six rooms each,
and one boarding-house of the same size. We could only get one small
room, into which all three were packed, at a charge of a dollar and a
quarter per day; while for two wretched meals we paid a dollar and a
half each. The reader may judge of our fare from the fact that one day
our soup was raspberry juice and water, and another time, cold beer,
flavoured with pepper and cinnamon. Add tough beafsteaks swimming in
grease and rancid butter, and you have the principal ingredients. For
the first time in my life I found my digestive powers unequal to the
task of mastering a new national diet.


CHAPTER XXX.

A TRIP TO THE VÖRING-FOSS.


After waiting only five hours, we obtained three horses and drove away
from Bergen. It was a superb afternoon, spotlessly blue overhead, with
still bluer water below, and hills of dark, velvety verdure throbbing
and sparkling in the sunshine, and the breezes from off the fjord. We
sped past the long line of suburban gardens, through the linden avenues,
which, somehow or other, suggested to me the days of the Hanseatic
League, past Tivoli, the Hoboken of Bergen, and on the summit of the
hill beyond stopped to take a parting look at the beautiful city. She
sat at the foot of her guardian mountain, across the lake, her white
towers and red roofs rising in sharp relief against the purple
background of the islands which protect her from the sea. In colour,
form, and atmospheric effect, the picture was perfect. Norway is
particularly fortunate in the position and surroundings of her three
chief cities. Bergen bears away the palm, truly, but either of them has
few rivals in Europe.

Our road led at first over well-cultivated hills dotted with
comfortable farmhouses--a rolling, broken country enclosed by rugged and
sterile groups of hills. After some miles we turned northward into a
narrow valley running parallel to the coast line. The afternoon sun,
shining over the shoulder of the mountain-ridge on our left, illuminated
with dazzling effect the green pastures in the bosom of the valley, and
the groves of twinkling birch and sombre fir on the opposite slope. I
have never seen purer tints in the sunshine--never a softer transparency
in the shadows. The landscape was ideal in its beauty, except the
houses, whose squalor and discomfort were real. Our first station lay
off the road, on a hill. A very friendly old man promised to get us
horses as soon as possible, and his wife set before us the best fare the
house afforded--milk, oaten shingles, and bad cheese. The house was
dirty, and the aspect of the family bed, which occupied one end of the
room, merely divided by boards into separate compartments for the
parents, children and servants was sufficient to banish sleep.
Notwithstanding the poverty of the place, the old woman set a good value
upon her choice provender. The horses were soon forthcoming, and the
man, whose apparent kindness increased every moment, said to me, "Have I
not done well? Is it not very well that I have brought you horses so
soon?" I assented cheerfully, but he still repeated the same questions,
and I was stupid enough not to discover their meaning, until he added;
"I have done everything so well, that you ought to give me something for
it." The naïve manner of this request made it seem reasonable, and I
gave him something accordingly, though a little disappointed, for I had
congratulated myself on finding at last a friendly and obliging
_skyds-skaffer_ (Postmaster) in Norway.

Towards evening we reached a little village on the shore of the
Osterfjord. Here the road terminated, and a water station of eighteen
miles in length lay before us. The fjords on the western coast of Norway
are narrow, shut in by lofty and abrupt mountains, and penetrate far
into the land--frequently to the distance of a hundred miles. The
general direction of the valleys is parallel to the line of the coast,
intersecting the fjords at nearly a right angle, so that they, in
connection with these watery defiles, divide the mountains into immense
irregular blocks, with very precipitous sides and a summit table-land
varying from two to four thousand feet above the sea level. For this
reason there is no continuous road in all western Norway, but alternate
links of land and water--boats and post-horses. The deepest fjords reach
very nearly to the spinal ridge of the mountain region, and a land-road
from Bergen to this line would be more difficult to construct than any
of the great highways across the Alps. In proportion to her population
and means, Norway has done more for roads than any country in the world.
Not only her main thoroughfares, but even her by-ways, give evidence of
astonishing skill, industry, and perseverance. The Storthing has
recently appropriated a sum of $188,000 for the improvement of roads, in
addition to the repairs which the farmers are obliged to make, and which
constitute almost their only tax, as there is no assessment whatever
upon landed property. There seems a singular incongruity, however, in
finding such an evidence of the highest civilisation, in connection with
the semi-barbaric condition of the people. Generally, the improvement
of the means of communication in a country is in the ratio of its social
progress.

As we were obliged to wait until morning before commencing our voyage,
we set about procuring supper and lodging. Some dirty beds in a dirty
upper room constituted the latter, but the former was a doubtful affair.
The landlord, who persisted in calling me "Dock," made a foraging
excursion among the houses, and, after some time, laid before us a
salted and smoked leg of mutton, some rancid butter, hard oaten bread,
and pestilential cheese. I ate as a matter of duty towards my body, but
my companions were less conscientious. We deserve no credit for having
risen early the next morning, neither was there any self-denial in the
fact of our being content with a single cup of coffee. The boatmen, five
in number, who had been engaged the evening before, took our carrioles
apart and stowed them in the stern, while we three disposed ourselves
very uneasily in the narrow bow. As we were about pushing off, one of
the men stepped upon a stone and shouted in a loud voice, "Come and help
us, fairies!"--whereat the others laughed heartily. The wind was against
us, but I thought the men hugged the shore much more than was necessary.
I noticed the same thing afterwards, and spoke of it, but they stated
that there were strong currents in these fjords, setting towards the
sea. The water, in fact, is but slightly brackish, and the ebb and flow
of the tides is hardly felt.

The scenery in the Osterfjord is superb. Mountains, 2000 feet high,
inclose and twist it between their interlocking bases. Cliffs of naked
rock overhang it, and cataracts fall into it in long zigzag chains of
foam. Here and there a little embayed dell rejoices with settlement and
cultivation, and even on the wildest steeps, where it seems almost
impossible for a human foot to find hold, the people scramble at the
hazard of their lives, to reap a scanty harvest of grass for the winter.
Goats pasture everywhere, and our boatmen took delight in making the
ewes follow us along the cliffs, by imitating the bleating of kids.
Towards noon we left the main body of the fjord and entered a narrow arm
which lay in eternal shadow under tremendous walls of dark rock. The
light and heat of noonday were tropical in their silent intensity,
painting the summits far above with dashes of fierce colour, while their
bases sank in blue gloom to meet the green darkness of the water. Again
and again the heights enclosed us, so that there was no outlet; but they
opened as if purposely to make way for us, until our keel grated the
pebbly barrier of a narrow valley, where the land road was resumed. Four
miles through this gap brought us to another branch of the same fjord,
where we were obliged to have our carrioles taken to pieces and shipped
for a short voyage.

At its extremity the fjord narrowed, and still loftier mountains
overhung it. Shut in by these, like some palmy dell in the heart of the
porphyry mountains of the Sahara, lay Bolstadören, a miracle of
greenness and beauty. A mantle of emerald velvet, falling in the softest
slopes and swells to the water's edge, was thrown upon the valley; the
barley had been cut and bound to long upright poles to dry, rising like
golden pillars from the shaven stubble; and, to crown all, above the
landing-place stood a two-story house, with a jolly fat landlord smoking
in the shade, and half-a-dozen pleasant-looking women gossiping
in-doors. "Can we get anything to eat?" was the first question. "The
gentlemen can have fresh salmon and potatoes, and red wine if they wish
it," answered the mistress. Of course we wished it; we wished for any
food clean enough to be eatable, and the promise of such fare was like
the falling of manna in the desert. The salmon, fresh from the stream,
was particularly fine; the fish here is so abundant that the landlord
had caught 962, as he informed us, in the course of one season.

We had but two miles of land before another sheet of water intervened,
and our carrioles were again taken to pieces. The postillions and
boatmen along this route were great scamps, frequently asking more than
the legal fare, and in one instance threatened to prevent us from going
on unless we paid it. I shall not bore the reader with accounts of our
various little squabbles on the road, all of which tended more and more
to convince us, that unless the Norwegians were a great deal more
friendly, kind, and honest a few years ago than they are now, they have
been more over-praised than any people in the world. I must say,
however, that they are bungling swindlers, and could only be successful
with the greenest of travellers. The moment an imposition is resisted,
and the stranger shows himself familiar with the true charges and
methods of travel, they give up the attempt; but the desire to cheat is
only less annoying to one than cheating itself. The fees for travelling
by _skyds_ are, it is true, disproportionably low, and in many instances
the obligation to furnish horses is no doubt an actual loss to the
farmer. Very often we would have willingly paid a small increase upon
the legal rates if it had been asked for as a favour; but when it was
boldly demanded as a right, and backed by a falsehood, we went not a
stiver beyond the letter of the law.

Landing at Evanger, an intelligent landlord, who had four brothers in
America, gave us return horses to Vossevangen, and we enjoyed the long
twilight of the warm summer evening, while driving along the hills which
overlook the valley connecting the lakes of Vossevangen and Evanger. It
was a lovely landscape, ripe with harvest, and the air full of mellow,
balmy odours from the flowers and grain. The black spire of Vossevangen
church, standing dark against the dawning moonlight, was the welcome
termination of our long day's journey, and not less welcome were our
clean and comfortable quarters in the house of a merchant there. Here we
left the main road across Norway, and made an excursion to the
Vöring-Foss, which lies beyond the Hardanger Fjord, about fifty miles
distant, in a south-eastern direction.

Vossevangen, in the splendour of a cloudless morning, was even more
beautiful than as a moonlit haven of repose. The compact little village
lay half buried in trees, clustered about the massive old church, with
its black, pointed tower, and roof covered with pitched shingles, in the
centre of the valley, while the mountains around shone bald and bright
through floating veils of vapour which had risen from the lake. The
people were all at work in the fields betimes, cutting and stacking the
barley. The grass-fields, cut smooth and close, and of the softest and
evenest green, seemed kept for show rather than for use. The bottom of
the valley along which we drove, was filled with an unbroken pine
forest, inclosing here and there a lake,

     "Where Heaven itself, brought down to Earth,
       Seemed fairer than above;"

while the opposite mountain rose rich with harvest fields and
farmhouses. There are similar landscapes between Fribourg and Vevay, in
Switzerland--finer, perhaps, except that all cultivated scenery in
Norway gains wonderfully in effect from the savage environment of the
barren fjelds. Here, cultivation is somewhat of a phenomenon, and a
rich, thickly settled valley strikes one with a certain surprise. The
Norwegians have been accused of neglecting agriculture; but I do not see
that much more could be expected of them. The subjugation of virgin
soil, as we had occasion to notice, is a serious work. At the best, the
grain harvests are uncertain, while fish are almost as sure as the
season; and so the surplus agricultural population either emigrates or
removes to the fishing grounds on the coast. There is, undoubtedly, a
considerable quantity of wild land which could be made arable, but the
same means, applied to the improvement of that which is at present under
cultivation, would accomplish far more beneficent results.

Leaving the valley, we drove for some time through pine forests, and
here, as elsewhere, had occasion to notice the manner in which this
source of wealth has been drained of late years. The trees were very
straight and beautiful, but there were none of more than middle age. All
the fine old timber had been cut away; all Norway, in fact, has been
despoiled in like manner, and the people are but just awaking to the
fact, that they are killing a goose which lays golden eggs. The
government, so prudently economical that it only allows $100,000 worth
of silver to be quarried annually in the mines of Kongsberg, lest the
supply should be exhausted, has, I believe, adopted measures for the
preservation of the forests; but I am not able to state their precise
character. Except in valleys remote from the rivers and fjords, one now
finds very little mature timber.

                  "The tallest pine,
     Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the mast
     Of some great admiral,"

I have not yet seen.

We at last came upon a little lake, in a close glen with walls 1000 feet
high. Not suspecting that we had ascended much above the sea-level, we
were surprised to see the gorge all at once open below us, revealing a
dark-blue lake, far down among the mountains. We stood on the brink of a
wall, over which the stream at our side fell in a "hank" of divided
cataracts. Our road was engineered with great difficulty to the bottom
of the steep, whence a gentler descent took us to the hamlet of
Vasenden, at the head of the lake. Beyond this there was no road for
carrioles, and we accordingly gave ours in charge of a bright, active
and intelligent little postmaster, twelve years old. He and his mother
then rowed us across the lake to the village of Graven, whence there was
a bridle-road across the mountains to a branch of the Hardanger Fjord.
They demanded only twelve skillings (ten cents) for the row of three
miles, and then posted off to a neighbouring farmhouse to engage horses
for us.

There was a neat white dwelling on the hill, which we took to be the
parsonage, but which proved to be the residence of an army captain on
leave, whom we found sitting in the door, cleaning his gun, as we
approached. He courteously ushered us into the house, and made his
appearance soon afterwards in a clean shirt, followed by his wife, with
wine and cakes upon a tray. I found him to be a man of more than
ordinary intelligence, and of an earnest and reflective turn of mind,
rare in men of his profession. He spoke chiefly of the passion for
emigration which now possesses the Norwegian farmers, considering it not
rendered necessary by their actual condition, but rather one of those
contagions which spread through communities and nations, overcoming
alike prudence and prejudice. He deplored it as retarding the
development of Norway. Personal interest, however, is everywhere
stronger than patriotism, and I see no signs of the emigration
decreasing for some years to come.

After waiting a considerable time, we obtained two horses and a
strapping farmer's son for guide. The fellow was delighted to find out
where we came from, and was continually shouting to the people in the
fields: "Here these are Americans: they were born there!" whereat the
people stared, saluted, and then stared again. He shouldered our packs
and marched beside the horses with the greatest ease. "You are strong,"
I remarked. "Yes," he replied, "I am a strong Normand," making his
patriotism an excuse for his personal pride. We had a terribly tough
pull up the mountain, through fine woods, to the summit level of the
fjeld. The view backwards, over the lake, was enchanting, and we
lingered long on the steep, loth to lose it. Turning again, a desolate
lake lay before us, heathery swells of the bleak table-land and distant
peaks, touched with snow. Once upon the broad, level summit of a
Norwegian fjeld, one would never guess what lovely valleys lie under
those misty breaks which separate its immense lobes--what gashes of life
and beauty penetrate its stony heart. There are, in fact, two Norways:
one above--a series of detached, irregular masses, bleak, snowy,
wind-swept and heather-grown, inhabited by herdsmen and hunters: and one
below--a ramification of narrow veins of land and water, with fields and
forests, highways and villages.

So, when we had traversed the upper land for several miles, we came to a
brink overlooking another branch of the lower land, and descended
through thick woods to the farms of Ulvik, on the Eyfjord, an arm of the
Hardanger. The shores were gloriously beautiful; slopes of dazzling turf
inclosed the bright blue water, and clumps of oak, ash, and linden, in
park-like groups, studded the fields. Low red farmhouses, each with its
hollow square of stables and granaries, dotted the hill-sides, and the
people, male and female, were everywhere out reaping the ripe barley and
piling it, pillar-wise, upon tall stakes. Owing to this circumstance we
were obliged to wait some time for oarsmen. There was no milk to be had,
nor indeed anything to eat, notwithstanding the signs of plenty on all
sides. My friend, wandering from house to house, at last discovered an
old man, who brought him a bowl of mead in exchange for a cigar. Late
in the afternoon two men came, put us into a shabby and leaky boat, and
pulled away slowly for Vik, ten miles distant.

The fjord was shut in by lofty and abrupt mountains, often interrupted
by deep lateral gorges. This is the general character of the Hardanger
Fjord, a broad winding sheet of water, with many arms, but whose extent
is diminished to the eye by the grandeur of its shores. Nothing can be
wilder or more desolate than this scenery, especially at the junction of
the two branches, where all signs of habitation are shut out of sight,
and one is surrounded by mighty precipices of dark-red rock, vanishing
away to the eastward in a gloomy defile. It was three hours and a half
before we reached Vik, at the head of a bay on the southern side. Here,
however, some English fishermen were quartered and we made sure of a
supper. The landlord, of course, received their superfluous salmon, and
they were not the men to spare a potato-field, so both were forthcoming,
and in the satisfaction of appeased hunger, we were willing to indorse
the opinion of a former English traveller in the guest's book: "This
place seems to me a paradise, although very probably it is not one." The
luxury of fishing, which I never could understand, has taught the
Norwegians to regard travellers as their proper prey. Why should a man,
they think, pay 50_l._ for the privilege of catching fish, which he
gives away as soon as caught, unless he don't know how else to get rid
of his money? Were it not that fishing in Norway includes pure air, hard
fare, and healthy exercise, I should agree with somebody's definition of
angling, "a rod with a fly at one end and a fool at the other;" but it
is all that, and besides furnished us with a good meal more than once;
wherefore I respect it.

We were now but eight miles from the Vöring-Foss, and set out betimes
the next morning, taking with us a bottle of red wine, some dry bread,
and Peder Halstensen as guide. I mention Peder particularly, because he
is the only jolly, lively, wide-awake, open-hearted Norwegian I have
ever seen. As rollicking as a Neapolitan, as chatty as an Andalusian,
and as frank as a Tyrolese, he formed a remarkable contrast to the men
with whom we had hitherto come in contact. He had long black hair,
wicked black eyes, and a mouth which laughed even when his face was at
rest. Add a capital tenor voice, a lithe, active frame, and something
irresistibly odd and droll in his motions, and you have his principal
points. We walked across the birch-wooded isthmus behind Vik to the
Eyfjordsvand, a lake about three miles long, which completely cuts off
the further valley, the mountains on either side falling to it in sheer
precipices 1000 feet high.

We embarked in a crazy, leaky boat, Peder pulling vigorously and
singing. "_Frie dig ved lifvet_" ("Life let us cherish"), with all the
contentment on his face which is expressed in Mozart's immortal melody.
"Peder," said I, "do you know the national song of Norway?" "I should
think so," was his answer, stopping short in the midst of a wild
fjeld-song, clearing his throat, and singing with a fervour and
enthusiasm which rang wide over the lonely lake:--

     "Minstrel, awaken the harp from its slumbers,
       Strike for old Norway, the land of the free!
     High and heroic, in soul-stirring numbers,
       Clime of our fathers, we strike it for thee!
     Old recollections awake our affections--
       Hallow the name of the land of our birth;
     Each heart beats its loudest, each cheek glows its proudest,
       For Norway the ancient, the throne of the earth!"[D]

"Dost thou know," said he, becoming more familiar in his address, "that
a lawyer (by the name of Bjerregaard) wrote this song, and the Storthing
at Christiania gave him a hundred specie dollars for it. That was not
too much, was it?" "No," said I, "five hundred dollars would have been
little enough for such a song." "Yes, yes, that it would," was his
earnest assent; and as I happened at that moment to ask whether we could
see the peaks of the Halling Jökeln, he commenced a soeter-song of life
on the lofty fjeld--a song of snow, and free winds, and blue sky. By
this time we had reached the other end of the lake, where, in the midst
of a little valley of rich alluvial soil, covered with patches of barley
and potatoes, stood the hamlet of Sæbö. Here Peder procured a horse for
my friend, and we entered the mouth of a sublime gorge which opened to
the eastward--a mere split in the mighty ramparts of the
Hardanger-Fjeld. Peder was continually shouting to the people in the
fields: "Look here! These are Americans, these two, and the other one is
a German! This one talks Norsk, and the others don't."

We ascended the defile by a rough footpath, at first through alder
thickets, but afterwards over immense masses of rocky ruin, which had
tumbled from the crags far above, and almost blocked up the valley. For
silence, desolation, and awful grandeur, this defile equals any of the
Alpine passes. In the spring, when the rocks, split by wedges of ice,
disengage themselves from the summit, and thunder down upon the piled
wrecks of ages, it must be terribly sublime. A bridge, consisting of two
logs spanned across abutments of loose stones, and vibrating strongly
under our tread, took us over the torrent. Our road, for some distance
was now a mere staircase, scrambling up, down, under, over, and between
the chaos of sundered rocks. A little further, and the defile shut in
altogether, forming a _cul de sac_ of apparently perpendicular walls,
from 2000 to 3000 feet high. "How are we to get out of this?" I asked
Peder. "Yonder," said he, pointing to the inaccessible summit in front.
"But where does the stream come from?" "That you will soon see." Lo! all
at once a clean split from top to bottom disclosed itself in the wall on
our left, and in passing its mouth we had a glimpse up the monstrous
chasm, whose dark-blue sides, falling sheer 3000 feet, vanished at the
bottom in eternal gloom and spray.

Crossing the stream again, we commenced ascending over the débris of
stony avalanches, the path becoming steeper and steeper, until the
far-off summit almost hung over our heads. It was now a zigzag ladder,
roughly thrown together, but very firm. The red mare which my friend
rode climbed it like a cat, never hesitating, even at an angle of 50°,
and never making a false step. The performance of this noble animal was
almost incredible. I should never have believed a horse capable of such
gymnastics, had I not seen it with my own eyes, had I not mounted her
myself at the most difficult points, in order to test her powers. You,
who have climbed the _Mayenwand_, in going from the glacier of the Rhone
to the Grimsel, imagine a slant higher, steeper, and composed of loose
rocks, and you will have an exact picture of our ascent. We climbed
well; and yet it took us just an hour and a half to reach the summit.

We were now on the great plateau of the Hardanger Fjeld, 2500 feet above
the sea. A wild region lay before us--great swells, covered with
heather, sweeping into the distance and given up to solitude and
silence. A few isolated peaks, streaked with snow, rose from this upper
level; and a deep break on our left revealed the top of the chasm
through which the torrent made its way. At its extremity, a mile or more
distant, rose a light cloud of vapour, seeming close at hand in the thin
mountain air. The thick, spongy soil, not more than two feet deep, rests
on a solid bed of rock,--the entire Hardanger Fjeld, in fact, is but a
single rock,--and is therefore always swampy. Whortleberries were
abundant, as well as the multeberry (_Rubus chamoemorus_), which I have
found growing in Newfoundland; and Peder, running off on the hunt of
them, was continually leading us astray. But at last, we approached the
wreath of whirling spray, and heard the hollow roar of the Vöring-Foss.
The great chasm yawned before us; another step, and we stood on the
brink. I seized the branch of a tough pine sapling as a support and
leaned over. My head did not swim; the height was too great for that,
the impression too grand and wonderful. The shelf of rock on which I
stood projected far out over a gulf 1200 feet deep, whose opposite side
rose in one great escarpment from the bottom to a height of 800 feet
above my head. On this black wall, wet with eternal spray, was painted a
splendid rainbow, forming two thirds of a circle before it melted into
the gloom below. A little stream fell in one long thread of silver from
the very summit, like a plumb-line dropped to measure the 2000 feet. On
my right hand the river, coming down from the level of the fjeld in a
torn, twisted, and boiling mass, reached the brink of the gulf at a
point about 400 feet below me, whence it fell in a single sheet to the
bottom, a depth of between 800 and 900 feet.

Could one view it from below, this fall would present one of the
grandest spectacles in the world. In height, volume of water, and
sublime surroundings it has no equal. The spectator, however, looks down
upon it from a great height above its brink, whence it is so
foreshortened that he can only guess its majesty and beauty. By lying
upon your belly and thrusting your head out beyond the roots of the
pines, you can safely peer into the dread abyss, and watch, through the
vortex of whirling spray in its tortured womb, the starry coruscations
which radiate from the bottom of the fall, like rockets of water
incessantly exploding. But this view, sublime as it is, only whets your
desire to stand below, and see the river, with its sprayey crest shining
against the sky, make but one leap from heaven to hell. Some persons
have succeeded, by entering the chasm at its mouth in the valley below,
in getting far enough to see a portion of the fall, the remainder being
concealed by a projecting rock; and the time will come, no doubt, when
somebody will have energy enough to carry a path to its very foot. I
envy the travellers who will then visit the Vöring-Foss.

A short distance above the fall there are a few cabins inhabited by
soeters, or herdsmen, whither we repaired to procure some fresh milk.
The house was rude and dirty; but the people received us in a friendly
manner. The powerful housewife laid aside her hay-rake, and brought us
milk which was actually sweet (a rare thing in Norway,) dirty, but not
rancid butter, and tolerable cheese. When my friend asked for water, she
dipped a pailful from a neighbouring stream, thick with decayed moss and
vegetable mould, and handed it to him. He was nice enough to pick out a
rotten root before drinking, which one of the children snatched up from
the floor and ate. Yet these people did not appear to be in want; they
were healthy, cheerful, and contented; and their filthy manner of living
was the result of sheer indolence and slovenliness. There was nothing to
prevent them from being neat and comfortable, even with their scanty
means; but the good gifts of God are always spoiled and wasted in dirty
hands.

When we opened our bottle of wine, an exquisite aroma diffused itself
through the room--a mingled smell of vine blossoms and ripe grapes. How
could the coarse vintage sent to the North, watered and chemically
doctored as it is, produce such a miracle? We tasted--superb old Chateau
Latour, from the sunniest hill of Bordeaux! By whatever accident it had
wandered thither, it did not fall into unappreciative hands. Even Brita
Halstendsdatter Höl, the strong housewife, smacked her lips over the
glass which she drank after sitting to me for her portrait.

When the sketch was completed, we filled the empty bottle with milk and
set out on our return.

FOOTNOTES:

[D] Latham's translation.


XXXI.

SKETCHES FROM THE BERGENSTIFT.


Our return from the Vöring-Foss to the hamlet of Sæbö was accomplished
without accident or particular incident. As we were crossing the
Eyfjordsvand, the stillness of the savage glen, yet more profound in the
dusk of evening, was broken by the sudden thunder of a slide in some
valley to the eastward. Peder stopped in the midst of "_Frie dig ved
lifvet_" and listened. "Ho!" said he, "the spring is the time when the
rocks come down, but that sounds like a big fellow, too." Peder was not
so lively on the way back, not because he was fatigued, for in showing
us how they danced on the fjeld, he flung himself into the air in a
marvellous manner, and turned over twice before coming down, but partly
because he had broken our bottle of milk, and partly because there was
something on his mind. I waited patiently, knowing that it would come
out at last, as indeed it did. "You see," said he, hesitatingly, "some
travellers give a drink-money to the guide. It isn't an obligation, you
know; but then some give it. Now, if you should choose to give me
anything, don't pay it to the landlord for me, because then I won't get
it. You are not bound to do so you know but _some_ travellers do it,
and I don't know but you might also. Now, if you should, give it
directly to me, and then I will have it." When we reached Vik, we called
Peder aside and gave him three marks. "Oh, you must pay your bill to the
landlord," said he. "But that is your drink-money," I explained. "That?"
he exclaimed; "it is not possible! _Frie dig ved lifvet_," &c., and so
he sang, cut a pigeon-wing or two, and proceeded to knot and double knot
the money in a corner of his pocket-handkerchief.

"Come and take a swim!" said Peder, reappearing. "I can swim ever since
I fell into the water. I tumbled off the pier, you must know, and down I
went. Everything became black before my eyes; and I thought to myself,
'Peder, this is the end of you.' But I kicked and splashed nevertheless,
until my eyes opened again, wide enough to see where a rope was. Well,
after I found I could fall into the water without drowning, I was not
afraid to swim." In fact, Peder now swam very well, and floundered about
with great satisfaction in the ice cold water. A single plunge was all I
could endure. After supper the landlady came in to talk to me about
America. She had a son in California, and a daughter in Wisconsin, and
showed me their daguerreotypes and some bits of gold with great pride.
She was a stout, kindly, motherly body, and paid especial attention to
our wants on finding where we came from. Indeed we were treated in the
most friendly manner by these good people, and had no reason to complain
of our reckoning on leaving. This experience confirms me in the belief
that honesty and simplicity may still be characteristics of the
Norwegians in the more remote parts of the country.

We bade a cordial farewell to Vik next morning, and set off on our
return, in splendid sunshine. Peder was in the boat, rejoiced to be with
us again; and we had no sooner gotten under way, than he began singing,
"_Frie dig ved lifvet_." It was an intensely hot day, and the shores of
Ulvik were perfectly dazzling. The turf had a silken gloss; the trees
stood darkly and richly green, and the water was purest sapphire. "It is
a beautiful bay, is it not?" said the farmer who furnished us with
horses, after we had left the boat and were slowly climbing the fjeld. I
thought I had never seen a finer; but when heaven and earth are in
entire harmony, when form, colour and atmosphere accord like some rich
swell of music, whatever one sees is perfect. Hence I shall not say how
beautiful the bay of Ulvik was to me, since under other aspects the
description would not be true.

The farmer's little daughter, however, who came along to take back one
of the horses, would have been a pleasant apparition at any time and in
any season. She wore her Sunday dress, consisting of a scarlet boddice
over a white chemise, green petticoat, and white apron, while her
shining flaxen hair was plaited into one long braid with narrow strips
of crimson and yellow cloth and then twisted like a garland around her
head. She was not more than twelve or thirteen years old, but tall,
straight as a young pine, and beautifully formed, with the promise of
early maidenhood in the gentle swell of her bosom. Her complexion was
lovely--pink, brightened with sunburnt gold,--and her eyes like the
blossoms of the forget-me-not, in hue. In watching her firm yet graceful
tread, as she easily kept pace with the horse, I could not realise that
in a few more years she would probably be no more graceful and beautiful
than the women at work in the fields--coarse, clumsy shapes, with frowzy
hair, leathery faces, and enormous hanging breasts.

In the Bergenstift, however, one sometimes sees a pretty face; and the
natural grace of the form is not always lost. About Vossevangen, for
instance, the farmers' daughters are often quite handsome; but beauty,
either male or female, is in Norway the rarest apparition. The grown-up
women, especially after marriage, are in general remarkably plain.
Except among some of the native tribes of Africa, I have nowhere seen
such overgrown, loose, pendant breasts as among them. This is not the
case in Sweden, where, if there are few beauties, there are at least a
great many passable faces. There are marked differences in the blood of
the two nations; and the greater variety of feature and complexion in
Norway seems to indicate a less complete fusion of the original stocks.

We were rowed across the Graven Lake by an old farmer, who wore the
costume of the last century,--a red coat, _à la_ Frederic the Great,
long waistcoat, and white knee-breeches. He demanded double the lawful
fare, which, indeed, was shamefully small; and we paid him without
demur. At Vasenden we found our carrioles and harness in good condition,
nothing having been abstracted except a ball of twine. Horses were in
waiting, apparently belonging to some well-to-do farmer; for the boys
were well dressed, and took especial care of them. We reached the
merchant's comfortable residence at Vossevangen before sunset, and made
amends on his sumptuous fare for the privations of the past three days.

We now resumed the main road between Christiania and Bergen. The same
cloudless days continued to dawn upon us. For one summer, Norway had
changed climates with Spain. Our oil-cloths were burnt up and cracked by
the heat, our clothes covered with dust, and our faces became as brown
as those of Bedouins. For a week we had not a cloud in the sky; the
superbly clear days belied the old saying of "weather-breeders."

Our road, on leaving Vossevangen, led through pine-forests, following
the course of a stream up a wild valley, enclosed by lofty mountains.
Some lovely cataracts fell from the steep on our left; but this is the
land of cataracts and there is many a one, not even distinguished by a
name, which would be renowned in Switzerland. I asked my postillion the
name of the stream beside us. "Oh," said he, "it has none; it is not big
enough!" He wanted to take us all the way through to Gudvangen,
twenty-eight miles, on our paying double fare, predicting that we would
be obliged to wait three hours for fresh horses at each intermediate
station. He waited some time at Tvinde, the first station, in the hope
that we would yield, but departed suddenly in a rage on seeing that the
horses were already coming. At this place, a stout young fellow, who had
evidently been asleep, came out of the house and stood in the door
staring at us with open mouth for a full hour. The postmaster sat on the
step and did likewise. It was the height of harvest-time, and the
weather favourable almost to a miracle; yet most of the harvesters lay
upon their backs under the trees as we passed. The women appeared to do
most of the out-door, as well as the in-door work. They are certainly
far more industrious than the men, who, judging from what I saw of them,
are downright indolent Evidences of slow, patient, plodding toil, one
sees truly; but active industry, thrift, and honest ambition, nowhere.

The scenery increased in wildness and roughness as we proceeded. The
summit of Hvitnaset (White-nose) lifted its pinnacles of grey rock over
the brow of the mountains on the north, and in front, pale, blue-grey
peaks, 5000 feet high, appeared on either hand. The next station was a
village of huts on the side of a hill. Everybody was in the fields
except one woman, who remained to take charge of the station. She was a
stupid creature, but had a proper sense of her duty; for she started at
full speed to order horses, and we afterwards found that she must have
run full three English miles in the space of half an hour. The
emigration to America from this part of Bergenstift has been very great,
and the people exhibited much curiosity to see and speak with us.

The scenery became at the same time more barren and more magnificent, as
we approached the last station, Stalheim, which is a miserable little
village at the head of the famous Naerödal. Our farmer-postillion wished
to take us on to Gudvangen with the same horses, urging the same reasons
as the former one. It would have been better if we had accepted his
proposal; but our previous experience had made us mistrustful. The man
spoke truth, however; hour after hour passed away, and the horses came
not. A few miserable people collected about us, and begged money. I
sketched the oldest, ugliest and dirtiest of them, as a specimen, but
regretted it afterwards, as his gratitude on receiving a trifle for
sitting, obliged me to give him my hand. Hereupon another old fellow,
not quite so hideous, wanted to be taken also. "Lars," said a woman to
the former, "are you not ashamed to have so ugly a face as yours go to
America?" "Oh," said he, "it does not look so ugly in the book." His
delight on getting the money created some amusement. "Indeed," he
protested, "I am poor, and want it; and you need not laugh."

The last gush of sunset was brightening the tops of the savage fjeld
when the horses arrived. We had waited two hours and three quarters and
I therefore wrote a complaint in the post-book in my best Norsk. From
the top of a hill beyond the village, we looked down into the Naerödal.
We stood on the brink of a tremendous wall about a thousand feet above
the valley. On one side, the stream we had been following fell in a
single cascade 400 feet; on the other, a second stream, issuing from
some unseen defile, flung its several ribbons of foam from nearly an
equal height. The valley, or rather gorge, disappeared in front between
mountains of sheer rock, which rose to the height of 3000 feet. The
road--a splendid specimen of engineering--was doubled back and forth
around the edge of a spur projecting from the wall on which we stood,
and so descended to the bottom. Once below, our carrioles rolled rapidly
down the gorge, which was already dusky with twilight. The stream, of
the most exquisite translucent azure-green colour, rolled between us;
and the mountain crests towered so far above, that our necks ached as we
looked upwards. I have seen but one valley which in depth and sublimity
can equal the Naerödal--the pass of the Taurus, in Asia Minor, leading
from Cappadocia into Cilicia. In many places the precipices were 2000
feet in perpendicular height; and the streams of the upper fjeld,
falling from the summits, lost themselves in evanescent water-dust
before they reached the bottom. The bed of the valley was heaped with
fragments of rock; which are loosed from above with every returning
spring.

It was quite dark before we reached Gudvangen, thoroughly tired and as
hungry as wolves. My postillion, on hearing me complain, pulled a piece
of dry mutton out of his pocket and gave it to me. He was very anxious
to learn whether brandy and tobacco were as dear in America as in
Norway; if so, he did not wish to emigrate. A stout girl had charge of
Braisted's horse; the female postillions always fell to his lot. She
complained of hard work and poor pay, and would emigrate if she had the
money. At Gudvangen we had a boat journey of thirty-five miles before
us, and therefore engaged two boats with eight oarsmen for the morrow.
The people tried hard to make us take more, but we had more than the
number actually required by law, and, as it turned out, quite as many as
were necessary. Travellers generally supply themselves with brandy for
the use of their boatmen, from an idea that they will be stubborn and
dilatory without it. We did so in no single instance; yet our men were
always steady and cheerful.

We shipped our carrioles and sent them off in the larger boat, delaying
our own departure until we had fortified ourselves with a good
breakfast, and laid in some hard bread and pork omelette, for the day.
The Gudvangen Fjord, down which we now glided over the glassy water, is
a narrow mountain avenue of glorious scenery. The unseen plateaus of the
Blaa and Graa Fjelds, on either hand, spilled their streams over
precipices from 1000 to 2000 feet in height, above whose cornices shot
the pointed summits of bare grey rock, wreathed in shifting clouds, 4000
feet above the sea. Pine-trees feathered the less abrupt steeps, with
patches of dazzling turf here and there; and wherever a gentler slope
could be found in the coves, stood cottages surrounded by potato-fields
and ripe barley stacked on poles. Not a breath of air rippled the dark
water, which was a perfect mirror to the mountains and the strip of sky
between them, while broad sheets of morning sunshine, streaming down the
breaks in the line of precipices, interrupted with patches of fiery
colour the deep, rich, transparent gloom of the shadows. It was an
enchanted voyage until we reached the mouth of the Aurlands Fjord,
divided from that of Gudvangen by a single rocky buttress 1000 feet
high. Beyond this point the watery channel is much broader, and the
shores diminish in grandeur as they approach the Sogne Fjord, of which
this is but a lateral branch.

I was a little disappointed in the scenery of Sogne Fjord, The mountains
which enclose it are masses of sterile rock, neither lofty nor bold
enough in their forms to make impression, after the unrivalled scenery
through which we had passed. The point of Vangnæs, a short distance to
the westward, is the "Framnæs" of Frithiof's Saga, and I therefore
looked towards it with some interest, for the sake of that hero and his
northern lily, Ingeborg. There are many bauta-stones still standing on
the shore, but one who is familiar with Tegner's poem must not expect
to find his descriptions verified, either in scenery or tradition. On
turning eastward, around the point of Fronningen, we were surprised by
the sudden appearance of two handsome houses, with orchards and gardens,
on the sunny side of the bank. The vegetation, protected in some degree
from the sea-winds, was wonderfully rich and luxuriant. There were now
occasional pine-woods on the southern shore, but the general aspect of
this fjord is bleak and desolate. In the heat and breathless silence of
noonday, the water was like solid crystal. A faint line, as if drawn
with a pencil along the bases of the opposite mountains, divided them
from the equally perfect and palpable mountains inverted below them. In
the shadows near us, it was quite impossible to detect the boundary
between the substance and its counterpart. In the afternoon we passed
the mouth of the northern arms of the fjord, which strike into the heart
of the wildest and grandest region of Norway; the valley of Justedal,
with its tremendous glaciers, the snowy teeth of the Hurunger, and the
crowning peaks of the Skagtolstind. Our course lay down the other arm,
to Lærdalsören, at the head of the fjord. By five o'clock it came in
sight, at the mouth of a valley opening through the barren flanks on the
Fille Fjeld. We landed, after a voyage of ten hours, and found welcome
signs of civilisation in a neat but exorbitant inn.

Our boatmen, with the exception of stopping half an hour for breakfast,
had pulled steadily the whole time. We had no cause to be dissatisfied
with them, while they were delighted with the moderate gratuity we gave
them. They were tough, well-made fellows, possessing a considerable
amount of endurance, but less actual strength than one would suspect.
Braisted, who occasionally tried his hand at an oar, could pull them
around with the greatest ease. English travellers whom I have met inform
me that in almost every trial they find themselves stronger than the
Norwegians. This is probably to be accounted for by their insufficient
nourishment. Sour milk and oaten bread never yet fed an athlete. The
proportions of their bodies would admit of fine muscular development;
and if they cannot do what their Viking ancestors once did, it is
because they no longer live upon the spoils of other lands, as they.


CHAPTER XXXII.

HALLINGDAL--THE COUNTRY-PEOPLE OF NORWAY.


There are two roads from Lærdalsören to Christiania, the eastern one
passing through the districts of Valders and Hadeland, by way of the
Little Miösen Lake and the Randsfjord, while the western, after crossing
the Fille Fjeld, descends the long Hallingdal to Ringerike. In point of
scenery there is little difference between them; but as we intended
visiting the province of Tellemark, in Southern Norway, we chose the
latter. The valley of the Fille Fjeld, which we entered on leaving
Lærdalsören, is enclosed by wild, barren mountains, more isolated and
irregular in their forms than the Hardanger and Dovre Fjelds. There were
occasional precipices and dancing waterfalls, but in general the same
tameness and monotony we had found on the Sogne Fjord. Down the bed of
the valley flowed a large rapid stream, clear as crystal, and of a
beautiful beryl tint. The cultivation was scanty; and the potato fields,
utterly ruined by disease, tainted the air with sickening effluvia. The
occasional forests on the hill-sides were of fir and birch, while
poplar, ash, and linden grew in the valley. The only fruit-trees I saw
were some sour red cherries.

But in the splendour of the day, this unfriendly valley shone like a
dell of the Apennines. Not a cloud disturbed the serenity of the sky;
the brown grass and yellow moss on the mountains were painted with sunny
gold, and the gloss and sparkle of the foliage equalled that of the
Italian ilex and laurel. On the second stage a new and superb road
carried us through the rugged defile of Saltenaaset. This pass is
evidently the effect of some mighty avalanche thousands of ages ago. The
valley is blocked up by tremendous masses of rock, hurled one upon the
other in the wildest confusion, while the shattered peaks from which
they fell still tower far above. Threading this chaos in the shadow of
the rocks, we looked across the glen upon a braided chain of foam,
twisted together at the end into a long white cascade, which dropped
into the gulf below. In another place, a rainbow meteor suddenly flashed
across the face of a dark crag, betraying the dusty spray of a fall,
else invisible.

On the third stage the road, after mounting a difficult steep, descended
into the valley of Borgund, in which stands most probably the most
ancient church in Norway. It is a singular, fantastic structure,
bristling with spiky spires and covered with a scale armour of black
pitched shingles. It is certainly of no more recent date than the
twelfth century, and possibly of the close of the eleventh. The
architecture shows the Byzantine style in the rounded choir and the
arched galleries along the sides, the Gothic in the windows and pointed
gables, and the horned ornaments on the roof suggest the pagan temples
of the ante-Christian period. A more grotesque affair could hardly be
found in Christendom; it could only be matched among the monstrosities
of Chinese art. With the exception of the church of Hitterdal, in
Tellemark, a building of similar date, this is the best preserved of the
few antiquities of Norway. The entire absence of feudal castles is a
thing to be noticed. Serfdom never existed here, and one result of this
circumstance, perhaps, is the ease with which institutions of a purely
republican stamp have been introduced.

Our road still proceeded up the bottom of a rough barren valley,
crossing stony headlands on either side. At the station of Haug our
course turned to the south-east, climbing a slope leading to the plateau
of the Fille Fjeld--a severe pull for our horses in the intense heat.
The birch woods gradually diminished in size until they ceased
altogether, and the naked plain stretched before us. In this upper land
the air was delicious and inspiring. We were more than 3000 feet above
the sea, but the summits to the right and left, with their soft gleams
of pale gray, lilac and purple hues in the sunshine, and pure blue in
shadow, rose to the height of 6000. The heat of the previous ten days
had stripped them bare of snow, and the landscape was drear and
monotonous. The summits of the Norwegian Fjelds have only the charm of
wildness and bleakness. I doubt whether any mountains of equal height
exhibit less grandeur in their upper regions. The most imposing features
of Norwegian scenery are its deep valleys, its tremendous gorges with
their cataracts, flung like banners from steeps which seem to lean
against the very sky, and, most of all, its winding, labyrinthine
fjords--valleys of the sea, in which the phenomena of the valleys of the
land are repeated. I found no scenery in the Bergenstift of so original
and impressive a character as that of the Lofoden Isles.

The day was Sunday, and we, of course, expect to see some evidence of it
in the appearance of the people. Yet, during the whole day, we found but
one clean person--the hostess of an inn on the summit of Fille Fjeld,
where we stopped to bait our horses. She was a young fresh-faced woman,
in the first year of her wifehood, and her snowy chemise and tidy
petticoat made her shine like a star among the dirty and frowzy
creatures in the kitchen. I should not forget a boy, who was washing his
face in a brook as we passed; but he was young, and didn't know any
better. Otherwise the people lounged about the houses, or sat on the
rocks in the sun, filthy, and something else, to judge from certain
signs. At Haug, forgetting that it was a fast station, where there is no
_tilsigelse_ (money for ordering horses) to be paid, I handed the usual
sum to the landlady, saying: "This is for _tilsigelse_." "It is quite
right," said she, pocketing the coin.

Skirting an azure lake, we crossed the highest part of the pass, nearly
four thousand feet above the sea, and descended a naked valley to the
inn of Bjöberg. The landlord received us very cordially; and as the inn
promised tolerable accommodation, he easily persuaded us to stop there
for the night. His wife wore a frightful costume, which we afterwards
found to prevail throughout all Hemsedal and Hallingdal. It consisted
simply of a band across the shoulders, above the breasts, passing around
the arms and over the back of the neck, with an immense baggy, dangling
skirt hanging therefrom to the ancles. Whether she was fat or lean,
straight or crooked, symmetrical or deformed, it was impossible to
discern, except when the wind blew. The only thing to be said in favour
of such a costume is, that it does not impede the development and
expansion of the body in any direction. Hence I would strongly recommend
its adoption to the advocates of reform in feminine dress at home. There
is certainly none of that weight upon the hips, of which they complain
in the fashionable costume. It is far more baggy, loose, and hideous
than the Bloomer, with the additional advantage of making all ages and
styles of beauty equally repulsive, while on the score of health and
convenience, there is still less to be said against it. Do not stop at
half-way measures, oh, fair reformers!

It seems incredible that, in a pastoral country like Norway, it should
be almost impossible to procure sweet milk and good butter. The cattle
are of good quality, there is no better grass in the world; and the only
explanation of the fact is to be found in the general want of
cleanliness, especially among the inhabitants of the mountain districts,
which are devoted to pasturage alone. Knowing this, one wonders the less
to see no measures taken for a supply of water in the richer
grain-growing valleys, where it is so easily procurable. At Bjöberg, for
instance, there was a stream of delicious water flowing down the hill,
close beside the inn, and four bored pine-trunks would have brought it
to the very door; but, instead of that, the landlady whirled off to the
stream in her revolving dress, to wash the dishes, or to bring us half a
pint to wash ourselves. We found water much more abundant the previous
winter in Swedish Lapland.

Leaving Bjöberg betimes, we drove rapidly down Hemsedal, enjoying the
pure delicious airs of the upper fjeld. The scenery was bleak and grey;
and even the soft pencil of the morning sun failed to impart any charm
to it, except the nameless fascination of utter solitude and silence.
The valley descends so gradually that we had driven two Norsk miles
before the fir-forests in its bed began to creep up the mountain-sides.
During the second stage we passed the remarkable peak of Saaten, on the
opposite side of the valley--the end or cape of a long projecting ridge,
terminating in a scarped cliff, from the very summit of which fell a
cascade from three to four hundred feet in height. Where the water came
from, it was impossible to guess, unless there were a large deposit of
snow in the rear; for the mountains fell away behind Saaten, and the
jagged, cleft headland rose alone above the valley. It was a strange and
fantastic feature of the landscape, and, to me, a new form in the
repertory of mountain aspects.

We now drove, through fir-woods balmy with warm resinous odours, to
Ekre, where we had ordered breakfast by _förbud_. The morning air had
given us a healthy appetite; but our spirits sank when the only person
at the station, a stupid girl of twenty, dressed in the same bulging,
hideous sack, informed us that nothing was to be had. After some
persuasion she promised us coffee, cheese, and bread, which came in due
time; but with the best will we found it impossible to eat anything. The
butter was rather black than yellow, the cheese as detestable to the
taste as to the smell, the bread made apparently of saw-dust, with a
slight mixture of oat-bran, and the coffee muddy dregs, with some sour
cream in a cup, and sugar-candy which appeared to have been sucked and
then dropped in the ashes. The original colour of the girl's hands was
barely to be distinguished through their coating of dirt; and all of us,
tough old travellers as we were, sickened at the sight of her. I verily
believe that the poorer classes of the Norwegians are the filthiest
people in Europe. They are even worse than the Lapps, for their habits
of life allow them to be clean.

After passing Ekre, our view opened down the valley, over a wild stretch
of wooded hills, to the blue mountain folds of the Hallingdal, which
crosses the Hemsedal almost at right angles, and receives its tributary
waters. The forms of the mountains are here more gradual; and those
grand sweeps and breaks which constitute the peculiar charms of the
scenery of the Bergenstift are met with no longer. We had a hot ride to
the next station, where we were obliged to wait nearly an hour in the
kitchen, our _förbud_ not having been forwarded from the former station
as soon as the law allowed us to expect. A strapping boy of eighteen
acted as station master. His trowsers reached considerably above his
shoulder blades, leaving barely room for a waistcoat, six inches long,
to be buttoned over his collar bone. The characteristic costumes of
Norway are more quaint and picturesque in the published illustrations
than in the reality, particularly those of Hemsedal. My postillion to
this station was a communicative fellow, and gave me some information
about the value of labour. A harvest-hand gets from one mark (twenty-one
cents) to one and a half daily, with food, or two marks without. Most
work is paid by the job; a strong lumber-man may make two and a half
marks when the days are long, at six skillings (five cents) a tree--a
plowman two marks. In the winter the usual wages of labourers are two
marks a week, with board. Shoemakers, tailors, and other mechanics
average about the same daily. When one considers the scarcity of good
food, and the high price of all luxuries, especially tobacco and brandy,
it does not seem strange that the emigration fever should be so
prevalent. The Norwegians have two traits in common with a large class
of Americans--rampant patriotism and love of gain; but they cannot so
easily satisfy the latter without sacrificing the former.

From the village of Göl, with its dark pretty church, we descended a
steep of many hundred feet, into Hallingdal, whose broad stream flashed
blue in the sunshine far below us. The mountains were now wooded to
their very summits; and over the less abrupt slopes, ripe oats and
barley-fields made yellow spots of harvest among the dark forests. By
this time we were out of smoking material, and stopped at the house of a
_landhandlare_, or country merchant, to procure a supply. A riotous
sound came from the door as we approached. Six or eight men, all more or
less drunk, and one woman, were inside, singing, jumping, and howling
like a pack of Bedlamites. We bought the whole stock of tobacco,
consisting of two cigars, and hastened out of the den. The last station
of ten miles was down the beautiful Hallingdal, through a country which
seemed rich by contrast with Hemsedal and the barren fjeld. Our
stopping-place was the village of Næs, which we reached in a famished
condition, having eaten nothing all day. There were two _landhandlare_
in the place, with one of whom we lodged. Here we found a few signs of
Christianity, such as gardens and decent dresses; but both of the
merchant's shops swarmed with rum-drinkers.

I had written, and sent off from Bjöberg, _förbud_ tickets for every
station as far as Kongsberg. By the legal regulations, the
_skyds-skaffer_ is obliged to send forward such tickets as soon as
received, the traveller paying the cost thereof on his arrival.
Notwithstanding we had given our _förbud_ twelve hours' start, and had
punctually paid the expense at every station, we overtook it at Næs. The
postmaster came to know whether we would have it sent on by special
express, or wait until some traveller bound the same way would take it
for us. I ordered it to be sent immediately, astounded at such a
question, until, making the acquaintance of a Scotchman and his wife,
who had arrived in advance of us, the mystery was solved. They had spent
the night at the first station beyond Bjöberg, where our _förbud_
tickets were given to them, with the request that they would deliver
them. They had punctually done so as far as Næs, where the people had
endeavoured to prevent them from stopping for the night, insisting that
they were bound to go on and carry the _förbud_. The cool impudence of
this transaction reached the sublime. At every station that day, pay had
been taken for service unperformed, and it was more than once demanded
twice over.

We trusted the repeated assurance of the postmaster at Næs, that our
tickets had been forwarded at once, and paid him accordingly. But at the
first station next morning we found that he had not done so; and this
interlinked chain of swindling lasted the whole day. We were obliged to
wait an hour or two at every post, to pay for messengers who probably
never went, and then to resist a demand for payment at the other end of
the station. What redress was there? We might indeed have written a
complaint in imperfect Norsk, which would be read by an inspector a
month afterwards; or perhaps it would be crossed out as soon as we left,
as we saw done in several cases. Unless a traveller is very well versed
in the language and in the laws relating to the _skyds_ system, he has
no defence against imposition, and even in such a case, he can only
obtain redress through delay. The system can only work equitably when
the people are honest; and perhaps they were so when it was first
adopted.

Here I must tell an unpleasant truth. There must have been some
foundation in the beginning for the wide reputation which the Norwegians
have for honest simplicity of character; but the accounts given by
former travellers are undeserved praise if applied at present. The
people are trading on fictitious capital. "Should I have a written
contract?" I asked of a landlord, in relation to a man with whom I was
making a bargain. "Oh, no," said he, "everybody is honest in Norway;"
and the same man tried his best to cheat me. Said Braisted, "I once
heard an old sailor say,--'when a man has a reputation for honesty,
watch him!'"--and there is some knowledge of human nature in the remark.
Norway was a fresh field when Laing went thither opportunities for
imposition were so rare, that the faculty had not been developed; he
found the people honest, and later travellers have been content with
echoing his opinion. "When I first came to the country," said an Irish
gentleman who for ten years past has spent his summers there, "I was
advised, as I did not understand the currency, to offer a handful in
payment, and let the people take what was due to them." "Would you do it
now?" I asked. "No, indeed," said he, "and the man who then advised me,
a Norwegian merchant, now says he would not do it either." An English
salmon-fisher told me very much the same thing. "I believe they are
honest in their intercourse with each other," said he; "but they do not
scruple to take advantage of travellers whenever they can." For my own
part, I must say that in no country of Europe, except Italy, have I
experienced so many attempts at imposition. Another Englishman, who has
been farming in Norway for several years, and who employs about forty
labourers, has been obliged to procure Swedes, on account of the
peculations of native hands. I came to Norway with the popular
impression concerning the people, and would not confess myself so
disagreeably undeceived, could I suppose that my own experiences were
exceptional. I found, however, that they tallied with those of other
travellers; and the conclusion is too flagrant to be concealed.

As a general rule, I have found the people honest in proportion as they
are stupid. They are quick-witted whenever the spirit of gain is
aroused; and the ease with which they pick up little arts of
acquisitiveness does not suggest an integrity proof against temptation.
It is but a negative virtue, rather than that stable quality rooted in
the very core of a man's nature. I may, perhaps, judge a little harshly;
but when one finds the love of gain so strongly developed, so keen and
grasping, in combination with the four capital vices of the
Norwegians--indolence, filth, drunkenness, and licentiousness,--the
descent to such dishonest arts as I have described is scarcely a single
step. There are, no doubt, many districts where the people are still
untempted by rich tourists and sportsmen, and retain the virtues once
ascribed to the whole population: but that there has been a general and
rapid deterioration of character cannot be denied. The statistics of
morality, for instance, show that one child out of every ten is
illegitimate; and the ratio has been steadily increasing for the past
fifty years. Would that the more intelligent classes would seriously set
themselves to work for the good of "_Gamle Norge_" instead of being
content with the poetical flourish of her name!

The following day, from Næs to Green, was a continuation of our journey
down the Hallingdal. There was little change in the scenery,--high
fir-wooded mountains on either hand, the lower slopes spotted with
farms. The houses showed some slight improvement as we advanced. The
people were all at work in the fields, cutting the year's satisfactory
harvest. A scorching sun blazed in a cloudless sky; the earth was baked
and dry, and suffocating clouds of dust rose from under our horses'
hoofs. Most of the women in the fields, on account of the heat, had
pulled off their body-sacks, and were working in shifts made on the same
principle, which reached to the knees. Other garments they had none. A
few, recognising us as strangers, hastily threw on their sacks or got
behind a barley-stack until we had passed; the others were quite
unconcerned. One, whose garment was exceedingly short, no sooner saw us
than she commenced a fjeld dance, full of astonishing leaps and whirls
to the great diversion of the other hands. "Weel done, cutty sark!" I
cried; but the quotation was thrown away upon her.

Green, on the Kröder Lake, which we did not reach until long after dark,
was an oasis after our previous experience. Such clean, refined,
friendly people, such a neat table, such excellent fare, and such
delicious beds we had certainly never seen before. Blessed be decency!
blessed be humanity! was our fervent ejaculation. And when in the
morning we paid an honest reckoning and received a hearty "_lycksame
resa!_" (a lucky journey!) at parting, we vowed that the place should
always be green in our memories. Thence to Kongsberg we had fast
stations and civilised people; the country was open, well settled, and
cultivated, the scenery pleasant and picturesque, and, except the
insufferable heat and dust, we could complain of nothing.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

TELLEMARK AND THE RIUKAN FOSS.


Kongsberg, where we arrived on the 26th of August, is celebrated for its
extensive silver mines, which were first opened by Christian IV in 1624,
and are now worked by the Government. They are doubtless interesting to
mineralogists; but we did not visit them. The guide-book says, "The
principal entrance to the mines is through a level nearly two English
miles in length; from this level you descend by thirty-eight
perpendicular ladders, of the average length of five fathoms each, a
very fatiguing task, and then find yourself at the bottom of the shaft,
and are rewarded by the sight of the veins of native silver"--not a bit
of which, after all, are you allowed to put into your pocket. Thank you!
I prefer remaining above ground, and was content with having in my
possession smelted specimens of the ore, stamped with the head of Oscar
I.

The goal of our journey was the Riukan Foss, which lies in Upper
Tellemark, on the south-eastern edge of the great plateau of the
Hardanger Fjeld. This cascade disputes with the Vöring Foss the
supremacy of the thousand waterfalls of Norway. There are several ways
from Kongsberg thither; and in our ignorance of the country, we
suffered ourselves to be guided by the landlord of our hotel. Let no
traveller follow our example! The road he recommended was almost
impassable for carrioles, and miserably supplied with horses, while that
through Hitterdal, by which we returned, is broad, smooth, and
excellent. We left on the morning after our arrival, taking a road which
led up the valley of the Lauven for some distance, and then struck
westward through the hills to a little station called Moen. Here, as the
place was rarely visited by travellers, the people were simple, honest,
and friendly. Horses could not be had in less than two hours; and my
postillion, an intelligent fellow far gone in consumption, proposed
taking the same horse to the next station, fifteen miles further. He
accepted my offer of increased pay; but another, who appeared to be the
owner of the horses, refused, demanding more than double the usual
rates. "How is it?" said I, "that you were willing to bring us to Moen
for one and a half marks, and will not take us to Bolkesjö for less than
five?" "It was my turn," he answered, "to furnish post-horses. I am
bound by law to bring you here at the price fixed by the law; but now I
can make my own bargain, and I want a price that will leave me some
profit." This was reasonable enough; and we finally agreed to retain two
of the horses, taking the postmaster's for a third.

The region we now traversed was almost a wilderness. There were
grazing-farms in the valley, with a few fields of oats or barley; but
these soon ceased, and an interminable forest enclosed us. The road,
terribly rough and stony, crossed spurs of the hills, slowly climbing to
a wild summit-level, whence we caught glimpses of lakes far below us,
and the blue mountain-ranges in the west, with the pyramidal peak of the
Gousta Fjeld crowning them. Bolkesjö, which we reached in a little more
than two hours, is a small hamlet on the western slope of the mountain,
overlooking a wide tract of lake and forest. Most of the inhabitants
were away in the harvest-fields; but the _skyds-shaffer_, a tall
powerful fellow, with a grin of ineffable stupidity on his face, came
forward as we pulled in our horses on the turfy square between the rows
of magazines. "Can we get horses at once?" "Ne-e-ey!" was his drawling
answer, accompanied with a still broader grin, as if the thing were a
good joke. "How soon?" "In three hours." "But if we pay fast prices?" He
hesitated, scratched his head, and drawled, "In a _liten stund_" (a
"short time"), which may mean any time from five minutes to as many
hours. "Can we get fresh milk?" "Ne-e-ey!" "Can we get butter?"
"Ne-e-ey!" "What can we get?" "Nothing." Fortunately we had foreseen
this emergency, and had brought a meal with us from Kongsberg.

We took possession of the kitchen, a spacious and tolerably clean
apartment, with ponderous benches against two sides of it, and two
bedsteads, as huge and ugly as those of kings, built along the third.
Enormous platters of pewter, earthen and stone ware, were ranged on
shelves; while a cupboard, fantastically painted, contained the smaller
crockery. There was a heavy red and green cornice above the bed, upon
which the names of the host and his wife, with the date of their
marriage, were painted in yellow letters. The worthy couple lay so high
that several steps were necessary to enable them to reach the bed, in
which process their eyes encountered words of admonition, painted upon
triangular boards, introduced to strengthen the pillars at the head and
foot. One of these inscriptions ran, "This is my bed: here I take my
rest in the night, and when morning comes I get up cheerfully and go to
work;" and the other, "When thou liest down to sleep think on thy last
hour, pray that God will guard thy sleep, and be ready for thy last hour
when it comes." On the bottom of the cupboard was a representation of
two individuals with chalk-white faces and inky eyes, smoking their
pipes and clinking glasses. The same fondness for decorations and
inscriptions is seen in all the houses in Tellemark and a great part of
Hallingdal. Some of them are thoroughly Chinese in gaudy colour and
grotesque design.

In the course of an hour and a half we obtained three strong and
spirited stallions, and continued our journey towards the Tind-Sö.
During this stage of twelve or thirteen miles, the quality of our
carrioles was tested in the most satisfactory manner. Up-hill and down,
over stock and stone, jolted on rock and wrenched in gulley, they were
whirled at a smashing rate; but the tough ash and firmly-welded iron
resisted every shock. For any other than Norwegian horses and vehicles,
it would have been hazardous travelling. We were anxious to retain the
same animals for the remaining stage to Tinoset, at the foot of the
lake; but the postillions refused, and a further delay of two hours was
the consequence. It was dark when the new horses came; and ten miles of
forest lay before us. We were ferried one by one across the Tind Elv, on
a weak, loose raft and got our carrioles up a frightful bank on the
opposite side by miraculous luck. Fortunately we struck the post-road
from Hitterdal at this place; for it would have been impossible to ride
over such rocky by-ways as we had left behind us. A white streak was all
that was visible in the gloom of the forest. We kept in the middle of
it, not knowing whether the road went up, down, or on a level, until we
had gone over it. At last, however, the forest came to an end, and we
saw Tind Lake lying still and black in the starlight. All were in bed at
Tinoset; but we went into the common sleeping-room, and stirred the
people up promiscuously until we found the housewife, who gave us the
only supper the house afforded--hard oaten bread and milk. We three then
made the most of two small beds.

In the morning we took a boat, with four oarsmen, for Mael, at the mouth
of the Westfjord-dal, in which lies the Riukan Foss. There was no end to
our wonderful weather. In rainy Norway the sky had for once forgotten
its clouds. One after another dawned the bright Egyptian days, followed
by nights soft, starry, and dewless. The wooded shores of the long Tind
Lake were illuminated with perfect sunshine, and its mirror of
translucent beryl broke into light waves under the northern breeze. Yet,
with every advantage of sun and air, I found this lake undeserving of
its reputation for picturesque beauty. The highest peaks rise to the
height of 2000 feet, but there is nothing bold and decided in their
forms, and after the splendid fjords of the western coast the scenery
appears tame and commonplace. Our boatmen pulled well, and by noon
brought us to Hakenaes, a distance of twenty-one miles. Here we stopped
to engage horses to the Riukan Foss, as there is no post-station at
Mael. While the old man put off in his boat to notify the farmers whose
turn it was to supply the animals, we entered the farm-house, a
substantial two-story building. The rooms were tolerably clean and well
stocked with the clumsy, heavy furniture of the country, which is mostly
made by the farmers themselves, every man being his own carpenter,
cooper, and blacksmith. There were some odd old stools, made of segments
of the trunk of a tree, the upper part hollowed out so as to receive the
body, and form a support for the back. I have no doubt that this fashion
of seat is as old as the time of the Vikings. The owner was evidently a
man in tolerable circumstances, and we therefore cherished the hope of
getting a good meal; but all that the old woman, with the best will in
the world, was able to furnish, was milk, butter, oaten bread, and an
egg apiece. The upper rooms were all supplied with beds, one of which
displayed remarkable portraits of the Crown Prince of Denmark and his
spouse, upon the head-board. In another room was a loom of primitive
construction.

It was nearly two hours before the old farmer returned with the
information that the horses would be at Mael as soon as we; but we lay
upon the bank for some time after arriving there, watching the
postillions swim them across the mouth of the Maan Elv. Leaving the
boat, which was to await our return the next day, we set off up the
Westfjord-dal, towards the broad cone-like mass of the Gousta-Fjeld,
whose huge bulk, 6000 feet in height, loomed grandly over the valley.
The houses of Mael, clustered about its little church, were scattered
over the slope above the lake; and across the river, amid the fields of
grass and grain, stood another village of equal size. The bed of the
valley, dotted with farms and groups of farm-houses, appeared to be
thickly populated; but as a farmer's residence rarely consists of less
than six buildings--sometimes even eight--a stranger would naturally
overrate the number of inhabitants. The production of grain, also, is
much less than would be supposed from the amount of land under
cultivation, owing to the heads being so light. The valley of the Maan,
apparently a rich and populous region, is in reality rather the reverse.
In relation to its beauty, however, there can be no two opinions. Deeply
sunken between the Gousta and another bold spur of the Hardanger, its
golden harvest-fields and groves of birch, ash, and pine seem doubly
charming from the contrast of the savage steeps overhanging them, at
first scantily feathered with fir-trees, and scarred with the tracks of
cataracts and slides, then streaked only with patches of grey moss, and
at last bleak and sublimely bare. The deeply-channelled cone of the
Gousta, with its indented summit, rose far above us, sharp and clear in
the thin ether; but its base, wrapped in forests and wet by many a
waterfall--sank into the bed of blue vapour which filled the valley.

There was no Arabian, nor even Byzantine blood in our horses; and our
attendants--a stout full-grown farmer and a boy of sixteen--easily kept
pace with their slow rough trot. In order to reach Tinoset the next day,
we had determined to push on to the Riukan Foss the same evening. Our
quarters for the night were to be in the house of the old farmer, Ole
Torgensen, in the village of Däl, half-way between Mael and the
cataract, which we did not reach until five o'clock, when the sun was
already resting his chin on the shoulder of the Gousta. On a turfy slope
surrounded with groves, above the pretty little church of Däl, we found
Ole's _gaard_. There was no one at home except the daughter, a blooming
lass of twenty, whose neat dress, and graceful, friendly deportment,
after the hideous feminines of Hallingdal, in their ungirdled sacks and
shifts, so charmed us that if we had been younger, more sentimental, and
less experienced in such matters, I should not answer for the
consequences. She ushered us into the guests' room, which was neatness
itself, set before us a bottle of Bavarian beer and promised to have a
supper ready on our return.

There were still ten miles to the Riukan, and consequently no time to be
lost. The valley contracted, squeezing the Maan between the interlocking
bases of the mountains, through which, in the course of uncounted
centuries, it had worn itself a deep groove, cut straight and clean into
the heart of the rock. The loud, perpetual roar of the vexed waters
filled the glen; the only sound except the bleating of goats clinging to
the steep pastures above us. The mountain walls on either hand were now
so high and precipitous, that the bed of the valley lay wholly in
shadow; and on looking back, its further foldings were dimly seen
through purple mist. Only the peak of the Gousta, which from this point
appeared an entire and perfect pyramid, 1500 feet in perpendicular
height above the mountain platform from which it rose, gleamed with a
rich bronze lustre in the setting sun. The valley was now a mere
ascending gorge, along the sides of which our road climbed. Before us
extended a slanting shelf thrust out from the mountain, and affording
room for a few cottages and fields; but all else was naked rock and
ragged pine. From one of the huts we passed, a crippled, distorted form
crawled out on its hands and knees to beg of us. It was a boy of
sixteen, struck with another and scarcely less frightful form of
leprosy. In this case, instead of hideous swellings and fungous
excrescences, the limbs gradually dry up and drop off piecemeal at the
joints. Well may the victims of both these forms of hopeless disease
curse the hour in which they were begotten. I know of no more awful
example of that visitation of the sins of the parents upon the children,
which almost always attends confirmed drunkenness, filth, and
licentiousness.

When we reached the little hamlet on the shelf of the mountain, the last
rays of the sun were playing on the summits above. We had mounted about
2000 feet since leaving the Tind Lake, and the dusky valley yawned far
beneath us, its termination invisible, as if leading downward into a
lower world. Many hundreds of feet below the edge of the wild little
platform on which we stood, thundered the Maan in a cleft, the bottom of
which the sun has never beheld. Beyond this the path was impracticable
for horses; we walked, climbed, or scrambled along the side of the dizzy
steep, where, in many places, a false step would have sent us to the
brink of gulfs whose mysteries we had no desire to explore. After we had
advanced nearly two miles in this manner, ascending rapidly all the
time, a hollow reverberation, and a glimpse of profounder abysses ahead,
revealed the neighbourhood of the Riukan. All at once patches of lurid
gloom appeared through the openings of the birch thicket we were
threading, and we came abruptly upon the brink of the great chasm into
which the river falls.

The Riukan lay before us, a miracle of sprayey splendour, an apparition
of unearthly loveliness, set in a framework of darkness and terror
befitting the jaws of hell. Before us, so high against the sky as to
shut out the colours of sunset, rose the top of the valley--the level of
the Hardanger table land, on which, a short distance further, lies the
Miös-Vand, a lovely lake, in which the Maan Elv is born. The river first
comes into sight a mass of boiling foam, shooting around the corner of a
line of black cliffs which are rent for its passage, curves to the right
as it descends, and then drops in a single fall of 500 feet in a hollow
caldron of bare black rock. The water is already foam as it leaps from
the summit; and the successive waves, as they are whirled into the air,
and feel the gusts which for ever revolve around the abyss, drop into
beaded fringes in falling, and go fluttering down like scarfs of the
richest lace. It is not water, but the spirit of water. The bottom is
lost in a shifting snowy film, with starry rays of foam radiating from
its heart, below which, as the clouds shifts, break momentary gleams of
perfect emerald light. What fairy bowers of some Northern Undine are
suggested in those sudden flashes of silver and green! In that dim
profound, which human eye can but partially explore, in which human foot
shall never be set, what secret wonders may still lie hidden! And around
this vision of perfect loveliness, rise the awful walls wet with spray
which never dries, and crossed by ledges of dazzling turf, from the gulf
so far below our feet, until, still further above our heads, they lift
their irregular cornices against the sky.

I do not think I am extravagant when I say that the Riukan Foss is the
most beautiful cataract in the world. I looked upon it with that
involuntary suspension of the breath and quickening of the pulse, which
is the surest recognition of beauty. The whole scene, with its breadth
and grandeur of form, and its superb gloom of colouring, enshrining this
one glorious flash of grace, and brightness, and loveliness, is
indelibly impressed upon my mind. Not alone during that half hour of
fading sunset, but day after day, and night after night, the embroidered
spray wreaths of the Riukan were falling before me.

We turned away reluctantly at last, when the emerald pavement of
Undine's palace was no longer visible through the shooting meteors of
silver foam. The depths of Westfjord-dal were filled with purple
darkness: only the perfect pyramid of the Gousta, lifted upon a mountain
basement more than 4000 feet in height, shone like a colossal wedge of
fire against the violet sky. By the time we reached our horses we
discovered that we were hungry, and, leaving the attendants to follow at
their leisure, we urged the tired animals down the rocky road. The smell
of fresh-cut grain and sweet mountain hay filled the cool evening air;
darkness crept under the birches and pines, and we no longer met the
home-going harvesters. Between nine and ten our horses took the way to a
_gaard_ standing a little off the road; but it did not appear to be Ole
Torgensen's, so we kept on. In the darkness, however, we began to doubt
our memory, and finally turned back again. This time there could be no
mistake: it was _not_ Ole Torgensen's. I knocked at various doors, and
hallooed loudly, until a sleepy farmer made his appearance, and started
us forward again. He kindly offered to accompany us, but we did not
think it necessary. Terribly fatigued and hungry, we at last saw a star
of promise--the light of Ole's kitchen window. There was a white cloth
on the table in the guests' house, and Ole's charming daughter--the Rose
of Westfjord-dalen--did not keep us long waiting. Roast mutton, tender
as her own heart, potatoes plump as her cheeks, and beer sparkling as
her eyes, graced the board; but emptiness, void as our own celibate
lives, was there when we arose. In the upper room there were beds, with
linen fresh as youth and aromatic as spring; and the peace of a full
stomach and a clear conscience descended upon our sleep.

In the morning we prepared for an early return to Mael, as the boatmen
were anxious to get back to their barley-fields. I found but one
expression in the guests' book--that of satisfaction with Ole Torgensen,
and cheerfully added our amen to the previous declarations. Ole's bill
proved his honesty, no less than his worthy face. He brightened up on
learning that we were Americans. "Why," said he, "there have only been
two Americans here before in all my life; and you cannot be a _born_
American, because you speak Norsk so well." "Oh," said I, "I have
learned the language in travelling." "Is it possible?" he exclaimed:
"then you must have a powerful intellect." "By no means," said I, "it is
a very easy thing; I have travelled much, and can speak six other
languages." "Now, God help us!" cried he; "_seven_ languages! It is
truly wonderful how much comprehension God has given unto man, that he
can keep seven languages in his head at one time. Here am I, and I am
not a fool; yet I do not see how it would be possible for me to speak
anything but Norsk; and when I think of you, it shows me what wonders
God has done. Will you not make a mark under your name, in the book, so
that I may distinguish you from the other two?" I cheerfully complied,
and hereby notify future visitors why my name is italicised in Ole's
book.

We bade farewell to the good old man, and rode down the valley of the
Maan, through the morning shadow of the Gousta. Our boat was in
readiness; and its couch of fir boughs in the stern became a pleasant
divan of indolence, after our hard horses and rough roads. We reached
Tinoset by one o'clock, but were obliged to wait until four for horses.
The only refreshment we could obtain was oaten bread, and weak spruce
beer. Off at last, we took the post-road to Hitterdal, a smooth,
excellent highway, through interminable forests of fir and pine. Towards
the close of the stage, glimpses of a broad, beautiful, and
thickly-settled valley glimmered through the woods, and we found
ourselves on the edge of a tremendous gully, apparently the bed of an
extinct river. The banks on both sides were composed entirely of gravel
and huge rounded pebbles, masses of which we loosened at the top, and
sent down the sides, gathering as they rolled, until in a cloud of dust
they crashed with a sound like thunder upon the loose shingles of the
bottom 200 feet below. It was scarcely possible to account for this
phenomenon by the action of spring torrents from the melted snow. The
immense banks of gravel, which we found to extend for a considerable
distance along the northern side of the valley, seemed rather to be the
deposit of an ocean-flood.

Hitterdal, with its enclosed fields, its harvests, and groups of
picturesque, substantial farm-houses, gave us promise of good quarters
for the night; and when our postillions stopped at the door of a
prosperous-looking establishment, we congratulated ourselves on our
luck. But (--) never whistle until you are out of the woods. The people
seemed decidedly not to like the idea of our remaining, but promised to
give us supper and beds. They were stupid, but not unfriendly; and our
causes of dissatisfaction were, first, that they were so outrageously
filthy, and secondly, that they lived so miserably when their means
evidently allowed them to do better. The family room, with its two
cumbrous bedsteads built against the wall, and indescribably dirty beds,
was given up to us, the family betaking themselves to the stable. As
they issued thence in the morning, in single garments, we were
involuntary observers of their degree of bodily neatness; and the
impression was one we would willingly forget. Yet a great painted desk
in the room contained, amid many flourishes, the names and character of
the host and hostess, as follows:--"Andres Svennogsen Bamble, and Ragnil
Thorkilsdatter Bamble, Which These Two Are Respectable People." Over the
cupboard, studded with earthen-ware dishes, was an inscription in
misspelt Latin: "Solli Deo Glorria." Our supper consisted of boiled
potatoes and fried salt pork, which, having seen the respectable hosts,
it required considerable courage to eat, although we had not seen the
cooking. Fleas darkened the floor; and they, with the fear of something
worse, prevented us from sleeping much. We did not ask for coffee in the
morning, but, as soon as we could procure horses, drove away hungry and
disgusted from Bamble-Kaasa and its respectable inhabitants.

The church of Hitterdal, larger than that of Borgund, dates from about
the same period, probably the twelfth century. Its style is similar,
although it has not the same horned ornaments upon the roof, and the
Byzantine features being simpler, produce a more harmonious effect. It
is a charmingly quaint and picturesque building, and the people of the
valley are justly proud of it. The interior has been renovated, not in
the best style.

Well, to make this very long chapter short, we passed the beautiful
falls of the Tind Elv, drove for more than twenty miles over wild piny
hills, and then descended to Kongsberg, where Fru Hansen comforted us
with a good dinner. The next day we breakfasted in Drammen, and, in
baking heat and stifling dust, traversed the civilised country between
that city and Christiania. Our Norwegian travel was now at an end; and,
as a snobby Englishman once said to me of the Nile, "it is a good thing
to have gotten over."


CHAPTER XXXIV.

NORWAY AND SWEDEN.


We spent four days in Christiania, after completing our Norwegian
travels. The sky was still perfectly clear, and up to the day of our
departure no rain fell. Out of sixty days which we had devoted to
Norway, only four were rainy--a degree of good fortune which rarely
falls to the lot of travellers in the North.

Christiania, from its proximity to the continent, and its character as
capital of the country, is sufficiently advanced in the arts of living,
to be a pleasant resting-place after the _désagrémens_ and privations of
travel in the interior. It has two or three tolerably good and very
exorbitant hotels, and some bankers with less than the usual amount of
conscience. One of them offered to change some Prussian thalers for my
friend, at only ten per cent. less than their current value. The
_vognmand_ from whom we purchased our carrioles, endeavoured to evade
his bargain, and protested that he had not money enough to repurchase
them. I insisted, however, and with such good effect that he finally
pulled a roll of notes, amounting to several hundred dollars out of his
pocket, and paid me the amount in full. The English travellers whom I
met had not fared any better; and one and all of us were obliged to
recede from our preconceived ideas of Norwegian character. But enough of
an unpleasant theme; I would rather praise than blame, any day, but I
can neither praise nor be silent when censure is a part of the truth.

I had a long conversation with a distinguished Norwegian, on the
condition of the country people. He differed with me in the opinion that
the clergy were to some extent responsible for their filthy and
licentious habits, asserting that, though the latter were _petits
seigneurs_, with considerable privileges and powers, the people were
jealously suspicious of any attempt to exert an influence upon their
lives. But is not this a natural result of the preaching of doctrinal
religion, of giving an undue value to external forms and ceremonies? "We
have a stubborn people," said my informant; "their excessive self-esteem
makes them difficult to manage. Besides, their morals are perhaps better
than would be inferred from the statistics. Old habits have been
retained, in many districts, which are certainly reprehensible, but
which spring from custom rather than depravity. I wish they were less
vain and sensitive, since in that case they would improve more rapidly."
He stated also that the surprising number of illegitimate births is
partly accounted for by the fact that there are a great number of
connections which have all the character of marriage except the actual
ceremony. This is an affair of considerable cost and show; and many of
the poorer people, unable to afford it, live together rather than wait,
hoping that a time may come when they will be able to defray the
expenses, and legitimate the children who may meanwhile be born. In some
cases the parties disagree, the connection is broken off, and each one
seeks a new mate. Whatever palliation there may be in particular
instances, the moral effect of this custom is unquestionably bad; and
the volume of statistics recently published by Herr Sundt, who was
appointed by the Storthing to investigate the subject, shows that there
is no agricultural population in the world which stands lower in the
scale of chastity, than that of Norway.

In the course of our conversation, the gentleman gave an amusing
instance of the very sensitiveness which he condemned. I happened,
casually, to speak of the Icelandic language. "The _Icelandic_
language!" he exclaimed. "So you also in America call it Icelandic; but
you ought to know that it is Norwegian. It is the same language spoken
by the Norwegian Vikings who colonised Iceland--the old Norsk, which
originated here, and was merely carried thither." "We certainly have
some reason," I replied, "seeing that it now only exists in Iceland, and
has not been spoken in Norway for centuries; but let me ask why you,
speaking Danish, call your language Norsk." "Our language, as written
and printed, is certainly pure Danish," said he; "but there is some
difference of accent in speaking it." He did not add that this
difference is strenuously preserved and even increased by the
Norwegians, that they may not be suspected of speaking Danish, while
they resist with equal zeal, any approach to the Swedish. Often, in
thoughtlessly speaking of the language as Danish, I have heard the
ill-humoured reply, "Our language is not Danish, but Norsk." As well
might we say at home, "We speak American, not English."

I had the good fortune to find Professor Munck, the historian of Norway,
at home, though on the eve of leaving for Italy. He is one of the few
distinguished literary names the country has produced. Holberg the
comedian was born in Bergen; but he is generally classed among the
Danish authors. In art, however, Norway takes no mean rank, the names of
her painters Dahl, Gude, and Tidemand having a European reputation.
Professor Munck is about fifty years of age, and a fine specimen of the
Viking stock. He speaks English fluently, and I regretted that the
shortness of my stay did not allow me to make further drafts on his
surplus intelligence. In the Museum of Northern Antiquities, which is
small, as compared with that of Copenhagen, but admirably arranged, I
made the acquaintance of Professor Keyser, the author of a very
interesting work, on the "Religion of Northmen," a translation of which
by Mr. Barclay Pennock, appeared in New York, some three years ago.

I was indebted to Professor Munck, for a sight of the Storthing, or
National Legislative Assembly, which was then in session. The large hall
of the University, a semi-circular room, something like our Senate
Chamber, has been given up to its use, until an appropriate building
shall be erected. The appearance and conduct of the body strikingly
reminded me of one of our State Legislatures. The members were plain,
practical-looking men, chosen from all classes, and without any
distinguishing mark of dress. The speaker was quite a young man, with a
moustache. Schweigaard the first jurist in Norway, was speaking as we
entered. The hall is very badly constructed for sound, and I could not
understand the drift of his speech, but was exceedingly struck by the
dryness of his manner. The Norwegian Constitution has been in operation
forty-three years, and its provisions, in most respects so just and
liberal, have been most thoroughly and satisfactorily tested. The Swedes
and a small conservative party in Norway, would willingly see the powers
of the Storthing curtailed a little; but the people now know what they
have got, and are further than ever from yielding any part of it. In the
house of almost every Norwegian farmer, one sees the constitution, with
the _facsimile_ autographs of its signers, framed and conspicuously hung
up. The reproach has been made, that it is not an original
instrument--that it is merely a translation of the Spanish Constitution
of 1812, a copy of the French Constitution of 1791, &c.; but it is none
the worse for that. Its framers at least had the wisdom to produce the
right thing at the right time, and by their resolution and determined
attitude to change a subject province into a free and independent state:
for, carefully guarded as it is, the union with Sweden is only a source
of strength and security.

One peculiarity of the Storthing is, that a majority of its members are,
and necessarily must be, farmers; whence Norway is sometimes nicknamed
the _Farmer State_. Naturally, they take very good care of their own
interests, one of their first steps being to abolish all taxes on landed
property; but in other respects I cannot learn that their rule is not as
equitable as that of most legislative bodies. Mügge, in his recently
published _Nordisches Bilderbuch_ (Northern Picture Book), gives an
account of a conversation which he had with a Swedish statesman on this
subject. The latter was complaining of the stubbornness and ignorance of
the Norwegian farmers. Mügge asked, (the remainder of the dialogue is
too good to be omitted):--

"The Storthing, then, consists of a majority of coarse and ignorant
people?"

STATESMAN. "I will not assert that. A certain practical understanding
cannot be denied to most of these farmers, and they often bestow on
their sons a good education before giving them the charge of the
paternal fields. One, therefore, finds in the country many accomplished
men: how could there be 700 students in Christiania, if there were not
many farmers' sons among them?"

AUTHOR. "But does this majority of farmers in the Storthing commit
absurdities? does it govern the country badly, burden it with debts or
enact unjust laws?"

STATESMAN. "That cannot exactly be admitted, although this majority
naturally gives its own interests the preference, and shapes the
government accordingly. The state has no debts; on the contrary, its
treasury is full, an abundance of silver, its bank-notes in demand,
order everywhere, and, as you see, an increase of prosperity, with a
flourishing commerce. Here lies a statement before me, according to
which, in the last six months alone, more than a hundred vessels have
been launched in different ports."

AUTHOR. "The Farmer-Legislature, then, as I remark, takes care of
itself, but is niggardly and avaricious when its own interests are not
concerned?"

STATESMAN. "It is a peculiar state of affairs. In very many respects
this reproach cannot be made against the farmers. If anything is to be
done for science, or for so-called utilitarian objects, they are always
ready to give money. If a deserving man is to be assisted, if means are
wanted for beneficial purposes, insane asylums, hospitals, schools, and
such like institutions, the Council of State is always sure that it will
encounter no opposition. On other occasions, however, these lords of the
land are as hard and tough as Norwegian pines, and button up their
pockets so tight that not a dollar drops out."

AUTHOR. "On what occasions?"

STATESMAN. "Why, you see (shrugging his shoulders), those farmers have
not the least _comprehension of statesmanship_! As soon as there is any
talk of appropriations for increasing the army, or the number of
officers, or the pay of foreign ministers, or the salaries of high
official persons, or anything of that sort, you can't do anything with
them."

AUTHOR. (To himself.) "God keep them a long time without a comprehension
of statesmanship! If I were a member of the Storthing, I would have as
thick a head as the rest of them."

On the 5th of September, Braisted and I took passage for Gottenburg, my
friend having already gone home by way of Kiel. We had a smooth sea and
an agreeable voyage, and awoke the next morning in Sweden. On the day
after our arrival, a fire broke out in the suburb of Haga, which
consumed thirteen large houses, and turned more than two hundred poor
people out of doors. This gave me an opportunity to see how fires are
managed here. It was full half an hour after the alarm-bell was rung
before the first engine began to play; the water had to be hauled from
the canal, and the machine, of a very small and antiquated pattern,
contributed little towards stopping the progress of the flames. The
intervention of a row of gardens alone saved the whole suburb from
destruction. There must have been from six to eight thousand spectators
present, scattered all over the rocky knolls which surround Gottenburg.
The fields were covered with piles of household furniture and clothing,
yet no guard seemed to be necessary for their protection, and the owners
showed no concern for their security.

There is a degree of confidence exhibited towards strangers in Sweden,
especially in hotels, at post-stations, and on board the inland
steamers, which tells well for the general honesty of the people. We
went on board the steamer _Werner_ on the morning of the 8th, but first
paid our passage two days afterwards, just before reaching Carlstad. An
account book hangs up in the cabin, in which each passenger enters the
number of meals or other refreshments he has had, makes his own bill and
hands over the amount to the stewardess. In posting, the _skjutsbonder_
very often do not know the rates, and take implicitly what the traveller
gives them. I have yet to experience the first attempt at imposition in
Sweden. The only instances I heard of were related to me by Swedes
themselves, a large class of whom make a point of depreciating their own
country and character. This habit of detraction is carried to quite as
great an extreme as the vanity of the Norwegians, and is the less
pardonable vice of the two.

It was a pleasant thing to hear again the musical Swedish tongue, and
to exchange the indifference and reserve of Norway for the friendly,
genial, courteous manner of Sweden. What I have said about the formality
and affectation of manners, and the rigidity of social etiquette, in the
chapters relating to Stockholm, was meant to apply especially to the
capital. Far be it from me to censure that natural and spontaneous
courtesy which is a characteristic of the whole people. The more I see
of the Swedes, the more I am convinced that there is no kinder, simpler,
and honester people in the world. With a liberal common school system, a
fairer representation, and release from the burden of a state church,
they would develop rapidly and nobly.

Our voyage from Gottenburg to Carlstad, on the Wener Lake, had but one
noteworthy point--the Falls of Trollhätten. Even had I not been fresh
from the Riukan-Foss, which was still flashing in my memory, I should
have been disappointed in this renowned cataract. It is not a single
fall, but four successive descents, within the distance of half a mile,
none of them being over twenty feet in perpendicular height. The Toppö
Fall is the only one which at all impressed me, and that principally
through its remarkable form. The huge mass of the Gotha River, squeezed
between two rocks, slides down a plane with an inclination of about 50°,
strikes a projecting rock at the bottom, and takes an upward curve,
flinging tremendous volumes of spray, or rather broken water, into the
air. The bright emerald face of the watery plane is covered with a
network of silver threads of shifting spray, and gleams of pale blue and
purple light play among the shadows of the rising globes of foam below.


CHAPTER XXXV.

A TRAMP THROUGH WERMELAND AND DALECARLIA.


On leaving Carlstad our route lay northward up the valley of the Klar
Elv, in the province of Wermeland, and thence over the hills, by way of
Westerdal, in Dalecarlia, to the head of the Siljan Lake. The greater
part of this region is almost unknown to travellers, and belongs to the
poorest and wildest parts of Sweden. We made choice of it for this
reason, that we might become acquainted with the people in their true
character, and compare them with the same class in Norway. Our heavy
luggage had all been sent on to Stockholm, in the charge of an Irish
friend, and we retained no more than could be carried easily in two
packs, as we anticipated being obliged to perform part of the journey on
foot.

It rained in torrents during the day we spent in Carlstad, and some
lumber merchants of Gottenburg, who were on their way to Fryxendal, to
superintend the getting down of their rafts, predicted that the deluge
would last an entire month. There was always a month of rainy weather at
this season they said, and we had better give up our proposed journey.
We trusted to our combined good luck however, and were not deceived,
for, with the exception of two days, we had charming weather during the
remainder of our stay in Sweden. Having engaged a two-horse cart for the
first post-station, we left Carlstad on the morning of the 11th of
September. The clouds were still heavy, but gradually rolled into
compacter masses, giving promise of breaking away. The city is built
upon a little island at the head of the lake, whence we crossed to the
mainland by a strong old bridge. Our road led eastward through a
slightly undulating country, where broad woods of fir and birch divided
the large, well cultivated farms. The _gårds_, or mansions, which we
passed, with their gardens and ornamental shrubbery, gave evidence of
comfort and competence. The people were in the harvest-fields, cutting
oats, which they piled upon stakes to dry. Every one we met saluted us
courteously, with a cheerful and friendly air, which was all the more
agreeable by contrast with the Norwegian reserve.

At the station, Prestegård, we procured a good breakfast of ham, eggs,
and potatoes, and engaged two carts to take us further. We now turned
northward over a lovely rolling country, watered with frequent
streams,--a land of soft outlines, of woods and swelling knolls, to
which the stately old houses gave an expression of contentment and
household happiness. At Deye we left our carts, shouldered our packs,
and trudged off on foot up the valley of the Klar Elv, which is here a
broad lazy stream, filled with tens of thousands of pine-logs, waiting
to be carried down to the Wener by the first freshet. The scenery
charmed us by its rich and quiet beauty; it was without grand or
striking features, but gently undulating, peaceful, and home-like. We
found walking very fatiguing in the hot sun, which blazed upon us all
the afternoon with a summer heat. The handsome residences and gardens,
which we occasionally passed, gave evidence of taste and refinement in
their possessors, and there was a pleasant grace in the courteous
greetings of the country people whom we met. Towards evening we reached
a post-station, and were tired enough to take horses again. It was after
dark before we drew up at Ohlsäter, in the heart of Wermeland. Here we
found a neat, comfortable room, with clean beds, and procured a supper
of superb potatoes. The landlord was a tall, handsome fellow, whose
friendly manners, and frank face, breathing honesty and kindness in
every lineament, quite won my heart. Were there more such persons in the
world, it would be a pleasanter place of residence.

We took horses and bone-shattering carts in the morning, for a distance
of thirteen miles up the valley of the Klar Elv. The country was very
picturesque and beautiful, well cultivated, and quite thickly settled.
The wood in the sheltered bed of the valley was of remarkably fine
growth; the birch trees were the largest I ever saw, some of them being
over one hundred feet in height. Comfortable residences, with orchards
and well-kept gardens attached, were quite frequent, and large sawmills
along the river, which in some places was entirely concealed by floating
rafts of lumber, gave an air of industry and animation to the landscape.
In one place the road was spanned, for a considerable distance, with
triumphal arches of foliage. I inquired the meaning of this display of
the boy who accompanied us. "Why," said he, "there was a wedding a week
ago, at the _herregård_ (gentleman's residence); the young Herr got
married, and these arches were put up for him and his bride." The
herregård, which we passed soon afterwards, was an imposing mansion,
upon an eminence overlooking the valley. Beside it was a _jernbruk_, or
iron-works, from which a tramway, some miles in length, led to the
mines.

Resuming our knapsacks, we walked on up the valley. The hills on either
side increased in height, and gloomed darkly under a threatening sky.
The aspect of the country gradually became wilder, though, wherever
there was cultivation, it bore the same evidence of thrift and
prosperity. After a steady walk of four hours, we reached the village of
Råda, where our road left the beautiful Klar Elv, and struck northwards
towards Westerdal, in Dalecarlia. We procured a dinner of potatoes and
bacon, with excellent ale, enjoying, meanwhile, a lovely view over a
lake to the eastward, which stretched away for ten miles between the
wooded hills. The evening was cold and raw: we drove through pine-woods,
around the head of the lake, and by six o'clock reached Asplund, a
miserable little hamlet on a dreary hill. The post-station was a forlorn
cottage with a single room, not of the most inviting appearance. I asked
if we could get quarters for the night. "If you _will_ stay, of course
you _can_," said the occupant, an old woman; "but there is no bed, and I
can get you horses directly to go on." It was a distance of thirteen
miles to the next station, but we yielded to the old woman's hint, and
set forward. The road led through woods, which seemed interminable. We
were jammed together into a little two-wheeled cart, with the boy
between our knees. He seemed much disinclined to hurry the horse, but
soon fell asleep, and one of us held him by the collar to prevent his
tumbling out, while the other took the lines, and urged on our slow
beast. The night was so dark that we had great difficulty in keeping the
road, but towards eleven o'clock we emerged from the woods, and found,
by shaking the boy, that we were approaching the station at last. This
was a little place called Laggasen, on the northern frontier of
Wermeland.

Everybody had gone to bed in the hut at which we stopped. We entered the
kitchen, which was at the same time the bedroom, and aroused the
inmates, who consisted of a lonely woman, with two or three children.
She got up in a very scanty chemise, lit a wooden splinter, and
inspected us, and, in answer to our demand for a bed, informed us that
we would have to lie upon the floor. We were about to do this, when she
said we could get good quarters at the _Nore_, on the top of the hill.
Her earnestness in persuading us to go made me suspect that she merely
wanted to get rid of us, and I insisted that she should accompany us to
show the way. After some hesitation she consented, and we set out. We
first crossed a broad swamp, on a road made of loose logs, then climbed
a hill, and trudged for some distance across stubble-fields, until my
patience was quite worn out, and Braisted made use of some powerful
maritime expressions. Finally, we reached a house, which we entered
without more ado. The close, stifling atmosphere, and the sound of hard
breathing on all sides, showed us that a whole family had been for some
hours asleep there. Our guide thumped on the door, and hailed, and at
length somebody awoke. "Can you give two travellers a bed?" she asked.
"No," was the comfortable reply, followed by the yell of an aroused baby
and the noises of the older children. We retreated at once, and opened a
battery of reproaches on the old woman for having brought us on a fool's
errand. "There is Ohlsen's," she replied, very quietly, "I think I can
get you a bed there." Whereupon we entered another house in the same
unceremonious manner, but with a better result. A plump, good-natured
housewife jumped out of bed, went to an opposite door, and thumped upon
it. "Lars!" she cried, "come out of that this minute!" As we entered,
with a torch of dry fir, Lars, who proved to be a middle-aged man, got
out of bed sleepily, picked up his clothes and marched off. The hostess
then brought clean sheets and pillow-cases, and by midnight we were
sweetly and blissfully stowed away together in the place vacated by poor
Lars.

Nothing could exceed the kindness and courtesy of the good people in the
morning. The hostess brought us coffee, and her son went off to get us a
horse and cart. She would make no charge, as we had had so little, she
said, and was quite grateful for the moderate sum I gave her. We had a
wild road over hills, covered with pine forests, through the breaks in
which we now and then caught a glimpse of a long lake to the westward,
shining with a steel-blue gleam in the morning sun. There were but few
clearings along the road, and miles frequently intervened without a sign
of human habitation. We met, however, with great numbers of travellers,
mostly farmers, with laden hay-carts. It was Sunday morning, and I could
not help contrasting these people with those we had seen on the same day
three weeks previous whilst crossing the Fille Fjeld. Here, every one
had evidently been washed and combed: the men wore clean shirts and
stockings, and the women chemises of snowy whiteness under their gay
boddices. They were mostly Dalecarlians, in the picturesque costume of
the province. We entered Dalecarlia on this stage, and the frank fresh
faces of these people, their unmistakable expression of honesty and
integrity, and the hearty cordiality of their greetings, welcomed us
delightfully to the storied ground of Sweden.

Towards noon we reached the village of Tyngsjö, a little settlement
buried in the heart of the wild woods. A mile or two of the southern
slope of a hill had been cleared away, and over this a number of dark
wooden farmhouses were scattered, with oats and potato-fields around
them. An odd little church stood in midst, and the rich swell of a hymn,
sung by sweet Swedish voices, floated to us over the fields as we drove
up to the post-station. The master, a tall, slender man, with yellow
locks falling upon his shoulders, and a face which might be trusted with
millions, welcomed us with a fine antique courtesy, and at once sent off
for horses. In a little while three farmers came, saluting us
gracefully, and standing bareheaded while they spoke to us. One of them,
who wore a dark brown jacket and knee-breeches, with a clean white shirt
and stockings, had a strikingly beautiful head. The face was a perfect
oval, the eyes large and dark, and the jet-black hair, parted on the
forehead, fell in silky waves upon his shoulders. He was as handsome and
graceful as one of Vandyk's cavaliers, and showed the born gentleman in
his demeanour. He proposed that we should take one horse, as it could
be gotten without delay, while two (which the law obliged us to take and
pay for, if the farmers chose), would have detained us an hour. As the
women were in church, the postmaster himself cooked us some freshly-dug
potatoes, which, with excellent butter, he set before us. "I have a kind
of ale," said he, "which is called porter; if you will try it, perhaps
you will like it." It was, in reality, so good, that we took a second
bottle with us for refreshment on the road. When I asked how much we
should pay, he said: "I don't think you should pay anything, there was
so little." "Well," said I, "It is worth at least half a rigsdaler."
"Oh, but that may be too much," he answered, hesitatingly.

Our postillion was a fine handsome fellow, so rosy and robust that it
made one feel stronger and healthier to sit beside him. He did not spare
the horse, which was a big, capable animal, and we rolled along through
endless forests of fir and pine as rapidly as the sandy road would
allow. After we had gone about eight miles he left us, taking a shorter
footpath through the woods. We guessed at our proper direction,
sometimes taking the wrong road, but finally, after two hours or more,
emerged from the woods into Westerdal, one of the two great valleys from
which Dalecarlia (_Dalarne_, or The Dales) takes its name. The day was
magnificent, clear, and with a cold north-east wind, resembling the
latter part of October at home. The broad, level valley, with its fields
and clustered villages, lay before us in the pale, cold autumnal
sunshine, with low blue hills bounding it in the distance. We met many
parties in carts, either returning from church, or on their way to visit
neighbours. All were in brilliant Sunday costume, the men in blue
jackets and knee-breeches, with vests of red or some other brilliant
colour, and the women with gay embroidered boddices, white sleeves, and
striped petticoats of blue, red, brown, and purple, and scarlet
stockings. Some of them wore, in addition, an outer jacket of snowy
sheepskin, with elaborate ornamental stitch-work on the back. Their
faces were as frank and cheerful as their dresses were tidy, and they
all greeted us with that spontaneous goodness of heart which recognises
a brother in every man. We had again taken a wrong road, and a merry
party carefully set us right again, one old lady even proposing to leave
her friends and accompany us, for fear we should go astray again.

We crossed the Westerdal by a floating bridge, and towards sunset
reached the inn of Rågsveden, our destination. It was a farmer's _gård_,
standing a little distance off the road. An entrance through one of the
buildings, closed with double doors, admitted us into the courtyard, a
hollow square, surrounded with two story wooden dwellings, painted dark
red. There seemed to be no one at home, but after knocking and calling
for a time an old man made his appearance. He was in his second
childhood, but knew enough to usher us into the kitchen and ask us to
wait for the landlord's arrival. After half an hour our postillion
arrived with four or five men in their gayest and trimmest costume, the
landlord among them. They immediately asked who and what we were, and we
were then obliged to give them an account of all our travels. Their
questions were shrewd and intelligent, and their manner of asking,
coupled as it was with their native courtesy, showed an earnest desire
for information, which we were most willing to gratify. By and by the
hostess came, and we were ushered into a very pleasant room, with two
beds, and furnished with a supper of fresh meat, potatoes, and mead. The
landlord and two or three of the neighbours sat with us before the fire
until we were too sleepy to answer any more questions. A more naturally
independent and manly bearing I have never seen than that of our host.
He was a tall, powerful man, of middle age, with very handsome features,
which were softened but not weakened in expression by his long blond
hair, parted on his forehead. He had the proper pride which belongs to
the consciousness of worth, and has no kinship with empty vanity. "We
have come to Dalecarlia to see the descendants of the people who gave
Gustavus Vasa his throne," said I, curious to see whether he would
betray any signs of flattered pride. His blue eye flashed a little, as
he sat with his hands clasped over one knee, gazing at the fire, a light
flush ran over his temples--but he said nothing. Some time ago a
proposition was made to place a portrait of Gustavus Vasa in the church
at Mora. "No," said the Dalecarlians, "we will not have it: we do not
need any picture to remind us of what our fathers have done."

The landlady was a little woman, who confessed to being forty-nine years
old, although she did not appear to be more than forty. "I have had a
great deal of headache," said she, "and I look much older than I am."
Her teeth were superb, as were those of all the women we saw. I do not
suppose a tooth-brush is known in the valley; yet the teeth one sees are
perfect pearls. The use of so much sour milk is said to preserve them.
There was a younger person in the house, whom we took to be a girl of
sixteen, but who proved to be the son's wife, a woman of twenty-six, and
the mother of two or three children. The Dalecarlians marry young when
they are able, but even in opposite cases they rarely commit any
violation of the laws of morality. Instances are frequent, I was told,
where a man and woman, unable to defray the expense of marriage, live
together for years in a state of mutual chastity, until they have saved
a sum sufficient to enable them to assume the responsibilities of
married life. I know there is no honester, and I doubt whether there is
a purer, people on the earth than these Dalecarlians.

We awoke to another glorious autumnal day. The valley was white with
frost in the morning, and the air deliciously keen and cold; but after
sunrise heavy white vapours arose from the spangled grass, and the day
gradually grew milder. I was amused at the _naïve_ curiosity of the
landlady and her daughter-in-law, who came into our room very early,
that they might see the make of our garments and our manner of dressing.
As they did not appear to be conscious of any impropriety, we did not
think it necessary to feel embarrassed. Our Lapland journey had taught
us habits of self-possession under such trying circumstances. We had
coffee, paid an absurdly small sum for our entertainment, and took a
cordial leave of the good people. A boy of fifteen, whose eyes, teeth
and complexion kept my admiration on the stretch during the whole stage,
drove us through unbroken woods to Skamhed, ten miles further down the
valley. Here the inn was a little one story hut, miserable to behold
externally, but containing a neat guest's room and moreover, as we
discovered in the course of time--a good breakfast. While we were
waiting there, a man came up who greeted us in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, on learning that we came from America. "Are you not afraid
to travel so far from home?" he asked: "how could you cross the great
sea?" "Oh," I answered, "there is no more danger in one part of the
world than another." "Yes," said he, "God is as near on the water as on
the land"--unconsciously repeating the last words of Sir Humphrey
Gilbert: "Christ walked upon the waves and quieted them, and he walks
yet, for them that believe in Him." Hereupon he began repeating some
hymns, mingled with texts of Scripture, which process he continued until
we became heartily tired. I took him at a venture, for an
over-enthusiastic _Läsare_, or "Reader," the name given to the Swedish
dissenters.

We had a station of twenty three miles before us, to the village of
Landbobyn, which lies in the wooded wilderness between Osterdal and
Westerdal. Our postillion, a fine young fellow of twenty-two, over six
feet in height, put on his best blue jacket and knee-breeches, with a
leather apron reaching from his shoulders to below his knees. This is an
article worn by almost all Dalecarlians for the purpose of saving their
clothes while at work, and gives them an awkward and ungraceful air.
This fellow, in spite of a little fear at the bare idea, expressed his
willingness to go with us all over the world, but the spirit of
wandering was evidently so easy to be kindled in him, that I rather
discouraged him. We had a monotonous journey of five hours through a
forest of pine, fir, and birch, in which deer and elk are frequently
met with; while the wolf and the bear haunt its remoter valleys. The
ground was but slightly undulating, and the scenery in general was as
tame as it was savage.

Landbobyn was a wretched hamlet on the banks of a stream, with a few
cleared fields about it. As the sun had not yet set, we determined to
push on to Kettbo, eight or ten miles further, and engaged a boy to
pilot us through the woods. The post-station was a miserable place,
where we found it impossible to get anything to eat. I sat down and
talked with the family while our guide recruited himself with a large
dish of thick sour milk. "Why do you travel about the earth?" asked his
mother: "is it that you may spy out the poverty of the people and see
how miserably they live?" "No," said I, "it is that I may become
acquainted with the people, whether they are poor or not." "But," she
continued, "did you ever see a people poorer than we?" "Often," said I;
"because you are contented, and no one can be entirely poor who does not
complain." She shook her head with a sad smile and said nothing.

Our guide poled us across the river in a rickety boat, and then plunged
into the woods. He was a tall, well grown boy of fifteen or sixteen,
with a beautiful oval face, long fair hair parted in the middle and
hanging upon his shoulders, and a fine, manly, resolute expression. With
his jacket, girdle, knee-breeches, and the high crowned and broad
brimmed felt hat he wore, he reminded me strongly of the picture of
Gustavus Vasa in his Dalecarlian disguise, in the cathedral of Upsala.
He was a splendid walker, and quite put me, old pedestrian as I am, out
of countenance. The footpath we followed was terribly rough; we
stumbled over stock and stone, leaped fallen trees, crossed swamps on
tussocks of spongy moss, and climbed over heaps of granite boulders:
yet, while we were panting and exhausted with our exertions to keep pace
with him, he walked onward as quietly and easily as if the smoothest
meadow turf were under his feet. I was quite puzzled by the speed he
kept up on such a hard path, without seeming to put forth any extra
strength. At sunset he pointed out some clearings on a hill side over
the tree tops, a mile or two ahead, as our destination. Dusk was
gathering as we came upon a pretty lake, with a village scattered along
its hilly shore. The post-station, however, was beyond it, and after
some delay the boy procured a boat and rowed us across. Telling us to go
up the hill and we should find the inn, he bade us good bye and set out
on his return.

We soon reached a _gård_, the owner whereof, after satisfying his
curiosity concerning us by numerous questions, informed us that the inn
was still further. After groping about in the dark for awhile, we found
it. The landlord and his wife were sitting before the fire, and seemed,
I thought, considerably embarrassed by our arrival. There was no bed,
they said, and they had nothing that we could eat; their house was
beyond the lake, and they only came over to take charge of the
post-station when their turn arrived. We were devoured with hunger and
thirst, and told them we should be satisfied with potatoes and a place
on the floor. The wife's brother, who came in soon afterwards, was
thereupon despatched across the lake to bring coffee for us, and the
pleasant good-wife put our potatoes upon the fire to boil. We lit our
pipes, meanwhile, and sat before the fire, talking with our host and
some neighbours who came in. They had much to ask about America, none of
them having ever before seen a native of that country. Their questions
related principally to the cost of living, to the value of labour, the
price of grain, the climate and productions, and the character of our
laws. They informed me that the usual wages in Dalecarlia were 24
skillings (13 cents) a day, and that one _tunne_ (about 480 lbs.) of rye
cost 32 _rigsdaler_ ($8.37-1/2). "No doubt you write descriptions of
your travels?" asked the landlord. I assented. "And then, perhaps, you
make books of them?" he continued: whereupon one of the neighbours
asked, "But do you get any money for your books?"

The potatoes were finally done, and they, with some delicious milk,
constituted our supper. By this time the brother had returned, bringing
with him coffee, a pillow, and a large coverlet made entirely of
cat-skins. A deep bed of hay was spread upon the floor, a coarse linen
sheet thrown over it, and, with the soft fur covering, we had a
sumptuous bed. About midnight we were awakened by an arrival. Two
tailors, one of them hump-backed, on their way to Wermeland, came in,
with a tall, strong woman as postillion. The fire was rekindled, and
every thing which the landlord had extracted from us was repeated to the
new comers, together with a very genial criticism upon our personal
appearance and character. After an hour or two, more hay was brought in
and the two tailors and the postillioness lay down side by side. We had
barely got to sleep again, when there was another arrival. "I am the
post-girl," said a female voice. Hereupon everybody woke up, and the
story of the two foreign travellers was told over again. In the course
of the conversation I learned that the girl carried the post twenty
English miles once a week, for which she received 24 _rigs_ ($6.25)
annually. "It is a hard business," said the hump-backed tailor. "Yes;
but I am obliged to do it," answered the girl. After her departure we
were not again disturbed, and managed to get some sleep at last.

We all completed our toilettes in the same room, without the least
embarrassment; and, with a traveller's curiosity, I may be pardoned for
noticing the general bodily cleanliness of my various bed-fellows,
especially as the city Swedes are in the habit of saying that the
country people are shockingly dirty. We had coffee, and made
arrangements with the girl who had brought the tailors to take us back
in her cart. Our host would make no charge for the bed, and next to
nothing for our fare, so I put a bank-note in the hand of little Pehr,
his only child, telling him to take care of it, and spend it wisely when
he grew up. The delight of the good people knew no bounds. Pehr must
hold up his little mouth to be kissed, again and again; the mother shook
us warmly by the hand, and the father harnessed his horse and started
with us. May the blessing of God be upon all poor, honest, and contented
people!

Our road led between wooded hills to the Siljan-Forss, a large
iron-foundry upon a stream which flows into the Siljan Lake. It was a
lovely morning, and our postillion who was a woman of good sense and
some intelligence, chatted with me the whole way. She was delighted to
find that we could so easily make ourselves understood. "When I saw you
first in the night," said she, "I thought you must certainly be Swedes.
All the foreigners I saw in Stockholm had something dark and cloudy in
their countenances, but both of you have shining faces." She questioned
me a great deal about the sacred localities of Palestine, and about the
state of religion in America. She evidently belonged to the _Läsare_,
who, she stated, were very numerous in Dalecarlia. "It is a shame," said
she, "that we poor people are obliged to pay so much for the support of
the Church, whether we belong to it or not. Our taxes amount to 40
_rigs_ yearly, ten of which, in Mora parish, go to the priest. They say
he has an income of half a _rigs_ every hour of his life. King Oscar
wishes to make religion free, and so it ought to be, but the clergy are
all against him, and the clergy control the _Bondestånd_ (House of
Peasants), and so he can do nothing." The woman was thirty-one years
old, and worn with hard labour. I asked her if she was married. "No,"
she answered, with a deep sigh, looking at the betrothal-ring on her
finger. "Ah," she continued, "we are all poor, Sweden is a poor country;
we have only iron and timber, not grain, and cotton, and silk, and
sugar, like other countries."

As we descended towards the post-station of Vik we caught a glimpse of
the Siljan Lake to the south, and the tall tower of Mora Church, far to
the eastward. At Vik, where we found the same simple and honest race of
people, we parted with the postillioness and with our host of Kettbo,
who thanked us again in Pehr's name, as he shook hands for the last
time. We now had fast horses, and a fine road over a long wooded hill,
which was quite covered with the _lingon_, or Swedish cranberry. From
the further slope we at last looked down upon Mora, at the head of the
Siljan Lake, in the midst of a broad and fertile valley. Ten miles to
the eastward arose the spire of Orsa, and southward, on an island in the
lake, the tall church of Sollerön. "You can see three churches at once,"
said our postillion with great pride. So we could, and also the large,
stately inn of Mora--a most welcome sight to us, after five days on
potato diet.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

LAST DAYS IN THE NORTH.


Mora, in Dalecarlia, is classic ground. It was here that Gustavus Vasa
first harangued the people, and kindled that spark of revolution, which
in the end swept the Danes from Sweden. In the cellar of a house which
was pointed out to us, on the southern shore of the Siljan Lake, he lay
hidden three days; in the barn of Ivan Elfssen he threshed corn,
disguised as a peasant; and on the road by which we had travelled from
Kettbo, in descending to the lake, we had seen the mounds of stone,
heaped over the Danes, who were slain in his first victorious
engagement. This district is considered, also, one of the most beautiful
in Sweden. It has, indeed, a quiet, tranquil beauty, which gradually
grows upon the eye, so that if one is not particularly aroused on first
acquaintance, he at least carries away a delightful picture in his
memory. But in order to enjoy properly any Swedish landscape whatsoever,
one should not be too fresh from Norway.

After dinner we called at the "Parsonage of Mora," which has given Miss
Fredrika Bremer the materials for one of her stories of Swedish life.

The _Prost_, Herr Kjelström, was not at home, but his wife received us
with great cordiality, and insisted upon our remaining to tea. The
magister----, who called at the same time, gave us some information
concerning the porphyry quarries at Elfdal, which we were debating
whether we should visit. Very little is doing at present, not more than
ten men in all being employed, and in his opinion we would hardly be
repaid for the journey thither; so we determined to turn southward
again, and gradually make our way to Stockholm. Fru Kjelström was one of
the few Swedes I met, who was really an enthusiastic admirer of Tegner;
she knew by heart the greater part of his "Frithiof's Saga."

The morning after our arrival in Mora dawned dark and cloudy, with a
wailing wind and dashes of rain. There were threats of the equinoctial
storm, and we remembered the prediction of the lumber merchants in
Carlstad. During the night, however, a little steamer belonging to an
iron company arrived, offering us the chance of a passage down the lake
to Leksand. While we were waiting on the shore, the magister, who had
come to see us depart, gave me some information about the Läsare. He
admitted that there were many in Dalecarlia, and said that the policy of
persecution, which was practiced against them in the beginning, was now
dropped. They were, in general, ignored by the clerical authorities. He
looked upon the movement rather as a transient hallucination than as a
permanent secession from the Established Church, and seemed to think
that it would gradually disappear, if left to itself. He admitted that
the king was in favour of religious liberty, but was so guarded in
speaking of the subject that I did not ascertain his own views.

We had on board about sixty passengers, mostly peasants from Upper
Elfdal, bound on a peddling excursion through Sweden, with packs of
articles which they manufacture at home. Their stock consisted mostly of
pocket-books, purses, boxes, and various small articles of ornament and
use. The little steamer was so well laden with their solid forms that
she settled into the mud, and the crew had hard poling to get her off.
There was service in Mora Church, and the sound of the organ and choir
was heard along the lake. Many friends and relatives of the wandering
Elfdalians were on the little wooden pier to bid them adieu. "God's
peace be with thee!" was a parting salutation which I heard many times
repeated. At last we got fairly clear and paddled off through the
sepia-coloured water, watching the softly undulating shores, which soon
sank low enough to show the blue, irregular hills in the distant
background. Mora spire was the central point in the landscape, and
remained visible until we had nearly reached the other end of the lake.
The Siljan has a length of about twenty-five miles, with a breadth of
from six to ten. The shores are hilly, but only moderately high, except
in the neighborhood of Rättvik, where they were bold and beautiful. The
soft slopes on either hand were covered with the yellow pillars of the
ripe oats, bound to upright stakes to dry. From every village rose a
tall midsummer pole, yet laden with the withered garlands of Sweden's
fairest festival, and bearing aloft its patriotic symbol, the crossed
arrows of Dalecarlia. The threatened storm broke and dispersed as we
left Mora, and strong sun-bursts between the clouds flashed across
these pastoral pictures.

