140. An impotent, an outcast as well as his son,[216] a cripple, a
madman, an idiot, one blind, one incurably diseased, and such
like,[217] are to be maintained, but do not share in the inheritance.

141. The _aurasa_ sons of those [disqualified] persons, also their
wives' sons,[218] if themselves free from defect,[219] succeed to
shares; and their daughters[220] are to be maintained until provided
with husbands.

142. [So] their childless wives shall be maintained, if of good
conduct; but shall be cast off, if of vicious habits, or of an evil
nature.[221]

143. What has been given [to a woman] by her father, her mother, her
husband, or her brother, or received by her before the nuptial fire,
or on occasion of her husband's marriage with another wife, and such
like,[222] is called _stridhana._

144. Gifts from her kindred, from the bridegroom [before marriage],
also subsequent gifts, descend to her own kindred, should she die
without issue.

145. The _stridhana_ of a wife dying without issue, who has been
married in one of the four forms of marriage designated _bráhma_
&c.,[223] belongs to the husband; if she have issue, then the
_stridhana_ goes to her daughters; should she have been married in
another form,[224] then her _stridhana_ goes to her parents.[225]

146. Whoso withholds his daughter,[226] after having promised to give
her [in marriage], shall be amerced, and shall reimburse all expenses
incurred with interest. If she die [after being affianced] he [_i. e._
the bridegroom] shall receive back what he has given, deduction being
made for the expenditure on both sides.

147. A husband need not return to his wife _stridhana_ appropriated by
him, during a famine, or in order to perform sacred rites,[227] or
when suffering from disease,[227] or when in prison.[227]

148. If he marry another wife, he shall give to the one he has, as a
consideration for superseding her, should she not already have
received _stridhana_, what is equivalent [to his gifts on the second
marriage]: but, should she have already received _stridhana_, then, it
is declared, [she is entitled to only] half the amount.[228]

149. If the fact of a partition be denied, the matter shall be
ascertained by [reference to] relatives, near or remote, witnesses,
and writings, also [by enquiry as to] separate possession of messuage
and land.[229]

150. When there is a dispute as to boundaries, the neighbours of the
[disputed] land, old men and the like,[230] cowherds, cultivators of
the soil close to the [disputed] boundary, and all whose business is
in forests--[231]

151.--these shall determine the boundaries, as they are indicated by
elevated ground, by charcoal [-remnants],[232] by husks,[233] by
trees, by a causeway, by ant-hills, by depressions of the soil, by
bones, by memorials,[234] and such like.[235]

152. Otherwise,[236] four, eight, or ten neighbours of the same
village, wearing a red wreath and red garments, and carrying earth,
shall settle the boundary.[237]

153. And if any falsehood be uttered, upon each one [speaking falsely]
the monarch shall impose the medium fine.[238]

In the absence of any persons having knowledge of the matter, and of
any indicatory signs, the monarch shall mark the boundary.[239]

154. The same rule applies to fruit-gardens, to out-houses, to
villages,[240] to wells or tanks, to pleasure-gardens, and to
dwellings, as well as to watercourses caused by the rain.[241]

155. If the boundary be broken, or be overstepped,[242] if a
field[243] be taken away; the lowest, the highest and the medium
fines shall be imposed.[244]

156. [Constructing] a useful dam, if it occasion but slight damage [to
individuals], is not to be prevented; nor is a well[245] which takes
from another's land, if having an abundant supply of water and not of
large extent.

157. If one construct a dam in a field, without notice to the owner
thereof, the right to use it, when complete, shall belong to the owner
of the field: if the field be without owner, then the user belongs to
the monarch.

158. Whoso fails to complete the cultivation of a field which he has
partially ploughed, shall be made to pay [to the landowner] the value
of the [expected] crop. He[246] shall complete the cultivation by
means of another.

159. If a female buffalo spoil corn,[247] [her owner] shall be fined
eight _máshas_,[248] if a cow, the half [of that sum]; if a goat or a
sheep, the half of the latter.

160. If, after having grazed, they repose there, the fine shall be
double what is above specified.

The same [rule applies] to land kept for pasture. An ass and a camel
are [in this respect] the same as a female buffalo.

161. There shall be an indemnity for the owner of the field equal in
value to the corn destroyed.[249] The herdsmen shall receive a
beating, but the cattle-owner be punished by fine, as before
mentioned.

162. No guilt attaches[250] [to the cattle-owner,] if the field[251]
be close to the public road, or to the village pasture lands,[252] and
he do not intend [the trespass]; if he do intend it, then he incurs
punishment as a thief.

163. A bull, cattle permitted to be at large,[253] a cow that has
recently calved, estrays,[254] and the like,[255] having no keeper or
brought there by accident or by act of the monarch, shall be let go
free.[256]

164. The herdsman shall, at the close of the day, give back the
cattle, in the same manner[257] as they were delivered to him: if he
be in receipt of wages, he shall replace such as have, through his
negligence, died or been lost.[258]

165. If loss accrue by fault of the herdsman, he shall be fined
thirteen _panas_ and a half, and shall make good the loss to the
owner.

166. Pasture-ground shall be allotted for cattle, such as the
villagers agree upon, or in proportion to the whole area of land, or
as the monarch wills.

A twice-born man may, in every place, appropriate as his own, grass,
fuel, and flowers.[259]

167. There shall be a space of one hundred _dhanus_[260] between a
_gráma_,[261] and the [surrounding] fields, of two hundred for a
_karvata_,[261] of four hundred for a _nagara_.[261]

168. A man may seize any thing, belonging to himself, which another
has sold.[262] The purchaser incurs blame, if [he have bought]
secretly: and, if [he bought] from a low man,[263] with secrecy, for
a small price, and at an unusual hour, he is [to be accounted] a
thief.

169. If one obtain property [which he afterwards discovers to have
been] lost or stolen, he should cause the taker[264] of it to be
secured: should time or the place not permit of this being done, he
must himself restore the property [to its owner].

170. Upon his producing the seller, he [the possessor,] is himself
cleared: the owner takes the property, the monarch the fine, and the
[defrauded] purchaser the value from the seller.

171. [A claim to] property [as] lost,[265] is to be supported by proof
of acquisition[266] or of user: [the claimant,] if he fail, shall pay
to the monarch one-fifth of the value [of the property] as a fine.

172. Whoever takes [back] from the hand of a stranger what has been
stolen or lost [from himself] without informing the monarch, shall pay
a fine of ninety six _panas_.[267]

173. When lost or stolen property has been recovered by customs
officers or by the local police, the owner may claim it until one year
has elapsed;[268] after that time it goes to the monarch.

174. If it be a single-hoofed animal, the owner shall pay four
_panas_; if a man, five _panas_; if a buffalo, or a camel, or a
cow, two _panas_; if a goat or a sheep, the fourth part of a
_pana_.[269]

