Transcribed from the Roxburghe Press edition by David Price,
ccx074@pglaf.org

                         [Picture: Cover of book]

                        [Picture: Charles Dickens]

The pages of this little book were in type and about to be sent for
correction to my sister--who had been for some months in very delicate
health--when she suddenly became still more gravely ill.  The hand which
had traced the words of love and veneration dedicated to our father's
memory grew too feeble to hold a pen, and before the proofs of her little
volume could be submitted to her for revision, my dear sister died.

                                                                     K. P.

                         [Picture: Mamie Dickens]


                        MY FATHER AS I RECALL HIM.


                                    BY
                              MAMIE DICKENS.

                                   THE
                            _ROXBURGHE PRESS_,
                        FIFTEEN, VICTORIA STREET,
                               WESTMINSTER.

THIS WORK, AND ALL THE PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROXBURGHE PRESS, ARE SUPPLIED
TO THE TRADE BY MESSRS. SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & COMPANY,
LIMITED, AND CAN BE OBTAINED THROUGH ANY BOOKSELLER.


CONTENTS.

                                                                     PAGE.

CHAPTER I.                                                               7

Seeing "Gad's Hill" as a child.--His domestic side and
home love.--His love of children.--His neatness and
punctuality.--At the table, and as host.--The original
of "Little Nell."

CHAPTER II.                                                             25

Buying Christmas presents.--In the dance.--The merriest
of them all.--As a conjurer.--Christmas at "Gad's
Hill."--Our Christmas dinners.--A New Year's Eve
frolic.--New Year on the Green.--Twelfth Night
festivities.

CHAPTER III.                                                            46

My father at his work.--Rooms in which he wrote.--Love
for his child characters.--Genius for character
drawing.--Nicholas Nickleby.--His writing hours.--His
only amanuensis.--"Pickwick" and "Boz."--Death of Mr.
Thackeray.

CHAPTER IV.                                                             69

Fondness for Athletic Sports.--His love of bathing.--His
study of the raven.--Calling the doctor in.--My father
with our dogs.--The cats of "Gad's Hill."--"Bumble" and
"Mrs. Bouncer."--A strange friendship.

CHAPTER V.                                                              88

Interest in London birds.--Our pet bird
"Dick."--Devotion of his dogs.--Decision to visit
America.--His arrival in New York.--Comments on American
courtesies.--Farewell public appearances.

CHAPTER VI.                                                            103

Last words spoken in public.--A railroad accident in
1865.--At home after his American visit.--"Improvements"
at "Gad's Hill."--At "Gad's Hill" once more.--The
closing day of his life.--Burial at Westminster.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

Charles Dickens                                               Frontispiece

Mamie Dickens                                            Facing Dedication

Charles Dickens reading in the garden                               page 7

Mr. Pickwick slides                                                     25

Mr. John Leech                                                          28

Mr. Pickwick under the Mistletoe                                        45

Mrs. Bouncer                                                            86

To Miss Dickens' Pomeranian "Mrs. Bouncer"                              86

The Empty Chair                                                        101

Charles Dickens' Grave                                                 127

CHAPTER I.


Seeing "Gad's Hill" as a child.--His domestic side and home-love.--His
love of children.--His neatness and punctuality.--At the table, and as
host.--The original of "Little Nell."

               [Picture: Charles Dickens Reading in Garden]

If, in these pages, written in remembrance of my father, I should tell
you my dear friends, nothing new of him, I can, at least, promise you
that what I shall tell will be told faithfully, if simply, and perhaps
there may be some things not familiar to you.

A great many writers have taken it upon themselves to write lives of my
father, to tell anecdotes of him, and to print all manner of things about
him.  Of all these published books I have read but one, the only genuine
"Life" thus far written of him, the one sanctioned by my father himself,
namely: "The Life of Charles Dickens," by John Forster.

But in what I write about my father I shall depend chiefly upon my own
memory of him, for I wish no other or dearer remembrance.  My love for my
father has never been touched or approached by any other love.  I hold
him in my heart of hearts as a man apart from all other men, as one apart
from all other beings.

Of my father's childhood it is but natural that I should know very little
more than the knowledge possessed by the great public.  But I never
remember hearing him allude at any time, or under any circumstances, to
those unhappy days in his life except in the one instance of his childish
love and admiration for "Gad's Hill," which was destined to become so
closely associated with his name and works.

He had a very strong and faithful attachment for places: Chatham, I
think, being his first love in this respect.  For it was here, when a
child, and a very sickly child, poor little fellow, that he found in an
old spare room a store of books, among which were "Roderick Random,"
"Peregrine Pickle," "Humphrey Clinker," "Tom Jones," "The Vicar of
Wakefield," "Don Quixote," "Gil Blas," "Robinson Crusoe," "The Arabian
Nights," and other volumes.  "They were," as Mr. Forster wrote, "a host
of friends when he had no single friend."  And it was while living at
Chatham that he first saw "Gad's Hill."

As a "very queer small boy" he used to walk up to the house--it stood on
the summit of a high hill--on holidays, or when his heart ached for a
"great treat."  He would stand and look at it, for as a little fellow he
had a wonderful liking and admiration for the house, and it was, to him,
like no other house he had ever seen.  He would walk up and down before
it with his father, gazing at it with delight, and the latter would tell
him that perhaps if he worked hard, was industrious, and grew up to be a
good man, he might some day come to live in that very house.  His love
for this place went through his whole life, and was with him until his
death.  He takes "Mr. Pickwick" and his friends from Rochester to Cobham
by the beautiful back road, and I remember one day when we were driving
that way he showed me the exact spot where "Mr. Pickwick" called out:
"Whoa, I have dropped my whip!"  After his marriage he took his wife for
the honeymoon to a village called Chalk, between Gravesend and Rochester.

Many years after, when he was living with his family in a villa near
Lausanne, he wrote to a friend: "The green woods and green shades about
here are more like Cobham, in Kent, than anything we dream of at the foot
of the Alpine passes."  And again, in still later years, one of his
favorite walks from "Gad's Hill" was to a village called Shorne, where
there was a quaint old church and graveyard.  He often said that he would
like to be buried there, the peace and quiet of the homely little place
having a tender fascination for him.  So we see that his heart was always
in Kent.

But let this single reference to his earlier years suffice, so that I may
write of him during those years when I remember him among us and around
us in our home.

From his earliest childhood, throughout his earliest married life to the
day of his death, his nature was home-loving.  He was a "home man" in
every respect.  When he became celebrated at a very early age, as we
know, all his joys and sorrows were taken home; and he found there
sympathy and the companionship of his "own familiar friends."  In his
letters to these latter, in his letters to my mother, to my aunt, and,
later on, to us his children, he never forgot anything that he knew would
be of interest about his work, his successes, his hopes or fears.  And
there was a sweet simplicity in his belief that such news would most
certainly be acceptable to all, that is wonderfully touching and
child-like coming from a man of genius.

His care and thoughtfulness about home matters, nothing being deemed too
small or trivial to claim his attention and consideration, were really
marvellous when we remember his active, eager, restless, working brain.
No man was so inclined naturally to derive his happiness from home
affairs.  He was full of the kind of interest in a house which is
commonly confined to women, and his care of and for us as wee children
did most certainly "pass the love of women!" His was a tender and most
affectionate nature.

For many consecutive summers we used to be taken to Broadstairs.  This
little place became a great favorite with my father.  He was always very
happy there, and delighted in wandering about the garden of his house,
generally accompanied by one or other of his children.  In later years,
at Boulogne, he would often have his youngest boy, "The Noble Plorn,"
trotting by his side.  These two were constant companions in those days,
and after these walks my father would always have some funny anecdote to
tell us.  And when years later the time came for the boy of his heart to
go out into the world, my father, after seeing him off, wrote: "Poor
Plorn has gone to Australia.  It was a hard parting at the last.  He
seemed to become once more my youngest and favorite little child as the
day drew near, and I did not think I could have been so shaken.  These
are hard, hard things, but they might have to be done without means or
influence, and then they would be far harder.  God bless him!"

When my father was arranging and rehearsing his readings from "Dombey,"
the death of "little Paul" caused him such real anguish, the reading
being so difficult to him, that he told us he could only master his
intense emotion by keeping the picture of Plorn, well, strong and hearty,
steadily before his eyes.  We can see by the different child characters
in his books what a wonderful knowledge he had of children, and what a
wonderful and truly womanly sympathy he had with them in all their
childish joys and griefs.  I can remember with us, his own children, how
kind, considerate and patient he always was.  But we were never afraid to
go to him in any trouble, and never had a snub from him or a cross word
under any circumstances.  He was always glad to give us "treats," as he
called them, and used to conceive all manner of those "treats" for us,
and if any favor had to be asked we were always sure of a favorable
answer.  On these occasions my sister "Katie" was generally our
messenger, we others waiting outside the study door to hear the verdict.
She and I used to have delightful treats in those summer evenings,
driving up to Hampstead in the open carriage with him, our mother, and
"Auntie," {15} and getting out for a long walk through the lovely country
lanes, picking wild roses and other flowers, or walking hand in hand with
him listening to some story.

There never existed, I think, in all the world, a more thoroughly tidy or
methodical creature than was my father.  He was tidy in every way--in his
mind, in his handsome and graceful person, in his work, in keeping his
writing table drawers, in his large correspondence, in fact in his whole
life.

I remember that my sister and I occupied a little garret room in
Devonshire Terrace, at the very top of the house.  He had taken the
greatest pains and care to make the room as pretty and comfortable for
his two little daughters as it could be made.  He was often dragged up
the steep staircase to this room to see some new print or some new
ornament which we children had put up, and he always gave us words of
praise and approval.  He encouraged us in every possible way to make
ourselves useful, and to adorn and beautify our rooms with our own hands,
and to be ever tidy and neat.  I remember that the adornment of this
garret was decidedly primitive, the unframed prints being fastened to the
wall by ordinary black or white pins, whichever we could get.  But, never
mind, if they were put up neatly and tidily they were always "excellent,"
or "quite slap-up" as he used to say.  Even in those early days, he made
a point of visiting every room in the house once each morning, and if a
chair was out of its place, or a blind not quite straight, or a crumb
left on the floor, woe betide the offender.

And then his punctuality!  It was almost frightful to an unpunctual mind!
This again was another phase of his extreme tidiness; it was also the
outcome of his excessive thoughtfulness and consideration for others.
His sympathy, also, with all pain and suffering made him quite invaluable
in a sick room.  Quick, active, sensible, bright and cheery, and
sympathetic to a degree, he would seize the "case" at once, know exactly
what to do and do it.  In all our childish ailments his visits were
eagerly looked forward to; and our little hearts would beat a shade
faster, and our aches and pains become more bearable, when the sound of
his quick footstep was heard, and the encouraging accents of his voice
greeted the invalid.  I can remember now, as if it were yesterday, how
the touch of his hand--he had a most sympathetic touch--was almost too
much sometimes, the help and hope in it making my heart full to
overflowing.  He believed firmly in the power of mesmerism, as a remedy
in some forms of illness, and was himself a mesmerist of no mean order; I
know of many cases, my own among the number, in which he used his power
in this way with perfect success.

And however busy he might be, and even in his hours of relaxation, he was
still, if you can understand me, always busy; he would give up any amount
of time and spare himself no fatigue if he could in any way alleviate
sickness and pain.

In very many of my father's books there are frequent references to
delicious meals, wonderful dinners and more marvellous dishes, steaming
bowls of punch, etc, which have led many to believe that he was a man
very fond of the table.  And yet I think no more abstemious man ever
lived.

In the "Gad's Hill" days, when the house was full of visitors, he had a
peculiar notion of always having the menu for the day's dinner placed on
the sideboard at luncheon time.  And then he would discuss every item in
his fanciful, humorous way with his guests, much to this effect:
"Cock-a-leekie?  Good, decidedly good; fried soles with shrimp sauce?
Good again; croquettes of chicken?  Weak, very weak; decided want of
imagination here," and so on, and he would apparently be so taken up with
the merits or demerits of a menu that one might imagine he lived for
nothing but the coming dinner.  He had a small but healthy appetite, but
was remarkably abstemious both in eating and drinking.

He was delightful as a host, caring individually for each guest, and
bringing the special qualities of each into full notice and prominence,
putting the very shyest at his or her ease, making the best of the most
humdrum, and never thrusting himself forward.

But when he was most delightful, was alone with us at home and sitting
over dessert, and when my sister was with us especially--I am talking now
of our grownup days--for she had great power in "drawing him out."  At
such times although he might sit down to dinner in a grave or abstracted
mood, he would, invariably, soon throw aside his silence and end by
delighting us all with his genial talk and his quaint fancies about
people and things.  He was always, as I have said, much interested in
mesmerism, and the curious influence exercised by one personality over
another.  One illustration I remember his using was, that meeting someone
in the busy London streets, he was on the point of turning back to accost
the supposed friend, when finding out his mistake in time he walked on
again until he actually met the real friend, whose shadow, as it were,
but a moment ago had come across his path.

And then the forgetting of a word or a name.  "Now into what pigeon-hole
of my brain did that go, and why do I suddenly remember it now?"  And as
these thoughts passed through his mind and were spoken dreamily, so they
also appeared in his face.  Another instant, perhaps, and his eyes would
be full of fun and laughter.

At the beginning of his literary career he suffered a great sorrow in the
death--a very sudden death--of my mother's sister, Mary Hogarth.  She was
of a most charming and lovable disposition, as well as being personally
very beautiful.  Soon after my parents married, Aunt Mary was constantly
with them.  As her nature developed she became my father's ideal of what
a young girl should be.  And his own words show how this great affection
and the influence of the girl's loved memory were with him to the end of
his life.  The shock of her sudden death so affected and prostrated him
that the publication of "Pickwick" was interrupted for two months.

"I look back," he wrote, "and with unmingled pleasure, to every link
which each ensuing week has added to the chain of our attachment.  It
shall go hard I hope ere anything but death impairs the toughness of a
bond now so firmly riveted.  That beautiful passage you were so kind and
considerate as to send to me has given me the only feeling akin to
pleasure, sorrowful pleasure it is, that I have yet had connected with
the loss of my dear young friend and companion, for whom my love and
attachment will never diminish, and by whose side, if it please God to
leave me in possession of sense to signify my wishes, my bones whenever
or wherever I die, will one day be laid."

She was buried in Kensal Green Cemetery, and her grave bears the
following inscription, written by my father:

"Young, beautiful, and good, God in His mercy numbered her among His
angels at the early age of seventeen."

A year after her death, in writing to my mother from Yorkshire, he says:
"Is it not extraordinary that the same dreams which have constantly
visited me since poor Mary died follow me everywhere?  After all the
change of scene and fatigue I have dreamt of her ever since I left home,
and no doubt shall until I return.  I would fain believe, sometimes, that
her spirit may have some influence over them, but their perpetual
repetition is extraordinary."

In the course of years there came changes in our home, inevitable
changes.  But no changes could ever alter my father's home-loving nature.
As he wrote to Mr. Forster, as a young man, so it was with him to the
time of his death: "We shall soon meet, please God, and be happier than
ever we were in all our lives.  Oh! home--home--home!!!"


CHAPTER II.


Buying Christmas presents.--In the dance.--The merriest of them all.--As
a conjurer.--Christmas at "Gad's Hill."--Our Christmas dinners.--A New
Year's Eve frolic.--New Year on the Green.--Twelfth Night festivities.

                      [Picture: Mr. Pickwick slides]

Christmas was always a time which in our home was looked forward to with
eagerness and delight, and to my father it was a time dearer than any
other part of the year, I think.  He loved Christmas for its deep
significance as well as for its joys, and this he demonstrates in every
allusion in his writings to the great festival, a day which he considered
should be fragrant with the love that we should bear one to another, and
with the love and reverence of his Saviour and Master.  Even in his most
merry conceits of Christmas, there are always subtle and tender touches
which will bring tears to the eyes, and make even the thoughtless have
some special veneration for this most blessed anniversary.

In our childish days my father used to take us, every twenty-fourth day
of December, to a toy shop in Holborn, where we were allowed to select
our Christmas presents, and also any that we wished to give to our little
companions.  Although I believe we were often an hour or more in the shop
before our several tastes were satisfied, he never showed the least
impatience, was always interested, and as desirous as we, that we should
choose exactly what we liked best.  As we grew older, present giving was
confined to our several birthdays, and this annual visit to the Holborn
toy shop ceased.

When we were only babies my father determined that we should be taught to
dance, so as early as the Genoa days we were given our first lessons.
"Our oldest boy and his sisters are to be waited upon next week by a
professor of the noble art of dancing," he wrote to a friend at this
time.  And again, in writing to my mother, he says: "I hope the dancing
lessons will be a success.  Don't fail to let me know."

Our progress in the graceful art delighted him, and his admiration of our
success was evident when we exhibited to him, as we were perfected in
them, all the steps, exercises and dances which formed our lessons.  He
always encouraged us in our dancing, and praised our grace and aptness,
although criticized quite severely in some places for allowing his
children to expend so much time and energy upon the training of their
feet.

When "the boys" came home for the holidays there were constant rehearsals
for the Christmas and New Year's parties; and more especially for the
dance on Twelfth Night, the anniversary of my brother Charlie's birthday.
Just before one of these celebrations my father insisted that my sister
Katie and I should teach the polka step to Mr. Leech and himself.  My
father was as much in earnest about learning to take that wonderful step
correctly, as though there were nothing of greater importance in the
world.  Often he would practice gravely in a corner, without either
partner or music, and I remember one cold winter's night his awakening
with the fear that he had forgotten the step so strong upon him that,
jumping out of bed, by the scant illumination of the old-fashioned
rushlight, and to his own whistling, he diligently rehearsed its "one,
two, three, one, two, three" until he was once more secure in his
knowledge.

                    [Picture: Mr. John Leech]

No one can imagine our excitement and nervousness when the evening came
on which we were to dance with our pupils.  Katie, who was a very little
girl was to have Mr. Leech, who was over six feet tall, for her partner,
while my father was to be mine.  My heart beat so fast that I could
scarcely breathe, I was so fearful for the success of our exhibition.
But my fears were groundless, and we were greeted at the finish of our
dance with hearty applause, which was more than compensation for the work
which had been expended upon its learning.

My father was certainly not what in the ordinary acceptation of the term
would be called "a good dancer."  I doubt whether he had ever received
any instruction in "the noble art" other than that which my sister and I
gave him.  In later years I remember trying to teach him the Schottische,
a dance which he particularly admired and desired to learn.  But although
he was so fond of dancing, except at family gatherings in his own or his
most intimate friends' homes, I never remember seeing him join in it
himself, and I doubt if, even as a young man, he ever went to balls.
Graceful in motion, his dancing, such as it was, was natural to him.
Dance music was delightful to his cheery, genial spirit; the time and
steps of a dance suited his tidy nature, if I may so speak.  The action
and the exercise seemed to be a part of his abundant vitality.

While I am writing of my father's fondness for dancing, a characteristic
anecdote of him occurs to me.  While he was courting my mother, he went
one summer evening to call upon her.  The Hogarths were living a little
way out of London, in a residence which had a drawing-room opening with
French windows on to a lawn.  In this room my mother and her family were
seated quietly after dinner on this particular evening, when suddenly a
young sailor jumped through one of the open windows into the apartment,
whistled and danced a hornpipe, and before they could recover from their
amazement jumped out again.  A few minutes later my father walked in at
the door as sedately as though quite innocent of the prank, and shook
hands with everyone; but the sight of their amazed faces proving too much
for his attempted sobriety, his hearty laugh was the signal for the rest
of the party to join in his merriment.  But judging from his slight
ability in later years, I fancy that he must have taken many lessons to
secure his perfection in that hornpipe.

His dancing was at its best, I think, in the "Sir Roger de Coverly"--and
in what are known as country dances.  In the former, while the end
couples are dancing, and the side couples are supposed to be still, my
father would insist upon the sides keeping up a kind of jig step, and
clapping his hands to add to the fun, and dancing at the backs of those
whose enthusiasm he thought needed rousing, was himself never still for a
moment until the dance was over.  He was very fond of a country dance
which he learned at the house of some dear friends at Rockingham Castle,
which began with quite a stately minuet to the tune of "God save the
Queen," and then dashed suddenly into "Down the Middle and up Again."
His enthusiasm in this dance, I remember, was so great that, one evening
after some of our Tavistock House theatricals, when I was thoroughly worn
out with fatigue, being selected by him as his partner, I caught the
infection of his merriment, and my weariness vanished.  As he himself
says, in describing dear old "Fezziwig's" Christmas party, we were
"people who would dance and had no notion of walking."  His enjoyment of
all our frolics was equally keen, and he writes to an American friend, _a
propos_ of one of our Christmas merry-makings: "Forster is out again; and
if he don't go in again after the manner in which we have been keeping
Christmas, he must be very strong indeed.  Such dinings, such conjurings,
such blindman's buffings, such theatre goings, such kissings out of old
years and kissings in of new ones never took place in these parts before.
To keep the Chuzzlewit going, and to do this little book the Carol, in
the odd times between two parts of it, was, as you may suppose, pretty
tight work.  But when it was done I broke out like a madman, and if you
could have seen me at a children's party at Macready's the other night
going down a country dance with Mrs. M. you would have thought I was a
country gentleman of independent property residing on a tip-top farm,
with the wind blowing straight in my face every day."

At our holiday frolics he used sometimes to conjure for us, the equally
"noble art" of the prestidigitateur being among his accomplishments.  He
writes of this, which he included in the list of our Twelfth Night
amusements, to another American friend: "The actuary of the national debt
couldn't calculate the number of children who are coming here on Twelfth
Night, in honor of Charlie's birthday, for which occasion I have provided
a magic lantern and divers other tremendous engines of that nature.  But
the best of it is that Forster and I have purchased between us the entire
stock-in-trade of a conjuror, the practice and display whereof is
entrusted to me.  And if you could see me conjuring the company's watches
into impossible tea-caddies and causing pieces of money to fly, and
burning pocket handkerchiefs without burning 'em, and practising in my
own room without anybody to admire, you would never forget it as long as
you live."

One of these conjuring tricks comprised the disappearance and
reappearance of a tiny doll, which would announce most unexpected pieces
of news and messages to the different children in the audience; this doll
was a particular favorite, and its arrival eagerly awaited and welcomed.

Of their vertues and learnyng, not of their auncestours, nobilitée rose to
them.

¶ Of the educacion.

THE singuler vertues of theim bothe, appered euen in their tender
youth: wherupon thei being brought vp, in all godlie learnyng and noble
Sciences, thei became moste noble Oratours, and by their copious Elo-
quence, counsaile, and wisedom, aspired to nobilitée & honor.

¶ Of their scholyng.

[Fol. xlviij.r]
BOthe were taught of the mouthe of the best learned, Demosthenes of Iseus,
a man moste Eloquent: Ci- cero of Philo and Milo, famous in wisedome and
Eloquence.

¶ Of their exercise.

CIcero did exercise hymself verie moche, to declaime, bothe in Greke and
Latine, with Marcus Piso, and with Quintus Pampeius. Demosthenes
wanted not industrie and labour, to attain to that singularitée, whi- che
he had, bothe in Eloquence, and pronounciacion.

¶ Of the giftes of their minde.

IN bothe, integritee, humanitee, magnanimitee, and all vertue flowed:
at what time as Demosthe- nes was commaunded of the Athenians, to
frame a accusacion, againste a certaine man, Demosthe- nes refused the
acte.

But when the people, and the whole multitude, were wrothe with hym, and
made a exclamacion against hym, as their maner was. Then Demosthenes
rose, and saied: O ye men of Athenes, againste my will, you haue me a
counsailer, or pleater of causes before you: but as for a accuser, &
calumniator, no, not although ye would. Of this sorte Tullie was affected,
excepte it were onely in the saue- gard of his conutrée: as against
Catiline, bothe were of god- lie, and of vpright conuersacion, altogether
in Mediocrite, and a newe leadyng their life.

¶ Of their actes.

DEmosthenes and Tullie bothe, gaue them selues to trauail, in the causes
and affaires of their com- mon wealthe, to the preseruacion of it. How
ve- hemently did Demosthenes pleate, and ingeni- ouslie handle the cause
of all his countrée, against Philip, for the defence of their
libertee: whereupon he gatte fame, and greate glory. Whereby not onely,
he was coumpted a great wise counsailour: but one of a valiaunte stomacke,
at whose [Fol. xlviij.v] [Sidenote: Darius.
Philip.
Demosthe- nes.] wisedome, all Grece stode in admiracion. The kyng
of Per- sia, laboured to enter fauour with him. Philip the king of the
Macedonians, would saie often tymes, he had to doe against a famous man,
notyng Demosthenes. Tullie also by his E- loquence and wisedome, saued
Roome and all partes of that dominion, from greate daungers

.

¶ Of their aucthoritee.

THeir aucthoritee and dignitee was equalle, in the common wealthe:
For, at their twoo mouthes, Roome and Athenes was vpholed. Demosthenes was
chief in fauour with Caretes, Diophetes, Le[-] ostines, Cicero with
Pompei: Iulius Cesar, ascending to the chief seate and dignitée of the
Consulship.

¶ Of a like fall that happened to them, before their death.

YOu can not finde soche twoo Orators, who borne of meane & poore parentes,
that attained so greate honour, who also did obiecte themselues to
tyran- tes a like, thei had losse of their children a like, bothe
were out of their countree banished men, their returne was with honour,
bothe also fliyng, happened into the han- des of their enemies.

¶ Of their death.

[Sidenote: Antipater.
Demosthe- nes.
Archias.
Marcus Antonius.
Tullie.] BOthe a like, Demosthenes and Tully wer put to death, Demosthenes
died, Antipater gouernyng by the handes of Archias. Cicero died by
the com- maundement of Marcus Antonius: by Herenius his hedde was cutte
of, and sette in Marcus Antonius halle.
His handes also were cutte of, with the whiche he wrote the vehement
Oracions against Marcus Antonius.

¶ The conclusion.

TO speake as moche as maie bee saied, in the praise of theim: their praise
would rise to a mightie volume, but this is sufficiente.

[Fol. xlix.r]
¶ _Ethopoeia._
_Ethopoeia_ is a certaine Oracion made by voice, and la- mentable imitacion,
vpon the state of any one.

This imitacion is in { _Eidolopoeia._ } iij. sortes, either it is. {
_Prosopopoeia._ } { _Ethopoeia._ }
That parte, whiche is called _Ethopoeia_ is that, whiche hath the persone
knowne: but onely it doeth faigne the ma- ners of thesame, and imitate
in a Oracion thesame.

_Ethopoeia_ is called of Priscianus, a certaine talkyng to of any one,
or a imitacio[n] of talke referred to the maners, apt- ly of any
certaine knowen persone.

Quintilianus saieth, that _Ethopoeia_ is a imitacion of o- ther meane
maners: whom the Grekes dooe calle, not onelie _Ethopoeia_, but _mimesis_,
& this is in the maners, and the fact.

This parte is as it were, a liuely expression of the maner and affeccion
of any thyng, whereupon it hath his name.

The _Ethopoeia_ is in three sortes.

The firste, a imitacion passiue, whiche expresseth the af- fection, to
whom it parteineth: whiche altogether expresseth the mocion of
the mynde, as what patheticall and dolefull o- racion, Hecuba the quene
made, the citee of Troie destroied, her housbande, her children slaine.

The second is called a morall imitacio[n], the whiche doeth set forthe
onely, the maners of any one.

The thirde is a mixt, the whiche setteth forthe, bothe the maners and
the affection, as how, and after what sorte, A- chilles spake vpon
Patroclus, he beyng dedde, when for his sake, he determined to fight:
the determinacion of hym she- weth the maner. The frende slaine, the
affection.

In the makyng of _Ethopoeia_, lette it be plaine, and with- out any large
circumstaunce.

[Fol. xlix.v]
In the makyng of it, ye shall diuide it thus, to make the Oracion more
plaine, into three tymes.

{ A presente tyme. } { A tyme paste. } { A tyme to come. }
_Eidolopoeia_ is that part of this Oracion, whiche maketh a persone knowne
though dedde, and not able to speake.

               [Sidenote: _Eidolopoeia_[.]]

_Eidolopoeia_ is called of Priscianus, a imitacion of talke of any
one, vpon a dedde manne, it is then called _Eidolopoeia_, when a
dedde man talketh, or communicacion made vpon a dedde manne.

    _Eidolopoeia_, when a dedde manne talketh, is set forthe of Euripides,
    vpon the persone of Polidorus dedde, whose spi- rite entereth at the
    Prologue of the tragedie.
    

Hector slain, speaketh to Eneas in _Eidolopoeia_. O Eneas thou goddes
sonne, flie and saue thy self, from this ruine and fire: the enemies
hath taken the walles, and loftie Troie is prostrate to the grounde. I
would haue thought, I had died valiantlie inough to my countrée, and
my father Priamus, if with this my right hande, Troie had bee
defended.

Polidorus beyng dedde, in _Eidolopoeia_ talketh to Eneas whiche Uirgil
sheweth in his thirde booke of Eneados.

Iulia the wife of Pompei beyng dedde, spake to Pompe, preparyng his
arme against Cesar, _Eidolopoeia_. Reade Lu- cane, in the beginnyng of his
thirde booke.

Tullie vseth _Eidolopoeia_, when he maketh talke vpon Hiero beyng dedde.

If that kyng Hiero were reduced fro[m] his death, who was a aduauncer of
the Romaine Empire, with what counte- naunce, either Siracusa or Rome,
might be shewed to hym, whom he maie beholde with his iyes. His countree
brought to ruin, & spoiled, if that kyng Hiero should but enter Rome,
euen in the firste entryng, he should beholde the spoile of his
countree.

Tullie also vseth the like _Eidolopoeia_, as thus, vpon Lu- [Fol. l.r]
cius Brutus dedde.

[Sidenote: Lucius Brutus.] If it so wer, that Lucius Brutus, that noble and
famous manne were on liue, and before your presence: would he not vse
this oracion: I Brutus, somtyme did banishe and cast out for
crueltee, the state and office of kinges, by the horrible fact of Tarquinius,
againste Lucretia, and all that name bani- shed, but you haue brought in
tyrauntes. I Brutus did re- duce the Romain Empire, to a fredome and
libertée: but you foolishly can not vphold and maintein, thesame giuen to
you.
I Brutus, with the daunger of my life, haue saued my coun[-] tree of
Roome, but you without all daunger, lose it.

¶ _Prosopopoeia._
AS co[n]cerning _Prosopopoeia_, it is as Pristianus saith, when to any
one againste nature, speache is feigned to bee giuen.

Tullie vseth for a like example this, when he maketh Roome to talke
againste Cateline.

¶ _Prosopopoeia_ of Roome.

[Sidenote: Catiline.] NO mischief hath been perpetrated, this many yeres,
but by thee Catiline, no pestiferous acte enterprised, without
thee: thou a lone, for thy horrible murther perpetrated vpon the
citee of Rome, for the spoile and robbe- ries of their gooddes art
vnpunished.

Thou onelie haste been of that force and power, to caste doune all
lawes and aucthori- tee. Although these thinges were not to be borne, yet
I haue borne them: but now thy horrible factes are come to soche an
issue, that I feare thy mischiues. Wherfore leaue of Cateline and
deminishe this feare from me, that I maie be in securitée[.]
Lucane the Poete, intreating of mightie and fearce war- res,
againste Pompei and Cesar, maketh Roome to vse this _Prosopopoeia_
againste Cesar.

_Quo tenditis vltra quo fertis mea signa viri, Si iure venitis si aues
hucusq[ue] licet._
_Prosopopoeia_ is properlie, when all thinges are faigned bothe the maners,
the persone, as of Roome in this place.

[Fol. l.v]
¶ What lamentable Oracion Hecuba Quene of Troie might make, Troie being
destroied.

[Sidenote: Kyngdomes.] WHat kyngdome can alwaies assure his state, or
glory? What strength can alwaies last? What [Sidenote: Okes.
Cedars.] power maie alwaies stande? The mightie O- kes are somtyme caste
from roote, the Ceadars high by tempestes falle, so bitter stormes dooe
force their strength. Soft waters pearseth Rockes, and ruste the massie
Iron doeth bryng to naught. So nothyng can by stre[n]gth so stande, but
strength maie ones decaie: yea, mightie kingdoms in time decaie
haue felt.

Kingdomes weake haue rose to might, and mightie kyngdomes fallen, no
counsaile can preuaile, no power, no strength, or might in lande. God
disposeth Princes seates, their kyngdome there with stan- des. I knewe
before the brickell state, how kyngdomes ruine caught, my iye the chaunge
of fortune sawe, as Priamus did aduaunce his throne, by fauour Fortune
gat, on other For- tune then did froune, whose kingdom did decaie. Well,
now [Sidenote: Fortune hath no staie.] I knowe the brickle
state, that fortune hath no staie, all rashe her giftes, Fortune
blind doeth kepe no state, her stone doth roule, as floodes now
flowe, floodes also ebbe. So glory doth remaine, sometyme my state on high,
was sette in Princelie throne, my porte and traine ful roiall was,
a kyng my father also was, my housband scepter held.

Troie and Phrigia ser- ued his becke, many kynges his power did dreade, his
wille their power did serue. The fame of Troie and Brute, his glorie and
renoume, what landes knoweth not? But now his falle, all toungues
can speake, so greate as glorie was, though kyngdomes stronge was sette,
loftie Troie in duste prostrate doeth lye, in blood their glorie, people,
kyng are fal- len, no Quene more dolefull cause hath felte. The sorowes
depe doe passe my ioyes, as Phebus light with stormes caste [Sidenote:
Hector.] doune.

Hectors death did wounde my hart, by Hectors might Troie stiffe did stande,
my comforte Hector was, Priamus ioye, of Troie all the[m] life, the
strength, and power, his death [Fol. lj.r] did wound me for to die,
but alas my dolefull and cruell fate to greater woe reserueth my
life, loftie Troie before me felle, sworde, and fire hath seate and
throne doune caste. The dedde on heapes doeth lye, the tender babes as
Lions praies [Sidenote: Priamus.] are caught in bloode, before my sight,
Priamus deare mur- dered was, my children also slain, who roiall
were, and prin- ces mates.

No Queene more ioye hath tasted, yet woe my io- yes hath quite defaced.
My state alwaie in bondage thrall, to serue my enemies wille, as enemie
wille, I liue or dye. No cruell force will ridde my life, onely in graue
the yearth shal close my woes, the wormes shall gnawe my dolefull
hart in graue. My hedde shall ponder nought, when death hath sence doune
caste, in life I sought no ioye, as death I craue, no glorie was so
wished as death I seeke, with death no sence.
In prison depe who dolefull lieth, whom Fetters sore dooeth greue. Their
dolefull state moste wisheth death, in dongion deepe of care my harte
moste pensiue is, vnhappie state that wisheth death, with ioye long life,
eche wight doeth craue, in life who wanteth smart?

Who doeth not féele, or beare som- time, a bitter storme, to doleful tune,
mirth full oft chaunged is, the meaner state, more quiet rest, on high,
who climes more deper care, more dolefull harte doeth presse, moste
tempestes hie trees, hilles, & moutaines beare, valleis lowe rough stor-
mes doeth passe, the bendyng trees doeth giue place to might by force
of might, Okes mightie fall, and Ceders high ar re[n]t from the roote.
The state full meane in hauen hath Ancre caste, in surgyng seas,
full ofte in vaine to saue the maste, the shippe Ancre casteth.

¶ The descripcion.

THis exercise profitable to _Rhetorike_, is an Ora- cio[n] that
collecteth and representeth to the iye, that which he sheweth, so
Priscianus defineth it: some are of that opinion, that descripcion
is not to bee placed emo[n]g these exercises, profitable to
_Rhetorike_.

Because [Fol. lj.v] that bothe in euery Oracion, made vpon a Fable, all
thyn- ges therein conteined, are liuely described. And also in euery
Narracion, the cause, the place, the persone, the time, the fact, the
maner how, ar therin liuely described. But most famous and Eloquente men,
doe place descripcion, in the nomber of these exercises. Descripcio[n]
serueth to these things, the person, as the Poete Lucane describeth Pompei
& Cesar: the person is described, thynges or actes, tymes, places, brute
beastes.

_Nec coiere pares, alter vergentibus annis In senium longo que toge,
tranquilior vsu.
Dedidicit. &c._
Homer describeth the persone of Thersites, in the second booke of his
Ilias.

Homer setteth out Helena, describing the persone of Me- nalaus and
Ulisses, in the fowerth booke of Ilias.

Thynges are described, as the warres attempted by sea and lande, of
Xerxes.

Lucan describeth the war of the Massilia[n]s against Cesar[.]
Thusidides setteth forthe in a descripcion, the warres on the sea,
betwene the Corcurians, and the Corinthians.

                                                  Tymes are described, as
                                                     the Spryng tyme, Sommer, Winter, Harueste, Daie, Night.

    Places are described, as Citees, Mountaines, Regions, Floodes, Hauens,
    Gardeines, Temples: whiche thynges are sette out by their
    commoditees, for Thusidides often ty- mes setteth forthe Hauens and
    Citees.

    
    Lucane also describeth at large, the places, by the whiche the armie
    of Cesar and Pompei passed. The descripcion of a- ny man, in all
    partes is to bee described, in mynde and bodie, what he was.
    
    The acttes are to bee described, farre passed, by the pre- sente
    state thereof, and also by the tyme to come.
    
    As if the warre of Troie, should be set forthe in a descrip- cion,
    it must bée described, what happened before the Greci- ans arriued
    at Troie, and how, and after what sorte it was [Fol. lij.r] ouerthrowne,
    & what thing chaunced, Troie being destroid.
    
    So likewise of Carthage, destroied by the Romaines.
    Of Hierusalem, destroied by Titus Uespasianus, what ad- monicion thei
    had before: of what monsterous thynges hap- pened also in that ceason:
    Of a Comete or blasyng Starre, and after that what followed.
    
    Lucane also setteth forthe the warres of Pompe and Ce- sar, what
straunge and marueilous thynges fell of it

    .
    
    
    ¶ A descripcion vpon Xerxes.
    
    WHen Darius was dedde, Xerxes his soonne did succede hym, who also
tooke vpon him to finishe the warres, bego[n] by his father Darius,
against Grece.

For the whiche warres, preperacion was made, for the space of fiue yeres,
after that [Sidenote: The armie of Xerxes.] Xerxes entered Grece, with
seuen hundred thousande Persi- ans, and thrée hundred thousande of forrain
power aided him that not without cause, Chronicles of aunciente
tyme dooe shewe, mightie floodes to be dried vp of his armie. The migh[-]
tie dominions of Grece, was not hable to receiue his houge, and
mightie power, bothe by sea and lande: he was no small Prince, whom
so many nacions, so mightie people followed hym, his Nauie of Shippes
was in nomber tenne hundred [Sidenote: Xerxes a cowarde.] thousande,
Xerxes had a mightie power, but Xerxes was a cowarde, in harte a
childe, all in feare the stroke of battaile moued. In so mightie
an armie it was marueile, the chiefe Prince and Capitaine to be a
cowarde, there wanted neither men, nor treasure, if ye haue respecte
to the kyng hymself, for cowardlinesse ye will dispraise the kyng,
but his threasures beeyng so infinite, ye will maruaile at the
plentie thereof, whose armie and infinite hoste, though mightie
floodes and streames, were not able to suffice for drinke, yet his
richesse [Sidenote: Xerxes laste in battaile, and first to runne
awaie.] semed not spente nor tasted of. Xerxes hymself would be
laste in battaile to fight, and the firste to retire, and runne
awaie.
In daungers he was fearfull, and when daunger was paste, [Fol.
lij.v] he was stoute, mightie, glorious, and wonderfull crakyng,
[Sidenote: The pride of Xerxes.] before this hassarde of battaile
attempted. He thought hym self a God ouer nature, all landes and
Seas to giue place to hym, and puffed with pride, he forgatte
hymself: his power was terrible, his harte fainte, whereupon his
enteryng into Grece was not so dreaded, as his flight fro[m] thence
was sham[-] full, mocked and scorned at, for all his power he was
driuen backe from the lande, by Leonides king of the Lacedemoni-
ans, he hauing but a small nomber of men, before his second battaile
fought on the Sea: he sente fower thousande armed men, to spoile
the riche and sumpteous temple of Apollo, at Delphos, from the
whiche place, not one man escaped. After that Xerxes entered Thespia,
Platea, and Athenes, in the whiche not one man remained, those he
burned, woorkyng his anger vpon the houses: for these citees were
admonished to proue the maisterie in wodden walles, whiche was ment
to bee Shippes, the power of Grece, brought into one place [Sidenote:
Themi- stocles.] Themistocles, fauoryng their part, although Xerxes
thought otherwise of Themistocles, then Themistocles perswaded
Xerxes to assaie the Grecians. Artemisia the Quene of Hali- carnasis
aided Xerxes in his battaile: Artemisia fought man[-] fullie, Xerxes
cowardly shronke, so that vnnaturally there was in the one a manlie
stomacke, in the other a cowardlie harte. The men of Ionia, that
fought vnder Xerxes banner, by the treason of Themistocles, shra[n]ke
from Xerxes, he was not so greate a terrour or dreade, by his maine
hoste, as now smally regarded & least feared. What is power, men,
or mo- ney, when God chaungeth and pulleth doune, bothe the suc-
cesse, and kyngdome of a Prince. He was in all his glorie, a vnmanlie,
and a cowardly prince, yet for a time happie state fell on his side,
now his might and power is not feared. He flieth awaie in a Fisher
boate, whom all the worlde dreaded and obaied, whom all Grece was
not able to receiue, a small boate lodgeth and harboureth. His owne
people contemned hym at home, his glorie fell, and life ingloriously
ended, who[m] [Fol. liij.r] whom God setteth vp, neither treason
nor malice, power nor money can pull doune. Worthelie it is to be
pondered of all Princes, the saiyng of Uespasianus Emperour of Rome,
at a certain time a treason wrought and conspired against him, the
conspiratours taken, Uespasianus satte doune betwene [Sidenote: The
saiyng of Uespasi- anus.] theim, commaunded a sworde to be giuen
to either of theim, and saied to them: _Nonne videtis fato potestatem
dari._ Dooe you not see? Power, aucthoritée, and regimente, by the
ordi- [Sidenote: A sentence comfortable to al princes.] naunce of
God, is lefte and giuen to princes: A singuler sen- tence, to
comforte all good Princes in their gouernemente, not to feare the
poisoned hartes of men, or the traiterous har- tes of pestiferous
men. No man can pull doune, where God exalteth, neither power can
set vp and extoll, where God dis- plaseth or putteth doune: Soche
is the state of Princes, and their kyngdomes.

¶ _Thesis._
_THesis_, is a certain question in consultacion had, to bée declaimed
vpon vncertaine, notyng no certaine per- sone or thyng.
As for example.
Whether are riches chieflie to be sought for, in this life, as of
all good thynges, the chief good.
Whether is vertue the moste excellente good thynge in this
life.
Whether dooe the giftes of the mynde, passe and excelle the giftes
and vertues of Fortune, and the bodie.
Whether doeth pollicie more auaile in war, then stre[n]gth of
menne.
Who so will reason of any question of these, he hath nede with
reason, and wittie consultacion to discourse, and to de- claime
vpon thesame.
The Greke Oratours doe call this exercise _Thesis_, that is to saie,
a proposicion in question, a question vncertain, in- cluded with
no certaintée, to any perticuler thyng.

[Fol. liij.v]
The Latine men doeth call it a question infinite, or vni- uersall:
Tullie in his booke of places called Topickes, doeth call _Thesis_,
_Propositum_, that is to saie, a question, in deter- minacion.
Priscianus calleth it _positionem_, a proposicion in question on
ether parte to be disputed vpon.

As for example.
Whether is it best to marie a wife?
Whether is frendship aboue all thynges to be regarded.
Is warre to be moued vpon a iuste cause?
Is the Greke tongue mete, and necessarie to be learned?
There is an other kinde of question called _hypothesis_, _hy[-]
pothesis_ is called _questio finita_, that is to saie, a question
cer- taine notyng a certaine persone, or thyng, a certaine place,
tyme, and so forthe.

As for example.
Is it mete for Cesar to moue warre against Pompei?
Is not there a certain persone?
Is the Greke tongue to be learned of a Diuine?
Is the Greke tongue meete for a Phisicion?
In this kinde of exercises, famous men of auncient time did exercise
youth, to attain bothe wisedome and Eloquence therby, to make a
discourse vpo[n] any matter, by art of lerning[.]
Aristotle the famous Philosopher, did traine vp youthe, to be perfite
in the arte of eloquence, that thei might with all copiousnes and
ingenious inuencion handle any cause.
Nothing doeth so moche sharpe and acuate the witte and capacitée
of any one, as this kinde of exercise.
It is a goodly vertue in any one man, at a sodain, to vtter wittely
and ingeniouslie, the secrete and hid wisedome of his mynde: it is
a greate maime to a profounde learned man, to wante abilitée, to
vtter his exquisite and profounde knowe- ledge of his mynde.
¶ _Thesis._
THis question _Thesis_, which is a question, noting no cer- taine
persone or thyng: is moche like to that Oracion, [Fol. liiij.r]
intreated of before, called a Common place.

¶ A Common place.
BUt a Common place, is a certaine exaggeracion of matter, induced
against any persone, conuicted of a- ny crime, or worthie defence.
¶ _Thesis._
_Thesis_ is a reasonyng by question, vpon a matter vncer-
taine.
_Thesis_, that is to saie, a questio[n] generall is in two sortes.
{ Ciuill.
A question { { Contemplatiue.
QUestions Ciuill are those, that dooe pertaine to the state of a
common wealth: and are daily practised in the common wealthe.
As for example.

Is it good to marie a wife.
Is Usurie lefull in a citee, or common wealthe.
Is a Monarchie the beste state of gouernement.
Is good educacion the grounde and roote, of a florishyng common
wealthe.

¶ A contemplatiue question.The exceptions
were when he was taking a holiday or resting, though even when ostensibly
employed in the latter, cessation from story writing meant the answering
of letters and the closer attention to his business matters, so that but
little of real rest ever came into his later life.

While in Italy he gave a fragmentary diary of his daily life in a letter
to a friend, and the routine was there very much what it was at home.  "I
am in a regular ferocious excitement with the Chimes; get up at seven;
have a cold bath before breakfast; and blaze away, wrathful and red-hot,
until three o'clock or so, when I usually knock off (unless it rains) for
the day.  I am fierce to finish in a spirit bearing some affinity to that
of truth and mercy, and to shame the cruel and the wicked, but it is hard
work."  His entire discomfort under sound interruptions is also shown in
the above, in his reference to the Chimes, and the effect which they had
upon him.

Despite his regularity of working hours, as I have said, the amount of
work which my father accomplished varied greatly.  His manuscripts were
usually written upon white "slips," though sometimes upon blue paper, and
there were many mornings when it would be impossible for him to fill one
of these.  He writes on one occasion: "I am sitting at home, patiently
waiting for Oliver Twist, who has not yet arrived."  And, indeed,
"Oliver" gave him considerable trouble, in the course of his adventures,
by his disinclination to be put upon paper easily.  This slowness in
writing marked more prominently the earlier period of my father's
literary career, though these "blank days," when his brain refused to
work, were of occasional occurrence to the end.  He was very critical of
his own labors, and would bring nothing but the best of his brain to the
art which he so dearly loved--his venerated mistress.  But, on the other
hand, the amount of work which he would accomplish at other times was
almost incredible.  During a long sojourn at Lausanne he writes: "I have
not been idle since I have been here.  I had a good deal to write for
Lord John about the ragged schools; so I set to work and did that.  A
good deal to Miss Coutts, in reference to her charitable projects; so I
set to work and did that.  Half of the children's New Testament to write,
or pretty nearly.  I set to work and did that.  Next, I cleared off the
greater part of such correspondence as I had rashly pledged myself to,
and then--began Dombey!"

I know of only one occasion on which he employed an amanuensis, and my
aunt is my authority for the following, concerning this one time: "The
book which your father dictated to me was 'The Child's History of
England.'  The reason for my being used in this capacity of secretary was
that 'Bleak House' was being written at the same time, and your father
would dictate to me while walking about the room, as a relief after his
long, sedentary imprisonment.  The history was being written for
'Household Words,' and 'Bleak House' also as a serial, so he had both
weekly and monthly work on hand at the same time."  The history was
dedicated: "To my own dear children, whom I hope it will help, by-and-by,
to read with interest larger and better books upon the same subject."

My father wrote always with a quill pen and blue ink, and never, I think,
used a lead pencil.  His handwriting was considered extremely difficult
to read by many people, but I never found it so.  In his manuscripts
there were so many erasures, and such frequent interlineations that a
special staff of compositors was used for his work, but this was not on
account of any illegibility in his handwriting.  The manuscripts are most
of them, exhibited at the South Kensington Museum in "the Forster
Collection," and they all show I think, the extreme care and
fastidiousness of the writer, and his ever-constant desire to improve
upon and simplify his original sentence.  His objection to the use of a
lead pencil was so great that even his personal memoranda, such as his
lists of guests for dinner parties, the arrangement of tables and menus,
were always written in ink.  For his personal correspondence he used blue
note paper, and signed his name in the left-hand corner of the envelope.
After a morning's close work he was sometimes quite pre-occupied when he
came into luncheon.  Often, when we were only our home party at "Gad's
Hill," he would come in, take something to eat in a mechanical way--he
never ate but a small luncheon--and would return to his study to finish
the work he had left, scarcely having spoken a word in all this time.
Again, he would come in, having finished his work, but looking very tired
and worn.  Our talking at these times did not seem to disturb him, though
any sudden sound, as the dropping of a spoon, or the clinking of a glass,
would send a spasm of pain across his face.

The sudden, almost instantaneous, popularity of "Pickwick" was known to
the world long before it was realized by its anxious young author.  All
the business transactions concerning its publication were modest to a
degree, and the preparations for such a success as came to it were none.
As to its popularity, Mr. Forster writes: "Judges on the bench, and boys
in the streets, gravity and folly, the young and the old, those who were
entering life, and those who were quitting it, alike found it
irresistible."  Carlyle wrote: "An archdeacon repeated to me, with his
own venerable lips, the other evening, a strange, profane story of a
solemn clergyman who had been summoned to administer consolation to a
very ill man.  As he left the room he heard the sick man ejaculate: "Well
thank God, Pickwick will be out in ten days, anyway!"  No young author
ever sprang into more sudden and brilliant fame than "Boz," and none
could have remained more thoroughly unspoiled, or so devoid of egotism
under success.  His own opinion of his fame, and his estimate of its
value, may be quoted here: "To be numbered amongst the household gods of
one's distant countrymen, and associated with their homes and quiet
pleasures; to be told that in each nook and corner of the world's great
mass there lives one well-wisher who holds communion with one in the
spirit, is a worthy fame, indeed.  That I may be happy enough to cheer
some of your leisure hours for a long time to come, and to hold a place
in your pleasant thoughts, is the earnest wish of 'Boz.'"

On the Christmas Eve of 1863 my father was greatly shocked and distressed
to hear of the sudden death of Mr. Thackeray.  Our guests, naturally,
were full of the sad news, and there was a gloom cast over everything.
We all thought of the sorrow of his two daughters, who were so devoted to
him, and whom his sudden taking away would leave so desolate.  In "The
Cornhill Magazine" of the February following, my father wrote: "I saw Mr.
Thackeray for the first time nearly twenty-eight years ago, when he
proposed to become the illustrator of my earliest book.  I saw him last
shortly before Christmas, at the Athenaeum Club, when he told me he had
been in bed three days, and that he had it in his mind to try a new
remedy, which he laughingly described.  He was cheerful, and looked very
bright.  In the night of that day week he died. * * * * No one can be
surer than I of the greatness and goodness of his heart.  In no place
should I take it upon myself at this time to discourse of his books, of
his refined knowledge of character, of his subtle acquaintance with the
weakness of human nature, of his delightful playfulness as an essayist,
of his quaint and touching ballads, of his mastery over the English
language.  But before me lies all that he had written of his latest
story, and the pain I have felt in perusing it has not been deeper than
the conviction that he was in the healthiest region of his powers when he
worked on this last labor.  The last words he corrected in print were
'and my heart throbbed with an exquisite bliss.'  "An' I'll run my ship
in Sydney, an' then I'll work my way To them smilin' South Seas Islands
where there's sunshine all the day, An' I'll sell my chest an' gear
there as soon's I hit the shore, An' sling my last discharge away, an'
go to sea no more.

    "It's a pleasant time they have there--they've easy quiet lives; They
    wear no clothes to speak on; they've a bunch of browny wives; They're
    bathin' all the day long or baskin' on the sand, With the jolly
brown Kanakas as naked as your hand.--"Bumble" and "Mrs. Bouncer."--A strange friendship.

As a child my father was prevented from any active participation in the
sports and amusements of his boyish companions by his extreme delicacy
and frequent illnesses, so that until his manhood his knowledge of games
was gained merely from long hours of watching others while lying upon the
grass.  With manhood, however, came the strength and activity which
enabled him to take part in all kinds of outdoor exercise and sports, and
it seemed that in his passionate enjoyment and participation in those
later years he was recompensed for the weary childhood years of suffering
and inability.  Athletic sports were a passion with him in his manhood,
as I have said.  In 1839 he rented a cottage at Petersham, not far from
London "where," to quote from Mr. Forster, "the extensive garden grounds
admitted of much athletic competition, in which Dickens, for the most
part, held his own against even such accomplished athletes as Maclise and
Mr. Beard.  Bar leaping, bowling and quoits were among the games carried
on with the greatest ardor, and in sustained energy Dickens certainly
distanced every competitor.  Even the lighter recreations of battledore
and bagatelle were pursued with relentless activity.  At such amusements
as the Petersham races, in those days rather celebrated, and which he
visited daily while they lasted, he worked much harder than the running
horses did."

Riding was a favorite recreation at all times with my father, and he was
constantly inviting one or another of his friends to bear him company on
these excursions.  Always fond, in his leisure hours, of companions, he
seemed to find his rides and walks quite incomplete if made alone.  He
writes on one occasion: "What think you of a fifteen-mile ride out, ditto
in, and a lunch on the road, with a wind-up of six o'clock dinner in
Doughty Street?"  And again: "Not knowing whether my head was off or on,
it became so addled with work, I have gone riding over the old road, and
shall be truly delighted to meet or be overtaken by you."  As a young man
he was extremely fond of riding, but as I never remember seeing him on
horseback I think he must have deprived himself of this pastime soon
after his marriage.

But walking was, perhaps, his chiefest pleasure, and the country lanes
and city streets alike found him a close observer of their beauties and
interests.  He was a rapid walker, his usual pace being four miles an
hour, and to keep step with him required energy and activity similar to
his own.  In many of his letters he speaks with most evident enjoyment of
this pastime.  In one he writes: "What a brilliant morning for a country
walk!  I start precisely--precisely, mind--at half-past one.  Come, come,
come and walk in the green lanes!"  Again: "You don't feel disposed, do
you, to muffle yourself up and start off with me for a good, brisk walk
over Hampstead Heath?"

Outdoor games of the simpler kinds delighted him.  Battledore and
shuttlecock was played constantly in the garden at Devonshire Terrace,
though I do not remember my father ever playing it elsewhere.  The
American game of bowls pleased him, and rounders found him more than
expert.  Croquet he disliked, but cricket he enjoyed intensely as a
spectator, always keeping one of the scores during the matches at "Gad's
Hill."

He was a firm believer in the hygiene of bathing, and cold baths, sea
baths and shower baths were among his most constant practices.  In those
days scientific ablution was not very generally practised, and I am sure
that in many places during his travels my father was looked upon as an
amiable maniac with a penchant for washing.

During his first visit to America, while he was making some journey in a
rather rough and uncomfortable canal boat, he wrote: "I am considered
very hardy in the morning, for I run up barenecked and plunge my head
into the half-frozen water by half-past five o'clock.  I am respected for
my activity, inasmuch as I jump from the boat to the towing path, and
walk five or six miles before breakfast, keeping up with the horses all
the time."  And from Broadstairs: "In a bay window sits, from nine
o'clock to one, a gentleman with rather long hair and no neckcloth, who
writes and grins as if he thought he were very funny, indeed.  At one
o'clock he disappears, presently emerges from a bathing machine, and may
be seen a kind of salmon-colored porpoise, splashing about in the ocean.
After that, he may be viewed in another bay window on the ground floor,
eating a good lunch; and after that, walking a dozen miles or so, or
lying on his back on the sand reading.  Nobody bothers him, unless they
know he is disposed to be talked to; and I am told he is very
comfortable, indeed."

During the hottest summer months of our year's residence in Italy, we
lived at a little seaport of the Mediterranean called Albaro.  
Personally, as a private secretary, I find it very difficult, though I
do my best. As a private secretary I labour in a rich house in the
notoriously idle neighbourhood of South Kensington, where nobody would
believe that anybody laboured, much less perspired over it. So when I
pass, on the way to my rich house, a builder's labourer or a milkman or
a dustman, I have to exhibit as clearly as I can all the signs of
a harsh employment and industrial fatigue. I take great pains about
this; I walk much faster; I frown heavily and I look as pale as possible.
In the Tube I close my eyes. I hope all this is effective, but as far as
I can see the milkman never looks at me, and the builder is always saying
to another builder, "'E says to me, 'Wot abaht it?' 'e says, and I
says to 'im, 'Yus, wot abaht it?' I says." But it is worth the
effort.

Well, that is why that poor man was carrying a typewriter. I wonder why
everybody else in the Tube carries an "attaché-case."

It has been calculated that if all the attaché-cases which get on to the
train at Hammersmith at 9 A.M. were left on the platform, six men
or twelve women or three horses could take their place in every car. That
means about ninety more men or one-hundred-and-eighty more women or
forty-five more horses could leave Hammersmith between 9 A.M. and 9.30.
So that if attaché-cases were forbidden the traffic problem would be
practically solved.

Why shouldn't they be forbidden? It depends, of course, on what is
inside the cases; and nobody knows that for certain. But one can guess. I
have been guessing for a long time. At first I thought they were full of
very confidential papers. In the old days the attaché-case was the
peculiar trademark of private secretaries and diplomats and high-up
people like that. Even attachés carried them sometimes. The very
lowest a man with an attaché-case could be was a First-Class Civil
Servant; and one was justified in imagining confidential papers
inside, or, at any rate, home-work of the first importance. But
nowadays there are too many of them for that. The attaché-case has
been degraded; it is universal. This might be because there is practically
no male person alive just now who has not been an adjutant at
one time or another, and pinched at least one attaché-case from the
orderly-room. But most of the cases in the Tube are carried by
females, so that theory is no good.

Well, then, I imagined sandwiches or knitting or powder-puffs or
tea; but those also are rotten hypotheses. I have too much faith in the
good sense of my fellow-countrywomen to believe that they would
cart a horrible thing like a cheap attaché-case about simply in
order to convey a sandwich or a powder-puff from one end of London
to the other.

So I had to fall back on my own experience.

I know, at any rate, what is inside mine. There are some rather grubby
envelopes which I borrowed from the House of Commons, and some very
grubby blotting-paper from the same source, and either a ream of foolscap
or a quire of foolscap, whichever is which; some pipe-cleaners and a
few pieces of milk-chocolate; and a letter from the Amalgamated Association
of Fish-Friers which ought to have been answered a long time ago;
and a memorandum on Hog-Importing which I am always going to read while
waiting at the station; and a nice piece of thick string with which I
have tied a bowline on a bight; and two broken pencils and some more
envelopes; and a Parliamentary Whip of last year and a stationery bill
of the year before; and several bills of my employer, not to mention a
cheque for ninety-seven pounds which I suppose he would like me to send
to the bank; and a great deal of fluff and a pipe or two and four or
five stamped letters which it is now too late to post. That is all there
is in my case.

But I carry it backwards and forwards, in and out, to and fro, day
after day; and the only time it is ever opened at either end of the
journey is when, in addition to the articles previously mentioned,
it contains bottles.

But I do not carry it for the sake of bottles; far from it. I am one of
those men who do not mind going about with a comparatively naked bottle.
I carry it simply because it is the tool of my trade, and because,
if you don't carry a tool of some kind on the Underground, at any
moment you may be taken for an idle rich, if not actually a parasite,
who never sweated in his life.
And that, I am persuaded, is why everybody else carries theirs.
But this is a very serious conclusion.He came
from Oxford and had lived all his life in a brewery.  Instructions were
given with him that if he were let out every morning alone he would
immediately find out the river, regularly take a swim and come gravely
home again.  This he did with the greatest punctuality, but after a
little while was observed to smell of beer.  His owner was so sure that
he smelled of beer that she resolved to watch him.  He was seen to come
back from his swim round the usual corner and to go up a flight of steps
into a beer shop.  Being instantly followed, the beer shopkeeper is seen
to take down a pot (pewter pot) and is heard to say: "Well, old chap,
come for your beer as usual, have you?"  Upon which he draws a pint and
puts it down and the dog drinks it.  Being required to explain how this
comes to pass the man says: "Yes, ma'am.  I know he's your dog, ma'am,
but I didn't when he first came.  He looked in, ma'am, as a brick-maker
might, and then he come in, as a brickmaker might, and he wagged his tail
at the pots, and he giv a sniff round and conveyed to me as he was used
to beer.  So I draw'd him a drop, and he drunk it up.  Next morning he
come agen by the clock and I draw'd him a pint, and ever since he has
took his pint reg'lar."

On account of our birds, cats were not allowed in the house; but from a
friend in London I received a present of a white kitten--Williamina--and
she and her numerous offspring had a happy home at "Gad's Hill."  She
became a favorite with all the household, and showed particular devotion
to my father.  I remember on one occasion when she had presented us with
a family of kittens, she selected a corner of father's study for their
home.  She brought them one by one from the kitchen and deposited them in
her chosen corner.  My father called to me to remove them, saying that he
could not allow the kittens to remain in his room.  I did so, but
Williamina brought them back again, one by one.  Again they were removed.
The third time, instead of putting them in the corner, she placed them
all, and herself beside them, at my father's feet, and gave him such an
imploring glance that he could resist no longer, and they were allowed to
remain.  As the kittens grew older they became more and more frolicsome,
swarming up the curtains, playing about on the writing table and
scampering behind the book shelves.  But they were never complained of
and lived happily in the study until the time came for finding them other
homes.  One of these kittens was kept, who, as he was quite deaf, was
left unnamed, and became known by the servants as "the master's cat,"
because of his devotion to my father.  He was always with him, and used
to follow him about the garden like a dog, and sit with him while he
wrote.  One evening we were all, except father, going to a ball, and when
we started, left "the master" and his cat in the drawing-room together.
"The master" was reading at a small table, on which a lighted candle was
placed.  Suddenly the candle went out.  Codrus.] try. Archidamus
also lieth not in obliuio[n], whose fame death buried not the famous
aduenture of Codrus kyng of the A- thenians is maruelous and almoste
incredible, but that the Histores, truelie set forth, and declare a
manifest truthe ther- [Sidenote: Epamniun- das.] of, who is more
famous then Epaminundas, bothe for vir- tue, nobilitie and marciall
feates among the Thebans, the [Sidenote: Grecians.] mightie armie of the
Grecians, at the longe sege of Troie, what valiaunte Capitains
hadde thei, whiche in the defence [Sidenote: Troians.] of their
countrie hasarde their life: the Troians also wanted not for proues
valiauntnes and al nobilitie, their péeres and [Sidenote: Romans.]
nobles: amonge the Romans, what a greate number was of noble peres,
whose studie alwaies was to liue and dye in the glorie, aide and
defence of their countrie, for he liueth not by whose cowardlines
fainted harte and courage, the contrie [Sidenote: Who liueth in
shame.] or kyngdome standeth in perrill, he liueth in shame, that
re- fuseth daunger, coste or charge, in the defence or procuryng,
better state to his countrie.

The worthie saiyng of Epami- nundas declareth, who liueth to his countrie,
who diyng va- liauntlie in the felde, beyng thrust thorow with the
speare of his enemie, asked those questions of these that stoede by him
at the poincte of deathe, is my speare manfullie broken, and [Fol.
xxxij.r] my enemies chassed awaie, the whiche things his co[m]panions
[Sidenote: Epameunn- das a most no[-] ble and vali- aunt pere.] in warre
affirmed, then saide he: nowe your Capitaine Epa- minundas beginneth to
liue in that he dieth valiauntlie for his countrie, and in the proffite
& aduauncement of the same, a worthie man, noble and valiaunte, his
sentence also was worthie to be knowen, and followed of all suche as bee
well affected and Godlie mynded to their countrie. Marcus Mar- cellus of
like sorte, and Titus Manlius Torquatus, & Sci- pio Aemilianus, Marcus
Attilius shewed in what hye price our naturall countrée ought to bee had,
by their valiaunt at- chifes, and enterprises: I might passe by in
sile[n]ce Scipio Ca- to, and Publius Scipio Nasica, but that thei by like
fame, honour and glorie liue immortall to their countrie, the same also
of Uibeus, Ualerius Flaccus, and Pedanius Centurio giueth ampell and
large matter to all menne, endued with nobilitie and valiaunt
proues, for the defence of their coun- trie with Quintus Coccius,
Marcus Sceua and Sceuola

.

¶ Possibilitie.

THere nedeth no doute to rise of possibilitie, seinge that examples doe
remain of famous men, of god- lie and well affected persones, whiche haue
with like magnanimitie putte in daunger their life, to [Sidenote:
The order of Athenes.] saue their Prince, kyngdome, and countrie. Greate
honour was giuen of the Athenians, to soche noble and valiaunte men,
whiche ventered their liues for their common wealthe, to maintaine the
florishyng state thereof. The eloquente and [Sidenote: Thusidides.] copious
oracion of Thusidides, the true, faithfull, and elo- quente Historiographer
doeth shewe: what honour and im- mortall fame was attributed, to all soche
as did venter their liues, in the florishyng state of their countrie,
in supportyng, mainteinyng, and defendyng thesame.

I send my
loving and respectful duty to her."  Again: "Think of my dreaming of
'Mrs. Bouncer,' each night!!!"

My father's love for dogs led him into a strange friendship during our
stay at Boulogne.  There lived in a cottage on the street which led from
our house to the town, a cobbler who used to sit at his window working
all day with his dog--a Pomeranian--on the table beside him.  The
cobbler, in whom my father became very much interested because of the
intelligence of his Pomeranian companion, was taken ill, and for many
months was unable to work.  My father writes: "The cobbler has been ill
these many months.  The little dog sits at the door so unhappy and
anxious to help that I every day expect to see him beginning a pair of
top boots."  Another time father writes in telling the history of this
little animal: "A cobbler at Boulogne, who had the nicest of little dogs
that always sat in his sunny window watching him at his work, asked me if
I would bring the dog home as he couldn't afford to pay the tax for him.
The cobbler and the dog being both my particular friends I complied.  The
cobbler parted with the dog heartbroken.  When the dog got home here, my
man, like an idiot as he is, tied him up and then untied him.  The moment
the gate was open, the dog (on the very day after his arrival) ran out.
Next day Georgy and I saw him lying all covered with mud, dead, outside
the neighbouring church.  How am I ever to tell the cobbler?  He is too
poor to come to England, so I feel that I must lie to him for life, and
say that the dog is fat and happy."

                         [Picture: Mrs. Bouncer]

Of horses and ponies we possessed but few during our childhood, and these
were not of very choice breed.  I remember, however, one pretty pony
which was our delight, and dear old "Toby," the good sturdy horse which
for many years we used at "Gad's Hill."  My father, however, was very
fond of horses, and I recall hearing him comment on the strange fact that
an animal "so noble in its qualities should be the cause of so much
villainy."

                                * * * * *

          [Picture: To Miss Dickens' Pomeranian "Mrs. Bouncer"]


To
Miss Dickens' Pomeranian.
"MRS. BOUNCER."


    Furry, lazy, warm and bright,
    Peeing from her fringe of white,
    She blinks and sleeps both day and night,

                                                            A happy Spitz!

    She need not fear the cruel stick,
    Nor has she learnt a single trick--
    Just deigns her mistress' hand to lick,

                                                             As she knits.

    She eats, and drinks, and eats again,
    Is never out in wind or rain,--
    Takes many a journey in the train,

                                                           And her admits.

    She has her own coquettish charms,
    Knows no sorrows, no alarms,
    And dozes in her mistress' arms--

                                                           A sleepy Spitz.

    How small and piquant are her feet--
    Ben Allen's sister had as neat--
    She looks so saucy, one could beat

                                                            Her into fits.

    Quite ravishing when neat and clean,
    Her cars seem lined with crinoline:
    She rules the house, a haughty queen,

                                                            A saucy Spitz!

    Just tolerates the frequent hug--
    Snoozing all day upon the rug,
    Complacent, philosophic--snug,

                                                       Her paws like mits.

    At dinner--ah! that pleasant Babel!
    Touch her paw beneath the table,
    She'd bite your foot--were she but able--

                                                          A naughty Spitz.

    To find her mistress how she flew!
    Faithful the coming step she knew
    Let others be as brave and true--

                                                            Lords or Wits!

    When SULTAN, TURK, and LINDA fleet
    The lost lov'd Master rushed to meet,
    _His_ kindly voice would always greet

                                                         The little Spitz!

    Alas! so furry, warm, and white,
    From this cold world she took her flight,
    No more on rug, by fireside bright,

                                                        Dear BOUNCER sits.

    PERCY FITZGERALD.


CHAPTER V.


Interest in London birds.--Our pet bird "Dick."--Devotion of his
dogs.--Decision to visit America.--His arrival in New York.--Comments on
American courtesies.--Farewell public appearances.

The warm affection which was so characteristic of my father toward people
was also directed, as I have already told, towards animals and birds.  A
few further anecdotes occur to me, and I have ventured to give them here,
before proceeding to tell of his visit to America, his readings, and the,
to me, sad story of his last public appearance.

My father's quick and amusing observation of London birds and their
habits, and of their fondness for "low company," is full of charm and
quaint oddity.  He writes: "That anything born of an egg and invested
with wings should have got to the pass that it hops contentedly down a
ladder into a cellar, and calls that going home, is a circumstance so
amazing as to leave one nothing more in this connection to wonder at.  I
know a low fellow, originally of a good family from Dorking, who takes
his whole establishment of wives in single file in at the door of the jug
department of a disorderly tavern near the Haymarket, manoeuvres them
among the company's legs, and emerges with them at the bottle entrance,
seldom in the season going to bed before two in the morning.  And thus he
passes his life.  But the family I am best acquainted with reside in the
densest part of Bethnal Green.  Their abstraction from the objects in
which they live, or rather their conviction that these objects have all
come into existence in express subservience to fowls, has so enchanted me
that I have made them the subject of many journeys at divers hours.
After careful observation of the two lords and of the ten ladies of whom
this family consists, I have come to the conclusion that their opinions
are represented by the leading lord and leading lady, the latter, as I
judge, an aged personage, afflicted with a paucity of feather and
visibility of quill that gives her the appearance of a bundle of office
pens.  They look upon old shoes, wrecks of kettles, saucepans and
fragments of bonnets as a kind of meteoric discharge for fowls to peck
at.  Gaslight comes quite as natural to them as any other light; and I
have more than a suspicion that in the minds of the two lords, the early
public house at the corner has superseded the sun.  They always begin to
crow when the public house shutters begin to be taken down, and they
salute the pot-boy the instant he appears to perform that duty, as if he
were Phoebus in person."

During one of his walks through the slums, my father was so fascinated by
the intelligence of a busy goldfinch drawing water for himself in his
cage--he had other accomplishments as well--that he went in and bought
it.  The classical work of Hawthorne has been generously drawn upon.
No change of any kind has been made in the text, but the introductions
connecting one myth with another have been omitted.

HAMILTON WRIGHT MABIE.

Myths That Every Child Should Know

CHAPTER I
THE THREE GOLDEN APPLES

Did you ever hear of the golden apples that grew in the garden of
the Hesperides?

Ah, those were such apples as would bring a great price, by the bushel,
if any of them could be found growing in the orchards of nowadays! But
there is not, I suppose, a graft of that wonderful fruit on a single
tree in the wide world. Not so much as a seed of those apples exists
any longer.

And, even in the old, old, half-forgotten times, before the garden of the
Hesperides was overrun with weeds, a great many people doubted whether
there could be real trees that bore apples of solid gold upon their
branches. All had heard of them, but nobody remembered to have seen
any. Children, nevertheless, used to listen, open-mouthed, to stories of
the golden apple tree, and resolved to discover it, when they
should be big enough. Adventurous young men, who desired to do a braver
thing than any of their fellows, set out in quest of this fruit. Many of
them returned no more; none of them brought back the apples. No wonder
that they found it impossible to gather them! It is said that there was
a dragon beneath the tree, with a hundred terrible heads, fifty of which
were always on the watch, while the other fifty slept.

In my opinion it was hardly worth running so much risk for the
sake of a solid golden apple. Had the apples been sweet, mellow, and
juicy, indeed that would be another matter. There might then have been
some sense in trying to get at them, in spite of the hundred-headed
dragon.
But, as I have already told you, it was quite a common thing with
young persons, when tired of too much peace and rest, to go in
search of the garden of the Hesperides. And once the adventure was
undertaken by a hero who had enjoyed very little peace or rest since
he came into the world. At the time of which I am going to speak,
he was wandering through the pleasant land of Italy, with a mighty
club in his hand, and a bow and quiver slung across his shoulders.
He was wrapt in the skin of the biggest and fiercest lion that ever
had been seen, and which he himself had killed; and though, on the
whole, he was kind, and generous, and noble, there was a good deal
of the lion's fierceness in his heart.Plornish, says his prayers at night in a
whisper lest the cat should overhear him and take offence.  The tradesmen
cry out as they come up the avenue: '_Me Voici_!  _C'est
Moi_--_boulanger_--_me tirez pas_, _Monsieur Frenche_!'  It is like
living in a state of siege, and the wonderful manner in which the cat
preserves the character of being the only person not much put out by the
intensity of this monomania is most ridiculous.  The finest thing is that
immediately after I have heard the noble sportsman blazing away at her in
the garden in front I look out of my room door into the drawing-room and
am pretty sure to see her coming in after the bird, in the calmest manner
possible, by the back window."  But no harm ever came to "our wonderful
little 'Dick,'" who lived to a ripe old age--sixteen years--and was
buried under a rose tree at "Gad's Hill."

On his return from his last visit to America he wrote a charming account
of his welcome home by the dogs at "Gad's Hill."  "As you ask me about
the dogs, I begin with them.  When I came down first I came to Gravesend,
five miles off.  The two Newfoundland dogs coming to meet me with the
usual carriage and the usual driver, and beholding me coming in my usual
dress out at the usual door, it struck me that their recollection of my
having been absent for any unusual time was at once cancelled.  They
behaved (they are both young dogs) exactly in their usual manner, coming
behind the basket phaeton as we trotted along and lifting their heads to
have their ears pulled, a special attention which they received from no
one else.  But when I drove into the stableyard, 'Linda' was greatly
excited; weeping profusely, and throwing herself on her back that she
might caress my foot with her great forepaws.  Mamie's little dog, too,
'Mrs. Bouncer,' barked in the greatest agitation on being called down and
asked: 'Who is this?' tore round me, like the dog in the Faust outlines."

My father brought with him, on his return from his first visit to
America, a small, shaggy Havana spaniel, which had been given to him and
which he had named "Timber Doodle."  He wrote of him: "Little doggy
improves rapidly and now jumps over my stick at the word of command."
"Timber," travelled with us in all our foreign wanderings, and while at
Albaro the poor little fellow had a most unfortunate experience--an
encounter of some duration with a plague of fleas.  Father writes:
"'Timber' has had every hair upon his body cut off because of the fleas,
and he looks like the ghost of a drowned dog come out of a pond after a
week or so.  It is very awful to see him sidle into a room.  He knows the
change upon him, and is always turning-round and round to look for
himself.  There may be no authentic history of Indians in the particular
locality in which these old-fashioned weapons come to light, but
their presence in the ground is the best kind of evidence that
Indians once lived on these fields or were in the habit of hunting
over them.

In many parts of the country these arrow heads are turned up in great
numbers; museums large and small are plentifully supplied with them; and
they form part of the record of the men who once lived here, and of their
ways of killing game and destroying their enemies. Wherever there are arrow
heads there have been Indians.

Among every people and in every language there are found stories,
superstitions, traditions, phrases, which are not to be explained
by the thoughts or ideas or beliefs of people now living; and the
same stories, superstitions, phrases, are found among people as
far apart as those of Norway and Australia. The people of to-day tell
these stories or remember the superstitions or use the phrases without
understanding where they came from or what they meant when first used.
As the ground in some sections is full of arrow heads that have been buried
no one knows how many centuries, so the poetry we read, the music we hear,
the stories told us when we are children, have come down from a time in
the history of man so early that there are in many cases no other records
or remains of it. These stories vary greatly in details; they fit every
climate and wear the peculiar dress of every country; but it is easy
to see that they are made up of the same materials, and that they
describe the same persons or ideas or things whether they are told
in Greece or India or Norway or Brittany.

                                Wherever they are found they make it certain that they come from a
very remote time and grew out of ideas or feelings and ways of
looking at the world which a great many men shared in common in
many places.

When a man sneezes, people still say in some countries, "God bless you."
They do not know why they say it; they simply repeat what they heard older
people say when they were children, and do not know that every time they
use these words they recall the age when people believed that evil
spirits could enter into a man, and that when a man sneezed he
expelled one of these spirits.

It is a very old and widely spread superstition that when a dog howls at
night someone not far away is dying or will soon die. Many people are
uncomfortable when they hear a dog howling after dark, not because they
believe that dogs have any knowledge that death is present or
coming, but because their ancestors for many centuries believed that
the howling of a dog was ominous, and the habits of our ancestors leave
deep traces in our natures.

Now, every time the melancholy howling of a dog at night makes a child
uncomfortable, he recalls the old superstition which identified
the roaring or wailing of the wind with a wolf or dog into which a god or
demon had entered, with power to summon the spirits of men to follow
him as he rushed along in the darkness. In the old homes in the forests,
thousands of years ago, children crowded about the open fire and trembled
when a great blast shook the house, for fear that the gigantic beast who
made the sound would call them and they would be compelled to follow
him. We think of wind as air in motion; they thought of it as the breath
and sound of some living creature. When we say that the wind "whistled
in the keyhole," or "kissed the flowers," or "drove the clouds" before
it, we are using poetically the language our forefathers used literally.

The frequent experience of this return of force when
it is wanted saves me much anxiety, but I am not at times without the
nervous dread that I may some day sink altogether."

But as a reward for his unstinted self-giving came the wonderful success
of his tour, the pride and delight which he felt in the enthusiasm which
greeted him everywhere, the personal affection lavished upon him, and the
many dear friends he made.  He writes from Boston, _a propos_ of these
rewards: "When we reached here last Saturday night we found that Mrs.
Fields had not only garnished the room with flowers, but also with holly
(with real red berries), and festoons of moss dependent from the
looking-glasses and picture-frames.  The homely Christmas look of the
place quite affected us."

Later, from Washington: "I couldn't help laughing at myself on my
birthday here; it was observed as much as though I were a little boy.
Flowers and garlands of the most exquisite kind, arranged in all manner
of green baskets, bloomed over the room; letters, radiant with good
wishes, poured in.  Also, by hands unknown, the hall at night was
decorated; and after 'Boots at the Holly Tree Inn' the audience rose,
great people and all, standing and cheering until I went back to the
table and made them a little speech."

He wrote home constantly, giving frequent commissions for improvements at
"Gad's Hill," to be made before his return.  He was much impressed on his
second visit, as on his first, I remember, with the beauty of the
American women.  "The ladies are remarkably handsome," he wrote.

                        [Picture: The Empty Chair]

In the autumn of 1869 he began a series of farewell readings, which were
another heavy tax upon his health and strength.  During his tour at this
time he writes to Mr. Forster after some rather alarming symptoms had
developed: "I told Beard, a year after the Staplehurst accident, that I
was certain that my heart had been fluttered and wanted a little helping.
This the stethoscope confirmed; and considering the immense exertion I am
undergoing, and the constant jarring of express trains, the case seems to
me quite intelligible.  Don't say anything in the 'Gad's' direction about
my being a little out of sorts.  I have broached the matter, of course,
but very lightly."

But even such warning as this failed to make him realize how much less
was his strength, and with indomitable courage and spirit he continued
his tour.  The trouble in his feet increased, and his sufferings from
this cause were very great.  It became necessary at one time for him to
have a physician in attendance upon him at every reading.  But in spite
of his perseverance, he became so ill that the readings had to be
stopped.


CHAPTER VI.


Last words spoken in public.--A railroad accident in 1865.--At home after
his American visit.--"Improvements" at "Gad's Hill."--At "Gad's Hill"
once more.--The closing days of his life.--Burial at Westminster.

My father gave his last reading in St. James' Hall, London, on the
fifteenth of March.  The programme included "The Christmas Carol" and the
"Trial" from "Pickwick."  The hall was packed by an enormous audience,
and he was greeted with all the warmth which the personal affection felt
for the reader inspired.  We all felt very anxious for him, fearing that
the excitement and emotion which must attend upon his public farewell
would have a bad effect upon him.  But it had no immediate result, at any
rate, much to our relief.

I do not think that my father ever--and this is saying a great
deal--looked handsomer nor read with more ability than on this, his last
appearance.  WHerein Esope wittely admonisheth all menne to be- ware
and take heede, of cloked and fained frendship, of the wicked and vngodlie,
whiche vnder a pretence and offer of frendship or of benefite, seeke
the ruin, dammage, miserie or destruccion of man, toune, citée, region,
or countree.

¶ The nature of the thyng.
OF all beastes to the quantitée of his bodie, the [Sidenote: The
Wolue moste raue- ning & cruell.] Wolue passeth in crueltee and
desire of bloode, alwaies vnsaciable of deuouryng, neuer conten-
ted with his pray.'In but two short weeks from this time I
hope that you may enter in your own homes on a new series of readings, at
which my assistance will be indispensable; but from these garish lights I
vanish now, for evermore, with a heartfelt, grateful, respectful,
affectionate farewell.'"

There was a dead silence as my father turned away, much moved; and then
came from the audience such a burst and tumult of cheers and applause as
were almost too much to bear, mixed as they were with personal love and
affection for the man before them.  He returned with us all to "Gad's
Hill," very happy and hopeful, under the temporary improvement which the
rest and peace of his home brought him, and he settled down to his new
book, "Edwin Drood," with increased pleasure and interest.

His last public appearances were in April.  On the fifth he took the
chair at the News-venders' dinner.  But your loue incensed with one, whose
maners and life contenteth you: so you bothe are linked together, [Fol.
lvj.r] [Sidenote: The loue of a harlotte.] that no calamitée can separate
you: who so hopeth loue of a harlotte, or profite, he maie hope as for
the fructe of a withe- red tree, gaine is all their loue, vice their
ioye and delite. In vertue is libertée, in vertue is felicitee, the
state of mariage is vertuous, there can be no greater bo[n]dage, then to
obaie ma- ny beastly affections, to the whiche whoredome forceth
hym vnto, Loue is fained, cloked amitée, a harte dissembled, ma-
ny a mightie person and wise, hath been ouerthrowen by the deceiptes
of harlottes: many a Citee plagued, many a region ouerthrowen for
that mischief, to obaie many affections is a greate bondage.

Who so serueth the beastlie affections of his [Sidenote:
Hercules.
Omphala.] mynde to that purpose, he must also as Hercules to Ompha- la bee
slaue, not onely to his owne will and affection: but to the maners,
will, and exspectacion of the harlotte. So serued Thraso, and Phedria
Thais, that Gorgious harlot, Antony and Iulius Cesar, Cleopatra, this
is a bondage, to liue slaue from reason and all all integritee, to a
monsterous rableme[n]t [Sidenote: The harlot- tes lesson, to her louers.]
of vices, who so serueth a harlot, thei must learne this lesson.
_Da mihi & affer_, giue and bryng.

The women of Scithia, abhorryng the godly conuersa- cion of mariage, with
their housbandes, lefte theim, who in tyme ware so mightie, that
thei repelled theim by force: thei called mariage not Matrimonie, but
bondage. For, the chro- nicles doe testifie, thei became conquerours ouer
many kyn- ges, all Asia obaied them: thei did builde many a great
citee, and for theire successe, thei might compare with many prin-
[Sidenote: The life of the Amazo- nes.] ces.

These women were called Amazones afterwarde, the order of their life was
this, ones in the yere thei would en- ioye the compainie of a man: if it
so were that thei had a man childe, the father to haue it, if a
daughter, then thei possessed her, and foorthwith burned her right pappe:
for thei were all Archers, and wonderfully excelled therein, but in the
ende, [Sidenote: Thalestris.] thei came all to ruine. One of them,
Thalestris their Quene in the tyme of Alexander the Greate, came to
Alexander, thinkyng that he had been, some monstrous man of stature:
[Fol. lvj.v] [Sidenote: The offer of a woman to Alexander.] whom, when she
did beholde (for Alexander was of no migh- tie stature) did contemne hym,
and offered him hand to hande [Sidenote: The answer of Alexander to the
offer.] to fight with hym. But Alexander like a wise Prince, saied to his
men, if I should ouercome her, that were no victorie, nor manhoode againste
a woman: and being ouercome, that were greater shame, then commendacion
in all my victories and conquestes, but afterwarde, there was a greate
familia- ritée betwene them. The adulterer and the adulteris, neuer
prospereth, for many mischiues are reserued, to that wicked and beastly
loue. Sincere loue is not rooted, frendship colou- red: the sober and
demure countenaunce, is moche to be com- mended in a chaste woman, whose
breaste pondereth a chaste [Sidenote: The facte of the matrones of Rome.]
life. The facte of the matrones of Rome, semeth straunge to be tolde, of
Papirius a Senators soonne, beyng taken to the Senate house, of his
father: the childe beyng indued with a singuler wit, harde many causes
in the assemble, talked and consulted vpo[n], at his retourne home, his
mother was inqui- sitiue of their consultacion, to heare somewhat.
The childe was commaunded by his father, to vtter no secrete that he
heard, wherevpon of a long tyme, he refused his mothers de- maunde:
but at the laste subtelie, he satisfied his mothers re- [Sidenote:
Papirius.] quest. Truth it is, my father willed me, to vtter no secret,
you keping my counsaill, I will shewe you, it is concluded by the
Senate house, that euery man shall haue twoo wiues, that is a
straunge matter, saieth the mother: foorthwith she had communicacion
with all the matrones of Roome, that could doe somewhat in this matter,
thei also full willyngly assem- bled themselues, to let this purpose,
to the Senate house, thei went to vtter, their swollen griues. The
Senators were a- mased at their commyng, but in this matter bolde thei
were, [Sidenote: The Oracio[n] of a matrone, to the Sena- tours.]
to enterprise that, whiche thei wer greued at.

The next time I passed her she was dead.  Then a man examined at the
inquest yesterday (who evidently had not the least remembrance of what
really passed) came running up to me and implored me to help him find his
wife, who was afterward found dead.  No imagination can conceive the ruin
of the carriages, or the extraordinary weights under which the people
were lying, or the complications into which they were twisted up among
iron and wood, and mud and water.  I am keeping very quiet here."

This letter was written from "Gad's Hill" four days after the accident.
We were spared any anxiety about our father, as we did not hear of the
accident until after we were with him in London.  With his usual care and
thoughtfulness he had telegraphed to his friend Mr. Wills, to summon us
to town to meet him.  The letter continues: "I have, I don't know what to
call it, constitutional (I suppose) presence of mind, and was not the
least fluttered at the time.  I instantly remembered that I had the MS.
of a number with me, and clambered back into the carriage for it.  But in
writing these scanty words of recollection I feel the shake, and am
obliged to stop."

We heard, afterwards, how helpful he had been at the time, ministering to
the dying!  How calmly and tenderly he cared for the suffering ones about
him!

But he never recovered entirely from the shock.  More than a year later
he writes: "It is remarkable that my watch (a special chronometer) has
never gone quite correctly since, and to this day there sometimes comes
over me, on a railway and in a hansom-cab, or any sort of conveyance, for
a few seconds, a vague sense of dread that I have no power to check.  It
comes and passes, but I cannot prevent its coming."

I have often seen this dread come upon him, and on one occasion, which I
especially recall, while we were on our way from London to our little
country station "Higham," where the carriage was to meet us, my father
suddenly clutched the arms of the railway carriage seat, while his face
grew ashy pale, and great drops of perspiration stood upon his forehead,
and though he tried hard to master the dread, it was so strong that he
had to leave the train at the next station.  The accident had left its
impression upon the memory, and it was destined never to be effaced.  The
hours spent upon railroads were thereafter often hours of pain to him.  I
realized this often while travelling with him, and no amount of assurance
could dispel the feeling.

Early in May of 1868, we had him safely back with us, greatly
strengthened and invigorated by his ocean journey home, and I think he
was never happier at "Gad's Hill" than during his last two years there.

During that time he had a succession of guests, and none were more
honored, nor more heartily welcomed, than his American friends.  The
first of these to come, if I remember rightly, was Mr. Longfellow, with
his daughters.  My father writes describing a picnic which he gave them;
"I turned out a couple of postilions in the old red jacket of the old
Royal red for our ride, and it was like a holiday ride in England fifty
years ago.  Of course we went to look at the old houses in Rochester, and
the old Cathedral, and the old castle, and the house for the six poor
travellers.

"Nothing can surpass the respect paid to Longfellow here, from the Queen
downward.  He is everywhere received and courted, and finds the working
men at least as well acquainted with his books as the classes socially
above them."

Between the comings and goings of visitors there were delightfully quiet
evenings at home, spent during the summer in our lovely porch, or walking
about the garden, until "tray time," ten o'clock.  When the cooler nights
came we had music in the drawing-room, and it is my happiness now to
remember on how many evenings I played and sang all his favorite songs
and tunes to my father during these last winters while he would listen
while he smoked or read, or, in his more usual fashion, paced up and down
the room.  I never saw him more peacefully contented than at these times.

There were always "improvements"--as my father used to call his
alterations--being made at "Gad's Hill," and each improvement was
supposed to be the last.  As each was completed, my sister--who was
always a constant visitor, and an exceptionally dear one to my
father--would have to come down and inspect, and as each was displayed,
my father would say to her most solemnly: "Now, Katie, you behold your
parent's latest and last achievement."  These "last improvements" became
quite a joke between them.  I remember so well, on one such occasion,
after the walls and doors of the drawing-room had been lined with
mirrors, my sister's laughing speech to "the master": "I believe papa,
that when you become an angel your wings will be made of looking-glass
and your crown of scarlet geraniums."

And here I would like to correct an error concerning myself.  I have been
spoken of as my father's "favorite daughter."  If he had a favorite
daughter--and I hope and believe that the one was as dear to him as the
other--my dear sister must claim that honor.  I say this ungrudgingly,
for during those last two years my father and I seemed to become more
closely united, and I know how deep was the affectionate intimacy at the
time of his death.

The "last improvement"--in truth, the very last--was the building of a
conservatory between the drawing and dining rooms.  My father was more
delighted with this than with any previous alteration, and it was
certainly a pretty addition to the quaint old villa.  The chalet, too,
which he used in summer as his study, was another favorite spot at his
favorite "Gad's Hill."

In the early months of 1870 we moved up to London, as my father had
decided to give twelve farewell readings there.  He had the sanction of
the late Sir Thomas Watson to this undertaking, on condition that there
should be no railway journeys in connection with them.  While we were in
London he made many private engagements, principally, I know, on my
account, as I was to be presented that spring.

During this last visit to London, my father was not, however, in his
usual health, and was so quickly and easily tired that a great number of
our engagements had to be cancelled.  He dined out very seldom, and I
remember that on the last occasion he attended a very large dinner party
the effort was too much for him, and before the gentlemen returned to the
drawing-room, he sent me a message begging me to come to him at once,
saying that he was in too great pain to mount the stairs.  No one who had
watched him throughout the dinner, seeing his bright, animated face, and
listening to his cheery conversation, could have imagined him to be
suffering acute pain.

He was at "Gad's Hill" again by the thirtieth of May, and soon hard at
work upon "Edwin Drood."  Although happy and contented, there was an
appearance of fatigue and weariness about him very unlike his usual air
of fresh activity.  He was out with the dogs for the last time on the
afternoon of the sixth of June, when he walked into Rochester for the
"Daily Mail."  My sister, who had come to see the latest "improvement,"
was visiting us, and was to take me with her to London on her return, for
a short visit.  The conservatory--the "improvement" which Katie had been
summoned to inspect--had been stocked, and by this time many of the
plants were in full blossom.  Everything was at its brightest and I
remember distinctly my father's pleasure in showing my sister the
beauties of his "improvement."

We had been having most lovely weather, and in consequence, the outdoor
plants were wonderfully forward in their bloom, my father's favorite red
geraniums making a blaze of color in the front garden.  The syringa
shrubs filled the evening air with sweetest fragrance as we sat in the
porch and walked about the garden on this last Sunday of our dear
father's life.  My aunt and I retired early and my dear sister sat for a
long while with my father while he spoke to her most earnestly of his
affairs.

As I have already said my father had such an intense dislike for
leave-taking that he always, when it was possible, shirked a farewell,
and we children, knowing this dislike, used only to wave our hands or
give him a silent kiss when parting.  What mortal, even if he possessed
a hundred lives, could hope to escape the fangs of such a monster? So
kind-hearted were the maidens that they could not bear to see this
brave and handsome traveller attempt what was so very dangerous, and
devote himself, most probably, to become a meal for the dragon's
hundred ravenous mouths.

"Go back," cried they all--"go back to your own home!

Your mother, beholding you safe and sound, will shed tears of joy; and
what can she do more, should you win ever so great a victory? No matter
for the golden apples! No matter for the king, your cruel cousin!
We do not wish the dragon with the hundred heads to eat you up!"
The stranger seemed to grow impatient at these remonstrances. He
carelessly lifted his mighty club, and let it fall upon a rock that lay
half buried in the earth, near by. With the force of that idle blow,
the great rock was shattered all to pieces.

It cost the stranger no more effort to achieve this feat of a giant's
strength than for one of the young maidens to touch her sister's rosy
cheek with a flower.

"Do you not believe," said he, looking at the damsels with a smile, "that
such a blow would have crushed one of the dragon's hundred heads?"
Then he sat down on the grass, and told them the story of his life, or
as much of it as he could remember, from the day when he was first
cradled in a warrior's brazen shield. While he lay there, two immense
serpents came gliding over the floor, and opened their hideous jaws
to devour him; and he, a baby of a few months old, had griped one of
the fierce snakes in each of his little fists, and strangled them
to death.

When he was but a stripling, he had killed a huge lion, almost as big
as the one whose vast and shaggy hide he now wore upon his shoulders.
The next thing that he had done was to fight a battle with an ugly
sort of monster, called a hydra, which had no less than nine heads, and
exceedingly sharp teeth in every one.

"But the dragon of the Hesperides, you know," observed one of the damsels,
"has a hundred heads!"
"Nevertheless," replied the stranger, "I would rather fight two such
dragons than a single hydra. For, as fast as I cut off a head, two
others grew in its place; and, besides, there was one of the heads
that could not possibly be killed, but kept biting as fiercely as
ever, long after it was cut off. So I was forced to bury it under
a stone, where it is doubtless alive to this very day. But the
hydra's body, and its eight other heads, will never do any further
mischief.".

                                * * * * *

It was not until they were seated at the dinner-table that a striking
change in the color and expression of his face startled my aunt.  Upon
her asking him if he were ill, he answered "Yes, very ill; I have been
very ill for the last hour."  But when she said that she would send for a
physician he stopped her, saying that he would go on with dinner, and
afterward to London.

He made an earnest effort to struggle against the seizure which was fast
coming over him, and continued to talk, but incoherently and very
indistinctly.  It being now evident that he was in a serious condition,
my aunt begged him to go to his room before she sent for medical aid.
"Come and lie down," she entreated.  "Yes, on the ground," he answered
indistinctly.  These were the last words that he uttered.  As he spoke,
he fell to the floor.  A couch was brought into the dining-room, on which
he was laid, a messenger was dispatched for the local physician,
telegrams were sent to all of us and to Mr. Beard.  This was at a few
minutes after six o'clock.  I was dining at a house some little distance
from my sister's home.  Dinner was half over when I received a message
that she wished to speak to me.  I found her in the hall with a change of
dress for me and a cab in waiting.  Quickly I changed my gown, and we
began the short journey which brought us to our so sadly-altered home.
Our dear aunt was waiting for us at the open door, and when I saw her
face I think the last faint hope died within me.

All through the night we watched him--my sister on one side of the couch,
my aunt on the other, and I keeping hot bricks to the feet which nothing
could warm, hoping and praying that he might open his eyes and look at
us, and know us once again.  But he never moved, never opened his eyes,
never showed a sign of consciousness through all the long night.  On the
afternoon of the ninth the celebrated London physician, Dr. Russell
Reynolds, (recently deceased), was summoned to a consultation by the two
medical men in attendance, but he could only confirm their hopeless
verdict.  Later, in the evening of this day, at ten minutes past six, we
saw a shudder pass over our dear father, he heaved a deep sigh, a large
tear rolled down his face and at that instant his spirit left us.  As we
saw the dark shadow pass from his face, leaving it so calm and beautiful
in the peace and majesty of death, I think there was not one of us who
would have wished, could we have had the power, to recall his spirit to
earthOn St.

                                John's Day, which was a time of great festivity, he suddenly
reappeared, blew a new and beguiling air on his pipe, and immediately
every child in the city felt as if a hand had seized him and ran
pell-mell after the musician as he climbed the mountain, in which
a door suddenly opened, and through that door all, save a lame boy,
passed and were never seen again.

From this old story probably came the proverb about paying the piper; and
it is one of many stories which turn on the magical power of a voice
or a sound to draw men, women, and children to their doom. These very
interesting stories are not like the stories which are made up just to
please people and help them pass away the time; they are different
forms of one story--the story of the wind, told by people who thought
that the wind was not what we call a force but a person, and that
when he called those who heard must follow if he chose; for "the
piper is no other than the wind, and the ancients held that in the
wind were the souls of the dead."

    If every time we think of a force we should
             think of a
    person, we should see the world as the men and women
             who made the myths saw it.
    Everything that moved, or made a
             sound, or flashed out light, or gave out heat was a person to them;
they could not think of the wind rushing through the trees or the
storm devastating the fields without out imagining someone like
themselves, only more powerful, behind the uproar and destruction,
any more than we can see a lantern moving along the road at night
without thinking instinctively that somebody is carrying it.

Our idea of the world is scientific because it is based on exact
though by no means complete knowledge; the myth-makers' idea of the world
was poetic because, with very incomplete knowledge, they could not
imagine how anything could be done unless it was done as they did
things.

                                

A grave was prepared and everything arranged when it
was made known to us, through Dean Stanley, that there was a general and
very earnest desire that he should find his last resting-place in
Westminster Abbey.  To such a tribute to our dear father's memory we
could make no possible objection, although it was with great regret that
we relinquished the plan to lay him in a spot so closely identified with
his life and works.

The only stipulation which was made in connection with the burial at
Westminster Abbey was that the clause in his will which read: "I
emphatically direct that I be buried in an inexpensive, unostentatious
and and strictly private manner," should be strictly adhered to, as it
was.

At midday on the fourteenth of June a few friends and ourselves saw our
dear one laid to rest in the grand old cathedral.  Our small group in
that vast edifice seemed to make the beautiful words of our beautiful
burial service even more than usually solemn and touching.  Later in the
day, and for many following days, hundreds of mourners flocked to the
open grave, and filled the deep vault with flowers.  And even after it
was closed Dean Stanley wrote: "There was a constant pressure to the spot
and many flowers were strewn upon it by unknown hands, many tears shed
from unknown eyes."

                    [Picture: Charles Dickens' Grave]

And every year on the ninth of June and on Christmas day we find other
flowers strewn by other unknown hands on that spot so sacred to us, as to
all who knew and loved him.  And every year beautiful bright-coloured
leaves are sent to us from across the Atlantic, to be placed with our own
flowers on that dear grave; and it is twenty-six years now since my
father died!

And for his epitaph what better than my father's own words:

    "Of the loved, revered and honoured head, thou canst not turn one
    hair to thy dread purposes, nor make one feature odious.  It is not
    that the hand is heavy and will fall down when released; it is not
    that the heart and pulse are still; but that the hand was open,
    generous and true, the heart brave, warm and tender, and the pulse a
    man's.  Strike! shadow, strike! and see his good deeds springing from
    the wound, to sow the world with life immortal."

                                 must you go to soon?"

                   they exclaimed.

"You--that have performed so many wonders, and spent such a toilsome
life--cannot you content yourself to repose a little while on the
margin of this peaceful river?"

Hercules shook his head.

"I must depart now," said he.She has been to me ever since I can remember anything, and to
all of us, the truest, best and dearest friend, companion and counsellor.
To quote my father's own words: "The best and truest friend man ever
had."